CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY




Cornell University
Library



The original of tiiis book is in
tine Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924098499506



THE

PULPIT COMMENTARY,

EDITED BY THE

VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D.,

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER;
AND BY THE

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL. M.A.

WITH

INTRODUCTIONS

BY THE



VEX. AECHDEACON F. W. FAEKAE, D.D., F.E.S.— EIGHT REV. H. COTTEEILL, D.D., F.R.S.E
-VERT REV. PRINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.— REV. CANON G. EAWLINSON, M.A
—REV. A. PLUMMEE, M.A., D.D.



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
New Yobk and Toronto.



THE

PULPIT COMMENTARY



BDITKD BT THK



REV. CANON H. D. M. SPENCE, M.A.,

nOUt USD BUBAL DBAN OF R. PASOBAB, AND EXAUtNINO OHAPLAIB TO TBB lABD
H8H0P OF OLOVOESIFIS AND BBISTOL;



AKD BT THE

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, MX



EXODUS.

CBxpostttoti ana l^omdeifcs
By rev. GEORGE RAWLINSON, M.A.,

OAMDeai PBOFEasoB or ancient histobt in the cnitebsitt or oxtobd, abv

OANON or OANTEBBUBT.



I^omflfes 6b Fatious ^utfiors.

BBV. 3. OBB, M.A., B.D. BEV. D. YOUNG, B.A.

BBV. a A. GOODHAET, M.A. REV. J. UEQUHABT, IiLA

BEV. H. T. BOBJOHNS, B.A.

VOL. I.



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
New Yoek and Toronto.



THE

BOOK OF EXODUS.

INTRODUCTION.



S 1. Title and Contents.

Th« Hebrew-speaking Jews have always designated the five boob ol
the Pentateuch by their initial word or words; and, as they called the
first book Bereshith, " In the Beginning," and the third Vay-yikra, " And he
called," so they denominated the second Ve-6leh shemdOi, " And these (are)
the names." The title "Exodus" was first applied to the book by the
Hellenistic, or Greek-speaking, Jews, who translated the Hebrew Bible
into Greek at Alexandria in the third and second centuries B.C. Exodus
(e|o8os) means " departure " or " outgoing," and was selected as an appro-
priate name for a work which treats mainly of the departure of the Children
of Israel out of the land of Egypt. The earliest Latin translation of the
Old Testament, which was made from the Greek, retained the Greek title
untranslated ; and hence it passed into the Vulgate of Jerome, and into the
languages of modern Europe.

WhUe the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, and the mode in
which it was brought about, constitute the main subject of the book, and
occupy its middle portion (ohs. ii. — ^xviii.), two other subjects are also treated
of, which form the prologue and the epilogue of the principal drama. The
former of these — ^the subject-matter of ch. i. — ^is the increase and growth of
the Israelites — their development from a tribe into a nation. The latter,
which in spuitual grandeur and importance holds a pre-eminent rank, is
the adoption of Israel as God's peculiar people by the Law given and the
Covenant entered into at Mount Sinai (chs. xix. — ^xl.). The contents are
thus in part historical, in part legislative. Historically, the book contains
the events of 360 years, which is the interval between th*? death of Joseph
and the giving of the Law at Sinai. It embraces the formation of tiie
people by a rapid increase, which may have been partly due to natural
causes, but was also in some degree the result of God's blessiiig resting
especially upon them ; the alarm of the Egyptian monarch at their growing
numbers ; his plans for Die venting their multiplicatior and the entire failure

h



LNTEODUCTION.



of those plans ; the tirtli and education of Moses ; his first nnauthorised
attempt to deliver his nation from oppression ; his flight to the land of
Midian, and Divine appointment to be the deliverer of his nation; his
communications with the Egyptian king on the subject of the people's
release ; the ten successive plagues whereby the king's reluctance was
ultimately overcome ; the institution of the Passover, and the departure of
the Isr»elites; Pharaoh's pursuit; the passage of the Eed Sea and the
destruction of the Egyptian host ; the journey from the Eed Sea to Sinai ;
the giving of the Decalogue and the acceptance of the "Book of the
Covenant " by the people ; the lapse into idolatry and its punishment
(ch. xxxii.); the directions given for the construction of the Tabernacle,
the freewill offerings made, and the execution of the work by Bezaleel and
Aholiab (chs. xxxv. — ^xl. 33); followed by the Divine occupation of the
new construction, and the establishment, in connection with it, of signs
whereby the further joumeyings of the people were directed (xl. 34 — 38).
In its legislative aspect, the book occupies the unique position of being the
very source and origin — fons et origo — alike of the moral and of the cere-
monial law, containing in the Decalogue an inspired summary of the first
principles of pure morality, and in the directions given with respect to the
Passover (xii. 1 — 60) and other feasts (ch. xxiii. 14 — 17), the redemption of
the firstborn (ch. xiii. 11 — 16), the materials and plan of the Tabernacle
(ch. XXV. 10 — ch. xxvii.), the vestments of the priests and high-priest
(ch. xxviii.), the method of their consecration (oh. xxix.), and other similar
matters, asserting and enforcing the necessity of a prescribed course of out-
ward acts and forms for the sustentation of religious life in a commTinity of
beings so constituted as men are in this world.

It has been well observed, that " the contents of the Second Book of
Moses include an extraordinary variety of matter, and offer to the inquiring
mind an unusual extent" of subjects for investigation.' The historical
sketch of Israel's position in Egypt invites inquiry into the dark and
difficult problems of Egyptian history and chronology : the Ten Plagues
open up to us the consideration of the natural phenomena of Egypt and the
East generally ; the joumeyings of the Hebrews in Egypt and the Sinaitic
peninsula lead the way to various geographical doubts and queries ; the
Decalogue and the Book of the Covenant give occasion for, if they do
not necessitate, investigations connected with the sciences of ethics and
jurisprudence ; lastly, the account of the Tabernacle, the sacred utensils,
and the sacerdotal dress and ornaments, involve the consideration of the
previous history of art, and the existing state of proficiency in such handi-
crafts as weaving, embroidery, and metallurgy. Again, the language of
Exodus, in common with that of the rest of the Pentateuch, has to some

• Kalisch, 'Historical and Critical Commentajy on the Old Testament,' Introduction to
Bxdous, § 1, par. 8.



INTRODUCTION. ffi



extent an Egyptian tinge, and involves philological inquiries of considerable
difficulty and importance. Altogether the Book is one of extraordinary and
diversified interest, and necessitates a number of disquisitions of a more or
less abstruse character.

§ 2. Divisions.

It is usual to divide Exodus iato two portions only, the first extending
from ch. i. to the end of ch. xix., and treating of the circumstances under
which the deliverance from Egypt was effected ; the second, commencing
with ch, XX. and reaching to the end of the book, containing an account of
the giving of the Law, and the institutions by which the organisation of
the people was completed. But, for the purposes of a comment such as the
present, something more than this broad distinction and single line of
demarcation is needed. It is not, however, necessary to have recourse to
artificial or imaginary termini. The Book itself bears a markedly sectional
character, which has been accounted for on the supposition that it was
composed at different times, and written on separate parchments or papyri,
each section being of such a length as suited it for congregational reading.'
The first and second chapters together form such a Bection. Its main subject
is the oppression of the Israelites by the Egyptians, with which is inter-
woven an account of the birth of Moses, and the first wholly abortive attempt
which he made to right the wrongs of his people and improve their social
position. This is followed by a section on the call of Moses, and the Divine
commission given to him, whereby he was empowered to take the oversight
of his people, to act for them, to plead for them with Pharaoh, and ulti-
mately to lead them out of Egypt ; the section terminating with the
people's acknowledgment of his mission, and acceptance of him as their chief
(ch. iv. 31). The third section is co-extensive with ch. v. It contains the
record of Moses' first application to the king of Egypt on behalf of Israel,
and of its unhappy result. Section 4 is the sequel to this. It consists
of ch. vi. vers. 1 to 27, and tells of the depression of the people in con-
sequence of their increased affliction, the encouragement vouchsafed by
Grod to Moses, and the fresh " charge " given by God to him and Aaron to
persist in their efforts and effect the people's release. The next section is
a long one. It begins at verse 28 of ch. vi. and continues to the end of
ch. xi. The subject is an account of the nine ineffectual plagues, against
which Pharaoh " hardened his heart," prefaced by a description of the one
miracle wrought as a mere sign to accredit the mission of the brothers, and
followed by the announcement of the tenth and last plague, before which
even Pharaoh's stubborn will was to bend. Section 6 contains the institution
of the Passover, the tenth plague, and the actual hasty departure of the

I • Speaker's Commentai7,' vol. i. pp. 237 — 8

»-2



INTEODUOTION,



Israelites from Eameses, when Pharaoh finally "thrust them out." It
consists of the first forty-two verses of ch. xii. Section 7 contains directions
with respect to the Passover and the sanctification of the firstborn. It
extends from ch. xii. 43 to ch. xiii. 16, and constitutes a document apart, of
a purely legal character, which was probably inserted at this point, as the
fittest place for it, when the various sections were finally put together by
their author. In the next section (ch. xiii. 17 — oh. xv.), the historical
narrative is resumed, and the march of the Israelites is traced from Sucooth
to the shores of the Eed Sea ; their pursuit by the Egyptians is related,
together with their miraculous passage across the bed of the sea, and the
destruction of Pharaoh's host by the return of the waters. Section 9
contains the song of Moses and Miriam, and consists of the first twenty-
one verses of ch. xv. In section 10 the further march of the Israelites is
traced, and they are conducted from the Eed Sea to Sinai, where God
proposes to enter into a covenant with them (ch. xv. 22 to the end of
ch. xix.). Section 11 contains the Decalogue, together with the " Book of
the Covenant," and extends from ch. xx. 1 to ch. xziii. 33. Section 12
comprises — ^the acceptance of the covenant ; the revelation of God's presence
to Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and the seventy elders ; together with the ascent
of Moses into the cloud that covered the mountaia, and his continuance
there for forty days (ch. xxiv.). Section 13 contains the directions gives
by God for the construction of the Tabernacle, the Ark of the Covenant,
the altar of bumt-ofiering, and the court of the Tabernacle ; for the
sacerdotal garments, and the ceremonial of priestly consecration ; for the
altar of incense; and for the composition of the incense and of the oil
of consecration (ch. xxv. — xxx.). Section 14 contains the appointment of
Bezaleel and AhoHab as the artists to execute the required works ; the
appointment of the Sabbath as a sign ; and the delivery to Moses of the
two Tables of stone, written with the finger of God. It is coincident
with ch. xxxi. Section 15 is purely historical. It gives an account of the
terrible sin of the people in setting up the golden calf, and the consequences
of this dreadful sin — the breaking of the two Tables, the slaughter of three
thousand guilty persons by the Levites, and the threat of the withdrawal
of God's presence, which however was revoked at the prayer of Moses
(chs. xxxii. — xxxiii.). Section 16 (ch. xxxiv.) is the sequel to section 15.
It records the renewal of the two Tables of stone, and the descent of Moses
from Sinai with them in his hand, and with a glory on his face that the
people could not bear to look on, whence the necessity of his veiling
himself. The remaining section (chs. xxxv. — xl.) contains the historiotd
account of the construction of the Tabernacle, the Ark of the Covenant, the
altars of incense and burnt-offering, the priests' dresses, etc., the setting of
all things in their places, and the sanctification of the whole by the visible
entrance of the Shechinah into the sacred dwelling-place.



INTRODUCTION.



§ 3. Unitt of the work.

Much the eame arguments have been employed to disprove the unity of
Exodus, and to establish the theory that it is the work of at least two
authors, as have been already examined in this Commentary with respect
to Genesis. "The Elohist" and "the Jehovist" are again paraded before
us, as if they were admitted realities, instead of being, as they are, pure
figments, the creations of a captious and over-refining pseudo-criticism.
There is the same want of agreement among the various advocates of the
theory, which has been already noticed in the comment on Genesis, as to
which passages are the work of the Elohist, and which of the Jehovist,
whole chapters being assigned to one of them by some critics, and by others
to the other.^ Moreover, curiously enough, in their application to Exodus,
the very raison d'Mre of the names disappears, passages being ascribed to
the Jehovist in which the only name of God is Elohim, and others to the
Elohist in which the only name used is Jehovah? Under these circumstances
it would only be reasonable that the terms Elohist and Jehovist should be
relinquished, and the confession made that the theory on which they are
based has broken down ; but " the higher criticism," as it delights to call
itself, seems not greatly to affect the virtue of candour. The real question
now raised with regard to Exodus is not whether it can be divided into two
sets of passages, Elohistio and Jehovistic respectively, in the former of
which may be recognised the original document, while the latter are the
work of an editor, supplementer, or compiler ; but whether any division at
all can be made, whether there are any clear traces of a second hand, or
whether the " book " has not, in its structure, style, and method such clear
and unmistakable marks of unity as to point distinctly to a single author.*

Now the book has one clear and plain purpose, which is to give an
ao«!ount of the circumstances under which the Israelites quitted Egypt, and
became God's peculiar people, bound to him by a covenant, and granted his
continuous presence with them to guide and direct them. The narrative
flows on without a break. If there are some chronological gaps in the
kirHer portion,* they are necessitated by the fact that nothing occurred

• As ch. 3CX., which is assigned to the Elohist by De Wette, Stahelin, and Von Lengerke, but
to the Jehovist \>j Knobel (' Exegetisches Handbuch,' vol. ii. p. xvilA

* E.g. Ex. i. 15 — 22 is assigned to the Jehovist by Knobel, De Wette, Von Lengerke, and
others, though God appears as Elohim in vers. 17, 20 and 21, and the name Jehovah does not
appear at aJL Similarly chs. xxv. — ^xxviii. are ascribed to the Elohist, though Jehovah occmrs
in them five times, and Elohim not at all. Less extreme cases are those of ch. iii. and chs

XXX. ^xxxi., both called Elohistic ; though in the former Jehovah occurs twenty times, and

Elohim seven oiJy ; in the latter, Jehovah occurs fifteen times, and Elohim only twice.

• Against the disintegrating views of so many German critics may well be set the conviction
of Kalisch : — " We see the completest harmony in all parts of Exodus ; we consider it as a
perfect whole : pervaded tiiroughout by one spirit and the same leading ideas." (' Hist and
tSrit Ccmmentary,' p. x. B. TO

* JiiB between the death of Joseph (ch. i. 6) and the accession of the " new king, which knew
not JoMph" (ib. S) ; between tiie adoption of Moses by Pharaoh's daughter (ch. ii. 5 — IV) and



INTEODUCTION.



during the omitted periods wMcli either advanced or hindered the action
which it is the writer's business to relate. He is not a secular historian,
bent on recording all the circumstances in the early life of his nation, but a
sacred writer, a religious teacher, bound to confine his attention to their
theocratic history, or in other words to God's providential dealings with
them. These consist for some centuries in two things only — the rapid
increase of the race, despite all attempts to hinder it ; and the severe
oppression to which after a time they were subjected. The former is
important as giving them the strength to do what they did ; the latter as
supplying the motive. So these two things are put on record ; but their
life before the oppression began, and even the time that the oppression
lasted, which an ordinary historian would of course have noted, are omitted
as unimportant for the theocratic history. Similarly, with regard to Moses,
the leader of the Exodus, while those circumstances which prepared him
for his task — his education at the court, which gave him ready access to
Pharaoh, and his sojourn in Midian, which made him familiar with life in
the desert — are clearly marked ; all the details of his early career, covering a
space (according to St. Stephen, Acts vii. 23) of " full forty years,'' and all
but the barest outline of his life in Midian, occupying another similar term,
are suppressed, as not helping on the people's deliverance, or conducing to
their reception into covenant. But, from the time that the deliverance
begins, i.e. from the date of Moses' call, there are no gaps, no omissions —
every step of the history is traced with the utmost minuteness, because each
furthers the great ends which the writer has in view — first, the people's
deliverance — ^then, their acceptance into covenant at Siaai — ^finally, the
completion of the covenant on God's part by the visible location of the
Shechinah in the Tabernacle.

And as there is this unity of historical aim in the whole of Exodixs, so is
there a great unity of style. Historical narrative indeed, and the details of
legislation and construction, being subjects exceedingly diverse, cannot well
be treated in the same way ; and it would be fanciful to maiatain, that
either " the Book of the Covenant " or the description of the Tabernacle is
manifestly from the same hand as the account of the oppression of Israel or
of the plagues ; but wherever in the later chapters a narrative pa«»sage
occurs {e.g. chs. xxiv. ; xxxii. — xxxiv. 8; xxxiv. 28 — 35; xl. 16 — 38), the
resemblances to the style of the earlier portion of the book (chs. i. — xix.)
are numerous and striking ; ^ and similarly, wherever in the early portion

his "going out unto his brethren" (e5. 11) ; and between the birth of Gershom (ib. 22) and
the miracle of the burning bush (ch. iii. 2).

' It would be tedious to exhibit this agreement, and it seems to be unnecessary. No argu-
ments of any weight have been adduced by the opponents of the unity, based upon style.
When Stehelin says, " Wherever I find mention of a ' pillar of fire,' or of a ' cloud,' or an
' angel of Jehovah, or the phrase ' flowing with milk and honey,' . . . when mention is made
of a ' coming down of God,' or when the Canaanite nations are numbered, or the Tabernacle
■opposed to be without the camp, I feel tolerably certain that I am reading the words of th«



INTRODUCTION. tO



legislation is introduced (e.g. ch. xii. 1 — 20 ; 43 — 50 ; oh. xiii. 1 — 16 ; oh., xx.),
the style and mode of expression recall the general tone of the Book's later
sections. Style indeed is so much a matter of instinctive perception and
feeling, and nnity of style is a thing so little admitting of proof, that no
writer can do much more than state his own impressions on the subject, it
being quite impossible adequately to represent the grounds of them. Foi
our own part, we feel bound to echo the conclusion of KaHsch, who says —
" We see the completest harmony in all parts of Exodus; we consider it as
a perfect whole, pervaded throughout by one spirit and the same leading
ideas." 1

The only reasonable ground which exists for any doubt or hesitation
on the question of the unity is the fact, already noted,^ of the markedly
sectional character of the work — ^its division into a number of distinctly
separate portions, not very skilfully or artistically joined together. But
this peculiarity is exactly what might have been looked for in a work
which was written by snatches in the rare intervals of leisure allowed by a
life of extreme and almost constant activity, and under circumstances that
precluded attention to literary finish. If the writer of Exodus was a con-
temporary, who from time to time placed on record the series of events
whereof he was a witness, soon after their occurrence, and who ultimately
arranged his various pieces into a volume, the result would naturally be
that which the Book of Expdus presents to us.^ Had a compiler, a mere
man of letters, efifected the arrangement, it is probable that the result would
have been, in a literary point of view, better, i.e. more artistic — the breaks
in the narrative would have been fewer and less abrupt ; repetitions would
have been avoided ; the roughness inseparable from a work hastily accom-
plished in odds and ends of time would have been smoothed down, and we
should have had a more finished literary composition. Thus, the " frag-
mentary character " of Exodus is an important and precious indication that
we have the work in its original form — the statue as it was rough-hewn in
the quarry — and that it has not undergone the process of polishing and
amoothing at the hands of a redactor, compUer, or supplementarist.

i 4. Mosaic authorship.

It IB an axiom of sound criticism that books are to be attributed to the
authors to whom tradition assigns them, unless very strong reasons can be
shown to the contrary.* Exodus, and indeed the Pentateuch generally, has

author of the Second Legislation," it is perfectly clear that the supposed notes of autliorship aM
wholly arbitrary and fanciful.
' ' Historical and Critical Commentary,' Introduction, p. x.

• Compa?rBose'nmiiller, " Prolegomena in Exodmn," § 2, in his ' Scholia in Vetaa Testa-

mentum,^vol. ii. pp. 2 — 4.

« See ' Aids to Faith,' Essay vi. § 3 ; pp. 238—9



»« INTEODUOTION.



been assigned to Moses by a unanimous tradition, current alike among
Pharisees and Sadducees, among Jews and Samaritans, among those who
ascri'bed a sacred character to the work and those who regarded it as •
mere human production. No other author has ever been put forward as
a rival candidate to Moses ; * and we must either ascribe the work to a
wholly unknown and nameless writer,^ who, with a marvellous humility
and self-abnegation, while composing the most important treatise which
the world had seen, concealed himself so effectually as to secure his own
complete oblivion, or we must admit that the tradition is in the right,
and that Moses, the hero of Exodus, and of the three following books,
was also their composer.

It has sometimes been argued that the historical Moses, considering the
time when he lived, and the condition of the world at that period, could not
possibly have been the author even of a single book of the Pentateuch.
Some have supposed that alphabetic writing was not at the time invented,
and that if the Egyptian hieroglyphic system was anterior to Moses, it
could not have been employed to embody with any definiteness the
articulate soimds of the Hebrew language.^ Others, without going these
lengths, have maintained that so grand a work as the Pentateuch could not
possibly have been produced at so early a period of the world's history,
when literature, like everything else, must have been in its infancy. Thus
De Wette urges that the Pentateuch is altogether beyond the Uteraiy
capabilities of the age, containing within it, as he says it does, " every
element of Hebrew literature in the highest perfection to which it ever
attained, and so necessarily belonging to the acme and not to the childhood
of the nation." It is absurd, he thinks, to suppose that in so rude and
primitive a time the Hebrew nation should have produced a writer
possessing such powers of mind, and such a mastery over his native
language as to " leave nothing for succeeding authors but to follow in his
footsteps." *

In answer to these prelimiuary objections it is to be noted — ^first, that
alphabetic writing is a much earlier discovery than has sometimes been
supposed, and that there is every reason to believe that its use was widely
spread over the world in ages long anterior to Moses. Berosus believed it
to have been an antediluvian invention, and related that Xisuthrus, or

' When Jerome says that the Pentateuch may be considered either the work of Moses or of
Ezra, he does not mean to ascribe to the latter anything more than that sort of verbal revision
(^modernising of language, explanation or possibly alteration of ob:;olete names, and the like)
which tradition connectB with his name. He distinctly calls Moses the " author " and Ezra the
" restorer " of the work.

• It does not much mend the matter if we suppose, with Ewald, half-a-dozen such writers,
all equally reticent ; while this theory introduces the fresh difficulty that the patchwork of sis
or seven difierent hands is found to be pervaded by a marked unity of style and of design.

• See Norton, ' Genuineness of the Gospels,' vol. ii. Appendix, Note D, § 3 ; pp. 439 — 111

• Db Wette. ' Einleitunff in d. alt. Tpjit..' S 1fi3. mh fin.



De Wette, ' Einleitung in d. alt. Test..' § 163, sub fia



INTEODUCTION.



Hasis-adia, his " Noah," consigned to writing the learning of the old world
before the Flood, impressing it on tablets of baked clay, which he buried at
Sippara, and exhumed after the Flood had Bubsided.* Existing Babylonian
inscriptions upon bricks and gems' are believed to date from before
B.C. 2000. Ewald remarks,* that the words expressive of " writing " (3^3),
" book " ("ISO), and " ink " (I'l), are common to aU the branches and
dialects of Semitic speech, except that the Ethiopio and the Southern
Arabian have pnv for " to write," and deduces from this fact the conclusion
that writing in a book with ink must have been known to the earliest
Semites before they separated off into their various tribes, nations, and
families.* The Hittites were certainly acquaiateJ with letters before the
time of Moses ; for not only had they written treaties with the Egyptians
at a period anterior to the Exodus,^ but a Hittite author is mentioned by
Fentaour, a royal scribe of the reign of Eameses the Great.' Alphabetic
writing was probably an art weU known in the greater part of Western
Asia from a date preceding not only Moses but Abraham.

The Egyptian system of hieroglyphic writing was also beyond all doubt
complete several centuries before Abraham. This system is sometimes
supposed to be little more than a representation of ideas by pictorial forms ;
but in reality it is almost wholly phonetic' There would be no difficulty
in transliterating the Pentateuch into hieroglyphic characters," which one
familiar with them would read off so as to be intelligible to a Jew. If
Moses, therefore, did not possess an alphabetic system of his own, and was
acquainted with the hieroglyphic system, which is not impossible, since he
was bred up at the court, and " learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians"
(Acts vii. 22), he might have written the Pentateuch in that character. At
any rate, it would have been easy for him to adopt the cursive hieratic
character, which, while based upon the hieroglyphics, presents no pictures
of objects, but only a set of straight or curvilinear lines. The hieratic
writing was certainly in use as early as the time of the twelfth or thirteenth
dynasty,' and therefore long anterior to the Exodus.

With regard to the objection of De Wette, that a work so perfect as the
Pentateuch is altogether beyond the literary capabilities of the age of Moses,

• Frag. 7 fin C. MuUer's ' Fragm. Hist Grsec.,' vol. ii. p. 501). . „ , , .

• EawUnson, 'Ancient Monarchies,' vol L pp. 80, 87, 199; 'History of Herodotus,' vol J.
pp. 360 — 2, 2nd edition.

• ' GescMchte des Volkes Israel,' voL i. p. 77. , „ , „ ,,,„ , ^.

• The argument is analogous to those drawn by Professor Max MOIler from the word*
eommon to all Aryan dialects, and seems to be quite unanswerable

• ' Eecords of the Past,' vol. iv. pp. 27—32.

• Brugsch, 'Histoired'£gypte,'p. 139. , , . ,:„»«. u ■ t. . ,tj a
' Lenormant, 'Manuel d'Histoire Ancienne,' voL i. p. 500; Birch, in Bunsens 'BgyM^

• For tiie details of the process, see Canon Cook's essay 'On Egyptian Words in the Penta-
teuch,' published in the ' Speaker's Commentary,' vol. i. pp. 476—492.

» ' Beeords of the Fast,' vol vi p. 134. Compare Birch, ' Ancient Egypt, p 48,



INTBODUOTION.



the present writer may perhaps be allowed to quote a passage which ho
wrote twenty years ago, and which he has never seen answered : — " De
Wette's statement is a gross exaggeration of the reality. Considered as
a literary work, the Pentateuch is not the production of an advanced or
refined, but of a simple and rude age. Its characteristics are plainness,
inartificiality, absence of rhetorical ornament, and occasional defective
arrangement. The only style which it can be truly said to bring to
perfection, is that simple one of clear and vivid narrative which is always
best attained in the early dawn of a nation's literature, as a Herodotus,
a Froissart, and a Stow suflSciently indicate. In other respects it is quite
untrue to say that the work goes beyond all later Hebrew efforts. We
look in vain through the Pentateuch for the gnomic wisdom of Solomon,
the eloquent denunciations of Ezekiel and Jeremiah, or the lofty flights of
Isaiah. It is absurd to compare the song of Moses, as a Hterary production,
even with some of the psalms of David, much more to parallel it with
Ezekiel's eloquence and Homeric variety, or Isaiah's awful depth and
solemn majesty of repose. In a literary point of view it may be questioned
whether Moses did so much for the Hebrews as Homer for the Greeks, or
whether his writings had really as great an influence on the after pro-
ductions of his countrymen. And if his literary greatness stUl surprises us,
if Hebrew literature stUl seems in his person to reach too suddenly a high
excellence, albeit not so high a one as has been argued — ^let us remember, in
the first place, that Moses was not, any more than Homer, the first writer of
his nation, but only happens to be the first whose writings have come down
to us. ' Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona.* Moses seems so great because
we do not possess the works of his predecessors, and so are unable to trace
the progress of Hebrew literature up to him. Had we the ' Songs of Israel '
(Niun. xxi. 17), and the ' Book of the Wars of the Lord ' (ib. 14), which he
quotes, we might find him no literary phenomenon at all, but as a writer
merely on a level with others of his age and nation." * Moreover, recent
research has shown that in Egypt, long prior to the time at which Moses
wrote, literature had become a profession, and was cultivated in a variety of
branches with ardour and considerable success. Morality, history, epistolary
correspondence, poetry, medical science, novel - writing, were known as
separate studies, and taken for their special subjects by numerous writers,
from a date anterior to Abraham.* In the times of the eighteenth and
nineteenth dynasties, under one or the other of which the Exodus almost
certainly took place, Egyptian Uterature reached its acme : lengthy works
were composed, such as that contained in the " Great Harris Papyrus,"
trhioh is 133 feet long by nearly seventeen inches broad ; ^ writers enjoyed

■ ' Aids to Faith,' Essay vi. pp. 245—6 Q>ablished in 1861).
* See Goodwin, in ' Cambridge Essays ' tot 1858, pp. 280 — 260l
' ■ Eecords of the Fast,' toL tl p. 21



INTBODUCTION. xi



a high status and reputation ; their compositions were engraved upon
temple walls ; ^ and it passed into a proverb that literature was the first and
best of aU employments.^ Moses, educated at the court under one or other
of these dynasties, and intended doubtless for official life, would necessarily
receive a literary training, and would be perfectly competent to produce an
extensive literary work, the exact merit of which would of course depend on
his ability and genius.

If then there is no obstacle arising out of the circumstan jes of the time
when Moses lived, to hinder our regarding him as the author of Exodus,
and if tradition is unanimous in assigning it to him, nothing remains but
to ask what internal evidence the book itself offers upon the subject —
does it support, or does it make against, the hypothesis of the Mosaic
authorship ?

And first, as to language and style. We have already noticed* the
simplicity of style observable in Exodus and the Pentateuch generally,
which places it on a par with the early writings of other nations, and
proves it to belong to the dawn of Hebrew literature. The language is
generally allowed to be archaic, or at any rate to contain archaisms ; and
though some writers deny this, and assert that the unusual forms and
words which characterise the Pentateuch are " not so much archaisms as
peculiarities," yet this conclusion is contrary to the general opinion vi
Hebrew scholars,* and has the appearance of being rather a position forced
on its maintainers by the exigencies of controversy, than one assumed'
spontaneously from a dispassionate consideration of the Unguistic facts.
Such features as the employment of the pronoun Nin for the third person
of both genders, of 1V3 for " girl " as well as " boy," and of the full form 1-1
instead of the abraded -1 for the termination of the third person plural of
the preterite, are by the very nature of things and the universal laws of
language, archaic. The archaic character of other peculiar forms is also
indicated by the fact that several of them occur besides only in Joshua,
whUe some are common to the Pentateuch with none but very late books,
e.g. Chronicles and Ezekiel, books written in the decay of the language,
when it is notorious that writers studiously imitate the 'old forms.' Exodus
has its full share of these peculiarities, which we must venture, with the
bulk of Hebrew critics, still to term " archaisms," and has therefore at least

> As the poem of Fentaour, which maj to this day be lead on the walls of the great Temple
of Xamak.

' In the ' Praise ui Learning ' we read — " Consider that there is not anything beyqnd letters "
(' Records of the Past,' vol. viiL p. 147) ; and again — " Love letters as thy mother ; it is a
greater possession than all employments" ((&. p. 148); and — "Cionsider, there is not an
employiaent destitute of superior ones, except the scribe's, which is the first" (ib. p. 153).

■ fitLrvrn.^ p. X.



* The archaic character of the language of Exodus and the Pentateuch generally is main-
tained by Jahn, Fritzsche, De Wette, Havemick, Keil and Delitzscb, Marsh, Stoiut, Bishof
Uarold Browne, Canon Cook, Dean Perowne, and others; it ii impugned by Vatar, Geeenius
and a few more.

* Perowne, in Dr. Smith's ' Dictionary of the Bible,' roL ii. p. 768.



Bii INTEODUCTION.



■8 mucb claim as any other of the five hooks to he regarded as Mosaic on
this ground.

The language of Exodus has also another peculiarity, which, if it does
not prove the Mosaic authorship, fits in exactly with it, viz. the freqn^it
occurrence of Egyptian words and phrases. This suhject has heen treated
elaborately by Canon Cook ' and M. Harkavy,* who have proved heyond
all question that in that part of his narrative which deals with Egyptian
matters, words are constantly used by the author of Exodus which are
either pure Egyptian, or common to Egyptian with Hebrew. From thirty
to forty such words occur in the first sixteen chapters.^ Subsequently they
are more rare ; but a certain number of Egyptian words occur even in the
later chapters,* showing how familiar the writer was with the language,
and how naturally he had recourse to it where the vocabulary of his native
tongue was defective. Egyptian phrases are also not unfrequently used, as
" the lip of the river " (ch. ii. 5) for " the brink of the river ; " " chiefs of
tribute" (ch. i. 11) for "taskmasters;" an "ark of bulrushes" (iL 3);
" making persons' savour to stink " (v. 21) ; " consuming enemies a» stvbble "
(oh. XV. 7), etc.

Next, vtdth respect to the matter of the book, it is to be remarked that
the •writer— whoever he was — shows a notable acquaintance with the
customs, climate, and productions of Egypt ; an acquaintance such as to
imply long residence in the country, and the sort of familiarity which it
takes years to acquire, with the natural phenomena, the method of culti-
vation, the religious ideas, and other habits and usages of the people.
Under this head it is important to observe that large additions are con-
stantly being made to the stock of our Egyptian knowledge by learned
research into the native documents, which are copious, even for the time
anterior to Moses, with this result hitherto — ^that fresh illustrations of the
truthfulness with which Egypt and the Egyptians are portrayed in Exodus
continually reveal themselves, while contradictions of the narrative, dis-
crepancies, even difficulties, are almost whoUy absent. There was a time
when the author of the Pentateuch was boldly taxed with ignorance of
Egyptian customs," and when it was argued on this groimd that he could
not possibly be Moses. Now, no one ventures on such an assertion. The
works of Hengstenberg * and Canon Cook ' are sufficient to preclude the

■ ' Appendix to Exodus,' Essay ii. ' On Egyptian Words in the Pentateach,' in the ' Speaker'!
Commentaiy,' vol. L pp. 476 — 492.

* See an article entitled ' Les Mots filgyptiens de la Bible,' published in the ' Jonmal Asia-
tique' for March, 1870.

• Cook, in the ' Speaker's Commentary,' vol. i p. 244, note -

' E.g. Shesh, in ch. zxT. 4 ; taeharah, in ch. xxviii. 32 ; thwmmim, in ch. zxriiL 80; and
Mn, in ch. xxix. 40.

• Von Bohleu, ' Gommentar,' p. 360

* ■ Aegypten und Moses,' Berfin, 1840. Translated by Robbing, with additional notes hj Dr
Cooke Taylor, in Clark's Edinburgh Series, Edinburgh, 1845.

' ' Comment on Exodus ' in the ' Speaker's Commentary,' vol. L London, 1871



IKTllODUCTION. xiii



possibilily of the revival of this line of attack; hut the couater-evidenoe
continually accumulateB. Not a year passes without the discovery of fresh
passages in Egyptian literature, which harmonise with and illustrate the
narrative delivered to us in Exodus.

It is further ohservable that the writer, who has this wide and exact
acquaintance with Egypt and the Egyptians, is also perfectly familiar with
the character of the Siaaitic peninsula, with its vegetable and animal
products, with its natural phenomena, as that of the manna, with its rare
springs, sometimes sweet, sometimes " bitter " (ch. xv. 23), its wells, its
occasional palm-groves {ib. 27), its acacia trees (ch. xxv. 10, 23 ; xxvi. 15,
eto.), its long stretches of dry sand, its bare rocks and lofty mountains. It
has been weU said that " the chapters of Exodus which belong either to the
early eojourn'of Moses or to the wanderings of the Israelites, are pervaded
by a peculiar tone, a local colouring, an atmosphere (so to speak) of the
desert, which has made itself felt by all those who have explored the
oonntry, to whatever school of religious thought they may have belonged." ^

This double knowledge of Egypt and of the Siaaitic peninsula, joined
to the antique character of the work, seems to amount to a proof that
the book of Exodus was written either by Moses or by one of those who
accompanied him in his journey from the land of Goshen to the borders of
Palestiae. There was no period between the Exodus and the reign of
Solomon when an Israelite — and the writer was certaialy an Israelite — ^was
likely to be familiar either with Egypt or with the Sinaitic peninsula, much
less with both. There was little intercourse between the Hebrews and
Egypt from the time of the passage of the Eed Sea to that of Solomon's
marriage with Pharaoh's daughter ; and if occasionally during this period
an Israelite went down into Egypt and sojourned there (1 Chr. iv. 18), it
was a very unlikely thing that he should visit the region about Sinai,
which lay above 150 miles out of his route. Add to this the dangers of the
journey and the absence of any conceivable motive for it, and the conclusion
seems almost certain that only one of those who, after being brought up
among the Egyptians, traversed the " wilderness of the wanderings" on bin
way to Palestine, can have composed the existing record.

The conclusion thus reached is, for aU critical purposes, sufficient. If
the narrative is from the pen of an eye-witness, it must possess the highest
degree of historical credibility,^ and, so far as accuracy and trustworthiness
are concerned, can gain nothing, or at any rate very little, by being ascribed
to one of the emigrants rather than another. We trust the last book of the
' De Bello GaUico ' no less than the remainder, though written by Hirtius
and not by Caesar; and the authenticity of Exodus would be no whit

' Canon Cook, in the ' Speaker's Commentary,' vol. L p. 244.

■ See the writer's 'Bampton Lectures,' pp 21, 22, and compare Comewall Lewii OD th«
'Oredibilitj of Early Boman History,' vol i. p 16.



»«v INTEODUCTION.



diminisLed by JosLua or Caleb being its author instead of Moses. Could
we suppbse it written by a mere ordinary Israelite, the case would be Bome-
what different ; but it is evidently impossible, considering the circumstances
of the ti rae, to ascribe a work of such high literary merit, and one evidencing
such varied and extensive knowledge, to any one below the rank of a high
officer, a leading man among the people.

The absolute Mosaic authorship of Exodus is thus a matter not so much
of historical importance as of literary curiosity. Still it is of interest to
know the real author of any great book, and essential to a right estimate
of the character and work of Moses that we should understand whether or
no he added to his other eminent qualities the literary ability and power
which " Exodus " displays. What then does the Book itself reveal to Tia
on this subject? In the first place it shows us the ability of Mosea
to write (ch. xxiv. 4); in the next it informs us that he was expressly
commanded by God to write an account of some of those very matters
which are contained in Exodus (ch. xvii. 14 ; xxxiv. 27) ; in the third
place it distinctly tells us in one passage that he " wrote aU. the words of
the Lcrd " (ch. xxxiv. 4), these " words " being (according to almost all
commentators) the passage which extends from ch. xx. 22 to the end of
ch. xxiii. ; finally, it speaks of a " book " which it calls " the book " * (the
expression used being 1SB3 and not "iSpS), wherein one of his writings was
to be inserted, whereby it would seem that at the time of the war with
Amalek (ch. xvii. 8 — 14) Moses already had a book in which he was putting
on record the circumstances of the Israelites' deliverance — a book, as Keil
says,* " appointed for the record of the glorious works of Grod." The
question naturally occurs to a candid mind. Why should not this be the
book which we possess ? why go out of our way to suppose a second author
unnamed and unnameable, when here is one distinctly proclaimed — an
author more competent to the task than any other Israelite then living —
and moreover the very man to whom an ancient and uniform tradition has
always ascribed the work in question ? There should be some very cogent
arguments, derivable from the contents of the book, to set against this
evident prima facie probability, in order even to raise a doubt on the subject,
and make it worth while to pursue the inquiry any farther.

What then is there said to be of this kind, constituting a di£Boalty in
our acceptance of the Mosaic authorship? First, the fact that Moses is
always spoken of in the third person. Now, as Xenophon and Csesar, in
writing histories of which they were the heroes, spoke of themselves always

> Knobel argaes that the expression, " write this in the book," merely means " pst thii into
writing " (' Exegetisches Handbuch,' vol. ii. p. 178), and qnotes Nmn. v. 23 ; 1 Sam. x. 25 ;
Jer. xxxii. 10 ; and Job xix. 23, as bearing out this explanation ; but of these passages oulj
the last is to the point, and there the LXX. have ^i' $iP\liii, not ir ry 0tfi\l^, « if their copi«
had had the reading 1QD3.

* 'CominMitaiy on itxe Old Testament,' toL ii p 81.



mXRODUOTION. xr



in the third person, it is at least not unnatural for a man who has to write
this sort of history to do so. Nay, it may rather be said to be distruotly
natural Perpetual egotism ia wearisome to the reader, and disagreeable
to the writer who is not pufFed-up by a sense of his own importance. The
use of the third person throws a veil, at any rate, over the egotistic character
of a work, softens it down, half obliterates it. We forget the writer in his
work, when the first person does not constantly obtrude him on us, and
pardon his being the hero of his own narrative when he is sufficiently
modest to preserve an incognito. Moreover, speaking of oneself in the third
person was common in Egypt in Moses' day. The inscriptions which kings
set up to commemorate their conquests were sometimes written wholly in
the third person,* sometimes partly in the third and partly in the first.'
The inscriptions placed by private individuals on their tombs generally
began in the third person.' With such examples before him, it cannot be
regarded as surprisirig that Moses avoided altogether the use of the first
person in his narrative and confined himself wholly to the third.

Secondly, it is said that Moses is spoken of —at any rate in one place
(oh. xi. 3), perhaps also in oh. vi. 26, 27 — in a way in which he would not
be likely to have spoken of himself. The objection taken may, in both
instances, be allowed, but without the conclusion following which is sup-
posed to follow. For the passages are both of them parenthetic, and also
abnormal. They do not speak of Moses as he is commonly spoken of; and
they are so isolated from the context that their removal would leave no gap,
produce no difficulty. They are thus exactly such passages as may have
been introduced on that review of the book which is ascribed to Ezra by
ancient authorities,* and generally allowed to have taken place by modems.
The question whether Moses or a nameless contemporary is to be regarded
as the author of Exodus cannot properly be ruled by reference to one or two
passages — especially parenthetic passages. We must look upon the matter
more broadly. We must ask ourselves, Is the entire presentation of the
personal character and qualifications of the great Israelite leader which the
book ofiers more consonant with the view that Moses himself wrote it, or
with the theory that it was composed by one of the younger and subordinate
Israelite leaders, as Joshua or Caleb ? Now, nothing is more striking in that
presentation than the humble estimate made of the character, gifts, powers,

> As the statistical tablet of Kamak, or 'Annals of Thothmes III.,' published in the 'Becords
of the Past,' vol. ii. pp. 19 — 28, and the inscription of Piauchi Mer-amon in the same voliune
(pp. 81—104).

* This is the case in the long inscription of Thothmes HI. (' Records of the Past,' vol. ii. pp.
S5— 58), where the person changes on page 53 ; and again in the ' Annals of Eameses 111.
(' Records,' vol. vi. pp. 23 — ^70), where changes of person occur on pp. 34, 50, 52, 59, and 69.

* For specimens, see the ' Records,' vol. vi. p. 7 ; vol. x. pp. 3, 7, etc. Sometimes a funereal
inscription is entirely in the third person, as that of Ameni (' Records,' vol. vi. pp. 3, 4).

* Tertullian, ' De Cultu Femin.^ $ 8 ; CUem. Alex. ' Strom.' i 22 ; Hieronym. ' Ad Helvid.'
vol. S. V. 212 : etc.



»d INTRODUCTION.



and even of the personal conduct of the great leader. From first to last he
is never praised ; once only (in the passage objected to) he is said to have
come to be " very great in the sight of Pharaoh's servants " and the Egyptian
people. His faults are set forth without any disguise or extenuation : his
hastiness and unjustifiable violence in " slaying the Egyptian " (ch. iL 12) ;
his foolish assumption of authority over his brethren (ib. 13) ; his timidity
when he found that he was likely to be punished for his crime {ib. 14, 15) ;
hifl onwiUingness to undertake the mission which God assigned to him
(ch. iv. 1 — 13) ; his neglect of the covenant of circimicision (ib. 24 — 26) : his
irreverent remonstrance when success did not attend his first application
to Pharaoh (oh. v. 22 — 24) ; and his want of self-control when on account of
the sia of his people in worshipping the golden calf he " cast the Tables "
— written by the finger of God — " out of his hands and brake them "
(ch. zxxii. 19). Nothing is said of his possessing any remarkable ability.
On the contrary, he is represented as insisting, over and over again, on his
incompetency, on his want of eloquence (ch. iv. 10), his insignificance
("Who am I?" ch. iii. 11), and his inability to persuade even his own
people (ch. iv. 1 ; vi. 12). No credit is assigned to him for anything that
he does ; for his bold and courageous behaviour before Pharaoh ; for that
organisation of the people which must have preceded the Exodus ; • for his
oonduct of the march ; or for that faith which never wavered, even when
he and his people were shut in between the irresistible host of Pharaoh and
the waters of an apparently untraversable sea (ch. xiv. 13, 14). While it
is in complete harmony with the general practice of the sacred writers,
and with the spirit of true religion, that such reticence and such a dis-
paraging tone should be employed by a writer respecting himself, it is
quite inconceivable that either Joshua or any other companion of Moses
should have written of him in this style. To his contemporaries, to those
who had seen his miracles, and who owed their lives and liberties to his
bold and successful guidance, Moses must have been a hero, a paladin, the
first, the greatest, and the most admirable of men. We may see what they
thought of him by the words with which Deuteronomy closes — "There
arose not a prophet since in Israel Uke unto Moses, whom the Lord knew
face to face, in aU the signs and the wonders which the Lord sent him to
do in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all hia
land, and in all that mighty hand, and in aU the great terror which Moses
showed in the sight of all Israel " (Deut. xxxiv. 10 — 12).

If then the style and diction of Exodus, combined with the knowledge

which it exhibits both of Egypt and of the Sinaitic peninsula, indicate

unmistakably for lis author either Moses or one of the other leading

Israelites of Moses' time, there cannot be any reasonable doubt towards

' Sea the remaiKi of Caaoa Cook in the ' Speaker's CommentaiT,' toI L p. 303, " Note «n



INTRODUCTION. x-ni



which of the two theories the balance of the internal evidence inclines. It
is simply inconceivable that one of those who looked up to Moses with the
reverence and admiration that he must have inspired in his foUowers, could
have produced the unflattering portraiture which Exodus presents to us of
one of the very greatest of men. It is, on the other hand, readily conceivable,
and completely in accordance with what experience teaches of the thoughts
and words of great saints concerning themselves, that Moses should havo
given such a representation of himself. The internal evidence is thus in
harmony with the external. Both alike point to Moses as the author of
this Book and of those which follow.

S 6. Chbokoloot.

The internal chronology of the Book of Exodus is a matter of great
simplicity, presenting only a single point of doubt or difficulty. This is
the question whether the Hebrew text of ch. xii. 40 is to be regarded as
sound and genuine, or whether it is to be corrected from the Samaritan
version and the Septuagint. In the Hebrew text we read : " Now the
sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, waa four hundred
and thirty years ; " or more literally, " Now the sojourning, of the children
of Israel, which they sojourned in Egypt,' was 430 years." But in the
Septuagint the passage runs thus : " The sojourning of the children of
Israel, which they sojourned in Egypt and in tlie land of Canaan, was 430
years ; " * and in the Samaritan thus : " The sojourning of the children of
Israel and of their fathers, which they sojourned in the land of Canaan and
in the land of Egypt, was 430 years." If the Hebrew text is sound we
must count 430 years from the descent of Jacob into Egypt to the Exodus ;
if it is corrupt, and to be corrected from the two ancient versions, the time
of the sojourn will be reduced one-half, for it was a space of exactly 215
years from the entrance of Abraham into Canaan to the descent of Jacob
into Egypt.'

In favour of the short period it is urged, first, that the genealogies
contained in the Pentateuch, and especially the genealogy of Moses and
Aaron (Ex. vi. 16 — 20), wiQ not admit of the longer term;* and, secondly,

• The verb and the substantiye used are cognate ; and the passage is correctly, as well as
literally, rendered by the LXX. : ri Se KOTof/njiris TaJK ulaii' 'Icrpo))A., ^k Kanjffnjiroi' iv y^ AlyirTip.

• In some copies of the Septuagint (e.g. the Codex Alexaudrinus) the reading is — " The
sojourning of the children of Israel, which they and their fathers sojourned in Egypt and in
(he land of Canaan, was 430 years," which approaches to the Samaritan, but still differs
from it.

• From the entrance of Abraham into Canaan to the birth of Isaac was twenty-five years
(Gen. xii 4 ; xvii. 1, 21) ; from the birth of Isaac to that of Jacob was sixty years (ib. xxv.
26). Jacob was 130 years old when he went into Egypt (i6. xlvii. 9). But 25 f 60 + 130 =215.

• So Kennicott, Pool, Houbigant, Geddes, Morinus, Cappellus, Deyling, Koppen, Usher,
Maisham, Buddseus, Bengel, Knobel, Oolenso, etc. The last-named writer, who has coUated
aU the genealogies contained in the Pentateuch, has shown that they vary between four and
six Dames, tending thus, in some degree, to confirm the estimate of four generations from Lwri
to Mas*



ivitt INTRODUCTION.



that St. Paul reckoned no more than 430 years from the call of Abraham to
the Exodus (Gal, iii. 17). Now, certainly, if the genealogies are complete,
and especially that of Moses and Aaron, the longer term of years cannot
have been reached, since even if Kohath was but a year old at the time of
his lieing carried into Egypt (Gen. xlvi. 11), and if Amram was bom in
th« last year of Kohath's Ufe, and Moses in the last year of Amram's, the
eightieth year of Moses, in which the Exodus took place (Ex. vii. 7), would
be only the 350th from the descent into Egypt and not the 430th.' But
the ordinary Jewish practice with regard to genealogies was to contract
them ; and it is quite possible that in all the recorded genealogies of this
period, except that of Joshua (1 Chr. vii. 22-27), there are omissions. The
number of generations in the genealogy of Joshua is ten, an amount very
much more consonant with the period of 480 than with that of 215 years ;
and this number we are bound to accept as historical, since there could be
no possible reason why the writer of Chronicles should have invented it ;
so that, on the whole, the argument to be drawn from the Scriptural
genealogies is rather in favour of the long period than against it. It is the
Oriental practice to call any male descendant a son, any female descendant
a daughter ; ^ it is the Jewish practice to contract genealogies by means of
omissions ; ^ it is unheard-of to expand a genealogy by thrusting in un-
nistorical names : there must consequently have been ten generations from
Joseph to Joshua. Ten generations would certainly, at this period of Jewish
history, represent 400 years, and might easily cover 430, giving an average
of forty-three years to a generation, instead of the thirty-three years of
later times.^

With respect to St. Paul's estimate (Gal. iii. 17), it would simply
show that, in writing to Greek-speaking Jews, whose only Bible was the
Septuagint version, he made use of that translation. It would not even
prove his own opinion upon the point, since the chronological question is
not pertinent to his argument, and, whatever he may have thought upon it,
he would certainly not have obtruded upon his Galatian disciples a wholly
irrelevant discussion.

In favour of the longer term the great argument is the general one, that

' Colenso's statement is correct — " Now supposing that Kohath was only an infant, when
bronght down by his father to Egjrpt with Jacob, and that he begat Amram at the very end of
his iSe, when 133 years old, and that Amram, in like manner, begat Moses when he was 137
years old, stiU these two numbers added to eighty years, the age of Moses at the time of the
Exodus, would only amount to 350 years, instead of 430 " (' The Pentateuch and the Book of
Joshua,' Part I., p. 92).

' No one would suppose that " a daughter of Levi " in Ex. ii. X meant more than a female
descendant of Levi ; yet when exactly the same phrase is used of the same person in Num. xxvi
i)9, it has been argued that an actual daughter must be intended.

• In the genealogy of Ezra (Ezr. vii. 1 — 5) at least seven names are omitted ; in that of oui
Lord (Matt. i. 2-16) at least three, probably more. A comparison of 1 Chr. ix. 4 — 19 with
Nehem. xi. 4 — 22, gives additional evidence of the practice of omission.

* Herod, ii. 142— yt veal rscts imSpar ^Korby Itm irru Compare Clem Alex ' Strom.' L 81.
p 145



INTRODUCTION. xta



ihe Hebrew text is to be taken aa tbe true original unless it contains
internal signs of imperfection, and that here there are no such signs. On
the other hand, there are signs that the Septuagint and Samaritan texts are
interpolated — ^viz. first, their variations ; ' and secondly, the fact that the
length of the sojourn in Egypt is alone naturally before the writer's mind
at this point of his narrative. A further argument is furnished by Gen,
XV. 13 — 16, where the term of the Egyptian sojourn is prophetically given
(in round numbers) as 400 years ; a passage quoted by St. Stephen (Acts
vii. 6), who clearly regards the prophecy as fulfilled. It has been argued
that " the 400 years is meant to refer to the time during which the ' seed
of Abraham' shoidd be sojourners in a strange land," rather than to the
time during which they should sufier oppression, and so, that the sojourn
in Canaan is included ; * but this exposition, which is admitted to be con-
trary to the apparent sense,* cannot possibly be allowed, since Gen. xv.
13 — 16 speaks of one land and one nation — a nation which should " afflict"
them, and which they should " serve," and which at the end of the 400
years should be "judged " — ^whereas the Canaanites did not " afflict" them,
for quarrels about weUs (Gen. xxvi. 16 — 21) are not an " affliction" in the
language of Scripture,* and certainly they did not " serve " the Canaanites —
neither could it possibly be of the Canaanites that it is said, " That nation,
whom they shall serve, vrill I judge, and afterward shall they come out with
great substance " (Gen. xv. 14). EiaaUy, the long term is most consonant
alike with the estimate formed of the entire number of the grown males at
the time of the Exodus (600,000, Ex. xii. 37), and with the details given
of particular families in the Book of Numbers, as especially those of the
families of the Levites, ia ch. iii. 21 — 39.

If, upon these grounds, the longer term of 430 years for the sojourn in
Egypt be preferred to the shorter term of 215 years, the details of the
chronology must be arranged as follows : *—

Yaa.
from the descent of Jacob into Bgypt to the death of Joseph . • . 71
H ' death of Joseph to the birth of Moses ..... 278
„ birth of Moses to his flight into Midian . . • . 40

„ flight of Moses into Midian to his retnm to Egypt . . 40

„ letum of Moses to the Exodus ... 1

430

It is a different, and a much more intricate, question, how the chronology
of this period is to be attached to the general chronology of mundimo

• See above, p. xvii

• Colenso, ' The Pentateuch and the Book of Joshua,' Part I, p. 94.
*Ibid.

• Note the constant use of the terms " affliction " and " afflict " with reference to Egypt in
the Pentateuch (Gen. xli. 52 ; Ex. i. 11, 12 ; iii. 7, 17 ; iv. 31 ; Deut. xxvi. 6, 7). They are
never used in reference to any suffering the Israelites may have imdergone in Canaan

• See Keil and Delitzsch, ' Commentary on the Old Testament,' vol. L p. 414, B. T ; and
Kaliscb, ' Comment on Exodus,' Introduction, pp xi — ^xiii



«i INTRODUCTION.



affain, or even how it is to be Tinited with the later chronology of the
Jewish nation. If complete reliance conld be placed on the gennineneas
, of a particnlar text (1 Kings vi. 1), the difflcnlties indeed of this latter
problem would in a great measure disappear ; for, having fixed the date of
the commencement of Solomon's temple, which was certainly begun about
B.C. 1000, we should only have to add to the exact date on wliich we
decided, the number 480, in order to obtain an equally exact date for the
Exodus. It was in this way that Archbishop Ussher produced his date of
B.C. 1491, which is still maintained by Kalisch,^ and with an unimportant
variation by KeU..* But the genuineness of the words in 1 Kings vi. 1 —
" in the 480th year after the children of Israel were come out of the land
of Egypt " — ^is open to serious question.* They stand alone, unsupported
by anything analogous in the whole of the rest of Scripture.* They vere
apparently unknown to Josephus, to Theophilus of Antioch, and to Olemena
of Alexandria, who would necessarily have quoted them, had they existed in
their copies.* They are also at variance with the tradition glanced at by
St. Paul (Acts xiii. 20), that from the partition of Canaan to Samuel was a
space of 450 years. But if, on these grounds, we surrender the genuiuenesa
of 1 Kings vi. 1, we are launched at once upon an open sea of conjecture.
St. Paul's statement is defective both in consequence of his using the
expression "about," and in consequence of his not marking whether he
means to include the judgeship of Samuel in the 450 years or to exclude it.
His statement leaves moreover the space between the death of Moses and
the partition of Canaan nnestimated. The detailed statements in the
books of Scripture from Joshua to Kings are defective, since in the first
place they leave many periods unestimated,' and further, they are expressed
to a large extent in round numbers,' which are fatal to exact computation.
It has been calculated that, on the most probable estimate, the details of
Joshua, Judges, and Samuel would produce for the period between the
Exodus and the foundation of the Temple, 600, 612, or 628 years.' On the
other hand, it has been argued with considerable force that these estimates
are greatly in excess of the real time — ^that different judges bore o£&ce

' ' Historical and Critical Commentary,' Introduction, p. xiv.

• By lengthening the duration of the kingdom of judah by one year, Keil makes the date
B.O. 1492 (' BiblicaJ Commentary,' vol. i. p. 414).

• Hales says — " The period of 480 years is a forgery, foisted into the text " (' Chronology,'
ToL ii. p. 287). The date is also rejected by Jackson, Clinton, Stuart Poole, Bunsen, Lepsius,
Lenormant, Brugsch, and others, but defended by Canon Cook and Mr. Greswell.

• The words involve the assumption of the Exodus as an era from which to date events.
But the idea of an era nowhere else appears in Scripture, and was nnknown to the nations ol
tntiquity until the time of Thucydides.

• See the writer's note on the passage in the ' Speaker's Commentary,' vol. ii. pp. 51 59.

• As the periods during which Joshua, Shamgar and Samueljudged Jbrael ; the time between
the death of Joshua and the first servitude ; and the reign of Saul (estimated at forty yeais by
Bt Paul, Acts xiii. 21).

' Forty years (Judg. iii 11 ; v. 31 ; viii. 28 ; xiii. 1 ; 1 Sam. iv. 18) j twenty years (Jndg
T. 8 ; xvi. 31 ; 1 Sam. vil. 2) ; eighty years (Judg. iii. 30) ; 800 yeare (ib xi, 26).

• Clinton, ' Fasti Hellenici * vol i p. 312



INTEODUCTION. xd



rimnltaneoualy in different parts of Palestine,* and that the actual period
-which, elapsed from the Exodus to Solomon's accession did not much exceed
300 years. The result is that the best and most learned of modem critics
vary in their dates for the Exodus hy as much as 332 years, some placing it
as late as b.c. 1300, and others as early as B.C. 1632.

It might have been supposed that the difficulties of the Scriptural
chronology would have received light from the parallel chronology oi
Egypt, or even have been set at rest by it ; but Egyptian chronology has
difficulties of its own which render it one of the most abstruse of studies,
and preclude the possibility of any positive conclusions being formed
respecting it, unless by the method of arbitrary selection from among co-
equal authorities. Hence it is not yet a settled point among Egyptologists,
under which dynasty, much less under which king, the Exodus took place,
some placing it as early as Thothmes III., the fifth king of the eighteenth
dynasty, and others as late as Seti-Menephthah, the fifth king of the
nineteenth. An interval of above two centuries separates these reigns.
On the whole, the preponderance of authority is in favour of the Exodus
having fallen under the nineteenth, rather than the eighteenth dynasty,
and under either Seti-Menephthah or his father Menephthah,^ who wer«
the fifth and fourth kings. The Egyptian tradition upon the subject,
recorded by Manetho,* Chseremon,* and others, points evidently to one or
other of these kings, and has generally been taken as decisive in favour
of the father. But a hieratic inscription,^ deciphered and translated by
Dr. Eisenlohr of Heidelberg in 1872, has been thought by some to incline
the scale towards the son, Seti-Menephthah, whose reign seems to have been
followed by a period of revolution and disturbance, described in terms
almost identical with those in which Manetho speaks of the time that
followed the Eaodus.

If we accept Manetho's account of the period in Egyptian history to
which the Exodus belongs, we shall have as the probable date of the event,
calculated from Egyptian sources,* about b.c. 1300, or from that to B.C. 1350.
Four hundred and thirty years before this will bring us to the eighteenth
century b.c, when Egypt was, according to all writers,' under the dominion
of the Shepherd kings. This wUl agree well with the tradition, which
George the SynceUus says was universal,' that Joseph governed Egypt in

' Bunsen, ' Egypt's Place in Universal History,' voL ill. pp. 282—288 ; Canon Cook, in the
' Speaker's Commentary,' toI. L p. 248. v • «

' This is the view of Lepsius, Bunsen, Lenormant, Brugsch, and Birch — a combination of
authority which it is difficult to resist. The last-named writer says of Menephthah— " It if
generally admitted that the Exodus took place in his reign."

» ' Ap. Joseph, c. Apion.' i. 26, 27. * Ibid. i. 32.

» See the ' Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archaeology,' vol. L pp. 355—384 • and
compare ' Becords of the Past,' vol. viii. pp. 45 — 47.

• Brugsch makes the year of Menephthah's accession b.o. 1300 (' History of Egypt,' voL ii
p. 314) ; Wilkinson, B.a 1245 ; Lenormant, B.O. 1350 (' Manuel d'Histoire Ancienne,' voL i

pp. 404. 428). , . ^ ^^ — „

» So Brugsch, Lenormant, Bunsen, Wilkinson, Birch, etc ■ Ohronographia, p. <B, B



z^



INTBODUCTION.



the time of King Apophis, who was the last king of the seventeenth or
great Shepherd dynasty. Joseph prohahly outlived Apophis, and saw the
commencement of the eighteenth dynasty, so that the founder of that
dynasty, Aahmes, cannot be the " king that knew not Joseph " (Ex. i. 8).
Nor could the Israelites have been by that time so numerous as to rouse
the king's fears. The Pharaoh intended is probably the founder of the
nineteenth dynasty, Eameses I., or his son Seti, the great conqueror. If
Moses was bom under this monarch, his flight to Midian would have taken
place under Bameses II., Seti's son and successor; and his return, forty
years later, on the death of the Pharaoh who sought his life, would fall in
the reign of Menephthah, the son and successor of Eameses II. It may have
been the exhaustion of Egypt through the double loss of the firstborn and
of the great bulk of the armed force in the Eed Sea, together with the
discontent caused by the unwise conduct of the king, that led shortly
afterwards to those troubles which supervened on the death of Menephthah
— first disputes with regard to the succession, and then a period of com-
plete anarchy.* The Israelites were in the Sinaitic peninsula at this time.
When the Egyptian troubles came to an end, and Eameses III. began
his conquests, they were engaged in their wars on the eastern side of
Palestine, and profited by his attack, which weakened their enemies. After
Eameses III. Egypt declined ; and hence no more is heard of her in the
Biblical history tiU the reign of Solomon. The subjoined table wiU show at
a glance the view here taken of the synchronisms between the Egyptian and
the Israelite history &om the time of Joseph to the entrance into Canaan.



Onu B.C.


EOTnUN HiSIOBT.




1900—1700


E^pt nnder the Shepherd Kings
Dynasty XVH


Joseph in Egypt. His brethren join




him. Commencement of the 430






years, about B.C. 1740.


1700


Accession of Dynasty Xvm.


Joseph dies about B.O. 1670.


1400


Accession of Dynasty XIX.
(Bameses L first king).




1S95


Seti I. (great conqaeror) . . .


Bise of " king who knew not Joseph."
Pithom and Barneses built.


1885


Bameses n. (associated) . . .


Birth of Moses (circa B.C. 1390).
Flight of Moses to Midian (cirea










B.C. 1350).


1820


Menephthah L . . • . .


Moses returns from Midian (cirea
1811).


1305


Seti n. (Seti-Menephthali} . .


The Exodus (eirca b.o 1310>


1800—1280


Bevolution in Egypt. Short
reigns of Amon-meses and
Siphthah. Period of anarchy.




1280


Accession of Dynasty XX.
Set-Nekht




1276


Bameses ITL (conqueror) . .


The Israelitfis enter Canaan (eirem
B.0. 1270).


1255


Barneses IV





' Birch, ' Egypt from the Earliest Times,' pp. 185—7 ; Brugsch, ' History of Egypt,' toI ii
fp. ISO— «



INTEODUCTION. xxffl



On Eablt Egyptian History and Cheonology.

The admitted uncertainty of the proper mode of synchronising Egyptian
with Biblical history makes it desirable to add in this place a few remarks
on the main features of Egyptian chronology and history in the earlier
times, that so the reader may be able to judge for himself between the
various synchronistic theories which come under his notice, and form his
own scheme, if that in the text {supra, p. xxii.) does not satisfy him.

It is allowed on all hands that civilisation, kingly govenunent, archi-
tecture of a remarkable kind, and fairly advanced mimetic art, existed ib
Egypt from a time considerably anterior to Abraham. The lowest dat*
that has been assigned, so far as we are aware, by any modem scholar * to
the commencement of the civilised monarchical Egypt, is B.C. 2250, or from
that to B.C. 2450. Some of the most learned writers raise the date by one
thousand or two thousand years.^ But, setting aside sUch extravagances,
we may state it as universally agreed upon among historians of the present
day that the history of Egypt goes back at least to the date mentioned
above. It is maintained by many that, in this early period, the country
was for the most part split up among several distinct kingdoms ; but on
the other hand it is allowed that at times a single monarchy held the whole,
and kings possessed of great power and resources ruled Egypt from the
Tower of Syene to the waters of the Mediterranean. Manetho assigned to
the period no fewer than fourteen dynasties, and though some of these may
be purely mythical,* and others * may represent lines of petty princes who
bore sway in some obscure province, yet a certain number — as the fourth,
fifth, sixth, eleventh and twelfth — ^were beyond a doubt dynasties of great
power, dominant over the whole or the greater part of Egypt, and possessed
of resources which enabled them to erect monuments of an extraordinary
character. The two greatest of the Pyramids belong to the fourth dynasty,
and must have been seen by Abraham when he visited Egypt, about b.c.
1950. The Third Pyramid in its present state is the work of a queen of
the sixth dynasty. A king of the twelfth erected the obeUsk which still
stands at Heliopolis, as well as another which lies prostrate in the Fayoum.
The artificial Lake Mceris, the Eayoum pyramids, and the celebrated Laby-
rinth belong to the same period. Egypt from b.c. 2460 (or at any rate
from B.C. 2250) to about B.C. 1900 was in a flourishing condition : unattacked
by foreign foes, she developed during this time the chief features of her

• See the author's ' Origin of Nations,' p 31, where he has suggested that " the establish
ment of a settled monarchy in Egypt fell between B.O. 2450 and B.C. 2250." The data
suggested by Mr. R. S. Poole is B.C. 2717 : that preferred by Sir G. Wilkinson, b.o. 2691.

'> Bunsen gives b.o. 3059, Lepsius b.o. 3892, Dr. Brugsch B.o. 4400, Marietta and Lenoimant
B.O. 5004.
■ As the first three, which have left no remains and no histoij

* Aa the seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth



mIt DTTBODUCTION.



srohitectnre and of her sculpture, carried to perfection her complex syatem
of hieroglyphicB — and attained very considerable proficiency in most of the
OBefol and ornamental arts. The period of this civilisation was designated
by Manetho that of " the Old Empire ; " and the phrase has been preserved
by some modem historians of Egypt ' as indicative of a very important
reality.

The period of " the Old Empire" was followed by that of "the Middle
Empire." At a date variously estimated, but believed by the present
writer to have been about b.c. 1900, Egypt was conquered by a pastoral
Asiatic people, which destroyed the old civilisation, defaced the monuments,
burnt the cities, and completely demolished the temples. The whole country
was plimged for a time into utter ruin and desolation. All the less massive
buildings disappeared — literature, unless enshrined in pyramids or buried
in sepulchral chambers, ceased to exist — ^architecture, mimetic art, even the
ornamental arts, finding no demand, died out — for a century or more utter
barbarism settled down generally over the land, and if it had not been that
in a few places native Egyptian dynasties were suffered to drag on a
dependent and precarious existence, all the old knowledge would have
perished. It was as when the Groths and Yandals and Alans and Alemanni
and Burgundians swept over the Eoman Empire of the West, and brought
in those " Dark Ages " of which so much has been said and so little is
known. Egypt for a century or more was crushed under the iron heel of
her conquerors. Then, by slow degrees, there was a revivaL The bar-
barism of the invaders yielded to the softening influences of that civilisa-
tion which it had nearly, but not quite, annihilated. First the useful, then
the ornamental arts, were recalled into life. Temples were built, sphinxes
were carved, even statues were attempted by the rude race which had at
first despised all arts but war, and aU trades but that of the armourer. The
court of the invaders, held at Tanis in the Delta, became assimilated to
that of the old Egyptian Pharaohs. No great works, however, were
attempted ; and the memorials of the period which remain are few and
insignificant. How long the foreign domination lasted is uncertain, but
the five centuries of some writers ^ are reduced by others to two centuries
or two centuries and a half.* The present writer inclines to the shorter
estimate, and would assign to the " Middle Empire " or " Hyksos rule " the
period between B.C. 1900 and 1700— or at most that between b.o. 1926 and
B.O. 1675.

• See Bnnseii, ' Egypt's Place in Universal History,' paitim ; Biich, ' Egypt from the
Earliest Times,' pp. 23—56 ; etc

• As Brugsch (' History of Egypt,' vol ii p. 314), Lenormant (' Manuel d'Histoii*
Ancienne,' vol. i. p. 321), and WUkinsou (in the author's ' Herodotus,' vol. ii. pp 297, 298).

• The arguments for the shorter period are well stated by Canon Cook in his Essa^r on the
Bearings of Egyptian Histoiy upon the Pentateuch (' Speaker'* Commentary,' voL L part i
pp. 447— «>



INTRODUCTION. xm



The yote of the invaders was thrown off ahout B.C. 1700 — 1675 by an
n^^rising of the native Egyptians against them, tinder a leader named
Aahmes, who had his capital at Thebes. The most brilliant period in
Egyptian history — ^the time of the " New Empire '' — now set iq. Under
the eighteenth dynasty, which consisted of twelve kings and a queen,
Egyptian fleets explored the Mediterranean and the Eed Seas, commerce
flourished, Palestine and Syria were conquered, the Euphrates was crossed,
Assyria invaded, and the Khabour made the eastern limit of the Empire.
At the same time architecture and all the arts revived ; great temples were
built, lofty obelisks erected, huge colossi upreared. The duration of the
dynasty is variously estimated at from two to three centuries. In assigning
to it the period from b.c. 1700 to B.C. 1400 we follow the high authority of
Dr. Brugsoh. Other writers^ have assigned it the space from b.c. 1703 to
B.C. 1462— from e.g. 1633 to B.C. 1412— and from b.c 1520 to b.c 1324.

In the ensuing dynasty — the nineteenth— Egyptian art and literature
onLninated, while in arms there was a slight retrogression. Seti I. and
Barneses II. erected the most magnificent of aU Egyptian buildings. Seti
was a conqueror, but Eameses was content to resist attack. Towards its
close the dynasty showed signs of weakness. Internal troubles broke out.
The succession to the crown was disputed ; and three or four short reigns
were followed by a time of complete anarchy. The dynasty probably held
the throne from about b.c 1400 to b.c. 1280.

Under the twentieth dynasty a rapid decUne set in. The second king,
Eameses III., was a remarkable monarch, successful in his wars, and great
in the arts of peace. But with him the glorious period of the Egyptian
monarchy came to an end — his successors rapidly degenerated, and for more
than two centuries — until the time of Solomon — there was not the slightest
sign of a revival. Architecture, art, literature — all pass under a cloud ; and,
but for the dynastic lists and the excavated tombs of the kings, we might
have supposed that some sudden calamity had engulfed and destroyed the
Egyptian people.

It is agreed on aU hands that the period within which the Israelites and
their ancestors came into contact with Egypt prior to their settlement ia
Canaan fell within the space occupied in Egyptian history by the dynasties
between the twelfth and the twentieth inclusively. Abraham's visit to
Egypt is generally assigned to the period called above that of " the Old
Empire,'' Joseph's residence to the " Middle Empire," the oppression of the
IsraeUtes and the Exodus to the " New Empire." The chief controversy
raised is with respect to the Exodus, which some assign to the nineteenth,
some to the eighteenth, some to a period anterior to the eighteenth dynasty.
The materials at present existing seem insufficient to determine this con-
troversy; and perhaps the unlearned reader will do best to follow th»

■ Lenomiant gires the first of these estimates, Bunsen the second, and Wilkinson the third.



XXTl



INTEODUCTION.



balance of authority, whicli certainly at present points to the nineteenth at
the dynasty, and to Menephthah, son of Barneses II., as the king, undtil
whom the " going forth " of the Israelites took place.

Tabtjlab View of the Chibp Events in Egyptian History pkom the Twelfth
TO THE Twentieth Dynasty, with appeoximatb Dates.



About B.C.



2150

1960
1900

1700



DTVA8TIE8.



Accession of the
12th Dynasty
(Theban).



Acce.s.'iion of the
13th Dynasty
(Theban).

Accrssion of the
17th Dynasty
(Shepherds).

Accession of the
18th Dynasty
(Theban).



Chief Kinob.



Accession of the
19th Dynasty
(Theban).



UsnTtasen I

Usnrtasen m
Amenemhat HI.



Set (or Saites).



Apepi (or Apophis).
Aahmes.



Thothmes 1

Queen Hatasu.
Thothmes m



EvXNTg.



Amenophis HI.



Amenophis IV. (or
Khuenaten),
Saanekht, Ai, and
Tutankhamen
(heretic kings).

Hor-em-het.

Barneses L



Restoration of the Old Beligion.
1400 Accession of the Eameses L Campaign in Syria. Treaty with

Hittites.

Seti L Great victories over the Shasu

(Arabs), Hittites, and natives of
N. Africa. Egyptian power re-
established in Mesopotamia.
Splendid additions made to the
Temple of Kamak. Bameseum and
city of Fa-Bamesu commenced.

I Among tbese were Included the tallest existing one, that before the Chuich of S. John Lateran at Rome-
m0 tUu obelisk recently placed on the Thames Embankment.



Obelisks erected at Heliopolis and
in the Fayoum. Great Temple of
Kamak commenced

Ethiopia conquered. Frontier
advanced to the Second Cataract.

Construction of the Labyrinth,
and the artificial Lake Moeris.

Egypt invaded by nomadic races
from Asia.

Great Shepherd invasion under
Set. Destruction of Egyptian
monuments and records.



Shepherds driven out.
taken.



Avuis



Southern frontier advanced Asia
invaded. Campaign in Mesopo-
tamia. Temple of Kamak en-
larged. Obelisks erected.

Egyptian ships navigate the Bed
Sea.

Campaigns in Asia. Syria and
Western Mesopotamia conquered,
Assyria invaded and forced to pay
a tribute. Great additions made
to the Kamak temple. Erection
of numerous obelisks * and colossi.
A fleet employed in the Mediter-
ranean.

Conquests of Thothmes HI
maintained. Luxor temple erected.
The two great sitting colossi set up.

Disk-worship introduced.



INTEODUCTION,



jxH



Tasvlas Vorw of the Chief Events in Esyftian Histobt fbom the Twelfth to
THE Twentieth Dtnastt, with affboximate Bates. — Continued.



Aanrt B.G.



Dthasttu.



CHiEr Knios.



EvENn.



1400



1280



Accession of the
aoth Dynasty
(Theban).



1100



Close of the 20th
Dynasty



Barneses II. (reigns
67 years).



Menephtliali.



Seti n. (or Seti-
Menephthah).



Set-Nekht.



Barneses ID. (reigns
31 years).



Barneses IV. to

xm.



Acme of Egyptian civilisation,
architecture, and art. Military
decline begins. Peace made witii
the Hittites on terms of perfect
equality. Mesopotajnia relin-
quished. Great magnificence in
building. Bameseum completed
and adorned with huge colossL
Bock-temple of Ipsambul con-
structed. Canal completed between
the Nile and the Bed Sea. City
of Pa-Bamesu completed.

Great attack on Egypt from the
north and north-west repulsed.
Friendly relations maintained with
the Hittites. Expulsion of the
"lepers " from Egypt according to
Hanetho. Beign terminates in
troubles and disturbances.

Crown claimed by a pretender,
caUed Amon-mes, and afterwards
by another called Siphthah. Long
smuggle, terminating in anarchy.



Combined attack on Egypt of
Asiatics and Europeans by land
and sea from the north-east re-
pulsed. Nations of N. Africa de-
feated. Syria OTerrun, and power
of Egypt re-established as far as
Carchemish. Temple of Ammoii
at Medinet Abou built. Com-
merce encouraged.

General decline of Egypt. No
wars. No great works. Scarcely
any literature. The kings gra-
dually sink into fainianU, and
power passes into the hands of the
high-priests of Ammon.



On the Geoqkaphy of the Exodus and op the Wandeeings
AS FAB AS Sinai.

The difficulties in the way of tracing the ronte wherehy the Israelites
passed from the Land of Goshen to Sinai, always considerable, have heen
recently much enhanced by the propounding of an entirely new line of
march by a scholar of high reputation. Dr. Heinrich Brugsch.^ It is true

> See a paper read before the International Congress of Orientalists in London, Sept. 17,
1874, and afterwards published onder the title 'L'Ezode et les Monuments Egyptieni.



xxrlfl INTEODUCTION.



that the same theory waB put forward many years ago by two other learned
Germans, Messrs. Unruh and Sohleiden, but their views attracted little
attention, having no great local knowledge to recommend them, whereas
Dr. Brugsch is probably the highest authority living on the subject of
Egyptian geography, and a view which has his support cannot possibly be
ignored or passed over. "We must, then, commence the examination of the
subject before us by discussing the theory of Dr. Brugsch, which is regarded
in some quarters as " a brilliant one," and as having " at any rate prima
facie much to recommend it." *

Dr. Brugsch supposes that the "Eameses" from which the Israelites
started (Ex. xii. 37 ; Num. xxxui. 3) was the same place as Tanis or Zoan,
now iSon, a large town situated on the Tanitic branch of the Nile, about
lat. 31° and long. 31° 50' E. from Greenwich. He brings abundant proof
to show that this town, which was rebuilt by Eameses II., was known in
his reign and in that of his son, Menephthah, as Fa-Eamesu, or " the city of
Eameses," that it was a place of great importance, and a common residence,
if not tJie common residence, of the court at that period. Placing the
Exodus, as we do ourselves, in the reign of Menephthah, he naturally
concludes that the miracles of Moses and his interviews with the Egyptian
king took place at this city, the only " city of Eameses " known to have
existed at the time, and that it was the starting-point from which he and
his company commenced their journey. In proof that he is right, he very
properly adduces the statement of the psalmist, probably Asaph, that the
miracles of Moses were wrought " in the field of Zoan " (Ps. Ixxvui. 1 2, 43).
These arguments are of so much weight that we, at any rate, do not care
to dispute them, and we shall assume as highly probable, if not absolutely
certain, that the Eameses from which the Israelites started was Zoan-
Eameses, the. capital city of Eameses II. and Menephthah, now marked by
the extensive ruins at San-el Hagar, which have lately been visited and
described by Mr. GreviUe Chester.''

The children of Israel journeyed " from Eameses to Succoth " (Ex. xii.
37). Dr. Brugsch assumes the identity of this word, Succoth, with an
Egyptian name, Thuku or Thukot, which he finds applied to the marshy
district east and south-east of Tanis, and suggests that the place where the
Israelites encamped was a certain fort, called "the barrier of Thukot,"
which, he says, is mentioned in papyri, and which he believes to have lain
to the south-east of Tanis, halfway between that place and the modem
Tel-Defneh, the ancient Daphnae. We quite agree as to the direction in

Leipzig, 1875. An English translation of the work is appended to the ' Historj of Egrati' by
the same writer, translated by the late Mr. H. Danby Stymojir and Mr. FhUip Smith, and
published by Mr. Murray, London, 1879.

> See an article by Mr. GreviUe Chester in the 'Quarterly Statement ot the Falestint
Exploration Fund,' for July, 1880, p 134

fim pp. 140— i



INTRODUCTION. nb



which Sucooth is to be Bought, since the wilderness, for which Moses wae
bound, lay south-east of Tanis ; we demur, however, to the identification of
Sucooth with Thuku.i and we regard seven and a-half mUes, which is half
the distance between San and Tel-Defneh, as too short a march for the
people to have made in the first freshness of their powers and the first
warmth of their zeal. We should incline to double the distance, and to
place Sucooth at Tel-Defneh, an elevated spot of ground in a marshy-
district, where the cultivators of the soil would be likely to fix their
" booths " of sedge and brushwood.^

The third station named in the journey of the Israelites is Etham
(Ex. xiii. 20) " in the edge of the wilderness." Having identified Succoth
with "the barrier of Thukot," about seven or eight mUes from San,
Dr. Brugsch not unnaturally places Etham at Tel-Defneh, seven or eight
miles further on in the same direction. Here there was, he says, in the
time of Eameses II., a " Khetam," or fort, to guard the passage of the
easternmost branch of the Nile, whence (according to him) the Hebrew
name, Etham. Khetam, however, with a strong guttural hh, is not Etham,
DnS, which commences with the light breathing, alepJi. And Khetam, again,
is not a local name, but a descriptive word, meaning " fort " or " stronghold." *
Consequently there were many Khetams, especially towards the frontier;
and even granting the identity of the words, there is nothing to mark the
identity of the Biblical Etham with the Khetam, or fortress, at Tel-Dafneh.
We should incline to place Etham at El-Kantara, on the line of the Suez
Canal, about eleven or twelve mUes from Tel-Defneh, almost due east.
El-Kantara is truly " in the edge of the wilderness " proper, which com-
mences as soon as the Suez Canal is crossed ; and the ruins show it to have
been a place of some importance in the time of Eameses II.*

At Etham the Israelites were commanded to change their route.
" Speak unto the children of Israel," said God to Moses, " that they turn
and encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, over against
Baal-zephon " (Ex. xiv. 2). Dr. Brugsch believes that the " turn " was
made to the left — ^that from Tel-Defneh the south-east course was changed
to a north-east one, and a march made which brought the Israelites close to
the Mediterranean Sea at the western extremity of Lake Serbonis. The
distance to this point from Tel-Defneh, his Etham, is by the shortest route
considerably over forty mUes — yet Dr. Brugsch appears to regard this
distance as accomplished in one day.

' We believe that the Egyptian t (th) never replaces the sharp Hebrew sibilant samech,
which is the initial letter of Succoth.

' Succoth is more properly " booths " than " tents,'' and is so translated in Gen. xxxiii. 17 ;
Lev. xxiii. 42 ; Neh. viii. 14, 16. The natives of the marsh district to this day lodge m " huti
made of reeds" (' Quarterly Statement of Pal. Exp. Fund,' p. 144).

• See Dr. Birch's 'Dictionary of Hieroglyphics,' in vol. v. of Bunsen's 'Egypt's Place,
p. 658, ad voc. Khetmu.

* Greville Chester, in the ' Quarterly Statement ' above quoted, p 147.



INTRODUCTION.



Pi-hahiroth is described (Ex. xiv. 2) as " between Migdol and the sea,"
and aa "over against Baal-zephon." Dr. Brugsoh finds a Migdol some
twenty nules from the western end of Lake Serbonis, to the south-west, and
conjectures that Baal-zephon was a Phoenician settlement, situated at the
modem Eas Kazeronn, the ancient Mons Casius. As this place is distant
from his site for Pi-hahiroth some twenty-five miles in the opposite direction
from Migdol, he regards the description of Ex. xiv. 2 as sufiiciently
answered, and even places the three sites accordingly. Almost all other
expositors have felt that the three places must have been very near together
— indeed, so near that the encampment beside Pi-hahiroth (Ex. iv, 9) was
regarded as " pitching before Migdol " (Num. xxxiii. 7).

We approach now the main feature of Dr. Brugsch's theory, to which aU
the rest is subordinate. He beUeves that the Israelites, having reached the
shores of the Mediterranean at the poiut opposite the western extremity of
Lake Serb6niB, found stretching before them a long tongue of land, which
formed the regular road from Egypt to Palestine,^ and that immediately,
without having to wait for a miracle, they entered upon it. The Egyptians
followed them. After the Hebrews, marching on foot, had successfully
traversed the entire neck of land to the point where it (as he supposes)
re-joined the continent, " a great wave from the Mediterranean took by
surprise the Egyptian cavalry, and the captains of the war-chariots." '
Thrown into disorder, their pathway obliterated, they became entangled in
the soft mud of the Serbonian Lake, which was, he says, " a lagoon of
weeds,"* and thence called YamnSuph — they suffered the calamity which
befel the soldiers of Ajtaxerxes Ochus,^ and to which Milton alludes in
' Paradise Lost ' ^ — they perished in the waters of Serbonis.

The objections to this entire view are numerous, and of various kinds.
In the first place, it gives no reason for the Pharaoh's sudden resolve to
pursue the Israelites, siuce, instead of being " entangled in the land," they
were, according to Brugsch, on the shortest and readiest road leading out of
Egypt to Palestine. In the second place, it contradicts the statement ° that
" God led them not the way of the Philistines, but led the people the way
of the Yam-Suph," since it makes the way of the Philistines and the way
of the Yam-Suph one and the same, and it makes God lead them out of
Egypt by the way which conducted most directly to Palestine, or the
country of the Philistines. Thirdly, it leaves no place for the miracle of
dividing the sea (Ex. xiv. 21), since it regards the tongue of land as a
regular road constantly used. Fourthly, it contradicts the natural features

' Brugsch, ' History of Egypt,' toI. ii. p. 360 : — " A long tongue of land, which in ancient
times formed the only road from Egypt to Palestine." This point is essential to Dr. Brugsch'a
theory, since he could not otherwise suppose that the Israelites would have pent themselves up
in inch a comer as that between the Mediterranean and Lake Serb6nis.

• md. p. 364. » Ibid r, 360 * Diod. Sic. xvi 46

• Book U. U. 592—4 • Ex siU 17



INTRODUCTION'. xx*l



of the place, Bince (1) the Lake Sertonis contains no weeds, sedge, or rusliei
of any kind,* and (2) it is, and always must be, so long as it is a lake, fed
by a deep channel connecting it with the Mediterranean, so that the tongue
of land is not continuous, and cannot be used as a road, unless by an army
carrying pontoons, or a small company of travellers, who might be conveyed
across the channel in boats. Fifthly, it assumes that the expression Tam-
Suph is used by the writer of the Pentateuch of two quite different pieces
of water, since no one can possibly deny that Yam-Suph in Num. xxxiii.
10, 11, is used of the Eed Sea. Finally, it is in the teeth of a twofold
tradition, Egyptian^ and Jewish,^ which unhesitatingly made the upper
end of the Eed Sea the scene of the disaster.

On the destruction of the Egyptians, the Israelites, according to Dr.
Brugsch, turned sharp to the south from Baal-zephon, or the Mons Casius,
and entered the wilderness of Shur, now the Tih, in long. 32° 50' nearly.
A recent examination of the locality has shown such a movefnent to have
been impossible, since the Lake Serbdnis continues in an unbroken line
from long. 32° 32', where it commences, to long. 33° 20', where it terminates,
at a place called El Saramit.* Even at this point there is no escaping from
the tongue of land on which the Israelites are supposed to have entered,
without crossing the channel connecting Lake Serbonis with the Mediter-
ranean,^ so that, having reached the end of the spit, the Israelites would
have had no course open to them but to have turned back and retraced their
steps to the supposed site of PLhahiroth.

From the Mons Casius, his Baal-zephon, Dr. Brugsch, having conducted
the Israelites across a tongue of land which does not exist, makes them enter
the wilderness of Shur, and travel three days in a south-west direction to
Marah, which he identifies with the "Bitter Lakes." It seems to have
escaped him that the distance is one of at least seventy miles, which could
not certainly have been accomplished under five days, and being through
an arid desert would probably have taken six. He also fails wholly to
account for the extraordinary change of mind on the part of the Israelites,
who, having marched out of Egypt thirty miles on the direct road to
Palestine, suddenly turn round and go back to the very confines of Egypt,

• GrevUle Chester, in the ' Quarterly Statement,' p. 155 : — " The clear bright water of Lake
SerhSnis is as devoid of lacustrine vegetation as the Dead Sea itself. Of it there is no trace
whatsoever. But more, it is matter of fact that Lake Serbdnis is almost equally devoid oj
marine vegetation."

" The Egyptian tradition appears in Polyhistor, who reports the people of Memphis as
maintaining that the passage of the sea was made by Moses watching the eHb of the tide,
(' Fragm. Hist. 6r.' vol iii. p. 223), which could only be done on the Red Sea side of Egypt,
not on the side of the Mediterranean, which is tideless.

• The Jewish tradition has never been doubted. It appeAs by the regular translation of
Tam-Suph by the LXX., in every place but one where it occurs, by ij IpvBph flcUoo'va, *• th«
Red Sea."

• Greville Chester, in the ' Quarterly Statement,' p. 154

• Md. p. 157



vxxil INTRODUCTION.



taking a line from Etham to Marah whioli must have meaBurecl at least
140 miles, when the two places (according to him) were not mnch above
thirty miles apart.

It seems needless to pursue Dr. Brugsch's theory any further. It is
alike in contradiction with tradition, geography, and common sense. Its
apparent foimdation is a string of geographical names, supposed to be
identical in the nomenclature of ancient Egypt and in that of the writer of
Exodus. But on careful examination the agreement is found to be strained
and forced. Only one of the Scriptural names (Migdol) really occurs upon
Dr. Brugsch's line of march, and that name is of a generic character
(migdol meaning simply " a tower "), and so Hkely to have been borne by
more than one place.* The other names are either pure inventions, not
found in Egyptian geography, as Baal-zapouna and Pi-hakhirot.^ or names
not really the same as the Hebrew, e.g. Thukot and Khetam. Common
Bense forbids belief in a route which involves the making of a circuit of
140 miles to reach a place thirty miles off, the performance of a six or
seven days' journey in the space of three, and the assignment by one
and the same writer of one and the same name to two quite different
sheets of water, without any note of distinction or indication that two
" seas " are meant.

Eetuming then to Etham, which we have placed conjeoturally at El-
Kantara, and which must certainly have been either there or in the neigh-
bourhood, perhaps toward IsmaUia, we have now to trace the further march
from Etham to Sinai. We imagine, then, that on the command being given,
— " Speak unto the children of Israel that they turn and encamp before
Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, over against Baal-zephon"
(Ex. xvi. 2), the direction of the route was altered from east or south-east
to due south — the " Bitter Lakes " were placed on the left hand, and the
march continued southwards along the western shore of the Eed Sea until
an extensive camping-ground was reached, lying between a place called
Migdol, quite distinct from the northern Migdol, and another called Pi-
hahiroth, which was on or near the Eed Sea. An exact location of these
places is impossible, since neither in ancient nor modem geography have we
any clear trace of the names,* and the position of the northern extremity of

' There were two Migdols in Palestine, distinguished as Migdol-Bl, and Migdol-Gad. Lepsins
and Stuart Poole maintain that there were at least two in Egypt. It is in favour of this
contention that the northern Migdol had a descriptive epithet, being called in the Egyptian
writings " the Migdol of King Seti-Menephthah " (Brugsch, ' Hist, of Egypt,' vol. ii. p. 359).

' Baal-iapouna is found in the Egyptian texts as an epithet of the god Anunon, but not as
the name of a place. Pi-hakhirot is not found at all, hut is supposed by Dr. Brugsch to be a
name that might have been given to a place situated at " the entrance of the gulfs " (i6.
p. 363). But Jablonsky's etyijiology — " the place where sedge grows " — seems to be quite as
probable.

• The ancient geographers (Hecatseus, Fr. 282 ; ' Itin. Antonin.' p. 76, ed. Parthey) have a
Magd61us which corresponds to the northern Egyptian Migdol : Herodotus has a MagdOlui
(ii 169) which seems to refNTesent Megiddo. But there is no trace of the southern Egyptian



IKTBODUCTION. xxxiil



the Gulf of Suez at the time of the Exodus is open to question. On the
whale, it is perhaps most probable that the Bitter Lakes were then a
portion of the Eed Sea inlet,* being connected with it by a narrow and
shallow channel, which is now dried up. We should ourselves place the
passage somewhere near the present site of Suez, and we should suppose the
point of landing to have been about five or six miles north of the Aytin
Muaa, about which, for the sake of the water, the host would no doubt have
encamped. To the objection that the site of Suez is too far south, since the
distance from Etham, as we have now placed it, is above forty miles, which
could not have been accomplished in a day, we answer that in the Scriptural
narrative there is no mention of days, and that it is quite a gratuitous
supposition that the number of camping-places mentioned marks the
number of days spent on the journey. In point of fact only six camping-
places are mentioned between Bameses and the wUdemess of Sin ; yet it ia
expressly stated that the journey took a full month (Ex. xvi. 1). We
should suppose at least three days to have been occupied by the march from
Etham to Pi-hahiroth.

The Eed Sea crossed, and the Aylin Musa reached, there was no doubt a
halt of at least a day, while Moses composed his " Song,'' and thanksgiving
was offered, and Miriam and the other women danced and sang for joy
(Ex. XV. 1 — 21). The Israelites were then led out into "the wilderness of
Shur " (ib. ver. 22), or, as it is elsewhere called, " the wilderness of Etham "
(Num. xxxiii. 8). These names seem to have been applied, indifferently,
to the whole western portion of the great desert-tract which separates
Egypt from Palestine. It was called " the wilderness of Etham," because
Etham lay " in its edge " (Ex. xiii. 20), at the point where it was most
accessible from Egypt ; and it was called " the wilderness of Shur,"
probably from a name, Zor, which the Egyptians applied to the tract
within which Etham was situated.^ Through this tract, or rather through
the south-western portion of it, which lay along the eastern side of the Gulf
of Suez, the Israelites proceeded for three entire days without finding any
water (ib.). Travellers tell us that this is the exact character of the tract
east of the Gulf from the Aylin Musa to the source, called Howarah,* which
lies at the distance of about thirty-eight or thirty-nine miles. Most critics
agree that this was the line of route pursued, and identify Marah (ib. ver. 23)
with Howarah or its neighbourhood, which has several springs that are

MlgdoL In modem geography, some low hiUs near Suez are said to be called Muktala (Stanley,
' Sinai and Palestine,' p. 65), which may he a reminiscence of Migdol, but points to no exact
Me. Of the names Pi-hahiroth and BaaJ-zephon there is no trace at all.

' So Canon Cook (' Speaker's Commentary,' Tol. L pt. i. p. 435), and Mr. B. Staart Poole
(' Dictionary of the Bible, vol. iii. p. 1016).

• Bragsch, 'History of Egypt,' vol. ii. p. 357.

» Bobinson, ' Biblical Eesearches,' vol. i. pp. 91—96 ; Stanley, ' Sinai and Palestine,' p. 66 ,
WilaoD and Palmer ■ Our Work in Palestine, p. 275 ; etc.

d



«MT INTEODUCTION.



remarkably " bittor." > "We incline to agree witb them, though it must be
allowed that in the space of three thousand years many physical changes
are likely to have occurred, and that an exact correspondence between the
present condition of the country and the description of Moses is not to be
expected.

The next camping-place after Marah was Elim, which means " trees "
according to some critics.^ Here were twelve springs of water and a grove
of seventy palm-trees ^ (Ex. xv. 27) — pleasing objects to the traveller who
has spent three or four consecutive days in the true wilderness. Elim has
been identified with three distiact sites — Wady Ghurundel, Wady TTseit, and
Wady Shubeikah,* all of which have trees and water. They are distant
from Howarah, respectively, six miles, ten miles, and sixteen miles. To us
it seems that Wady Ghurundel, which would be reached first, and which is
the most beautiful of the three, has the best claim of the three to represent
the camping-place of Elim, the short distance from Howarah furnishing no
objection now that there was no need of haste, and the abundance of shade,
pasturage, and water rendering the place most attractive. We are incUned
to believe that a considerable stay was made in this locality, more especially
for the refreshment of the flocks and herds, which must have sufiiered severely
during the three days' march without water.*

The next notice of movement which we have in Exodus is remarkably
vague, and but for the light thrown upon the subject by the summary in
Numbers might be misleading. " They took their journey," we are told,
" from EHm, and all the congregation of the children of Israel came unto
the wilderness of Siu, which is between Elim and Sinai " (Ex. xvi. 1).
From this it might have been supposed that the next encampment after
Elim was in the wilderness of Sin, which must then have been looked for
within twelve or fifteen miles of Wady Ghurundel. But there is no suitable
tract within the distance. We find, however, by Numbers (xxxui. 10, 11),
that there was at least one encampment between Elim and the Sia desert.
" They removed from Elim," it is said, " and encamped by the Eed Sea ;

' The bitterness of Ain Howarah is recognised by all travellers, from Burckhardt (' TiaveUi
in Syria,' p. 473) downwards. Winer (Eealworterhuch, ad voo. Marah) says that a still
bitterer well lies east of Marah. Mention is also made of an exceedingly bitter spring south of
Marah (' Dictionary of the Bible,' vol ii. p. 233).

' Stanley, ' Sinai and Palestine,' pp. 22, 608 ; Highton, in Smith's ' Dictionary of the Bible,
vol. ii. p. 532, note, etc.

• Palms are still found in these parts, both at Wady Ghurundel and Wady Useit. They are
"either dwarf, i.e. trunkless, or else with savage hairy trunks and branches all dishevelled "
(Stanley, p. 68).

* Shubeikah is preferred by Lepsius (' Travels,' vol. i. p. 27) ; Useit by Laborde (' Geographical
Commentary on Exodus,' xv. 27) ; Ghurundel, or Ghurundel together with TJseit, by Dean
Stanley (p. 68); Ghurundel positively by Canon Cook, the Eev. S. Clark, Kalisch, Kuobel,
and most others.

' It is our conviction that the cattle of the Israelites rapidly decreased as they pursued theii
march. Many were probably kUled for food ; others died of thirst, or pined away f nun ttM
insufficiency of the pasturage.



INTBODUOTION.



and they removed from the Eed Sea and encamped in the wilderness of
Sin." This makes it certain that Wady Ghnrundel was reached at some
distance inland,* and that after leaving it the route was deflected towards
the right, and the coast of the Eed Sea reached, probably either at the
mouth of Wady Ethal or of Wady Shubeikah. As Wady Ethal is only ten
miles from Ghurundel, and Shubeikah is less than fifteen, the latter would
seem to be the more probable,^ unless indeed there was more than one
encampment on the sea-shore.

We have now to identify " the wilderness of Sia." Within eleven or
twelve miles of the mouth of Wady Shubeikah are two tracts fairly suitable.
One of these is the plain of El Markha,^ an open sandy space, about
thirteen miles long by three broad, intervening between the mountains and
the sea, which may be reached from Wady Shubeikah by a march along
the shore in about three or four hours. The other is the Debbet er Eamleh,
an inland tract, " bare, wild, and desolate," * extending about twenty-five
miles from N.W.W.to S.E.E., between long. 33° 20' and 33° 40', and varying
in width from two to seven miles. This tract may be reached from Wady
Shubeikah by a succession of wadys, rough but practicable, in a march of
about three hours. The conductors of the recent Sinai Survey Expedition,
having examined both localities, are strongly of opinion that the way by
the shore and El Markha is the one most likely to have been pursued by
so large a body as the Israelites,^ and that El Markha consequently is " the
wilderness of Sin," where the quails were brought and the manna was first
given (Ex. xvi. 4 — 36). The opinion of scientific observers has so much
weight, that, though some coincidences of name have been noted on the
rival route,* we incline to accept the line by El Markha as that which the
Israelites most probably took.

From some part of the plain El Markha they must have turned inland.
Three wadys lead out of it, the Wady Shellal towards the north, the Wady
Feiran on the south, and the Wady Seih-Sidreh, halfway between the two.
Wadys Shellal and Seih-Sidreh unite in the Wady Magharah, where the
Egyptians had an important settlement for the working of the copper-
mines, defended by a fortress and a garrison.' It is probable that the

• The whole of the coast-line is arid. The wadys are entered from the shore up a steep dry
incline (Stanley, p. 10), and it is not till some distance inland that vegetation is found.

» Shubeikah has trees, water, and pasturage. It is, next to Ghurundel, the most fertile of th«

°"»^Cook in the ' Speaker's Connnentaiy,' vol. i. pt. i. p. 438 ; Stanley, ' Sinai and Palestine,
_ i^Q ' * Cook, p. 436.

• Pahner, ' Desert of the Exodus,' vol. i. pp. 232—9. „ , . ^ - , , „

' D''lbei is said to have exactly the same meaning as Sin (Cook, in the ' Speakers Lommen-
tarv ' vol i pt i. p. 436), Daphkah (Num. xxxiii. 12) to correspond to Sih, the name of a wady
which coinmunicates with the Debbet, and Almh to be the same as El Esk, another wady further

» sLgTch, ' Historf of Egypt," vol. i. p. 65 ; Cook, in the ' Speaker'^ Commentaiy,' ?oL i. pt i
p, 438: Stanley, ' Sinai and Palestine,' p. 28.



axvi INTEODUCTION.



Israelites wotild wish to avoid a collision with a disciplined force, and would
therefore prefer the southern route, which, though circuitous, and said to he
at the present time ill- watered, was spacious and free from enemies. Three
encampments brought them to Eephidim, which, if we have correctly
; divined the movements of the host up to this point, must have heen in the
Wady Feiran, a valley declared to te " richer in water and vegetation than
any other in the peninsula." ' Here, consequently, abundant water was
expected, but none was found ; the watercourse was dry (Ex. xvii. 1).
Hence the extreme anger of the people against Moses, followed by the
miracle of bringing water out of the rook (Jb. vers. 2 — 6), and soon after-
wards by the battle with the Amalekites. Wady Feiran, of great value in
itself on account of its fertility, was also of extreme importance as giving
access to the entire group of valleys about Sinai, which formed an oasis in
the stony wilderness. It has been well observed that " if the Israel it,e8
passed through Wady Feiran, it seems improbable that they should not
have come into collision with the natives." ^ Here were " the tombs and
storehouses of the Amalekites ; " ^ here probably was the ancient sanctuary
of the nation ; * here certainly, and in the neighbourhood, was one of the
best grazing districts, for which a nomadic horde will fight, if it fights for
anything. Heire, finally, is a spot fitting well the description of the battlo
and its attendant circumstances. " Every one who has seen the valley
of Feiran will at once recognise the propriety of the 'hill' (Ex. xvii
9, 10), if applied to the rocky eminence which commands the palm-grove,
and on which, in early Christian times, stood the church and palace of the
bishops of Paran. Thus, if we can attach any credence to the oldest known
tradition of the peninstila, that Eephidim is the same as Paran, then
Eephidim, ' the resting-place,' is the natural name for the paradise of the
Bedouins in the adjacent palm-grove ; then the hill of the church of Paran
may fairly be imagined to be " the hUl " on which Moses stood, deriving its
earliest coisecration from the altar which he built; the Amalekites may
thus have naturally fought for the oasis of the Desert and the sanctuary of
their gods ; and Jethro may well have found his kinsmen encamping after
their long journey amongst the palms ' before the mount of God ' (Serbal),
and acknowledged that the Lord was greater even than all the gods who
had from ancient days been thought to dwell on the lofty peaks which
overhung their encampment." ^

The "SVady Feiran bifurcates at its eastern extremity, sending off the
Wady esh Sheikh to the left, and to the right the Wady Solaf, both of them

• HightoD, in Smith's ' Dictionary of the Bible,' vol. iii. p. 1030

• Cook, in the ' Speaker's Commentary,' l.s.c.

• Kev. F. W. Holland, quoted in the same work, vol. i. pt. 1. p. 438, note '. (Compan
Our Work in Palestine,' p. 282.)

• Ritter, ' Sinai,' pp. 728-44 ; Stanley, ' Sinai and Palestine,' p. Mi

• Stanley, pp. 41-2.



INTRODUCTION.



practicaUe routes, but the former tlie easier. It is a reasonable suggestion
that both may have been utilised, and that the two portions of the congrega-
tion, reuniting where the above-mentioned wadys converge, thus entered the
Wady er Eahah, " the enclosed plain in front of the magnificent cliffs of
Eas Sufsafeh," ^ which is now generally admitted to be " the wilderness of
Sinai " (Ex. xix. 1), the camping-ground in which the IsraeHtes assembled
to see the Lord " come down upon Mount Sinai " (ih. ver. 11). The southern
extremity of the mountain, once preferred by many ^ as the probable scene
of the descent, is found to have no plain at all at its base, and no place
within moderate distance at all suited for a great assembly.* Er Eahah
and Eas Sufsafeh, on the other hand, answer aU the conditions. " No one,"
says Dean Stanley,* " who has approached the Eas Sasafeh (Sufsafeh)
through that noble plain, or who has looked down upon the plain from that
majestic height, will willingly part with the belief that these are the two
essential features of the view of the Israelite camp. That such a plain
should exist at all in. front of such a oUff is so remarkable a coincidence with
the sacred narrative as to furnish a strong internal argument, not merely
of its identity with the scene, but of the scene itself having been described
by an eye-witness. The awful and lengthened approach, as to some natural
sanctuary, would have been the fittest preparation for the coming scene.
The low line of alluvial mounds at the foot of the cliff exactly answer [?]
to the ' bounds ' which were to keep the people off from ' touching the
mount.* The plain itself is not broken and uneven and narrowly shut in,
like almost all others iu the range, but presents a long retiring sweep,
against which the people could 'remove and stand afar off'.' The cUff,
rising like a huge altar in front of the whole congregation, and visible
against the sky in lonely grandeur from end to end of the whole plain, is
the very image of ' the mount that might be touched,' and from which
the voice of Grod might be heard far and wide over the stillness of the plain
below, widened at that point to its utmost extent by the confluence of aU
the contiguous valleys." The opinion here stated rests upon such solid
grounds that further exploration can scarcely shake it. The latest and
most scientific explorers have given to it their full adhesion. And the
trigonometrical survey which these explorers made of the entire neighbour-
hood has converted one," who was strongly incliaed to the rival view, into a
zealous advocate of the opinion here set forth. Finally, the judgment of
Sir Henry James, one of our best engineers, coincides with that of the

> Stanley, p. 42.

* As Eitter, Kalisch, Wellsted, Laborde, Strauss, and otbeis.

* So far as I know, this was fiist pointed out by Dean Stanley in 1856 (' Sinai and Palestine,
pp. 75 — 6). His judgment on the point was completely confirmed by the engineers who madi
fife Ordnance Survey in 1868.

* • Sinai and Palestine,' pp. 42-3.

» Canon Cook. (See the ' Speaker's CJonunentary,' vol. L pt. i. pp 440 — 1.)



xxxviii INTEODUCTION.



officers who made the survey. Sir Henry telieves that " no spot in tha
world can be pointed out which combines in a more remarkable manner tha
conditions of a commanding height and of a plain in every part of which
the sights and sounds described in Exodus would reach an assembled
multitude of more than two million souls." ^

There would seem, therefore, to be no reasonable doubt that Sinai and
its wilderness have been identified, and that the Law was given from Baa
Sufsafeh to the people of Israel assembled in the Wady of Er Bahah.



LrrEBATUBB OP Exodus.



The Book of Exodus is so closely connected with the remainder of the Pentateuch
that it has but seldom, comparatively speaking, been made the subject of distinct and
separate comment. The great bulk of those who have written upon it, have been
either composers of " Introductions " to the whole of the Old Testament, like Eichhom,
Bertholdt, Oarpzov, Havernick, Keil and Delitzsch, De Wette, Jahn, Herbst, Michaelis,
Bleek, and Stahelin, or writers of commentaries on the entire Pentateuch, Uke Vater,
Knobel, Baumgarten, Marsh, Jahn (Aechtheit des Pentateuch), Hartmann, Fritzsche,
Kahsch, and Bush. One English writer of repute, Graves, occupied somewhat
narrower groimd in his ' Lectures on the Last Four Books of the Pentateuch,' whicL
in England was long reckoned among standard theological works. The volume devoted
to Exodus by Kalisch, though part of a general commentary, stands on a somewhat
peculiar footing, since it was written and published separately by one who viewed
" Exodus " as " forming the centre of the Divine Eevelation," and as being consequently
" the most important volume which the human race possesses." As the comment of a
Jew, a special interest attaches to this treatise, the author having certain advantages
of intimate familiarity with the text and close acquaintance with Hebrew customs and
ideas, which render his remarks deserving of attentive consideration.

Of comments on Exodus alone, the earliest which deserves mention is that of Rivet,
entitled ' Commentarii in Exodum,' which wUl be found in his Opera Theologioa, vol. i.
pubUshed at Rotterdam in 1651. After this, no contribution of much value was made
towards the right vmderstanding of the work until EosenmiUler published his ' Scholia
in Exodum' in 1822. The strictures of Von Bohlen in his ' Alte Indien ' (1835) called
forth in 1840 the excellent work of Hengstenberg, entitled 'Aegypten und Moses,'
which, although containing reference to Genesis, is in the main a comment on Exodus,
of great value in all that regards Egypt and the Egyptians. 'J'hirteen years later KeU
and DeUtzsch commenced the publication of their great work, 'Einleitung in die
Kanonischen Schriften des alten 1'estameutes,' by commentaries on Genesis and Exodus,
which were translated into English in Clark's Edinburgh Series in the year 1864.
Kalisch's 'Historical and Critical Commentary,' which has been already mentioned,
appeared within two years of that of Keil and Delitzsch, but was written apparently
without any knowledge of it, and shows throughout marks of original and independent
thought. It was published simultaneously in English and in German, in the year
1855. In 1857, two years later, the editors of the ' Kurzgefasstes exegetisches Handbuch
zmn alten Testament,' published by Hirzel of Leipsic, gave to the world a still more
elaborate corament than either of these, entitled ' Die Biicher Exodus und Leviticus
erklart von Augustus Knobel,' in which great and varied learning was brought to bear
on the subject, and a view taken which, though rationalistic to a certain extent, waa
moderate in comparison with the older generation of German commentators, as
De Wette, Von Lengerke, and Stahelin. Finally, in 1871, the iirst volume of tha
'Speaker's Commentary' contained an Introduction and Explanatory Comment oo

> • Speaker's Commentary,' vol. L p. 442



INTRODUCTION. xxxlx



Exodus, accompanied by additional Notes and Essays — the joint production of Canoa
Cook and the Rev. S. Clark, remarkable for the great knowledge of Egyptian history
and of the ancient Egyptian language which it displayed — a knowledge that at once
placed the principal author in the first rank of European Egyptologers.

Some good collections have been made in recent years of the Jewish commentators
upon Exodus, or the Pentateuch generally. Among these the most important are
' Mechilta, der alteste halach. und hagad. Commentar z. 2. Buch Moses, von J. H. Weiss,'
Wien, 1865 ; ' Wehishir, gesammelte, erlauterte, Midrasch- und Halachasteken z.
Buche Exodus des Pentateuch, von R. Chefez Aluf,' Leipzig, 1873 ; and ' Der Pentateuch,
mit folgenden zehn Commentatoren, Raschi, Ibn Bsra, Ramban, Baschbam, Balhaturim,
Sefurus, Asvi Eser, Mesoras Targum, Paschegen, und dem Commentar Nesina-la-ger
von B. Nathan Adler, ferner mit Targum und Toldos Aron,' Wilna, 1876.

Important works have also been written on portions of Exodus, e. g. that of Bryant,
entitled 'Observations upon the Plagues inflicted upon the Egyptians,' 2nd edition,
London, 1810, and that of Millington on the same subject ; also Michaelis, < Mosaisches
Recht,' Frankfurt, 1775-80; and the following upon the Tabernacle — Priedrich,
' Symbolik der MosaiBohen Stiftshutte,' Leipzig, 1841 ; and Neumann, ' Die Stiftshiitta^
Bild und Wort,' Gotha, 1861. Important light has also been thrown on this last-
mentioned subject by Mr. James Fergusson, in Dr. Smith's 'Dictionaiy of the Bible'
gjt. Tempiii



THE



BOOK OP EXODUS.



INTEODUOTOEY SECTION. CHAPTEES L, H.
The Offbebsiom or Israel in Eotft, with tbb Bibth asd Eaxlt Lifk of MoaML



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB L



Vera. 1 — 6. — ^The Book of Eixodns, being
written in continuation of the histoiy recorded
in Genesis, is carefuU}r connected with it by
a recapitulation. The recapitulation inTolves
three points : — 1. The names of Jacob's child-
ren ; 2. The number of Jacob's descendants
trho went down into !p)gypt ; and 8. The death
of Joseph. Verses 1—4 are a recapitulation of
Gen. zxxv. 22-26 ; verse 8, of Gen. zlvi. 27 ;
and veise 6, of Gen. 1. 26. In no case, how-
ever, is the recapitulation exact, or (so to
speak) mechanical. The "households" of
verse 1 had not been mentioned previously ;
Joseph had not in Genesis been separated off
from his brethren, as he is in verse 5; nor
had the deaths of "his brethren" been re-
corded, much less of "all that generation."
Thus there is here no "vain repetition."
New facts come out in the course of the
recapitulation; and the narrative advances
while aiming especially at maintaining its
continuity.

Ver. 1. — ^Now these are the names. Lite-
rally, " And these are the names." Compare
Gen, xlvi. 8, where the phrase used is the
same. We have here the first example of
that almost miivendl practice of the writers
of the Historical Scriptnres to connect book



with book in the dosest possible way by tiw
simple copulative " and." (Compare Josh. i. 1^
Judg. i. 1, Buth, Samuel, Kings, Ezra, Nehe-
miah, and Esther.) This practice, so onlike
that of secular writers, can only be explained
by the instinctive feeling of all, that they
were contributors to a lingU hook, each later
writer a continuator of the narrative placed on
record by his predecessor. In the Pentateuch,
if we admit a single author, the initial van
will be less remarkable, since it will merely
serve to join together the different sections ot
a single treatise. Which oame into Egypt.
The next two words of the original, "with
Jacob," belong properly to this claose. The
whole verse is best translated, " Now these are
the names of the children of Israel which came
into Egypt with Jacob ; they came every man
with his household." So the LXX., Fagnini,
Kalisch, Geddes, Boothroyd, etc. Every man
and hiB household. This is important in
connection with the vexed question of the
possible increase of the original band of so-
called "Israelites" within the space of 430
years to such a nmnber be is said to have
quitted Egypt with Moses (ch. xii. 37). The
"household of Abraham comprised 818
adult males (Gen. xiv. 14). The "house-
holds" of Jacob, his eleven sons, and his
numerous grown-up grandsons, have been
with reason estimated at " several thousands."
(Kurtz, ' History of the Old Covenant,' vol. ii
p. 149, E. T.)

Vers. 2 — 5. — ^Theeons of the legitimate wives
Leah tad Baehel are placed first, in .the



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[OH. 1. 1— «.



order of their senioritj (Gen. zxix. 32-35 ;
ixi. 18-20; XXXV. 18); then those of the
gecondaiy mves, or concuhines, also in the
order of their birth (ib. xxx. 6 — 13). The
order ia* different from that observed in
Gen. xlvi., and seems intended to do honour
to legitimate, as opposed to secondary, wed-
lock. The omission of Joseph follows neces-
sarily from the exact form of the opening
phrase, " These are the names of the children
of Israel, which came into Egypt with Jacob."
Yer. 5. — ^AIl the souls that came out of
the loiliB of Jacob were seventy souls.
This 'S manifestly intended as a repetition of
Gen. xlvi. 27, and throws the reader back
upon tha details there adduced, which make
up th J exact number of " seventy souls," by
the inclusion of Jacob himself, of Joseph, and
of Joseph's two sons, Ephraun and Manasseh.
The inaccuracy by which Jacob is counted
among his own descendants, is thoroughly



Oriental and Hebraistic, however opposed to
Western habits of thought. To stumble at it
shows a narrow and carping spirit. (Compare
note on Gen. xlvi. 15.) Tor Joseph was in
Egypt already. Joseph, i.e., has not been
mentioned with the other sons of Jacob, since
he did not "come into Egypt with Jacob,"
but was there previously. 'Fhe transfer of the
clause to the commencement of the verse,
which is made by the LXX., is unnecessary.

Ver. 6. — And Joseph died. Or, "So
Joseph died" — a reference to Gen. I. 26
— and all his brethren. All the other actual
sons of Jacob — some probably before him ;
some, as Levi (ch. vi. 16), after him. Joseph's
" hundred and ten years " did not constitute
an extreme longevity. And all that gene-
ration. All the wives of Jacob's sons, their
sister Dinah, and the full-grown members of
their households who accompanied them into
Egypt



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 5. — The patriarchal naima. I. The names in themselves. Nothing t
to the ordinary reader of Holy Scripture so dry and uninteresting as a bare catalogue of
names. Objections are even made to reading them as parts of Sunday or week-day
" lessons." But " all Scripture," rightly viewed, " is profitable " (2 Tim. iii. 16). Each
Hebrew name has a meaning, and was given with a purpose. What a wealth of joys
and sorrows, hopes and fears, surmises, triumphs, jealousies, is hid up in the list before
us 1 Jacob, the tupplanter (Gen. xxvii. 36) ; Beuben, the son of God's gracious regard
(ib. xxix. 32) ; Simeon, the proof that God hears prayers and answers them (ib. ver. 33) ;
Levi, the bond of association between wife and husband ; Judah, he for whom God is
praised ; Issachar, the son given as a reward ; Zebulon, he who will make the husband
and wife dwell together ; Benjamin " son of my strength," otherwise Benoni, " son of my
Borrow " (ib. xxxv. 16) ; Dan, the sign that there is a God who Judges us ; Naphtali,
"one ivresiltd for"; Gad, "good fortune cometh"; Asher, "the happy one"l How
the private life of Jacob, how the rivalries and heats and contentions of that polygamist
household, come before us, as we read the names ! How again, amid all these heats and
contentions, is revealed on all sides a faithful trust in God, a conviction of his over-
ruling providence, and an acceptance of that aspect of his character which the Apostle
holds up to view, when he calls him " a rewarder of them that diligently seek him "
(Heb. xi. 6). Again, how strong the feeling, that, whatever cares and troubles they
bring with them, children are a blessing ! What a desire is shown to have children !
What a pride in the possession of many children ! Already " the Desire of all nations "
was looked for, and each Hebrew mother hoped that in the line of descent from her
might be bom that Mighty One, who would " bruise the serpent's head " (Gtea. iii. 15),
and in whom "all the nations of the earth would be blessed" (ib. xii. 3; xviii. 18).
Thus this list of names, if we will consider the meaning of them and the occasion of
their being given, may teach us many a lesson, and prove " profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness."

II. The obdeb op the names. The order in which the names are given assigns a just
advantage to legitimate and true marriage over even the most strictly legal union which
falls short of true marriage. Let men beware lest they forfeit God's blessing upon their
domestic life, by contracting marriage in any but the most solemn way that is open to
them. There is a sanctity in the relation of husband and wife, that should lead us to
surround the initial contract with every sacred association and every holy form that the
piety of bygone ages has provided for us.

Agun, the order followed assigns a just and rightful advantage to priority of birth.
FrimoguiltUM is in a certain sense, a law of nature. The elder brother, superior in



CH. L 1— 6.J THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 3

■trength, in knowledge, ivnd experience, rightfully claims respect, submission, reverence
from those younger than himself. In a properly regulated family this principle will be
laid down and maintained. Age, unless by misconduct it forfeits its privilege, wiU be
assigned the superior position ; younger children will be required to submit themselves
K> elder ones ; elder children will be upheld and encouraged to exercise a certain amount
c/ authority over their juniors. There will be a training within the domestic circle in
the habits both Qf direction and submission, which wiU prepare the way for the after
discipline of life in the world.

Ill The numjee op the names. Whatever minor lessons he may have intended to
teach in this opening paragraph, the main purpose of the writer was undoubtedly to show
from what small beginnings God produces the greatest, most remarkable, nay, the most
astounding results. From the stock of one man and his twelve sons, with their house-
holds, Qtxi raised up, within the space of 430 years, a tiation. Similarly, when " in the
fulness of time" the New Dispensation succeeded the Old, from "the Twelve" and
from " the Seventy " TLuke x. 1), the original " little flock " {ibid. xii. 32) was derived
that " general assembly and church of the firstborn " (Heb. xii. 23) which is a " great
multitude that no man can number " (Rev. vii. 9). And the growth was even more
rapid. " We are but of yesterday," says TertuUian, in the third century after our
Lord's birth, " and yet we fill all places — ^your cities, islands, forts, towns, villages ; nay,
your camps, tribes, decuries — ^your palace, your senate, your forum." How wonderful
is such increase in either case I How clearly the consequence of Divine favour and
■ • 5!



Ver. 6. — Joseph in Egypt. Exodus here points back to Genesis. So the present is
always pointing back to the past. In the life of an individual, in the life of a family,
in the life of a nations there is a continuity : no past act but affects the present — no
present act but afi'ects the future. Joseph's descent into Egypt is at the root of the
whole of Exodus, underlies it, forms its substratum. Without an in-coming, no out-
going ; and it was at Joseph's instance that his brethren had come into the country
(Gen. xlv. 9 — Zi). Or our thoughts may travel further back. "Joseph in Egypt."
How had he come there ? Through the envy and jealousy of brethren, provoked by
the favouritism of a too fond father. Here are evils to be guarded against ; here are
sins to be cast out. And yet of the evil good had come : " Ye thought evil against me ;
but God meant it unto good" (Gen. 1. 20). "The fierceness of men he turns to his
praise ; and the fierceness of them he doth refrain " (Ps. Ixxvi. 10). The cruel wrong
done to Joseph had saved from starvation his father and his father's house, had pre-
served the entire people of the Egyptians from extreme sufl'ering, and had brought
Joseph himself to the highest honour. " God's ways are not as our ways, nor his
thoughts as our thoughts." He is potent to bring good out of evil, and to turn the
n-orst calamity into the choicest blessing.

Ver. 6. — Joseph in death with all his generation. There are some sayings 80 trite
that we can scarcely bring ourselves to repeat them, so vital that we do not dare
to omit them. One of these is that immemorial one : " We must all die." Joseph,
great as he had been, useful as his life had been to others, unspeakably precious
as it had proved to his near kinsmen, when his time came, went the way of all
fti^f— died like any common man, and "was put in a cofiin" (Gen. L 26) and
W^ied. So it must always be with every earthly support and stay; it fails us
at last^ aud if it does not betray us, at any rate deserts us ; suddenly it is gone,
and its' ^^e knows it no more. This is always to be borne in mind ; and no
excessive re^g^e is to be placed on individuals. "The Church is safe ; for its Lord is
always " with; i)^ and so will be " even to the end of the world." But the men in
whom from time to tmk& it trusts are all mortal — may at any time be lost to it — may
in one hour be snatched away. It is important therefore for the Church to detach itself
from individuals, and to>.6sfe to two anchors — Christ and the Faith of Christ — which
can never cease to exist, anci can never fail it. For, when our Joseph dies, there die
with him, or soon after him, '*ail his brethren, and all that generation." The great
lights of an age are apt to go out at once, or if a few linger on, they bum with a dim
lustre. And the generation that hung upon their words despairs, and knows not which

B 2



4 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. 1. 1— 6.

way to turn itself, until the thought comes — " Lord, to whom shall we go ? Thou hast
the words of eternal life." Then, in resting upon Christ, it is well with us. Well, toM,
for each generation to remember, it will not long stay behind — it will follow its teachers.
Joseph dies — his brethren die ; wait a few years, and God will have taken to himseli
" all that generation."

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 1. — Remcnial to Egypt. This early instance of emigration show»—

I. How the CALL to leave the land of one's fathers may sometimes be — 1. Unexpected
Jacob little expected to end his days in Egypt. 2. Trying. Canaan, the land of
promise, where were the graves of his ancestors, etc. 3. Mysterious. An apparent
reversal of the lines on which Providence had hitherto been moving. Yet — 4. Distinct.
Jacob had no doubt that God's call had come to him. It came first in providence, ami
was ratified by direct Divine permission (Gen. xlvi. 2 — 5). Many have the indirect
call, who can scarcely doubt that it is also a direct one. Causes of emigration— Want
and distress at home, with reasonable prospect of comfort and plenty abroad ; opening
of a better field for talents and energies ; state of health, necessitating change of climate ;
persecution, as in case of Huguenots, Pilgrim Fathers, etc.

II. What CONSOLATIONS the emigrant may carry with him. 1. God accompanies
him (Gen. xlvi. 4). 2. He can serve God yonder as well as here. 3. He is fiirther-
ing wise and beneficent purposes. Little doubt of that, if he is leaving at God's
bidding. Israel's residence in Egypt secured for the tribes — (1) A home. (2) Provi-
sion. (3) Room to grow. (4) Education in arts and letters. (5) Valuable discipline
— all preparatory to settlement in Canaan, and the fulfilment of their spiritual mission
to the world. 4. The terminus is not Egypt, but Canaan. Jacob never saw again the
Canaan he had left, but, dying in faith, he and his sons became heirs of the better
Canaan. Whatever his earthly destination, let the emigrant keep in view a " better
country, that is, an heavenly " (Heb. xi. 16).

III. The ADVANTAGES of emigration. 1. It is not always advantageous. (1) Not
always advantageous to the country left. A country that by misgovemment, bad
laws, excessive taxation, or persecution, drives its best subjects from its soil, may be
compared to a man who humours an insane bent by occasionally opening a vein.

(2) Not always advantageous to the country settled in. Emigrants may carry with
them — too often do — low and immoral habits, and prove a curse, rather than a blessing,
to the populations in whose midst they settle. (3) Not always to the emigrant
himself. His step may prove to have been hasty. He may have taken it on impulse,
or on insufficient information, or in a spirit of adventure. He finds when too
late that a sanguine disposition has deceived him. Ttiis is to go forth without a
clear call. But — 2. Emigration, wisely and judiciously conducted, is of great benefit
to society. (1) It thins an overstocked country, and so relieves pressure on the means
of subsistence. (2) It occupies territory needing population to develop its resources.

(3) It affords room and scope for the vigorous expansion of a young race. (4) It benefits
native populations. The Egyptians would profit by the residence of the Hebrews in their
midst. (5) It may be made subservient to the diffusion of the knowledge of the true
religion. How seldom is this thought of, yet what a responsibility rests on those who
leave Christian shores, carrying with them, to lands sunk in the night of heathenism,
the blessed truths of Christianity I The conclusion of the matter is : Let emigration be
an act of faith. Do not, in so important a step in life, lean to your own understanding.
Ask guidance and clear direction firom on High. But if the way is open and the call
plain, then, like Jacob, go forth, and go boldly, and in faith. Trust God to be with
you. He goes before you to seek you out a place to dwell in, and will surely bless you
in all you put your hand to (Deut. i. 33 ; xv. 10). — J. 0.

Vers. 1 — Q.-^The twelve foundations. The heads of the covenant race had hitherto
been single individuals. Abraham — Isaac — Jacob. The one now expands into the
twelve. Glance briefly at this list of the patriarchs.

I. The UN. Here we are struck — 1. With the original unfitneM qf most tf theie
men for the position qf dignity they we/re afterwards called to occupy. How shall we



OH. 1. 1—6.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. g

describe them I Recall Reuben's incest ; Simeon and Levi's cruelty ; Judah's lewdness ;
the " evil report " which Joseph brought to his father of the sons of the handmaids.
The picture in the later chapters of Genesis is crowded with shadows, and it is chieflr
the sins of these men which are the causes of them. Joseph is the one bright excep-
tion. The rest appear to have been men of a violent, truculent disposition, capable of
selling their yoimger brother into Egypt, and afterwards, to screen their fault, of
imposing by wilful falsehood on their aged father. Even in Benjamin, traits of charactei
were discernible which gave ground for the tribal prediction : " Benjamin shall ravin
as a wolf " (Gen. xlix. 17). How unlikely that men of so ungodly a stamp, who began
so iU, should end by being exalted to be patriarch-heads of a covenant nation 1 And
neither in truth were they, tiU, by God's grace, a great change had passed upon them.
Their crime in selling Joseph was, in a sense, their salvation. It was an act for which
they never forgave themselves. Compunction wrought in them a better disposition,
and laid the basis for " a train of humiliating and soul-stirring providences, tending to
force on them the conviction that they were in the hands of an angry God, and to bring
them to repentance of sin and amendment of life." See— (1) .The natural unfitness of
man for God's service ; " that which is born of the flesh is flesh " (John iii. 6).
(2) What the grace of God can make even of very bad men. " By grace ye are saved "
(Eph. ii. 5). (3) How those whom God designs for honoiu- in his kingdom, he first
prepares for that honour. Whatever disciphnes are neediiil for that purpose — and they
may not be few — he will not withhold. 2. With the variety of yi/ts and dispositions
found amongst them. This variety is taken note of in the blessings of Jacob and of
Moses, and is reflected in the history. Judah is from the first a leader. He and
Joseph were heads of what subsequently became the royal tribes. Reuben's impulsive-
ness reminds us of Peter, but he lacked Peter's underlying constancy. Levi's zeal
wrought at first for evil, but afterwards for good. The other brethren were less dis-
tinguished, but, as shown by the blessings, all were gifted, and gifted diversely. Does this
not teach us ? (l) That God can use, and (2) that God requires, every variety of gift in
his service. Hence, (3) that there is both room and nee^ in his kingdom for all types
•ad varieties of character — for every species of gift. A type of religion is self-con-
demced which cannot find room in it for the play and development of every legitimate
capability of human nature. This is but to say that the goal of God's kingdom is the
perfecting of humanity, not in part, but in the totality of its powers and functions.
Grace does not suppress individuality ; it develops and sanctifies it. It does not trample
on gifts, but lays hold upon, transforms, and utilises them. 3. With the existence of a
law of heredity in spiritual as in natural descent. The characteristics of the patriarchs
were stamped with remarkable distinctness on the tribes which bore their names.
Reuben's instability, Judah's capacity of rule, Levi's zeal, Dan's agility, Benjamin's
fierceness, etc. Tius reappearance of ancestral characteristics in the descendants is a
feet with which we are familiar, and is only explained in part by inherited organisa-
tion. Inheritance of ideas, customs, family traditions, etc., plays quite as important
a part in producing the result. A law this, capable of being the vehicle of much good,
but also of much evil — as potent to punish as to bless.

IL Theib numbeb. The number twelve not to be regarded as fortuitous. Twelve
(3 X 4), the symbol of the indwelling of God in the human family, of the interpene-
tration of the world by the Divinity. Three, the number of the Divine ; four, the
number of the world. Hence, twelve tribes, twelve cakes of shewbread, twelve apostles,
twelve foundations and twelve gates of the New Jerusalem. The number twelve is kept
up in spite of actual departures fi:om it in fact. The " twelve tribes " are spoken of in
the days of the apostles (Acts xxvi. 17 ; Jas. i. 1), though, counting Levi, there were
really thirteen tribes, and after the Captivity only two. It was doubtless with reference
to the twelve tribes of Israel, and therefore to the number of these patriarchs, that
Christ chose the twelve apostles. View the patriarchs, accordingly, as representing the
covenant race, not only — 1. In its natural heads, but symbolically — a. In its spiritual
privilege as a people of God, and 3. In its world-wide destiny. — J. 0.

Ver. 6.— An ending. The descent into Egypt was— 1. An ending. 2. A beginning.
Ct closed one chapter in God's providence, and opened a new one. It terminated the
sojourn in Canaan ; brought to a harmonious conclusion the complicated series of events



6 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. i. 1—6.

which separated Joseph from his father, raised him to power in Egypt, wrought for the
purification of his brethren's character, and prepared the way for the ultimate settlement
of the whole family in Goshen. It laid the foundation for new historical developmeuts.
There is now to be a pause, a breathing space, while the people are gradually multiply-
ing, and exchanging the habits of nomadic life for those of agriculturists and dweUers
in cities. The death of Joseph, and of his brethren, and of all that generation, is the
proper close of this earlier period. Their part is played out, and the stage is cleared
for new beginnings. 1. They died — so must we all. The common fate, yet infinitely
pathetic when reflected on. 2. They died — the end of earthly greatness. Joseph had
all he could wish for of earthly power and splendour, and he enjoyed it through a long
lifetime. Yet he must part with it. Well for him that he had something better in
prospect. 3. They died — the end of earthly disciplines. The lives of the brethren had
been singularly eventful. By painful disciplines God had moulded them for good.
Life to every one is a divinely ordained discipline. The end is to bring us to repentance,
and build us up in faith and holiness. With some, the discipline succeeds ; with others
it fails. In either case death ends it. " After this the judgment " (Heb. ix. 27). The
fact of discipline an argument for immortahty. God does not spend a lifetime in per-
fecting a character, that just when the finishing touches have been put upon it, he may
dash it into non-existence. Death ends discipline, but we carry with us the result and
the responsibility. 4. They died — Joseph and his brethren — happily in faith. There
was a future they did not live to see ; but their faith grasped God's promise, and
"Joseph, when he died . . . gave commandment concerning his bones" (Heb. xi. 22).
And behind the earthly Canaan loomed something better — an inheritance which they
and we may share together. — J. 0.

Vera. 1 — ^22. — The prosperity of Israd. This prosperity was not a mere appearance,
nor a passing spurt of fortune. It was a deep, abichng, and significant reality. Nor
was it something exaggerated in order to make an excuse for the cruelties of a sus-
pidous tyrant. There was indeed only too much to make Pharaoh uneasy ; but
altogether apart from his alarms there is a plain and emphatic statement of the
prosperity of Israel in ver. 7. It is a very emphatic statement indeed, summoning lu
m the most imperative way to a special notice of this remarkable prosperity. Let ui
therefore take a general view of Israel's prosperity as it is set before us in all the extent
of this first chapter. Note —

I. The indications or this prospbbitt. The prosperity is not only plainly stated,
but the chapter abounds in indications of Jehovah's favour towards Israel, and his
peculiar watchfulness over it. 1. 'JTie wonderful way in which God had brought a
whole family into Egypt, wnd provided for their comfortaMe settlement in the land.
Families usually get scattered ; but here are the children of J srael and children's children
all kept together. The very means which they had employed in order to get rid of one
of their number who was an oflence to them, had ended in their being brought together
more closely than ever. Joseph went before, and all unconsciously made a solid
foundation for the building of their prosperity. Through all domestic jealousies, in the
perils of famine, and in their journeyings between Canaan and Egypt, the Lord had
preserved these twelve men so that not one of them was lacking in his contribution to
the future excellency of Israel. 2. The name hy which they were described — the children
of Israel. God had said to Jacob (Gen. xxxii. 28), " Thy name shall be called no more
Jacob, but Israel," and yet down to the end of his life he is sometimes called Jacob and
sometimes Israel, as if to keep before our minds both his natural character and also his
new position and privileges gained in the memorable wrestling at Peniel. These twelve
men, the fathers of the tribes, were children of Israel as well as sons of Jacob. Jacob
himself had done many things tu show the meanness and corruption of fallen human
nature, and his sons had been not one whit better than himself (consider the revengeful
action of Simeon and Levi in Gen. xxxiv. 25 ; the conduct of Reuben in xxxv. 22 ; and
especially the conduct of the brethren towards Joseph and the father who so doted upon
him). But these sons of Jacob, with all their personal demerits, were also the chilcken
of him who by his sublime, persistent, courageous, and successful struggle had gained
the name of Israel. It was a name to be transmitted from them to their children, fiiU
of ngnificance, recalling a glorious experience in the past and promising a still more



CH. 1. 1—6.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. f

glorious experience in the future. Tt was a name not to be forfeited even in the greatest
apostasies, and perhaps its chief splendour lay in this, that it pointed forward to a still
more glorious fatherhood enjoyed by those who through the gracious work of him who
taught Nicodemus concerning regeneration, are permitted to say, " Now are wo the
children and heirs of God." 3. The apprehensive attitude of Pharaoh. He is a witness
to the greatness of Israel's prosperity, and to the Divine and miraculous origin of it, all
the more valuable because he gives his evidence unconsciously. The more we consider
his unaffected alarm and his continuous and energetic efforts to crush Israel, the more
we feel what & real and Divine thing Israel's prosperity was, how it was nourished bj
the secret and unassailable strength of God. It should be a matter of great rejoicing to
God's people when the world, in its hatred, suspicion, and instinctive sense of danger,
takes to the instruments of persecution, for then there is unmistakable indication of
prosperity within.

II. Whekein the fbosfebitt consisted. It did not consist in the accumulation <if
external possessions. The Israelites might have remained comparatively few or have
increased in a way such as to excite no attention. Their increase might have been in
external wealth, and this would have been reckoned, by many, true prosperity. But it
wovdd not have been prosperity after a godly sort. It was the purpose of God to show
in Israel how our true resources come, not from things outside of us, but from the
quality of the life which he puts within. Hence the prosperity of Israel was not the
result of industry, personal ability, and fortunate circumstances. It was shown by th«
manifestation of a miraculous fulness of life. The husbandman does not reckon it
anything wonderful that there should be among the trees of his vineyard a certain
increase of fruitfulness, corresponding to the carefulness of his cultivation. But if all
at cnce certain trees begin to put forth a fulness of fruit altogether beyond expectation,
the husbandman would not claim that such a result came from him. There is the
greatest possible difference between the prosperity lying in mere external possessions
and that which comes from the energy of a Divine life working in us. It needs no
special help from God to make a man a millionaire. There are but few who can be
■uch ; but place them in favourable circumstances, and the immense results of their
industry and attention are quite intelligible. But to produce such a result as appear!
in the peculiar prosperity of Israel in Egypt required a special influx of Divine energy.
We have not only unmistakable indications of the prosperity of Israel ; it is an equally
important thing to notice that this prosperity in its peculiar character is an indication
of the. presence of God. He was doing what none but himself could do. Learn then
that our spiritual prosperity must be something produced by God manifesting bis
power in our hearts. There is no chance of attributing it to our unaided industry,
attention, and prudence. It is a growth more than anything else, and must show itsdl
in the abundant and beautiful fruits of a Divine life within us.

III. A PAiNFuii ACCOMPANIMENT ov THE FBOSPBRITY. Such prosperity as is indi-
cated in ver. 7 could not but produce apprehension and opposition on the part of
Pharaoh — inevitably assuming, as it did, the appearance of a menace to his kingdom.
But it was better for Israel to go on increasing with the increase of God, even in the
midst of persecutions, than to be without the persecutions on condition of being without
the increase. Spiritual prosperity not only may be, but must be, accompanied with
afflictions of the natural life. That is a very doubtftd spirituality which manages to
keep clear of all temporal troubles. They that will live godly must suffer persecution.
Let us pray for spiritual prosperity, and hail its coming, and secure its_ stay, whatever
pains be suffered and whatever lesser comforts be lost. The more the life of God is in
us, the more we must expect the powers of evil to be stirred against us. — ^Y.

Vers. 1 — 7. Tarry thou the LorcTs leisv/re. Introduction to the Book of ExodoA
How much summed up in so few words. When men live history, every month seems
important ; when God records history a few sentences suffice for generations. Mam't
standpoint in the midst of the tumult is so different from God's : he " sitteth above the
waterflood" and seeth "the end from the beginning" (Ps. xxix. 10; Isa. xlvi. 10>
From God's standpoint we have here as of main consequence —

L A LIST OF NAMES, vers. 1 — 5. Names of certain emigrants. More in them thait
seems at first sight. If I say, " William, Arthur etc., came to F/ngl » nd at suob wi



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. l 7—14



such a time," not much. If I say, " William, a great warrior ; Arthur, a great inventor,"
we feel at once that with them elements are introduced which may prove important.
In these early times names are connected with the characters of the men who bearthetn.
All these names are significant. Illustrate from their meaning as given in Gen. xxix.,
etc., and expanded in Jacob's blessing, Gen. xlix. We are supposed, too, to know
something of the men from the previous history. The whole, taken together, shows us,
HS it were, a nation in embryo — a nation of which the characteristics were wholly
Afferent from those of the Egyptians. " Seventy souls," but — 1. Seed souls ; bound
to develop through their offspring the characteristics they exhibited. 2. United, not
isolated ; a nation in embryo, not a collocation of units.

II. Wh^t happened to the EEAEEB8 OP THE NAMES, ver. 6. All died — Joseph
*nd all that generation. The common lot, but, from God's standpoint, the ordained
method of development (John xii. 24). What wailing, as each patriarch, in his own
time, passed away I Yet with each death the harvest of the future was being ever more
sftourely sown. Death, as it were, rounds off the life ; pedestals it ; sets it where it can
become exemplary. So set it becomes fruitful ; the old husk drops away, and the true
life-grain is enfranchised. Gad, Asher, and the rest, very ordinary men, or, if not
ordinary, not very high-class men ; and yet, once dead, they are rightly reverenced aa
the fathers of their tribes. Which is better, the day of death or the day of. birth?
(The, day which makes life possible for us, or the day which, by sanctifying our
memory, makes that life an ennobling influence for others?

:, IIL How THE DESCENDANTS PKOSPEKED, vcr. 7. So — through the vicissitudes of life;
the varieties of character ; the monotony of death — God works on, slowly but cer-
tainly, to his destined end. New generations, each more numerous, succeed the old.
Power and prosperity, for a time, go hand-in-hand with increased numbers — the people
" waxed exceeding mighty." [The shepherd life, even in Egypt, ensured some know-
ledge of warfare. Goshen, the border land — of. "the borders" in the wars vrith
Scotland. . Perhaps Joseph had purposely placed his brethren as a defence to Egypt
against raids from the desert.] Families grew into tribes, and the tribes learnt their
first lessons in discipline and war. Egypt, God's Aldershot — the training-ground for
his armies. Canaan had to be conquered and cleared, but God could take his own
time about it. When at length the hour shoidd come, it would find his preparation!
perfected.

Application : — Would that man — God's child — would be content to copy his Fathei't
methods — slow ; thorough ; a definite end in view ; quiet, persistent preparation. K«
haste, no hurry, no delay (Isa. xxviii. 16). — G.



EXPOSITION.



Vera. 7 — 14. — ^Here the real narrative of
Exodns begins. The history of the Israelites
from and after the death of Joseph is entered
on. The first point touched is their rapid
multiplication. The next, their falhng under
the dominion of a new king. The third, his
mode of action under the circumstances. It
is remarkable that the narrative contains no
notes of time. How long the increase continued
before the new king arose, how long it went on
before he noticed it, how long the attempt was
made to check it by mere severity of labour,
we are not told. Some considerable duration
of time is implied, both for the multiplication
(ver. 7) and for the oppression (ver. 11 — 14);
but the narrator is so absorbed in the mattcns
which he has to communicate that the ques-
timi what time these matters occupied does



not seem even to occur to him. And so it ll

with the sacred narrative frequently — ^perhape
we should say, generally, 'the cluonologicil
element is regarded as of slight importance;
" A thousand years in the Lord's sight are but
as yesterday " — " one day is as a thousand yean,
and a thousand years as one day." Where *
profane writer would have been to the last
degree definite and particular, a sacred writer
is constantly vague and indeterminate. Wa
have in the Bible nothing like an exact con-
tinuous chronology. Certain general chrono-
logical ideas may be obtained from the Bible;
but in order to construct anything like a com-
plete chronological scheme, frequent reference
has to be made to profane writen and monu-
ments, and such a scheme must be mainly
dependent on these references. Archbishop



.1.7—14.]



THE BOOK OF EXODDS.



Uasher'B dates, inserted into the margin of so
many of oar Bibles, are the private specn-
lations of an indlTiduM on the subject of
mnndane chronology, and must not be re-
garded as in any way authoritatiTe. Their
primary basis is profane history ; and, though
taking into consideration all the Scriptural
nnmbers, they do not consistently follow any
single rule with respect to them. Sometimes
the authority of the Septuagint, sometimes
that of the Hebrew text, is preferred ; and the
result arrived at is in a high degree uncertain
and arbitnuy.

Ver. 7. — The multiplication of the Israelites
in Egypt from " seventy souls " to " six hun-
dred thousand that were men " (ch. xii. 37) — a
number which may fairly be said to imply a
total of at least two millions — ^has been de-
dared to be " impossible," and to stamp the
whole narrative of Exodus with the character
of mireality and romance. Manifestly, the
soundness of this criticism depends entirely on
two things — ^fiist, the length of time during
which the stay in Egypt continued; and
secondly, the sense in which the original
number of the children of Israel in Egypt is
said to have been " seventy souls." Now, as
to the first point, there are two theories — one,
basing itself on the Septuagint version of
Ex. xii. 40, would make the duration of the
Egyptian sojourn 215 years only ; the other,
following the clear and repeated statement of
the Hebrew text ([Ex. xii. 40, 41), literally
rendered in our version, would extend the time
to 430 years, or exactly double it. Much may
be said on both sides of this question, and the
best critics are divided with respect to it. The
longer period is supported by Kalisch, Kurtz,
Knobel, Winer, Ewald, Delitzsch, and Canon
Cook among modems; by Koppe, Frank,
Beer, Bosenmilller, Hofmann, Tiele, Beinke,
Jahn, Yater, and J. D. Michaelis among
earlier critics; the short period is approved
by Calvin, Grotius, Buddeus, Morinus, Voss,
Honbigant, Baumgarten ; and among our own
countrymen, by Ussher, Marsham, Geddes,
and Kennicott. The point cannot be properly
argued in an " exposition " like the present ;
but it may be remarked that both reason and
authority are in favour of the simple accept-
ance of the words of the Hebrew text, which
assign 430 years as the interval between
Jacob's descent into Egypt and the deliverance
under Moses.

With respect to the number of those who
accompanied Jacob into Egypt, and were
assigned the land of Goshen for a habitation
(Gen. xlvii. 6), it is important to bear in
mind, first of all, that the "seventy souls"
enumerated in Gen. xlvi. 8 — 27 comprised only
two females, and that " Jacob's sons' wives '"



are expressly mentioned as not included anunc
them (ib. ver. 26). If we add fte wives of
67 males, we shall have, for the actual famJy
of Jacob, 137 persons. Eurther, it is to M
borne in mind that each Israelite family which
went down into Egypt was accompanied by
its " household " (Ex. i. 1), consisting of at
least some scores of dependants. If each son
of Jacob had even 50 such retainers, and if
Jax^ob himself had a household like that of
Abraham (Gen. xiv, 14), the entire number
which " went down into Egypt " would havs
amounted to at least 2000 persons.

According to Malthus, population tends to
double itself, if there be no artificial check
restraining it, every twenty-five years. At
this rate, 2000 persons would expand into
2,048,000 in 250 years, 1000 would reach the
same amount in 275 years, and SCO in SCO
years ; so that, even supposing the " seventy
souls " with their " households to have num-
bered no more than 500 persons when they
went down into Egypt, the people would,
unless artificially checked, have exceeded two
millions at the expiration of three centuries —
that is to say, 130 years before the Exodus i
No doubt, the artificial checks wfiich keep
down the natural tendency of population to
increase began to tell upon them considerably
before that time. The " land of Goshen." a
broad tract of very fertile country, becamo
tolerably thickly peopled, and the rate of in-
crease gradually subsided. Still, as the Delta
was a space of from 7000 to 8000 square iniles,
and the land of Goshen was probably about
half of it, a population of two millions is very
much what we should expect, being at the
rate of from 500 to 600 persons to the squaro
mile.

It is an interesting question whether the
Egyptian remains do, or do not, contain any
mention of the Hebrew sojourn ; and if they
do, whether any light is thereby thrown on
these numbers, mw it is admitted on all
hands that, about the time of the Hebrew so-
journ, there was in Egypt a subject race, often
employed in forced labours, called Aperb or
Aperiu, and it seems impossible to deny that
this word is a very fair Egyptian equivalent
for the Biblical D^aV, " Hebrews." We are
forced, therefore, either to suppose that there
were in Egypt, at one and the same time, two
subject races with names almost identical, or
to admit the identification of the Aperu with'
the descendants of Jacob. The exact numbers
of the Aperu are nowhere mentioned ; but it
is a calculation of Dr. Brugsch that under
Barneses H., a little before the Exodus, the
foreign races in Egypt, of whom the Apem
were beyond all doubt the chief, " amounted
certainly to a third, and probably still more,"
of the whole population (' History of Egypt,'
vol. ii. p. 100, E. T.), which is usuidlT
reckoned at from 7,000,000 to 8,000,000



10



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CH. I. T— 14.



One-third of this numher would be from
2,8p0,0g0 to 2,600,000.

The writer of Exodus does not, however, as
yet, m^e anything like a definite calculation.
He is merely bent on having it understood that
there had oeen a great multiplication, and
that the " family " had grown into a " nation."
To emphasise his statement, he uses four
nearly synonymous verbs ("were fmitful,
and increased abundantly, and mnltiplied,
and waxed-mighty"), adding to the last a
duplicated adverb, bim'od m'od," much, much."
Clearly, an astonishing increase is intended.

Ver. 8. — ^There arose up a new king. It
is asked. Does this mean merely another king,
or a completely different king, one of a new
dynasty or a new family, not bound by pre-
cedent, but free to adopt and likely to adopt
quite new principles of government? The
latter seems the more probable supposition ;
but it is probable only, not certain. Assuming
it to be what is really meant, we have to ask,
What changes of dynasty fall within the pro-
bable period of the Israeute sojourn in Egypt,
and to which of them is it most likely that
allusion is here made? Some writers (as
Ealisch) have supposed the Hyksos dynasty
to be meant, and the " new king " to be Set,
or Salatis, the first of the Hyksos rulers. But
the date of Salatis appears to us too early. If
Joseph was, as we suppose, the minister of
Apophis, the last Hyksos king, two changes of
dynasty only can come into consideration —
that which took place about B.C. 1700 (or,
according to some, B.O. 1600), when the
Hyksds were expelled ; and that which fol-
lowed about three centuiies later, when the
eighteenth dynasty was superseded by the
nineteenth. To us it seems that the former of
these occasions, though in many respects suit-
able, is (a) too near the going down into
Egypt to allow time for l£e multiplication
which evidently took place before this king
arose (see ver. 7), and (6) unsuitable from the
circumstance that the first king of this dynasty
was not a builder of new cities (see ver. 11),
but only a repairer of temples. We therefore
conclude that the "new king" was either
Itameses I., the founder of the nineteenth
dynasty, or Seti I., his son, who within little
more than a year succeeded him. It is evi-
dent that this view receives much confirmation
from the name of one of the cities buUt for
the king by the Hebrews, which was Baamses,
or Barneses, a name now appearing for the
first time in the Egyptian dynastic lists.

Who knew not Joseph. Who not only
had no personal knowledge of Joseph, but was
wholly ignorant of his history. At the
distance of from two to three centuries the
benefits conferred by Joseph upon Egypt,
more especially as they were conferred under
t, foreign and hated dynasty, were forgotten.
Vet. 9 — ^And he said unto his people,



Behold, the children of Israel are more
and mightier than we. I^iterally, "great
and strong in comparison with us. Actual
numerical superiority is not, perhaps, meant ;
yet the expression is no doubt an exaggerated
one, beyond the truth — ^the sort of exaggera-
tion in which unprincipled persons indulge
when they would justify themselves for taking
an extreme and tmusual course.

Ver. 10.— Come on. The " Come then " of
Kalisch is better. Let ns deal wisely. " The
children of this world are in their generation
wiser than the children of light. Severe
grinding labour has often been used as a
means of keeping down the aspirations of a
people, if not of actually diminishing their
numbers, and has been found to answer.
Aristotle (Pol. v. 9) ascribes to this motive the
building of the Pyramids and the great works
of Polycrates of Samos, Pisistratus of Athens,
and tlie CypselidtB of Corinth. The con-
structions of the last Tarquin are thought to
have had the same object (Liv. 1. 56 ; Niebuhr,
' Roman History,' vol. i. p. 479). lest, when
there falleth out any war, ikey join also
to our enemies. At the accession of 1 ;
nineteenth dynasty, though there was peace,
war threatened. While the Egyptians, under
the later monarchs of the eighteenth dynasty,
had been quarrelling among themselves, a
great nation upon Qieii borders "had been
growing up to an importance and power which
began to endanger the Egyptian supremacy in
Western Asia " (Brugsch, 'History of Egypt,'
vol. ii. p. 2). Both Barneses L and his son
Seti had almost inmiediately after their acces-
sion to engage in a war, which was rather
defensive dan offensive, with the Khita, or
Hittites, who were the great power of Syria
(i6. pp. 9, 15, 16). At the commencement
of his reign, Seti may well have feared a
renewed invasion like that of the Hyks6s,
which would no doubt have been greatly
helped by a rising of the Israelites. And so
get them up out of the land. Literally,
" And go up out of the land." The Pharaoh
already fears that the Israelites will quit
Egypt. As men of peaceful and industrious
habits, and in some cases of considerable
wealth (Joseph. ' Ant. Jud.' ii. 9, § 1), they at
once increased the strength of Egypt and the
revenue of the monarch. Egypt was always
ready to receive refugees, and loth to lose
them. We find in a treaty made by Ea-
meses H., the son of Seti, with the Hittites, a
proviso that any Egyptian subjects who quit
the country, and transfer themselves to the
dominion of the Hittite king, shall be sent back
to Egypt (' Becords of the Past,' vol. iv. p. 30).

Ver. 11. — They did set over them task-
masters. LiteraUv, "lords of tribute," or
"lords of service.'' The term used, earey
massim, is the Egyptian ofScial title for over-
lookers of forced labour. It occnis in thij



ea. 1. 7—14.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



II



f eme on the monament representing brick-
making, which has been supposed by some to
be a picture of the Hebrews at work. (See
Cook, in the ' Speaker's Commentary,' vol. i.
pt. i. p. 253, and compare Brugsch, • History of
Egypt,' vol. i. p. 376.) To afliot them with
their buidens. Among the tasks set the
laboureiB in the representation above alluded
to are the carrying of huge lumps of clay and
of water-jais on one shoulder, and also the
conveyance of bricks from place to place by
means of a yoke. They built for Pharaoh
treasnre-cities, Fithom and Baamses. By
" treasure - cities " we are to understand
" store-cities," or " cities of store," as the same
word is translated in 1 K. ix. 19 and 2 Chr.
viii. i. Such cities contained depots of pro-
visions and magazines of arms. They were
generally to be found on all assailable
frontiers in ancient as in modem times.
(Compare 2 Chr. xi. 5, 12 ; xxxiii. 28, etc.)
Of the cities here mentioned, which the
Israelites are said to have " built," or helped
to build, Fithom is in all probability the
Patumos of Herodotus (ii. 158), which was
not far from Bnbastis, now Tel-Basta. Its
exact site is uncertain, but if identical with
the Thou, or Thoum, of the ' Itinerary of An-
tonine,' it must have lain north of the Canal of
Necho, not south, where most maps place it.
The word means " abode of the sun," or rather
" of the setting sun," called by the Egyptians
Turn, or Atum. Names formed on the model
were very common under the nineteenth
dynasty, Eameses II. having built a Pa-Ra,
a Pa-Ammon, and a Pa-Phthah in Nubia
^rugsch, ' History of Egypt,' vol. ii. p. 90).
Pa-Tmu itself has not been found among the
cities of this period (ib. p. 99), but appears in
the records of the twentieth dynasty as a place
where the Setting-Sun god had a treasury
(' Records of the Past,' vol. vi. p. 54). The
name Eaamses is probably put for Pa-Eameses
(as Thoum for Pa-Tum), a city frequently
mentioned in the inscriptions of the nineteenth
dynasty, and particularly favoured by Ea-
meses II., whose city it was especially called
(' Eecords of the Past,' vol. ii. p. 77 ; vol. vi.
p. 13), and by whom it was greatly enlarged,
& not wholly built. We incline to believe
that the building was commenced by Seti,
who named the place, as he did his great
temple, the Bameseum, after his father. The
city was, according to Brugsch, a sort of
suburb of Tanis (' History of Egypt,' vol. ii.
p. 94). It was a magnificent place, and
nnder Bameses IL and his son Menephthah
was the ordinary residence of the court.
Hence the miracles of Moses are said to have
been wrought " in the field of Zoan," i.e. the
country about Tanis (Ps. Ixxviii. 12, 43).

Ver. 12. — They were grieved because of
the children of Israel. The word grieved
very insufficiently renders the Hebrew verb,



which " expresses a mixture of loathing and
alarm " (' Speaker's Commentary,' vol. i. pt. 1,
p. 251). Kalisch translates forcibly, if in-
elegantly — " They had a horror of the children
of Israel."

Yer. 13. — The Egyptians made the chil-
dren of Israel to serve with rigour. The
word translated rigour is a very rare one. It
is derived from a root which means " to break
in pieces, to crush." The " rigour " would be
shown especially in the free use of the stick
by the taskmaster, and in the prolongation of
the hours of work.

Ver. 14. — They made their lives bitter
with hard bondage, in morter and in
brick. While stone was the material chiefly
employed by the Egyptians for their grand
edifices, temples, palaces, treasuries, and the
like, brick was also made use of to a large
extent for inferior buildings, for tombs,
dwelling-houses, walls of towns, forts, enclo-
sures of temples, etc. There are examples of
its employment in pyramids (Herod, ii. 136 ;
Vyse, 'Pyramids of Gizeh,' vol. iii. pp. 57 — ^71);
but only at a time long anterior to the nine-
teenth and even to the eighteenth dynasty.
If the Pharaoh of the present passage was
Seti I., the bricks made may have been
destmed in the main for that great wall which
he commenced, but did not live to complete,
between Pelusium and Heliopolis, which was
to secure his eastern frontier (Birch, 'Egypt
from the Earliest Times,' p. 125). All manner
of laboni in the field. The Israelitish
colony was originally employed to a large
extent in tending the royal flocks and herds
(Gen. xlvii. 6). At a later date many of
them'were engaged in agricultural operations
(Deut. xi. 10). These, in Egypt, are in some
respects light, e.g. preparing the land and
ploughing, whence the remark of Herodotus
(ii. 14); but in other respects exceedingly
heavy. There is no country where care and
labour are so constantly needed during the
whole of the year. The inundation necessi-
tates extreme watchfulness, to save cattle, to
prevent the houses and the farmyards from
being inundated, and the embankments from
being washed away. The cultivation is contin-
uous throughout the whole of the year ; and suc-
cess depends upon a system of irrigation that
requires constant labour and unremitting atten-
tion. If the "labour in the field" included,
as Josephus supposed (l.s.c), the cutting of
canals, their lives would indeed have been
" made bitter." There is no such exhausting
toil as that of working under the hot Egyptian
sun, with the feet in water, in an open cutting,
where there can be no shade, and scarcely a
breath of air, from sunrise to sunset, as forced
labourers are generally required to do. Me-
hemet Ali lost 20,000 labourers out of 150,000
in the construction of the Alexandrian Canal
towards the middle of the present centuiy.



II THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. L 7— R



H0MILETIC8.

Vers. 7 and 12. — Ood the Protector of his people. I. The MULTiFLiOATioir of Isbael.
All increase is of God, and comes to man by bis blessing. As be gave tbe original
command, " Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenisb tbe earth " (Gen. i. 28), so be in
every case gives tbe new lives by wbicb tbe eartb is replenished. " Children, and the
fcAt of tbe womb, are an heritage and gift that cometh of the Lord" (Ps. cxxviii. 3).
He gives or withholds offspring as he pleases; enlarges families, tribes, nations, or
causes them to decline, decay, and die out. Increase is a sign of his favour — 1. To
the individual — " Happy is the man that hath bis quiver full of them" (Ps. cxxviii. 5) ;
2. To the nation — " 1 will multiply them and they shall not be few ; I will also glorify
them and they shall not be small " (Jer. xxx. 19) ; and 3. To churches — " Walking in
the fear of tbe Lord, and the comfort of the Holy Ghost, they were multiplied"
(Acts ix. 31). A nation or church that increases has, so far at any rate, a sign of
God's , approval of it, of bis favour, of his having in bis eternal counsels work for
it to do for him in tbe present and the future. One which dwindles has, on the
contrary, a note of God's disapproval— at the very least, a warning that all is not
with it as it should be. Nations, when they can no longer do God service, die out;
churches, wbeii they become effete and useless, have their candlesticks removed
(Rev. u. 5).

U. Effect of PEBSEcnTioN on it. Note, that the efiect of persecution was the
very opposite of what was intended. The more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied.
^0 is it ever with God's people. Persecutions always " fall out for the furtherance of
the Gospel " (Phil. i. 12). " They which were scattered abroad upon the persecution
that arose about Stephen, travelled as far as PhTenice, and Cyprus, and Antiooh preaching
the word " (Acts xi. 19). Persecution brought Paul to Rome, and enabled him to proclaim
the Gospel and make many converts in the very citadel of Satan, the headquarters of
the enemy. So marked was the prevalence of the law, that among the early Christiang
it became a proverb, that " the blood of the martyrs was the seed of the Church." After
each of the ten great Imperial persecutions, the Church was found within a brief space
to be more numerous than ever. And so it will be to the end. "Tbe gates of Hell"
cannot prevail against the Church. Out of the last and greatest of all the persecutions,
when Antichrist shall be revealed, the Church will issue triumphant, a " great multitude^
which no man can number " (Bev. vii. 9).

Ver. S,-^Joseph forgotten. " '/Tie evil that men do lives after them — the good is oft
interred with their bones." Haa Joseph been a tyrant, a conqueror, an egotist who
crushed down tbe Egyptians by servile toil for the purpose of raising a huge monument
to 'his own glory, be would no doubt have remained fresh in the memory of the nation,
abd his name and acts would have been familiar even to a " new king," who was yet
Ui Egyptian and an educated man. But as he bad only been a benefactor of the
nation, and especially of tbe kings (Gen. xlvii. 20 — 26), he was utterly forgotten — a*
isome think, within sixty-five years of his death, but according to our calculations,
not till about 275 years after it. This is about the space that separates us from Queen
Elizabeth, who, is certainly not forgotten, as neither are her ministers. So Christian
nations would seem to have better ;memories than heathen ones. In time, however,
every man is forgotten; and Christians should therefore not make their object tbe
praise of men, or posthumous fame, but the praise and approval of God, which will
continue for ever. " God is not unrighteous to forget " (Heb. vi. 10)

Vers. 10 — 12. — J%e wisdom of the wise brought to nought, God is wont to
"destroy tbe wisdom of tbe wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the

5rudent" (1 Cor. i. 19). He "makes the devices of the people of none effect"
Ps. xxxiiL 10). Humanly speaking, the Pharaoh had done " wisely," had counselled
well: many a people has been crushed utterly under the yoke of an oppressor,
ground down by bard labour — even after a time well-nigh exterminated. It wa»
• clever and crafty plan to avoid the risk and discredit of a massacre of unoffending
■ubjects, and at the same time to gain advantage by their heavy labours wnile effectually



,1.7—14.] THE BOOK OF EXODTJS. 1»



thinning their ranks through the severity of the toils imposed on them. Unless God
had interfered, and by his secret help supported and sustained his people ; enabled them
to retain their health and strength under the adverse circumstances ; induced them,
bitter and hopeless as their lot seeined, still to contract marriages, and blessed those
marriages, not only with offspring, but with superabundant offspring (see verses 12 and
20) — lSio result anticipated would without doubt have followed : the multiplication of
the people would have been checked — their numbers would soon have begun to diminish^
But Ood had determiued that so it should not be. He had promised Abraham an
extraordinary increase in the number of his descendants, and was not going to permit a
cruel and crafty king to interfere with the carrying out of his designs, the performance
of his gracious promises. So the more that Pharaoh and his obsequious subjects afSicted
them, " the more they multiplied and grew " — " the Uttle one became a thousand, and
the small one a strong nation " — the Lord " hastened it in his time " (Is. Ix. 22),
Christians therefore need never fear the devices of their enemies, however politic they
may seem. God has the power, and if he sees fit will exert it, to turn the wisdom of
the world into foolishness, to upset all human calculations, confound all prudent counsels,
and make each act done in opposition to his will help to work it out. In Israel's case,
the hard labour and unceasing toil which made their lives bitter (ver. 14), was at once
needed to wean their minds from the recollection of the " fieshpots " and other delights
of Egypt, and so make them content to quit it ; and also it was required to brace them
for the severe life of the wilderness — the hard fare, the scant water, the scorching heat
by day, the chill dews at night ; to harden their frames, relaxed by a time of sensiul
indulgence (ch. ztL 3), and nerve their minds to endurance.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 7—11.—^ multiplying people and a king's fean. The increase of Israel in Egypt
excited Pharaoh's jealousy. They were a useful people, and he dreaded their departure
(ver. 10). But their staying was almost equally an occasion of uneasiness. Their
position in Lower Egypt, so near the frontier, made them dangerous in case of wars.
Revolutions were not infrequent, and many things were less likely than a future Hebrew
dynasty. Hence the policy of breaking their power, and checking their increase, by
reducing them to servitude.

L View Isbael's incbbasb as a work of Divine power. While — 1. Natural — that
is, not miraculous, but due to the superabundant blessing of God on ordinary means — it
was yet, 2. Extraordinary, and 3. Invincible — defying the efforts of the tyrant to check
it. It may be legitimately viewed as a type of the spiritual increase of the Church.
This also — 1. Excites astonishment. So great a fruitfulness had never before been knowii.
It was a marvel to all who witnessed it. Like surprise is awakened by the facts of the
history of the Church. Consider (1) The smallness of the Church's beginnings. (2)
The rapidity of her growth. (3) What opposition she has encountered. (4) What
efforts have been made to crush her. (5) How she survives, and has from time to time
renewed her youth. (6) How she has even thriven in the fires of persecution. (7)
How, notwithstanding formidable resistance, and great internal lukewarmness and
corruption, her progress is being steadily maintained. 2. Awakens jealousy and fear.
The world does not relish the progi-ess of the Gospel. It resents it as fuU of danger tp
itself. The filling of the land with sincere believers would mean the downfall of its
power. Its spirit shown in opposition to revivals of religion, in decrying missions, in
anger at bold and fearless preaching of Christ, followed by saving results, &c. 3. Can
only he accounted for hy ascribing it to Ood as its author. Naturalistic explanation^
have been offered. Gibbon has enumerated "secondary causes." So "secondary
causes " might be pointed to in explaining the increase of Israel, yet these alone would
not account for it. There was implied a Divine power, imparting to ordinary means an
extraordinary efficacy. As little can the success of Christianity be explamed on grounds
of mere naturalism. 1. The Bible attributes it to Divme efficiency. 2. Those who
experience its power unhesitatingly trace it to this source. 3. The Church is successful
only as she relies on Divine assistance. 4. NaturaUstic theories, one and all, break
down in their attempts at explanation. Each new one that appears founds itself <«



M THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. i. 7— 14.

the foilure of its predecessors. It, in turn, is exploded by a rival. The supematunl
hypothesis is the only one which accounts for all the facts.

II. View Pharaoh's policy as a type of worldly policy oenebally. Leave
it to describe itself, and it is — 1. Par-seeing. 2. Politic. 3. Unsentimental. Napoleon
was unsentimental : " What are a hundred thousand lives, more or less, to me I" 4. A
necessity of the time. Describe it as it ought to be described, and it appears in a less
favourable light. 1. Ever awake to selfish interests. 2. Acute to perceive (or imagine)
danger. 3. Unrestrained by considerations of gratitude. The new king " knew not
Joseph." Nations, like individuals, are often forgetful of their greatest benefactors.
4. Begardless of the rights of others. 5. Cruel — stops at nothing. It will, with
Fiiaraoh, reduce a nation to slavery ; or, with Napoleon, deluge continents with blood.
Yet — 5. Is essentially short-sighted. All worldly policy is so. The King of Egypt
could not have taken a more effectual means of bringing about the evils that he dreaded.
He made it certain, if it was uncertain before, that in the event of war, the Hebrews
would take part with his enemies. He set in motion a train of causes, which, as it
actually happened, led to the departure of the whole people from Egypt. His policy
thus outwitted itself, proved suicidal, proclaimed itself to be folly. Learn — 1. The folly
of trusting in man. " Beware of men " (Matt. x. 17). 2. How futile man's wisdom
and cunning are when matched against God's power. 3. The short-sightedness of selfish
and cruel action. — J. O.

Vers. 11 — 14. — The londage. I. How effected ? Doubtless, partly by craft, and
partly by force. To one in Pharaoh's position, where there was the will to enslave,
there would soon be found the way. 1. The Israelites were politically weak. " The
patriarchal family had grown into a horde ; it must have lost its domestic character, yet
it had no polity .... a people in this state was ripe for slavery " (Maurice). 2. And
Pharaoh had no scruples. Those engaged in tillage and keeping of cattle could easily
be ruined by heaping on them tributes and exactions. Liberty once forfeited, they were
at Pharaoh's disposal, to do with as he hsted. Of the rest, large numbers were probably
already employed — ^as forced labourers — on Pharaoh's works of construction. Over
these (ver. ll).it was proposed to set "taskmasters" — "chiefs of tribute" — to afSict
them with their burdens. 3. Complaint was useless. The Hebrews soon found, as
expressed afterwards (ch. v. 19), that they were " in evil case " — ^that a general con-
spiracy, from the king downwards, had been entered into to rob, injure, and oppress
them. Their subjugation in these circumstances was easily accomplished. Learn —
1. A nation may outgrow itself. It will do so if intelligence and morals, with suitable
institutions, do not keep pace with numbers. 2. Great prosperity is not always an
advantage. It (1) excites jealousy ; (2) tempts cupidity ; (3) usually weakens by
enervating.

II. Why permitted ? This question may be answered by viewing the bondage
1. As a punishment for sins. The Hebrews had doubtless greatly corrupted themselves
in Egypt, and had become in their masses very like the people around them. This was
in them a sin that could not pass unpunished. God cannot suspend his moral laws
even for his own people. If they do wrong, they must, no less than others, sufler for
it. Nay, they will be punished with even greater severity than others are for similar
offences. It is this which explains the bitter servitude of Israel. The nation is allowed
to sink into a condition which is at once a fit retribution for its own sin, and an apt
image of the condition of the sinner generally. For sin is slavery. It is inward
bondage. It is degradation. It is rigorous service, and bitterness, and misery. God's
law, the soul's own lusts, an exacting worid, become in different ways taskmasters. It
Is unprofitable service. It sends a man to the husks, to the swine-troughs. It is
slavery from which nothing but the power of God Almijihty can redeem us. We bless
God for our greater Moses, and the grander Exodus. 2. .4s a teial of faith. It would
be so in a very especial degree to the godly portion of Israel. For ^y this long hiding
of God's face — this keeping silence while his people were broiling and pesishiQg under
their terrible tasks ? Did it not seem as though the promise had faite$ an^ Q/A had
/(irjroWe»i to be gracious ? (Ps. Ixxvii. 8, 9.) Truly we need not wonder at anjE^ySMia
God's dealings with his Church when we reflect on h w long and how fearfdu^ &^mL
was afSicted. Tlie faith which endured this trial must have come out of the furnast



OH. 1.7—14.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 15

■even times purified. 3. As a moral preparation. It is now manifest, though it could
hardly have been seen then, how needful was this affliction, protracted through succes-
sive generations — (1) To wean the people's hearts from Egypt. (2) To make them
willing to leave it. (3) To make the thought of Canaan sweet to them. (4) To break
up trust in self and man. (5) To lead them to cry mightily to God. The same reasons,
in whole or part, serve to explain why God lays trials on ourselves ; indicate at least the
ends which affliction is used to subserve. Had everything been prosperous, the hearts
of Israel would naturally have clung to the fleshpots; their hopes would have been
forgotten ; even their God would in time have been abjured. — J. 0.

Vers. 7 — 14. — Israel in Egypt. The life of a people, like that of an individual, to
• great extent shaped by circumstances. In Canaan the Israelites might learn hardi-
hood, but no room for much growth ; few opportunities for national organisation ; the
tendency would be for the families to separate, each seeking pasturage for its own
flocks (of. Abraham and Lot). To become a nation they had to be placed (1) where
they might increase and multiply, and (2) where their slightly connected elements
might coalesce and be welded into one. To attain this object God led his people into
Egypt. [Cf. (1) Hothouse where plants may strike and grow before being planted out,
•nd (2) Deut. iv. 20. Furnace where metal may be smelted into one homogeneous
mass and the worst of the dross removed.] We may notice in this view —

I. Prospbeity and its uses. Cf. ver. 7. In Goshen life simple and the means of
■ubsistence plentiful, ample room and ample provision. Happy years without a history,
passed in a land which even now yields the largest revenue in Egypt, and where the
population still increases more rapidly than in any other province. Probably no
incident of more importance than some occasional skirmish with border tribes. No
wonder that " they increased abundantly and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty."

Prosperity has its uses as well as adversity. 'I he long imnoticed years through
which the fruit-tree attains maturity are necessary antecedents to the tiery summers
which see the fruit ripening. Not much to notice in such years. Still their existence
is noteworthy. They make no small portion of the sum of human life, whether viewed
in its national or individual aspect. History grows out of them even whilst it is
compelled to forget them in its records. The fruit of Life draws from them its substance,
though other years may give it its colour and flavour.

II. Adversity and its uses. Vers. 10 — 14 show how trouble came to Israel, and
the nature of the trouble which did come. Originating in Pharaoh's natural jealousy at
the increasing influence of an alien race, it took the form of enforced labour, such as —
perhaps owing to Joseph's land law (Gen. xlvii. 23, &c.) — ^he clearly had the acknow-
ledged right to levy at wiU from jul his subjects. Pharaoh however was but the
instrument which God used for the education of his people ; he knew that adversity
was needed to carry on the work which prosperity had begun. Notice — 1. Affliction
did not hinder progress. We gather from ver. 12 that it really advanced it. Prosperity
long continued may be a greater hindrance than adversity. It tends to produce a
stagnant condition [ cf. the opening poems in Tennyson's ' Maud ']. The after-history
shows us that Israel had, to some extent, morally deteriorated; and moral deterioration
in the long run must lead to physical degradation. When the stock needs pruning
the pruning process stimulates growth. 2. Affliction proved morally helpful. The
people had been getting careless and slothful, forgetting God (cf. Josh. xxiv. 14,
Ezek. XX. 5 — 8) or paying him a merely nominal service. Now, however, cf. ii. 23 — 25,
God could hear their cry because their cry was genuine; he could have respect
unto them because they were learning to have respect unto him. 3. Affliction
ensured national wnian. Hitherto the people was just a collection of families, united
by a common name and common traditions. Mutual need begets mutual help-
fulness, and it is by mutual help that tribes are dovetailed into one another and
come to form one nation. [Isolated fragments of ore need smelting in the furnace to
produce the consolidated metal.] It is in the heat of the furnace of affliction that
rivalries, jealousies, and all kinds of tribal littlenesses can alone be finally dissolved.
And affliction still has such uses. Prosperity is good, no doubt, but, in this world,
it requites to be complemented by adversity. " Why is trouble permitted?" l^ecause
men caTiiiot rtherwise be perfected. It is just as necessary for our moral ripening M



16



THE BOOK OP BXODUB.



[CH. 1. 15—22



heat is necessary for the ripening of the .fruit. (1) It need not hinder any man's
progress; (2) If rightly used it should purge out the dross from us and make us
morally better ; (3) It tends to dissolve the barriers which selflshness erects between
man and man, and works towards the formation of that holy brotherhood which embraces
in one family all the nations of the earth. — G.

Vers. 8 — 14. — Egypt t sin. I. National wbong-doino the seed op national
DISASTER. The story of Egypt's suffering begins with the story of Egypt's injustice
There was wisdom in Pharaoh's statesmanship, and a nncere desire to serve his country,
and yet he was his country's worst foe. The service rendered by wickedness is in the
end rebuke and ruin.

II. The care bought to be removed by sm becomes greater (10 — 12). 1. The
liondage was imposed to prevent their multiplying : " but the more they afSicted them
the more they multiplied and grew." 2. The trouble was at first simply a possibility
detected by the statesman's keen eye, and now all Egypt was " grieved because of the
diildren of Israel." The way of wickedness is through a deepening flood.

III. Weong grows into greater wrong (13, 14). Egypt had gone too far to
retreat. Israel's enmity was now a certainty, and they must be crushed. Prom being
compelled to labour in the erection of strong cities, their lives are made bitter by all
manner of hard bondage. Evil grows with an inward necessity. When a nation makes
•n unjust deinand it diow not mean murder, yet that is its next step. Satan dare not
whisper all his counsel at first but by-and-by he can tell it all and have it all
•ccompli8hed.^n.

EXPOSITION.



Vers. IS — VS. — Some time — say five or six
years — ^having elapsed and the Pharaoh's first
plan having manifestly failed, it was necessary
for him either to give up his purpose, or to
devise something else. Persevering and tena-
cious, be preferred the latter course. He
bethought himself that a stop might be put to
the multiplication of the Israelites by means of
infanticide on a large scale. Infanticide was
no doubt a crime in Egypt, as in most countries
except Borne ; bnt the royal conunand would
legitimate almost any action, since the king
was recognised as a god ; and the wrongs of a
foreign and subject race would not sensibly
move the Egyptian people, or be likely to
provoke remonstrance. On looking about for
■uitable instruments to carry out his design, it
■truck the monarch that something, at any
rate, might be done by means of the midwives
who attended the Hebrew women in their
confinements. It has been supposed that the
two mentioned, Shiphrah and Fnah, might be
{he only midwives employed by the Israelites
(Canon Cook and others), and no doubt in the
East a small number sufiice for a large popula-
tion : but what impression could the monarch
expect to make on a population of from one to
two millions of souls by engaging the services
of two persons only, who could not possibly
attend mate than about one in fifty of the



bui;hs? The midwives mentioned must there-
fore be regarded as " superintendents," chiefs
of the guild or faculty, who were expected to
give their orders to the rest. (So Kalisch,
Knobel, Aben Ezra, ete.) It was no doubt
well known that midwives were not always
called in; but the king supposed that they
were employed sufficiently often for the exe-
cution of his orders to produce an important
result. And the narrative implies that he had
not miscalculated. It was the disobedience
of the midwives (ver. 17) that frustrated the
king's intention, not any inherent weakness in
his plan. The midwives, while professing the
intention of carrying out the orders given
them, in reality killed none of the infants ;
and, when taxed by the Pharaoh with disobe-
dience, made an untrue excuse (ver. 19).
Thus the king's second plan failed as com-
pletely as his first — " the people " still " multi-
plied and waxed very mighty " (ver. 20).

Foiled a second time, the wicked king threw'
off aU reserve and all attempt at concealment.
If the midwives will not stain their hands witk
murder at his secret command, he will make the
order a general and public one. "All his people''
shall be commanded to put their hand to the
business, and to assist in the massacre of the
innocents — it shall be the duty of every loyal
snbject to cast into the watois of the Nile anj



Ci-1. 15—22.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



17



Hebrew male child of whose hirth he has cog-
nisance. The object is a national one — to
■ecnre the public safety (see ver. 10): the
whole nation mar well be called npon to aid
in canying it out.

Ver. 15. — ^The Hebrew midwiveB. It is
questioned whether the midwives were really
Hebrew women, and not rather Bgyptian
women, whose special busiuess it was to attend
the Hebrew women in their labours. Kalisch
translates, "the women who served as mid-
wives to the Hebrews," and assumes that they
were Egyptians. (So also Canon Cook.) But
the names are apparently Semitic, Shiphrah
being " elegant, beautifiU," and Puah, " one
who cries out." And the most natural render-
ing of the Hebrew text is that of A. V.

V er. 16. — The stools. The explanation fur-
nished by a remark of Mr. Lane ('Modem
Egyptians,' vol. iii. p. 142) is more satisfactory
tiian any other. In modem Egypt, he says,
" two or three days before the expected time
of delivery, the midwife conveys to the house
the hursee elwiladeh, a chair of a peculiar
form, upon which the patient is to be seated
during the birth." A chair of the form intended
is represented on the Egyptian monuments.

Ver. 17. — The midwives feared God. The
midwives had a sense of religion, feared God
sufficiently to decline imbruing their hands in
the innocent blood of a number of defenceless
infants, and, rather than do so wicked a thing,
risked being punished by th6 monarch. They
were not, as appears by ver. 19, highly reli-
gious — ^not of the stuff whereof martyrs are
made ; they did not scruple at a falsehood,
believing it necessary to save their lives ; and
it would seem that they succeeded in deceiving
the king.

Ver. 19. — They are vigorons. Literally,
" they are lively." In the East at the present
day a large proportion of the women deliver
themselves; and the services of professional
accoucheurs are very rarely called in. The
excuse of the midwives had thus a basis of
fact to rest upon, and was only untrue because
it was not the whole truth.

Vers. 20, 21. — Therefore God did well to
the midwives. Literally, "And God did
well," etc. (see ver. 21). Because they feared
him sufficiently to disobey the king, and take
their chance of a punishment, which might
have been very severe — even perhaps death —
God overlooked their weak and unfaithful di-
vergence from truth, and gave them a reward.



He made them houses. He blessed them by
giving them children of their own, who grew
up, and gave them the comfort, support, and
happiness which children were intended to
give. There was a manifest fitness in reward-
ing those who had refused to bring misery
and desolation into families by granting them
domestic happiness themselves.

Ver. 22. — Every son that is bom. The
words are universal, and might seem to apply
to the Egyptian, no less 5ian the Hebrew,
male children. But they are really limited
by the context, which shows that there had
never been any question as to taking the life
of any Egyptian. With respect to the ob-
jection sometimes raised, that no Egyptian
monarch would possibly have commanded such
wholesale cold-blooded destruction of poor inno-
cent harmless children, it is to be observed, first,
that Egyptian monarchs had very little regard
indeed for the lives of any persons who were
not of their own nation. They constantly
massacred prisoners taken in war — they put to
death or enslaved persons cast upon their
coasts (Died. Sic. i. 67) — ^they cemented with
the blood of their captives, as Lenormant says
('Manuel d'Hist. Anc.,' vol. i. p. 423), each
stone of their edifices. The sacredness of human
life was not a principle with them. Secondly,
that tender and compassionate rep -rl for
children which seems to us Englishmen uf the
present day a universal instinct is in truth the
fruit of Christianity, and was almost unknown
in the ancient world. Children who were
" not wanted " were constantly exposed to be
devoured by wild beasts, or otherwise made
away with (DoUinger, ' Jew and Gentile,' vol.
ii. p. 246) ; and such exposition was defended
by philosophers (Plat. 'Rep.' v. p. 460 c).
In Syria and Carthage they were constantly
offered to idols. At Eome, unless the fathei
interposed to save it, every child was killed
It would probably not have cost an Egyptian
Pharaoh a single pang to condemn to death a
number of children, any more than a number
of puppies. And the rule " Salus publica
suprema lex," which, if not formulated, still
practically prevailed, would have been held to
justify anything. The river. Though, in the
Delta, where the scene is laid throughout the
early part of Exodus, there were many branches
of the Nile, yet we hear constantly of " the
river" (ch. ii. 3, 5 ; vii. 20, 21 ; viii. 3, etc.),
because one branch only, the Tanitic, was
readily accessible. Tanis (Zoan) was situated
on it.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 15 — 22. — Steps mi sin. Bad men, when their designs are frustrated, and things

fall out otherwise than as they wish, are far from suspecting that it is God who opposes

them and brings their counsels to nought. They find fault with themselves or their

kdyisers, and suppose that, if their end is not to be compassed in one way, it may be

BXOOOS.



IS THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. j. 16— 2&

obtdned in another. Like Balak (Num. xxii. xxiii.), they would outwit God ; or rather,
not realising his existence, they would force fortune by a combination of inventiveness,
perseverance, and audacity. When one means fails, they do not lay aside their design,
but seek another means. And their second plan is almost always more wicked than
their first. Pharaoh follows up the cruel thought of grinding oppression by the still
more cruel resolve to effect his purpose through murder. And not liking to incur the
odium of open murder, he devises a secret system, a crypteia, which shall rid him of a
certain number of his enemies, and yet keep him clear, even of suspicion. The mid-
wives, had they come into his plan, would of course have said that the children they
murdered were stillborn, or died from natural causes. But this crafty scheme like-
wise fails ; and then what follows ? His subtle brain invents a third plan, and it is
the crudest and wickedest of all. Grown shameless, he openly avows himself a
murderer, takes his whole people into his confidence, compels them, so far as he can,
to be a nation of murderers, and extends his homicidal project to all the males. " Every
son that is born ye shall cast into the river." The Nile, according to his own religion,
was a god, and no Egyptian corpse ever defiled it ; but everything must give way
that the king may work his wicked will, and the restraints of the national creed
are as little regarded as those of natural morality. Facilis descensus A verni ; the steps
by which men go down the road to hell are easy ; each is in advance of the other,
a little further on in guilt; there is no startling transition; and so, by little and
little, advance is made, and the neophyte becomes a graduate in the school of crime.

Ver. 17. — Duty of opposing authority when its commands are against Ood^i
Law. Pew lessons are taught in Holy Scripture more plainly than this, that the
wrongful commands of legitimate authority are to be disobeyed. " Saul spake to
Jonathan his son, and to all his servants that they should kill David " (1 Sam. xix. 1).
But Jonathan positively refused, and rebuked his father : " Wherefore wilt thou sin
against innocent blood ? " (ib. ver. 5). Uzziah would have usurped the priest's oflSce ;
but Azariah the priest " withstood him " (2 Chr. xxvi. 16 — 21), and God signified his
approval by smiting the king with leprosy. Ahasuerus commanded that a " reverence "
trenching upon God's honour should be done to Haman (Esth. iii. 2). Mordecai
" transgressed the king's commandment," and it is recorded of him to his credit. The
" Three Children " disobeyed Nebuchadnezzar when he would have had them " worship
the golden image which he had set up" (Dan. iii. 18) on the plain of Dura. Daniel
disobeyed Darius the Mede when required to discontinue his daily prayers. The
Apostles disobeyed the Sanhedrim, when forbidden " to preach at all or teach in the
name of Jesus" (Acts iv. 18). God's law is paramount; and no human authority
may require anything to be done which it forbids, or anything to be left undone which
it commands. The argument is unanswerable: "Whether it be right in the sight of
God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye" (ib. ver. 19). So the
midwives, because they "feared God," disobeyed the king. No doubt the lesson
is to be applied with caution. We are not to be always flying in the face of
authority, and claiming it as a merit. More especially, iu States calling themselves
Christian and retaining even partially a Christian character, opposition to the law is
a serious matter, and, if resorted to, should only be resorted to under a clear and
distinct conviction that the Divine law and the human are in absolute opposition.
" Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin." If we are not sure of the Divine obligation we
must accept the human one. Still, as the good man struggling against adversity is
admitted to be one of the noblest of sights, so there is nothing grander, nothing finer,
nothing more heroic, than the conscientious resistance of religious persons to the wicked
and tyrannical commands of men, whether they be kinjis, or judges, or mobs. Daniel
refusing to obey Darius, Peter and John rejecting the orders of the Sanhedrim, Socrates
declining to take part in the arrests of the Thirty, the iSeven Hishops refusing: to read
the proclamation of King James 11., are among the most admirable and inspiriting facts
of history. The men who rightfully resist authority are " the salt of the earth." They
save the world from a rapid and complete corruption. The remembrance of their acts
continues, and is a warning to authorities, preventing hundreds of iniqu tons laws and
orders, which would otherwise have been enjoined and enacted. Their example is an
undying one, and encourages others on fitting occa.sion to do the like. All honour then



0H,tl6— 22,J THE BOOK OP EXODUS. W

to the noble band, who, when the crisis came, have " obeyed God rather than man," and
taken their chance of the consequences 1 Not that the final consequences to themselvei
can be doubtful. "But and if ye suffer for righteousness' sake, blessed are ye I"
(1 Pet. ill. 14). In this Ufe, the consequence may be success, severe punishment, or
(occasionally) neglect and obhTion. But in the world to come there will he a reward'
for rightful resistance undoubtedly. " God made the midwives houses." For all wh m
a tyrannical authority makes to suffer because they fear and obey him, he will reserve
in his own house " mansions " where they will enjoy bliss eternal.

Vers. 18 — 21. — Qod^a acceptance of an imperfect obedience. The midwives had not
the courage of their convictions. They did not speak out boldly, like Daniel, and
the "Three Children," and the Apostles. They did not say, "Be it known unto
thee, king, that we fear God, and will not do this thing." They cast about for
an excuse, which should absolve them of the crime of disobedience, and so perhaps
save them from punishment, and they found one which was no doubt partially
true, but which by a snppressio veri was a suggestio falsi. Some have exonerated
them from all blame under the circumstances; but though the circumstances may
extenuate, they do not justify their conduct. It was a fault, but (especially if they
were heathens) a venial fault. And it was perhaps repented of. At any rate God
condoned it. He was not " extreme to mark what was done amiss." He accepted
their good deeds and their reverent fear of him, though it was not accompanied by
high courage and a heroic love of truth ; that is to say, he accepted an imperfect
ooedience. And this is what he does in all cases. No man but One has rendered
an obedience that was perfect. "All we, the rest, offend in many things; and if
we say that we have no sin, deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us." Well
for us that God, for hi^ Son's sake, and through his atonement on the cross, can
condone our offences, and despite our many misdeeds reward our acts of faithfulness I
(See Matt. Ti. 4 ; z. 42 ; xvi. 27 ; Luke vi. 35 ; 1 Cor. ui. 14 ; &c.)

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 16 — 22. — A hin<fs edicts. I. The oommamd to the midwives to destrot
THE MALES (vcr. 16). This was a further stage in the persecution of the Hebrews.
Happily the command was not obeyed. There is a Umit even to the power of kings.
Stronger than kings is — 1. The power of religion. "The midwives feared God"
(ver. 17). 2. The force of patriotism. They were " Hebrew midwives " (ver. 15), and
would not, even at the king's bidding, be murderers of their race. 3. The instincts of
hvmvanity. These came in to thwart both this and the next expedient for destroying
the children. 4. The cunning of evasion. It is hopeless to attempt to force laws upon
• people determined not to obey them. The midwives had only to stay away, and let
the Hebrew women help themselves, to reduce the king's decree to a dead letter. And
this was probably what they did (ver. 19). The result shows how much better it is,
even at some risk, to obey God than to obey man. The midwives — 1. Lost nothing.
2. Retained a good conscience. 3. Were signally honoured and rewarded : God made
them houses (ver. 21). Kindness shown to God's people never fails of its reward.

II. The command to the people to oast the males into the eiveb (ver. 22).
He must indeed have been a foolish king, if he thought to secure obedience to so
inhuman a decree. Parents would not obey it. The work was of a kind which would
soon grow hateful even to those who might at first be willing to do it for reward.
The hearts of the most abandoned ere long sicken at murder. Public sympathy doe«
not appear to have gone with the edict, and the number of males at the Kxodus makes
it certain that it was not long in operation. Its chief frait was one little contemplated
by the tyrant — the salvation and courtly upbringing of Moses. Learn — 1. How one
cruelty leads to another, and increasingly hardens the heart. It is told of Robespierre
that when judge at Arras, half-a-dozen years before he took his place in the popular
mind of Prance and Europe as one of the bloodiest monsters of myth or history, he
resigned his post in a fit of remorse after condemning a criminal to be executed. " He
is a° criminal, no doubt," he kept groaning to his sister, "a criminal no doubt; but
to put a man to death!" (Morley). 2. The impotence of human devices. 3. The

03



so THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. 1.8- 22.

certainty of the Chtiich suTviTing under the worst that man can cx> against it. Tha
more Pharaoh persecuted, the more the people multiplied and grew (veil. 12, 20^1—
J.O.

Vers. 8 — 22. — The policy of Pharaoh. I. The principle of the polict. This ib
indicated in vers. 9, 10. It was a pulley of selfish fear, proceeding upon an unconcealed
regard for the supremacy of Egypt. Whatever interfered with that supremacy was
to he, if possible, swept completely out of the way. Pharaoh was dealing, not with the
necessities of the present, but with the possibilities of the future. He made no
pretence that Israel deserved to he dealt with in this merciless fashion. There was no
attempt to cloak the cruelties of the tyrant under the aspect of needful severity
against evil-doers. The fear of Pharaoh is seen in the very language he employs. It
was not true as yet that the Israelites were more and mightier than the Egyptians :
but Pharaoh feels that such a state of things is not improbable, and may not he
remote. Something has already happened very different from what might have been
expected. Who was to suppose that a handful of people from Canaan, instead of
blending with the bulk of tgypt, would keep persistently separate and increase with
such alarming rapidity? Seeing that such unexpected things have already happened,
what may not be feared in the future I Who knows what allies Israel may ultimately
find, and what escape it may achieve? Thus from this attitude and utterance of
Pharaoh we learn — 1. Not to make our safety and our strength to consist in an
unscrupulous weakening of others. The true strength, ever becoming more and more
sufficient, is to be gained within ourselves. Pharaoh would have done more for his
own safety and the safety of his people by putting away idolatry, injustice, and
oppression, than by all his frantic attempts to destroy Israel. It is a sad business,
if we must hold our chief possessions at the expense of others. If my gain is the loss
or suffering of some one else, then by this very fact the gain is condemned, ami however
large and grateful it may be at present, it will end in the worst of all loss. Surely the
luxuries of the few wovld become utterly nauseous and abhorrent, if it were only con-
sidered how often they depend on the privation and degradation of the many. Pharaoh'i
kingdom deserved to perish, and so deserve all kingdoms and all exalted stations cf
individuals, if their continuance can only be secured by turning all possible enemies
into spiritless and emasculated slaves. 2. Not to set our affections on such things as lie
at the mercy of others. Pharaoh had to be incessantly watching the foundations of his
vast and imposing kingdom. Other nations only saw the superstructure from a dis-
tance, and might be excused for concluding that the magnificence rested upon a solid
base. But we may well believe that Pharaoh himself lived a life of incessant
anxiety. The apprehensions which he here expresses must have been a fair sample of
those continually passing through his mind. The world can give great possessions and
many opportunities for carnal pleasure ; but security, vmdisturbed enjoyment of the
possession, it cannot give.

II. The wokkino out of the policy. The thing aimed at was to keep the numbers
of Israel within what were deemed safe bounds ; and to this end Pharaoh began by
trying to crush the spirits of the people. He judged— and perhaps not unwisely,
according to the wisdom of this world — that a race oppressed as he proposed to oppress
Israel would assuredly not increase to any dangerous extent. If only the rate of
increase in Israel did not gain on the rate of increase in Egypt, then all would he safe.
Pharaoh firmly believed that if only Igvpt could keep more numerous than Israel,
Egypt would be perfectly secure. Therefore he put these people into a state of bondage
a Kil oppression ever becoming more rigorous. I>otioe that he had peculiar advantages,
from his point of view, in making this course of treatment successful. The Israelites
hvd hitherto lived a free, wandering, pastoral life (Gen. xlvii. 3 — 6), and now they were
)uped-up under merciless taskmasters and set to hard manual toU. If any human
P licy had success in it, success seemed to be in this policy of Pharaoh. Nevertheless
It utterly failed, from Pharaoh's point of view, for, whatever depressing effect it had on
the spirits of the Israelites, there was no diminution in their numbers. The extra-
ordinary and alarming increase still went on. The more the ta.skmasters did to hinder
Israel, the more, in this particular matter of the numerical increase, it seemed to prosper.
It waa »U very perplexing and unaccountable, but at last Ph^woh recognises the faiJuwJ



ck.t8— 22.] TflE BOOK: OB* EXOJjtJS. ||

even while he cannot explain it, and proceeds to a more direct method of action, which
surely cannot fail in a perfectly efficacious result. He commands the men-children of
Israel to be slain from the womb. But here he fails even in a more conspicuous
and humiliating way than before. He was a despot, accustomed to have others go
when he said " Go," and come when he said " Come." Accordingly, when he commanded
men to become the agents of his harsh designs, he found obedient servants in plenty,
and probably many who bettered his instructions. But now he turns to women — weak,
despised. women, who were reckoned to obey in the most obsequious manner — and he
finds that they will not obey at all. It was an easy thing to do, if it had only been in
their hearts to do it ; for what is easier than to take away the breath of a new-born
infant ? They do not openly refuse ; they even pretend compliance ; but for all that
they secretly disobey and effectively thwart Pharaoh's purpose. When we find others
readily join with us in our evil purposes, then God interferes to disappoint both us and
them ; but we cannot always reckon even on the support of others. Notice lastly, that
in carrying out this policy of defence against Israel, Pharaoh never seems to have
thought of the one course which might liave given him perfect safety. Ih miyht liane
expelled Israel altoyether out of his coasts. But, so far from deeming this desirable, it
was one of the very things he wished to guard against. Israel was a continual source
of alarm and annoyance, a people beyond management, an insoluble problem ; but it
never occurred to him that Egypt woiild be better with them away. It would have
had a very bad look to send them out of the land ; it would have been a confession of
inability and perplexity which those proud lips, so used to the privileged utterances of
despotism, could not bring themselves to fiame.

III. The total result of the policy. Though it failed in attaining the par-
ticular end which it had in view, it did not fail altogether ; nay, it rather succeeded,
and that with a most complete success, seeing that in doing so it effectually served the
pur|joae of God. Fhiaadh failed as dealing with thednldren of Israel. He called them
the children of Israel, but in profound ignorance of all that this description involved.
He did not know that Israel was the son of him who was born to Abraham and Sarah
in tlieir old age, contrary to all expectation and entirely of promise. But Pharaoh
$ucceeded in a way he did not anticipate, in so far as he was dealing with the posterit
of 'acob, the heirs of human infirmity. They did become, in the course of time, slav
in spirit as well as in body, personally so undeserving of freedom that when they ha
received it, they wished almost immediately to go back to the creature comforts of
Kgypt like a dog to its vomit, or a sow to her wallowing iu the mire. Hence we s^ee
that i.iod served himself, alike by Pharaoh's failure and Pharaoh's success. Pharaoh's
failure showed how really and powerfully God was present with his people. It was
another instance of the treasure being in an earthen vessel that the excellency of tlje
p iwer might be of God and not of men. And Pharaoh by his very success in making
the iron to enter into the soul of Israel, was unconsciously working a way to make the
stay of Israel in Egypt as full a type as possible of the tyrannous bondage of sin. As
Kgypt presented its pleasant side at first, so does sin. For a considerable time Egypt
looked better than Canaan. There had been corn in Egypt ; there had been a land of
Goshen ; there had been a reflected honour and comfort from the relation of the children of
Israel to the all-powerful Joseph. But Joseph dies, and then little by little it becomes
plain that Egypt will be anything but a Ian<l of happiness. What the Israelites might
have become if Pharaoh had not persecuted them, it is vain to speculate, as vain as to
speculate what might happen to the sinner if he could go on sinning without sufieiing.
We have to thank Pharaoh for helping to set before us in such a clear way the bitter
bondage of sin, and the greatness of that deliverance by which God will liberate us from
it. God moves in a mysterious way. He fills Israel with a strength whereby even in
bondage and ojjpression their numbers are rniiaculously nicreased, but he denies t
them the strength wherebv they might have ovorthi-own their oppressors. We can
now see the why and wherefore of all this mysterious dealing. By the work of his Son
God fills us with a life which, through all the discomforts of the present state, goes oi'
undestroyed and still increasing into a state where these discomforts will be unknown.
But at the same time God makes it clear that we cannot escape all the sufferings that
belong to sin. So far as we have sown to the flesh, we must also out of the flesh reap
eorruption. Our joy is that, even in this world, amid all tribulation and all reaping of



n THE BOOK OF EXODUS, [ch. 1. 16— 22.

the temporal results of sin, there is also the opportunity for another and better sowing,
and the consequent opportunity for another and better reaping. — Y.

Vers. 15 — ^21. — The conduct of the midwives. I. Notice what was peaisewoethy
IN THBiE coNDOCT. "They did not as the king of Egypt commanded them, but
saved the men-children alive," and this conduct was made possible because behind
it there was a praiseworthy feeling. "The midwives feared God." They saw
how real was the power of Pharaoh in enslaving and oppressing the Israelites,
but they were not thereby misled into supposing the power of Pharaoh to be greater
than the power of God. . They had ample opportunity, even more than the rest
of Israel, to mark the Hand that was producing this extraordinary increase in the
numbers of the people. Their very professional experience was of a kind to impress them
deeply with the fact that Israel was increasing at a rate not to be accounted for by the
ordinary processes of nature. They could not see God as they saw Pharaoh, but liis
superior power was made evident by the things he did. Then, on the other hand, with
all the manifestations of Pharaoh's power, it was impossible for him to conceal that
he was afraid himself. Moreover, as the oppression and affliction of Israel increased,
it became still clearer that God was with the people, and the more confirmed would the
midwives be in their fear of him. Hence it would have been a very poor sort of
prudence to comply with Pharaoh's order, to avoid his displeasure, perhaps to gain his
rewards, and then find themselves face to face with an angry God, from whom there
was no escape. What a rebuke, out of these depths of bondage and suffering, and out
of a very imperfect moral state, these two women give to us ! They feared God, and
that fear kept them safe, and made them prosperous. The fear of man ever briiigeth a
snare ; but a real, practical and all-dominating sense of the presence and the power of
God takes snares and stumbling-blocks out of our path.

n. Notice what was cbksueablb in theie conduct. It must not be supposed
that because they feared God, and God dealt well with them, everything therefore which
they did was quite as it should be. With all their deep sense of God's presence, these
women were living but in the twilight of the revelation, as far as they personally
were .concerned. They knew enough to fear God, i.e. they knew thfe reality and great-
ness of his power, but they did not know enough to love him. With them, conscience
was in such a half-enlightened, half-awakened state, that while they felt it wrong to
obey Pharaoh's command, and would probably not have obeyed it if the sword had been
hanging over their heads, yet they have no scruple as to deceiving Pharaoh. Un-
doubtedly, women who had been fully instructed in all the will of God, and who were
fully alive to all the round of duty, would have faced the king boldly, and said, " We
cannot do this thing, come what may." But they were living, as we have already
noticed, in a very imporfect moral state. They honestly felt that deceiving Pharaoh
was a quite permissible way of showing their obedience to God. Hence, while upon
certain considerations we may excuse their deception, we must not slur it over as a
matter of no moment ; and though it is said that God was pleased with them as it was,
this does not prevent us from feeling that he would have been even better pleased if
they had said straight out to Pharaoh, " How can we do this great wickedness and sin
against God?"

II J. Consider the condttot of these two women ab illusteative op a
OBKTAiN STAGE IN THE PK0QEES8 OP SINNERS TOWARDS GOD. There are many who
have got so far as to fear God, and this is no small attainment. It may be that there
is something slavish, terrifying, paralysing even in the fear ; but, even so, it is better
to have the fear than be as those who are completely destitute of it. For, with a
feeling of real fear to lay hold of, God can do great things. He can gradually bring us
nearer and nearer, so that we shall love as well as fear him. He can show us his loving
spirit, and his power to fill our lives with blessing and surround them with security.
He can show us that there is really no more reason to live in restless dread of him than
there is for a little bird to fly hastily away at the approach of some kind-hearted human
being. But where there is no fear of God, what can be done? When the chief thing
Ton dread is the laughter of fools ; or the censure of unsympathising friends and neigh-
bours or threatening superiors ; or the fear of temporal loss and pain in general ; what
na dien be done? Be thankfrd if you have got so far as to fear Ood. Fearing Lim,



tti. II. 1—10] ,



ME BOOK OF EXOPUS.



23



dreading him, trembling before him, feeling his power more than any other of hb
attributes — this is a long way short of loving him, but nevertheless it is a stage
toward that glorious state of the heart ; and it is incomparably better than to have
no feeling for God at all, and to let an arrogant world fill his place. It is a great point
gained, when once we clearly perceive, and act upon the perception, that to be safe and
right with man is a mere trifle to the great necessity of being safe and right with
God. One Pharaoh goes and another comes, but the God of Israel, the God who is
bringing all these men-children to the birth, abides for ever. Before we begin to pity
Shiphrah and Puah for their defective notions with regard to truth, we had bettei
make sure that they do not rise in the judgment against us, on account of our gross
indifference to the majesty and authority of Uod. — Y.

Vers. 15 — 22. — The way of gin. I. The growing shamblessness or ceimb. 1. Murder
■was intended from the first — the hope was that the people should be diminished — but
the intention was veiled. 2. (15, 16.) The crime was now looked in the face, but it
was so arranged that it might be done secretly. 3. When this failed, then public
proclamation was made that the murder should be deliberately and openly done (fi'l).
No man steps at first into shameless commission of sin. Every sin is a deadening of
the moral sense and a deepening of shame.

II. Those who kefuse to aid in pharaoh's chime find blessing. 1. The
refusal of the midwives was service to God. (1) It prevented secret murder. (2) It
rebuked Pharaoh's sin. 2. Their refusal was justified because it sprang from obedience
to a higher authority : " they feared God." Disobedience to human law must have
a higher sanction than a factious spirit. 3. God gave them inheritance among his
people. In that dread of sin and heroism for the right they were fit allies for (J od's
people. Those who separate themselves from evil God will lead into the light.

III. Those who aid bring judgment upon themselves. The king appeals to
his people and they make his crime their own. But E<!;ypt's sin is set at last in the
light of Egypt's desolation. Obedience to unjust laws will not protect us irom God's
just judgment. The wrong decreed by authority becomes by obedience a nation's
crime. -U.



EXPOSITION,



CHAPTER n



Vera. 1 — 10. — The bikth, escape, and
EDUCATION OP MosES. Some years before the
Pharaoh issued his edict for the general de-
struction of the Hebrew male children, Amram
of the tribe of Levi, had married Jochebed, his
kinswoman (ch. vi. 20). They had aheady had
two children — Miriam, a daughter, bom proba-
bly soon after the marriage, and Aaron, a son,
bom some twelve years later. Soon af xr the
issue of the edict, Jochebed gave birth to her
third child, a son, who therefore came under
its terms. Knowing as she did what fate was
in store for him, if his existence became knonTi
to the Egyptians, she " hid him three months."
Then, despairing of being able to keep him
concealed much longer, she devised the plan
related in vers. 3 — 4, which proved successful.

Ver. l.-^There went a man. The Hebrew
language is deficient in tenses, and cannot
mark pluperfeet time. The meaning is, that
"a man of the house of Levi had gone, some



time before, and taken to wife a daughter of
Levi." Miriam must have been fourteen or
fifteen at the time of the exposure of Moses.
By a daughter of Levi, we must not under-
stand an actual daughter, which is irrecon-
cilable with the chronology, but one of Levi's
descendants — "a wife of the daughters of
Levi," as the LXX. translates.

Ver. 2. — And the woman conceived. Not
for the first time, as appears from ver. 4, nor
even for the second, as we learn from ch. vii.
7 ; but for the third. Aaron was three years
old when Moses was bom. As no difficulty
hiiJ occurred with respect to him, we must
regard the edict as issued between his birth
and that of Moses. When she saw that he
was a goodly child. Perhaps Jochebed would
have done the same had Moses been ill-
favoured, for mothers have often loved best
their weakest and sickliest ; but still it natu-
rally seemed to her the harder that she was
called upon to lose a strong and beautiful
baby : and this is what the writer means to
express — the clauses are not " simply co-ordi-
nate." She hid him — i.e. kept him within the
house — perhaps even in the female apartments.
Egyptians were mixed up with the Israelites



24



fSE BOOK OiP EJCObufe.



[cH. n. i— 16.



in Godien — not perhaps in any great numbeis,
but still so that no Hebrew felt himself safe
from observation.

Ver. 3. — She took for him an ark of bnl-
nuhes. The words translated " ark " and " bul-
msbes " are both of Egyptian origin, the former
corresponding to the ordinary word for " chest,"
which is teb, tAa, or tebat, and the latter cor-
responding to the Egyptian ham, which is the
same in Coptic, and designates the papyros
plant. This is a strong-growing rush, with a
triangular stem, which attains the height of
from 10 to 15 feet. The Egyptian paper was
made from its pith. The msh itself was used
for various purposes — among others for boat-
bnilding (Plin. ' H. N.'vi. 22 ; vii. 16 ; Theo-
phrast. iv. 9 ; Plut. ' De Isid. et Osir.' § 18, etc.),
as appears from the monuments. It would be
a very good material for the sort of purpose to
which Jochebed applied it. She daubed it
with slime and with pitch. The word trans-
lated "slime " is the same as that used in Gen.
xi. 8, which is generally thought to mean
"mineral pitch" or "bitumen. According
to Strabo and Diodorus, that material was
largely used by the Egyptians for the embalm-
ing of corpses, and was imported into Egypt
from Palestine. Boats are sometimes covered
with it externally at the present day (Kei
Porter, Travels, vol. ii. p. 260 ; Layard,'Nineveh
and its Bemains,' pt. ii. ch. v.) ; but Jochebed
seems to have used vegetable pitch — the
ordinary pitch of commerce — for the purpose.
Here again the Hebrew word is taken from
the Egyptian. She laid it in the flags.
" Suph, the word translated " flags," is a
modificatio^ of the Egyptian, tufi, which has
that mieaniug. Water-plants of all kinds
abound in the backwaters of the Nile and
the marshy tracts communicating with it.
The object of placing the ark in a thicket of
reeds probably was, that it might not float
away out of sight. The river's brink. Lite-
rally, the lip of Vte river — an Egyptian
idiom.

Ver. 4. — His sister. There can be no
reasonable doubt that this is the " Miriam " of
the later narrative (ch. xv. 20, 21 ; Num. xx.
1), who seems to have been Moses' only sister
(Num. xxvi. 59). She was probably set to
watch by her mother.

Ver. 5. — The daughter of Pharaoh. Pro-
bably a daughter of Seti I. and a sister of
Eameses the Great. Josephus calls her Ther-
muthis; SynceUuSjPharia; Artapanus,Merrhis,
and some of the Jewish commentators, Bithia
— ^the diversity showing that there was no
genuine tradition on the subject. There is
nothing improbable in an Egyptian princess
bathing in the NUe, at a place reserved for
women. (See Wilkinson, ' Manners and Cus-
toms of Ancient Egyptians,' vol. iii. p. 389.)
The Nile was regarded as sacred, and its water
as health-giving and fmctifying (Strab. xt.



p. 695). Her maidens. Egyptian ladies of
high rank are represented on the monmnentg
as attended to the bath by a number of hand-
maidens. As many as four are seen in one
representation (Wilkinson, 1. s. c). Her maid
is her special personal attendant, the others
being merely women attached to her house-
hold.

Ver. 6. — The princess herself opened the
" ark," which was a sort of covered basket.
Perhaps she suspected what she would find
inside ; but would it be a living or a dead
chUd ? This she could not know. She opened,
and looked. It was a living babe, and it wept.
At once her woman's heart, heathen as she
was, went out to the child — its tears reached
the common humanity that lies below all dif-
ferences of race and creed — and she pitied it.
" One touch of nature makes the whole world
kin." This is one of the Hebrews' children.
Hebrew characteristics were perhaps stamped
even upon the infant visage. Or she fonned
her conclusion merely from the circumstances.
No Egyptian woman had any need to expose
her child, or would be likely to do so ; but it
was just what a Hebrew mother, under the
cruel circumstances of the time, might have
felt herself forced to do. So she drew her
conclusion, rapidly and decidedly, as is the
way of woman.

vers. 7 — 9. — ^Ihen said his sister, MiriMn
had watched to some purpose. She had seen
everything — she had (hrawn near as she beheld
the " maid " go down to the water's edge, and
take the ark out. She had heard the words of
the princess ; and thereupon she promptly
spoke — " Shall I go and call thee a nurse of
the Hebrew women 1" No doubt, all had
been prepared beforehand by the mother, who
had selected the place and time of the expo-
sure from a knowledge of the habits and
character of the princess, had set her daughter
to watch, and — so far as was possible — in-
structed her what she was to say. But Miriam
at least carried out the instructions given her
with excellent judgment and tact. Sht "d
not speak too soon, nor too late. She did not
say a word too much, nor too little. " Surely,"
exclaimed the princess, " this is one of tiic
Hebrews' children." " Shall I fetfihthee then
a Hebrew mother to nuise him ? is the re-
joinder. Egyptians, it is implied, cannot
properly nurse Hebrews — cannot know how
they ought to be treated ; an Egyptian nurse
would mismanage the boy — shSl I fetch one
of his own nation ? And the prince;^, feeling
all the force of the reasoning, answers in one
short pregnant word — "Go." "Yes," she
means, " do so ; that will be best." And then
the result follows — " The maid (Miriam) went
and called the child's mother." So the
scheming of the loving mother, and the skilful
performance of the part assigned her by the
clever sister, were crowned witli success —



&. tt. \—ib.]



fHE book of EiODttS.



§s



Moses' life vras saved, and yet he was not
separated from his natural guardian, nor given
nver to the tender mercies of strangers : the
child went back to his own home, to his own
apartment, to his own cradle; continued to
be nourished bj his own mother'^ milk ; and
received those first impressions, which are so
indelibly impressed upon the mind, in a
Hebrew family. Pharaoh's daughter said,
"Take this ohild away, and nurse itfoi me."
" Take him with you — take him to your own
home for a while — and there nurse him for
me, as long as he needs nursing." And to
mark that he is mine, and not yours — ^to
silence inquiry — ^to stop the mouths of in-
formers — "I will give thee thy wages."
Jochebed was more than content, and " took
the ohild and nursed it."

Ver. 10. — The child grew. Compare Gen.
xxi. 8, where the full phrase is used — " The
child grew, and was weaned." Jochebed had
saved her son's life by a transfer of her
mother's right in him to Pharaoh's daughter.
She had received him back, merely as a hired
nurse, to suckle him. When the time came,
probably at the end of the second year, for
him to be weaned, she was bound, whatever
the sufferings of her heart may have been, to
give him up — ^to restore him to her from whom
she had received him, as a child put out to
nurse. And we see that she made no attempt
to escape her obligations. No sooner was the
boy weaned, than "she brought him unto
Pharaoh's daughter" — as it would seem, of
her own accord. And he became her son.
There is no evidence that formal " adoption "
was a custom of the Egyptians ; and probably
no more is here meant than that the princess
took the child into her family, and brought
him up as if he had been her son, giving
him all the privileges of a son, together
with such an education as a princesss son
usually received. We obtain the best general
idea of what such an education was from the
words of St. Stephen (Acts vii. 21) — " Now
Moses was learned in elII the wisdom of the
Egyptians." This "wisdom," though not
perhaps very deep, was multiform and mani-
fold. It included orthography, grammar,
histoiy, theology, medicine, arithmetic, geome-
try, astronomy, and engineering. Education
began, as in most countries, with orthography
and grammar. The hieroglyphical system
was probably not taught, and tiie knowledge
of it remained a special privilege of the priest-
class : but the cnrsive character, known as the



hieratic, was generally studied, and all toler-
ably educated persons could read it and write
it. Style was cultivated, and though no greal
progress was made in the graces of finished
composition, the power of expressing thought
and relating facts in a simple and perspicuous
prose was acquired by the greater number.
Much attention was paid to letter- writing ';
and models of business and other letters were
set before the pupil as patterns which he was
to follow. By the more advanced, poetry was
read, and poetic composition occasionally prac-
tised. Arithmetic and geometry, up to a c( r-
tain point, were studied by all; and a plain
moraUty was inculcated. But history, theology,
astronomy, medicine, and engineering, were
viewed as special studies, to be pursued by
those intended for certain professions, rather
than as included within the curriculum of an
ordinary education ; and it may well be doubted
whether Moses' attention was much directed
to any of them. He may indeed have been
initiated into the mysteries, and in that case
would have come to understand the esoteric
meaning of the Egyptian myths, and of all
that most revolts modems in the Egyptian
religion. But, on the whole, it is most
probable that he was rather trained for active
than for speculative life, and recejved the
education which fitted men for the service t'
the State, not that which made them dreamers
and theorists. His great praise is, that " he
was mighty in words and deeds " (Acts, l.s.c.) ;
and he was certainly anything rather than a
recluse student. We should do wrong to
regard him as either a scientific man or a
philosopher. His genius was practical; and
his education was of a practical kind — such as
fitted him to become the leader of his people
in a great emergency, to deal on equal terms
with a powerful monarch, and to guide to a
happy conclusion the hazardous enterprise of
a great national miration. And she called hifi
name Moaea. The Egyptian form of the name
was probably Mesu, which signifies "bom.
brought forth, child," and is derived from a
root meaning " to produce," " draw forth."
Egyptian has many roots common to it with
Hebrew, whereof this is one. The princess's

filay upon words thus admitted of being
iterally rendered in the Hebrew — " she called
his name Mosheh (drawn forth) ; because, she
said, I drew him forth (meshithi-hu) from
the water." Mesu is found in the monuments
as an Egyptian name under the nineteenth
dynasty



HOMILBTICS.

Vers. 1 ^2.-4 1. The Urth of Moses. In the providence of Qoa, great men are

raised up from time to time, for, the express object of working out his purposes. A great
task is before them, but there is often nothing peculiar, nothing striking, in theii
birth or parentage. They come into the world with as little commotion, as little ^ccat,



M THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [ch. n. 1-10-

as othei children. True history admits this. Legendary history conceals it, denies
it, makes up a series of extraordinary events anterior to the birth, which shadow
forth the coming greatness of the mighty one, and warn the world what to expect
of him. The legends attaching to Oyrus, to Romulus, to Pericles (Herod, vi. 131)
are cases in point. Contrast with such legends the extreme simplicity of vers. 1,2; —
" There went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of Levi ;
and the woman conceived and bare a son." Here is the founder of the Jewish
nation, the originator of its independence, its lawgiver, historian, prophet, for the
first time introduced to our notice; and not one word is said to exalt him, to
challenge to him special attention, to show that he is the foremost man of his age,
greater than I'entaour the poet, or Seti, or Rameses. His father and mother not even
named — " a man " — " a daughter of Levi " — no rank assigned them, no epithet used —
nothing recorded but the bare facts : a marriage, a birth, the child a male child, a son !
Here at length a note is struck, which wakes a responsive echo in the heart of the
reader. The last verse of ch. i. had told him of the barbarous edict issued by the
cruel despot who wielded the sceptre of Egypt, and his interest is awakened for the
poor babe bom under such circumstances. Will he perish at once, or will he escape ?
Can it be possible to elude or defy the express order of an absolute monarch ? And if
so, how ? The sequel shows, relating as it does his escape from death through the
faithful, bold, and loving action of his mother. (See below, p. 27.)

Ver. 2. — § 2. The beauty of Moses. Moses was "a goodly child" — beautiful to look
upon — " fair to God," or " exceeding fair," as St. Stephen expresses it (Acts vii. 20).
Though beauty be but " skin-deep," and if unaccompanied by loveliness of character
is apt to be a snare and a curse, yet, in its degree, and rightly employed, it must
be regarded as a blessing. The beauty of Old-Testament saints is often mentioned.
Moses was "goodly," David "ruddy and of a beautiful countenance" (1 Sam. xvi. 12),
Daniel " fair and well-favoured " (Dan. i. 4, 15), Ksther " fair and beautifiil " (Esth. ii. 7);
Solomon was comely and " the chiefest among ten thousand " (Cant. v. 10) : One greater
than Solomon was " fairer than the children of men " (Ps. xlv. 2). It is an afiectation to
ignore beauty, and the influence which it gives. Those who possess it should be taught
that they are answerable for it, as for other gifts, and are bound to use it to God'i
glory: Esther's example may help them in the details of conduct.

Vers. 3 — 9. — § 3. The escape of Moses. The escape of Moses teaches three things
especially — 1. God's over-ruling providence, and his power to make wicked men work
out his will ; 2. The blessing that rests upon a mother's faithful love and care ; and
3. '1 he fact that natural virtue i-s acceptable in God's sight.

I. God's over-ruling providence tuined the cruel king's edict to the advantage of
the child whom he designed for great things. IJad it not been for the edict, Moses would
never have been exposed, and I'haraoh's daughter would probably never have seen him.
Had she not come down to the river when she did — had any little circumstance occurred
to prevent her, as might easily have happened, the child might have died of hunger or
exposure before she saw it, or might have been found by an unfriendly Egyptian and
thrown from the ark into the water. Moreover, had the child not happened to be in
tears when she opened the ark, it might not have moved her compassion, or at any raie
not have so stirred it as to make her take the boy for her son. In any of these con-
tingencies, Moses, even if saved by some further device of his mother's, would no.
have had the e lucation which alone fitted him to be the nation's leader and guide,
nor the familiarity with court life which enabled him to stand up boldly before the
Pharaoh of his time and contend with him as an equal. Thus Pharaoh's pet weapon,
the edict, was turned against himself, and brought about that Exodus of the Israelites
which he was so anxious to hinder (ch. i. 10). it was an aggravation of his pimish-
ment that the hand by which his designs were frustrated was that of his own daughter,
who unwittingly preserved the child which, of all others, he was most concerned to
destroy.

II. God's blessino on a mother's faithful love and caeb. " 'By faith Moses, when
he was born, was hid three months of his parents " (Heb. xi. 23). Disobediecce to the
edict of the king would in Egypt, if detected, have been punished either by death or



oa. li. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 27

mutilation. Amram and Jooheljed, but especially Jochebed, who must have been the
main agent in the concealment, braved these penalties — did not allow their fear of
them to influence their conduct — haA faith in Uod that he would, somehow or other,
give success to their endeavours to preserve their child, and either save them from
punishment or reward them in another world. And it was done to them according as
they believed. The concealment of the birth was undetected fur the long space of
three months — the ark was placed, no one perceiving, among the flags at the edge of
the river — the daughter of Pharaoh made her appearance at the time expected — " iiad
compassion " on the babe — accepted without hesitation Miriam's suggestion that she
should fetch a nurse — accepted without demur or suspicion the mother as the nurse —
gave him back to her care for a space of nearly two years — and finally assigned the
child the highest position possible, almost that of a prince of the blood royal — allowed
him to be called and considered her son — and had him educated accordingly. Jochebed's
utmost hope had probably been to save her child's life. God's blessing brought it to
pass that she not only obtained that result, but procured him the highest social rank
and the liest possible cultivation of all his powers, whether of mind or body. Mothers
should lay this lesson to heart, and — whatever danger threatens their children — hope
for the best, plan for the best, work for the best ; they may not always, like Jochebed,
find a.', their plans crowned with success ; but they may trust God to bless their
endeavours in his own « ay and in his own good time, if only they be made in faith,
and with due submission of their own wills to his.

III. Natural vihtdb acceptable in God's sight. There runs through both the Old
and the New Testament a continual protest against the view that God is " a respecter
of persons" in the sense of confining his favour to those who have been brought by the
appointed mode into actual covenant with him. 'i'he lesson is taught with frequent
Iteration, that " in every nation he that feareth God and worketh righteousness is
accepted with him" (Acts x. 35). Here it is an Egyptian — Pharaoh's (k,ughter— ^that
is evidently regarded favourably. Elsewhere it is Rahab of Jericho, or Euth the
Moabitess, or Araunah the Jebusite, or Darius the Mede, or Cyrus the Persian, or
Artaxerxes, or the Syro -Phoenician woman, or Cornelius the centurion — all of whom
are examples of the same universal law, which is, that God looks graciously upon all
his creatures, and accepts every sincere effort towards good that is made by any of
them. In his house are "many mansions" — in his future kingdom are many
gradations. No one is shut out of his kingdom by the circumstances of his birth or
profession. Let a man but seek honestly to do his will according to his lights, and
persevere to the end, he will obtain acceptance, whatever the belief in which he has
been brought up, and whatever his professed religion. His profession will not save
him ; but his love of goodness, his eflorts to do what is right, his earnest cleaving
to truth, and right, and virtue, will be accepted, through the merits of Christ, and
counted to him for righteousness. Man may be very far gone from his original perfect-
ness ; but he was made in God's image — he has an instinctive sense of right and
wrong. When he refuses the evil and chooses the good — whether he be in covenant
with God or out of covenant — his conduct is pleasing and acceptable for Christ's sake,
who has enlightened him and sustained him, and enabled him to do his good works,
and presents tliem to the Father and obtains for them acceptance through his merits.
Pharaoh's daughter stands to us here as a type of the heathen world — a world lying in
wickedness, but still salvable, still on the verge of salvation — she has the approval of
the writer, and of the Holy Spirit, who inspired him — she had only to continue to act
compassionately, kindly — according to her lights, rightly — and she was secure of final
acceptance by him who "judges the folk righteously, and governs all the nation?
upon earth " (Ps. Ixvii. 4). We hear much in these days of Cod's supposed exdusive-
ness and favouritism. Scripture does not sanction any such views. He i-^ there
presented to us as " no respecter of persons," but " a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him" (,Heb. xi. 6).

Ver. 10. — § 4, The education of Moses. Education is to fit us for the battle of life.
The first and most important point is that a child be " virtuously brought up to lead it
godly life." In Egypt morality was highly regarded ; and some have gone so far us to
«ay that " the laws of the Egyptian religion " — in respect of morality et any



Si TSii Book OF ^XODtJS. to*- »• i— i^

" fell short in nothing of the teachings of Christianity " (see Brugsch, ' History of Egypt,'
vol. i. p. 20). This is, no doubt, an over-statement ; but it is the fact, that correct
•nd elevated ideas on the subject of morality were entertained by the Egyptian sages,
and inculcated on the young by Egyptian teachers. To " give bread to the hungry,
didnk to the thirsty, to clothe the naked, set the wanderer in his path, resist the
oppressor, and put a stop to violence," were regarded as the first elements of duty,
the very alphabet of morality, which the most ignorant was expected to know and
practise. To the more advanced such counsels as the following were given : — " If thou
art become great after thou hast been humble, and if thou hast amassed riches after
poverty, and art come to be the first man of thy city ; if thou art known for thy
wealth, and hast become a great lord : let not thy huart grow proud because of thy
riches ; for it is God who has given them to thee." " Despise not another who is
as thou wast ; be towards him as towards thine equaL" " Happiness makes one
content with any abode ; but a small disgrace darkens the life of a great man."
"Good words shine more than the emerald which the hand of the slave finds
among a heap of pebbles." " The wise man is satisfied with what he knows ; content
dwells in his heart, and his lips speak words that are good." " The son who accepts
the words of his father will grow old in consequence ; for obedience is of God,
disobedience is hateful to God." " Let thy heart wash away the impurity of
thy mouth : fulfil the word of thy master." Moses in the household of a virtuous
Egyptian princess, the wife probably of a respected ofiicial, would be guarded from
corrupting sights and sounds, would hear none but " good words," would learn courtesy,
good manners, politeness, a liability, gentlemanly ease ; while at the same time he
would have inculcated upon him the duties of activity, diligence, truthfulness,
benevolence, consideration for others, temperance, purity, courage. The peculiar
circumstances of his position, as a foreigner, a foundling, a mere adopted child, would
lay him open to many a reproach and innuendo on the part of those who were jealous
of his good-fortune. In this way his path would be beset with difBculties, which would
furnish tho necessary discipline that might otherwise have been lacking to one brought
up by a tender and indulgent mistress who assumed towards him the attitude of a
mother. He would learn the virtues of reticence and self-controL As he grew to
manhood, active duties would no doubt be assigned to him — he would have to exercise
a certain amount of authority in the household, to undertake the management of this
or that department, and thus acquire experience in the direction and government of
men. Altogether, it is easy to see that the position wherein by God's providence he
was placed would furnish an excellent training for the part which he was to be called
upon to play, would naturally tend to make him at once outwardly gentle and
inwardly firm and self-reliant ; at once bold to rebuke kings and patient to govern a
stiff-necked and refractory people.

To the moral training thus furnished was added a mental training, on which we have
already enlarged. Book-learning is of little use towards the management of men.
But when it is superadded to a good practical education, which has already given
active habits and facility in dealing with all the various circumstances of life, it
adds a grace and dignity to its possessor which are far from contediptible. Moses,
without his Kgyptian "learning," might have led his people out of Egypt and con-
ducted them safely to Palestine; but he would have lost' his most glorious titles
and offices ; he would scarcely have been the great legislator that he was ; he could
certainly not have been the great historian, or the great poet. Moses, to obtain the
knowledge and the powers that he shows in his writings, must have been during his ,
youth a most diligent student. In this respect he is a pattern to all the youag, and
most especially to those high-placed youths who are too apt to think that ueir wealth
and rank put them above the necessity of hard work and diligent applicaticc The
truth is, that such a position lays its holder under a special obligation to diligence.
" Noblesse oblij;e." Those who are highly placed, and will have many eyes on them,
should endeavour to make their acquirements such as will bear close scrutiny and
observation. " A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid " (Matt. v. 14).



CH. n. 1— IL] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 29



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vera. 1 — U.^A ektld of providence. This section recounts the birth, deliverance,
and upbringing at the court of Pharaoh, of the future Deliverer of Israeli In which
we have to notice — ■

I. An act of faith on the part of Moses' parents. The faith of Moses' parents
IS signalised in the Epistle to the Hebrews (Heb. xi. 23). Observe — 1. The occasion of
its trial. The king's edict threatened the child's life. The case of Moses was peculiar,
yet not entirely so. No infancy or childhood but lays a certain strain upon the faith of
parents. The bark of a child's existence is so frail, and it sets out amidst so many
perils 1 And we are reminded that this strain is usually more felt by the mother than
the &ther, her affection for her offspring being in comparison deeper and more tender
(cf. Is. xlik. 16). It is the mother of Moses who does all and dares all for the salvation
of her babe. 2. Its nature. Both in Old and New '1 estameuts it is connected with
something remarkable in the babe's appearance (Acts vii. 20 ; Heb. xi. 23). Essen-
tially, however, it must have been the same faith as upholds believers in their trials
still — simple, strong feith in God, that he would be their Help in trouble, and would
protect and deliver the child whom with tears and prayers they cast upon his care.
This was sufficient to nerve Jochebed for what she did. 3. Its working. Faith
wrought with works, and by works was faith made perfect (Jas. ii. 22). (1) It nerved
them to disobey the tyrant's edict, and hide the child for three months. Terrible as
was ..this period of suspense, they took their measures with prudence, calmness, and
success. Religious faith is the secret of self-collectedness. (2) It enabled them, when
concealment was no longer practicable, to make the venture of the ark of bulrushes.
The step was bold, and still bolder if, as seems probable, Jochebed put the ark where
(he did, knowing that the princess and her maidens used that spot as a bathing-place.
Under God's secret guidance, she ventured all on the hope that the babe's beauty, and
helplessness would attract the lady's pity. She would put Pharaoh's daughter as a
shield between her child and Pharaoh's mandate. Learn — 1. Faith is not inconsistent
with the use of means. 2. Faith exhausts all means before abandoning effort.
3. Faith, when all means are exhausted, waits patiently on God. 4. Pious parents are
warranted in faith to cast their children on God's care. It was a sore trial to Jochebed
to trust her child out of her own arms, especially with that terrible decree hanging over
him. But faith enabled her to do it. She believed that God would keep him — would
make him his charge — would provide for him, — and in that faith she put the ark
among the rushes. Scarcely less faith are parents sometimes called upon to exercise in
taking steps of importance for their children's future. Missionaries in India, e.g.,
partir.c with their children, sons leaving home, etc. Sorest trial of all, when parents
on their leathbeds have to part with Uttle ones, leaving them to care of strangers.
Hard, very hard, to flesh and blood ; but God lives, God cares, God will provide, — will
watch the ark of the little one thus pushed out on the waters of the wide,
wide world.

II. An act or pbovidbnoe on the past op Moses' God. The faith of Moses'
parents met with its reward. Almost " whiles " they were yet " praying " (Dan. ix. 20),
their prayers were answered, and deliverance was vouchsafed. In regard to which
observe — 1. How various a/re the instrumentalities employed by Providence in working
Out its purposes. A king's edict, a mother's love, a babe's tears, a girl's shrewdness,
the pity of a princess, Egyptian customs, etc. 2. Bow Providence co-operates with
human freedom in bringing about desired residts. 1'he will of God was infallibly
accomplished, yet no violence was done to the will of the agents. In the most
liatural way possible, Moses was rescued by Pharaoh's daughter, restored to his mother
to nurse, adopted by the princess as her son, and afterwards educated by her in a
way suitable to his position. Thus was secured for Moses — (1) Protection. (2) A libera
education. (3) Experience of court^life in Egypt. 3, How easily the plans of the wicked
can be turned against themselves. Pharaoh's plans were foiled by his own daughter.
His edict was made the means of introducing to his own court the future deliverer of
the race he meant to destroy. God takes the wicked in their own net (Ps. fat. 15, 16).
4, ffow good, in Ood's providence, is frequently brought out of evih The people might



80 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. n. 1—9.

well count the issuing of this edict as the darkest hour of their night — the point oi
lowest ebb in their fortunes. Yet see what God brought out of it ! The deliverance oi
a Moses — the first turning of the tide in the direction of help. What poor judges we
are of what is really for or against us ! 5. How greatly Ood often exceeds our expectations
in the deliverances he sends. He does for us above what we ask or think. The utmost
Moses' parents dared to pray for was doubtless that his life might be preserved. That
he should be that very day restored to his mother, and nursed at her bosom; that
he should become the son of Pharaoh's daughter ; that he should grow to be great, wise,
rich, and powerful — this was felicity they had not dared to dream of But this is God's
way. He exceeds our expectations. He gives to faith more than it looks for. So in
Redemption, we are not only saved from perishing, but receive " everlasting life " (John
iii. 16) — ^honour, glory, reward. — J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 9. — TJie infancy of Moses. I. Wb have, in this experience of ihb

INFANT AND HIS MOTHER, A MOST AFFECTINO ILLUSTRATION OF THE MISERABLE STATE

TO WHICH Israel had been rbdctced. We come down from the general statement
of the first chapter to the particular instance of the second. Moses was born, in all
likelihood, just at the very height of Pharaoh's exasperation, and when the command
of ch. i. 22 was in process of being carried out. His servants, ever becoming more
savage and brutal in disposition, as the very consequence of the harshness and
severity they had daily to exercise, would be going about, watching the midwives
and hanging round the abodes of the Israelites to listen for the first faint cry of
the newborn child. In such circumstances, the work of the midwives must likely
fell into abeyance; for the midwife became the unwilling herald of the murderer.
Thus mothers in the crisis of their greatest need might be left without any ministry
or sympathy whatever; their greatest safety in solitude, their greatest comfort to
know that the newborn infant's existence was utterly unknown to any Egyptian.
Ko hour could well be darker, no circumstances more provocative of despair. We may
depend upon it that God meant much to be suggested to Israel in after generations, by
the birth of Moses just at this time. " In which time Moses was born" (Acts vii. 20).
May we not well imagine that when in later years Moses stole away from time to time,
out of the splendours and luxuries of his royal home, to spend an hour or two with hig
own mother, she would tell him that, for all his relation to Pharaoh's daughter and all
his privileges about the court, he had been once, with many another helpless babe, the
object of Pharaoh's bitterest animosity. Things were in a very bad state when Moseg
was born. Bad for Israel in point of present suffering ; bad for Egypt itself, seeing
what a merciless and unscrupulous man sat upon the throne ; bad for the prospects of
Moses and all the coming generation. And so we cannot but feel that the whole world
was in a very bad state when Jesus was born. He was exposed to the risk of a Herod ;
and Herod was but one of many like-minded oppressors. And worse than any cruelty
and oppression from without was the state of the people in their hearts. Jew and
Gentile were alike utterly departed from God. Romans, ch. i., does as much as human
language can do to give us the measure of the universal corruption and degradation.
We shall do well to mark in the New Testament the many things that show what
unregenerate, vile, and apostate hearts were those with whom Christ and his apostlcB
came iu contact. Then, when we have the dark, repulsive picture of the times well
before us, we may imitate Stephen, and say — " in which time Christ was born."

11. We have a MOST affecting instance OF THE PECULIAR CAKES AND SORROWS

WHICH BELONG TO THE MATERNAL RELATION. "When slie saw him that he was a
goodly child, she hid him three months." This can hardly mean that if he had been a
puny dwarfling, she would have cast liim aside as not worth anxiety. We know that
it is precisely the weakest, the least attractive to a stranger's eye, who most draws forth
the mother's love ; thus furnishing a sweet suggestion of that Divine affection which
yearns, with the greatest tenderness, over those who may seem to others hopelessly
lost. But as Moses was a goodly child, she was bound by this fact to give all available
chances for the promise that was in liim. Who can tell what anxieties and alarms
filled her thoughts during these terrible three months, and how often she skirted the
extreme edge of disaster, always feeling that with each succeeding week her task
became more difficult ? Qow keen must have been the struggle before she brought hw



«B.ii.l-«.J THE BOOK 01' EXODUS. 81

mind to face the dread necessity of exposure I We can imagine her being driven tc
decisive action at last, by seeing the agonies of some neighbouring mother, as the
servants of Pharaoh discover her child and ruthlessly extinguish its delicate life. Here,
in the sufferings of the mother of Moses, and of all the rest whom she but represents,
we have something like the full significance set before us of that curse which first
rested upon Eve. There may have been a measure of truth in what the midwives said
concerning the ease with which the mothers in Israel had been delivered; but not so
were they going to escape the curse. Their trouble only began when the man-child
was bom into the world. Not to them at least was the birth to be an occasion of joy,
but the beginning of unspeakable solicitude (Matt. ii. 16 — 18 ; xxiv. 19 ; John xvi. 21).
This poor woman exposed her tender infant, not because she was callous of heart,
unnatural, and lacking in love ; but because of the very intensity of her love. So
wretched had the state of Israel become that its infants found no place so dangerous aa
the place that should have been safest — the warm bosom of the mother.

III. We have a most impressive illustration of womakly sympathy. The
Scriptures, true to tlieir character as being the fullest revelation not less of human
nature than of the Divine nature, abound in illustrations of the demonstrativeness
of womanly sympathy. To go no further afield, we have such an illustration in the
previous chapter (the conduct of the midwives). But here there is an instance which
is peculiarly impressive. It was the daughter of Pharaoh who showed the much-needed
sympathy. Slie knew well how the babe came to be forsaken, and how, though it was
forsaken, this waterproof ark had been so carefully provided for it. Somewhere in
Israel she could see a mother anxiously speculating on the fate of this child ; and she
knew that all the strange discovery she had made came out of the stern, unrelenting
policy of her own father. Some women indeed in her circumstances would have said,
" Sad it may be that an infant should thus perish, but my father knows best. Leave it
there." But compassion rose to flood-tide in her heart, and choked all thoughts of
selfish policy, if they even so much as entered into her mind. Jesus says to his
disciples, concerning one of the difficulties and pnins of discipleship, that a man's foes
shall be they of his own household. And the principle seems to hold good in the
carrying out of worldly plans. It' a man wants to be downright selfish, he also may
find foes in his own household, not to be conquered, bribed, or p.ersuaded. Pharaoh
thinks he is closing-up the energies of Israel in a most effective fashion ; but his own
daughter opens a little window only large enough for an infant three months old to get
through it, and by this in the course of time all the cunning and cruelty of her father
aro made utterly void.

IV. We have, in all these events connected with the infancy of Moses, a cbitical
ILLU.STRATION OP THE REALITY OF SPECIAL PROVIDENCE. Notice that there is uot a
word about God in the narrative ; indeed, he is not mentioned as having a-nything
directly to do with Moses, until the interview, long after, at Horeb. There is plenty of
mention of human beings, in the play of their affections, their desires, and their inge-
nuity. The mother, the child, the sister, the nurse, the mother by adoption, all come
before us, but there is no mention of God. Yet who does not feel that the Lord of
Israel, unmentioned though he be, is yet the central, commanding, and controlling
figure in all that takes place ! It was he who caused Moses to be born at that particular
time. It was he who sheltered the infant during these three months, when perhaps
others were being snatched away in close proximity on the right hand and the left. It
was he who put into the heart of the mother to dispose of her child in this particular
way, and taught her to make such a cradle as surely never was made before. It was
he who gave the sister wisdom to act as she did — a wisdom possibly beyond her years.
It was he who turned the feet of Pharaoh's daughter (of her and no one else) in that
particular direction, and not in some other. All his excellent working in this matter
is hidden from those who do not wish to see it ; but how manifest it is, how wonderful
and beautiful, to those whose eyes he himself has opened I How different is his
working here from the working of the Deus ex machina in the tanglements and com-
plications of classical fable. There, when things get to all appearance hopelessly
disordered, a deity comes in visible form and puts them right. But in this real
deliverance of Moses, the God who is the only true God works in a far different way.
He works through natural means,, and so silently, so unobtrusively, that if men wise in



32 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. n, 1—10

their own conceits ore determined to ignore his presence, there is nothing to force u
upon them.

v. This narrative, along with that of the midwives, has a vbkt special bbabing oh
THE capabilities AND DUTIES OF WOMEN. We have here in the compass of some flve-
and-twenty verses a most encouraging instance of what women are able to do. So far,
in this book of the Exodus, God is seen exalting the woman and abasing the man.
Man, so fer as he appears, is set before us a weak, thwarted creature ; cruel enough in
disposition, but unable to give his cruelty effect. Even a king with all his resources is
baffled. But weak women set themselves to work, to shelter a helpless infant, and
they succeed. Here as on other occasions the hand of God is manifest, taking the weak
things of the world to confound the strong. What a lesson, what an appeal and
warning to women 1 We are all only too readily inclined to say, " What can I do ? " —
women perhaps more than others, because of their inability to share in the bustle and
strain of public life. Think then of what God enabled these women to do, simply
following out the dictates of natural affection and pity. They did far more than they
were conscious of. Might not women ask very earnestly if they are doing anything
like what they ought to do, and have the opportunity to do, in bringing up children in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord ? Christian women, those who are themselves
new creatures in Christ Jesus, able to have all the love and wisdom and every spiritual
grace that belongs to the new creature, might do a work for the world, compared with
which the work of these women whom we have been considering would look a small
matter indeed. — Y.

Vers. 1 — 10. — Bii works was faith made perfect. Bad times ; harsh decrees against
the Israelites ; doubts and misgivings which must have occurred to one in Amram's
position ; a hard experience and a dark prospect. Still the man believed in God,
remembered the promises, and knew that God also must remember them; did not
see hmv they were to be fulfilled, but 'was content to do his own duty and leave
all else to God. See —

I. How HIS FAITH WAS MANIFESTED BY HIS WORKS. We have — 1. His marriogt.
Under all the circumstances he might well have beea excused if he had decided to
remain unmarried. Such advice as that of St. Paul to the Corinthians (1 Cor. vii.
25 — 28) would seem to apply to such a time. The matter, however, was not to be so
easily settled. Faith will not permit marriage without prudence and due forethought,
but neither will Faith permit abstinence from marriage merely because marriage will
bring "trouble in the flesh." Improvidence and a too-calculating abstinence both
prompted by selfishness. Faith looks forward and looks around, but she looks tip also.
And is guided by the result of that upward look. Theories of political economists, etc.,
are not to be despised, none the less Faith will act — her actions regulated to some extent,
but not fettered, by calculation. Paul's teaching is to be qualified by Amram's example ;
Amram knew the times, foresaw the rocks ahead, yet he " took to wife a daughter of
Levi." 2. His choice of a viife. Clear from narrative that the woman was the man's
true helpmeet. ( )f the same family, they must have been well acquainted, and her
conduct shows that her faith equalled his. Faith not only prompted marriage, but also
directed choice. Amram and his wife did not marry merely for the sake of marrying,
but " for the mutual society, help, and comfort which the one ought to have of the
other both in prosperity and adversity." 3. Conduct in the face of trial. The two,
man and wife, now as one : though the woman comes to the fore, no doubt her faith
represents that of both. Aaron and Miriam, reared before the trial reached its height ;
then " a goodly child," just at the season of greatest danger. Note the action prompted
by faith ; how different fi-om that which might have been suggested by fatalism.
Fatalism would have said, " Let things be ; if he must be killed he must." Cf. Eastern
proverb, " On two days it skills not to avoid death, the appointed and the unappointed
day." Faith, on the other hand, is ready and courageous, holding that God helps thoso
who help themselves, or rather that he helps them through self-help. But notice —

II. How THIS LIVING FAITH WAS APPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 1. The COuduct of

the wife justified her husband's choice. She was the helpmeet he hoped she would be.
God gave her wisdom to comfort and strengthen him ; Bis blessing added the third
strand to that threefold cord which is not quicttiy broken, ii. Their united effort*



OH. n. 1—10.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. m

for the preservation of their children were crowned by God with complete success.
[Illustrate from the history— all happening, all ordained to happen, just as they
hoped.] They had prepared, by carrying out the plan which faith prompted, a channel
through which Grod's gracious and ready help might reach them ; and God used the
channel which they had prepared. The whole narrative shows how faith, when it
is living, proves its life by works, and how in response to a living faith God shows
that he is a living God. If Amram had walked by sight and not by feith, Moses
might never have been born, Jochebed never have been married ; as it was he walked
by faith and not by sight, doing his duty and trusting God, and through him came
redemption unto Israel — the child " taken out of" the water became the leader who
should. " take" his people " out of" bondage. — G.

Vers. 1 — 10. — A picture of true faith. I. What tbub faith is. 1. There was
obedience to a Divine impulse : her heart was appealed to, she saw he was a goodly child,
and she hid him three months. She read in the child's appearance an intimation of
future greatness, and that God did not mean him to die in accordance with the king's
commandment. The work of faith begins in obeying the Spirit's prompting in the
heart. 2. She was not daunted by difficulties. She might have asked what could this
temporary concealment do but only prolong her misery. Faith is content if it has
light but for one step. 3. Faith is fertile in expedients. The safety which is no longer
to be had in the home may be found on the waters. 4. When it has done all, it waits,
as with girded loins, for the dawning light. Miriam stood afar off.

II. How God justifies omi trust. When we have done all, and, knowing it is
nothing, look unto him, then God appears for us. 1. The child's life was saved.
2. He was given back into his mother'." arn.s. 3. The very might which before was
raised to slay was now used to guard him. 4. He was freed from the unhappy lot of
his countrymen, and set among the princes < f the land. Our trust prepares a place
where God may manifest himself. He " is able to do exceeding abundantly above all
that we ask or think." — U.

Vers. 1 — lO.^-The child of the water. " And she called his name Moses . . . water." —
Exod. ii. 10. Save Jesus, Moses is the greatest name in history. Compare with it
Mahomet, or even that of Paul. As the founder of the Jewish religion — under God —
his influence is felt to-day, not only by 6,000,COO Jews, but throughout the Christian
Church. Here is the beLxinning of his career. This mighty stream of influence we can
trace to its source ; not like the NiL^, whose origin is still in debate, a mystery. The
text gives the name and its reason. The derivation is either Hebrew, and then =
"Drawing out," so designating the act of the princess; or I'gyptian, and then=
" Saved from the water." The name a memorial of salvation. Happy, when children
bearing distinguished names, shame them not in the after-years. We treat the subject
in the order of the story : so its suggestiveness for heart and life will appear.

I. The familv of the child. Amram and Jochebed, the father and mother;
Miri m, much older, and Aaron, three years older, than Moses. Note : Moses owed —
1. Little to his family. Look at ver. 1. But the pre-eminence of Levi was not yet.
The tribe did not make Moses ; rather Moses (with Miriam and Aaron) the tribe.
"Blue blood?" Yes! and No! There is a sense in which we m«y be proud, of
ancestry, a sense in which not. What to me that I descend from a Norman baron ?
Everything to me that I come from able, gifted, saintly parentage. See Cowper on
" My Mother's Picture," lines 108 — 1 12. 2. Little to his home. Only a slave hut ; the
scene of toil, poverty, suflering, fear. Out of it brought one thing — sympathy with
suffering. 3. Little to his parents. Biographers usually give us the attributes and
history of ancestors, and show how they account for the career of the child. Nothing
of that here. Eveu the names of the parents do not appear. Note omission in ver. 1.
"A man," etc. "A daughter," etc. No doubt here a mental and moral heritage;
but Httle training, because little opportunity. Generally, there is, under this head,
ft lesson of encouragement for those who have, or &ncy they have, hard beginnings
in life. Some of earth's noblest have risen out of disadvantage.

II. The appeakancb of the child. For traditions of predictions of his birth seo
Jos. Antiq. ii. 9. 2 — 4. Moses was — 1. No common child. Scepticism objects that

EXODUS. O



S4 THE BOOK OF EXODUfe. [ch. ii. 11— IH

Miriam and Aaron are not mentioned in vers. 1, 2 by name. But the motive and
imp'ulse of iuspiratiuu are to be taken into account. The object was to give the event
which led to the Exodus, and to the constitution of the Jewish Church. Prom this
point of view interest concentrates on Moses. Hence we infer the extraordinary
greatness of his character and career. 2. born at a critical moment. See Acta
vii. 20. So the Jewish proverb: "When the tale of bricks is doubled, then comes
Moses." Note: — (1) Ai the moment of deepest darkness God sends deliverance.
(2) When he wants instruments lie creates them. 3. Of no common beauty. Not
only in his mnther's eyes, which would be natural enough, but absolutely. See
Acts vii. 20, as well as Exod. ii. 2 ; and for intere6l;ing illustration, Jos. Antiq. ii. 9. 6.
All this the promise of a higher beauty of character that opened out with the years.

III. The daxgee of the child. 'Ihe child bom to great issues, and therefore
mast run the gauntlet of peril. Compare Jesus under the edict of Herod with
Moses imder that of Pharaoh. No sooner born than a battle for life. The two
only infants, but full of possibilities. I'haraoh! the babe you may crush; hereafter
the man shall ruin you. A seeming law in the case, to which witness the legend*
of many nations, e.g. Komulus and Remus, Cyru.s, King Arthur.

IV. Love fencing fob the child. 1. Of the mother. (1) Concealing. Heb.
xi. 23. How by faith? Went right on in the discharge of common duty to the
child, not turning aside to observe the king's commandment. Then the love went
to the other extreme : — (2) Exposing. Here narrate the facts, for which see the text
and commentary above; e.g. impossibility of longer concealing a growing child, form
and material of the ark, laid in a place of. comparative safety, " in the flags " at " the
lip of the river," the elements of danger — starvation, discovery — not crocodiles on the
Tanitic branch of the river. But observe the feeling behind the facts. A mother's
despair becoming hope, and then faith ; but a faith provident and workful, for, living
in the neighbourhood, she could not fail to know where the childless (so says tra-
dition) princess was wont to bathe. Just there she placed the child. 2. <fthe sister.
Imagine her anxiety I The mother-heart in every girl. She was (1) Watchful :
)ver the ark, against an enemy, for the princess; (2) Active; (3) Clever, full of
resource; (4) Successful; (5) Became eminent; a prophetess, Ex. xv. 20. One of
the three deliverers, Mioah vi. 4. The adored of the people, Num. xii. 10 — 15. In
childhood are laid the foundations of character. 3. Of God. Before all, over all,
and behind all! Love to the child, sister, parents, to Israel, and to the world to
be blest through him.

V. The deliverance of the child. This of God, but note the part played by
each of the following instruments: — 1. The princess. Note the independent status
of an Egyptian princess, the custom then of bathing in the open river, the probable
locality, Zoan (Ps. Ixxviii. 43), that comi^assion was inculcated by the Egyptian
religion, and the probable application to her of Acts x. 3i. 2. The sister. 3. Th»
mother. 4. The princess again ; and possible lifelong parting from the mother.

Finally, observe — 1. The deli'-erances of (iod are wonderful. Only one person in
all the land of Egypt that could save Moses, and she came to the river. 2. Ute object of
God's deliverances does not centre and rest on the delivered. It passes beyond : Moses
for Israel, Israel for the Messiah, Messiah for the world. So Abraham, (jren. xii. 2.
So with elect spirits and elect nations in all ages. None for himself. 8. S.i is it with
ihe great salnation. Wonderful ! The benediction thereof unresting, passino; on from
the first recipients. 4. But the retributions if Ood are just as marvellous. Moses
was to be the ruin of the house of Pharaoh, and deservedly so. But in the providence
of God the tyrant is made to pass by and even protect the instrument of his future
punishment. — R.

EXPOSITION.



Vers. 11 — 15. — First attempt op Moses

TO DELIVER his NATION, AND ITS FAILURE.

After Moses was grown up — according to the
tradition accepted by St. Stephen (Acts vii.
|S)« when he was " full forty years old "



— having become by some means or other ac-
quainted with the circumstances of his birth,
which had most probably never been con-
cealed from him, he determined to "go out"
to liis bretliren, see with his own e^ea wiial



«H. n. 11—15.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



38



their treatment was, and do his best to alle-
viate it. He had as jet no Divine mission,
no command from God to act as he did, but
onlj a natural sympathy with his people, and
■ feeling perhaps that in his position he was
bound, more than any one else, to make some
efforts to ameliorate what must have been
generally known to be a hard lot. It is
scarcely likely that he had fonned any defi-
nite plans. How he should act would depend
on what he should see. Thus far, his con-
duct deserves nothing but praise. It only
perhaps a little surprises us (if St. Stephen's
tradition accords with tact) that he did not
earlier in his life take some steps in the direc-
tion here indicated. We are bound to recol-
lect, however, that we know very little of the
restraints under which he would have been
laid — whether a severe law of etiquette, or
the commands of his benefactress, may not
have hampered him, and caused the long delay
which strikes us as strange. Living with the
court — in Tanis probably — he would have been
required to make a strong effort — to break
through an established routine, and strike out
for himself a new and unheard-of course, if
he quitted the princess's household to make a
tour of inspection among the enslaved He-
brews. The author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews seems to consider that his act in
"going out "to "look upon the burdens "of
his people involved a renunciation of his court
life — a refusal to be called any more the sou
of Pharaoh's daughter (Heb. xi. 24) ; a cast-
ing-in of his lot with his brethren, so as
thenceforth to be a sharer in their afflictions
(ib. ver. 24). It this were so, we can well
understand a long period of hesitation before
the resolve was made to take the course from
which there was no retreating.

Ver. 11. — When Moses was grown. "When
he had become a man of vigour and intelli-
gence" (Kalisch). He went out. The ex-
pression is emphatic, and accords with the
view above exhibited — ^that i» complete change
in the life of Moses was now effecte4,>that the
court was quitted, with its attractions and its
temptations, its riches and its pleasures ; and
the position of adopted child of a princess for-
feited. He spied an Egyptian smiting a
Hebrew. It is not certain that this was one
of the "taskmasters" (ch. i. 11); but most
probably he was either a taskmaster, or one of
the officers employed by them. Such persons
we on the Egyptian monuments represented
w armed with long rods, said to be " made of



a tough pliant wood imported from Syria'
(Chabas, 'Voyage d'un Egyptien,' p. 119). It
was their right to employ their rods on the
backs of the idle, a right which was sure to
degenerate in many cases into tyrannous and
cruel oppression. We may assume that it waj
an instance of such abuse of power that ex-
cited the anger of Moses ; " seeing one of them
suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged
him that was oppressed " (Acts vii. 24). For
a light fault, or no fault at all, a heavy chas-
tisement was being inflicted.

Ver. 12. — He looked this way and that
way. Passion did not so move him as to make
him reckless. He looked round to see that he
was not observed, and then, when he saw
there was no man, slew the Igyptian. A
wrongful act, the outcome of an ardent but
undisciplined spirit ; lot to be placed among
the deeds " which history records as noble and
magnanimous" (Kalisch), but among those
which are hasty and regrettable. A warm
sympathetic nature, an indignant hatred of
wrong-doing, may have lain at the root of the
crime, but do not justify it, though they may
qualify oar condemnation of it. (See the re-
marks of St. Augustine quoted by Keil and
Delitzsch, 'Commentary on the Pentateuch,'
vol. i. p. 451 : " I aiiinn that the man, though
criminal and really the offender, ought not to
have been put to death by one who had no
legal authority to do so. But minds that are
capable of virtue often produce vices also, and
show thereby for what virtue they would have
been best adapted, if they had but been pro-
perly trained," etc.) And hid him in the sand.
There is abundant "sand" in the "field of
Zoan," and in all the more eastern portion of
the land of Goshen. (See the ' Quarterly State-
ment of the Palestine Exploration Fund ' foi
July, 1880, p. 140.)

Ver. 13.— The second day. I.e. " the fol-
lowing day." See Acts vii. 26. Him that
did the wrong. Literally, " the wicked one."
Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow? Lite-
rally "thy neighbowr." In interposing here
Moses certainly did nothing but what was
right The strife was one in which blows
were being exchanged, and it is the duty of
everyone in such a case, by persuasion at any
rate, to seek to stop the combat.

Ver. 14. — Who made thee a prince and a
judge over ns? It was not his interference
now, but his wrongful act of the day before,
that exposed Moses to this rebuke. There was
no assumption of lordship or of judicial autho-
rity in the bare inquiry, " Why smitest thou
thy neighbour ? " nor in the fuller phrase re-
ported by St. Stephen, " Sirs, ye are brethien.
Why do ye wrong one to another ? " (Acts
vii. 26), unless as coupled with the deed oj
the preceding day Thus the violence of to
day renders of no avail the loving persuasion
of to-moirow ; the influence for good which



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[OH. n. 11—15.



the education and position of Moses mig'bt
have enabled him to exercise upon his nation
was lost by the very act to which he had been
urged by his sympathy with them ; it was
an act which could be thrown in his teeth, an
act which he could not justify, which he trem-
bled to find was known. The retort of the
aggressor stopped his mouth at once, and made
his interposition valueless.

Ver. 15. — Pharaoh heard. If we have been
right in supposing the Pharaoh of the original
oppression to have been Seti 1., the present
Fharaoh, from whom Moses flies when he is
" full forty years old " (Acts vii. 23), and who
4oes not die till Moses is near eighty, must be
his son, the Great Kameses, Eameses II. This
prince was associated by his father at the age
of ten or twelve (Brugsch, ' History of Egypt,'
vol. ii. pp. 24 — 5), and reigned sixty-seven
years, as appears from his monuments. He is
the only king of the New Empire whose real
reign exceeded forty years, and thus the only
monarch who fulfils the conditions required by
the narrative of Exodus supplemented by St.
Stephen's speech in the Acts. He sought to
clay Hoses. We need not undeistand from
this expressjon that the Pharaoh's will was
thwarted or opposed by anything but the sud-
den disappearance of Moses. As St. Stephen
says (Acts vii. 29), " Then fled Moses at this
laying," i.e. at the mere words of the aggres-
■or, " Wilt thou slay me aa thou didst the



Egyptian ? " Moses fled, knowing what he
h^ to expect, quitted Egypt, went to Midian ;
and the Egyptian monarch " sought to slay
him " too late. The land of Uidian is a some-
what vague expression, for the Midianites were
nomads, and at different times occupied dis-
tinct and even remote localities. Their prin-
cipal settlements appear to have been on the
eastern side of the Elanitic Gulf (Gulf of
Akabah) ; but at times they extended north-
wards to the confines of Moab (Gen. xxxvi.
35; Num. xxii. 4, 7, etc.), and westward into
the Sinaitic peninsula, which appears to have
been " the land of Midian " whereto Moses
fled (see below, ch. iii. 1). The Midianites
are not expressly mentioned in the Egyptian
inscriptions. They were probably included
among the Mentu, with whom the Egyptians
contended in the Sinaitic region, and from
whom they took the copper district north-west
of Sinai. And he sat down by a well. Bather
" and he dwelt by the well." He took up his
abode in the neighbourhood of the principal
well belonging to the tract here called Midian.
The tract was probably one of no great size,
an offshoot of the greater Midian on the other
side of the gulf. We cannot identify th«
well ; but it was certainly not that near the
town of Modiana, spoken of by Edrisi and
Abulfeda, which was in Arabia Proper, on tb*
east of the gulf.



HOMILETICa

Vers. 11, 12. — § 1. Moses as a would-be deliverer. Moses, as a would-be deliverer,
shows us how zeal may outrun discretion. Actuated by deep love for his brethren,
he had quitted the court, resigned his high prospects, thrown in his lot with his nation,
and "jione out" to see with his own eyes their condition. No doubt he came upon
many sights which vexed and angered him, but was able to restrain himself. At
last, however, he became witness of a grievous — an extreme — case of oppression. Some
Hebrew, we may suppose, weaker than the generality, delicate in constitution or
suffering from illness, rested awhile from his weary labour under the scorching sun, and
gave himself a few moments of delightful, because rare, repose. But the eye of the
taskmaster was on him. Suddenly his rest was interrupted by a. shower of severe
blows, which were rained pitilessly upon his almost naked irame, raising great wheals,
from which the blood streamed down in frequent heavy drops. Moses could no
longer contain himself. Pity for the victim and hatred of the oppressor surged up
iff his heart. " Many a time and oft " had he wished to be a deliverer of his brethren,
to revenge their wrongs, to save them from their sufferings. Here was an opportunity
to make a beginning. He would save at any rate this one victim, he would punish
this one wrongdoer. There was no danger, for no one was looking (ver. 12), and sureiy
the man whom he saved would not betray him. So, having a weapon in his belt, or

finding one ready to his hand — a stone, it may be, or a working man's implement

he raised it, and striking a swift strong blow, slew the Egyptian. In thus actin^
he was doubly wrong. He acted as an avenger, when he had no authority from
God or man to be one; and, had he had authority, still he would have inflicted a
punishment disproportionate to the offence. Such a beating as he had himselt
administered the taskmaster may have deserved, but not to be cut off' in his sins-
■ot to be sent to his last account without warning, without time even for a repentant



aan. 11— 15.] THE ' BOOK OF EXODUS. 81

thouglit. The deed done, conscience reasserted herself: it was a deed of darkness;
a thing which must be concealed: so Moses dug a hole in the sand, and hid the
dreadful evidence of his crime. It does not appear that the man whom he had
delivered helped him ; he was perhaps too much exhausted with what he had suffered,
and glad to creep to his home. Moses, too, returned to his own abode, well satisfied,
as it would seem, on the whole, with what he had done. Having struck the blow,
and buried the body unseen, he did not fear detection ; and he probably persuaded
himself that the man deserved his fate. He may have even had self-complacent
thoughts, have admired his own courage and strength, and thought how he had
at last come to be a deliverer indeed. In reality, however, he had disqualified
himself for the ofiBce; he had committed a crime which lorced him to quit his
brethren and fly to a distance, and be thus unable to do anything towards mitigating
their sufferings for the space of forty years 1 Had he been patient, had he been
content with remonstrances, had he used his superior strength to rescue the oppressed
without injuring the oppressor, he would have shown himself fit to be a deliverer,
and God might not' improbably have assigned him his mission at once. But his
self-willed and wrongful mode of proceeding showed that he needed a Ions; course
of discipline before he could properly be entrusted with the difficult task which
God designed him to accomplish. Forty years of almost solitary life in the Sinaitic
wilderness chastened the hot spirit which was now too wild and untamed for a leader
and governor of men.

Vers. 13 — 14. — § 2. Moses as a peacemaker. A great sin disqualifies a man for
many a long year from setting himself up to be a guide and teacher of others. It
may at any time be thrown, in his teeth. Nothing could be better intended than
the efforts of Moses, on the day after his crime, to compose the quarrels of his
brethren, and set the disputants at one. Nor is he fairly taxable with any want of
equity, or even of tact, in the manner in which he set to work. He rebuked " him
that did the wrong." His rebuke was mild in character — a mere expostulation;
" Wherefore smitest thou," etc. Nay, accordint; to St. Stephen (Acts vii. 26), it was
not even an expostulation addressed to an individual, but a general address which
avoided the assignment of special blame to cither disputant. " Sirs, ye are brethren ;
why do ye wrong one to another V " Yet it had no effect ; it failed utterly. The tables
were at once turned on the expostulator by the inquiry, " Who made thee a prince
and a judge over us? Intendest thou to slay me as thou didst the Egyptian?"
Conscience makes cowards of us all. Moses, hearing this, had no more to say ; he
had essayed to pluck out the mote from his brother's eye, and behold ! the beam was
in his own eye. His brethren were quanelsome and injurious ; but he — he was a
muiderer.

Ver. 15. — § 3. Moses as a fuyitive. Men's sins are sure to " find them out." Moses
had thought that he would not be detected. He had carefully " looked this way and
that way " ere he struck the blow, and had seen " that there was no man." He had
at once hidden the body of his victim underground. He had concluded that the
Hebrew whom he had delivered from the oppressor would keep silence ; if from no
other reason, yet at any rate to save himself from being suspected. But the man, it
appears, had chattered. Perhaps from no ill motive, but simply from inability to keep
a secret. He had told his wife, or his daughter, or his neighbour ; and at once " the
thint? was known." While Moses imagined his deed shrouded in deepest secrecy, it was
the general talk. All the Hebre« s knew of it ; and soon the Egyijtians knew also.
l\esently it came to the ears of the king, who^e business it wns to punish crime, and
who, naturally and rightfully, " sought to slay Moses." But he had fled away ; he had
put seas and deserts between himself and the royal vengeance ; he was a refugee in
Midian. So, though he escaped the public execution which P^gyptian law awarded to
his crime, he had to expiate it by forty years of exile and of hard sorvice, a hireling
shepherd tending the flock of another man.



88 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. n. 11, 12.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 11, 12. — The choice of Moses. Underlying this episode of killing the Egyptian
there is that crisis in the history of Moses to which reference is made so strikingly in the
eleventh of the Hebrews — " By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be
called the son of Pharaoh's daughter ; choosing rather," etc. (Heb. xi. 24 — 27). Two
views may be taken of the episode. Either, as might be held, the elements of decision
were floating in an unfixed state in the mind of Moses, when this event happened, and
precipitated a choice ; or, what seems more likely, the choice had already been made,
and the resolution of Moses already taken, and this was but the first outward
manifestation of it. In either case, the act in question was a deliberate committal of
himself to his brethren's side — the crossing of the Rubicon, which necessitated thereafter
a oasting-in of his lot with theirs. View this choice of Moses —

I. As A RESULT OP MENTAL AND MORAL AWAKENING. " When MoSCS WaS grOWU."

With years came thought; with thought "the philosophic mind;" with this, power of
observation. Moses began to think for himself, to see things with his own eyes. What
he saw made evident to him the impossibility of halting longer between two opinions.
He had not before felt the same necessity of definitely making up his mind whether he
would be Hebrew or Egyptian. He had not seen in the same way the impossibility of
retaining a sort of connection with both — sympathising with the Hebrews, yet enjoying
Egypt's pleasures. Now there came awakening. The two spheres of life fell apart to
Ms vision in their manifest incongruity — in their painful, and even, in some respects,
hideous contrast. He may now be Hebrew or Egyptian ; he can no longer be hoth.
Up to this time choice could be staved off. Now it is forced upon him. To determine
now not to choose, would be to choose for Egypt. He knows his duty, and it is for
him to decide whether or not he will do it. And such in substance is the effect of
moral awakening generally. 1. In most lives there is a time of thoughtlessness, at
least of want of serious and independent reflection. It is not at this stage seen why
religion should require so very decided a choice. God and the world seem not absolute
inoompatibles. It is possible to serve both ; to agree with both. Christ's teaching to
the contrary sounds strangely on the ears. 2. But an awakening comes, and it is now
Been very clearly that this double service is impossible. The friendship of the world is
felt to be enmity with God (Jas. iv. 4). The contrariety, utter and absolute, between
what is in the world and love of the Father (John ii. 15) is manifest beyond dispute.
Then comes the need for choice. God or the creature ; Christ, or the world which
crucified him ; God's people or the friendship of those who deride and despise them.
There is no longer room for dallying. Not to choose is already to have chosen wronrlT
— to have decided for the world, and rejected Christ.

II. As A vicToBT OVER STRONG TEMPTATION. It Was no slight victory Over the
temptations of his position for Moses to renounce all at the call of duty, and cast in his
lot with an oppressed and despised race. His temptation was obviously a typical one,
including in it everything which tempts men still to refrain from religious decision, and
to dissemble relationship to Christ and connection with his people ; and his victory
was also typical, reminding us of his who became poor that we might be rich
(2 Cor. viii. 7), and who put aside "all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of
them," when offered him on sinful terms (Matt. iv. 8 — 10). View it — 1. As a victory
over the world. Moses knew his advantages at the court of Pharaoh, and doubtless
felt the full value of them. Egypt was to him the world. It represented to his mind
(I) Wealth and position. (2) Ease and luxury. (3) Brilliant worldly prospects.
(4) A sphere congeuiiil to him as a man of studious tastes. And all this he vi,luutarily
surrendered at the call of duty — surrendered it both in spirit and in fact. And are
not we, as Christians, called also to surrender of the world ? Renouncing the world,
indeed, is not monkery. It is not the thoughtless flinging away of worldly advantages.
But neither is it the mere renouncing of what is sinful in the v/orld. It is the
renouncing of it wholly, so far as use of it for selfish ends or selfish enjoyment is
concerned : the sinking of its ease, its pleasures, its possessions, in entire self-surrender
to Christ and duty. And this carries with it the ability for any outward sacrifice that
may be needed. 2. As a victory over the dread of rgwoacA. In renouncing Egypt,



<«.n. 11, 13.] THE BOOK OF EXOUUS. 39

MoRes chose that which the multitudes shun as almost worse than death itself, viz.
(1) Poverty. (2) Reproach. Yet how many stumble at reproach in the service of the
Saviour ! A measure of rejjroach is implied in all earnest religious profession. And it
requires courage to face it — to encounter the moral crucifixion involved in being flouted
and scouted by the world. It is when " tribulation and persecution ariseth because of
the word " that " by and by " many are " offended " (Matt. xiii. 21). Yet to be able to
encounter reproach is the true moral greatness — the mark of the spiritual hero. 3. As
a victory over private feelings and inclinations. Not only was there much about his
life in Egypt which Moses dearly loved (leisure, opportunities for self-culture, etc.) ;
but there must have been much about the Hebrews which, to a man of his courtly
up-bringing, would necessarily be repulsive (coarseness of manners, servility of
disposition, etc.). Y'et he cheerfully cast in his lot with them, taking this as part of
his cross. A lesson for people of culture. He who would serve God or humanity must
lay his account for much he does not like. Every reformer, every earnest servant of
mankind, has to make this sacrifice. He must not be ashamed to call those "brethren"
who are yet in every way " compassed with infirmity," about whom there is much
that is positively distasteful. Here also, " no cross, no crown."

III. As AN ACT OF RELIGIOUS FAITH. The determining motives in Moses' choice
were — 1. Patriotism. This people was his people, and his blood boiled with indignation
at the wrongs they were enduring. Only a nature dead to the last spark of nobleness
could have reconciled itself to look on their sufferings and yet eat bread and retain
favour at the court of their oppressor, 'i. Humanity. " There was in him that nobleness
of nature, which besides tending to sympathy with the oppressed, revolts from ill that
is, selfish and cruel ; and this nobleness was stirred up in him by seeing the state of his
kindred; and comparing it'with his own. This was his faith. Faith saved him from
being content to be itUe and useless, and gave him zeal and courage to play the part of
a man and a hero in the liberation of his people " (Dr. J. Service). 3. Religion. We
fail of a right view of Moses' conduct if we stop short of religious faith proper. Moses
ktew something of the history of his people. He knew them to be the people of God.
He knew of the covenants and promises. He knew of their religious hopes. And it
was this which weighed most of all with him in casting-in his lot among them, and
•nabled him to count their reproach greater riches than all the treasures of Egypt.
His faith was — (1) Faith in God. He believed in the God of his fathers, and in the
truth and certainty of his promise. (2) Faith in the spiritual greatness of his nation.
He saw in these Hebrews, sweat- covered, down-trodden, afflicted as they were, the
"people of God." Faith is not misled by the shows of things. It pierces to the
reality. (3) Faith in duty. " It is of the essence of faith that he who has it feels
himself to be in a world of better things than pleasures, whether innocent OT sinful,
which are only pleasures of s&ase ; and in which to be right is greater and better than
to be mighty or to be rich— feels, in a word, that the best of this life, and of all life, is
goodness " (Dr. J. Service). (4.) Faith in the reCoinpense of reward. Moses believed
in future recompense — in immortality. A cardinal doctrine, even in Egyptian theology,
it can scarcely be supposed to have been absent from his. How great was the reward ,
of Moses, even in this life ! " He was happier as the persecuted and despised worshipper
of Jehovah, the avowed kinsman of slaves, than as the son of Pharaoh's daughter, and
the admired proficient in all Egyptian wisdom. He felt that he was richer, despoiled
of the treasures of Egypt. He felt that he was happier, divorced from the pleasures of
Bin. He felt that he was freer, reduced to the bondage of his countrymen. He was
richer, because enriched with the treasures of grace ; happier, because blessed with the
emiles of an approving conscience ; freer, because enfranchised with the liberty of the
sons of God. The blessings he chose were richer than all the advantages he cast away "
(Lindsay). How great has been his reward in history ! " For ages past his name has
outshone all the monarchs combined of the one-and- thirty dynasties" (Hamilton).
But the eternal reward has been greatest of all. A glimpse of it in the glorious
reappearance of Moses on the mountain of transfiguration. Wise choice, for honoura
like these to surrender riches and pleasures which were perishable ! Through faith in
God, Christ, duty, and eternity, let the same noble choice be repeated in ourselves I

J. a



40 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. u. 11— 15

Vers. 11 — 15. — Unfruitful effort. I. Moses' belf-sacriticE' (Heb. xi. 24 — 2S),

1. He owned his relationship to the enslaved and hated people. 2. He cast in his lot
unong them. God calls for the same sacrifice to-day ; confession of Jesus and brother-
hood with his people. 3. The result of a mother's influence : from her he must hav*
learned the truth regarding his descent and the hope of Israel. The seed sown outlived
the luxury, temptations, ambitions of the court. God's blessing rests on these efforts
of holiest love.

II. The lessons or his failuee. 1. True desire to serve is not the only requisite
for success. We may be defeated by mistakes of judgment, an ungoverned temper, etc.

2. There can be no true service without the heart's waiting upon God. In order to
guide we ourselves must follow. 3. The power which does not wait upon God comei
to nothing. Contrast the prince with the unknown wanderer in Midian. Not only
were means and influence lost, hia very opportunity was gone. " Fret not thyself in
any wise to do evil." — U.

Vers. 11 — 15. — Unpurified zeal. We must certainly attribute the killing of the
Egyptian, not to Divine inspiration, but to the natural impetuosity of Moses' character.
At this stage Moses had zeal, but it was without knowledge. His heart burned with
indignation at the wrongs of his brethren. He longed to be their deliverer. Something
told him that "God by his hand would deliver them" (Acts vii. 25). But how to
proceed he knew not. His plans had taken no definite shape. There was no revelation,
and perhaps one was not expected. So, acting under impulse, he struck the blow which
killed the Egyptian, but did no service to the cause he had at heart. That he did not
act with moral clearness is manifest from the perturbation with which he did the deed,
and from his subsequent attempt to hide the traces of it. It completed his discomfiture
when, next day, he learned that the deed was known, and that his brethren, instead of
welcoming his interposition, were disposed to resent it. He had involved himself in
murder. He had sown the seeds of later troubles. Yet he had gained no end by it.
How, true it is that violence seldom leads to happy issues ! " The wrath of man
worketh not the righteousness of God " ( Jas. i. 20). An exhibition of violence on our
3wn part is a bad preparation for interfering in the quarrels of others. He that does
the wrong will rarely fail to remind us of it. Learn lessons from the narrative —

I. As TO THE CHABAOTEB OF MosBS. Moscs, like every man of true, powerful, and
loving nature, was capable of vehement and burning anger. He was a man of great
natural impetuosity. This casts light upon the sin of Meribah (Num. xx. 10). An
outbreak of the old, long-conquered failing (cf. ch. iv. 13). The holier side of the same
disposition is seen in the anger with which he broke in pieces the Tables of the Law
(Ex. xxxii. 19). It casts light also on his meekness, and teaches us to distinguish
meekness from mere natural placableness and amiability. Meekness — the meekness
for which Moses is famed (Num. xii. 3)^was not a gift of nature, but the result of
passions, naturally strong, conquered and controlled — of long and studied self-
repression.

II. As TO UNPURIFIED ZEAL. 1. Unpurified zeal leads to hasty action. It is
Mngoverned. It acts from impulse. It is not schooled to bearing and waiting. It
cannot bide God's time, nor keep to God's ways. 2. Unpurified zeal unfits for Ood'$
service. It relies too much on self. It takes events into its own hand. Hence Moses
is sent to Midian to spend forty years in learning humility and patience — in acquiring
power of self-control. He has to learn that the work is not his, but God's, and that
only God can accomplish it. 3. Unpurified zeal, by its hasty action, retards, rather
than furthers, the accomplishment of Ood's purposes. By driving Moses mto Midian,
it probably put back the hour of Israel's deliverance. — J. 0.

Vers. 11 — 12. — Moses, the ardent but mistaken patriot. We are not told much
«f Moses in the first forty years of his life, just as we are not told much of Jesus
before he began his public ministry ; but as it is with Jesus, so it is with Moses — what
we are told is full of light concerning their character, disposition, and thoughts of the
future. Just one action may be enough to show the stuff a man is made of. Moses,
grown to manhood, by this single action of killing the Egyptian makes clearly



OH. n. 11, 12.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 41

manifest his spirit and his sympathies ; shows to us in a very impressive way much that
was good, and much also that was evil.

I. CONSIOER THE CONDUCT OF MoSES HERB AS CASTING LIGHT UPON CERTAIN QUALIFI-
CATIONS FOR THE WORK TO WHICH HE WAS AFTERWARDS CALLED. 1. Though he had

been broutiht up amid Egyptian surroundings, he remained an Israelite in heart.
Very early he must have been made acquainted, in some way or other, with the
strange romance that belonged to his infancy. Whatever Pharaoh's daughter brought
to bear on him in the way of Egyptian influence one day, would be neutralised by
what he heard from his own mother the next. For it was not likely that, after ho
was able to understand it, his nurse would long conceal the fact that she was his true
mother. Perhaps the very ark of bulrushes had become one of his treasured posses-
sions. His name, once explained, was a continual memento of infantile peril and
deliverance. And as he grew onward to manhood, he would be inclined to reproach
himself again and again for living so easily and comfortably with Pharaoh's daughter,
while her father was treating with such harshness and injustice his own people, his own
kinsfolk — Aaron his own -brother being probably among ,them. Thus there was every-
thing to keep the state of Israel incessantly in his mind ; everything in the way of
good soil to make the seed of patriotism grow, if only the seed were in his nature
to begin with. And there it unquestionably was, growing with his growth and
strengthening with his strength. 2. It is very important to notice how clearly the
vicarious element comes out in the relation of Moses to Israel during the years he spent
with Pharaoh's dauyhtcr. In one sense, he did not suffer himself. His life was
not made " bitter with liard bondage, in morter, and in brick, and in all manner
of service in the field." No taskmaster ever smote him. And yet, in another sense,
he suffered perhaps even more than any of the Israelites. There are burdens of the
spirit which produce a groaning and prostration far worse than those of any bodily
toil. There is a laceration of the heart more painful, and harder to heal, than that
of any bodily wound. Moses felt the sorrows of Israel as if they were his own. In
all their affliction he was afflicted. Not one of them smarted more under a sense
of the injustice with which they were treated than he did. It is a most precious,
ennobling and fruitful feeling to have in the heart — this feeling which links the
unsuffering to the suffering in a bond not to be broken. It brings together those
who have the opportunity to deliver, and those who, fastened hand and foot, can do
nothing for themselves. We find this feeling, in its purest, most operative, and most
valuable expression in Jesus, in him who knew no sin, no defiling thoughts, no torture
of conscience for his own wrong-doing ; and who yet came to feel so deeply the misery
and helplessness of a fallen world, that he descended into it for its deliverance, having
an unspeakably keener sense of its calamities than the most observant and meditative
of its own children. It is a grand thing to have this element of vicarious •suffering in
our hearts ; for the more we have it the more we are able to follow Jesus in serving our
needy felluw-men. Moses had this element; the prophets had it; Paul had it; every
true and successful apostle and evangelist must have it (Rom. ix. 1 — 5). Eveiy
Chiistian in process of salvation should have this element as he looks round on those
still ignorant and out of the way. The civilised should have it as he looks on the
savage ; the freeman as he looks on the slave ; the healthy as he looks on the sick ; the
man as hi: looks on the brute creation. This element of vicarious suffering has been at
the root of some of the noblest and most useful lives in all ages, and not least in modern
times. A thousand times let us run the risk of being called sentimental and maudlin,
rather than lack the element or cripple it in its vigorous growth. Certain it is, that we
shall do but little for Christ without it. 3. We have a very suggestive intimation of
the superiority of Moses to the people whom he was about to deliver ; this superiority
being not a mere matter of greater social advantages, but arising out of personal
character. The brother whom he succoured treated him but badly in return. He did
not mean to treat him badly ; but simple thoughtlessness makes untold mischief. He
must have known that Moses wished the act kept a secret, yet in a few hours it is
known far and wide through Israel. Not all might have been so inconsiderate, but
assuredly most would ; and so this man may be taken as representative of nis people.
He had not the courage and energy to return the Egyptian's blow himself; nor had ht
the activity and forethought of mind to shelter the generous champion who did retuia



4t THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. n. 13—15.

the blow. Israel was in servitude altogether ; not only in bndy, but in all the noblei
faculties of life as well. Hence, if Israel was to be santd, it must be by the condescending
act of a superior and stronger hand. And thus Moses slaying the Egyptian shadows
forth a pnme requirement in the greater matter of the world's redemption. Unless the
Son of Qod had stooped from his brighter, holier sphere, to break the bonds of sin
«nd death, what could we poor slaves have done ?

II. CONSIDEB THE CONDUCT OF MosES HERE AS INDICATING THE PRESENCE IN HIM
OF GREAT DEFECTS WHICH REQUIRED MUCH DISCIPLINE AND ENLIGHTENMENT TO REMOVE

THEM. Moses, in respect of his ardent and sustained sympathy with Israel, was a
man after ttod's own heart ; but he had every tiling yet to learn as to how that sympathy
was to bo made truly serviceable. His patriotism, strong and operative as it had
proved, was produced by entirely wrong considerations. His profound and fervent
interest in Israel was a right feeling, and an indispensable one for his work ; but it
needed to be produced by quite different agencies, and directed to quite different ends.
How had thii feeling been produced ? Simply by observing the cruelties inflicted on
his brethren. He slew the Egyptian simply because he smote his brother, not because
that brother belonged to the chosen people of God. The thing wanted was that he
should come to understand clearly the connection of Israel with God, their origin aiid
their destiny. He was to sympathise with Israel, not only as his brethren, but first
and chiefly as the people of God. Patriotism is a blessing or a curse just according to
the form, it takes. If it begins to say, " Our country, right or wrong," then it is one of
the greatest curves a nation can be afflicted with. Arrogance, conceit, and exorbitant
self-assertion are as hideous in a nation as in an individual, and in the end coi;re3pond-
ingly disastrous. Our greatest sympathy with men is wanted in that which affects them
most deeply and abidinyly. Sympathy has no full right to the name till ft is the
sympathy of forgiven sinners who are being sanctified and perfected, with those
who are not only sinners, but still in the bondag ■ of sin, and perhaps hardly conscious
of the degradation of the bondage, and the firmness with which its fetters are fixed.
Moses did not know how much his brethren weie losing, because he did not know
how much he himself was still lacking, even though in such comfortable freedoa
at Pharaoh's court. In his eyes, the main thing to be done for Israel was to get them
freedom, independence, self-control in this world's affairs. And therefore it was necessiry
for Qod to effect a complete and abiding change in Mosei way of thinking. He nee>led
to be made better acquainted with God, and with God's past revelations, and ox-

?ressed purposes for Israel. Slaying the Egyptian did not advance the real interests of
srael a whit, except as God wove the action in with his own far-reaching plans.
Considered purely as a human action, it was an aimless one, fruitful of evil rather than
good. It was natural enough and excusable enough ; but the wrath of man worketh not
the righteousness of God ; they that take the sword shall perish with the sword ; and
thus Moses in his carnal impetuosity made clear how dependent he, was to be upon God
for a really wise, comprehensive, practical plan of action. In the providence of God he
was to come back to Israel, not to deal with some obscure subordinate, but with a Pharaoh
kimself ; not to take the sword into his own hands, but to stand still himself, and make
the people stand still also, that he and they together might see the salvation of God. — Y.

Vers. 13 — 15. — Moses the hater of all oppression. I. We have here furtheb

mPOKTANT revelations WITH RESPECT TO THE CHARACTER OF MoSES AND HIS FITNESS

TO BE DELIVERER OF ISRAEL. \. Jt is evident that his conscience did not accuse him,
as touching the slaying of the Egyptian. Wrong as the action was, he made it clear
that he had done it from a right motive. Although he had taken the life of a felluw-
man, he had taken it not as a murderer, with malice in his heart against the individual,
but as a patriot. Hence the conscience that makes cowards of iis all — the consciousness,
that is, of having doue a wrong thing — was absent from his breast. It is a Vv,ry great
matter indeed not to go against conscieuce. Let conscience have life and authority,
and God will take his own time and means to cure the blinded understanding. 2. Moses
felt continueii interest in the state of Israel. He went out the second day. He did not
say, upon reflection, that these visits to his brethren were too perilous to be continued.
He did not say, " 1 cannot trust my own indignant feelings, and therefore I must keep
away feom these oppressed countrymen of mine." His heart was wholly and steadily



•B. n. 13—15.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 4M

with them. Interest may be easily produced while the exhibition of an injm'y is fresh,
or the emotions are excited by some skilful speaker. But we do not want the heart to
be like an instrument, only producing music so long as the performer touches it. We
want it to have such a continued activity within, such a continued thoughtfaluess, aa
will maintain a nobk and alert sympathy with men in all their varied and incessant
needs. 3. Tlie conduct of Moses here shows that he was a hater of all oppression. His
patriotic feeling had been excited by the Egyptian smiting the Hebrew, and now his
natural sense of justice was outraged by seeing one Hebrew smiting another. He beheld
these men the victims of a common oppression, and yet one of them who haj ^ens to be
the stronger adds to the already existing sufferings of his weaker brother instead of
doing what he can to diminish them. The patriotism of Moses, even with all its yet
unremedied defects, was founded not only in community of blood, but in a deep and
ardent love for all human rights. We may conclude that if Moses had been an
Egyptian, he would not have joined Pharaoh in his remorseless treatment of Israel, nor
seconded a policy of oppression and diminution on the plea that it was one of necessity.
If the Egyptians had been under the thraldom of the Hebrews, then, Hebrew though he
was, he would have sympathised with the Egyptians.

II. CoNSiDEB THE OCCASION OF HIS KEMONSTKANCB. It is a Bad lesson Moses has now
to learn, that the oppressed will be the oppressors, if only they can get the chance.
Here we are in the world, all sinners together, with certain outward consequences of
gin prevalent amongst us in the shape of poverty and sickness, and all such trials
onward to death. Eight feeling should teach us, in these circumstances, to stand by
one another, to bear one another's burdens and do what we can, by union and true
brotherliness, to mitigate the oppressions of our great enemy. While he is going
about seeking whom he may devour, we, his metlitated prey, might well refrain from
biting and devouring one another. IJut what is the real state of things ? The rich
siiiaer afflicts the poor, and too often uses him in his helplessness for his own
aggrandisement. The strong sinner is always on the look-out to make as much aa
he can out of every sort of weakness among his fellow-sinners. And what is worse
Btill, when the sinner professes to have passed from death unto life, he does not always
show the full evidence of it in loving the brethren as he is bound to do (1 John iii. 14).
Some professed Christians take a long time to perceive, and some never perceive at
all, that even simple self-indulgence is not only hurtful to self, but an ever-flowing
•pring of untold misery to others.

III. Consider the eemonstrance itself. 1. Notice the person whom Moset
addresses. "He said to him that did the wrong." He does not pretend to come
forward as knowing nothing of the merits of the quarrel. He does not content
himself with dwelling in general terms on the unseemliness of a dispute between
brethren who are also the victims of a common oppressor. It is not enough for
him simply to beseech the disputants to be reconciled. One is clearly in the wrong,
and Moses does not hesitate by implication to condemn him. Thus there appears
in Moses a certain disposition towards the judicial mind, revealing the germs of another
qualification for the work of his after-life. For the judicial mind is not only that which
strives to bring out all the evidence in matters of right or vyrong, and so to arrive at a
correct conclusion ; it is also a mind which has the courage to act on its conclusions,
and without fear or favour pass the necessary sentence. By addressing one of these
men rather than the other, Moses does in a manner declare himself perfectly satisfied
ihat he is in the wrong. 2. Notice the question wldch Moses puts. He smote the
Egyptian ; he expostulated with the Hebrew. The smiting of one Hebrew by another
was evidently very unnatural conduct in the eyes of Moses. When we consider what
men are, there is of course nothing astonishing in the conduct of this domineering
Israelite ; he is but seizing the chance which thousands of others in a like temptation
would have seized. But when we consider what men ought to he, there was great reason
for Moses to ask his question, " Why smitest thou thy fellow ? " Why indeed ! There
was no true ruason he could give but what it was a shame to confess. And so we might
often say to a wrong-doer, " Why doest thou this or that ? " according to the particular
wrong he is committing. " Why f " There might be great virtue in this persistent
interroo'ation if only put in a spirit purged as far as possible from the censorious and the
meddlesome. What a man does carelessly enough and with much satisfaction, upon tba



44 THE B OK OP EXODUS. [oh. n. 11--H.

low coDi-ideration of self-i idulgence, he might come to forsake if only brought face to
fece with high considerati ais of duty and love, and of cuufurmity to the will of God
and example of Christ. Everything we do ought to have a sufficient reason for it.
Not that we are to be iu a perpetual fidget over minute scruples. But, being by nature
so ignorant, anil by training so bound-in with base traditions, we cannot too often or too
promptly ask ourselves whether we have indeed a sufficient reason for the chief prin-
ciples, occupations and habits of life. 3. Notice that the question put to the Hebrew
wrong-doer might Just as well have been put to the Egyptian. He also had been guilty
of indefensible conduct, yet he as well as the other was a man with powers of reflection,
and the timely question, " Why smitest thou this Hebrew ? " might have made him
consider that really he had no sufficient reason at all to smite him. We must not too
readily assume that enemies will persist in enmity, if only we approach them in a friendly
manner. He that would change an enemy into a friend must show himself friendly.
The plan may not always be successful ; but it is worth trymg to cow^uer our foes by
love, patience and meekness. We must ever strive to get the selfish people to think ,
their thinking powers and all the better part of their humanity only too often get
crushed into a corner before the rush of pride, appetite and passion.

IV. CoKsi-DEB THE RESULT OF THE REMONSTRANCE. The wrong-doer has no sufficient
and justifying answer to give; and so he tells Moses to his face that he is a mere
meddler. When men are in a right course, a course of high and generous aims, they
hail any opportunity of presenting their conduct in a favourable aspect. But when they
are doing wrong, then they make a pretence of asserting their independence and liberty
in order that they may fight shy of awkward confessions. If we wait till we are never
found fault with as meddlers we shall do very little to compose quarrels and redress
injuries, to vindicate the innocent or deliver the oppressed. Men will listen to a
general harangue against tyranny, injustice and selfishness. They will look at us with
great admiration as long as we shoot our arrows in the air ; but arrows are not meant
to be shot in the air ; they are meant, at the very least, to go right into the crowd of
men, and sometimes to be directly and closely personal. — Y.

Vers. 11 — 15. — ■Mo:e.i "was grown." According to the tradition he had already
distinguished himself as a warrior — was " a prince and a judge " amongst the Egyptians,
if not over the Hebrews (ver. 14). Learned, too, in all the wisdom of the day (cf.
Acts vii. 22). At his age, forty years, with his influence, surely if ever he was to do
anything for his people, now must be the time. Motice :

I. The hasty miscalculation of the man. 1. What he did, and why he did it.
" It came into his heart to visit his brethren." In the seminaries of the priests, in
the palace, with the army, he had not forgotten his people ; but he had scarcely realised
the bitterness of their trial. Now his heart burns within him as he looks upon their
burdens. He feels that he is the appointed deliverer trained for this very purpose.
What is so plain to him must, he thinks, be equally plain to others (Acts vii. 25).
A chance encounter gives him the opportunity of declaring himself; defending a
Hebrew, he kills an Egyptian. The supposition that his brethren will understand
proves to be a great mistake : " they understood not." Moses did that which we are
all too ready to do : took it for granted that other people would look at things from
his standpoint. A man may be all that he thinks himself to be ; but he will fail in
accomplishing his designs if he maUes their success depend upon other people takirg
him at his own estimate ; there is an unsound premiss in his practical syllogism which
will certainly vitiate the conclusion. What we should do is to take pains to place
ourselves at the standpoint of other people, and before assuming that they see what
we see, make sure that at any rate we see what they see. Moses, the courtier, could
see the weakness of the oppressor, and how little power he had if only his slavei
should rise ; the slaves, however, bowing beneath the tyranny, felt and exaggerated the
tvrant's power — they could not see much hope from the aid of this self-constituted
champion. 2. What fo'hwed from his deed. Life endangered, compulsory flight, a
refuge amongst shepherds in a strange land, forty years' comparative solitude, life'»
prospects blighted through impatience. " More haste worse speed " is one of the woTid'a
wise proverbial generalisations. Motes illustrates the proverb-- -forty years' exile for
»n hour's hurry 1



CB. iL 11—15.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 45

II. The ovBRRTTLrNG PKoviDBNCE OF UoD. "There's a divinity that shapes oui
ends, rough-hew ihem as we will." The apparently wasted years not really wasted —
no needless delay, only preparation and Divine discipline. Moses had learnt much, but
he needed to learn more. God takes him from the school of Egypt, and places him in
the university of Nature, with Time and Solitude and the Desert as his tutors. What
did they teach him? 1. The value of the knowledge gained already. Well "to be
learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians." But wisdom improves by keeping — H
needs time and solitude to ripen it. Intellectually and spiritually we are ruminants ;
silence and solitude are needed to appropriate and digest knowledge. 2. Aew knowledge.
Few books, if any, of man's making, but the books of Nature invited study. The
knowledge of the desert would be needed by-and-bye, together with much other know-
ledge which could be gained nowhere else. 3. Meekness. He not merely became a
wiser man, he grew to be also a better man. The old self-confidence yielded place to
entire dependence upon the will of God. God had delivered him from the sword of
Pharaoh (cf. ver. 15 with ch. xviii. 3), and would help him still, though in a strange
land. Nothing makes a man so meek as faith ; the more he realises God's presence and
confides in him, the more utterly does the "consuming fire" burn out of him all pride
and selfishness.

Application: — Turning the pages of the book of memory, what records of delay
occasioned by impatience 1 Yet how do the same pages testify to the way in which all
along God has shaped our ends ! It is a mercy that we are in such good hands, and not
left to our own devices. Trusting in God, we can hope to make the best even of our
errors. He can restore — ay, more than restore — even years which the locust hath
eaten (Joel ii. 25). — G.

Vers. 11 — 15. — Mistake in life's morning. " He supposed his brethren would have,"
etc. (Acts vii. 25). The heart-abandonment of the throne must have taken place before
Moses went out from the palace of the -princess to inquire, .and therefore before the
enforced, flight. Place therefore "the crisis of being " between Exod. ii. 10 and 11.
Let no one fear to face this error in the life of the Lord's servant. Admit frankly
that Moses was wrojig. We are embarrassed by a notion that clings to us, that
the Bible is a repertory of good examples. It is not so. Only One perfect. All oilier
men and women in the Bible are imperfect and sinful, the subjects of God's grace,
pardoning, correcting, sanctifying, glorifying. Never lower the moral standard to-
defend a Bible character. It gives occasion to the adversary, and brings no satisfaction
to the believer. In this chapter of the biography of Moses observe in his conduct — ■

I. The kiout. 1. Inquiry. No inclination to shrink from responsibility under the
plea of want of knowledge. See the striking passage, Prov. xxiv. 11, 12. Moses going
out to investigate for himself, argues that either his mother or his people, or both, had
opened and maintained communication with him, informing him of his origin, teaching
the doctrine of the true God, and awakening concern. 2. Sympathy, " He looked on
their burdens." 3. Indignation. We may be angry and sin ; but it is also true that
we may not be angry, and sin even yet more deeply. For illustration cite modern
instances of cruel oppression.

II. The wrong. 1. Excess of indignant feeling. 2. Murder. The "supposition"
of Stephen is no justification, even if true ; but it may not be true, or may be only
partially true ; for the utterance of Stephen, based on tradition, is not to be confounded
with the inspired dictuin' of God. That furtive look " this way and that way " does not
indicate an assured conscience. Note the true meaning and spirit of Rom. xiv. TA.

III. The immediate results. Failure — Peril — Fear — Flight — Belay of IsratCit
deliverance.

IV. The PINAL overruling. God originates no wrong, but, being done, lays on it
the hand of the mighty. That enforced life in the desert became as important a part
of the training of Moses as life at Avaris ; acquainted him with " the Wilderness of
the Wandering," its resources, mode of life ; those other children of Abraham — the
Midianites ; gave him to wife a descendant of Abraham ; led to an important policy
for all the future of Israel (Ex. xviii.) ; and furnished an all-bit-indispensable human
helper and guide (Num. x. 29 — 31). Thus does the Eternal Mercy overrule an4
oonntervail the errors, even the sins, of penitent believers. — R.



«e



THE BOOK UF EXOUUS.



[CH. n. 16—22.



EXPOSITION.



Vera. 16 — ^22. — ^Lifb op Moses in Midian.
Fngitives from Egypt generally took the
northern route from Pelusium or Migdol to
(xaza, and so to Syria, or the regions beyond.
But in this quarter they were liable to be
arrested and sent back to the Egyptian mon-
arch. Eameses 11. put a special clause to this
effect into his treaty with the contemporary
Hittite king (Brugsch, ' History of Egypt,'
vol. ii. p. 73). It was, perhaps, the fear of extra-
aition which made Moses turn his steps south-
eastward, and proceed along the route, or at
any rate in the direction, which he afterwards
took with his nation. Though Egypt had
possessions in the Sinaitic peninsula, it was not
difficult to avoid them ; and before Sinai was
reached the fugitive would be in complete
safety, for the Egyptians seem never to have
penetrated to the southern or eastern parts of
the great triangle. "The well," by which
Moses took up his abode, is placed with some
probability in the neighbourhood of Sherm,
about ten miles north-east of Bas Mahommed,
the southern cape of the peninsula.

Ver. 16. — The priest of Midian. Cohen is
carta nly " priest " here, and not " prince," since
the father-in-law of Moses exercises priestly
functions in ch. xviii. 12. His seven daugh-
ters drew water for his flock, in accordance
with Eastern custom. So Eachel " kept the
sheep " of her father Laban, and watered them
(Gen. xxix. 9). Such a practice agrees well
with the simplicity of primitive times and
peoples ; nor would it even at the present day
be regarded as strange in Arabia.

Ver. 17.— The shepherds came and drove
them away. There is not much " natural
politeness" among primitive peoples. The
right of the stronger prevails, and women go
to the wall. Even the daughters of their
priest were not respected by these rude sons
of the desert, who would not wait their turn,
but used the water which Eeuel's daughters
had drawn. The context shows that this was
jOt an accidental or occasional circimistance,
hut the regular practice of the shepherds, who
thus aay after day saved themselves the trouble
of drawing. (See the next verse.) Moses
stood up and helped them. Ever ready to
assist the weak against the strong (supra,
vers. 12, 13), Moses " stood up " — sprang to
his feet— -and, though only one man against a
dozen or a score, by his determined air intimi-
dated the crowd of wrong-doers, and forced
them to let the maidens' sheep drink at the
troughs. His dress was probably that of an
Egyptian of rank ; and they might reasonably



conclude from his boldness that he had attend-
ants within call.

Ver. 18. — Beuel their father. Beuel is
called " Raguel " in Num. x. 29, but the
Hebrew spelling is the same in both places.
The word means " friend of God," and implies
monotheism. Compare ch. xviii. 9 — 12.

Ver. 19. — An Egyptian. Reuel's daughters
judged by the outward appearance. Moses
wore the garb and probably spoke the lan-
guage of Egypt. He had had no occasion to
reveal to them his real nationality. Drew
water enough for us. The shepherds had
consumed some of the water drawn by the
maidens, before Moses could drive them off.
He supplied the deficiency by drawing more
for them — an act of polite attention.

Ver. 20. — ^Where is he 1 Eeuel reproaches
his daughters with a want of politeness — even
of gratitude. Why have they " left the man " ?
Why have they not invited bim in? They
must themselves remedy the omission — ^they
must go and " call him " — that he " may eat
bread," or take his evening meal with them.

Ver. 21. — Moses was content to dwell with
the man, Moses had fled from Egypt with-
out any deflnite plan, simply to save his Ufe,
and had now to determine how he would ob-
tain a subsistence. Received into Reuel's
house, or tent, pleased with the man and with
his family, he consented to stay with him, pro-
bably entered into his service, as Jacob into
Laban's (Gen. xxix. 15 — 20), kept his sheep, or
otherwise made himself useful (see ch. iii. 1) ;
and in course of time Reuel gave Moses his
daughter, accepted him for hS son-in-law, so
that he became not merely a member of his
household, but of his family, was adopted pro-
bably into the tribe, so that he could not quit
it without permission (ch. iv. 18), and, so far
as his own intention went, cast in his lot with
the Midianites, with whom he meant hence-
forth to live and die. Such vague ideas as he
may previously have entertained of his " mis-
sion" had passed away; he had been "dis-
illusioned " by his Hi-success, and now looked
forward to nothing but a life of peaceful
obscurity.

Ver. 22. — Gershom. An Egyptian etymo-
logy has been assigned to this name (' Speaker's
Commentary,' vol. i., p. 488) ; but Moses in
the text clearly indicates that his own inten-
tion was to give his child a name significant in
Hebrew. " He called his name Gershom, for
he said, a stranger (ger) have I been," etc.
The only question is, what the second element
of the name, shorn, means. This appears to be
correctly explained by Kalisch and others aa
equivalent to sham " there " — so that the entire
word would mean " (J. was) a stranger there "
— i.e. in the countiy wh°re this son was born
tome



,n.l5— 23.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. «



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 16 — 19. — § 1. Moses a second time the champion of the oppressed. His
championship of an oppressed Hebrew, indiscreetly and wrongfully asserted, had
driven Muses from the country of his birth. No sooner does he set foot in the land
where he seeks a refuge, than his championship is again called forth. On the first
occasion it was a weaker race oppressed by one more powerful that made appeal to his
feelings ; now it is the weaker sex, oppressed by the stronger, that rouses him. His
Egyptian civilisation may have helped to intensify his aversion to this form of oppres-
sion, since among the Egyptians of his time women held a high place, and were treated
with consideration. He springs forward therefore to maintain the rights of Reuel's
daughters ; but he has learnt wisdom so far that he restrains himself — kills no one,
strikes no one — merely " helps " the victims, and has their wrong redressed. The circum-
stances of life give continual occasion for such interference as this; and each man is
bound, so far as he can, to check oppression, and " see that they who are in need and
necessity have right." If Moses is a warning to us i,i respect of his mode of action on
the former occasion, he is an example here. The protection of women, whensoever and
wheresoever they are wronged and ill- used, is a high Christian duty.

Vers. 21, 22. — § 2. Moses as husband and father. The Midianites were descendants
of Abraham (Gen. xxv. 2 — 4) ; and marriage with them was permitted, even under
the Law (Num. xxxi. 18). Moses, in wedding Zipporah, obeyed the primeval com-
mand, " Be fruitful and multiply " (Gen. i. 28), while at the same time he gave
himself the solace so much needed by an exile, of tender and loving life-long com-
panionship. I'hat Reuel was willing to give him one of his daughters indicates
that he had approved himself as a faithful servant in the good priest's household,
«nd was felt to deserve a reward. That Zipporah accepted him was perhaps mere filial
obedience, for which she was rewarded when the fugitive and exile became the first
man in a considerable nation. God blessed the marriage with male issue, a blessing
fondly desired by each true Israelite, and certainly not least by Moses, who knew so
well that in some descendant of Abraham " all the families of the earth should be
blessed." A shade of sadness shows itself, however, in the name which he gave his
firstborn — Gershom, " a stranger there." He himself had been for years, and, for
aught that he could tell, his son might always be, " a stranger in a strange land " —
far from his true home, far from his own people, a refugee among foreigners, who could
not be expected to love him as one of themselves, or treat him otherwise than with
coldness. Depression like this often assails us at moments of great joy, the good
obtained making us feel all the more sensibly that other goods have been In^st, Ruch
depression, however, after a time, passes away, and the desponding cry of "Gershom"
is followed (ch. xviii. 3, 4) by that of " Eliezer," or " my God helps."

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 15 — 23. — The long exile. Moses took with him into Midian all the best
elements of his character ; he left some of the faulty ones behind. He may be assumed
to have left much of his self-confidence, and to have been cured in part of his natural
rashness. His after growth in meekness would almost imply that he had come to
see the need of curbing his hot passions, and had, like David, purposed in his heart
that he would not transgress (Ps. xvii. 3 ; xxxii. 1). But he carried with him all
' is nobleness, all his magnanimity and courtesy. This comes beautifully out in his
defence of the women at the well (vers. 16, 17).

I. An instance op ohivaley. We have in the incident — 1. The weak pushed
aside by the strong. Rude, ill-mannered fellows thrust aside the daughters of the priest
of Midian from the sheep-troughs, and shamelessly appropriate the water with which
they had diligently filled them. 2. Brave championship of the weak. Moses takes
their part, stands up to help them, and compels the shepherds to give way. Not
content with this, he gives the maidens whs i assistance he is able. The two disposi-



THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. u. 15—23



tions stand in fine contrast : the one all that is unmanly and contemptible, the other
all that is chivalrous and noble. The instance teaches — 1. That the chivalrous disposi-
tion is also helpful. The one grace sets off the other. But the bully is a churl,
kelping nobody, and filching from the weak. 2. That the bully is to boot a coward.
He will insult a woman, but cringes in the presence of her vindicator. No true man
need be afraid to beard him. 3. That acts of kindness to the defenceless a^e often repaid
in unexpected ways They are indeed their own reward. It revives one's spirit to
maintain the cause of the needy. Moses, like Jesus, sat by the well; but this little
act of kindness, like the Saviour's conversation with the woman of ISamaria, did more
to refresh his spirit than the sweetest draught he could have taken from it. It was
good for him, defeated in resisting tyranny in Egypt, and discouraged by the reception
he had met with from his brethren, to have this opportunity of reasserting his
crushed manliood, and of feeling that he was still useful. It taught him, and it
teaches us — (1) Not to despair of doing good. Tyranny has many phases, and when
it cannot be resisted in one form, it may in another. And it taught him (2) Not to
despair of human nature. Gratitude had not vanished from the earth, because his
brethren had proved ungrateful. Hearts were still to be found, sensitive to the magic
touch of kindness ; capable of responding to it ; ready to repay it by love. For the
little deed of chivalry led to unexpected and welcome results. It prepared the way
for the hospitable reception of Moses by Reuel ; found for him a home in Midian ;
gave him a wife ; provided him with suitable occupation.

II. The residence in Midian. Notice on this — 1. The place of it. In or near the
Peninsula of Sinai. Solitude and grandeur. Fit place for education of thought and
heart. Much alone with God — with Nature in her more awful aspects — with his own
thoughts. 2. 'J'he society of it. He had probably few companions beyond his
immediate circle : his wife ; her father, sheikh and priest, — pious,^ hospitable, kindly-
natured ; the sisters. His life simple and unartificial, a wholesome corrective to
the luxury of Egypt. 3. The occupation of it. He kept flocks (ch. iii. 1). The
shepherd's life, besides giving him a valuable knowledge of the topography of the
desert, was very suitable for developing qualities important in a leader — watchfulness,
ekill, caution, self-reliance, bravery, tenderness, etc. So David was taken " from the
sheepcote, from following the sheep," to be ruler over God's people, over Israel (2 Sam.
Tii. 8). It lets in light on Moses' character that he was willing to stoop to, and did
not spurn, this lowly toil. He that could so humble himself was fit to be exaiteo.
By faithfulnesss in that which was least, he served an apprenticeship for being faith-
ful also in much (Luke xvi. 10). 4. '1 he duration of it. Forty years was a long
time, but not too long for the training God was giving him. The richest characters are
slowest in coming to maturity, and Moses was all this while developing in humility,
and in knowledge of God, of man, and of his own heart. 'J'he whole subject teaches
us valuable lessons. Learn — 1. Ood's dealings with his servants are often mysterious.
Moses in Midian seems an instance of the highest gifts thrown uselessly away. Is
this, we ask in surprise, the only use God can find for a man so richly gifted, so
remarkably preserved, and on whom have been lavished all the treasures of Egypt's
wisdom? Any ordinary man might be a shepherd, but how few could do the work of a
Moses? Moses himself, in the meditations of these forty years, must often have
wondered at the strange irony of his life. Yet how clear it was ail made to him at
last ! - 1 rust God to know better what is good for you than you do yourself.
2. How little a man has, after all, to do with the shaping of his own history I In
one sense he has much, yea everything, to do with it. Had Moses, e.g,, not so rashly
slain the Egyptian, his whole future would doubtless have borne a different com-
plexion. Man is responsible for his acts, but once he has done them, they are taken in
spite of himself out of his hands, and shaped in their consequences by overruling
Providence. He who sent the princess to the river, sent also the priest's daughters to
the well. 3. It is man's wisdom to study contentment with his lot. It may be humble,
and not the lot we like, or had counted on. It may be a lot to which we never
expected to be reduced. We may feel as if our gifts and powers were being wasted in
it. Yet if it is our lot — the one meanwhile providentially marked out for us — our
wisdom is cheerfully to accept of it, and make the best of the tasks which belong to it

.». O.



BH. n. 16— 22.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. '49

Ver. 22. — Oershom. 1. The good man in this world is often lonely at heart.
(1) When violence reigas unchecked. (2) When God's cause is in a depressed condi-
tion. (3) When repulsed in efforts to do good. (4) When severed from scenes of
former labour. (5) When his outward lot is uncongenial. (6) When deprived of
suitable companionships, and when he can find few to sympathise with him. 2. Ood
tends to the yood man alleviations of his loneliness. We may hope that Zipporah, if not
without faults, formed a kind and helpful wife to Moses, 'i'hen, sons were bom to
him-^the ficst, .the Gershom of this text. These were consolations. A wife's, affection,
the prattle and innocence of children — have sweetened the lot of many an extile.
Bunyan and his blind daughter. — J. 0.

Vers. 15 — 22. — Moses in Midian. Moses had to flee. ITie hard, unworthy reproach,
humiliating as he must have felt it to be, nevertheless gave him a timely warning.
His flight seems to have been instantaneous ; perhaps not even the opportunity t»
bid farewell to his friends. An utter rupture, a complete separation was his only safety.
Consider —

I. What he left behind him. 1. Possibly Pharaoh's daughter was still alive.
If so, we can imagine her sorrow and utter perplexity over the son of her adoption,
and the reproaches she might have to bear from her own kindred. How often she
may have heard that common expression which adds insult to bitter disappoint-
ment, "I told you so." We may be tolerably sure as to one result of tho
long sojourn of Moses in Midian, viz., that when he returned, she would be
Tanished from the scene, spared from beholding the son of her adoption the
agent of such dreadful visitations to her own people. Yet even with this miti-
gation, the agony may have been more than she could bear. She had sheltered
Moses, watched over him, and " nourished him for her own son," giving him
the opportunity to become " learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians ; " only to
ind at List that a sword had pierced through her own soul (Luke ii. 35 ; Acts vii.
21, ii2). 2. He left his brethren in servitwie. Any expectation they may have had,
from his present eminence and possibly greater eminence in the future, was now
completely crushed. It is well to effect a timely crushing of false hopes, even if great
eeverity has to be used. 3. He left behind all difficulties that came from his connexion
with the court. Had he gone on staying in Egypt he would have had to make his
•lection, sooner or later, between the Egyptians and his own people. But now he is
•pared having to decide for himself. We have to thank God tlat he sometimes takes
painful and difficult decisions out of our hands, so that we have no longer to blame
ourselves either for haste or procrastination ; for rashness and imprudence, or cowardice
and sloth. God in his providence does things for us, which we might find it very hard
to do for ourselves.

II. V\hat he found before him. He went out, hardly knowing whither he
went. 'J'he safest place was the best for him, and that safest place might not
immediately appear. Yet how -plain it is that God was guiding him, as really
as he guided Abraham, though Moses was not conscious of the guiding. He
fled because he had slain a fellow-man, yet he was not going forth as a Cain.
Under the wrath of Pharaoh, he was not under that wrath of God which rests
upon murderers. He was going to a new school, that was all — having learned all
that could be learned in the old one. He probably asked himself as he fled, " Where
san I go? Who will receive me ? What story can 1 tell? " He would feel, now the
homicide was known, that it was Impossible to say how far the news had reached.
Onward he sped — perhaps, like most fugitives of the sort, hiding by day and travelling
by night — ^until at last he reached the land of Midian. Here he concluded to dwell,
although it may have been in his mind only a temporary stage to a distant and safei
abode. And now observe that with this fresh mention of what happened to him aftei
his flight, there is an immediate and still further revelation of his character, all. in
the way of showing his natural Jitness for the great work of his life. He has made, an
awful mistake in his manner of showing sympathy with Israel, and in consequence has
exposed himself to a humiliating rebuff; but all this does not make him one whit less
willing to champion the weak when the occasion comes, t'e was a moM always ready
for opportnn il ies of service ; and wherever he went there seemed to be something fo»

Exonus. H



10 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. n. 15— 21

lum to do. He had fled from a land where the strong oppressed the weak, and com*
into another land where he found the same thing prevailing, and in one of its most
offensive forms ; for the tyranny was that of man over woman. The people of Midian had
a priest who seems to have been himself a hospitable man and a judicious and prudent
one (ch. xviii.) ; but there was so little reality of religion among the people, so little
respect for the priest's office, that these shepherds drove his daughters away from the
well — whom rather they should have gladly helped. It was not an occasional misad-
venture to the daughters, but a regular experience (ver. 18). Kone of these shepherds
perhaps had ever killed a man, but for all that they were a pack of savage boors.
Moses, on the other hand, even though he has slain a man, is not a mere bravo, on»
who puts little value on human life. One might have said of him as Chaucer says of
one of his pilgrims in the ' Canterbury Tales,'

"He was a veray parfit gentil knight."

Then, when Moses had helped the women, his difficulties and doubts were soon
brought to an end. He had helped them, though they were utter strangers, because he
felt it his duty so to do. He was not looking to them for a release from his difficulties,
for how could a few weak women help him, those who had just been the objects of
his own pity ? But as women had been the means of protecting him in infancy, so
they were the means of providing for him now. He did not seek Beuel ; Eeuel sought
him. He needed no certificate of character; these daughters themselves were an
epistle of commendation to their father. He might safely tell all his story now, for
even the darkest chapter of it would be viewed in the Ught of his recent generou*
action. — Y.

Ver. 15. — fitting by the well : a suggestive comparison. The very expression, " He
eat down by a well," inevitably suggests that conversation beside the well at Sychar,
in which Jesus took so important a part. Note the following points of resemblance^
and then say if they can be considered as purely accidental. Are they not rather
involved in the profound designs of him who presided over the construction of the
Scriptures ? 1. As we see Moses fleeing from the face of Pharaoh, so we see Jesu»
making a prudent departure from Judaea into Galilee, on account of the Pharisees.
2. Both Moses and Jesus are found sitting by a well. 3. As Moses comes in
contact with seven women of a different nation, so Jesus with the woman of Samaria,
And just as the daughters of Reuel made the difference seem greater still by
calling Moses an Egyptian, which though a name partly appropriate, was yet particu-
larly inappropriate at a time when he was the object of Pharaoh's bitterest hatred — so
the woman of Samaria laid emphasis on the fact that Jesus was a Jew, being altogether
Ignorant how small a part was that of the truth concerning him; 4. The very
difference in number is significant. Moses could help a number in the service that he
rendered, because it was a mere external service. But Jesus needed to have the woman
of Samaria alone, that he might deal effectually with her peculiar, individual need.
There is a great difference in respect of the things to be said and done, according as we
ire dealing with one person or more than one. 5. The meeting of Moses with the
daughters of Beuel led on to his becoming acquainted with Eeuel himself; gaining hie
confidence and becoming his helper. So Jesus serving the woman of Samaria was led
on to serve, not one only, but many of those connected with her. 6. Moses soon
entered into a nearer relation still with Eeuel, and Jesus in the course of his conversa-
tion with the woman asserted principles which were to break down the barriers between
Jew and Samaritan, and every wall of partition separating those who should be united.
Lastly, he who helped these women became a shepherd ; and his dying thought was of
% shepherd's work, as he prayed God to give him a successor who should be a true
»hepherd to Israel. And as to Jesus, we all know how he delighted to set himself
before his disciples as the Good Shepherd, deeply concerned for the nourishment and
security of his fiock, and concerned most of a 1 to seek and to save that which waa
lost (Matt, xviii. 11—13 ; Luke xv. 4 ; xix. 10). — Y

Ver. 22. — Life and its muods. " He called his name Gershom," etc. (Ex. ii. 22)^
•ompared with — " And the name of the other was Eliezer," etc. (Ex. xviiL 4>



OE. n. 2S — 25.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



Note the isolation and misery of the earlier time, and the mercy of the later — each
begetting its own tone and mood of mind ; and fiirther, the desirability of livins; above
the mood of the passing day. Eev. C. Kingsley says (' Life,' i. 82) : " Let us watch
against tones. They are unsafe things. The tone of a man or woman's mind ought to
be that of thoughtful reverence and love ; but neither joy or sorrow, or activity oc
passiveness, or any other animal tone, ought to be habitual," etc. — B.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 23 — 25. — Death op the Phabaoh
FBOM WHOM Moses pled — CoNnNUANOB of

THE oppression OF ISBAEL — IsbAEl's PRAYERS

— God's acoeitanoe of them. — After a space
of forty years from the time of Moses' flight
from Egypt, according to the estimate of St.
Stephen (Acts vii. 30), wliich is' not, how-
ever, to be strictly pressed, the king whose
anger he had provoked — Barneses II., as we
believe— died. He had reigned sixty-seven
years — about forty-seven alone, and about
twenty in conjunction with his father. At his
death, the oppressed Israelites ventured to
hope for some amelioration of their condition.
On his accession, a king in the East often
reverses the policy of his predecessor, or at
any rate, to make himself popular, grants a
remission of burthens for a certain period. But
at this time the new monarch, Menephthah I.,
the son of Barneses 11., disappointed the hopes
of the Israelites, maintained his father's policy,
continued the established system of oppression,
granted them no relief of i any kind.-, They
"sighed," therefore, in consequence of their
disappointment, and "cried" unto Qod in their
trouble, and made supplication to him more
earnestly, more heartily, than ever before. We
need not suppose that they had previously
fallen away from their faith, and " now at last
returned to God after many years of idolatrous
aberration " (Aben Ezra, Kalisch). But there
was among them an access of religious fervour ;
they " turned to God " from a state of dead-
ness, rather from one of alienation, and raised
a " cry " of the kind to which he is never deaf.
God therefore " heard their groaning," deigned
to listen to their prayers, and commenced the
course of miraculous action which issued in
the Exodus.

(Ihis section is more closely connected
with what follows than with what went before,
and would better begin ch. iii. than terminate

ch. ii.)



Ver. 23. — In process of time. Literally,
" in those many days." The reign of Barne-
ses II. was exceptionally long, as previously
explained. He had aheady reigned twenty-
seven years when Moses fled from him (ch. IL
15). He had now reigned sixty-seven, and
Moses was eighty 1 It had seemed a weary
while to wait. The children of Israel sighed.
If the time had seemed a weary whUe t*
Moses, how much more to his nation 1 He had
escaped and was in Midian — ^they toiled on in
Egypt. He kept sheep — ^they had their hve«
made " bitter " for them " with hard bondage,
in morter, and in brick, and in all manner of
service in the field" (ch. i. 14). He could
bring up his sons in safety ; their sons were
still thrown into the river. No wonder that
" an exceeding bitter cry " went up to God from
the oppressed people, so soon as they found that
they had nothing to hope from the new king.

Vers. 24, 25. — God heard their groaning.
God is said to " hear " the prayers which h«
accepts and grants ; to " be deaf " to thos*
which he does not grant, but rejects. He now
" heard " (i.«. accepted) the supplications of
oppressed Israel ; and on account of the cove-
,nant \vhich he had made with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob — ^a covenant always remembered
by him — he looked upon his people, made
them the objects of his special regard, and
entered on a course, which was abnormal,
irregular, miraculous, in order to cany out hii
pui-poses of mercy towards them It is ob-
served that anthropomorphic expressions are
here accumulated ; but this is always the case
when the love and tenderness of God towards
man are spoken of, since they form the only
possible phraseology in which ideas of love
and tenderness can be expressed so as to be
intelligible' to human beings. And God re-
garded them. Literally, " and God knew."
God kept the whole in his thoughts — bore in
mind the sufferings, the wrongs, the hopes,
the fears, the groans, the despair, the appeal
to him, the fervent supplications and frayeif
— knew all, remembered all — counted every
word and sigh — ^gathered the tears into hi
bottle — noted all things in his book — and for
the present endured, kept silence— but wal
preparing for his foes a teiTible vengeance—
for his people a marvellous deliverance



■ s



U THE BOOK OF EXODUS. • [ch. n. 23— 2&



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 23. — -Death comes at last, even to theprovdest monarch. Rameses II. left behind
Um the reputation of being the greatest of the Egyptian kings. He was confounded with
the mythical Sesostris, and regarded as the conqueror of all Western Asia, of Ethiopia,
and of a large tract in Europe. His buildings and other great works did, in fact, probably
excel those of any other Pharaoh. His reign was the longest, if we except one, of. any
upon record. He was victorious, by land or sea, over all who resisted his arms. Yet
• time came when he too "went the way of all flesh." " It is appointed unto all men
once to die, and after that the judgment." After eighty years of life and sixty-seven
of regal power, the Great Rameses was gathered to his fathers. Of what avail then was
•11 his glory, all his wealth, all his magnificence, all his architectural display, all his
long series of victories ? Could he plead them before the judgment-seat t)f an all-
righteous God ? He could not even, according to his own belief, have pleaded them
before the tribunal of his own Osiris. A modem writer says that every stone in the
edifices which he raised was cemented with the blood of a human victim (Lenormant,
'Manuel d'Histoire Ancienne,' vol. i. p. 423). Thousands of wretches toiled incessantly
to add to his glory, and cover Egypt with buildings, obelisks, and colossi, which still
•how forth his greatness. But what is the result of all, what advantage has he gained
by it? On earth, he is certainly not forgotten; but History gibbets him as a tyrant
and oppressor — one of the scourges of the human race. In the intermed'ate region
where he dwells, what can be his thoughts of the past ? what his expectations of the
future ? Must he not mourn continually over his misspent life, and unavailingly regret
his cruelties ? The meanest of his victims is now happier than he, and would refuse to
change lots with him.

Vers. 24, 25. — 0"d is never deaf to earnest prayer for deliverance. It was eighty years
rince the cruel edict went forth, " Every son that is bom ye shall cast into the river "
(ch. i. 22) — ninety, or perhaps a hundred, since the severe oppression began (ih. 11 — 14).
Israel had sighed and groaned during the whole of this long period, and no doubt addressed
many a prayer to God, which seemed unheard. But no earnest faithful prayer during
the whole of the long space was unheard. God treasured them all up in his memory.
He was " not slack, as men count slackness." He had to wean his people from their
attachment to Egypt — he had to discipline them, to form their character — to prepare
them to endure the hardships of the desert, and to face the fierce tribes of Canaan.
When this was done— when they were fit — he gave effect to their prayers — "heard
their groaning " — and just as they were on the point of despairing, delivered them.
The lesson to us here is, that we never despair, never grow weary and listless, never
cease our prayers, strive to make them more and more fervent. We can never know
how near we are to the time when God will show forth his power — grant and accom>
^ish our prayers.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 23 — 25. — The hour of help. 1. It was long delayed. (1) Till tyranny had
done its worst. (2) 'I ill the last hope of help from man had disappeared. Improve-
ment may have been looked for at death of king. 2. It came at last. (1) When the
bondage had served its ends. (2) When the people, in despair of man, were crying to
God. 3. When it did come — (1 ) 'I he man was found ready who was to bring it. (2) God
was found faithful to his promise. — J. 0.

A^ers. 1 — 25. — Moses and Christ. Compare in circumstances of early life. 1. Obscu-
rity of birth. 2. Peril in infancy. 3. Protection in Egypt. 4. Rejected by brethren.
6. Humble toil. 'I'he carpenter's shop — keeping sheep. 6. Long period of silent

5 reparation. See F. W. Robertson's striking sermon on "The Early Development of
esus " (' Sermons,' vol. ii.). '1 he period was not so long in Christ's case as in the
ease of Moses, but had a like significance — preparation for future work. — J. 0.

Vers. 23 — 25. — A groaning Israel and an observant Ood. I. 'Thebk was stghino
AND CBTINO, YET NO BEAL PRAtER. There was DO Supplication for help, no expression
of confidence in a helper; seeing there was no real sense of trust in One who



OH. n. 23— 25.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 53

could keep, and therefore no possibility of real expectation from him. These Israelite!
did not wait as they that watch for the morning, sure that it will come at last
(Ps. cxxx. 6), but rather as those who say in the morning, " Would God It were
even ! " and at even, " Would Uod it were morning ! " (Deut. xxviii. 67). Their right
attitude, if only they had been able to occupy it, was that which Jesus is said to
have occupied (Heb. v. 7). They should have offered up prayers and supplications
along with their strong crying and tears to him that was able to save them. But
the God who had been so near to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, seemed now removed
to a distance. No one appeared with whom the Israelites in their despair could wrestle
until they gained the blessing of deliverance. And thus it has been in every generation,
aad sliU continues. The misery of the world cannot be silent, and in it all the
saddest feature is, that the miserable have no knowledge of God, or, if they have,
it is a knowledge without practical use. They are without hope in the world, because
they are without God in the world. They go on groaning like a sick infant that
neither knows the cause of its trouble nor where to look for help. And in the
midst of all this ignorance, Jesus would lead men to true prayer — to intelligent and
calm dependence upon God for things according to his will.

II. iNOtice the reason given for the sii'.HiNG AND CRYING. They sighed by
reason of the bondage. Bodily restraint, privation, and pain — in these lay the reasons
for their groaning. Their pain was that of the senses, not that of the spirit. Little
wonder then that they were not susceptible to the presence of God. Contrast their
painful experiences with those recorded in the following Psalms, xxxii., xxxviii., xxxix.,
li., cxix. 136. Jesus made it evident by his dealings with many of those who came to
him that the bulk of men, like the Israelites of old, are sighing because of some
temporal bondage. They think that pain would vanish, if only they could get all
sensible comforts. The poor man thinks what a comfort wealth and plenty must be,
yet a rich man came to Jesus, still unsatisfied in spite of his wealth, and was obliged
to go away again, sad, because of what Jesus had said, deeply disturhed and dis-
appointed ; and all because he had great possessions. There was no chance of doing
much good to Israel, as long as they were sighing simply because of the bondage. The
pain of life which comes through the senses would sink into a matter of superficial
insignificance, if only we felt as we ought to do the corruption and danger which come
through sin. We should soon come to the true remedy for all our pains, if only we
learnt to cry for the clean heart and the right spirit.

III. ThOU(;H THE SIGHING AND CRYING DID NOT AMOUNT TO A REAL PRAYER,

YET God ATTENDED TO IT. G od made allowance for the ignorance of the people. He
knew what was wanted, even though they knew not. The father on earth, being evil,
has to make the best guess he can at the interests of his children ; our Father in
heaven knows exactly what we want. God does not expect from the ignorant what
can only be presented by those who know him ; and he was about to deal with Israel
so that they might know him. And first of all they must be made to feel that Egypt
was in reality a very difi'erent place from what it appeared to Jacob and his sons,
coming out of famine-stricken Canaan. The time had long past when there was any
temptation to say, " Surely Egypt is better than Canaan ; we shall be able to take our
ease, eat, drink, and be merry." There had not only been corn in Egypt, but tyrants
and taskmasters. We have all to find out what Egypt really is ; and until we make
the full discovery, we cannot appreciate the nearness of God and profit by it. God can
do much for us when we come to the groaning-point, when the dear illusions of lite not
only begin to vacate their places, but are succeeded by painful, stern, and abiding
realities. When we begin to cry, even though our cry be only because of temporal
losses and pains, there is then a chance that we may attend to the increasing revela-
tiuus of the presence of God, and learn to wait upon him in obedience and prayer. — Y.

Vers. 23 — 25. — As in streams the water is attracted to and .swirls round various
centres, so here the interest of the narrative circles about three facts. We have —

I. The king's death. Who the king was may be uncertain. [Some say Aahmes I.
' — see Canon Cook, in ' Speaker's Commentary ;' others, Barneses II. — see R. S. Poole,
in ' Contemporary Review,' March, 1879.] What he had done is sufficiently evident.
Confronted with an alien people, of whose history he knew little and with whom ht
had no sympathy, he had treated them with suspicion and cruelty. Walking by



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CH. m. 1— 22i



sight he had inaugurated a policy which was sufficiently clever but decidedly unwise ;
he had hatched the very enmity he dreaded, by making those whom he feared miserable.
Ifeyertheless, he, personally, does not seem to have been the loser in this life. He
leh a legacy of trouble for his successor, but probably to the last he was feared and
lipnoured. Such lives were to the Egyptians, and must still be, suggestive of immor-
tality. If evil can thus prosper in the person of a king, life must indeed be a moral
chaos if it end with death and there be no hereafter. " Tlie king of Kgypt died :" what
about the King of Heaven and Earth ?

II. 'I'he i'boplb's cey. The inheritance of an evil policy accepted and endorsed by
the new king, llesults upon an oppressed people: — 1. Misery finds a voice. "They
sighed " — a half-stifled cry, which however gathers strength ; " tliey cried." Forty years
uf silent endurance seeks at length relief in utterance. The king's death brings the
dawn of hope ; the first feeling after liberty is the cry of anguish which cannot be
suppressed. Sucli a cry, an inarticulate prayer which needed no interpreter to. trans-
late it — an honest and heartfelt prayer of which God could take cognizance. 2. The
voice of misery finds a listener. The cry was a cry with wings to it — it " came up unto
God." Too many so-called prayers have mo wings, or at most clipped wings. They
grovel on the earth like barn-yard fowls, and if they chance to pick up solace, it is, like
themselves, of the earth earthy. Winged prayers, even when winged by sorrow, go up^
and for a time seem lost, but they reach heaven and find harbour tliere.

III. God's response. 1. Attention secured and tlie covenant remembered. God had
not been deaf before, nor had he been forgetful of his promise. For practical memory,
however, there must be a. practical claim upon that which is remembered. So long as
the people are indifferent, their indifierence suspends the fulfilment of the covenant.
All the while God, by permitting the tyranny, had been stirring up tlieir memory that
they might stir up his. When they are amused, he shows at once that he is mindful.
2. The children of the covenant beheld, and respect paid to their necessities. So far, God
had looked upon a people of slaves, trying hard to make themselves content with
•ervitude. Now that misery has aroused them to remember who and what they are,
he sees once more the childrt-n of Israel — uffspring of . t he , wrestling Princes. People,
have to come to themselves before fiod can efiectually look iijiou them. Content with
servitude, he sees them slaves. Mindful of the coveuaut, he sees them as children.
God is ready to help them directly they are ready to claim and to receive help from
God.

Application : — Evil in this world often seems to triumph, because men submit
to it, and try to make the best of it, instead of resisting it. The general will not fight
the foe single-handed; in the interest of those who should be his soldiers, he must
have them ready to fight under him. When we realise our true position, then Grod
is ready at once to recognise it. Indifference, forgetfulness, delay, all reajly due to
God the deliverer only seems to be that which man the sufferer m.— G.



SECTION II.— CHAPTEKS III. IV.

The Call and Mission of Mosbs.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER m.

Vers. 1 — 22. — The mission op Moses. After
forty years of monotonous pastoral life, afford-
ing abundant opportunity for meditation, and
for spiritual communion with God, and when
he had attained to the great age of eighty
years, and the hot blood of youth had given
place to the calm serenity of advanced life,
Qod at last revealed Himself to Moses



■' called him " (ver. 4), and gave him a definite
mission. The present chapter is intimately
connected with the next. Together, they
contain an account of that extraordinary and
indeed miraculous interchange of thought and
speech between Moses and God himself, by
which the son of Amram was induced to
undertake the difficult and dangerous task ot
freeing his people, delivering them from their
;e in Egypt, and conducting them



CH. m. 1 — ^22.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



66



throngh the wilderness to that " land flowing
with milk and honey," which had been pro-
mised to the seed of Abraham more than six
centuries previously (Gen. xv. 18). Whatever
hopes he had entertained of being his people's
deliverer in youth and middle life, they had
long been abandoned ; and, humanly speaking,
nothing was more improbable than that the
aged shepherd, grown " slow of speech and of
a slow tongue " (ch. iv. 10) — ^his manners
rusticised — ^his practical faculties rusted by
disuse — his physical powers weakened — should
come forth from a retirement of forty years'
duration to be a, leader and king of men.
Nothing less than direat supernatural inter-
position could— one may well believe — ^have
sufficed to overcome the natural vis inertise of
Moses' present character and position. Hence,
after an absolute cessation of miracle for more
than four hundred years, miracle is once more
made use of by the Euler of the Universe to
work out his ends. A dignua vindiee nodus
has arisen; and the ordinary laws of that
Nature which is but one of his instruments
are suspended by the Lord of All, who sees
what mode of action the occasion requires, and
acts accordingly,

Ver. 1. — ^Uoses kept the flock. The Hebrew
expresses that this was his regular occupation.
Understand by " flock " either sheep or goats,
or the two intermixed. Both anciently and
at the present day the Sinaitic pastures sup-
port these animals, and not homed cattle.
Of Jethro, his fether-in-law. The word
translated " father-in-law " is of much wider
application, being used of almost any relation
by marriage. Zipporah uses it of Moses in
ch. iv. 25, 26 ; in Gen. xix. 12, 14, it is ap-
plied to Lot's " sons-in-law ; " in other places
it is used of " brothers-in-law." Its applica-
tion to Jethro does not prove him to be the
same person as Beuel, which the difference of
name renders improbable. He was no doubt
the head of thp tribe at this period, having
succeeded to that dignity, and to the priest-
hood, when Beuel died. He may have been
either Eeuel's son oi his nephew. The back-
side of the desert, t'.e. " behind " or " beyond
the desert," across the strip of sandy plain
which separates the coast of the Elanitie
Gulf from the mountains, to the grassy regions
beyond. He came to the monutaiu of Ood,
even Horeb. Bather, " the mountain of God,
JSoreh-way" or " towards Horeb." By " the
mountain of God " Sinai seems to be meant.
It may be so named either by anticipation (as
" the land of Barneses " in Gen. xlvii. 11), or
because there was already a sanctuary there to



the true God, whom Beuel and Jethro wor»
shipped (ch. xviii. 12).

Ver. 2. — The angel of the Lord. Literally,
" an angel of Jehovah." Taking the whole
narrative altogether, we are justified, in con-
cluding that the appearance was that of " the
Angel of the Covenant " or " the Second Person
of the Trinity himself ; " but this is not
stated nor implied in the present verse. We
learn it from what follows. The angel " ap-
peared in a flame ,of fire out of the midst of
the thom-bush " — ^not out of " a thom-bush "—
which may be explained by there being only
one on the spot, which however seems impro-
bable, as it is a common tree ; or by Moses
having so often spoken of it, that, when he
came to write to his countrymen, he natxirally
called it " the bush," meaning " the bush of
which you have all heard." So St. John says
of the Baptist (iii. 24) that " he was not yet
cast into the prison," meaning, the prison into
which you all know that he was cast. SeTieh,
the word translated " bush," is still the name
of a thorny shrub, a species of acacia, commoa
in the Sinaitic district.

Ver. 3. — ^I win turn aside. Suspecting
nothing but a natural phenomenon, which he
was anxious to investigate. The action be-
speaks him a man of sense and intelligence,
not easily scared or imposed upon.

Ver. 4. — ^When the Lord saw . . . Ood
called. This collocation of words is fatal to
the entire Elohistic and Jehovistic theory, for
no one can suppose that two different writers
wrote the two clauses of the sentence. Nor,
if the same term was originally used in both
clauses, would any reviser have altered one
without altering both. Out of the midst of
the bush. A voice, which was the true voice
of God, appeared to Moses to proceed out of
the midst of the fire which enveloped the
thom-bush. An objective reality is described,
not a vision. Moses, Koses. The double call
implies urgency. Compare the call of Samuel
(1 Sam. iii. 10).

Ver. 5. — ^Draw not nigh. The awful great-
ness of the Creator is such that his crpatures,
until invited to draw near, are bound co stand
aloof. Moses, not yet aware that God himself
spoke to him, was approaching the bush too
close, to examine and see what the " great
thing " was. (See ver. 3.) On the general
unfitness of man to approach near to holy
things, see the comment on ch. xix. 12. Pnt
off thy shoes. Rather, " thy sandals." Shoes
were not worn commonly, even by the Egyp-
tians, until a late period, and woiid certainly
not be known in the land of Midian at this
time. The practice of putting them off before
entering a temple, a palace, or even the pri-
vate apartments of a house, was, and is, uni-
versal in the East — ^the rationale of it being
that the shoes or sandals have dust or dirt
attaching to them. The command given to



56



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[cH. m. 6 — IL



Moses at this time was repeated to Joshua
(Josh. V. 15). Holy ground. Literally,
*' ground of holiness " — ground rendered holy
by the presence of God upon it— not " an old
eanotuary," as some have thought, for then
Moses would not have needed the information.

Ver. 6 - The God of thy father. " Father "
here is Uded collectively, meaning forefathers
gem Tally, a usage well known to Hebraist"
((Jo.upare ch. xv. 2, and ch. xviii. 4.) The
God of Abraham, etc., i.e. the God who re-
vealed himself to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and entered into covenant with them (Gen. xv.
1—21 ; xxvi. 2—5 ; xxxv. 1—12). The con-
clusion which our Blessed Lord drew from this
verse (Matt. xxii. 32) is not directly involved
in it, bat depends on his minor premiss, " God
is not the God of the dead, but of the living."
Mjses hid his face. A natural instinctive
action. So Elijah, on the same site (1 K. xix.
13) and the holy angels before God's throne in
heaven (Is. vi. 2). In the religious system of
Borne, the augurs when discharging their
office, and all persons when offering a sacrifice,
veiled their heads. (See Liv. i. 18 ; Virg. Ma.
iii. 405 ; Juv. vi. S'JO.)

Ver. 7. — X have surely seen. Literally
" Seeing I have seen " — an expression imply-
ing continuance. On the force of the anthro-
pomorphic terms " seeing, hearing, knowing,"
■s used of God, see the comment on ch. ii. 24
— 25. Taskmasters. Not the general superin-
tendents of ch. i. 11, but subordinate officials,
who stood over the labourers and applied the
rod to their backs. (See above, ch. ii. 11.)

Ver. 8. — I am oome down. Another an-
thropomorphism, and one very common in
Scripture (Gen. xi. 5, 7 ; xviii. 21 ; Ps. xviii.
8 ; cxliv. 5, etc.), connected of course with the
idea that God has a special dwellingplace,
■which is ahove the earth. To bring them up.
Literally correct. Palestine is at a much
liigher level than Egypt. (Compare Gen. xii.
10 ; xiii. 1 ; xxxvii. 25 ; xxxix. 1 ; xlii. 2 ;
xlvi. 3, 4 ; 1. 25.) A good laud and a large.
The fertility of Palestine, though not equal to
that of Egypt, was still very great. Eastward
of Jordan, the soil is rich and productive, the
country in places wooded with fine trees, and
the herbage luxuriant. Vast tracts in the
■pring produce enormous crops of grain, and
throughimt the year pasturage of every kind is
abundant. " Still the countless flocks and
herds jiiay be seen, droves of cattle moving
on like tmii|is of soldiers, descending at sunset
to drink of the springs — literally, in the lan-
guage of IIk' prophet, "rams, and lambs, and
goat-, auil bullocks, all of them fatlings of
Bushan" (Stanley, 'Jewish Church,' pp. 217,
318). Thp west-rn region is less productive, bat
by careful cultivation in terraces may be made
to bear cxci llent crops of corn, ohves, and figs.
Palestine piuper to a modern European seenis
tmall, bemt: about the s'ze uf Belgium, less



than Holland or Hanover, and not much largci
than Wales. It contains about 11,000 square
miles. To an Israelite of the age of Mose*
such a land would appear sufficiency " large ;"
for it was considerably larger than the entire
Delta of Egypt, whereof his nation occupied
the smaller half ; and it fell but little short of
the entire cultivable area of the whole land of
Egypt, which was the greatest and most
powerful country known to him. It may be
added that the land included in the covenant
which God made with Abraham (Gen. xv.
18 — 21), and actually possessed by David and
Solomon (1 K. iv. 21), was a " good land
and a large," according even to modem no-
tions, including (as it did) besides Pales-
tine the whole of Syria, and thus contain-
ing an area of from 50,000 to 60,00P square
miles. The phrase flowing with milk and
honey, first used here, and so common in
the later hooks (Num. xiii. 27; Deut. xxvi.
9, 15 ; xxxi. 20 ; Jer. xi. 5 ; xxxii. 22 ; Ezek.
XX. 6, etc.) was probably a proverbial expres-
sion for " a land of plenty, and not inteuded
literally. See what the spies say. Num. xiii. 27

The enumeration of the nations of Palestine
here made is incomplete, five only of the ten
whose land was promised to Abraham (Gen.
XV. 19 — 21) being expressly mentioned. One,
however, that of the Hivites, is added. We
may suppose that they had succeeded to the
Kenizzites or the Kadmonites of Abraham's
time. The only important omission is that of
the Girgashites, who hold their place in most
other enumerations (Gen. i. 16 ; xv. 21 ;
Deut. vii. 1 ; Josh. iii. 10 ; xxiv. 11, etc.), but
seem to have been the least important of the
" seven nations,"and are omitted in Judg. iii. 5.
(" Girgashites " is introduced in the Samaritan
version and the Sept.)

Ver. 9. — This is a repetition, in substance,
of ver. 7, on account of the long parenthesis in
ver. 8, and serves to introduce verse 10. The
nexus is : "I have seen the oppression — I
am come down to deliver them — come now,
therefore, I will send thee "

Ver. 11. — ^And Moses said . . . Who am I,
that I should go, etc. A great change had
come over Moses. Forty years earlier he had
been fon\'ai-d to offer himself as a " deliverer."
He " went out " to his brethren and slew one
of their oppressors, and " supposed his brethren
would have understood how that God by his
hand would deliver them " (Acts vU. 25).
" But they understood not " (ihid.) They
declined to accept him fos leader, they re-
proached him with setting himself up to be
" a ruler and a judge " over them. And now,
taught by this lesson, and sobered by forty
yeara of inaction, he has become timid and
distrustful of himself, and shrinks from putting
himself forward. Who am I, that I should
go to Pharaoh 1 What weight can 1, a fo-
reigner, forty years an exile, with the mannen



, in. 12— iB.]



'IHffi BOOK OF EXODUS.



a



of a rough shepherd, expect to have with
the mighty monarch of all Egypt — the son of
Rameses the Great, the inheritor of his power
•nd his glories ? And agam, Who am I, that
I should bring forth the children of Israel t
What weight can I expect to have with my
countrymen, who will have forgotten me —
whom, moreover, I could not influence when I
was ii( my full vigour — who then " refused "
my guidance and forced me to quit them?
Trae diifidence speaks in the words used —
there is no ring of insincerity in them ; Moses
was noW as distrustful of himself as in former
days he, had been confident, and when he had
become fit to be a deliverer, ceased to think
bimself fit.

Ver. 12. — Certainly I will be with thee.
Literally, '■ Since I will be with thee." Moses
had excused himself On the ground of unfit-
ness. (Jod replies — "Thou wilt not be imfit,
rince I will be with thee — 1 will supply thy
deficiencies — I will impart all the qualities
thou needcst — and this shall be a sign unto
thee of my power and faithfulness — this shall
assure thee that I am not sending thee upon a
fruitless errand — it is determined in my coun-
sels that not only shalt thou succeed, and lead
the people out, but after that — when thou hast
so done — thou and they together shall serve
me on this mountain." The " sign " was one
which appealed to faith only, like that given
to Hezekiah by Isaiah (I K. xix. 29), but, if
accepted, it gave a full assurance — the second
step involved the first — ^the end implied the
means — if Moses was of a certainty to bring
the Israelites to Sinai, he must first lead them
out of Egypt — ^he must in some way or other
triumph over all the difficulties which would
beset the undertaking.

Ver. 13. — ^What is his namel It is not at
all clear why Moses should suppose that the
Israelites would ask him this question, nor
does it even appear that they did ask it.
Perhaps, however, he thought that, as the
Egyptians used the word " god," generically,
and had a special name for each particular
god — as Ammon, Phthah, Ka, Mentu, Hor,
Os . is, and the like — when he told his people
of " the God of their fathers," they would con-
clude that he, too, had a proper name, and
would wish to know it. The Egyptians set
much store by the names of their gods, which
ia every case had a meaning. Ammon was
"the concealed (god)," Phthah, "the re-
vealer," Ra, " the swift," etc. Hitherto Israel's
<Jod had had no name that could be called a
proper name more than any other. He had
Le . knuwn as " El," " The High ;" " Shad-
dai," " The Strong ;" and " Jehovah," " The
Existent ;" but these terms had all been felt
to be descriptive epithets, and none of them
llad passed as yet into a proper name. What
was done at this time, by the authority of God
liimself, was to select from among the epithets
one to be distinctly a pioper name, and »* the



same time to explain its true meaning ai
something more than "The Existent" — aj
really " The Alone Existent " — the source of
all existence. Henceforth this name, which
had previously been but little used and per-
haps less imderstood, predominated over every
other, was cherished by the Jews themselves
as a sacred treasure, and recognised by those
around them as the proper appellation of the
one and only God whom the Israelites wor-
shipped. It is found in this sense on the
Moabite stone (' Records of the Past,' vol. xi.,
p. 166), in the fragments of Philo-Byblius, and

Ver. 14.— I AM THAT I AM. No better
translation can be given of the Hebrew words.
" I will he that I mill be " (Geddes) is more
literal, but less idiomatic, since the Hebrew was
the sunplest possible form of the verb substan-
tive. " I am because I am " (Boothroyd) is
wrong, since the word aeher is certainly the
relative. The Septuagint, 'Eyti e\)u 6 &v, ex-
plains rather than translates, but is otherwise
unobjectionable. The Vulgate, sum qui sum,
has absolute exactness. The idea expressed by
the name is, as already explained, that of real,
perfect, unconditioned, independent existence.
I AM hath sent me to yon. " I am " is an
abbreviated form of " I am that I am," and i«
intended to express the same idea.

Ver. 15. — The lord God. In the original
Jehovah ehhey — "Jehovah, God of your
fathers," etc. The name is clearly an equiva-
lent of the "I am" in the preceding verse
The exact mode of its formation from the old
root hava, " to be," is still disputed among the
best Hebraists. This is my name for ever.
Henceforth there will be no change — this will
be my most appropriate name so long as the
world endures — " The Existent " — " The Alone
Existent" — "He that is, and was, and is to
come " (Rev. i. 4, 8 ; iv. 8 ; xi. 17 ; xvi. 5).
My memorial. The name whereby I am to be
spoken of.

Ver. 16. — Gather the elders. It is gene-
rally thought that we are to understand by
" the elders " not so much the more aged men,
as those who bore a certain oSicial rank and
position among their brethren, the heads of
the vaiious houses (ch. vi. 14, 25 ; xi. 21),
who exercised a certain authority even during
the worst times of the oppression. Moses was
first to prevail on them to acknowledge his
mission, and was then to go with them to
Pharaoh and make his representation (ver. 18).
I have surely visited you. The words are a
repetition of those used by Joseph on his
deathbed (Gen. 1. 24), and may be taken to
mean, " I have done as Joseph prophesied — I
have made his words good thus far. Expect,
therefore, the completion of what he pro-
mised."

Ver. 18.— They shall hearken to thy voica
Moses thought they would despise him — turn
a deaf ear to his words — ^look unon him ai



THK BOOK OP EXODUS.



[cH. in. 19—22,



Bnworthy of credit. But it was not so. The
hearts of men are in God's hands, and he dis-
posed those of the elders to receive the mes-
sage of his servant, Moses, favourably, and
believe in it. (See ch. iv. 29—31.) Thou
(halt come, thou and the elders of Israel,
unto the king of Egypt. This future is per-
haps one of command rather than of prophetic
announcement. The elders do not seem to
have actually made their appearance before
Pharaoh. (See ch. v. 1 — i.) Thoymay, how-
ever, have authorised Moses and Aaron to
speak in their name. The Lord Ood of the
Hebrews hath met irith us. Through our
representative Moses. " Met with us " is un-
doubtedly the true meaning. That we may
■aorifice. There was reticence here, no doubt,
but no falseness. It was a part of God's de-
sign that sacrifice, interrupted during the
sojourn in Egypt for various reasons, should
be resumed beyond the bounds of Egypt by
His people. So much of his purpose, and no
more, he bade Moses lay before Pharaoh on
the fast occasion. The object of the reticence
was not to deceive Pharaoh, but to test him.

Ver. 19. — I am sure. Literally, " I know,"
a better rendering, since, " I am sure " implies
something less than knowledge. No, not by a
mighty hand. Or " not even by a mighty
hand." Pharaoh will not be willing to let you
go even when my mighty hand is laid upon
him. (See ch. viii. 15, 19, 32; ix. 12, 35;
X. 20, 27.) " But by strong hand " (marg.)
is a rendering which the rules of grammar do
not permit.

Vei 20. — I will stretch out my hand. To
encourage Moses amd the people, to support
them in what was, humanly speaking, a most
unequal contest, this important promise is
made. It is a confirmation, and to some
extent, an explanation of the pledge already
given, " Certainly I wiU be with thee "
(ver. 12). It shows how God would be with
him — ^he would smite Egypt with all his
wonders — what those would be was left ob-
scure. He would come to his people's aid,
■nd openly assert himself, and afflict and strike
terror into their enemies — until at last even
Pharaoh's stubborn spirit would be broken,
•nd he wouia consent to let them go.

Vers. 21, 22.— The "spoiling of the Egyp-
tians " has called forth much bitter «)nmient. '
(See Kalisch, note on Ex. iii. 22.) It has
been tenned a combination of " fraud, decep-
tion and theft*' — "base deceit and nefarious



fraud " — " glaring villainy," and the like. The
unfortunate translation of a verb meaning
" ask " by " borrow " in ver. 22, has greatly
helped the objectors. In reality, what God
here commanded and declared was this : — The
Israelite women were told on the eve of their
departure from Egypt to ask presents (bakh-
sheesh) from their rich Egyptian neighbours,
as a contribution to the necessary expenses of
the long journey on which they were entering ;
and God promised that he would so favourably
incline the hearts of these neighbours towards
' them, that, in reply to their request, articles
of silver and of gold, together with raiment,
would be freely and bounteously bestowed on
them — so freely and so bounteously, that they
might clothe and adorn, not only themselves,
but their sons and daughters, with the pre-
sents ; and the entire result would be that,
instead of quitting Egypt like a nation of
slaves, in rags and permiless, they would go
forth in the, guise of an army of conquerors,
laden with the good things of the country,
having (with their own good-will) " spoiled
the Egyptians." No fraud, no deceit, was to-
be practised — the Egyptians perfectly well
understood that, if the Israelites once went,
they would never voluntarily return — they
were asked to give and they gave— with the
result that Egypt was " spoUed." Divine
justice sees in this a rightful nemesis. Op-
pressed, wronged, down-trodden, miserably
paid for their hard labour during centuries,
the Israelites were to obtain at the last some-
thing like a compensation for their ill-usage ;
the riches of Africa were to be showertd od
them. Egypt, "glad at their departing,"
was to build them a bridge of gold to expedite
their flight, and to despoil herself in order to
enrich her quondam slaves, of whom she was,
under the circumstances, delighted to be rid.

Ver. 22. — Borrow. The Hebrew wori
means simply " ask " (aiV^o-Ei, LXX. ; postula ■
bit, Vulg.). Of her neighbours. The inter-
mixture to some extent of the Egyptians with-
the Hebrews in Goshen is here again implied,,
as la chs. i. and ii. And of her that sojaurU'
eth in her house. Some of the Israelites, it
would seem, took in Egyptian lodgers superior
to them in wealth and rank. 'This implies
more friendly feeling between the two nations
than we should have expected ; but it is quite
natural that, after then: long stay in Egypt,
the Hebrews should have made a certain
number of the Egyptians their friends.



HOMILETICS.

Vera. 1, 2. — The Burning Bush. — ^All nations have seen in fiw something emhlematlo-
of the Divine nature. The Vedio Indians made Agni (fire) an actual god, and sang
hymns to him with more fervour than to almost any otW deity. The Persians-
maintained perpetual fires on their fire-altars, and suppo!<«c tbem to have a divim
character. Hephaistos in the Ureek and Vulcan in the t^vaoi mythology- war*



otnH— 6. THE BOOK OP EXODUS. B»

fire-gods; and Baal, Chemosh, Moloch, Tabiti, Orotal, etc., represented more or leas
the same idea. Fire is in itself pure and purifying; in its effects mighty and
terrible, or life-giving and, comforting. Viewed as light— its ordinary though not
nniversal concomitant — it is bright, glorious, dazzling, illuminative, soul-cheering.
God under the Old Covenant revealed himself m fire, not only upon this occasion,
but at Sinai (oh. xix. 18 ; xxiv. 17), to Manoah (Judg. xiii. 20), to Solomon
(2 Chr. vii. 1—3), to ilzekiel (Ezek. i. 4r— 28), to Daniel (Dan. vu. 9, 10) ; under
the New Covenant, he is declared to be "a consuming fire" (Heb. xii. 29), " tlie
Lii:ht of the world" (John viii. 12), "the True Light" (i6. i. 9), "the S\m of
Ei-hteousness." Of all material things nothing is so suitable to represent Hod
as this wonderful creation of his, so bright, so pure, so terrible, so comforting !
To Moses God i-eveals himself not merdy in fire, but in a " burning bush." in this
respect the revelation is abnormal — nay, unique, without a parallel. Surely this was
done, not merely to rouse his curiosity, but to teach him some lesson or other. 1 1 is
well to consider what lesson or lessons may have been intended by it. First, Moses
would see tliat " the ways of God were not as man's ways ; " that, instead of coming
with as much, he came with as little, display as po.-sible ; instead of showing all his
f>lory and lighting up all Sinai with unendurable radiance, he condescended to appear
in a small circumscribed fiame, and to rest upon so mean, so poor, so despised an object
as a thorn-bush. God " choostth the weak things of the world to confound the strong ;"
anything;; is sufficient for his purpose. He creates worlds with a word, destroys kingdom*
with a breath, cures diseases with clay and spittle or the hem of a garment, revolu-
tionises the earih by a group of fishermen. Secondly, he would see the spirituality of
God. Even when showing himself in tlie form of fire, he was not fire. Material fire
would have burnt up the bush, have witliered its lair boughs and blasted its green
leaves in a moment of time ; this fire did not scathe a single twig, did not injure even
the most delicate just-opening bud. '1 hirdly, he might be led on to recognise God's
tenderness. God's mercy is " over all his u orks," he will not hurt one of them unneces-
sarily, or without an object. He " careth for cattle " (Jonah iv. 11), clothes the lilies with
glory (Matt. vi. 28 — 30), will not let a sparrow fall to the ground needlessly (ib. x. 29).
Lastly, hemiglit learn that the presence of God is "consuming" only of what is evil.
Of all else it is preservative, (jod was present with his people in Egypt, and his
presence preserved them in that furnace of affliction. God was present in each devout
and humble heart of his true followers, and his presence kept them from the fiery
darts of the Wicked One. God would be present through all time with his Church
and with his individual worshippers, not as a destroying, but as a sustaining, preserving,
glorifying influence. His spiritual fire would rest upon them, envelop them, encircle
them, yet would neither injure nor absorb their Ufe, but support it, maintain it,
strengthen it.

Ver. 3. — The impulse to draw nigh. Moses saw a strange sight; one that he had
never seen before ; one that struck him with astonishment. His natural impulse wan
to inquire into its cause. God has implanted in us all this instinct, and we sh( ii Id
do ill if we were to combat it. Natural phenomena are within reason's sphere ; ai^d
Moses, who had never yet seen a supernatural sight, could not but suppose, at first
beholding it, that the burning bush was a natural phenomenon. That he approached
toycxamine is.an, indication that he ^i^as a man g( spirit and intelligence ; not a coward
who might have, feared some snare,, not' careless and unobservant, as too many country
folk ate. ; He drew. near to see more clearly, and to use his other senses in discovering
what the " great thing" was — acting like a sensible man and one who had had a good
education.

Vers. 4 — 6. — The prohibition, and the ground of it. Suddenly the steps of the
inquirer are arrested. Wonder upon wonder ! a voice calls to him out of the bush,
and calls him by his own name, " Moses, Moses ! " Now must have dawned on
him the conviction that it was indeed a "great thing" which he was witnessing;
that the ordinary course of nature was broken in upon ; that he was about to be
the recipient of one of those wonderful commimications which God from time in
time had vouchsafed to his forefathers, as to Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isauc, and



60 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. in. 7— la

Israel. Hence his submissive, child-like answer, " Here I am." (Compare 1 Sam. iiL
4, 6.) Then came the solemn prohibition, " Draw not nigh hither.'' Man, until sanctified,
until brought into covenant, must not approach near to the dread presence of the
Supreme Being. At Sinai Moses was commanded to " set bounds " to keep the people
off, that no one might " go up into the mount, nor touch the border of it " (ch. xix. 12),
The men of Bethshemesh were smitten with death, to the number of 50,070, for
looking into the ark of the covenant (1 Sam. vi. 19). Uzzah was slain for pjttlzg
forth his hand to touch it, when he thought that there was danger of its falling (2 Sara,
vi. 7). God, under the Old Covenant, impressed on man in a multitude of ways his
imapproachableness. Hence all the arrangements of the Temple ; the veil guarding the
sanctuary, into which only the high-priest could enter once in the year; the main
temple-building, only to be entered by the priests ; the courts of the Levites, of the
Israelites, and of the Gentiles, each more and more remote from the Divine Presence.
Uence the purifications of the priests and of the Levites before they could acceptably
offer sacrifice ; hence the carrying of the Ark by means of staves forming no part of it ;
hence the-^side-chambers of .the Temple, emplaced on " rests " in the walls, " that the
beams should not be fastened in the walls of the house" (1 Kings vi. 6). It was so
needful to impress on men, apt to conceive of God as " such an one as themselves,"
his awful majesty, purity, and holiness, that artificial barriers were everywhere created
to check man's rash intrusion into a Presence for which he was unf.t. Thus reverence
was taught, man was made to know and to feel his own un worthiness, and, little by
little, came to have some faint conception of the absolute perfectness and incomprehen-
sible greatness of the Supreme One. Further, God being such as this, each place
where he makes himself manifest, becomes at once holy ground. Though "heaven
is his throne, and earth his footstool," and no " place " seems worthy of him or
can contain him, yet it pleases him, in condescension to our infirmities and our
finiteness, to choose some spots rather than others where he will make himself
known and make his presence felt. And these at once are sacred. So was the mount
to which Moses went up; so was Shiloh; so was Araunah's threshingfloor ; so was
Jerusalem. And so in our own days are churches and the precincts of churches.
God's presence, manifested in them, albeit spiritually and not materially, hallows them.
And the reverent heart feels this, and cannot but show its reverence by outward
signs. In the East shoes were put off. With us the head should be uncovered, the
voice hushed, the eye cast down. We should feel that " God is in the midst of us."
So felt Moses, when God had proclaimed himself (ver. 6), and not only bared his
feet as commanded, but shrouded his face in his robe — " for he was afraid to look uji m
God." All his own sinfulness and imperfection rushed to his thought, all his un worthi-
ness to behold God and live. Jacob had once seen God " face to face," and had
marvelled that " his life was preserved" (Gen. xxxii. 30). Moses shut out the awful
Vision. So Klijah, on the same site, when he heard the "still small voice" (1 Kings
xix. 13) ; and so even the seraphim who wait continually before God's Throne in
heaveT. (Is. vi. 2). Consciousness of imperfection forces the creature to stand abashed
in the presence of the Creator.

Vers. 7 — 10. — The call of Moses, With face covered, but with ears attent to hoar, Moses
stands before God to learn his will. And God takes him, as it were, into counsel, not
only calling him to a certain work, but revealing to him why he is called, what exactly
he is to do, and what will be the issue of his enterprise. 1. Why he is called. He is
called because the affliction of Israel — their sufferings — from the constant toil, from the
brutal taskmasters, from the cruel Pharaoh, from the apparent hopelessness of their
position — had reached to such a point that God could allow it to go on no longer.
There is a point at which he will interfere to vindicate the oppressed and punish the
wrong-doers, even if the oppressed are too much crushed, too downtrodden, too
absolutely in despair, to cry to him. Their case calls to him ; their " blood cries from
the ground." But in this instance actual despair had not been reached. His people
had " cried to him." And here was a second reason why he should interfere. God is
never deaf to any prayers addressed to him for succour; he may not always grant
them, but he hears them. And if they are sustained, and earnest, an'l justified by the ■
occasion, he grants them. tSuch was the case now, and Moses was called because ol



.aH.ni.il.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 9i

the extreme affliction of the Israelites, and because of their prolongM and parnest cry
to God under it. 2. Moses is told What he is to do. He is to " oring forth th«
children of Israel out of Egypt " (ver. 10) ; and, as a preliminary step, he is to " go to
' Pharaoh" (iiirf.). Thus he is directed to return to Egypt forthwith, and to put
himself into communication with the new king who had succeeded the one from whom
he had fled. So much is made clear to him. He, an exile for forty years, and a mere
hireling shepherd of the desert during that space, is to seek an interview with the great
monarch of all Egypt, and to plead the cause of his people-before him — to endeavour to
induce him to " let them go." A difficult enterprise, to say the least ; humanly
speaking, a hopeless one. How should a king be induced to allow the departure of
600,000 able-bodied labourers, whose condition was that of state slaves, who could be
set to any work which the king had in hand — to keep cattle, or make bricks, or build
oities, or erect walls, or excavate canals ? What inducement was to be offered to him
to make the sacrifice? Such thoughts would naturally occur to Moses under the
circumstances, and would naturally have risen to his lips but for the distinct announce-
ment made with regard to the further point. 3. What would be the issue of the
EKTEKPRisK. The Divinc declaration, " I am come down to deliver them, and to bring
them up out of that land into a good land and a large," was so definite and clear a
statement, so positive a promise of success, as to override all objections on the score
of the task being an impossible one. God " had come down to deliver " his people,
and would undoubtedly do it, whatever opposition was raised. Ihus, to counteract
the despondency which the consideration of the existing facts and circumstances was
calculated to produce, there was held forth before Moses the positive assurance of
•uccess ; the certainty that God would make good his word ; would, however difficult
it seemed, lead his people forth, deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptian, and
make them the masters of another land, large and good, flowing with milk and honey,
into possession of which they would enter through his might and by his irresistible
kssistance.

Ver. 11. — Fitness of Moses to be Oocfs instrument in ddiverinij Israel. The fitnew
of Moses to be Israel's deliverer will appear if we consider, first. What were the qualities
which the part of deliverer required ; secondly, how far they were united in him ; and
thirdly, what reasons there are for believing that, at the time, they were not united to
the same extent in any other person. 1. NECESSAnr qualities of the Deliverer. As
having to deal,in the first instance, with a great king and his court, it was necessary
that the Deliverer should be familiar with the habits of the court, should be able to
■ssume its manners, speak its language, and not unwittingly infringe its etiquette.
Not being set merely to petition, but to require — to prefer demands — it was requisite
that he should feel himself, socially, on a par with the monarch, so as not to be timid
or abashed before him, but able without difficulty to assert himself, to use freedom ot
speech, to talk as prince with prince, and not as mere courtier with monarch. Again,
as having to meet and baffle Egyptian priests, and further, to be not only the Deliverer,
but the Teacher and Educator of his nation, it was to the last degree necessary that he
should be " learned in all the wisdom " of the time ; that he should have had as good
an education as any other man of the day ; be able to foil the priests with their own
weapons ; and, after delivering his people out of bondage, be capable of elevating them,
instructing them, advancing them from a rabble of slaves into an orderly, self-sufficient,
fairly-enlightened, if not highly-civilised, nation. Once more : a moral fitness was
necessary. '1 he Deliverer needed to have high aspirations, a bold spirit, fervent zeal,
and yet to have all these under control ; to be calm, quiet, self-contained, imperturb-
able in danger, persevering, prompt, considerate. Moreover, he needed to be a religious
man. Anyone not upheld by h gh religious principle, anyone not possessed of deep
and true faith, would have fallen away in some of the trials through which the nation
had to pass; would have d- spaired, or murmured, or "lusted after evil things" (1 Cor.
X. 6), or waxed proud and wanton, or grown weary of seemingly interminable wan-
derings, and settled down in Arabia or even returned to Egypt. 2. Moses' possession or
IHD.SE qualities. Moses was familiar with the customs of the Kgyptian court, having
been brought up in the household of a princess, and been himself a courtier until he
was nearly forty years of age. Though he had subsequently spent forty years in th«



« THE BDOK OF EXODUS. [oh. in. 11— 16.

desert, tliis would not unfit him ; since, in the first place, Egyptian manners and custonw
were unchanging ; and i^econdly, life in the desert is at no time a bad school of mannen.
Arabian ^shepherds are not like European ones. As much politeness is often seen in
the tent of a Bedouin as in the drawiugroom of an empress. Moses probably thought
that his forty years' of seclusion rendered him less suited for the atmosphere of a court,
but he was probably mistaken. What he may have lost in polish he gained in sim-
plicity, directness, and general force of character. Moses, again, could speak with the
Fbaraoh almost as an equal, since as the adopted son of a princess he had bee*
accounted a prince, and may even, before his flight, have met MenejAthah in thu
royal palace on terms of social equality. *0n the education and "wisdom" of Moses
we have already descanted, and it will scarcely be questioned that in these respects he
was eminently fitted for the part assigned to him by Providence. His character, too,
as chastened and ripened in Midian, made him exceptionally fit. Audacity, high
aspirations, strong sympathies, a burning zeal, had shown themselves in the conduct
that led to his exile. '1 hese. had been disciplined and brought under control by the
influences of desert life, which had made him calm, self-contained, patient, persevering,
considerate, without quenching his zeal or taming, his high sipirit. ; And of his religious
principle there is no question. If he angered God once by " speaking unadvisedly "
(Ps. cvi. 33 ; Num. xx. 10), this does but show that he was human, and therefore not
perfect. Apart from this one occasion his conduct as leader of the people is, as nearly
as possible, blameless. And his piety is everywhere conspicuous. 3. No one but Moses
POSSESSED THE NECESSABY QUALITIES. With the limited knowledge that we possess, the
negative is incapiible of positive proof. But, so far as our historical knowledge goes,
there is no one who can be named as possessing any one of the necessary quahties in
a higher degree than Moses, much less as uniting them all. No Hebrew but Moses
had had, so fur as we know, the advantages of education and position enjoyed by
Moses. No Egyptian would have been trusted by the Hebrew nation and accepted as
iheir leader. No one who was neither Egyptian nor Hebrew would have had any
weight with either people. Thus Moses was the one and only possible deliverer,
«3i;actly fitted by Providence for the position which it was intended he should take :
raised up, saved, educated, trained by God to be his instrument in delivering his
people, and so exactly fitted for the purpose.

Vers. 11 — 12. — Moses' timidity notwithstanding his fitness. It is not often that
those are most confident of their powers who are fittest for God's work. Great
capacity is constantly accompanied by a humble estimate of itself. Jeremiah's
reply when God called, him was : " Ah! Lord God, I cannot speak, for I am a child"
{Jer. i. 6). Newton seemed to himself a child gathering shells upon the shores of
the ocean of Truth. The exclamation of Moses, " Who am I that I should go," etc.
has been echoed by thousands. If, however, God's call is clear, the voice of self-
depreciation is not to be much listened to. He knows best whether we are fit to work
out his purposes, or no. Whether the call is to be an ordinary minister, or a
missionary, or a bishop, or a civil leader, the foremost in a political movement, or a
general at the crisis of a war, or anything else, too much timidity ought not to ba
shown. There is cowardice in shrinking from responsibility. If the call be clearly
from without, not courted by ourselves, not sought, not angled for, not assignable to
any unworthy motive, then it is to be viewed as God's call ; and the proper answer is
" Speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth." Unfit as we may think ourselves, we may be
sure that he will not leave us to ourselves — his grace will be suflScient for us — he will
give us all the strength we need.

Vers. 13 — 15. — God's revelation of himself under the name JeJ>rvah,and the meaning
of it. At first sight the name by which God shall be called may seem unimportant, si
it is unimportant whether a man be called TuUy or Cicero. But, originally, each name
that is given to God is significant ; and according as one name or another is commonly
used, one idea or another of the Divine nature will be prevalent. Hitherto God had
been known mainly to the Semites as El, iiliun, Elohim, " Exalted, Lofty," or Sladdai,
" Strong, Powerful." Another name known to them, but rarely used, was JHVH,
" Existent." (The vocalisation of the name has been lost, and is uncertain.) God was



,1D IS— 18.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



now asked by Moses under what name he should speak of him to the Israelites, and
was bidden to speak of him as JHVH. What, then, was the full meaning of JHVH,
and why was it preferred to the other names ? Probably as a security against poly-
theism. When words expressive of such attributes as exaltation, strength, knowledge,
goodness, beautifulness, even creative energy, are made into names of God, there is a
temptation at once to extend them from the one to the many, from the possessor of
the attribute in the highest degree to others who possess it, or are supposed to posses*
it, in a high degree. Thus all such words come to be used in the plural, and the way
is paved for polytheism. But if God is called " the Existent," this danger disappears ;
for there are but two kinds or degrees of existence, viz., self-existence, and created,
dependent existence. " The Existent " must mean " the Self-Existent," who must
necessarily be One. Hence JHVH never had a plural. The only way by which aa
Israelite could become a polytheist was by deserting Jehovah altogether and turning to
Elohim. In vindicating to himself the name Jehovah, " He who exists," or " He who
alone exists," God declared himself to be — 1, eternal; 2, uncaused; 3, unconditioned;
4, independent ; 5, self-sufficient. He placed agulf,, profound— not to be bridged —
between himself and every other being. He indicated that all other gods were
unrealities — breath, vapour, shadows of shades; that he alone was real, stable, to
be trusted; and that in him his worshippers might have "quietness and assuranca
tor ever."

Ver. J.6. — The Divine injwaction to gather the elders. God here added another
injunction to those which he had previously given (ver. 10), as to the modus operandi
which Moses was to adopt. He was to go to the children of Israel, but not immediately
or as the first step. Before making any appeal to them he was, in the first instance, to
" gather the elders of Israel together." In this is involved a principle of very generfd
application. When great designs are on hand, consultation should first be with the
few. With the few matters can be calmly and quietly di.scussed, without passion
or prejudice ; questions can be asked, explanations given. And the few will have
influence with the many. This was the whole idea of ancient government, which
was by a king, a council, and an assembly of the people, which last was expected to
ratify the council's decision. Direct appeal to the masses is, as much as possible, to
be avoided. The masses are always, comparatively speaking, ignorant, stolid, unim-
pressible. Great ideas take root and grow by being first communicated in their fulness
to a " little flock," who spread them among their companions and acquaintance, until
at length they prevail generally. So our Lord called first the Twelve, and then
the Seventy, and made known his doctrine to them, leaving it to them to form the
Church after his ascension.

Vers. 17, 18. — The promises to the elders, and to Moses. The elders were promised
two things : (1) that they should be brought forth out of the affliction of Egypt,
and (2) that they should be established in a good land, " a land flowing with milk
and honey." Ordinary men — men who are, spiritually speaking, backward and
undeveloped — require to be stirred to action by comparatively low motives. Escape
from present suffering and unpleasantness, enjoyment of happiness in the future —
these are practically the two chief moving powers of human action. Neither of
them is a wrong motive ; and Moses was instructed to appeal to each by a special
promise. So may the preacher rightly do with his congregation, the minister with his
flock, the father with his children. As long as men are what they are, appeals to the
lower motives cannot be dispensed with at first. Care must, however, be taken that
before each one, as he becomes fit for it, higher motives are set — such as duty, the love
of goodness for goodness' sake, and — last, not least — the highest motive of all, the love of
God, our Creator, Sustainer, Sanctifier, " in whom we live, and move, and have our being."
Moses was promised at this point, to stimulate him to action, immediate success.
He had doubted whether his people would listen to him, or regard him as anything but
a dreamer. He is told, " they shall hearken unto thy voice." A great comfort to
every one who feels that he has a mission is the acceptance of it by others. Each man,
more or less, misdoubts himself, questions his own ability, sincerity, singleness of
heart. The seal of an apostleship is the success of the apostolic efibrts (1 Cor. is. 2).



54 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. ch. in. 1&-^'^

Direct promise of success at the mouth of God was, to one so faithful as MoseSi
•s powerful to cheer, encourage, and sustain, as .success itself.

Vers. 19, 20. — Pharaoh's ohduracy, and Ood's mode of overcoming it. There are
stubborn hearts which no warnings can impress, no lessons teach, no pleading, even of
God's Spirit, bend. With such he " will not always strive." After they have resisted him
till his patience is exhausted, he will break them, crush them, overrule their opposi-
tion, and make it futile. God's will surely triumphs in the end. , But it imay be long
first. God is so patient, so enduring, so long-sufiering, that he will permit for months,
or even years, the contradiction of sinners against himself. He will not interfere with
the exercise of their free-will. He will warn, chide, chasten, afflict, contend with the
' sinner ; try him to the uttermost ; seek to lead him to repentance ; give him chance
' after chance. But he will not compel him to submit himself; man may resist to the
last; and even "curse God and die" at war with him. The final success in such a
- struggle cannot, however, rest with man. God " will not alway be chiding, neither
keepeth he his anger for ever." At the fitting time he " stretches forth his hand and
smites " the sinner, strikes him down, or sets him aside, as the storm-wind sets aside a
feeble barrier of frail rushes, and works his own will in his own way. Mostly he works
by natural causes ; but now and again in the history of the world he has asserted
himself more openly, and has broken the power and chastised the pride of a Pharaoh, a
Benhadad, or a Sennacherib, in a miraculous way. Such manifestations of his might
produce a marked effect, causing, as they do, "all the kingdoms of 'the earth to know
that he is the Lord God, and he only" (2 Kings xix. 19).

Vers. 21, 22. — God brings good out of evil. Had Pharaoh yielded at the firstj the
Egyptians would have seen the departure of Israel with regret, and would have in no
way facilitated it. The opposition of the king and court, the long struggle, the ill-
usage of the Israelites by the monarch who so often promised to relea-se them, and so
often retracted his word, awoke a sympathy with the Israelites, and an interest in them,
which would have been altogether lacking had there been no opposition, no struggle, no
ill-usage. Again, the plagues, especially the last, thoroughly alarmed the Egyptians,
and made them anxious to be quit of such dangerous neighbours. " Egypt was glad of
their departing, for they were afraid of them " (Ps. cv. 38). But for Pharaoh's obduracy
the plagues would not have been sent ; and but for the plagues the departing Israelites
would not have been looked upon by the Egyptians with the " favour " which led to
their going out laden with gifts. Thus Pharaoh's stubbornness, though jt led to their
Bufferings being prolonged, led also to their final triumphant exit, as spoilers, not as
spoiled, laden with the good things of Kgypt, "jewels of silver and jewels of gold," and
/ich apparel, the best that the Egyptians had to offer. History presents an infinitude
of similar cases, where the greatest advantages have been the result of oppression and
wrong. Extreme tyranny constantly leads to the assertion of freedom ; anarchy to the
firm establishment of law ; defeat and ill-usage by a conqueror to the moral recovery of
a declining race or nation. Each man's experience will tell him of the good that has
arisen to him individually from sickness, from disappointment, from bereavement, from
what seemed at the time wholly evil. God brings good out of evil in a thousand mar-
vellous ways ; at one time by turning the hearts of oppressors, at another by raising
the tone and spirit of the oppressed; now by letting evil run riot until it produces
general disgust, anon by making use of adverse circumstances to train a champion and
deliverer. Countless are the evidences that God causes evil to work towards good ; uses
it as an instrument — evolves his own purposes, in part, by its means, vindicating thug
his absolute lordship over all, and showing that evil itself, though it fight against him,
cannot thwart him.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 5. — Moses at the bush. We do not now see burning bushes, or hear voices
calling to us from their midst. The reason is, that we do not need them. The series
of historical revelations is complete. Revelation in the sense of the communication of
new truth— of truth beyond the range of our natural faculties, or not cai)able of being



ett.m.1— 6.J THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 65

derived, under the guidance of God's Spirit, from revelations already given — ^is not to be
expected. The Bihle is the sum of God's authoritative revelations to the race. This
bush, e.g., still bums for us in Scripture, where at any time we can visit it, and hear
God's voice speaking out of it. But in another sense, revelation is not obsolete. It is
not a tradition of the past, but a living reality. It has its objective side in the con-
tinuous (non-miraculous) revelation going on in nature (Ps. xix. 1 ; Rom. i. 19, 20)
and history (Acts xvii. 26, 27); and in the tokens of a supernatural presence and
working in the Church (Matt, xxviii. 20 ; 1 Thess. i. 3 — 10 ; Rev. ii. 1). And it has
its subjective side in the revelation (mediate) of Divine things to the soul by the Holy
Spirit (Eph. i. 17), and in the manifestation of God to the heart in private spiritual
experience (John xiv. 21, 23 ; Rom. v. 5 ; viii. 16). The veil between the soul and
the spiritual world is at all times a thin one. The avenues by which God can reach
devout minds are innumerable. The Word, sacraments, and prayer are special media,
the Divine Spirit taking of the things of Christ, and showing them to the soul
(John xvi. 15), illuminating, interpreting, applying, confirming. But, in truth, God is
" not far from every one of us " (Acts xvii. 27) ; and by events of providence, in
workings of conscience, through our moral and spiritual intuitions, enlightened and
purified as these are by the Word, by numberless facts of nature and life, he can still
draw near to those who tarry for him ; meets them in ways as unexpected and sur-
prising as at the burning bush ; awes them by his wonders ; flashes to them the mes-
sages of his grace. Viewing this revelation at the bush as a chapter in spiritual
history, consider —

I. The circumstances of it. The revelation came to Moses — (1) unexpectedly;
(2) while in the way of duty — he " kept the flock ; " (3) in a solemn place — " mountain
of God," a natural oratory and place of sacred repute — and probably while revolving
solemn thoughts ; (4) from a most unlooked-for quarter — a common bush ; and at first
(5) impersonally. The bush burning had no apparent relation to Moses more than to
another. It was there for him to look at, to inquire into, if he chose. It invited, but
did not compel, or even ask for, his attention. All which circumstances are significant.
1. The Divinity is ever nearer to us than we think. So Jacob, as well as Moses, found
it. " Surely God is in this place, and I knew it not " (Gen. xxviii. 16). 2. Revelations
are not to bp expected, save in the way of duty. 3. God may be met with anywhere
(John iv. 24), but some places are more favourable for communion with Ood than
others — ^tbe closet (Matt. vi. 6), the sanctuary (Ps. Ixxiii. 16, 17), natural solitudes
(Matt. xvi. 23). And revelations have usually a relation to the state of mind of those
who receive them — answering questions, resolving perplexities, affording guidance,
adapting themselves to psychological conditions (cf. Job ii. 12, 13 ; Dan. ii. 29 ; ix. 20,
21 ; X. 2 — 6 ; Acts x. 3, 10 ; 1 Cor. xii. 9 ; Rev. i. 10). It is in every way likely that
Moses' thoughts were at that moment deeply occupied about Israel's future. 4. Qo^s
discoveries of himself are marked by great condescension. Lowliness of situation is no
bar to the visits of the King of Heaven, while humility of heart is indispensable to our
feoeiving them. He who dwelt In the bush will not refuse the dwelling place of the
contrite heart (Is. Ivii. 15). God's most wonderful discoveries of himself have been
made through " base things of the world, and things which are despised" (1 Cor. ii. 28).
The highest example of this is Christ himself, of whose incarnation the angel in the
bush may be regarded as a prophecy. " He shall grow up before him as a tender plant,
and as a root out of a dry ground ; he hath no form nor comeliness," etc. (Is. liii. 2).
6. GoiPs revelations act as a moral test. This applies to the objective revelation — to the
tokens of the supernatural strewn everywhere around us in life and history, as well as
to Nature and the Bible. We may pass them unheeded, or we may draw nearer
to inquire. The Bible invites attention by the supernatural in its history, as well as by
its teachings. It is only when we draw nearer to it that the Word becomes personal,
and seizes on the conscience with spiritual power. Attention on man's part is rewarded
by further self-discovery on God's.

II. Its interest for Moses. We may connect his turning aside to see (ver. 4) —
1. With an appeal to his faculty of wonder. This is one function of miracle — to arrest
attention, and awaken in the witness of it a powerful consciousness of the Divine
presence. 2. With a general habit of devout inquiry. It may be true that " many a
man has been led tlu'ough the pale of curiosity into the sanctuary of reverence*

EX0DI7S. y



«e THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch in. 1—6.

(Parker) ; but it is also true that to a merely curious disposition God usually reveals
uttls, and to an irreverent one nothing. The habit of inquiry is as valuable, if one's
ultimate aim is in all things to become acquainted with God and his will, as in science
and philosophy, or any other form of the pursuit of knowledge; but let inquiry be
devout.. "Search the Scriptures" (John v. 39). Ponder thoughtfully events of pro-
vidence and facts of history. Study Nature with an eye to spiritual suggestions — to
underlying spiritual analogies. Give to whatever you read or hear, which seems to have
truth or value in it, the attention it deserves. Inquiry throws the mind into the atti-
tude most favourable for receiving Divine revelations. Moses was not called by name
till he " turned aside to see." 3. With the perception that in this circumstatice Uod was
specially calling him to inquire. As Moses gazed, he would be prompted to ask about
this bush — What means it ? What invisible power is here manifesting itself? Why
is it burning at this place, and at this time ? What mystery is contained in it ? Has
it a message for me ? And he would not be long in perceiving that it must be burning
there with the special view of attracting his attention. And is it not thus that the
Divine usually draws near to us ? Attention is arrested by something a little aside
from the course of ordinary experience, and the impression it makes upon us produces the
conviction that it is not unintended ; that it is, as we say, " sent ; " that it has a
meaning and message to us we do well to look into. Every man, at some point or
another in his history, has felt himself thus appealed to by the supernatural. The im-
pression may be made by a book we feel drawn to read, or by something we read in it ;
through a sermon, through some event of life, by a sickness, at a deathbed, by the
sayings an^ doings of fellow-men, or in hours of solitude, when even Nature seems
peopled with strange voices, and begins to speak to us in parables. But, originate as it
may, there is plainly in it, as in all special dealings of God with us, a call to inquire,
to question ourselves, to ask whether, from the midst of the mystery, God may not have
bome further message for our souls.

III. The bight itself. The bush that burned (ver. 2) was — 1. A token of the
Divine Presence. Moses would soon feel that he was standing in presence of the
Unseen Holy. 2. A significant emblem. It i-epresented the Israelites in their state ot
affliction, yet miraculously surviving. Possibly, in the questionings of his spirit, Moses
had not before sufficiently considered the " token for good " implied in this astonishing
preservation of the nation, and needed to have his attention directed to it. It was a
clear proof that the Lord had not cast off his people. If Israel was preserved, it could
only be for one reason, llie continued vitality, growth, and vigour of the nation was
the infallible pledge of the fulfilment of the promise. 3. An answer to prayer. For
what could be the meaning of this portent, but that the long, weary silence was at
length broken ; that the prayer, " Lord, how long ? " was at last to receive its answer ?
Faith can see great results wrapped up in small beginnings. For nothing in God's
procedure is isolated. Beginnings with God mean endings too.

IV. The personal call. As Moses wondered — 1. The reuelation became personal.
He heard himself addressed by name, " Moses, Moses " (ver. 4). Solemnised, yet with
that presence of mind which could only arise from long habituation to the idea of an
invisible spiritual world, he answered, " Here am I." This was to place himself unre-
servedly at God's disposal. Mark the order — (1) God revealing (ver. 1) ; (2) man
attending (ver. 2) ; (8) the revelation becoming personal (ver. 3). Then followed the
direction (ver. 5), " Draw not nigh hither ; put off thy shoes," etc. Thus Moses was
instructed : 2. As to the right attitude towards OocPs revelations. (1) Self-surrender ;
(2) reverence ; (3) obedience. Moses doubtless obeyed the injunction he received.
These qualities meet in all true religion : humility in hearing what Cod has to say ;
submission of mind and heart to it when said ; readiness to obey. Glance for a moment
at the requirement of reverence. One can understand how in the tumult of his feelings
at the moment — in the very eagerness of his spirit to hear what further God had to say
to him — ^Moses should be in danger of neglecting the outward tokens of the reverence
which no doubt he felt ; but it is instructive to observe that God recalls his attention
to them. We are thus taught that reverence becomes us, not only in relation to
God himself, but in relation to whatever is even outwardly connected with his presence,
worship, or revelation. Kg., in our dealing with Scripture, in the use of Divine names
and titles, in the ritual of Divine service. Ti^ attitude of the spirit is doubtless the



OB. m. 1—5.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS, CI

muD thing ; but a reverent spirit will seek for itself suitable forms of expression ; and
respect for the forms is itself a duty, and an aid in the education of the sentiment.
Those are greatly to be censured who, presuming on a supposed special intimacy with
God not granted to others, venture to take liberties, and allow themselves in a
demeanom' and in a style of expression to the Almighty at the least irreverently
familiar, and not unfrequently bordering on profanity. Raptures of piety, however
sincere, do not justify us in forgetting that in communion with God we stand on " holy
ground." — J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 5. — Hie hish and its suggestions. Glean here a few of the general sugges-
tions of the passage : —

I. Eevelation. 'I'he appearance at the bush suggestive — 1. Of the supernatural in
Nature. Bushes are aglow all around us, if only we had eyes to see them. Christ's
teaching an illustration of the spiritual suggestiveness of Nature. " Consider the lilies"
(Matt. vi. 28). The parables. 2. Of tha supernatural in common life. " Moses kept
the flock of Jethro." The Higher Presence may be with us in the humblest occupa-
tions. 3. Of the supernatural in the Churdi — (1) As a whole; (2) Individual
believers. '1 he bush, burning but not consumed, an emblem of Israel — of the Church —
enduring in tribulation. 4. i'ii the hiyher supernatural of positive revelation. Authori-
tative revelation is suspended, but the sum of its results is given m Scripture. The
Bible is the Bush of revelation, to which the student of Divine things will do well to
direct his attention.

II. Preparedness. Cultivate with Moses — 1. A spirit of duty (ver. 1). 2. A spirit
of devout inquiry (ver. 3). 3. A spirit of humility and reverence (vers. 5, 6). To such
» spirit, God — 1. Reveals himself. 2. Addresses calls to his service (ver. 4). 3. Givei
work to do. 4. Honours in its work. — J.

Ver. 2. — The lush in history. The bush had primary reference to Israel, and the fire
In the bush represented Jehovah's fiery presence in the midst of his people — 1. For
their protedion. A fire flaming forth to consume the adversaries. 2. For their purifi^
cation. God was in the fires that tried them, as well as in the power that upheld them.
The fire was thus a figurative representation at once of destroying punishment and of
refining affliction. But the bush, while burning, was not consumed. This involves
the principle that nothing, however weak and perishable in itself, with which God
connects his presence, or which he wills to continue in existence, can by any possi-
bility be destroyed. From this point of view — a thoroughly legitimate one — the
emblem admits of various applications, and directs our attention to a series of super-
natural facts yet greater than itself, and well deserving our turning aside to see.
1. There is the obvious application to the Church, which to a thoughtful mind,
pondering as it should the facts of history, is a veritable repetition of the wonder of the
bush " burning but not consumed." The bush is an emblem of the Church iu the other
respect of outward plainness and unattractiveness. And it is noteworthy that the
times when the Church has forgotten her calling to be meek and lowly in heart, and
has aspired to great outward splendour, and been ambitious of worldly supremacy, have
invariably been times of marked decline in purity and spirituality. She fares best
when content with modest outward pretensions. 2. A second application is to the
nation of the Jews — also a " sign and wonder " in history (see Keble's hymn, " The
Burning Bush "). 3. A third is to the Bible. What enmity has this book encountered,
and what fierce attempts have been made to disprove its claims, destroy its influence,
sometimes even to banish it from existence ! Yet the miraculous bush survives, and
retains to this hour its greenness and freshness, as if no fire had ever passed upon it.
4. Yet another application is to individual helieoers, against whom, while tried by fiery
trials (1 Pet. iv. 12), neither the enmity of man, the assaults of Satan, nor providential
afflictions and calamities (Job i.) are permitted to prevail, but who, under all, enjoy
a support, a peace, a comfort, plainly supernatural — "dying, and behold we live"
(2 Cor. vi. 9). Flippant observers may see in these things nothing worthy of peculiar
attention — ^Lothing which cannot be explained by ordinary historical causes ; but sober
minds will not reaidily agree with them. They will regard the facts now referred to as
trulv " great sights," and will, like Moses, reverently turn aside to inquire into them

1-2



« THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. m. 6— 11

further. Note — 1. The true glory of the Church is God in her midst. 2. The outward
weakness of the Church enhances the wonder of her preservation. 3. The Church ha«
most reason to glory in those periods of her history when she has heen most despised
and persecuted (Matt. v. 11 ; 2 Cor. xii. 9 ; 1 Pet. iv. 14). — J. 0.

Ver. 6.—T!ie Ood of the fathers. « I am the Gk)d of thy father, the God of
Abraham," etc. In these words —

I. GrOD CONNECTS HiMSELr WITH THE DEAD PATEIARCHS. They imply — 1. Continued
existence ; for God, who says here, not " I was," but " I am, the God of thy father," is, as
Christ reminds us, "not the God of the dead, but of the living" (Matt. xxii. 32). 'i'he
personal relation was not dissolved. The patriarchs still lived to him. 2. 'J he resur-
rection of the body. This will not appear a far-fetched inference, if we consider the nature
of the Bible hope of immortality. The Bible has little or nothing to say of an abstract
"immortality of the soul." It nowhere regards the disembodied state as in itself
desirable. The immortality it speaks of is the immortality of the " man " — of man in
his whole complex personality of body, soul, and spirit. This implies a resurrection.
The life forfeited by sin was a life in the body, and so must be the life restored by
Redemption. The covenant-promise could not fall below the hopes of the heathen ;
and even Egyptian theology held by the notion of a revival of the body, as essential to
perfected existence. Hence the practice of embalming, with which compare the care of
the body by the patriarchs.

II. Connects this revelation with past revelations, as one of a SERiEa,
It introduces what is to be said as the fulfilment of what had been already promised.

III. Connects himself with the existino generation. The God of the father*
Is, in virtue of the promise, the God of the children. — J. 0.

Vers. 7-^11. — Go^s sympathy with the oppressed. I. God is ever in sympathy
with the oppressed, and against their oppressors (vers. 7, 9). 'J his is now,
thanks to the Bible, made as certain to us as any truth can be. God's sympathy may
be viewed — 1. As implied in his moral perfection. 2. As certified to us by the pity of
vox own hearts. He who put pity in tiiese hearts must surely himself be pitifiiL
Yet, so much is there in the world which bears a different aspect, that — 3. It needs
revelation to assure us of it — to put the fact beyond all doubt. And the revelation has
been given. No student of God's character in the Bible can doubt that he com-
passionates. (1) His words declare it. (2) His deeds attest it. (3) The Cross
demonstrates it. And, whatever mystery surrounds God's ways at present, he will one
day make it plain by exacting a terrible retribution for aU wrongs done to the defence-
less (Ps. xii. 5 ; Jas. v. 4). 1. Comfort for the oppressed. Not one of their sighs
escapes the ear of God. 2. Warning to the oppressor.

II. Gh3D IS PECULIARLY IN SYMPATHY WITH THE OPPRESSED, WHEN THE OPPRESSED

ABB HIS OWN PEOPLE (vcrs. 7, 10). Israel was God's people — 1. As Abraham's seed —
children of the covenant — far gone indeed from righteousness, yet beloved for the
fathers' sake((Eom. xi. 28). 2. As retaining, in however corrupt a form, the worship
of the true Ood. They were his people, in a sense in which the worshippers of Osiris,
and Thoth, and the other gods of Egypt, were not. 3. As containing many true
hdievers. There was a-spiritual Israel within the natural — an " holy seed " (Is. vi. 13)
— " a remnant according to the election of grace " (Rom. xi. 5). Therefore, because
Israel was God's people, God was deeply interested in them. He knew their sorrows.
He was zealous on their behalf, as One whose own honour was concerned in what they
suffered. And as in all their afSiction he was afflicted ( Is. Ixiii. 9), so when the time
came, he would avenge them of their adversaries. Believers l.ave the same consolation
in enduring trial (2 Thess. 4 — 10).

III. God's sympathy with the oppressed is shown by his mercifully inteb-
posiNO ON THEIR BEHALF. As he interposed for Israel — as he has often interposed for
his Church since — as he interposed for the salvation of the world, when, moved by
our pitiable state imder sin — afflicted and "oppressed of the devil" (Acts x. 38;
xxvi. 18 ; Bph. ii. 2 ; Col. i. 13) — he sent his Son that " we should not perish, but
have everlasting life " (John iii. 16). His sympathy with his Church is shown, not
only in the comforta he imparts, and the grace by which he upholds, but in th«



OL m. 10—16.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



deliverances he sends ; on which remark — 1. God has his own times for them. 2. Till
the time comes, his people must be content to wait. 3. When it comes, no power can
hinder the execution of his purpose. 4. 'J he deliverance will bring with it compensa-
tion for all that has been endured — " a good land," etc. The ultimate compensation,
when God has brought his people up out of the Egypt of all their afflictions, and
planted them in the land of perfected bliss, will be such as to clear his character from
all imputations of injustice and unkindness. — J. 0.

Vers. 10 — 12. — Insufficiency. A very different Moses this from the hero who was
formerly so ready, even without a call, to undertake the work of Israel's deliverance.
Probably failure in that first attempt led him to doubt whether he was th e Instrument
ordained for so great a task. He may have concluded he was not, and lua/i.ed his first
lesson of acquiescence in the Divine wiU, by surrendering the hope. Or, he may ha ■'8
thought himself rejected for his fault. In any case, Moses had now much juster views
of the magnitude of the work, and of his natural unfitness to undertake it. Who was
he — a man of lonely, self-retired spirit — that he should brave the power of the Pharaohsy
or think of bringing Israel out of Egypt ?

Learn — 1. Conscious imfitnesa for our work is one of the best preparations for it.
The greatest of God's servants have had this feeling in a remarkable degree. They
needed to be " thrust forth " to the harvest (Matt. x. 38, Gr.). 2. Conscious unfitnesi
for work grmvs with the clearness of our apprehensions of the Divine call to it. The
nearer we are brought to God, the less we feel fit to serve him (Is. vi. 5). 3. Ood's call
arid promise are sufficient reasons for undertaking any work, however deep our
consciousness of personal unfitness. " Our sufficiency is of God '' (2 Cor. iii. 6). The
sign in ver. 12 was a pledge to Moses that God would " make all grace to abound
toward " him (2 Cor. ix. 8).— J. 0.

Vers. 15 — 16. — The Name. The request of Moses to know the name of the Being
who had filled him with such unutterable awe (ver. 6), rested on ideas deeply rooted in
ancient modes of thought. The " name " with us tends to become an arbitrary symbol — a
mere vocable. But this is not the true Idea of a name. A real name expresses the
nature of that to which it is given. It is significant. This idea of the name is the
ruling one in scientific nomenclature, where names are not imposed arbitrarily, but are
designed to express exactly the essential characteristics of the object or fact of Nature
for which a name is sought. 1'he man -of science interrogates Kature — allows it to
reveal itself. He stands before his fact, asking — " 'I'ell me, I pray thee, thy name ? "
(Gen. xxxii. 29), and the name but expresses the properties which come to light as the
result of the interrogation. Hence, as science progresses, old names are superseded by
new ones — the former no longer proving adequate to the stage at which knowledge has
arrived. This illustrates in some degree the ancient idea of a name, and the desire that
was felt at each new stage of revelation fur a new name of God. God's Name is the
revelation of his attributes or essence — the disclosure of some part or aspect of the
fulness of his Deity. The vocable is valueless in itself — its significance is derived from
the fact of revelation of which it is the memorial. To know God's ahsolute Name — the
Name, if one might so speak, wherewith he names himself, would be to wrest from
him the secret of his absolute existence. And Jacob was rebuked when, in this sense,
he sought to wrest from God his Name (Gen. xxxii. 29). God's revealed Name
expresses that of his Nature which is communicable and comprehensible — his attri-
biites in their relations to the intelligence and needs of the creatiire. Each of his
names is but part of the whole — a ray. 'I he whole Name is given in the completed
revelation. (An illustration of the extent to which in ancient times name and reality
were held to interpenetrate each other is furnished by the practice of conjuration — the
name being viewed as so truly a living part of the Being, so bound up with his essence
and qualities, that to know it was to obtain a certain power over him.)

I. The Name abked (ver. 13). Moses expected that this would be the first question
the people would ask him — "What is his Name?" 1. It was natural to expect that
a Being announcing himself, would do so by some name, either a name by which he
was already known, or a new one given in the revelation. 2. It was probable, in
uudogy with past history, that the name would be a new one, and would serve — (1) Am



«> THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. m. 14- 22.

A memorial of the revelation ; (2) As an exponent of its significance ; (3) As a clue to
God's pui'pose in it; and (4) As a name by which God might suitably be invoked in
the new crisis of their nation's history. And 3. \t was certain that the people would
ask this question, familiarised as tliey were iu Egypt with the practice of invoking the
gods by the one or other of their riiimy names which bore jiarticularly on the wanti
and circumstaaces of the worahijipers. To Moses, however, this re(|ucst for the Name
had a much deeper significance. It originated, we may believe, in the felt inadequacy
of all existing names of God to syllable the deep and jjowcrful impression made on him
by this actual contact with the Divine. Cf. Jacob at Peniol ((jen. xxxii. 24 — 30).
God in that hour was nameless to the spirit of Mosea — his experience of God went
beyond any name he knew for him. A multitude of ideas crowded on him, and he
could not fix or express them. Language thus fails us in moments of extraordinary
experience, not always because none of the words we know would suit our purpose, but
because language tends to become conventional, and the profounder meaning which lies
in words gets rubbed off them. The name which God gave was after all not a new one,
but an old name with new life put into it.

II. The Name given (vers. 14, 15). God grants bis servant's request. The name
is given first explicatively, — " I am that I am " (ver. 14), then as a denominative —
" Jehovah " (ver. 15) ; while he who gives it expressly claims for himself, as formerly

Sver. 6), that he is the God of the old covenants — the " Jehovah God " of the fathers
vers. 15, 16). 1. The name, as above remarked, while new in this relation, is itself
an old one. This is already implied in the expression — " Jehovah Gcd of your fathers "
(ver. 16) ; and is proved by its occurrence in the earlier history, and by the name of
Moses' own mother — Jochebed (ch. vi. 20), "she whose gloiy is Jehovah." This old
and half-obsolete name God revives, and makes it the key- word of a new era of revela-
tion. 2. He who assumes the name is the "Angel of Jehouah" of ver. 1. The Angel —
" a self-presentation oi Jehovah entering into the sphere of the creature, which is one
in essence with Jehovah ; and is yet again different from him " (Oehler). The soundest
view is that which regards the " Angel" as the Pre-incarnate Logos — ^the Divine Son.
3. The name was eminently suitable and significant. 'J he ideas awakened in Moses
by the revelation he had received would be such as these — God's living Personality ;
his enduring Existence (the same God that spoke to the fathers of old, speaking to'him
at Horeb) ; his covenant-keeping Faithfulness ; his Self-identity in will and pmpose ;
his unfailing Power (the bush burning unconsumed) ; his Mercy and Compassion. All
these ideas are expressed in the name "Jehovah, which represents the highest reach of
Old Testament revelation. '1 hat name denotes God as — 1. Personal. 2. Self-existent.
3. Eternal. 4. Independent of his creatures. 5. Self-identical. 6. Self-revealing and
gracious. Hence — 1. Changeless in his purpose. 2. Faithful to his promises.
3. Able to fulfil them. 4. Certain to do so. — J. O.

Vers. 16 — 22. — The two messages. I. The message to "uhb elders of Israel
(vers. 16 — 18). Moses was to go fiist to the elders of the people. First — ^before ha
went to Pharaoh ; and first — before communicating with any of the people. This
arrangement was — 1. Necessary. The people's consent must be obtained to their own
deliverance. God would have them co-operate with him — (1) Freely. (2) Intelligently;
would carry them with him as free agents iu all he did. This applies to the higher
Redemption. Men cannot he saved without their own consent. We must, in the
sense of Phil. ii. 12, work out our own salvation — must co-operate with God, by
freely adopting and falling in with his method of grace. There must be free choice
of Christ as our Savioiu-, free compliance with the directions of the Gospel, free
co-operation vrith the Spirit in the work of our sanctification. 2. H ise. 'J he elderi
were the representatives of the people. They had a claim to be approached first. They
were men of experience, and were better able to judge deliberately of the proposals
laid before them. They had exceptional facilities for diffusing information, while
communication with them would have the additional advantage of greater piivacy. If
Moses could satisfy the elders of his Divine commission, and could gain their inteUigeut
consent to his proposals, the consent of the people would readily be forthcoming. So
Paul, in going up to Jerusalem, commimicated the Gospel he had received " privately
u> them which were of reputation," — to " James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be



OH. m. 18— 22.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. Tl



pillars " (Gal. ii. 2 — 9). And it was not till Jesus had been decisively rejected by the
authorities in Jerusalciii that he commenced a popular ministry in Galilee. Learn
lesjims — (1) Of the respect due to constituted authorities. (2) Of the value of
representative institutions. (3) Of the need of prudence and caution in the initiation
and conduct of public movements. 3. Kindly. No time was to be lost in carrying
to the Israelites the tidings of approaching deliverance. The message brout;ht to them
was a true gospel. Mark its nature. It told how God had seen their affliction, and
had visited them, and would redeem them from bondage. This gives no sanction to
Ewald's theory, that the Exodus had its origin in a powerful movement in the nation
itself — "the most extraordinary exertions, and most noble activities of the spirit
wrestling for freedom." The narrative says nothing of this mighty spiritual movement,
but represents the people as lying hopeless and helpless till God visited them ; their
help did not come from themselves, but from God. The two views well illustrate the
two ways of conceiving the possibility of man's deliverance from the woes that oppress
him. The one — the humanitarian — trusts to recuperative powers inherent in the race,
to its own " extraordinary exertions " and noble spiritual activities — and predicts for it
a glorious fiiture wrought out by its own efforts. The other — the Christian — has no
Buch hope. It views the race as lying in a state of moral and spiritual helplessness,
and recognises the necessity of a salvation coming to it from without. " We look,"
says Neander, "upon Christianity, not as a power that has sprung up out of the hidden
depths of man's Bature, but as one which descended from above, when heaven opened
itself anew to man's long-alienated race; a power which, as both in its origin and
essence it is exalted above all that human nature can create out of its own resources,
was designed to impart to that nature a new life, and to change it in its inmost
principles."

II. The message to Pharaoh (ver. 18). Moses, with the elders, was to go to
Pharaoh, and demand of him that the Hebrews be allowed to take a three days' journey
into the wilderness, there to sacrifice to Jehovah. Note on this request — 1. Its honesty.
The ultimate design was to lead Israel out of Egypt altogether. If this first request
was studiously made moderate, it was not with the intention of deceiving Pharaoh, but
that it might be the easier for him to grant it. The demand was made in perfectly
good faith. What was asked sufficed to test the king's disposition. Had Pharaoh
yielded, no advantage would have been taken of his compliance to effect a dishonourable
escape from Egypt. New announcements would doubtless have been made to him,
rewarding him as amply for obedience to this first word of God as afterwards he was
punished for disobedience to it, and informing him further of the Divine intentions.
2. Its incompleteness. For this demand bore on the face of it that it was not the
whole. It told Pharaoh his immediate duty, but beyond that left matters in a position
requiring further revelation. Whatever was to follow the three days' journey, it was
certain that " the God of the Hebrews," who had met with them, would never consent
to his worshippers being sent back again to bondage. That Pharaoh must plainly
enough have perceived, and Moses made no attempt to dissemble it. Learn — (1) God's
counsels are revealed to men bit by bit. (2) When present duty is revealed to us, we
ought to act on that, though ignorant of all that is to follow. (3) God partially hides
Ms counsels from men, that the spirit of obedience may be tested. (4) The gravest
consequences may hang on first acts of obedience or disobedience.

III. Pharaoh's rejection or God's message (vers. 18 — 22.) 1. It was foreseen
by God (ver. 19). Yet — 2. It did not hinder the execution of God's purpose (ver. 20).
Whether Pharaoh willed or not, the Exodus would take place. If not with his consent,
then against it, and " by a mighty hand." Pharaoh's disobedience would be overruled —
(1) To God's glory. The clay cannot escape from the hand of the potter (Jer. xviii. 6 ;
Eom. ix. 21). If Pharaoh will not be made a vessel unto honour, he will be moulded
into a vessel unto dishonour, and made to subserve God's purpose in another way
(ch. ix. 16). (2) To his own hurt (ver. 20). His disobedience would bring on him
wrath and destruction. "Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker!'' (Is. xlv. 9).
(3) To the enrichment of the people (vers. 21 — 22). The Egyptians would be glad in
the end to give the Hebrews whatever they wished. So would they " spoil the
Egyptians." Believers' trials tend to their ultimate enrichment (2 Cor. iv. 18). And
it is the saints of God who shall yet inherit the earth. Learn also that whatever ii



n THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [cB. m. 1— 6>

valuable in the world's learning, science, literature, or art, is not to be despised, but to
be freely appropriated by the Church, and used in God's service. — J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 5. — The hirning lush. I. Obseeve the circumstances in which God
FINDS Moses. He is still with Jethro, although forty years have passed since their
first acquaintance. Though a fugitive, he had not become a mere wanderer. 1. He
continues, however, in a comparatively humble position. His marriage to Jethro's
daughter and his long stay in the country do not seem to have brought him much
external prosperity. He has not reached even the modest point of success in the eyes
of a Midianite shepherd, viz. to have a flock of his own. But this very humility of
position doubtless had its advantages and its place in the providence of God with
respect to him. With all the lowliness of his state, it was better to be a living man in
Midian than to have been slain as the son of Pharaoh's daughter. God had brought
him out of a king's house, so that he might be freed from all the temptations of soft
raiment, and also to make manifest that, although among courtiers, he was,not of them.
But if during his stay in Midian he had increased in pastoral wealth, and become a
■econd Job (Job i. 3), then, Uke Job, he might have had to go into humiliation
because of his wealth. It was well for him that while he had the care of property, he
had not the cares of it (Jam. i. 10, 11). 2. Ood finds him engaged infaithfvl service,
leading his flock far into the desert that they might find suitable pasture. God comes
to those who are diligently occupied in some useful work, even if it be as humble and
obscure as that of Moses. He does not come with his revelations to day-dreamers;
they are left to build their castles in the air. They who despise common and daily
work, on the pretext that they are fitted for something much better, will at last be
thrown into the comer among the refuse. " Let those that think themselves buried
alive be content to shine like lamps in sepulchres, and wait till God's time comes for
•etting them in a candlestick " (Matt. iv. 18 — 22, ix. 9 ; Luke ii. 8).

II. God approaches Moses with a sudden test. "The angel of the Lord
appeared to him in a flame of fire, out of the midst of a bush " i.e. the flame of fira
became a messenger of God to Moses. We are told in Psalm civ. that God is he who
makes the clouds his chariot, walks upon the wings of the wind, makes the winds his
messengers, and flaming fire into his ministers (Heb. i. 7). And so here God sends this
flame of flre, encompassing and attacking the bush, in order to discover what sort oj
man Moses is. Certain features of his character, viz. his patriotism, his hatred ot
oppression, his prompt action to serve the weak, have hitherto been exhibited rather
than tested. He had shown what sort of man he was in the ordinary experiences of
life, such experiences as might come to any of us. But now he is face to face with an
extraordinary experience, a sudden and unexpected test. The burning bush was to
Moses what both miracles and parables were to those who came into contact with
Jesus. To some the miracles were mere wonders ; to others they revealed an open
door of communication with God. To some the parables were only aimless narratives,
mere story-telling. To others the Divine Teacher was able to say, " It is given unto
you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven " (Matt. xiii. 11). And, in a
similar way, when Moses came suddenly upon the burning bush, there was also a
sudden revelation of the state of his heart. He did not treat the phenomenon as a
delusion ; did not begin to suspect his own sanity ; did not seek his kindred, that they
might come and gape at this new wonder. It was impressed upon his mind exactly as
it was meant to be impressed. He asked the very question that above aU others
needed to be asked — why this bush was not consumed. For observe that it was
something which in ordinary circumstances would be easily and quickly consumed
(ch. xxii. 6 ; Eccl. vii. 6 ; Matt. vi. 30). It was not some metal well used to the fire,
but a bush actually burning yet not burning away. And as this burning bush was
thus a test to Moses, so the record of it is also a test to us. Let us suppose the question
put all round, " What would you have done if you had been there?" We know weD
the answer that would come from one class of minds : " There was no such thing ; it
was all Moses' own imagination." Thus the test comes in. As God tested Moses in
exhibiting the burning bush as his messenger, so he tests us by the record of this and
all other unusual occurrences with which the Scriptures are crowded. If we say at
ouce concerning the burning bush and all that is supernatiu'al that it is but delusion,



«Lm.l— 6.] THE BOOK OF EXODtJS. 71

then God's way to our hearts and our salvation is blocked at once. We must be loyal
to feet wherever we 'find it. The very evidence of our own senses, and the accumulated
testirsony oi honest and competent witnesses, are not to be sacrificed to so-called first
principles of rational inquiry. The right spirit is that shown by Peter and hit
companion in the house of Cornelius. They saw with their own eyes that the Holy
Spirit fell on Cornelius and his household; and Peter made his inferences and his
action to depend on this indisputable fact (Acts x. 44 ; xi. 18). When Moses.^tumed
aside to see the great sight his eye was single; he 'did not quibble and despise; and
therefore his whole body was filled with light.

III. God meets a proper inquiry with proper treatment. Moses is approaching
the burning bush to investigate the difficulty by his natural faculties, when Ood at
once arrests him, making known his own presence, and enjoining such outward marks of
reverence as hecame the place and the occasion. And Moses, as we might expect, is
immediately obedient. Those who have in them the spirit that seeks for truth, this
spirit of faith and right inquiry, will also show a spirit ready at once to respond to the
presence of God. Moses must have had those principles in his life which pointed on
to perfect purity of heart. That purity he had in its beginnings, or he would not have
gained such a sense of God's presence as was here bestowed on him. Note next, that
Ood does not proceed to answer the inquiry of Moses. There was really no occasion to
answer it. When Moses knew that the presence of God had to do with the miracle,
he knew enough. To know exactly how God had done it was beyond him. Even God
cannot explain the inexplicable. The secrets of creation cannot be penetrated by those
who lack creative power. Man can make machines ; therefore the man who makes a
machine can explain the purpose and the parts of it to another man. Human beings
are the parents of human beings ; but as they have no power to make intelligently any
living thing, so they cannot understand either how living things are brought into
existence or sustained in it. God calls Moses now, not to explain why the bush la
burning, but to subdue liis mind into appropriate reverence and expectation. The search
for truth must not degenerate into curiosity, nor be pursued into presumption.

IV. Though God leaves the inquiry formally unanswered, yet the burning

BUSH DOES SERVE SOME FURTHER PURPOSE AS AN INSTRUMENT OF INSTRUCTION. There

was much teaching in this burning bush. If the aim had been merely to arrest the
attention of Moses, then any wonder would have served the purpose. But the wonders
of God not only test ; they also teach. They must be something unusual, or they
would not test sufficiently ; they must be something more than merely unusual, elsb
they would not teach. I'he bush was Israel in the flame of Egypt. That bush had
been burning now a century, more or less, yet it was not consumed. All that was
essential to its nature, its growth, aad its fruitfulness still remained. What was
permanent in Israel was no more affected than the tree is by the fading and falling of
its leaves in autumn. The leaves die, but the tree remains. Its roots are stiU in the
soil and the sap still in the trunk. Thus, by this exhibition of the burning bush, God
brought before Moses the great truth that, however natural forces may be gathered
against his people, and however they may be intensified in their attack, there is never-
theless a power from on high which can resist them all — a secret, countervailing power
in which we may ever put our trust. And this power is not only for preservation in
the midst of aiHiction, but for ultimate deliverance from it. The power by which God
can keep the bush from being consumed, is a power by which he can take it out of the
fire altogether. Believe in tlus power, and trust it more and more, and God wiU lead
you into sublime conclusions, and endow you with most precious privileges. — Y.

Ver. 6. — The Ood of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. — Having wakened the mind of
Moses into full activity, given him a revelation of supernatural power, and brought him
altogether into a state of the greatest reverence and awe, God proceeds to a revelation of
himself in a particular aspect — »n aspect which required and repaid the most earnest
attention. Notice that, unlike the revelation of the name I am (ver. 13), it wa»
unsolicited.

1. Consider the significance of this name to Moses and the children op Israel.
1. It was a confident reference to the past. Moses might look back on his own career,
«r th«t of he people to whom be belonged, with a measure of shame, doubt, humiliA<



T4 THE BOOK OF EXODLS. [oh. ni. •

tion, and disappointment ; but God could point back to all his dealings with men aa
consistent, glorious, and worthy of all remembrance. 2. It provided a certain kind of
mediatorship in the knowledge of God. It gave the best way for Muses and Israel to
think of God, at that particular time. It was as if God had said to Moses, " You are to
gain your chief sense of my nearness to Israel and abiding interest in them by thinking
of my actual, repeated, and recorded dealings with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob." Ko
devout Israelite could become acquainted with that section of Genesis, from the time
when God first appeared to Abram down to the death of Jacob, without feeling that the
God of these three men was even a more prominent figure in the history than they are
themselves. W e could as easily leave out the name of Abraham from the narrative, as
leave out the name of God. What we are told of Abraham is nothing, save as the effect
and expression of the will of God. Abram is as a mere name, till God comes in contact
with him. It is not so much a life of Abraham we are reading, as a history of how
God's purposes and power became manifest in his experience. 3. It kept before Moses
the connexion of God with the lives of individuals. God made separate appearances to
each of these three men, dealing with them according to their circumstances and their
character. He showed his continual and unfailing observation of their lives, by
revealing his presence at every critical point. 4. There was a connexion of peculiar
importance which Ood had with some individuals rather than with others. He was the
God of Adam, of Enoch, and of Noah; why not have associated kimself with these
illustrious names? The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob stood towards Israel in the
relation of one who had made large promises, allowed himself to become the source of
large expectations, and imposed strict requirements. He was not only the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, taken separately, but of these three men, bound together in
a very peculiar way. Kot only did they stand in a lineal succession, Abraham being
fether to Isaac, and Isaac father to Jacob, but that succession was contrary to natural
expectations and customary arrangements. 1 saac was the son of Abraham, but also a
son born when the resources of nature were exhausted. Jacob was the son of Isaac, but
also the younger son, on whom, contrary to custom, the privileges of the firstborn
alighted. Thus it became impossible to describe God as the God of Abraham and
Ishmael, though in a certain sense he was the God of Ishmael (Gen. xvii. 20). Nor
could he be called the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Esau, though assuredly he was the
God of Esau also. The only name which would indicate to Moses all he had to bear in
mind, was the name which God here employs. 5. Be was the God of these men in spite
of great defects of character and great blots on conduct. They we're men in whom ho
found much that was evil, much that indicated a low moral state, but he found in them
all, and particularly in the first of them, a spirit of faith which enabled him to begin,
as fi-om a certain definite point in history, that work which is to end in all nations of
the e:irth being blessed. Already he had made a great nation out of Abram — a perse-
cuted and oppressed nation indeed, but none the less a great one. And had he not
spoken to Abram concerning this very bondage in Egypt? (Gen. xv. 13, 14). Some
such revelation as this at Horeb, to some deliverer or other, might now be expected.
It must surely have been often a perplexity to Moses, what had become of this God
who had done so much for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

II. Consider the significance of this name to us. We are not mere spectators of
the way in which the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob approved himself as also the
God of Moses and the Israelites in Egypt and in the wilderness. To speak of the God
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob is only another way of speaking of the Gud of those who
really believe in him. Whenever a real believer ponders this name, then it becomes
one of precious associations ; it leads by the very mention of it, further and further
onwards in subjection to the invisible. But after all, this name, so deeply impressed on
Mopes, is chiefly valuable to us as suggesting a name far richer in meaning and in
power. We have a look into the past which Moses had not. He looked backward and
saw God's dealings with Abraham, and found in them everything to inspire faith in
God and expectation from him. We look backward and see, not only Abraham, but
Christ ; not only Isaac, but Christ ; not only Jacob, but Christ. When we look back
to these men of Genesis, we see faith standing out like an isolated mountain in the
midst of a plain ; but we see much also that we would rather not see. Whereas, when
«• look back to Christ we see not only a full believer, but a flawless Ufe. In him ther«



OB. ra. 7— 9.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 75

ttands the chief of those that walk by faith, the facile princeps of them — ^he who, for
the ji y that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame. His faith wa*
such a full, exalted element of his character, that it needs much effort on our part to
grasp the fact that, while here below, Jesus, as much as all the rest of us, needed to
walk by faith, and was constantly compelled to struggle with unbelief The great
Jehovah is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; also the God of Paul and
ersry true apostle. Suppose Moses could have had the spirits of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob appear to him in Horeb, and assure him that the God of the burning bush was
the God who had dealt with them in the days of their flesh ; would not this have been
reckoned a most confirming and exhilarating testimony ? And we, practically, have a
testimony of this sort. We read of Jesus re<;arding God as his Father, habitually and
in the most appropriating way. We have his actual experience for our comfort, our
inspiration, and our guide. If an Israelite was asked what God he believed, tried to
serve, and had his highest expectations from, his best answer was, " The God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob." So we, if asked a similar question, can give no better
answer than " The God of Christ and the God of Paul : the God who has ever been the
same through all vicissitudes of his Church ; ever loving, faithful, and sustaining." — Y.

Vers. 7 — 9. — A large promise for a great need. I. The okeat need. It is a need
carefully observed by God and well ktiown to him. This has been recorded already,
although hardly so emphatically, in ch. ii. 23 — 25. It is one thing to have intelligence
of God's interest communicated by some third person ; quite another to hear the
words of pity warm and tender from God himself. Moses and many of the Israelites
may have thought that they knew the need only too well, bitter as their experiences
had been ; but, with all their experiences, they knew not that need as God knew it,
looking down from heaven, seeing all things with his searching eye, and having a
con-ect and complete knowledge of them. It is with great force that God represents
himself seeing as well as hearing. Hearing indicated that he noted the representation
of their troubles and needs which the people themselves made ; seeing indicated the
Investigation he made for himself Uod was not dependent upon the complaints of the
people for his knowledge of their troubles. The cries of men are not always worthy of
. pity, any more than the cry of a spoilt child. Such cries can only be left unheeded,
with the hope that they may end in wisdom and submission. But the cry of Israel
was the cry of the oppressed, the cry of Ood's people; and, as God saw their state,
there was ample evidence of the nppression and the cruelty. When he came down to
meet Moses at Horeb, he needed not to listen to a long account of Israel's troubles ;
he came not in order that he might inquire, but because of what he already fully
knew.

II. The large promise. God may be long unmanifested, but, when he appears, it
is with indubitable proofs of his presence ; he may be long silent, but when he speaks,
it is with statements and promises worthy of himself. He does not merely utter an
expression of sympathy with suffering Israel ; that expression is only the starting
word of a large undertaking for the future. He repeats, emphatically, the essence of
aU he had ever said to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob concerning their posterity. He ha,a
distinctly in view, not only the removal of a burden, but a future of liberty, independ-
ence, and blessedness. Thus it became manifest that the deliverance had not come
earlier in time because the matter of deliverance was not the only thing in question.
It had to be considered how liberty should be used when acquired. Israel needed a
leader, and the leaders whom God approves are not made in a day. Israel had to
wait while Moses went through his eighty years of varied discipline. Then, moreover,
the people were going into a good land and a large, a land flowing with milk and
honej , a land of rich pastures and great fertility, a land inhabited by six strong and
warlike nations ; and therefore they must not go as a handful of people. 1'hus, while
the people were going through these gi-eat afflictions, groaning as if in despair, God
was doing two things of the greatest moment. He was training Moses and increasing
Israel in numbers. What a lesson to us in the midst of our afflictions, with all their
»onsequent murmuring and unbelief! If God seemed to have little to do with Israel
during these years of oppression, it was that he might have all the more to do with
them, manifestly, in the years to come. Little did either Moses or Israel dream how



»« THE BOOK Ob' EXODUS. [cH. m. 10— lA

cldsely God would keep to them in the future. By the word of God to him here, the
thoughts of Muses were brought as at one bound from the darkness of midnight to the
blaze of noonday. Uod does not confine himself to telling Moses that he will deliver
Israel. Deliverance for its own sake was as nothing ;' it was for the sake of what lay
beyond it. He does not say that he will deliver, and wait till the time of deliverance
comes, to speak of the glories and blessings of Canaan. All these things had been
spoken of generations before. God was but taking, as it were, out of some muniment-
room, his old plan, first shown to Abraham ; unfolding it, and showing also to Muses
that it still remained in all its integrity. — Y.

Vers. 10 — 12. — The first difficulty: "Who am It" Divine promises are not long
kept separated from human duty. Scarcely has God presented to Moses this welcome,
almost dazzling prospect for Israel, when there breaks upon his ear an announcement
of his own connection with it, and that in the most trying and responsible position.
That he was to have some sort of connection with the liberation of Israel was just
what he might expect. God assuredly ha<l not chosen to visit him so far from Egypt,
and in that solitary place, simply to give him the good ' news and leave him there.
And now a duty indeed is laid upon him, the duty of duties ; he who has not been
near Israel for forty years is to be the chief agent in their deliverance.

I. Consider the ueception which Moses givks to God's announcement. Observe
— 1. Tlie point on which Moses expresses no doubt. He says no word of doubt as to the
possibility of Israel being delivered from Egypt. The achievement is from the human
point of view a great one, and how it is to be managed he has not yet the slightest
clue, but he does not doubt that it will be managed. He might have asked, " How can
a thing so great as this be done, and the thraldom of generations utterly cast off? " but
he had profited already by the lesson uf the burning bush, and no such question crossed
his lips. For whether is easier, to preserve a bush amid the fierce flames, or to deliver
a nation from bondage? The power that can do the one can do the other. 2. The
point on which he is full of doubt. "Who am I?" etc. His mind is turned at
once to his own qualifications. And what wonder? It was a great leap from being
a shepherd in the wilderness to being an ambassador to a king, and a leader of men.
The fact that Moses questioned his personal ability and personal worthiness is, though
it may not at first appear so, a great indication of his very fitness for the post. He
did not jump at the chance of distinction. He had a remembrance of his bad odour in
Egypt. He had lived, too, at court, and knew how hard it is to get at kings. We can
hardly call this doubt of Moses blameworthy, for he was spoken to as a sinful man,
and God did not expect from him at this first opening of the interview a response
such as could only come fittingly from an angel, ready at once to fly on any errand of
the Almighty. A Gabriel would not have said, " who am I, that I should go to
Pharaoh ? " fur angels cannot be spuken of as either humble or proud. But Moses was
deeply conscious of his o^vn faults. Indeed, if he had not been, God would not haVe
chosen him. Men of a different sort, self-complacent and self-confident, were the
last God would have looked to in such circumstances. The men he wants are such as
feel keenly all natural defects — sensitive, may be, to criticism and harsh words of every
kind; men, too, who for their own inclination, love the quiet and shady nooks of
existence, and do not care to leave them, save under the pressure of some manifest
public claim or some persistent voice of God to the tender conscience within. Buch
men are generally called, upon their first emergence into public, presumptuous, meddle-
some, and fanatical ; and they have to lay their account with these hard names. 'I hey
are apt to meet with a great deal of gratuitous counsel, given on the grounds of what
is called common sense. Moses well knew the difficulties that would come in his way.
The one thing he had yet to learn was that God knew him far better than he dit*
himself.

II. Consider the encouragements which God gives to Moses. There is no word
of rebuke in any way, but immediate and abundant encouragement. 1. The emphatie
assurance of God's presence and companionship. The " I " of Moses is met by the " I "
of God. Moses was to go to Pharatih strong in the consciousness that the God who sent
him was also with him. There would not be about him anything that ambassadors
OBually had — ^rich personal adornments, pomp of attendance, great profusion ot presents,



at m. 13-17.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 71

distinguished earthly rank. But the absence of these things only makes more manifest
the presence and dignity of the invisible (Sod. The less of earth was seen, the more ol
heaven ; the less of man, the more of Grod. If God be for us, who can be against us?
If God be with us, what need we care who forsake us ? Because Moses felt his own
deficiencies, compared with the greatness of the work before him, God gave him this
promise, and the fulfilment of it gave both needed and sufficient strength during all
his conflict with Pharaoh. What about our relation to Christ's promise, " Lo, I am
with you alway, even unto the end of the world?" The mournful truth with respect
to us may be that we do not feel, either the greatness of the work before us, or our
utter lack of strength to do it. We must know the burdens and the bonds, the
smitings and the contumely, the sighing and the crying, of spiritual Kgypt, before we
can appreciate the necessity and graciousness of Christ's parting promise to his people.
2. God adds .something even more noticeable than the promise of his presence. VVo
do not say it is more important, but it is certainly more noticeable. Se makes an
intimation of a very helpful token to be exhibited in the future. Moses needed no
more tokens of God's power at present ; he had a sufficient token in the burning bush.
If this had failed to impress him, neither could he have been persuaded by any
additional wonder. But God gave to Moses a word which would keep in his mind
the prospect and hope of a great sign in the time to come. What a thought to takje
with him through all the dismal succession of the plagues, through all the steady
progress towards deliverance — that somehow or other God would bring the large host
of Israel to this very mountain ; to this lonely place where few people lived, because
few could live ! Moses would need a token by-and-bye even more than he had needed
one now. His greatest difficulties were to be, not with Pharaoh, but with Israel ; not
in getting them out of Egypt, but in leading them onward to Cauaan. Some difficulties
doubtless he would expect, but all the stubbornness, waywardness and carnality of Israel
he did not yet foresee. So the Apostle found his greatest difficulties and sorrows, not
from those who stoned him at Lystra, imprisoned him at Philippi, and conspired against
him at Jerusalem ; but from the fornicators, the litigious, the schismatical, the denieis
of the resurrection at Corinth; from the pliable yielders to .Jewish bigotry in Galatia;
in short, from all who, having professed to receive the truth, acted in a way incompatible
with their professions ; and thus we see Ood keeping Moses, as it were, ahead of tht
people. He was forty years ahead of them already, 'i'he creature comforts of Egypt,
for which Israel lusted so in the wilderness, were no temptation to him, seeing he had
become used to the wilderness. And so, when he came again to Horeb, with all this
vast host in nis charge, it was to rejoice in the strength that came from a fulfilled
promise of God.

III. CONSIDEE THR EXPECTATION FROM IbRAEL WITH WHICH GoD LOOKS FORWARD TO

THE aiviNQ OF THIS TOKEN. Not Only will God bring Israel to this mountain, but
when they reach it, it will be to serve him. He says very little ; only, " Ye shall
serve God," but that little would be enough to set Moses thinking. And yet, with all
his anticipations, they must have fallen far short of the reality. One small word from
the lips of God has behind it a fulness of meaning far beyond present thoughts. We
learn, by the time we come to the end of this book, that serving God meant gathering
in solemn and timid awe around the smoking mount ; meant for Moses himself forty
days and nights of retirement with Jehovah ; meant the construction of the Tabernacle
with all its holy contents according to the pattern shown in the mount. What a
difference in the knowledge, the obligations, and the outlook of the Israelites when
they left Sinai 1 And if the word " service," looked at in the light of past experience,
was a word of meaning so large with respect to them, is it not incumbent on us to do
all we can for ourselves to fill the great terms of the Christian dispensation with the
fiilness of their meaning? Faith — atonement — the blood of Christ — ^regeneration —
love — ^holiness — heaven: let these words represent to our minds an ever-growing, •
devout and correct experience of the great body of the truth as it is in Jesus. — Y.

Vers. 13 — 17. — The second difficulty: the Ood of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob—
what is his name f Moses feels that when he goes among his brethren, one of thei»
first questions will be as to the name of this God of Abraham, Isaac, and JaGoh
OoDsider^



n THE BCX)K OF EXODUS. [ch. in. ia-17.

I. How IT WAS THAT THE POSSIBILITY OP SUCH A QUESTION WAS STIGQEsTED TO

HIS MIND. All the deities of the other natiiins had names, and doubtless the gods of
Egypt were well known by name to the Israelites. Part of the glory of each nation
came from the fact that it was under the i)riitection and favour of so renowned a being
as its God. The feeliua of Moses in askiuf; this question may be illustrated from the
clamour of the I pliesiiin mub against Paul. The Ephesians felt that it was a great
deal to be able to say lliat Diana had a special interest in them. And so it seemed to
Moses a reversal of the proper order of things to go to his brethren with no more
indication of the lieing wlio had sent liini, tliaii that lie had been historically connected
with Abraham, 1 saac and Jacob. Moses could not believe that his own people would
rest contented with such a representation as this ; indeed, we may very reasonably go
further, and assume that he himself was anxious to know the name of this unnamed
(iod. He was not yet filled witli the liglit and power of the pure monotheistic concep-
tion. Certainly he had just felt what real might there was with the Grod of his fathers,
and probably there was no shadow of doubt in his mind that this God was powerful far
beyond any of the rest; but he had yet tu learn that he was God alone, and that all
other deities, however imposing, were nothing more than the fictions of degraded and
wayward imagination. When ue bear in mind that Moses was only at the beginning
of his personal acquaintance with God, then we shall see that there was nothing
wonderful or unreasonable, from the point of his attainments at the time, in asking
such a question. Observe also that the very question is a reoelation of l.ou) ignorant
the Israelites were of God. How clear the proof is that the thought of God, as
Jehovah, came down from above, and did not rise out of the corrupted hearts of men.
When we have much to do with persons, it is a matter of necessity to have names for
them, and if they give us none, we must make them for ourselves. But the Israelites
had no transactions with God, save as he came down and pressed his presence upon
them ; and even then all that they could see was such power as became manifest to
the senses. It is very certain that if God had not revealed this name, there was no
faculty among the Israelites to invent it.

II. The giving of the name. We must hear in mind the purpose for which tht
name was given. The question at once suggests itself — Would God have given this
name, if he had not been asked ? To this perhaps the best answer is that the difficulty
out of which the question rose was sure to be felt, even if the question itself was not
asked. Some name of the kind assuredly became needed for distinguishing purposes.
It was a name as helpful to the people of idolatrous nations as to Israel itself. An
Egyptian or a Philistine could say, " I he Hebrews call their God Jehovah." What
the Israelite understood by the name in itself, is, we may fairly say, a point impossible
to settle. The wisdom of God is certainly evident in giving a name which, while it so
well served a temporary purpose, remains still to suggest matters which no lapse of
time can ever render indifferent. It is vain to discuss the form of the expression, with
the aim of tying it down to mean some particular aspect of the Divine nature, to the
exclusion of others. Far better is it for Christians to take it — and thus, surely, devout
Israelites woukl take it— as suggesting all that it is fitted to suggest. There is the
name ; some will put into it moi'e, and some less, but no one can pretend that he has
filled it with the fulness of its import. It would be very helpful for the Israelites
always to bear in mind the occurrence of the first person in this great distinguishing
name. The Ciod of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, is one who can say "I." He is not
represented by some dumb idol, voiceless save through the trailidons of those who
worship it. He who says " 1 am " thus registers in lluly Writ an expression which
will have meaning and suggestiveness in every language under heaven. What an
intimation is given to us of tlie [lei'iiianent value of the expression when we come upoii
it so suddenly in the discusMun between Jesus and the Jews! They had spokeu
haughtily concerning great names in the past — the dead Abraham and the dead
prophets ; when straightway, as by the breath of his mouth, Jesus shrivels up the
glories of all mere mundane history by his declaration, " Before Abraham was, I am."
(John viii. 58.) Abraham and all the rest of us have come into existence. But Jesus
is one who, even here below, with the knowledge of what happened at Bethlehem, has
that in him whereby he can say, " I am.'

Ill Tub aiviNQ of tuis name made it nkedful to beitebate and empbabiu



OH. in. 18—22.] THE BOUK. OF EXODUS. 79



THE NAME ALBEADT GIVEN. There is nothing to indicate that the name for which
Moses asked was to he mentioned to the Israelites unless they applied for it. The
real necessity and value of it belonged to the future rather than the present. The
name aheady given was the name of urgent importance for the present need. It could
not for a moment sink into the background even before the name " I am." The one
thing needful for Israel, at this time, was to get them into the past, and to brines before
their minds with all possible freshness and impressiveness, the actions, the purposes
and the claims of the God who had dealt with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Of what
avail is it to know that there is an eternal immutable God, unless we, in our mutability,
in our melancholy experiences of time, are brought into helpful connection with him ?
We may ponder over the name Jehovah without coming to any knowledge of the God
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob ; but if we only begin by a devout consideration of the
narrative concerning these men, then assuredly we shall come at last to a profitable
and comforting knowledge of God. 'Ihere are many good purposes to be served by
studying the differences between created and uncreated existence, and by making our-
selves acquainted with those subtle speculations concerning the Divine nature which
have fascinated and too often tantalised the greatest intellects among men ; and yet all
these are as nothing unless from our acquaintance with them we advance, still
searching and seeking, to a personal knowledge of the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. It is well to have our minds lifted up to lofty conceptions ; it is better
still, coming to the Father through Christ, to have our hearts nourished, gladdened and
consoled. — Y.

Vers. 18 — 22. — The coming liberation : Ood indicates the method of it. In this
conversation between God and Moses, recorded in chaps, iii. and iv., we observe that
God is occupied with something more than simply answering the questions of Moses.
Answering these questions, he then goes on to give his own instructions besides.
God's instructions to us, for right service, do not depend on our questions. These
must be answered, that stumblingblocks may be taken out of the way ; but when
they are removed, then we must wait and listen, to find out the exact path accordinf to
the Divine will. Thus in the passage before us, God indicates to Moses the really
critical part of the great enterprise. The questions of Moses show that it is in Israel,
in himself and in his brethren, that Moses looks for the great difficulties. But now
God would point out to him that the real struggle is to be in breaking down the
proud, despotic resolution of Pharaoh. There was no occasion for Moses to doubt
the concurrence of his own people. Nothing very taxing or trying is yet asked from
them. " They shall hearken to thy voice." But, when ' they had hearkened, Moses
had to go from them to a man who would not hearken, either to him or to God who
had sent him. Observe —

I. The INSTRUCTION'S FOB APPBOACHiNG Phaeaoh. Moses was not left to approach
Pharaoh in any way that might seem best to himself. God ordered who the- suppliants
were to be, and what the exact petition they were to present. 1. The suppliants.
They are Moses and the elders of Israel. There is a due, general and dignified repre-
sentation of the v/hole people. Moses is to go, not only as the messenger of God, but
undeniably as the spokesman of his enslaved brethren. God assures him that he will
win the companionship and support of the older and experienced men among them. It
is not to be some hot, rebellious crowd of youths that will seek to break in upon
Pharaoh. A representative body, most if not all of them well up in years, and hiaded
by a man of fourscore, are to approach him in a dignified way, respectful to him and
respectful to themselves. Those who are the advocates of a righteous cause must not
spoil or dishonour it by a rash, provocative and boisterous line of conduct. Pharaoh is
to be made conscious that he is dealing with those who have every right and compe-
tency to speak. If he meets them in an angry, unyielding spirit, he will be left with
no chance of finding excuse for himself in the spirit in which he has been approached.
2.' The petitiun. 'J he petitioners are to ask for only a small part of what is really
required, 'i'he request has been called by some a deceptive one. It is wonderful how
quick the worldly mind is, being so full of trickery and deceit itself, to find out deceit
in God. Ii this had been purely the request of Israel, then it would have been deceit-
ful, bat it was emphatically God's request, and it served more purposes than one. la



•0 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. ra. 1— &

the first place, the character of the boon desired indicated to Israel, and especially to
these responsible men the elders, what God was expecting from them. He who had
told Moses, in direct terms, concerning the service in " this mountain " (ver. 12), was
now intimating to them, indirectly, but not less forcibly, something of the same kind.
God has more ways than one of setting our duties before us. Secondly, the request
was a very searching test of Pharaoh himself. It was a test with regard to the spirit
and reality of his own religion. If to him religion was a real necessity, a real source of
strength, then there was an appeal to whatever might be noble and generous in his
heart not to shut out the Hebrews fi:om such blessings as were to be procured in
worshipping Jehovah their God, and the request searched Pharaoh's heart in many
ways besides. God well knew beforehand what the result would be, and he chose such
an introductory message as would most completely serve his own purposes. These
threatened wonders were to start from plain reasons of necessity. We must constantly
bear in mind the comprehensiveness of the Divine plans, the certainty with which God
discerns beforehand the conduct of men. If we keep this truth before us we shall not
be deceived by the shallow talk of would-be ethical purists concerning the deceptions
found in Scripture. We must not argue from om-selves, wandering in a labyrinth of
contingencies, to a God who is above them all.

II. God now seeks to make cleae to Moses that what Pharaoh emphati-
cally REFUSES to grant AT FIRST, HE WILL BE COMPELLED TO GRANT AT LAST.

Thus God makes luminous another important point in the future. That future now
stretches before Moses, like a road in the dark, with lamps fixed at certain intervals.
Between the lamps there may be much darkness, but they are sufficient to indicate the
direction of the path. God had lighted one lamp to assure Moses of a favourable
reception by his own people ; another to show the kind of treatment which would have
to be adopted towards Pharaoh ; a third to show the complete success of this treatment ;
and a fourth shining all the way from Sinai, to make plain that in due course Moses
and his liberated brethren would arrive there. God was quickly adding one thing after
another, to increase and assure the faith of his servant, and make him calm, courageous,
and self-possessed in the prosecution of a momentous enterprise. Only let Moses be
faithful in certain matters that are comparatively little, such as making a prompt
return to Egypt, and then delivering his messages, first of all to Israel and afterwards
to Pharaoh ; and God will take care of all the rest. At the beginning Pharaoh will
thunder forth a decided and apparently decisive " No !" — but in spite of all his present
resolution, the end will see Israel hurried out of the land by a nation smitten with
universal bereavement and terror. And, to make this point clearer still, God gives to
Israel the marvellous assurance that Egypt will rush from the one extreme of pitiless
extortion to the other of lavish generosity. God would secure to Israel much of its
own again, even in the secondary matter of external possessions. The Egyptian wealth
that had been gained by oppressing the people would be largely disgorged. They were
not to go out as impoverished fugitives, but as bearing the rich spoils of God's own
great battle. Thus does God invite his servant to bear in mind this mighty compelling
force. Pharaoh is great and rich and strong, but God is about to do things in the
midst of his land which will force him to confess that there is One far greater and &r
stronger than himself. — Y.

Vers. 1 — 6. — Forty years since, Moses (ii. 11) had " turned aside " from court life in
Egypt to see huw his brethren the children of Israel fared amid the furnace of trial. The
old life seems like a dream, so long ago ; the old language (iv. 10) grown unfamiliar.
The annual routine ; flocks to be driven to distant pasturage at the approach of summer.
God's hour at hand just when least expected.

I. The PROPHETIC vision. When God calls to the prophetic office, there is usually some
vision or appearance, through which the call is emphasised and its significance sug-
gested. Cf. Is. vi. 1 — 7 ; Jer. i. 1 1 — 13 ; Ezek. i. 4 ; Matt. iii. 16 to iv. 1 1 ; Acts ix. 3 — 6.
So here: 1. 2%e vision. A dry acacia bush on fire, not very singular. What is
singular is that the bush seems to flourish amidst the flame ! The mystery explained,
vers. 2 — 4. The bush is in the midst of the flame, but the angel of Jehovah is in the
midst of the bush. 2. Its significance. Israel " a root out of a dry ground." In the
furnace of affliction, yet flourishing amid the furnace (of, L 12). When Moses had



(B. m. I -10.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. ffl

" turned aside to see " forty years before, he had supposed that his brethren would
have recognised in him their deliverer ; had not sufficiently recognised himself that it
was God's angel in their midst who was really preserving them. Trouble, sorrow,
persecution may consume and practically annihilate ; whole peoples have been killed
ofT and left hardly a trace in history. Though " the blood of the martyrti is the seed
of the Church," yet there is no specially conservative power in suffering ; it is only
when God is with men that they can " walk through the fire and yet not be burned "
(cf. Is. xliii. 2).

II. The Divine revelation. 1. Preliminary condition: ver. 4. "Jehovah saw
that he turned aside to see." (1) Revelations are not for the unobservant. God will
give us eye-guidance if we will have it (Ps. xxxii. 8), but we must be alert to catch hig
glance. (2) Bevelations are not for the cowardly ; where one turned aside to see, nine
might have turned aside in sheer terror to escape seeing. He that would hear God's
voice must fight with and overcome his fears, otherwise he is likely to be classed with
the unbelieving and the abominable (Kev. xxi. 7, 8). 2. Tlie call heard and answered.
To the man ready to receive it the call comes. God is going to reveal his own name
to Moses, but calls Moses first by his name. The conviction ihat God knows us is the
best preparation for learning more about him. Moses is on the alert ; eager to listen,
ready to obey. 3. Reverence secured : ver. 5. Interviews with God need preparation.
Even when God calls, man cannot hear his voice aright save in the hush of utter
reverence. To attain this for those who are in the body, material aids must not be
despised ; so long as men possess senses there must be a sensuous form for even the
most spiritual worship. 4. Ood declares himself: ver. 6. Cf. Matt. xxii. 32. God
in the mjdst of the nation, as in the midst of the bush, was preserving it in its entirety,
Not lik? a bundle of green twigs, the relics of a perished stem. Mem and twigs, the
ancestrfd stock no less than the offspring, all alike preserved — kept by him who can
say, "^ am their God." Application : — Has God ever declared himself to us? If not,
whos^ the fault ? Have we been on the outlook to catch his signs ? Have we used
due reverence in listening for his voice? Have we been ready to obey even the
lightest indication of his will? Attention, reverence, obedience — all needed if we
would hear God speak. We must be as Moses was — self stifled, the world silenced,
Srhush to hear the Divine voice. — G.

Vers. 1 — 10.— The Burning Bush. " Behold the bush," etc. Ex. iii. 2. A very
astonishing event ; yet amply evidenced to us by those voluminous arguments which
now more than ever establish the authenticity of Exodus ; but in addition to this,
we have here the special endorsement of the Truth Incarnate. ISee Mark xii. 26.
[Examine this passage critically, and consider how full and valid the endorsement is I
No mere acceptance of received legend.]

I. The time. A solemn undertone in ver. 1. A great soul wandering under the
starlight of a partial revelajon. 1. In the life of the V/iurch. A time of tr al ; Israel
like leaves in autumn, like the foam of the sea, and that for long. Of deepening trial,
see Ex. i. Deliverance apparently impossible. The government of the new Pharaoh
now firm and strong. For evidence of depression see Ex. vi. 9. 2. Jn the life of
Muses. Eighty years of age. Acts vii. 23, 30. Yet hardly any history of the man.
In fact we have no continuous history. Died at 120. First forty years V Blank. So
with second and third. A history of four crises I Birth ; decision ; entrance on
service ; death.

Learn ; (1) Crises in all lives. Divergent roads I Crises fix what we are to he
and do. Illustrate fi-om life. Watch for them. Pass them on your knees. " Hold
up my goings," etc. (2) God determines them. This came on Moses unexpectedly.
Where? On the line of common duty. "He led the flock," etc. "So, rest in the
Lord," etc. (3) Leave life to Ood.

II. The scene. The following should be carefully observed, with the view of
vivifying and realising this story of Divine manifestation. The scene was laid —
1. In the desert. See Stanley's 'Sinai and Palestine,' pp. 12—14, for the general
characteristics of the desert. 2. In the Midian section of the desert. For exact
definition of this, see " Midian," in Smith's ' Bibl. Diet.' 356a. 3. In the Eoreb range.
Horeb designates the range of mountains about Sinai j Sinai the solitary grandeur c(

W0PU8, e



88 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [ch. m. 1»— 15,

Jebel Miisa. • Desert of the Exodus,' p. 118. 4. At Sinai. Probably in Er Eahah,
the wide wady north of Sinai, with the mighty pile of Kas Sufs&feh towering on the
south. 5. Generally — amid mountains : where oft, as on the sea at night, God seems
so near. His face towards the sun, Sinai in grand altitude of shade before him, Moses
saw the brightness and heard the word of the Logos, the manifested God.

HI. '1'he vision. Observe here two elements : — 1. The subjective. Moses' state of
mind. This would be determined by the known circumstances of Israel, and by his
own : he was away from his people, seemingly out of the covenant, the Divine promise
forgotten. 2. The objective. A lowly plant ; not a tree. Fire. No consuming ; no
smoke, no ashes, no waste. In the Fire (ver. 4) the Angel- God of the Old Testament.
Symbol of the Church of all time. Is. xliii. 2, 3.

IV. The fiest effect. Intellectual curiosity. " I will now . . . why the bush,"
etc. This attention was better than indifiFerence, but was probably nothing more than
an intelligent curiosity. Still, this was not enough.

V. '1'he check : vers. 4, 5. — The attitude of the mind should be that of reverent
attention, face to face with Divine manifestations. " The word of the Lord always
went along with the glory of the Lord, for every Divine vision was designed for Divine
revelation." This the more necessary because over every revelation there is a veil.
Hah. iii. 4. Distance becomes us. " Draw not nigh hither ! " So in Science, Psycho-
logy, History, the revelation of the Christ. The aim not to satisfy the curiosity, but
to enlighten and empower the conscience, and direct the life.

VI. The drawing into covenantal relations, notwithstanding the momentary check.
This by making known — 1. The Divine Name : ver. 6. The God of thy father ; of
the immortal dead too; therefore thy God. The effect of this tender revelation:
"Moses hid his face," etc. 2. Tfie Divine sympathy. " I know." Sense of the Divine
Omniscience alone is an awful pressure from above on the soul ; but there is a restora-
tion to equilibrium, by a pressure from beneath supporting, i.e. by a sense of Divine
sympathy — " their sorrows." See Maurice, ' Patriarchs and Lawgivers,' p. 162. 3. A
Divine salvation. " I am come down to deliver." 4. Possibility of Divine service.
" Come now, therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh : " ver. 10. — B.

Vers. 13 — 15. — The proper Name of Qod. " This is my name for ever," etc. —
(Ex. iii. 15.) This incident of the burning bush teems with subjects susceptible of
nomiletic treatment. We name a few of the more important, which we ourselves do
not linger to treat. 1. The indesteitotibilitt of the Church: ver. 2. 2. The
DOCTEINE OP THE Angel-God. Note in vers. 2 — 4 that " The Angel of Jehovah,"
" Jehovah," and " God," are one and the same. 3. The eesthiction of Judaism
OONTKASTBD WITH THE FEKEDOM OF THE GosPEL I ver. 5. For Valuable hints on this,
see ' Moses the Lawgiver,' by Dr. Taylor of New York, pp. 46, 47. 4. The doctrine
OF lUMOETALlTT IN THE (JLD TESTAMENT : ver. 6, comp. with Matt. xxii. 31, 32.
5. Shrinking at the Divine oai.i,. The reluctance of Moses ; his four reasons —
incompetence, ver. 11 ; ignorance of the proper name of God, ver. 13 ; incredulity of
the people, iv. 1 ; want of speaking power, iv. 10 — and how they were severally
overcome. 6. Ouk life work — Preparation for it and possible late discovery of it:
ver. 10. It is in connection with the second disability of Moses that the Deity gives
his proper name. Note, that whilst Elohim and other names are generic, this name
" Jahveh," or more commonly "Jehovah," is the distinctive proper name of God. See
Is. xlii. 8, in Heb. As a foundation it will be needful to exhibit, in a popular way, the
connection between the Hebrew form for " I am " and " Jehovah." See exegesis of
vers. 14, 15 above, and also the valuable Dissertation on the Divine Name, by Russell
Martineau, M.A., in Ewald's ' History of Israel,' Eng. ed. vol. ii. 483. The writer of
the hymn, " The God of Abraham praise I " speaking of " Jehovah, great 1 Am,"
showed that he had perceived the etymological relation, 'i'he fundamental idea in
the name is that of '■ Being," but around that idea plays many a piismatio light,
Bomething of which will now be exhibited. There are associated with " 1 am," " 1 am
what I am," " Jahveh," the following ideas : —

I. Existence. How calm and solemn is this Divine affirmation in the silence of the
desert, as in it God protests against being confounded with — 1. Idols. Material oi
intfllectuaL Over against the teaching of the atheist positivist, pantheist aiinostic,



OH. in.»— 10.] THE BOOK OF EXODUa



polytheist, God places his " 7 am." 2. Mere phenomena. Who can separate always
surely in nature between reality and appearance ; or within the realm of mind, between
certainty and illusion or delusion? But behind all phenomena is the Existence — God.

II. Eternity. The Existence is absolute, without any limit of time ; so much so,
that many are anxious to translate " Jahveh," or " Jehovah," everywhere by " The
Eternal." See same idea of God in Eev. i. 4 — 8. In opening out the eternity and con-
sequent immutability of God, we expound it, not metaphysically, but experimentally,
that is, in relation to the actual experience of men, who need beyond everything the
assurance of an unchanging Saviour and Father to trust, and love, and serve — " the
same yesterday, to-day," etc.

III. Causative enerqy. "Jahveh," or "Jehovah," is from Hiphil, the causative
'orm of the verb. Carries, then, in itself, not only the meaning " To be," but " To cause

o be." The idea is not however merely, having once/or all caused existence, but that
of constantly creating. Note this mighty causative force operating — 1. /n nature,
which is the momentary work of the ever-present God. 2. In creating a people for his
praise, as now about to do in the desert of Sinai.

IV. Personality. The transcendently sublime egoism, " I am ! " It is not neces-
sary that we should be able to answer the question. What is a person? to know what
personality is, or to be sure that there is personality in God. On this point see Wace's
Boyle Lectures on " Christianity and Morality," p. 62, and, indeed, the whole of lecture
iv. on " The Personality of God." " The question of immediate practical importance is,
not what God's nature is, but how we may feel towards him, and how we may suppose
him to feel towards us. The simple and perfectly intelligible answer given to these
questions by the Jews was, that they could feel towards God in a manner similar to
that in which they felt towards other beings whom they considered persons, and that
he felt similarly towards them." Our true knowledge of personality is quite indepen-
dent of our ability to define it in words. This meeting of the personality in Moses with
the personality in God constituted for Moses a crisis in his history. So is it ever — the
confronting of my spirit by the Spirit of God is the supreme moment of existence.

V. Fidelity. The words iu ver. 14 may be read: "I shall be what I shall be." Prom
future to future the same ; not like the gods of the heathen, fitful, capricious. What
God was to the fathers, that he wUl be to children's children ; not a promise broken or
a purpose unfulfilled.

VI. Covenantal geacb. Evidence that " Jahveh," or " Jehovah," is the covenantal
name of God is accumulated in abundance in Smith's ' Bib. Diet.' under word " Jehovah,"
(sect. V.) p. 957. To the many striking illustrations there, add, that Jesus is equivalent
to Joshua = Jehovah that saves.

VII. Mystery. God we may apprehend, never comprehend; touch, as with the
finger, never grasp or embrace. "I. am what I am." Job. xi. 7 — ^9; Pb. IxxvU. 19;
Hab. m. 4.— li.

Observe generally on the name : 1. It was then new : Ex. vi. 8. Not absolutely
new, but practically so. 2. It became sacred. The Jew never pronounced it. This
savoured of superstition, and its ill effect is to be seen in the suppression of the name
Jehovah, even in our English Bibles, and in the substitution for it of Lord in small
capitals. We will enter into their reverence without showing their superstition.
" Where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty." 3. The name is a rooi-designation
in the revelation of God. Assumed universally in Judaism and Christianity, see
Maurice's ' Patriai .hs and Lawgivers,' pp. 165, 166. 4. The name sets forth objective
truth. " This is my name for ever." It is the sign-manual of the Almighty across
nature, in providence, on the cross. The name gives us a true idea of the Deity. 5. The
name should be subjectively cherished. "This is my menwrial to all generations.
God's forget-me-not in the believer's heart. The name by which he would be
remembered. — B.

Vers. 3 10. ^I. How Moses met with God. 1. The marvel was marked and con-

ridered. He might simply have glanced at it and passed on ; but he observed it till the
wonder of it i«issessed his soul. There are marvels that proclaim God's presence in tha
earth to-day. Creation, the Bible, Christ's saving work. The first step towards con-



84 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ca. in. 11—22.

riction is to consider them. 2. " He turned aside to see." It was a matter to ba
inquired into and probed to the buttuni. 3. Gud meets the earnest, sincere spirit:
" When the Lord saw," etc., " God called unto him." The eunuch reading in his chariot,
and Philip, etc. We cannot turn aside to consider these things with a sincere desire for
light, and not meet at last with him who is Light. To all true seekers God will reveal
himself.

II. What fits fob God's service. 1. We must rise from a mere seeking after God
to the knowledge that we are known of God : his heart was thrilled by the cry, " Moses 1
Moses I " The cry proclaimed not only that God knew him, but that he was his God.
The Lord claimed him in that cry as his servant, his son. Have we heard it ? If not,
we do not know God as the living God, as our God, and how can we serve him?
2. The sense of God's holiness and majesty, hallowing all things for us (ver. 5). The
depth of our trust and our love may be measured by the depth of our adoration. 3. The
vivid realisation of what God has done in the past (ver. 6). That is God's revelation of
nimself. The story of the past must yield strength to the present. 4. The assurance
that God's purpose of redemption is behind our efforts: that we speak and laboui
because he lias surely risen to redeem (vers. 7 — 10). — U.

Vers. 11 — 17. — Hindrances to service and how God removes them. 1. The hindrance

FOUND IN THE SENSE OF OUR OVITN WEAKNESS (VCTS. 11, 12). 1. MoSCS knCW the pomp

and pride of the Egyptian court. He remembered how Israel had rejected him when
he was more than he was now. Once he' had believed himself able for the task, but he
was wiser now : " Who am I ? " etc. He might serve God in the lowly place he held,
but not there. Moses in this the type of multitudes. God's call for service is met on
every hand by the cry, " Who am I that I should go ?" 2. How God meets this sense
of weakness. (1) By the assurance of his presence. It was not Moses only that should
go, but God also. The conviction that he is with us, and that we speak for him, makes
the meekest bold, the weakest strong. (2) By the assurance of success : " Ye shall
serve God upon this mmintain." He is armed with faith and hope. From self let oi
look to God and his ]}ledged word.

II. The hindrance found in the sense op cub ignorance (vera. 13 — 17). 1. Hit
own thought of God was dim. How then could he carry conviction to the hearts of the
people ? The same lack of clear, living thought of God keeps tongues tied to-day.

2. How it may be removed. (1) God is the unchanging One. He had revealed
himself to their fathers : he was all this still. It was his memorial for ever. Grasping
this thought, all the past is God's revelation. (2) He takes with him a gospel for
present need (vers. 16, 17), and these two things will be God's full revelation. We
must make men apprehend the revelation which God has given of himself in the past,
and proclaim him as the God of to-day. " I have surely visited you . . . and I will
bring you up out of the afHiction," — ^U.

Vers. 18 — ^22. — ^I. The removal op Moses' fear. His mission will be successful.
1. He will win the people's trust for God. They will not refuse to hear. 2. Their elders
will accompany him into Pharaoh's presence : his request will become the people's.

3. The Lord will lead them out laden with the spoils of Egypt. Going on God's errand
there is no possibility of failure. The fears which rise as we measure the greatness of
the task and our own strength vanish when we look up into the face of Gud.

II. Opposition will be met with, but it will only heighten God's triumph,
" I am sure that the King of Egypt will not let you go . . . and I will stretch out my
hand and smite Egypt with all my wonders." 1. We are not to expect that we shall
sail over an unruffled sea, and that labour for Christ will be a continuously triumphal
progress. "In the world ye shall have tribulation." 2. It is the occasion of the
revealing of God's mighty power. Trial is God's school for deepening and purifying
trust in himself. The triumph of Christianity in the first ages a consecration of the
Church and a proof to the world of the Divine origin of our faith.

III. The plan God follows in' efkkctixg his people's deliverance. 1. A small
demand is made: permission to go three days' journey into the wilderness. Great
promises are given to the Church, but it does not now demand that the silver and the
||old ehoiild be gelded for the service of God, and that the mighty should Qon^e down



Ml IV. 1—3.3



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



from their thrones and give them to his saints. It asks only for liberty to serve God
Hid to declare his will. 2. The world's refusal brings down God'a judgments; and
then comes the glory and the enrichment of the sous of God. — U.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER rV.



Vers. 1 — 17. — The reluctance of Moses to un-
dertake the part of leader, indicated by his first
reply at his first calling, " Who am I that I
should go ?" etc. (ch. iii. 11), was not yet over-
come. God had promised that he would succeed ;
but he did not see how he could succeed, either
with the people or with Pharaoh. It was not
enough for him that God had declared, " They
(the people) shall hearken unto thy voice"
(ib. 18) ; he does not, cannot believe this, and
replies : " Behold, they will not believe, nei-
ther hearken unto my voice " (ch. iv. 1). This
was pl^ want of faith ; but not unnatural,
and not, in God's sight, inexcusable. God
therefore condescended to the human weakness
of his servant, and proceeded to show him hom
he intended that he should persuade the people
of his mission. He should persuade them by
producing the credentials of miracles (vers.
2—9). But the laggard heart finds yet a fur-
ther objection. Moses feels that he labours
under a personal defect, which (he thinks) is
an absolute disqualification. He is " slow of
speech and of a slow tongue" (ver. 10), has
always been wanting in eloquence, and does
B*t find himself any the more eloquent since
God has been speaking with him. In vain
does Jehovah promise to " be with his mouth "
(ver. 12) ; Moses' last word indicates all the old
feeling of self-distrust. " Send, I pray thee,
by the hand of him whom thou wilt send " (ver.
13). Then at la^t the anger of the Lord is
kindled against Moses, and God inflicts on him
a sort of punishment — degrades him, as it were
—deposes him from the position of sole leader,
and associates Aaron with him in such sort
that Aaron must have appeared, both to the
Israelites and to the Pharaoh, as the chief
leader rather than Moses. (See ch. iv. 80 ;
vii. 2, 10, 19 ; viii. 6, 17, etc.)

At this point the interview between Moses
and Jehovah ends, and the action of the Ex-
odus commences. Moses obtains leave to qurt
Midian, and quits it — returns to Egypt, after
escaping from a daogerons sickness on tha



way (vers. 24 — ^26), is met by Aaron and takes

him into his counsels, summons the elders and
exhibits before them his miraculous powers,
persuades them, and is finally accepted as
having, with Aaron, a mission from God, both
by the elders and the people.

Ver. 1. — Behold, they will not believe.
Attempts have been made to soften down this
contradiction of God's words in ch. iii. 18, and
to represent Moses as merely saying, " What
it the people will not hearken, etc. What
shall I do then?" (So the LXX., Geddes,
Boothroyd, and others.) But the phrase is
really emphatic and peremptory. As Eosen-
miiller says : " Vox est negantis et detrac-
tantis officium." The Lord hath not appeared
to thee. It is quite probable that the Israel-
ites would have so spoken, if Moses had had
no sign to show. There had been no appear-
ance of Jehovah to anyone for above four hun-
dred years. And the Israelites, who had not
seen Moses for forty years, would not know
whether he was a veracious person or not.

Ver. 2.— A rod. Or " a staff." Some sup-
pose the ordinary shepherd's staff, or crook, to
be meant ; but it is objected that this would
have been an unfit object to have brought into
the presence of Pharaoh (Kalisch), being un-
suitable for a court, and emblematic of an oc-
cupation which the Egyptians loathed (Gen.
xlvi. 84) ; and the suggestion is thercforo
made, that it was the baton or long stick
commonly carried by Egyptians of good posi-
tion and especially by persons in authority.
But Moses in Midian, forty years after ha
quitted Egypt, is not likely to have possessed
such an aiticle; nor, if he bad possessed it,
would he have taken it with him when shep-
herding. Probably a simple staff, the natural
support of a man of advanced years, is meant.

V er. 3. — It became a serpent. The word here
used for " serpent," nahhaih, is, a generic word
applicable to any species of snake. We can-
not assume that the cobra is the serpent meant,
though no doubt Moses, when he fled from
before it, believed it to be a venomous serpent.
Various reasons for God's choice of this particular
sign have been given. Perhaps the best is, that
a trick of the kind was known to the Egyptian
conjurors, who would be tempted to exhibit it
in order to discredit Moses, and would then be
discredited themselves by his stick swallowing
theirs. (See ch. vii. 10 — 12 ) It is fanciful to
suppose a reference either to the serpent ol
Gen. iii. (Keil and Delitzsch) ar tc the oraia



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



fcH. rv. 4 — 10k



(eohra), which the Egyptian kings bore in
their headdress as a mark of sovereignty (Canon
Cook)

Ver 4. — By the tail. A snake-charmer
will usually take up his serpents by the neck,
80 that they may not be able to bite him.
Moses -nas bidden to show his trust in God by
taking up his serpent by the tail. His cou-
lage, as well as his faith, is shown in his ready
obedience. It became a rod. A veritable rod
once more, not a mere stiffened snake like the
" rods " of the magicians (ch. vii. 12)

Ver. 5. — That they may belie i e. The sign
was to convince the Israelites, in the first in-
Btance, and cause them to accept the mission
of Moses (see vers. 30, 31). It was afterwards
to be exhibited before Pharaoh (ver. 21), to
try him and prove him, but not to convince
him.

Ver. 6. — Furthermore. The first sign is
followed by a second, equally simple and easy
of performance, and perhaps, in the eyes of the
Israelites, even more marvellous. Leprosy in
• developed form was regarded as absolutely
incurable. (Celsus, 'De Be Medioa,'v. 7 — 8.)
Its instantaneous production and removal were

- contrary to all experience, and in themselves
thoroughly astonishing. • Further, while the
first miracle was simply a sign of supernatural
power — a credential, the second was a warning

•«ad a lesson. What might not he do to smite
or to save on whom God had bestowed such
power over the human organism ? Each man
would naturally fear to resist or disobey one
so dangerously gifted. Leprous as snow.
The Gi eek name for the worst form of leprosy,
XiixT), was based on this fact of whiteness.
The loathsome disease is thus described by
Kalisch : — " It begins with mealy crusts and
icurfy scabs, originally not larger than a pin's
point, a little depressed' in the skin (Lev. xiii.
3, 30), and covered with white hairs (ih. 3, 20).
These spots rapidly spread (ib. 8), and produce
wild [proud?] flesh (ib. 10, 14). The leprous
symptoms appear most frequently oi^ the hairy
parts of the body, and alsoi on members which
have been ulcerously affected. When the le-
prosy has gained ground, (he whole shin appears
glossy white at the forehead; nose, etc., tube-
rated, thickened, dry like leather, but smooth ;
sometimes it bursts, and ulcers become visible.

■ The nails of the hands and feet fall ; the eye-
lids bend backwards ; the. hair covers itself

i with a fetid rind, or goes off entirely (Lev.
xiii. 42). All external senses are weakened :
the eyes lose their brightness, become very
sensitive, and are continually blearing ; from
the nostrils runs a fluid phlegm." (' Comment,
on Exodus,' p. 50.)

Ver. 8. — ^The voice of the first sign. Some
understand " the voice of Moses as he gave
them the first sign ; " but it is better to regard
the sign itself as speaking to them. Accord-
ing to the sacred writers everything that con



teach ns anything — day, night, the heavens,
the firmament, the beasts, the fowls of the air,
the fishes, nay, the very stones — have a voice.
They teach us, speak to us, declare to us, cry
out aloud, lift up their voice, shout, sing, pro-
claim God's will, whether man will hear or
whether he will forbear. (See Ps. xix. 1 — 3 ;
Job xii. 7, 8 ; Hab. ii. 11 ; Luke xix. 40, etc.)
Equally, or rather much more, must a miracle
be regarded as having a voice. God speaks to
us by it.

Ver. 9. — ^If they will not believe also,
"Even" would be a better translation than
"also." The river is of course "the Nile."
See the comment on ch. ii. 3. Of the three
signs given, the first would probably convince
all those who were religious, well-disposed,
and fair-minded ; the second, acting upon their
fears, would move aU but the desperately
wicked, who despised Jehovah and put their
trust in the gods of the Egyptians (Josh. xxiv.
14 ; Ezek. xx. 7, 8 ; xxiii. 3, 8, etc.). The
third sign was for these last, who would re-
gard the Nile as a great divinity, and would
see in the conversion of Nile water into
blood a significant Ladication that the God
who had commissioned Moses was greater than
any Egyptian one.

Ver. 10. — ^And Moses said, my lord.
The phrase used by Moses is full of force. It
is " vox dolentis et supplicantis " (Noldius).
Joseph's brethren use it to the steward ot
Joseph's house, when they expect to be fallen
upon and taken for bondsmen (Gen. xliii. 20) ;
Judah used it (ib. xliv. 18) when pleading
with Joseph for Benjamin ; Aiiron when plead-
ing for Mjriam (Num. xii. 11) ; Joshua when
expostulating with God about Ai (Josh. viL
8). There is a deprecatory idea in it, as well
as a supplicatory one ; an idea" like that which
Abraham expanded into the words, " Oh I let
not the Lord be angry, and I will speak yet
but this once " (Gen. xviii. 32). Moses feels
that he is trying the patience of God to the
uttermost ; but yet he must make one more
effort to escape his mission. I am not elo-
quent. Literally, as in the margin, " a man
of words." " Words do not come readily to
my tongue when I attempt to speak ; I have
never been a fluent speaker, neither yesterday
(i.e. recently) nor the day before (i.e. for-
merly). Nor do I even find that I have be-
come eloquent oy divine inspiration since then
spakest with me. StiU I remain slow of
speeon and slow ot tongue." A question is
raised whether the mere difficulty of finding
words and giving them utterance — a difficulty
felt at first by almost every speaker — is here
meant, or something further, as "a natural
impediment owing to defect in the organs of
speech" (Kalisch ), or a want of readiness, owing
to disuse, in speaking the Hebrew language
(Clarke). The latter suggestion is scarcely
consistent with the ease and flneocy with



Ok. w. 11—17.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



87



which Moses had carried on the conversation
in Hebrew up to this point. The former is a
possible meaning, though not a necessary one.
According to a Jewish tradition, Moses had a
difficulty in pronouncing the labials b, v, m.



''Ve.



i^ers. 11—13. — Who hath made man's
mouth 1 God could and would have cured
the defect in Moses' speech, whatever it was ;
could and would have added eloquence to his
other gifts, if he had even at this point yielded
himself up unreservedly to his guidance and
heartily accepted his mission. Nothing is too
hard for the Lord. He gives all powers —
sight, and tearing, and speech included — to
whom he will. He would have been " with
Moses' mouth," removing all hesitation or in-
distinctness, and have "taught him what to
say " — supplied the thought and the language
by which to express it — if Moses would have
let him. But the reply in ver. 13 shut up
the Divine bounty, prevented its outpour, and
left Moses the ineffective speaker which he
was content to be. The words, my lord,
send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom
Thou wilt send, are curt and ungracious ;
much curter in the original than in our ver-
sion." They contain a grudging acquiescence.
But for the deprecatory particle with which
they commence — the same as in ver. 10 —
thfly would be almost rude. And we see the
result in *he next veise.

Ver. 14. — ^The anger of the lord was kin-
dled against Uoses. The expression used is
a strong one, but does not perhaps here mean
more than that God was displeased. At least,
he did not punish the offender in any severer
way than by the withholding of a gift that
he was ready to bestow, and the partition be-
tween two of a position and a dignity which
Moses might have had all to himself. Per-
haps diffidence and self-distrust, even when
out of place, are not altogether abhorrent to
One whose creatures are continually offending
him by presumption and arrogance. Is not



Aaron the Levite thy brother % I know, etc.
This translation is wrong. The two clauses
form one sentence, and should be rendered,
" Do I not know that Aaron the Levite, thy
brother, speaks well ? " Aaron's designation
as " the Levite " is remarkable, and seems ts
glance at the future consecration of his tribs
to God's especial service. Behold, he cometh
forth to meet thee, It has been conjectured
that Aaron designed to visit Moses in Midian,
in order to convey to him the intelligence that
the king who had sought his life (ch. iL 15)
was dead. He did not, however, start on the
journey till God gave him a special direction
(ver. 27).

Ver. 15. — ^Ihon shalt speak nnto him and
put words in his month. Moses was to tell
Aaron what to say — furnish, i.e., the matter
of his speeches — ^and Aaron waa to clothe this
matter in fitting words. God promised to bo
with both of their mouths ; with Moses', to
make him give right directions to Aaron ; with
Aaron's, to make him utter them persuasively.
Moses' position was still the more honourable
one, though Aaron's might seem the higher
to the people.

Ver. 16. — He shall be thy spokesman.
Literally, "He shall speak for thee." He
shall be, even ho. It is the verb that is re-
peated, not the pronoun. Probably the mean-
ing is, " he shall sarely be." There is no com-
parison between Aaron and anyone else. Thon
shalt he to him instead of God, Divine in-
spiration, that is, shall rest on thee ; and it
shall be his duty to accept thy words as
Divine words, and to do all that thou biddest
him.

Ver. 17. — Thou shalt take this rod. Not
any rod, but the partieulai' one which had
already once become a serpent. Wherewith
thou shalt do signs. Bather, " (he signs," i.e.
the signs which thon wilt have to do, as
already declared in ch. iii. 20. It is quite
gratuitous to suppose that God had already
particularised them



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 5. — The intent of the first sign. Primarily, no doubt, the object was to
•mpower Moses to show forth a sign easily, readily, without preparation, and so at ,any
moment. He had come to the time of life at which he naturally carried a staff: That
he should be able at his will to transform that dead piece of vegetable matter into an
active, living organism, would show him endued with supernatural power over both
the vegetable and animal worlds, and give him a means, always ready to his hand, of
demonstrating the truth of his mission. This alone was a great matter. But the fact
that his rod became a serpent, rather than any other living thing, was specially calcu-
late d to impress the Egyptians. In one form, the serpent with them meant " a king,"
or " a crown ; " and the change of a staff into a snake would typify the conversion of •
shepherd into a monarch. In another form it was a sign for a " multitude," and the
transformation might remind them that the single stock or stem of Jacob was now

' They might perhaps be best translated—" Ah t my Lord, pray send by whom thou wilt*



61 *fia Sook oi* texoDtis. Ech.iv.8— id

Decome " millions." The great serpent, Apap, moreover, held a high position in their
mythology, as powerful to destroy and punish, whence they might the more fear ona
who seemed able to create serpents at his pleasure. The Israelites would perhaps view
the staff as a rod to smite with, and connect its change into a serpent with the notion
that when rods or whips were not thought severe enough, rulers chastised with
" scorpions " (1 Kings xii. 11). Altogether, the sign, if viewed as a type, was
threatening and alarming ; perhaps the more so on account of its vagueness. Forms
ill-defined, seen through mist, affright men more than those which are clear aai
definite.

Vers. 6 — 8. — The intent of the second sign. If the first sign was powerfid to con-
vince, the second was still more powerful (ver. 8). It showed Moses able to produce,
and cure, in a moment of time, the most virulent malady to which human nature was
liable. The Egyptians greatly feared leprosy, and declared in their own accounts of the
Exodus that they drove the Israelites out of their country because they wtre afflicted
with that loathsome disease. The Israelites regarded it as the worst affliction that
could befall a man. The hand of Moses made leprous within the folds of the garment
that enwrapped his bosom typified perhaps the Israelitish nation, corrupted by the
circumstances that enwrapped it around in Egypt. The cure indicated that Moses
would, through the power committed to him, cleanse the people from their defilements,
and restore them to a state of spiritual soundness. Thus it was at once a warning and
a promise. The sign appears not to have been used in Moses' dealings with the
Egyptians (ch. vii. 10 — 17), because it was inappropriate as respected them, since they
were beyond cleansing — there was no healing of their wound. Thus by this sign were
taught two things : 1. That there is a fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness which
can wash away, under the condition of repentance, any defilement ; and 2. That there
is a state of sinfulness and corruption when repentance ceases to be possible, and the
moral nature can no longer be restored, and nothing remains but that fearful looking-
for of judgment to come whereof the Epistle to the H-ebrews speaks (ch. x. 27). The
signs of the serpent and the blood — signs of judgment — were for the Egyptians and the
Israelites alike ; the sign of the hand made leprous and then restored — a sign of mercy —
was for the Israelites only.

Ver. 9. — The intent of the third sign. — BlooQ poured on the ground could symbolise
nothing but war and destruction. That water should be turned into it implied that
peace should be changed into war, prosperity into ruin, quiet and tranquillity into
a horrible carnage. The special reference would be to the destruction of Pharaoh's host
in the Bed Sea ; but the other ruinous plagues, as especially the fifth, the seventh, and
the tenth, would be glanced at also. That the water became blood on touching the
ground of Egypt would indicate that it was the land and people of Egypt who were to
be the sufferers. A very dreadful vengeance was thus foreshadowed by the third sign,
which should have warned the Pharaoh of the terrible results that would foUow hia
resistance to God's will as proclaimed by Moses. To the Israelites, on the contrary, the
sign was one assuring them of final triumph ; that the blood of their enemies would
be poured out like water in the coming struggle, and their resistance to God's will be
agnaUy punished.

Ver. 10. — Slowness of speech a drawback on ministerial fitness, hut not a disquali-
fication. It is remarkable that both Moses, the great prophet of the First Covenant,
and St. Paul, the " chosen vessel " for the publication of the Second Covenant, were
ineffective as speakers ; not perhaps both " in presence base," but certainly both " in
speech contemptible" (2 Cor. x. 1, 10). Speakers and preachers should lay the lesson
to heart, and learn not to be overproud of the gift of eloquence. A good gift it is, no
doubt — when sanctified, a great gift — which may redound to God's honour and glory,
and for which they should be duly thankful, but not a necessary gift. The men of
action, the men that have done the greatest things, and left their mark most enduringly
upon the world, have seldom been " men of words." Luther indeed was mighty in
ipeech, and John Knox, and Whitfield, and (though less so) John Wesley, but not our
own Cranmer, nor Melancthon, nor Anselm, nor Bishop Cosin, nor John Keble. In
lb« tecular sphere of statesmanship and generalship the same principle holds even mora



i*.i*. IS, U,j li'tlE! Book OF fcxObJS. i\i

decidedly. Demosthenes has to yield the palm to Alexander, Cicero to Caesar, Pym to
Cromwell, the Abb€ Si^y^s to Napoleon. On the whole it must be said that those who
are great in deed are rarely great in speech. And without eloquence a man may do
Go\l good service in every walk of life, even as a minister. The written sermon may
go as straight to the heart of the audience as the spoken one. Ministerial effort in
house-to-house visiting may do as much to convert a parish as any number of extem-
pore sermons. Example of life preaches better than palaver. Let no one who feels
within him the ministerial call, who longs to serve God by bringing his fellow-men to
Christ, be deterred by the thought that ho is " slow of speech and of a slow tongue."
God, without making him eloquent, can " be with his mouth," give his words force,
make them powerful to the conversion of souls. It has been said that there are many
"dumb poets." So are there many "dumb preachers," whose weak and hesitating
words God blesses and renders effectual, so that in the end they have no cause to be
ashamed, but may point to those whom they have brought to Christ, and exclaim with
St. Paul, " Ye are our work, ye are our epistle, the seal of our apostleship are ye in the
Lord " (1 Cor. ix. 1, 2 ; 2 Cor. iu. 2).

Vers. 13, 14. — The sin of self-distrust, and its punishment. Undoubtedly the
general inclination of men is towards self-assertion and self-sufficiency, so that
diffidence and distrust of self are commonly regarded as excellences. But there
is a diffidence which is wrongful, a self-distrust which Scripture condemns. St. Paul
calls it " a voluntary humility " (J6e\oTawcivo^po<rvinj) — a humblemindedness, that is,
which has its root in the will ; a man not choosing to think that he is fit for high
things, and determining to keep down his aims, aspirations, hopes, endeavours. The
same apostle exhurts his converts " not to think of themselves more higlily than they
ought to think " (Rom. xii. 3), but at the same time, by implication, not to think too
humbly, for he tells them to think soberly, according as i od has dealt to every one the
measure of faith." We ought to take trtie views of ourselves, of our capacities, powers,
Acuities, even of the graces to which by God's mercy we have been able to attain ; and
not to deny them or depreciate them. K we do so we keep ourselves back firom high
things, and this is how God punishes us. Moses lost the gift of eloquence, which God
would supematurally have bestowed upon him (ver. 12), and lost one-half of his
leadership (vers. 14—16), by liis persistent diffidence and distrust. We prevent
ourselves from attaining heights to which we might have attained, we keep ourselves
down in this world and make our position low in the next, by similar folly. The
youth who bore the banner with the word " excelsior " upon it, was wiser than most
of us. If we would rise high we must aim high ; if we would aim high we must not
be too diffident of ourselves.

Ver. 14. — The love of brothers. Few things are more lovely than the affection of
brothers. James and John, Simon and Andrew, Philip and Bartholomew, James and
Jude, were sent out together by our Lord, that they might enjoy this sweet companion-
ship. How touching is the love of Joseph for Benjamin 1 If there is " a friend that
sticketh closer than a brother," the fact is noted for its rarity ; and the force of the
phrase depends on the known intensity of fraternal affection. Aaron, though so long
parted from Moses, perhaps the more because so long parted, would at the sight of him
be " glad in his heart." Though not brought up together, though educated so differently,
and gifted so differently, though seemingly intended for such different walks in life, the
two had a true affection, each for each, which had survived a long and — so far as we are
told— complete separation. Here, and again in verse 27, it is the affection of Aaron
which is especially noticed — perhaps because it was the more praiseworthy. Aaron,
the elder brother, might naturally have felt some jealousy of Moses' advancement above
himself, of liis superior education, social position, privileges, etc. But he seems to have
been entirely free from this feeling. Moses might, for aught that he knew, resume his
old princely rank on his return to Egypt, and tlirow him once more into the shade.
Aaron did not disquiet himself about this. God knew that he longed for the simple
keen pleasure of seeing his brothei- (" when he seeth thee, he will be glad," etc.). of
pressing him to his heart, and kissing him on the face (ver. 27). Well would it be il
Among Christians all brothers were thus minded.



M> THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [ch. nr. 14— 16

Vers. 14 — 16. — Diversities of gifts a benefit hoth to individuals and to the Uhwch.—
After all, the self-distrust of Moses was turned by God to good. Without it Moses
would have been sole leader of the entire enterprise, must have appeared alone befors
the elders and before the monarch, must have undertaken the entire charge, direction,
superintendence of everything, must have had upon his mind an unshared burden which
it would have been most trying to bear. God's strength might indeed have been
sufficient for his weakness. But his life could not but have been a weariness to him.
He would have lacked the unspeakable solace and comfort of a loved and loving
associate, to whom he might open — indeed, was bound to open (ver. 15) — all his mind,
and with whom he could constantly " take sweet counsel together." He would have
also lacked the support, so much needed by a shy man, of a companion and coadjutor in
crises and times of difficulty, as when he appeared first before the elders (vers. 29, 30),
and when he appeared first before Pharaoh (ch. v. 1). Thus the association of Aaron
with himself in the leadership must have been felt by Moses as a benefit. And to
Aaron it was an unmixed advantage. The gift with which God had endowed him, and
which he had no doutt sedulously cultivated, caused him to be placed almost on a par
with his brother — enabled him to be of use to him — gave him loving companionship —
and caused him to have a large part in the deliverance of his nation. After forty years
of separation, during which he had never ceased to long for the return of his brother,
Aaron found himself associated in the closest possible way with Moses, made his
"right-hand man," his other self, his constant aider and assister. After a wholly
undistinguished life, which had lasted eighty-three years (ch. vii. 7), he found himself
brought into a position of the highest dignity and responsibility. And the Church was
benefited greatly by the double leadership. Moses, the man of thought, was able to
devote himself exclusively to thinking out all the details of the great work entrusted to
him. Aaron, the man of words, was able to give all his attention to the framing of
addresses whereby he might advance the plans of his brother. So in the Christian
Church there have always been, and will always be, " diversities of gifts." At one time
they are " gifts of healing, tongues, prophecy, interpretation, discerning of spirits, faith,
wisdom, prudence " (1 Cor. xii. 8 — 10) ; at another, preaching power, administrative
energy, learning, scholarship, influence, and the like. Seldom are even two of these
gifts united in the same individual. The Church prospers by utilising the gifts of all,
assigning to each man the position suited to him, and taking care that he has a fair
field for the employment of his special gift. In this way, " the whole building fitly
joined together, and compacted hy that which every joint supplieth, according to the
efiectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body to the
edifying of itself in love " (Eph. iv. 16).

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 1. — Unbelief. The objection started by Moses to the mission on which he was
sent was a very natural one. The people would not believe him, nor hearken to his
voice For —

I. He was as yet unfurnished with distinct credentials. In so grave a matter
Moses could not expect the people to believe his bare word. This was a real difficulty.
Before committing themselves to his proposals, the Hebrews would be entitled to ask
for very distinct proofs that the message brought to them had really come from God —
that there was no mistake, no deception. God acknowledges the justice of this plea, by
furnishing Moses with the credentials that he needed. From which we gather that it
is no part of the business of a preacher of the Gospel to run down "evidences."
Evidences are both required and furthcoming. God asks no man to confide in a message
as of Divine authority, without furnishing him with sufficient grounds for believing
that this character really belongs to it. The reality of revelation, the supernatural
mission of Christ, the inspiration of prophets and apostles, the authority of Scripture,
all admit of proof; and it is the duty of the preacher to keep this fact in view, and in
delivering his message, to exhibit along with the message the evidences of its Divine
original.

II. MOKAL OAUBES, AS DISTINQUIBBED FROM MERE DEFICIENOT OF EVIDENCB, WODUI



06. IV. 1.J THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 8J

MAKE IT DIFFICULT FOR HIM TO SECURE CREDENCE. Moses anticipated being met, not
simply with hesitation and suspense of judgment, which would be all that the mera
absence of credentials would warrant, but by positive disbelief. "The Lord hath not
appeared to thee." How account for this ? 1. The message he had to bring was a very
wonderful one. He had to ask the people to believe that, after centuries of silence, God,
the God of the patriarchs, had again appeared to him, and had spoken with him. This
in itself was not incredible, but it would assume an incredible aspect to those whose
faith in a living God had become shadowy and uninfluential — who had learned to look
on such appearances as connected, not with the present, but with a distant and already
faded past. Credulous enough in some things, they would be incredulous as to this ;
just as a believer in witchcraft or fairies might be the hardest to convince of a case of
the supernatural aside from the lines of his ordinary thinking and beliefs. It is a
similar difficulty which the preacher of the Gospel has to encounter in the indisposition
of the natural mind to believe in anything outside of, or beyond, the sphere in which it
ordinarily works and judges, — ^the sphere of things sensible (John xiv. 17). The super-
natural is strange to it. It pushes it aside as inherently incredible, or at least as of no
interest to it. From this the advance is easy to that which is so peculiarly a charac-
teristic of our age, the denial of the supernatural as such — the flat assertion that miracle
is impossible. 2. The announcement contained in his message was so good as almost
to surpass belief. Great good news has often this effect of producing incredulity.
Of. Gen. xlv. 26, — " Jacob's heart fainted, and he believed them not," and Ps. cxxvi.
.'Vnd would not the Hebrews require evidence for the great good news that God had
visited them, and was about to bring them out of Egypt, and plant them in Caanan I
In like manner, is it not vastly wonderful, almost passing belief, that God should have
done for man all that the Gospel declares hi in to have done! Sending his Son, making
atonement for sin, etc. 3. The difficulties in the way of the execution of the purpose
teemed insuperable. Even with God on their side, it might seem to the Israelites as if
the chances of their deliverance from Pharaoh were very small. True, God was omni-
potent ; but we know little if we have not learned how much easier it is to believe in
God's power in the abstract, than to realise that this power is able to cope successfully
with the actual difficulties of our position. The tendency of unbelief is to " limit the
Holy One of Israel " (Ps. Ixxviii. 41). And this tendency is nowhere more manifest
than in the difficulty men feel in believing that the Gospel of the Cross is indeed the
very " power of God unto salvation " — able to cope with and overcome the moral evil of
the world, and of their own hearts. 4. Une difficulty Moses would not have to contend
with, viz. : aversion to his message in itself. For, after all, the message brought to the
Israelites was in the line of their own fondest wishes — a fact which ought, if anything
could, powerfu'ly to have recommended it. How different with the Gospel, which, vidth
its spiritual salvation, rouses in arms against itself every propensity of a heart at enmity
against God! The Israelites must at least have desired that Moses' message would
turn out to be true ; but not so the mass of the hearers of the Gospel. They desire
neither God nor his ways ; have no taste for his salvation ; are only eager to find
excuses for getting rid of the unwelcome truths. To overcome an obstacle of this kind,
more is needed than outward credentials — even an effectual working of the Holy Ghost.
III. Inferences from these considerations. 1. Preachers of the Gospel must
prepare themselves for encountering unbelief. It is the old complaint — " Who hath
believed our report?" (Is. liii. 1). 2. The success of Moses in overcoming the people's
unbelief shows that he must have possessed decisive credentials of his mission. The
complaint of this verse does not tally with what is sometimes alleged as to the unlimited
drafts that m^y be made on human credulity. Moses .(fid nut find the people all
readiness to believe him. He was bringing them a message in the line of their dearest
wishes, yet he anticipated nothing but incredulity. He had never much reason to
complain of the over-credulity of the Israelites ; his complaint was usually of theii
unbelief. Even after signs and wonders had been wrought, he bail a constant battle to
fight with their unbelieving tendencies. How then, unless his credentials had been of
the clearest and most decisive kind, could he possibly have succeeded V For, mark —
(1) It was not merely a few enthusiasts he had to carry with him, but the whole body of
the people. (2) He was no demagogue, but a man of slow, -yffident, self-distrustful
nature, the last man who might be expected to play successtully on popular creduUty



Ai tHte Book Ot' EXobtJS. tofi- 1*. 1— W

or enthusiasm. (3) His plans were not to be laid before the multitude at all, but
before the " elders " — the cool, cautious heads of the nation, who would be sure to ask
him for very distinct credentials before committing themselves to a contest with
Pharaoh. The inference is that there must have been a true supernatural in the
founding of the Mosaic era ; as afterwards there must have been a true supernatural in
the founding of the Christian era. Imposture, credulity, the force of mere ideas, the
commanding power of a great personality, are, together or apart, incapable of explaining
all the facts. Wonders must have been wrought, alike in the accrediting of the mission
of Moses and in the stupendous work of the deliverance itself. — J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 10. — A trilogy of signs. In reply to his complaint that the people would
not believe him, nor hearken to his voice, God gave Moses three signs. These are to
be viewed —

I. As ATTESTATIONS OP HIS DiviNE COMMISSION (ver. 5, 8). Divine power ia
supematviraUy exercised in proof of Moses' title to speak with Divine authority. This
is a clear case of the use of miracles as credentials of a mission, and confutes those who
reason that this view of miracles has no basis in Scripture. The character of the signs
was not to be disregarded, but the immediate circumstance which gave them evidential
value was the fact of supernatural origin. Practically, signs of the kind wrought by
Moses would be felt to be incontestable proofs of his Divine commission; and it is
difficult to see Low otherwise his message could have been authenticated. Why should
this be objected to ? Why, if the message is worthy of God, and the work of power is
also worthy of God, should the work of power not be employed to add authority to the
word, as indicating with certainty the source from which it comes ?

II. As SIGNIFICANT OB PARABOLIC ACTS. This is implied in their character as
" signs." They had had of themselves a " voice." They told over again what Moses
had explained in words, while they exhibited in symbol the superiority of Jehovah
to the king and gods of Egypt. 1. Sign 1st. — The impotence of Pharaoh against
Jehovah's messenger. This seems to be the import of the turning of the rod into the
serpent (vers. 2—5). The serpent " was the symbol of the royal and divine power on
the diadem of every Pharaoh." (1) The rod cast to the ground and changing into a
serpent symbolised the effect of the challenge to Pharaoh. (2) Before this terrible
apparition, with its gleaming eyes, inflated neck, hissing tongue, and vehemence of
assault, Moses fled in natural terror. (3) But he is instructed not to fear it, but to
seize it by the tail ; when there is given a representation of Pharaoh's absolute power-
lessness to hurt him in the reconversion of the serpent into the rod. The foe vanishes,
and Moses remains master of the situation. The lesson is, that God's servants, charged
with the execution of his mission, are more than a match for all the powers of ill that
can be arrayed against them^ God wiU bruise even Satan — "that old serpent" —
under their feet shortly (Eom. xvi. 20). They wield an authority which gives them
for the time a charmed existence, and ensures the defeat of those opposed to them. Gf.
with this sign Mark xvi. 18 ; Acts xxviii. 5 ; Bev. xii. 6 ; and instance Luther before
the Diet of Worms. 2. Sign 2nd. — 2'Ae power of Jehovah to smite and heal. The
symbol of this was at the same time an instance of it — ^viz. the sudden smiting of
Moses' hand with leprosy, followed by as instantaneous a cure (vers. 6 — 8). Leprosy
was peculiarly the theocratic punishment (Miriam, Uzziah, Gehazi). It was probably
a common disease among the Israelites, who figure in Egyptian traditions as a nation
of lepers, hateful to the gods on account of their pollutions. The obvious teaching of
this sign would therefore be — (1) That Jehovah was able to smite with the most
grievous plagues, yet (2) As able to heal when he had smitten. This conveyed both
threat and promise. (1) If the people obeyed his voice, as he had healed the leprous
hand, so would he heal them of their natural and spiritual disorders, and lift them
out of their despised and unclean state in Kgypt ; while conversely, (2) If they
resisted, great and sore strokes of the Divine anger would fall upon them ; or, if Egypt
resisted (.iod's will, it in turn would be smitten by his plagues. The power in both
cases was omnipotent and resistless. 'I hus we are instructed — 1. To fear the stroke;of
the Divine anger. 2. That God who smites can also heal (Hos. vi. 1). 3. That God
18 more williug to remove judgments than to send them. 4. That God can heal the
leprous heart. 6. To fear, above all, that most awful fulfilment of the lepiosy symbol



at IT. ,10— 17J THE BOOK Ui' EXUDUS, 94

— ^the adjudging of the soul, under Divine wrath, to the unchecked spread of its own
corruptions — ^to the reign of sin within itself. Hign 3rd. — The ruin that would descend
on Egypt if God^s will continued to be disobeyed. The sign of the turning of a portion
of the water of the Nile — the source of I'jgypt's beauty, fertility, and prosperity — into
blood (ver. 9) could only have one meaning. It portended ruin to the state of Egypt.
And such would be the inevitable consequence of a contest between Pharaoh and
Jehovah, if protracted by the king's obstinacy. In this case there was no reversal of
the sign. The end of strife with d is judgment without mercy — utter destruction.
Lesson — the folly of striving with the Almighty.

III. As A SKWES OF SIGNS ADAPTED TO REMOVE DOUBT AT DIFFERENT STAGES

(vers. 8, 9). Though, strictly speaking, one sign was enough to attest the Uivino
commission of him who wrought it, yet God, who condescends to man's infirmity,
added sign to sign, thus furnishing a su[)erabundance and accumulation of evidences,
and rendering unbelief wholly inexcusable. It has often been observed that the
strength of the evidence for revelation lies, nut in any single line of proof, but in the
cumulative force of a great variety of evidences, some of which strike one class of
minds as of peculiar cogency, while minds ditt'erently constituted are more impressed by
others. In the case before us, a certain progression may be noted; each sign, by
peculiar marks, carrying us a step further than its predecessor. 1. In the turning of
the rod into ths serpent, we have a work of Divine power, but not without a certain
resemblance to the feats of the native serpent-charmers. 'I he points of contrast were
great, but it might be doubted whether the acts of the magicians were not competent
to produce as great a wonder. 2. In the second sign — the stroke of leprosy — this
doubt is eliminated, and the presence of Divine power conclusively demonstrated. But
Egypt had her gods also, and the question, as it would present itself to those who
believed in them, was not simply. Is Jehovah powerful V but. Is his power greater than
theirs ? 3. 1 he last sign gives the final proof, by working a miracle on the water of
the Nile— itself one of Egypt's greatest gods. The turning of that sacred water into_,
blood was the death-blow to all hope of help from the Egyptian idols. Observe —
1. The anxiety of God to remove doubt. 2. The ample provision he has made for its
removal. 3. The patience with which he bears with man's dulness and sLv*ness of
heart. 4. The inexcusableness of unbelief. — J. O.

Vers. 10 — 17. — Slow of speech. The longer Moses pondered the mission on which
he was sent, the more he shrank from it. The difficulty which now oppressed him was
his want of eloquence. It seemed to him that in this respect he was the least
qualified person God could have chosen. There was needed for such a work a man of
persuasive tongue, of fluent, forcible, and impressive speech; and his own utterance
was hesitating and heavy. Overwhelmed with the sense of unfitness, he again appeals
to God, and asks to be relieved from duty. We have here —

I. A FELT INFIEMITT. Moses was doubtless right in what he ssud of his natural
diifi'culty of speech. But his error lay— 1. In exaggerating the value of a gift of mere
eloquence. He did not possess it— though Stephen calls him "mighty in words
(Acts vii. 22) — and he was apt to overrate its influence. He forgot that the man of
deep silent nature has a power of his own, which expresses itself through the very
rug<redness and concentration of his speech ; and that oratory, while valuable for some
purposes, is not the most essential gift in carryin- through movements which are to
leave a permanent impress on history. What is chiefly wanted is not power of speech,
but power of action ; and when it is felt that a man can act, a very limited amount of
speech will serve his purpose (Cromwell, William the Silent, Bismarck, etc.). The
smooth persuasive tongue, though pleasant to liston to, is not the weightiest in
counsel. ' 2. Jn forgetting that God knew of this infirmity when he called him to the
work. God knew all about his slowness of speech, »nd yet had sent him on this
mission. Did not this carry with it the promise that whatever help he needed would
be graciously vouchsafed? God has a purpose in som( times calUng to his service men
who seem destitute of the gifts— the outward gifts— 'leedful for his work. 1. The
work is more conspicuously his own. 2. His power is glorified in mans weakn«ss.
3 The infirmity is often of advantage to the servant himself— keeping him humble,
4rivinf him to prayer, teaching him to rely on Divine pace, rousing him w effort, e^s



94 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. nr. 11— 17.

(2 Cor. xii. 7 — 10). Paul was a man " rude in speecli " (2 Cor. xi. 6), and came not
with eloquence of words (1 Cor. ii. 1) ; but his defects of speech only made the Divine
power which resided in his utterances the more conspicuous (2 Cor. ii. 4, 5).

II. A GRACIOUS PROMISE. God would be with his mouth, and teach him what to
say (ver. 11). The Maker of speech, he might be trusted to aid its powers, when
these were needed in his service. So Christ promises his disciples to give them in
their hour of need what they shall speak (Matt. x. 19). Lips touched by Divine grace
possess a simple, natural eloquence of their own, far excelling the attempts of studied
oratory. Then there is the other fact, that gifts of speech are often latent till grace
comes to evoke them. Moses' original awkwardness was no index to what, assisted by
God's grace, he might ultimately have become, even as a speaker. His gift, would
probably have grown with the necessity. The greatest preachers of the Gospel, with
Faul at their head, have not been men naturally eloquent. If they became so after-
wards, it was grace that made them. Thus, we are told of Luther that at first he
dared not enter the pulpit. "Luther, who subsequently preached with so much
power, — who gave a new direction, and a force and elevation never before attained, to
the whole system of German preaching, — who is still the unparalleled master of all who
hope to effect more by the internal demonstrativeness of a discourse than by its
external ornamentation, — this Luther was too humble, too modest, to take the place of
a preacher. It was only at the solicitation of Slauptitz that he finally consented to
preach — at first in the oratory of the convent, and afterwards in church " (Hagenbach).
Knox was equally diffident about "the exercise of his gifts, and when an unexpected
appeal was made to him, at the age of forty-two — " the said John, abashed, burst forth
in most abundant tears, and withdrew hrmself to his chamber " (Knox's ' History ').
All may not be eloquent like these; but anyone possessed of earnest feeling and
intense convictions, who is conttnt to deliver a plain message with directness and
simplicity, will be surprised at what God can sometimes make even of rude and
unskilled lips.

III. A siKFUL SHRINKING FROM DUTY (ver. 13). The Continued reluctance of
Moses, after so gracious an assurance, wfa not to be excused. It was a direct act of
disobedience, and argued, besides a want of feith, a certain measure of stubbornness.
God was angry with him, yet forbore with his infirmity. And .if God forbore with
Moses, it is surely not for us to blame him, who are so often in " the same condemna-
tion." Let him who has never shrunk from imwelcome duties, or who has never
stumbled in believing that Divine grace will, under trying circumstances, be made
sufficient for his needs, cast the first stone. Admire rather in this incident — 1. The
patience and forbearance of God in stooping to his servant's weakness, and 2. The
" exceeding greatness " of the power which accomplished such mighty results by so
unwilling an instrumentality. Nothing proves more clearly that the work of Israel's
deliverance was not of man, but of God, than this almost stubborn reluctance of Moses
to have anything to do with it.

IV. A SECOKD-BEST ARRANGEMENT (vers. 14 — 17). The appointment of Aaron as
spokesman to his brother, while in one view of it an act of conde.'-cension, and a
removal of Moses' difficulty, was in another aspect of it a punishment of his disobedience.
It took from Moses the privilege of speaking for God in his own person, and committed
the delivery of the message to more eloquent, perhaps, but also to less sanctined, lips,
1. The arrangement had its advantages (1) It supplied one's defect by another's gift.
(2) It utilised a talent lying unemployed. (3) It gave Aaron a share in the honour of
being God's messenger. (4) It formed a new link of sympathy between the brothers.
But — 2. It VMS not the best. (1) It prevented the development of the gift of speech in
Moses himself. Had he relied on God's promise, he would doubtless have acquired a
power of speech to which he was at hrst a stranger. (2) The message would lose in
force by being delivered through an intermediary. This of necessity. How much of
the power of speech lies in its being a direct emanation from the mind and heart of
the speaker — something instinct with his own personality ! As delivered by Aaron, the
messages of God would lose much of their impressiveness. Fluency has its disadvan-
tages. A mind burdened with its message, and struggling with words to give it utter-
ance, conveys a greater impression of force than ready delivery charged with a niessagu
th»t is not its own. (3) Moses woidd oe nampered in his work by the constancy ol



OH. IV. U— 17.] THE BOOK OF EXODIJS. 95

his dependence on Aaron. It limits a man, when he cannot act without continually
calling in another to his assistance. (4) It divided Moses' authority, and gave Aaron
an undue influence with the people (of. Ex. xxxii.). (5) It was a temptation to Aaron
himself to assume, or at least aspire to, greater authority than of right belonged to
him (cf. Num. xii.). Learn — 1. That it is not always good for us to have our wishes
granted. 2. '1 hat God sometimes punishes by granting us our wishes (c£ Hos. xiii. 11).
3. That God's way is ever the best. — J. 0.

Ver. 11. — Ood the Giver of owr faculties. See — 1. His power in the creation of tnein.
"Who hath made," etc. Wisdom also. Eyes, ears, organs of speech — miracles «1
contrivance. 2. His goodness in the bestowal of them. A reason for thankfulness.
3. His providence in the deprivation of them. " Who maketh the dumb, or deaf," etc
A reason for not murmuring. 4. His perfection as mirrored in their functions. " He
that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall he not see?*
(Ps. xciv. 9). An answer to the objection against positive revelation. He that formed
the mouth, shall he not speak? And he that formed the ear, can he not address
to it his own message ? 5. Lesson — His ability to aid us in using them for his glory
(ver. 12).— J. 0.

Ver. 13. — A servanfs difficulties. Observe — •

I. What they webb. Moses' difficulties resolved themselves into three. 1. Tht
power of Pharaoh. " Who am I that 1 should go to Pharaoh ?" (ch. iii. 10). We
may be staggered by the thought of the powers that are arrayed against us. 2. T?ie
anticipated unbelief of the people (ver. 1). The preacher has to encounter hard and
unbelieving hearts, and this may enfeeble and dishearten him. 3. Uis lack of gifts
(ver. 10). Humble natures are easily discouraged by the sense of their own short-
comings — ^by the consciousness of ignorance, defective education, lack of gifts of
speech, etc.

II. How THEY WBBE MET. 1. God armed Moses with powers that made him mors
than a match for tae mighty king of Egypt. 2. lie gave him the means of overcoming
the unbelief of the people. 3. He promised to endow him with po.wer of speech ; and,
when that was rejected, supplied his defect by giving him a coadjutor. From which
learn : — 1. That while it is right to state our difficulties to God — to pour out all our
hearts before him — it is wrong to make them an excuse for shrinking from duty.
2. That God, if relied on, will give us all sufficiency. — J. 0.

Ver. 17. — The rod. The rod a fit emblem of " the word of the truth of the Gospel."
1. The rod was something definite. " This rod." Not any rod, but the one which God
gives us. 2. Therod was perhaps the instrument of a despised calling. So is the preaching
of the Cross " foolishness " (1 Cor. i. 21 — 25). 3. The rod was to be grasped and used :
" in thine hand." Study, preach, expound, apply. 4. By the rod, Moses was to do
signs : " wherewith thou shalt do signs." Spiritual miracles wrought by the preaching
of the word. 5. The rod was efficient only as accompanied by Divine power
(1 Cor. u. 4).^J. 0.

Vers. 1 — ^9. — The third difficulty: how is Moses to deal with an incredulous Israel t
With the mention of this third difficulty, we begin to see how much of doubt, self-
distrust, and reluctance disturbed the mind of Moses. And no wonder. This revelation
and commandment of God had come very suddenly upon him; and though strong
assurances and sufficient information were readily given, yet he could not all at once
receive the comforts which flowed from them. Had he attended to what God said by
way of removing the difficulties already expressed he would never have given utterance
tc .jnis third one. His perseverance in suggesting obstacles almost makes us feel that
he hoped somehow to get out of the mission. But God meets him at every point.
There is no weak place in the Divine plans. Even a matter which seems sc uncertain
as the reception of Moses by Israel is confidently taken altogeiher out of the region of
uncertainties. God had already said (oh. iii. 18), "They shall hearken to thy voice,"
and if Moses had only waited, he would have been made to see how that hearkening
would be brought about. The suggestion of this difficulty, therefore, showed how much



THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. iv. 1—9.



he was still lacking in calm faith ; nerertlieless we must bear in mind tliat the difficulty
was a real one. There was only too much reason to apprehend that Israel would
receive him in the way he indicated. Consider —

I. The poor expectations Moses had of a favourable reception from Israel.
Why should he have these gloomy anticipations ? Was the cause of them to be looked
for wholly in Israel or wholly in himself? Did he mean to blame his brethren for theii
imbelief, or did he thus take another way of indicating his own utter distrust of
himself? As he expresses no blame of Israel it is not for us to assume that he intended
it. He knew very well that to go to his brethren with such a story, would be the very
way to make them reject him and laugh him to scorn. He could not bat feel that if
he had been in their position, he would probably have behaved in the same way.
What could it appear but presumptuous to return after forty years' absence from the
discant and half-barbarous Midian, and pretend that he had been chosen to deliver
Israel — ^he, a mere weather-beaten shepherd ? Truth is stranger than fiction, and for
this very reason it is too often believed to be the most improbable of all fictions,
Moses thus had every ground to expect that he would be treated either as insane or as
the most impudent of impostors. He would have been more easily believed in telling
some made-up story than when he told the simple truth. God had looked very kindly
and favourably on Moses in all his deeply felt un worthiness ; but the very things that
commended him to God, hindered him with men. In what a humiliating aspect this
word of Moses puts our fallen human nature ! When the truth in which we are most
of all concerned comes before us, we are tempted to neglect and repudiate it because the
messenger does not look sufficiently dignified. Nor is unbelief our only danger. We
must labour to have a state of mind in which we shall always not only receive the true
but reject the false. We have to do with false apostles as well as true ones. The elders
of Israel would have done very wrong if they had rushed into a welcome of Moses on
his bare ipse dixit. We must not, in our anxiety to avoid unbelief, deliver ourselves
over to credulity. If the world has in it only too many of the unbelieving spirit, so,
alas! it has only too many of the deceiving spirit; all the more deceivers because
thoroughly deceived themselves. We must try the spirits whether they be of God,
and ever live in thankful use of the infallible tests which God has given us.

II. God gives to Moses ample evidences to pkoddce faith in Israel. Observe
that God does not simply promise these signs. He works them at once, at least the two
that were possible, before the very eyes of Moses. Moses has faith enough to be sure
that it is indeed God who is with him at the present hour ; but what about the future?
True, God had said, " Certainly I will be with thee " (ch. iii. 12), and he might have
repeated these words rebukingly. But he remembered that Moses was as yet very
ignorant of the fulness of the Divine nature ; and he acted with all his own wisdotu
and tenderness, to cherish the real but as yet very feeble and struggling faith of his
servant. When Moses comes into the presence of his brethren, it is to cast down a rod
that has already been a serpent, and to stretch forth a hand that has already been snow-
white with leprosy. " What is that in thine hand ? " — as much as to say, " Take note of
it, look at it well, make sure that it is the rough, easily replaced instrument of your
daily work." Moses is to be taught that things are not what they seem. He who
according to his good pleasure took some of the original matter of the universe, and
from it made the rod-natiu-e, and from other made the serpent-nature, now by the same
power changes in a moment the dead rod into the living serpent, and the living serpent
into the dead rod. The healthy hand is all at once infected with leprosy, and even
while Moses is shuddering with the terrible experience, the leprosy is as suddenly
taken away. It is a fearful thing t» fall into the hands of the living God. As to
the significance of these miracles, there is doubtless much that lies beyond our power to
ascertain. Assuredly they had in them perfect propriety both as to their order and
their nature. What the burning bush became to Moses, these three miracles might
become to the Israelites ; not only paving the way for Moses to act with full authority
in their name, but giving many lessons to such as had eyes to see and hearts to under-
stand. For instance how could they but perceive that when God began his dealings
with Pharaoh, he began with two out of the three miracles which Moses had shown to
them. Moses turned the rod into a serpent, and the water into blood before Israel, and
Israel believed (vers, 88— 3J\ He did the same things before Pharaoh, and he renjaiood



m. TV. 16— 12.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. VJ

unmoved. Who can tell what terrible things Israel escaped by their timely acceptance
of the mission of Moses ? and yet that acceptance, as we discover by the rebellions in
the wilderness, did not amount to very much. The belief that is produced bv miracle,
if there be not some more penetrating force behind the mere exhibition of the extra-
ordinary, does not go very deep, nor does it last very long. The greatest benefit of
these miracles was to such Israelites as could see in them, not only the power of God,
but something of the purposes for which that power was used. Pharaoh caused great
pain to Israel, but he did nothing else ; he sought no blessed end for the people beyond
the pain. God, on the other hand, though he turned a rod into a threatening serpent,
and a clean and healthy hand into a leprous, loathsome mass, yet very speedily took
these signs of destruction away. When God brings threatening and affliction very near
to us, it is only to show how quickly and completely they may be removed. AU
untoward things are in his hands — all serpents, aU diseases, all degrading transforma-
tions of what is good and beautiful. — ^Y.

Vers. 10 — 12. — The fourth difficulty : Moses alleges defect of utterance. The third
time is often represented in Scripture as the final and decisive time (1 Sam. iii. 8 ;
Matt. xxvi. 44, 45, 75 ; John xxi. 17 ; 2 Cor. xii. 8). But Moses is not yet either
satisfied or even silenceid. As fast as one difficulty is swept away, his fearful and fertile
mind has another ready to take its place. He began with himself, in stating his
objections and difficulties, pleading then his unworthiness in general terms ; now in the
end he comes back to himself with the mention of a special difficulty. Consider —

I. The difficulty as stated by Moses. In the course of the conversation, God
has laid before him such particulars of the work required as seem to show him, in his
hasty view of them, that he will have much speaking to do. But for speaking he
alleges himself to be peculiarly unfit. What he meant by this unfitness we have no
means of exactly ascertaining. Perhaps he had some actual defect in the vocal organs ;
or it may have been nothing more than the well-nigh insurmountable difficulty which
some men feel when called on to speak in public. In any case he was bringing the
difficulty forward under mistaken views as to the importance of mere utterance. 1. He
was exaggerating the service of natural faculties. To say ^hat these are nothing at all
would be of course the language of mock humility. God has shown often in the history
of his work in the world that he welcomes great natural gifts, lovingly devoted to him
and thoroughly sanctified. But the great temptation undoubtedly is, to make too much
of natiual gifts — ^too much of the intellect, the voice, the physical presence altogether,
and too little of the purposes for which these instruments are to be used. How a thing
is said is of much less moment than the thing itself. Better to stammer out a great
truth than to deck lying, deception, and worldly vanities in the best-chosen words.
When the Jews conspiring against Paul wanted some one to plead their cause before
Felix, they sought, very wisely from their point of view, for the practised professional
orator. It mattered nothing that he lacked the love of truth and justice. It was his busi-
ness to do the best he could for even the worst of causes. God might easily have found
elsewhere in Israel a thousand fluent and attractive speakers, more pleasant to tho ear than
Moses, and yet none of them sufficiently endowed, in other ways, for the great work required.
2. Ee was underrating the power of Ood working through those whom he chooses for himself.
It is inevitable that if we exaggerate in one direction, we shall underrate in another.
If we make too much of the work of man, we shall make too little of the work of God.
Moses is not yet duly impressed with the fact that God has unmistakably and finally
ohosen him. He thinks he ought to be able to see clearly why he is chosen, and this is
just what he cannot as yet get even a glimpse of. If only he had been able to feel
conscious of some improvement in his natural faculties, it would have been a great
encouragement, a great help to submission and prompt advance, at least so he thought.
Depend upon it, we can never think of the power of God too highly. Nothing, so long
as it is agreeable to his character, is beyond him. If he has chosen us for any work, he
will always make his choice quite certain to our hearts ; though, at the same time, to
humble and try us, he may give much to perplex our intellects. In such moments our
true and sufficient refuge is to remember the unfailing power of him who directs us.
If Moses had only lived, say in the time of Paul, and been able to look back as Paul
looked on all the Divine dealings recorded in the Scriptures, he would have seen at onoa,

EXODCB. ^



80 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. fcH. iv. 13— iex

and gloried in the fact, that his very lack of fluent speech, so far from being against him,
was rather in his favour (2 Cor. iv. 7).

II. (Sod's treatment or this peksevbrino reluctance. Observe God's continued
patience. So far there has not been a word of rebuke to Moses ; no action such as
corresponds with the smiting of a stupid or inattentive scholar. But it was really quite
time for Moses to begin to reflect a little before he spoke. Moses seemed to hint in
this latest appeal that it was desirable at once to confer on him what he judged to be
the requisite powers of speech. But God saw that the real want was not speaking, but
thinking ; quiet, earnest, introspective thinking. There had been quite enough of speaking
unadvisedly with the lips, only to be excused by the fact that Moses had become so
recently acquainted with Jehovah. Now God gives his servant something to think about.
Moses has said in effect, " Here am I, called to a great work, for which, through no fault
of my own, I lack the necessary faculties." And God in return is not slow to meet
Moses with a plain admission of the Divine responsibility for many things which we
count defects in human nature. " Where," says the sceptic, " is the wisdom of that
God who allows the world to abound in so many human beings deficient in one or
another of their natural faculties ? " God meets the charge himself, and meets it
boldly. He not only allows man to be so, but he makes him so ; in other words, what
we call defects are not defects at all. The defect is in us, who are not able to look
at them in a right and comprehensive way. There are defects and defects. Man,
thinking of the blind, the deaf, the dumb, the lame, begins to wail what an imperfect
thing creation is ; yet he is only complaining of spots on the surface. Our outward
senses, with all the knowledge and pleasure that they bring, are only subsidiary parts of
humanity. Let Moses consider, and be will see that, inasmuch as these defects come
fiom no fault of his own, God can easily make them up. The fact that Moses was so
■low of heart to believe all that God had spoken was a far greater hindrance than all
his slowness of speech. We find serious defects and hindrances where, so to speak, God
rather finds helps ; while the things that hinder God's work and stir his indignation it
takes a great deal to make us conscious of. The worst obstacles to be encountered by
Moses did not come from any of the things he had laid such emphasis on ; they lay in
hia own heart — that heart into which the dawning of God's presence had only just begua
tc penetrate. — ^Y.

Vers. 13 — 16. — Moses, taking a step too far, is suddenly arrested. In ver. 13 w«
must evidently look at the spirit of the words, rather than the words themselves.
There is nothing wrong in the words. Uttered in a different tone and in different
circumstances they might have drawn forth the approval of God rather than his anger.
They might be used as expressing the most devout submissiveness, the consciousness
of one who, though he is treading forth into darkness and danger, is sure that he is
filled with the fulness of God. But not so had Moses yet learned to speak. God has
tried to caU him away from the turmoil of his doubts, from his hasty conjectures and
crude anticipations ; but instead of obeying, instead of acquainting himself with God,
and thereby being at peace, he flies in his face with this half-despairing half-defiant
cry. It is the crisis of the struggle, and it is very instructive to notice how firmly and
yet gently God deals with his servant. Observe, then, how we have here a due
mingling of righteous anger and compassionate aid.

I. God's manifested angbb with Mosbs. The expression is a strong and suggestive
one. Not simply that God was angry, but that his anger was kindled. We may take
it as meaning that there was some anger already, growing indeed hotter and hotter, but
only now under this great provocation breaking into flame. The anger of God must
inevitably rise at every contact with human ignorance and stubbornness, though it
may be so veiled beneath love, pity, and patience as to be concealed from the man
whose conduct excites it. And note in particular that there is no inconsistency Id
attributing to God anger with Moses. Moses himself was to be excused, as having
only recently become acquainted with God; but he could not escape his share of the
due effects arising out of the alienation of the entire human race from God. Besides,
God's anger must be looked upon as one of his instruments in bringing us effectually
to compliance with his will. God's anger is really i^art of the goodness which leads us
to repentance ; and if gentler methods fail, then the time will come at last when thai



OfciT. 17.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 99

•nger must be decidedly manifested, even for our good. Moses could not but admit
that so far he had been dealt with very gently indeed. God, quickly and. tenderly
responsive, had met every hint of diflficulty with a strong encouragement. But all the
encouragements had made no real difference in Moses' mood of mind. He turns upon God
in the querulous unappreciative strain indicated in ver. 13. Thus he vmconsciously
signifies that the time has come for God to change the method of his action. Moses,
like a persistently heedless scholar, must be made to feel that his master cannot be
trifled with. Qoi speaks, not that we may discuss and parley with him, but that we
may obey. Let Moses now understand that the time has come for him at once to go
forth.

II. The angeb ib mingled with a gracious promise of appropriate aid. God's
anger with his own chosen ones is but a sudden darkness to make the following light
more useiiil and esteemed. God, who has just shown his power to Moses in the
burning bush and the following signs, now shows power in a way even more attractive.
Ho is one who can at the same moment warn and comfort — not only smiting that he
may heal, but able to blend smiting and healing together. Even though Moses has
provoked his indignation, he does not leave him with a bare promise that somehow or
other his defect of utterance will be supplied. God sweeps away this latest difficulty
as completely as he had done the previous ones. And note moreover that he disposed
of it in his own unexpected way. It was better to leave Moses as he was, and make
Aaron his spokesman, than to enrich him in hi» own person with all gifts of utterance
and leave him alone. By linking the two men together, God was constantly teaching
them the need of mutual subordination. If they would only be companions in humility
they should also be companions in prosperity and in gladness of heart. Sad and
disastrous would be the day when Moses should be disposed to say to Aaron, " 1 have
no need of thee," or Aaron to Moses, " I have no need of thee." Aaron had what Moses
lacked. Moses had the matter of a Divine and gladsome message, but he felt utterly
at a loss how he was to get it properly laid before all whom it concerned. Aaron, on
the other hand, had voice and faculty of speech, but behind that voice there had
hitherto been nothing of commandment, direction, and encouragement. Aaron, says
the Lord, was a man who could speak well ; that is, as we may take it, a man able to
speak distinctly and impressively — one who could deliver any message entrusted to
him in a way which would not obscure the message, nor draw ridicule on the uttercr
of it. Moses and Aaron went together like the musician and the instrument on which
he plays. Thus we see the way in which Qod binds us together hy our very deficiencies.
He constitutes us so that we are always more or less dependent on our fellow-men, and
sometimes the dependence is very marked indeed. It is well for us in the midway and
strength of life to consider that there may be but a step between us and the need of
the teuderest sympathy. When we are most independent there are possibilities lying
before us — yes, there are even certainties — which should moderate our pride and self-
sufficiency. Manly independence is one of the greatest blessings ; egotistic isolatioo
one of tht greatest curses. They that are strong should bear the infirmities of the
weak ; there are none of us so strong but that in some emergency of life we may
accept the relief ; there are none of us so weak but that we may do something to
provide the relief. In a world which is so full of temptations to discord and rivalry
it is a great comfort to remember that God is constantly working to counteract them.
He guides human affairs, even as he guides the planets themselves ; the centripetal
force is greater than the centrifugal. If every one of us were free to work out the
desires of our selfish hearts, anarchy would come with fearful rapidity. — ^Y.

Ver. 17. — The importance of the rod: God guards Moses against a very natvral
oversight. " Thou shalt take this rod in thine hand." Was Moses, then, likely to
forget it ? That rod had just been pointed out to him as connected with his favourable
reception by Israel. It was to be the instrument for helping to deliver him from one
of his chief apprehensions. And yet it was as likely as not that in the hurry of
gathering his household goods together, the rod would be thrown into a comer of the
fdld as a mere bit of wood that could easily be replaced if Moses had once agair to
become a shepherd. Notice — 1. That other things seemed, to the natural eye, of a great

H 2



leO THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. vr. 1— b

deal more consequence. As Martha, when Jesus came to her house, was cumbered with
much serving, and in the middle of it all was unwittingly neglecting the one thing
needful, so Moses, amid the distracting questions that filled his mind, had no induce-
ment to regard the rod with such attention aa corresponded to its real importance.
Here is one of the great difBculties in bringing the natural man to discern the things
of the Spirit of God. Not only is man, by nature, indifferent to spiritual things, but
he is absorbingly occupied in the desires, cares, and apprehensions of the natural
life. When the disciples of Christ had their minds filled with carnal anticipations ol
the kingdom of heaven, they heard even such glorious news as that of the resurrection
of their Master as if they heard it not. 2. This rod' seemed a thing of particularly
little consequence. Were not a thousand such within easy reach ? Might not Gkid be
trusted to turn any rod Moses took up just as he had turned this ? If it had only been
some precious stone, something costly, elaborate, and rare, he would not have forgotten
it. 3. The real consequence of the rod appeared clearly in the light of after events.
Suppose Moses had left the rod behind him. The likelihood is that he would very
quickly have been stopped on the way, even as he was stopped and threatened because
of his uncircumcised sou. And if he had been allowed to go on, assuredly he would
have been put to shame on coming into the presence of Israel. God was be;;inning to
teach Moses that strict, unflagging attention to details would be necessary when ho
again came to this mountain to take his part in serving God on it. 4. The rod itself
was a great sign that Israel was to he delivered not by humom hut by Divine operations.
It was probably not only the companion of Moses, but the constant companion. Ever
In his hand, it was something by which he could readily turn his thoughts away from
his own inability to the all-sufficing power of God. It is our folly, both as concerns
our own salvation and the salvation of our fellow-men, that we go out w ithout the rod.
When the Israelites saw Moses coming among them vrith his rod, clinging to it, though
there seemed no use for it, some of them perhaps said, " Throw that rod aside ; why
cumber yourself with it, and become a laughingstock and a puzzle to beholders." And
in like manner how often have those put in trust with the Gospel been exhorted to lay
•side those elements which to the natural man appear mere excrescences and deformitieSb
We may well believe that to the first apostles, it was one of the hardest things in the
world to keep firm to the essential parts of their message. What the rod was to
Moses, going forth with it and working signs, that must the doctrine of the Cross be
to all apostles. Christ crucified is to the Jews a stumblingblock and to the Greeks
foolishness, but to them which are called, Christ the power of Grod and the wisdom of
QtxL— Y.

Vers. 1 — 9. — Weakness and strength /or Ood^s service. I. Fear of thk eejectioh

OF THE MESSAGE WB BBAB FOE GoD MAKES ITS DELIVEEANCB IMPOSSIBLE. The tidings

he was to bear were so wonderful that he believed his words would be listened to with
utter incredulity. Our Gospel is more wonderful still. To speak it, our eye must rest
less on the message, and more on Gbd's power to chastise and to bless. We are not
critics of, nor apologists for, the Gospel: we are messengers sent before God's fiice.
Our Master is behind us.

II. MiEAOLES BELONG TO THE iNFANCT OP FAITH. The slgns are given because of
nnbelief. Elijah and Elisha work miracles among the tribes which had almost wholly
forsaken God ; Isaiah, Jeremiah, John, work none. The Apostles alone were empowered
to bestow miraculous gifts, and these died out, with the men who received them from
the Apostles' hands. To bring again the age of miracles would be retrogression, not
advance.

III. The mikaoles as signs. 1. The rod cast upon the ground becomes a serpent }
the serpent dealt with in obedience to God's command becomes a rod. They who
reject God's guidance will be pursued by his terrors, and if we deal with our foes as
SoA directs us they wiU help, not harm us. 2. The hand put in the bosom (the
attitude of determined indiflference) becomes leprous ; placed again in obedience to
God's command, it is made whole. God can make the strength of the disobedient a
burden and horror ; and if we rest in him our loathsomeness and weakness will be
chang6d into health and strength. 3. The sweet Nile waters changed into blood. The
delight of the land to which unbelief will cUng will become a loathing and a curse. — ^U.



oa. IV. 1— IT.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 101

Vers. 10 — 17. — Coifs torath will fall where his service is declined. I. Moses'
OBJECTION AND God's ANSWER (10 — 12). 1. He deems himself unfit to occupy the
place even of spokesman to the Lord. The objection was based upon a real infirmity,
which so far God had not removed. The same objection urged as a reason to-day for
not engaging in Sunday-school work, etc. The want of power may be real, bul
is it a sufficient reason for refusal? 2. God's answer. (1) He points to his power.
Is that realised ? (2) He gives the promise of help. Our weakness will merely affort'
a field on which God's might and faithfulness will be manifested.

II. Moses' refusal and God's anger (13 — 17). 1. The disinclination to the
service which lay behind his objections is at last manifested. That very name
(Adonai) " my master," by which he addresses God, might have rebuked him. But
Moses in this may be the type of ourselves. We acknowledge that all we have, that
we ourselves, are his, and yet is there no service which no amount of reasoning or
expostulation can prevail upon us to undertake for God? 2. God's anger. (1) A
revelation of the judgment which awaits the slothful servant. Its shadows fall now in
the snthdrawal of his favour and the decay of spiritual life. (2) It left its mark upon
the life of Moses although his refusal was followed by repentance. Aaron was joined
with him, and where in the eye of Israel and the world there would have been one
figure only, there is henceforth two. The mark of God's anger is left in a lessened
glory.

III. The powee of the past for Christian service. "Take this rod" — not
another. It reminded him of the time when he contended with Groi, and ministered
humility in the moments of mightiest triumph. The Cross of Jesus the memento of
our stubbornness and guilt. — U.

Vers. 1 — 17. — Divine supplements for human infirmity. " Now therefore go, and
I wiU be with thee," etc. (ver. 12.) It is not at all clear whether the four objections
orged by Moses against receiving the Divine commission were presented at one inter-
Tiew with the manifested God, or whether the controversy recorded Ex. iii. 1 — ^iv. 17,
occupied weeks or months. The probabilities are in favour of some considerable time.
See iv. 10, and specially in the Heb. In dealing with this particular plea, viz. the
lack of eloquence, we must bear in mind that it is not for every man to be a Moses, or
a preacher, or even a worker. 'I rue, there is a ministry for each and aU ; but some
are called to. one of patience in suffering. Treat the subject therefore as one of
Divine supplementing of human infirmity generally. Comp. 2 Cor. xii. 7 — 10.

I. Shrinking from Divinb service. Not a doubt of this in the case of Moses.
Earlier he was not imwilling to put himself forward as the champion of Israel
— Acts vii. 25 ; but diffidence came with years. So Jeremiah — Jer. i. 6. So all the
prophets — their message a " burden " — something heavy to be carried, to which they
braced themselves. So Paul, 1 Cor. ix. 16. Nor is the feeling unhealthy or undesir-
able. Self-confidence looks at tirst the best preparation for great enterprises. But is it
so ? Look at life. In all departments, to estimate aright the greatness of the work,
the comparative feebleness of our resources, and yet the weight of our responsibility, is
the condition of success ; e g. Lord Clyde in India. The Christian minister. By the
reluctance of Moses, measure the irresistible impulse upon his spirit. Nor is con-
sciousness of incapacity always the reality of incapacity.

II. The excuse that is offered. Take ver. 10, translated thus : " And said Moses
unto Jehovah, Let it please Thee, U Lord, not a man of words am I, either since yester-
day, or since the day before, or since the time 'I hou hast spoken unto Thy servant ; foi
heavy of mouth and heavy of tongue am I." 1. The time-hint. An intimation
here of a long controversy between Moses and God. 2. The meaning of Moses. He
was not a "man of words" — not elogiievt, in the popular sense; he was heavy — doubly
heavy — of lip and tongue. A great writer of poetry and prose, but not a speaker.
'J'his self-estimate just. Yet there were compensations. He was " mighty in word."
Distinguish between fluency and power. He was, too, a man of thought. A man of
action. 3. A lesson in passing : " Take heed how ye hear !" — " Take heed what ye
hear." Compare the massive eloquence of the Puritan age, and the men it made, with
what seems to be now the taste of many for the sensational — ^with pres'int impatience
of so-called " heavy " preaching. Where would Israel have been, had Israel turned iU



M



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. rv. IS— 28.



back on the " heavy " Moses, and followed the lead of the brilliant but perhaps shallow
Aaron, who could make molten images under the very shadow of Sinai, the mount ot
God, ere reverberating thunders had died away in the desolation of the desert. 4. The
essence of his excuse. The defect was to the mind of Moses fatal- -eloquence was the
one quality material to his mission. To many missions (e.g. military or administrative)
eloquence is not essential. The mission of Moses was diplomatic — it needed tongue-
power. " Say unto the elders of Israel !" " Say unto Pharaoh." " He had to persuade
a nation of slaves that he was the heaven-sent deliverer. He had to go into the
audience-chamber of the greatest potentate of earth, and speak to him for a nation, and
for Jehovah behind the nation. Just the one thing he could not do ; and for which ht
had not the indispensable qualification. So in thousands of other cases, of various forms
of duty and responsibility, of sorrow and perplexity. "Tongue" and "lip" and
" word " are what the sei-vice demands, and all are wanting.

III. The Divine declining of excuse. Notice — 1. Tlie changing tone. It is —
(1) Encouraging. Vers- 11, 12. (2) Indignant. Moses said, ver. 13 : " Let it please
Thee, Lord, send I pray Thee by a hand Thou wilt send." (See the Heb.) This
sounds submissive, as though Moses meant, " Send me." But from the translation of
the LXX. the words seem 'to have carried a disloyal meaning, now lost in the Heb. :
" I pray Thee, Lord, prepare for Thyself another capable, whom Thou wilt send."
And so Jehovah was indignant. Self-difSdence may be carried too far. Yet was not
Moses wholly cast away — for Jehovah took up again a tone likely to woo him to his
duty. (3) Encouraging again : vers. 14 — 17. 2. The counter pleas. God allows
the truth of all we say, and then comes in with his own Divine counter pleas why he
should not accept either our excuses or declining — of which the main articles are these :
The glory of God will be manifested — (1) In the use of man at all. God might have
glorified himself in breaking to pieces the empire of Egypt without the intervention of
any human agency. Pietists have sometimes thought that they glorified God by
making him everything, man nothing. But God glorifies himself more by using men,
for men are such poor tools to work with. E.g. Quentin Matsys making the beautiful
covering for the well that stands in front of Antwerp cathedral with only a file and
hammer. How! Such work with only file and hammer? So great an overthrow here,
and such a creation of nation and church by a man, and such a man ? The strength of
God is evermore working by our weakness. (2) By the imperfection of our powers :
vers. 11, 12. &od the Creator of the imperfection as well as the power — the dumbness
of the dumb, as well as the eloquence of the eloquent. He does this — i.e. supplements
our imperfect power, by — i Other faculties in the man. So here " the rod" of might
in deed was to supplement the imperfect speech. [See also above, II. 2.] ii. Other
men. Here by Aaron, vers. 14 — 16. iii. Himself. In the earlier part of this controversy
it was, " Certainly I will be with thee " — a general declaration. Now it is, " I will
be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou ehalt say." The Almighty power goes
■long with the imperfect organ of the Divine will. Apply as suggested above to M —
whether in the activity or in the patience of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. — '&



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 18 — Z3. — If Moses had, as we have
inpposed, been accepted into the Midianitish
nation, he would need permission to withdraw
himseU from the tribal head. This head was
now Jether, or Jethro, Moses' connexion by
marriage, perhaps his brother-in-law, perhaps
a less near connexion. Nations and tribes
were at this time anxioos to keep up their
nnmbers, and jealous of the desertion even of
a single member. Jethro, however, made no
opposition to the return of Moses to Egypt,
even though he designed to be accompanied



by hio wife and sons (ver. 20). Scriptnre
gives no indications of the motives which
actuated him. Perhaps the Midianites were
at this time straitened for want of room.
Perhaps the peculiar circumstances of Moses
were held to justify his application for leave.

Ver. 18. — My brethren probably means
here "my relations" (compare Gen. xiii. 8;
xxix. 12). Moses could scarcely doubt but
that some of his countrymen were still hving.
It would not have been for the interest of the
Egyptians to exterminate them. Oo lA petM



am. IV. 18—23.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



108



means, " yon have my leare — I do not oppose
your going."

Ver. 19. — And the Lord said nnto Uoses
in Uidian, Go, letnm. It would seem that
Moses was stiU reluctant, and was delaying
his departure, even after he had obtained
Jethro^ leave to go. Perhaps he was making
it an excuse to himself for not setting out that
if he returned he might stiU suffer death on
account of the offence which had driven him
into exile. To remove this last impediment,
God assured him that " all the men were dead
who had sought his life."

Ter. 20. — His sons. Gershom, already
mentioned (ch. ii. 22), and Eliezer (ch. xviii.
4), who was probably an infant. Set them
npon an ass. Literally, "the ass," i.e. the
one ass that belonged to him. The word
might best be translated "hi> ass." When
Moses is said to have " set Ihem upon " the
animal, we need not understand " all of them."
Probably Zipporah and her baby rode, while
Geishom walked with his father. Though
horses were known in Egypt before this, they
could not be used in the Sinaitic peninsula,
and the employment of an ass by Moses is
thoroughly appropriate. Betnmed. J.e. " set
out to return." Took the rod of Ood in his
hand. This is of course the " rod " of ver. 2,
which had become " the rod of God " by the
miracle of vers. 3 and 4, and which God had
commanded him to take to Egypt (ver. 17).

Vers. 21 — 23. — And the Lord said, eto. Now
that Moses bad at last given up his own will
and entered on the path of obedience, God com-
forted him with a fresh revelation, and gave
him fresh instructions as to what exactly he
was to say to Pharaoh. The statements of
ver. 21 are not new, being anticipated in
ch. iii. 19 — 20 ; but the directions in vers. 22—
23 are wholly new, and point to the greatest
of all the miracles wrought in Egypt — the
death of the firstborn.

Ver. 21. — All those wonders. The miracles
wrought in Egypt are called niph^dfh, " mar-
vels," mSphethim, "portents, and 'Sthoth,
"signs." Mophethim, the word here used
signifies something out of the ordinary course
of nature, and corresponds to the Greek Ttpara
and the Latin portenia. It is a different
word from that used in ch. iii. 20. In " all
those wonders" are included, not only the
three signs of ch. iv. 3 — 9, but the whole series
of miracles afterwards wrought in Egypt, and
glanced at in ch. iii. 20. I will harden his
heart. This expression, here used for the first



time, and repeated so frequently in cha. ^ii. —
ziv., has given offence to many. Men, it ii
said, harden their own hearts against God ; God
does not actively interfere to harden the heart
of anyone. And this is so far true, that a
special interference of God on the occasion, in-
volving a supernatural hardening of Pharaoh's
heart, is not to be thought of. But among the
natural punishments which God has attached
to sin, would seem to be the hardening of the
entire nature of the man who sins. If men
" do not like to retain God in their knowledge,
God gives them up to a reprobate mind " (Eom.
i. 28) ; if they resist the Spirit, he " takes
his holy Spirit from them " (Ps. Ii. 11) ; if
they sin against light he withdraws the
light ; if they stifle their natural affections of
kindness, compassion and the like, it is a law
of his providence that those affections shall
wither and decay. This seems to be the
" hardening of the heart " here intended — not
an abnormal and miraculous interference with
the soul of Pharaoh, but the natural effect
upon his soul under God's moral government
of those acts which he wilfully and wrongfully
committed.

Ver. 22.— Then shalt say nnto Fharaoht
Israel is my son. This would be addressing
Pharaoh in language familiar to him. Each
Egyptian monarch of this period was accus-
tomed to style himself, " son of the Sun," and
to clcim and expect the constant favour and
protection of his divine parent. It was also
quite within the range of Egyptian ideas that
God should declare himself by word of mouth
to his special favourites, and give directioni
as to their actions. (See ' Eecords of the Past,'
vol. iv. p. 43.) My flrstbom. Not only " at
dear to me as to a father his firstborn " (Ka-
lisch), but the only nation that I have adopted,
and taken into covenant, so as to be unto me
" a peculiar people above all the nations that
are upon the earth " (Deut. xiv. 2). Israel's
sonship is here mentioned for the first time.

Ver. 23. — I will slay thy son, even thy
flrstbom. For the fulfilment of the threat,
see ch. xii. 29. Moses did not utter it till all
other arguments were exhausted, and he knew
that he was having his last interview with the
monarch (ch. x. 29 ; xi. 4, 5). In this reserve
and in the whole series of his dealings with
the Egyptian king, we must regard him as
simply carrying oat the special directions
which, after his return to Egypt, he continu-
ally received from the Almighty. (See ch.
vi. 11 ; vU. 9, 15 19 : viii 1, 5, 16, 20, etc.)



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 19. — TTie /act of having a mission does not release a man from social ohligationt.
Direct communications with Jehovah, appuiutment to a great and glorious mission, with
the power of working miracles, might have rendered many a man neglectful of ordinary
obligations, might have seemed to place him above the necessity of asking auyones



IM THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [ch. ly. W— 2a

permission to do as he pleased. But Moses read his duty diiferently. He had been
received among the Midianites with great kindness, had been given a home and a wife,
and probably enrolled formally as an adopted member of the tribe or nation. Though
Beuel, the head of the tribe at the time of his coming, had ceased to hold that position,
having probably died, the tribe had a new head, to whom he was bound, if not by all
the obligations which had attached him to Eeuel, yet by several very definite and
tangible bonds. Jethro was his near relative and his tribal chief; he had perhaps
sworn allegiance to him ; he had certainly received from him protection, employment,
sustenance (oh. iii. 1). To have quitted his service without permission, to have left
his flock in the Sinaitio valleys, and proceeded straight to Egypt would have been easy,
but would have been unkind, ungrateful, and contrary to the accepted standard of
tribal morality at the time. Moses therefore went back to Midian from Sinai before
proceeding to Egypt — ^made, that is, a considerable journey in the opposite direction
to that which he was about to take — ^in order to obtain Jethro's consent to his going,
thus acting the part of a faithful servant and a good subject. It would be well if ^
who beUeve themselves to have Divine missions, and to be highly gifted, would follow
Moses' example, and not make their mission and high gifts an excuse for neglect of
ordinary duties and obligations. Moses' example, and the words of One higher than
Moses, should teach them that it becomes all men to " fulfil aU righteousness " (Matt.
iii. 15). If those with high missions neglect even small social duties, they " give an
occasion to the adversary to blaspheme."

Reticence sometimes a duty. We are not bound in all cases to tell even those in
authority over us the reasons, much less all the reasons, which actuate us. Moses
wanted Jethro's permission to quit his adopted tribe, and return to his native country
and his people. He gave a reason which was not untrue, but which was far from being
his sole, or even his main, reason. If he had said more, if he had revealed his mission,
he would probably have raised a storm of opposition to his departure. He would have
been called a fanatic, a visionary, a madman ; and everything would have been said
that was possible to deter him from carrying out his projects. If Moses felt, as he may
have felt, that he was too weak to encounter such a storm of opposition, he was wise to
be silent and so not arouse it.

The reasonable wishes of a subordinate should he granted cheerfully. Jethro's answer,
" Go in peace," may well be taken as a pattern by those in authority. It is kindly,
gracious, and imgrudging. The chieftain of a tribe might naturally have demurred to
the withdrawal of a family of subjects, the master to the loss of a valuable servant, the
head of a household to parting with near kinsfolk. But Jethro, deeming Moses' plea
a sufficient one, is careful not to mar the grace of his concession by a single word of
objection, reproach, or querulousness. Nor is " Go in peace " even a bare consent, but
a consent embodying a blessing. It is equivalent to " Go, and the Lord go with thee ! "
Notf also the absence of inquisitiveness. Jethro does not pester Moses with questions —
does not ask, " Is the reason thou hast assigned thy true reason," or " thy sole reason ? "
or, " When wilt thou return ? " or, " Why take thy wife and children ? " or, " How
wilt thou live in Egypt ? " or, '• Art thou not afraid to return thither ? " He will not
pain his near connection by doubt or distrust, or even undue curiosity. He will
not travel beyond the record. His consent has been asked. He gives it freely, fully
cheerfuUy.

Vnrs. 19 — 23. — Obedience Irings a Messing. There must have been something in tha
hesiiition of Moses which caused it not to be wholly displeasing to God. Once he was
" angered " (ch. iii. 14), but even then not greatly offended— content to show his anger
by inflicting a slight penalty. Now, when Moses still delayed in Midian, how gentle
the rebuke that is administered — " Go, return ; " and to the rebuke moreover is appended
an encouragement — " all the men are dead who sought thy life." Observe al.so that no
sooner does Moses obey, than his reluctance seems wholly forgiven ; the Lord appears
afresh to him, and rewards his obedience by fresh revelations. " Israel is my son,
even my firstborn." This tender relationship, never before acknowledged, is breathed
into the prophet's ear as he enters on the path of obedience. What may he not
txpect, if he continues in it 1 Surely blessings upon blessings. Deliverance, triumph,
oontinued, never-ending orotection are assiued to them whom God declares to be oil



Ofc IT. 18— 21.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 106

children. Moses, as their leader, will have the glory of their success. Even the might
of Pharaoh will be. impotent if used against them. Should Pharaoh refuse to libeiatt
Qoi'e " firstbom," he will lose his own.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 18 — ^21. — The return. Weeks, perhaps months, intervened between the reve-
lation at the bush and Moses' actual departure from Midian. Time was given for
allowing the first agitation of his spirit to subside, for enabling him to take the just
measure of the task entrusted to him, for the final overcoming of his involuntary
reluctance. An interval is presupposed in ver. 10^" Neither heretofore, nor since
thou hast spoken unto thy servant," and is impKed again here. Events were not yet
quite ready for his departure. The preparation of the man, and the preparation of
events (ver. 19) were going on simultaneously. God would have his servant brought,
not only to a clear apprehension of his message, but into a state v.f intelligent and
entire sympathy vrith it, before actually starting him on his journey. The call would
come at the proper time.

I. Permission received (ver. 18). The request to Jethro was couched in simple
but courteous terms, and was as courteously responded to. Moses said nothing of the
revelations he had received. 1. He had no call to say anything. His message was to
the elders of Israel, not to Jethro. 2. It would have been a hreach of confidence to
have divulged what passed between him and God without permission. 3. It was not
advisable to say anything. He would have required to have entered into explanations,
and might have encountered unbelief and opposition. If Jethro perceived, as possibly
he did, that there was something underlying Moses' request which he did not care to
state, he had the good sense to refrain from prying too curiously into what did not
concern him. The parting was courteous and friendly, creditable aUke to both.
Observe: 1. There are times when it is prudent to keep one's own counsel. 2. It
is the mark of a wise man that he can keep his own counsel. 3. It is well to be
reserved about private religious experience (Gal. i. 16, 17). 4. It is one's duty on all
occasions to study fiiendliness and courtesy. 5. It is nearly as high a mark of
character not to be too curious in prying into the secrets of others, as it is to bo
cautious in keeping silence about those entrusted to us.

II. The WAT OLEAKED (vcr. 19). As suggested above, Moses had probably been
Instructed to wait a Divine intimation as to the time of his actual departure. In a
work so important every step must be taken under direct Divine guidance. Cf. the
movements of Mary and Joseph with the child Jesus (Matt. ii.). And the warning
was not given tiU God was able to announce that all the men were dead who had
formerly sought his hfe. This would be a comfort to Moses, and would remove at
least one set of fears as to his personal safety. There may have been another reason
for delaying to this point. Time had again brought matters to the condition of a
tabula rasa. The conflict now to be begun was not to be demeaned by being mixed
up with the spites and enmities of a buried past. Observe : 1. How Gorl t^es events
with a view to every class of conditions. 2. How God consults fc the safety cf
his servants. 3. How God's purposes move with steady step to their actiomphsh-
ment, while mortals, who thought to hinder them, drop into their graves, and are
forgotten.

III. The jouknby entered upon (ver. 20). 1. Moses took with him his wife and
two sons. The desire to have them with him was natural, but he afterwards saw
reason for sending them back. The work he was engaged in was of a kind not com-
patible with family entanglements. There are times when a man's hands need to be
absolutely free; when it is his duty not to enter into relationships which would
encumber him ; or, if these already exist, to make the temporary sacrifice of comfort
and affection which the exigencies of his work demand (Matt. viii. 21, 22 ; 2 Tim. ii. 4).
2. He took with him the rod of Ood. This was indispensable. By it he was to work
signs (ver. 17). The rod of the Christian worker is his Bible. Armed with that, he
can speak with Divine authority, work miracles in the souls of men and confound tlM
■lightest of his enemies. — J. O.



106 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. ch. iv. 21- -23.

Ver. 21. — Hardening. God communicates anew with Moses, fortifying his resolution
to appear before Pharaoh, putting words into his mouth, and warning him of the effect
his message would produce. He was not to fail to do all his wonders before Pharaoh,
though the only effect would be to harden the monarch's heart — to confirm him in hia
resolution not to let the people go.

I. The Word of God is to be addressed to men, whatever reception it mat
MEET WITH. It is to be set forth, and the evidence which attests it exhibited, "whether
they will hear, or whether they will forbear " (Ezek. ii. 5) ; and this — 1. That God's
will may be made known. 2. That men's dispositions may be tested. 3. That if men
disobey they may be left without excuse. 4. That ulterior purposes may be fulfilled.
For men's unbelief cannot make the faith of God without efieot (Hom. iii. 3). If men
disbelieve and are hardened, God will use even their hardening as the point of attach
ment for some new link in the chain of his providential developments.

II. God infalublt foreknows the effect of evert appeal or message hx
ADDRESSES TO HIS MORAL CREATURES. He knows those to whom his servants will be
" the savour of death unto death," and those to whom they will be '* the savour of life
unto life " (2 Cor. ii. 16). But the knowledge that his Word will be rejected is not a
reason for keeping it back. As respects these foreknown effects, we are not permitted
to say either — 1. That God wills (i.e. desires) that his Word should harden ; or 2. That
in any case it hardens by his arbitrarily withholding the grace which would have
produced an opposite result. Yet Divine sovereignty is not to be denied in the effects
produced by the preaching of the Word, or in God's dealings with men in mercy and
judgment generally. He wiU be a bold student of Divine things who ventures to assert
that by no means known to him could God have subdued the obstinacy even of a
Pharaoh. Hearts as stubborn have yielded before now. We cannot solve these
anomalies. Enough for us to know that God's sovereignty, however exercised, is ever
righteous, holy, and, could we see all, loving.

III. Gob's Word, when its message is resisted, hardens the heart that resists
IT. The hardening of the heart is here attributed to God, as in other places it is
attributed to Pharaoh himself. The latter statement occasions no difficulty. It is the
invariable law, and one which is constantly being exemplified, that he who resists
grace and truth incurs the penalty of being hardened. That result follows from the
constitution of the moral nature. But precisely in this fact lies the explanation of the
other mode of statement, that the hardening of the heart is from God. For God is
concerned in the results which flow from the operation of his own laws, and takes
providentially) the responsibility of them. We may go even further, and say that
God designs that those who resist his truth shall be hardened by it ; just as he designs
that those who believe and obey it shall be saved. And the stronger way of putting
the matter, harsh as it seems, has its own advantages. Eesisters of the truth do well
to remrmber that in their attitude of opposition they have to do, not merely with
" laws," reacting to darken the mind and indurate the heart, but with a living God
within and behind these laws, lending his solemn sanction to their operations, willing
the results which flow from them, and righteously punishing sin by means of them.
This explanation, indeed, is not complete. Other phases of the subject come into view
later. Meanwhile the preacher of the Gospel is not to be astonished that his word, in
maiy cases, produces hardening effects. This is foreseen by God, and is taken up into
his plan. Learn also how a career of iniquity is often punished by the transgressor
being brought into circumstances which, merciful in their own operation, yet lead t;
his greater hardening. — J. O.

Vers. 22, 23. — Isra^ a type of sonsliip. Consider — 1. The condescension of Ood in
the establishing of this relationship. A nation of slaves ; in the eyes of the Egyptians
little better than a nation of lepers ; yet Jehovah says of them, " Israel is my son, my
firstborn." " Behold what manner of love," etc. (1 John iii. 1). 2. Tlie privileges
implied, in it. On this cf. Deut. i. 31 — k4 ; viii. 2 — 6 ; xxxii. 9 — 15. Keflect how
Israel was led, fed, guided, trained, chastened, delivered from enemies, and conducted
to a bountiful inheritance. These privileges have all their counterparts in the expe-
rience of the " children of God by faith in Christ Jesus " (Gal. iii. 26). 3. The respon-
tUdUties it imposed on others. Because Israel was Gods son, his firstborn, Fb^aob



OIL IT. 18— 31.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 107

wac to refrain from oppressing his son, and if he did not he would be smitten in his
own firstborn. (1) As men treat God's children so will God treat them. He notes,
and he wiU reward, kindnesses done to his sons, and be will avenge their wrongs,
(i!) God's children may safely leave the avenging of their wrongs to God. It is not
their work, but his, to avenge them ; the rule for them is to avenge not themselves, but
rather to give place to wrath ; heaping coals of fire on the head of the enemy by
returning him good for his evil (Bom. xii. 19 — ^21),— J. 0.

Vers. 18 — 23. — True, faith aiiditi joy. I. The obedience of faith. 1. Note Moses'
swift compliance with God's command. He tarried no longer : " He went and re-
turned . . . and said ... let me go." He does not seek advice. He does not even
wait for a oonvenient opportunity of urging his request. We must wait neither
upon time nor men. If God has spoken, we must obey. 2. His wise reticence. Ho
said nothing of what he had seen and heard. These experiences are a holy place where
the soul meets alone with God. Where this holy place is profaned the soul suffers loss.

II. Consolations abound along the pathway of obedient faith. 1. Moses
receives Jethro's permission and blessing. 2. Fears are removed (ver. 19). 3. He
passes on with the consciousness of power : he " took the rod of God in his hand."
4. He has the assurance of victory. Pharaoh's heart wiU be hardened, yet there is one
judgment in reserve which will bow that heart to compliance with the will of God
(vers. 22, 23). The cause of God cannot be defeated. As we go on in obedience to
God's commandment our advance is a continuous discovery of God's goodness. The
lions which we saw in the distance are chained, and do not harm us. — U.

Vers. 24 — 31. — The three meetings. I. The Loed's mbetino with Moses (vers.
24 — 26). 1. Moses' sin. (1) Circumcision was the solemnly expressed will of God
(G«n. xvii. 9 — 14). (2) It was enforced by exclusion from the blessings of God's
covenant. (3) Preparations had been made for the journey, but the circumcision of
Eliezer was not among them. 2. The reason of the omission, weak yielding to the
prejudices of his Midianitish wife. 3. His guilt. God looked beyond the sign to that
which it signified and partially accomplished — the claiming of the hfe for himself and
righteousness. Moses' disobedience was therefore murder by neglect, and Ufe shall
answer for life. The guilt of the unfaithful watchmen in Zion (Ezek. xxxiii. 7 — 9) ;
of parents who never seek by instruction and example and prayer to have their children
circumcised with the circumcision of Christ. 4. God ^'ill withstand the inconsistent
worker. He will permit his work to be done only by the righteous and the faithful.
This is seen both in churches and in individuals.

II. The meetino op Moses and Aabon (vers. 27, 28). 1. Moses had to proceed
alone (Ex. xviii. 2), the type of many who pass to service through loss. 2. God prepares
consolation in the desert (Matt. xix. 27 — 29). 3. The marvels of God's providence. He
makes their meeting with each other a meeting with himself. " They met at the mount
of God." 4. Hviman love hallowed by the Divine love — " And Moses told Aaron," etc.

m. Theib meetingi with the elders of Israkl (vers. 29 — 31). Where Moses
dreaded failure he meets success. There is more faith waiting to receive God's word
than we imagine : souls wait round us like the parched land for the showers. — ^U.

Ver. 19. — The vntolicited removal of a source of great anxiety. God assures Moses
that he has no longer any cause to fear on account of the Egyptian slaiu forty years
before. This last piece of information casts a flood of light on all the hesitation,
reluctance, and perplexity which Moses has hitherto shown in his intercourse with
Jehovah. It might have made a great deal of difference, if he had only known at the
beginning that the men were dead who sought his hfe. Not but that Moses was
honest enough in all the pleas he had started in order to escape from this mission and
responsibility ; but, deep under all other considerations, and very potent, even though he
had been ashamed to confess it, lay his fear because of the slain Egyptian. He might
even have got as far as the expressing of the fear, if God had not brought him sharply
up by the kindling of his anger, and made him feel that of two perils it was wise to
choose the lesser. Better run the risk from some Egyptian breathing vengeance than
&om the visitations of an angry God ; and yet, though checked from speaking, ht



108 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. 17, l&-3i

would be saying very earnestly in his heart, " Oh that I only knew myself to be safe in
this matter." Bemember the terror with which, after so long a time, Jacob approached
his injured brother Esau. Certainly Jacob had the bitter consciousness of wrong-doing
to heighten his fears, but Moses would have equally the consciousness of danger. Nor
can it be too often impressed upon us, in considering this opening stage of Moses'
acquaintance with God, that while he had a profound impression as to the real and
awful Being with whom he had come in contact, the extent of his knowledge was not
correspondent to the depth of his feeling. He had come into a real acquaintance with
God ; but it was at first, of necessity, a very imperfect and blundering one. The
defective notions of Moses, with respect to God, find their New Testament parallel in
the earth-bom and earth-Umited questions which the disciples so often addressed to
Jesus. Hence, even though Moses has seen so much of God's power and promptitude
in dealing with every difficulty he has raised, he still remains uncertain whether God
has taken into account this peril from the slain Egyptian. It is no easy thing to get to a
real and operative conviction that God knows even the smallest transaction in the past
life of every one of us. — ^Y.

Vers. 18 — 31. — Facitig Egypt. "And the people believed, and when," eta
(Ex. iv. 31). This section of the history may be homiletioally treated under three
geographical headings, which will keep the historical development prominent, without
obscuring the moral and spiritual elements.

I. MiDiAN. Prom Sinai Moses returned to Midian. Eeuel now dead, Jethro,
probably his son, becomes priest and sheikh of the tribe. [We take Jethro to have
been the brother-in-law of Moses. See 'Speaker's Commentary,' additional note
on Exodus ii. 18.] In this part of the story it is of moment to observe the
situation of Midian — east, and perhaps also west, of the Elanitic Gulf. Hence
travellers from Egypt to Midian, or vice versa, would come on the journey tmto
"the mount of God." Moses could not stay long in Midian. There was now
pressing on him — 1. The original impulse (ii. 11 — 14). 2. The commission of the
Burning Bush. 3. The intelligence that it was now safe to go. [Ver. 19 fiip-
nishes a convenient opportunity for noticing the Old Testament formula, on the
correct understanding of which so much depends, in which God is represented to
have directly said and done what he may have done only mediately. Here, e.g., did God
speak out of the air into the ear of Moses, or was the intelligence brought in the ordi-
nary way, say by caravans across the desert ? It is a large subject, but the following
points are suggested : " God said," " God did " this or that, are to this day formulas with
the Arabs. This Oriental habit of the cousins of the Hebrews is the opposite of the
Occidental. We suppress the name of God as much as possible ; and if constrained to
refer to the Divine Being, we allude to him as " Providence " or " Heaven." The Oriental
habit is more direct and truer ; for God is in the secondary cause, which fact some
amongst ourselves ignore. The Arabian style of to-day was the Hebrew style, and the
mode of the Old Testament. In the interpretation of this formula we must be careful
not to assume always the direct or supernatural, though perhaps occasionally we shall
have no other alternative. Indeed, no doubt that is so.] On the receipt of this now*
Moses paid fealty to the chief of the tribe which had given him a home for forty years ;
asked permission to return ; obtained it, and set out with " rod," wife, two sons, and,
no doubt, the usual service and attendants of a considerable caravan.

II. The desert — on the eoad. On the road, which passed through scenes of
incomparable grandeur, several incidents of the first importance occurred. 1. A word
of Divine encouragement (vers. 21 — 23). Jehovah inspired his servant with courage,
warned him that success would not be immediate, and gave him the exact message for
Pharaoh. [Whether all this came direct from God, or grew up in the mind of Moses, in
the way of meditation, under the guidance of the Spirit, must be left to tlie decision of
each.] But something may be here said on ver. 21 : " I will harden," etc. The objec-
tion will occur to every one — How can God punish men for that which he himself
causes or does ? This " hardening " may be here considered once for all. The following
considerations will have weight : — 1. God is often in the Old Testament said to do what
he on\y permits to be done. 2. In this passage of history (Ex. iv. — xiv.) God is said
to harden Hiaraoh's heart ten times, P'araoh to harden his own three times; and the



IB,iv. 24— 26.J THE BUOK OF EXODUS. lOfl

fact that Pharaoh's heart was hardened is stated five times. 3. Generally, until aftei
the fifth plague. Pharaoh hardens his own heart; then, and only then, save in
Ex. vii. 13, God i3 said to harden Pharaoh's heart. 4. The fact seems to be that at
first Pnaraoh sinfully hardened his own heart, and then God permissively allowed the
process to go on and confirmed it. 5, It must also he borne in mind that the very same
gracious infiuenoes will either harden or soften, according to the subject. The same sun
melts wax and hardens clay. The final responsibility of the hardening lay with
Pharaoh. The honuletio applications are obvious ; but see a striking poem in Dr.
Taylor's ' Moses ' (p. 75), by Dr. J. A. Alexander, beginning : " There is a time, we
know not when." Another lesson is obvious, as soon as mentioned : We are not justified
in looking for results which God has not promised. The deliverance of Israel was
promised and certain, but there was no promise that Pharaoh would voluntarily yield.
2. A deed of Divine relyUke (vers. 24 — 26). This passage is obscure, difficult, yet full of
moral significance : must therefore be put in a true Ught. The incident shapes itself to
our minds thus : Moses came on the jom-ney to a caravanserai, burdened with a grievous
memory of duty neglected, of the Divine covenant virtually repudiated (Gen. xvii. 9 — 14).
The younger son had not been circumcised. Tliis neglect was weak ; had been simply to
please the Midianitish mother. Hence anxiety, contributing with other causes to fever
and threatening death — " Jehovah met him," etc. Zipporah was persuaded to perform
the rite. The " stone " would be a flint implement, considered more sacred than iron
or bronze. To this day flint is used in New Guinea even for shaving the head. The
task was performed unwUlingly, hence her invective, twice repeated. Then Jehovah
released Moses — " let him go." It was now clear that the wife in these matters was
out of sympathy with Moses, and so, on the ground of moral incompatibility, was sent
back vrith her children to the tents of Midian (Ex. xviii. 2), and the grand soul went
on alone upon his mission. But the lesson : — ^The teachers of obedience must be them-
selves obedient. The law-giver must himself be marked by obedience to law. There is
nothing small or great in questions of fidelity. How could Moses thereafter take a
stand for righteousness if not himself above indictment ? Some moral defects may be
absolutely fatal to moral strength. 3. The meeting of the delivering allies — of Moses
and Aaron — not like that of Wellington and Bllicher, after the battle, but before the
campaign. The following points may be noted : — Aaron moved at a Divine intima-
don. The two met at Sinai. Moses communicated to his brother the revelation and
conference connected with the burning bush. Had not told Jethro. With him no
blatant speaking of the deepest mysteries of spiritual life.

III. Egypt. Picture the familiarity of cities, monuments, and scenery, but the
unfamiliar faces. No change, yet many changes. 1. The assembling of the elders.
Moses, more wise than aforetime, knows that nothing can be done without the sympathy
of the people. Can come into contact with them through the elders. This an argu-
ment for the organisation of the people. 2. 'The prominence of Aaron. At once takes
his place. Note Moses' unfamiliarity now with Hebrew and Egyptian, after the lapse
of so many years, as well as natural want of eloquence. 3. The result. Great success 1
Belief! Sensation at the coming down of the delivering God! Every head bowed!
Worship! God had said: They will believe — "they shall hearken to thy voice."
Moses : " Behold, they wiU not believe me, nor hearken to my voice." Bur they did.
Success even beyond our hopes, and the fulfilments of God beyond all our fears. — R.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 24 — 26. — The transition is abrupt from
the promise of triumph over Pharaoh to the
threat of instant death. But we must bear in
mind that some days may have elapsed between
the two, and that the sin which provoked the
menace was probably not committed at the
date of the promise. The narrative of verses
24 26 is obscure from its brevity; bat the



most probable explanation of the ciicmnstancea
is, that Zipporah had been delivered of her
second son, Eliezer, some few days before she
set out on the journey to Egypt. ChUdijirth,
it must be remembered, in the East does not
mcapacitate a person trom exertion for more
than a day or two. On the journey, tlie eighth
day from the birth of the child arrived, and liii



110



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. IV. 24r— 26.



eircnmcision ought to have taken place ; but
Zipporah had a repugnance to the rite, and
deferred it, Moses weakly consenting to the
illegality. At the close of the eighth day,
when Moses went to rest for the night, he was
seized with a sudden and dangerous illness,
which he regarded, and rightly regarded, as a
God-inflicted punishment, sent to chastise his
sin in breaking the Divine command (Gen.
xvii. 10 — 12). Zipporah understood the matter
in the same way ; and, as her husband was
too ill to perform the rite, she herself with her
own hand cut oS her boy's foreskin, and, still
indignant at what she had been forced to do,
east it at her husband's feet, with the reproach
— " Surely a bloody husband art thou to me."
The rite once performed, however reluctantly,
God remitted his anger, and allowed Moses
to recover his health, and pursue his journey.

Ver. 24. — ^It came to pass by the way in
the inn. " Inns," in oar sense of the word,
were unknown in the East for many ages after
the time of Moses, and are still of very rare
occurrence. Khans or caravanserais take
their place. These are unfurnished buildings,
open to all travellers, who thus obtain shelter
gratis, but must provide themselves with food,
bedding, and aU other necessaries. It is
questioned, however, if even such a place as
this is here meant. Probably, the mdlon of
Moses' time was a mere recognised halting-
place, in the vicinity of a well, at which tra-
vellers were accustomed to pass the night.
The lord met him and sought to kill hun.
A sudden seizure, followed by a dangerous
illness, is generally thought to be intended



(Knobel, Kalisoh, Bosenm&Uer, Canon Cook) ;
but the words seem more appropriate to a
miraculous appearance, like that of the angel
to Balaam (Num. xxii. 31). Still, it is quite
possible that nothing more than an Ulness is
meant.

Yer. 25. — Zipporali took a sharp stone.
Literally " a stone." Stone knives were
commonly used in Egypt for making the in-
cisions necessary when bodies were embalmed,
and were regarded as purer than iron or bronze
ones. Joshua ordered the preparation of stone
knives for the circumcision of those bom in
the wilderness (Josh. v. 2) ; and the Jews
seem to have used stone for circumcision for
many ages, though before the compilation of
the Talmud they had changed their practice.
Cast it at his feet. Not, certainly, the child's
feet, but her husband's, to whom at the same
moment she addresses herself. A bloody hos-
band. Literally, " a bridegroom of blood."
The words are clearly a reproach ; and the
gist of the reproach seems to be that Moses
was a husband who cost her dear, causing the
blood of her sons to be shed in order to keep
up a national usage which she regarded as
barbarous.

Ver. 26.— So he let him go. I.e. " God let
Moses go " — allowed him to escape death, ac-
cepted Zipporah's tardy act as a removal of
the cause of offence, and gave her husband
back to her. Then she said, etc. This is not
a second address of Zipporah to Moses, con-
ceived in the same terms, but an explanation
of her previous address. She called him " a
bloody husband because of the cironmoision."
Literally, "of the circumcisions." The two
circumcisions, of Gershom in Midian, and of
Eliezer on the way to Egypt, are especially in
the writer's mind.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 24 — 26. One small duty neglected may frustrate the whole purpose of a life.
To an Israelite the circumcision of his male children on the eighth day was a plain
practical duty, resting upon a positive precept, which was unambiguous and peremptory.
(See Gen. xvii. 10 — 14.) Moses, probably in deference to the wishes of his wife, who
disliked the custom, had allowed his son, Eliezer, to remain uncircumcised beyond the
appointed time, perhaps making the excuse to himself that during a journey such a rite
CI luld not conveniently be performed, and intending that the thing should be done when
they reached Egypt. But the precept was plain — " He that is eight days old shall be
circumcised among you ;" and nothing had been said by God of any circumstances under
wbich the rite might be deferred. It was the appointed means by which the child was
to be brought into covenant with God ; and if he died before the performance of the rite,
he would die out of covenant, and so suffer a wrong. Moses probably thought that his
tin was a liitle matter — perhaps hardly recognised it as a sin at all. But it was tlie
" little rift within the lute " which destroyed the whole value of the instrument. He
who " shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all " (Jam. ii. li ').
Gild thought the neglect no small matter, and would have punished it, had it not been
repaired, with death. It can never be a small matter to neglect any command of God,
be it to perform a rite, or to undergo one, or to keep a particular day holy, or any other.



«.iv. 19— 29. THE BOOK OF EXODUS. Ill

When a positive command is admitted to have come from God, the obligation to obey it,
as Bishop Butler observes, is moral. And so this little duty neglected, had nearly cost
Moaes his life, Zippurah her husband, the child his natural protector. Moses' death at
thid period would have left the whole purpose of his life unaccomplished, have handed
over the deliverance of Israel to another, and have caused his special powers and special
training to have been wasted. Let men beware, then, of the neglect of little duties, the
allowance in themselves of " little sins." Let them beware especially of being led intc
such " little sins," by over-complaisance to a wife, a friend, a companion. Many a man
would have stood firm, but for such seductive influence, A man who is truly manlT
will resist it, and risk the loss of human affection, secure of the Divine approvaL

HOMILIES BY VAEIODS AUTHOBS.

Vers. 19 — ^29. — " My times are in Thy liand" Moses thought himself fit for hil work
at forty — eager to undertake it before the years increased ; God wMts until his iself-
confldence has abated, and then, at eighty, gives him his commission.

I. 'i HE GREAT COMMISSION. Hls errand is to Pharaoh, as an ambassador from the
King of heaven to the king of Egypt. Notice — 1. His credentials. As coming in a
king's name he must be accredited by the king who sends him. God gives him signs,
very simple but very significant. (1) The shepherd's rod, emblem of his office, turned
into a serpent, emblem of his new dignity. (2) A hand made leprous and cleansed,
emblem of a people degraded but to be redeexed. (3) A libation of water turned to
blood, emblem of life smitten by judgment. 'I'he signs are simple — a rod, a hand, a cup
of water; so are most of God's signs; yet by the way in which he uses them they
accredit the messenger, and attest the authenticity of his message. 2. His message
corresponds with the last two signs : — (1) A command. Israel in slavery is to be released.
God wUl have liis son free, the leprous cleansed. (2) A threat. If Pharaoh refiise,
his son shall be slain ; the joy of bis life turned to blood. Such the commission given
to Moses, and to fulfil which he starts for Egypt.

II. The GREAT TBIAL : vers. 24 — 26. [JUustration : — ^A man about to enter into battle
carefully selects his best weapon. Is it, however, really trustworthy? — ^has it no weak
points ? He must prove it that he may know. Proving looks like seeking to break ; it
is seeking to discover if breakage is possible.] God having selected Moses, must prove
him before he uses him ; so if the proof brings out weak points they may at any rate be
remedied. "The Lord met him and sought to kill him.' Two weak points were
immediately discovered : — 1. A broken covenant. He who is selected to represent the
covenant people, is himself shown to be a covenant-breaker 1 His son uncircumcised 1 1
If judgment must fall on Egypt it must begin at the house of God. Moses must him-
self be purified before he can be allowed to denounce Pharaoh. 2. A refractory vri/e.
The secret of the broken covenant was clearly the wilful obstinacy of Zipporah. She is
compelled to do through fear what she would not yield from love. A man's wife is
meant for a help-meet ; if not that, she may be his greatest hindrance. Let Zipporah
return to Midian for the time (xviii. 2), and at least leave her husband unencumbered.
So out of the trial God makes a way of escape ; proves and reproves his servant that
he may improve and approve him.

III. The great consolation: vers. 27, 28. God does not do, what kings and
rulers too often do, treat his envoys as mere machines, forgetting their human needs
ind cravings. If Zipporah is no help-meet for Moses, he shall have a help-meet who
will more than satisfy him. In Aaron he finds sympathy, ver. 27 ; to Aaron he can give
his confidence, ver. 28. His own strength is doubled in the friendship of one who thus
shares his burdens.

Application: — 1. God gives us commissions, but they are always accompanied by
credentials. You say God calls you to do this? Show then the signs of your calling.
2. God's envoys are not free from trials ; rather, they are the more tried that they may
be the more trustworthy. The Captain was perfected through suffering. 3. Whatever
the commission, whatever tlie trial, God will empower us to fulfil the one and strengthen
us to endure the other. One may well do without Zipporah when Qoi sends him
Aaron. — Q.



112 THE Book of exodus. [oh. iv. S4— 27

Vers. 24 — Z7,—Tnterpretation of providence. This mystenous passage in the life of
]Uuses suggestR variotis lefleccious The facts are few. Moses, probably in deference to
Zipporah's abhorrence of the rite, had neglected the circumcision of his child. This, in
■o eminent a servant of God, was a sin which could not be winked at. Least of all
could it be overlooked at a time when the covenants were undergoing a species of resur-
rection, and when Moses was on his way to Egypt for the very purpose of giving effect
to them. Hence this incident at the inn. Moses, apparently, was seized by an illness
which threatened to be mortal, and a fatal result was only averted by Zipporah, who, at
once divining the cause of the aiillction, used a sharp stone, and performed the neglected
rite. Thus was Moses taught that he who represents God before men must himself be
blameless — guiltless of gross neglect of Divine commandments ; taught also that service
of God must be whole-hearted — ^that in the way of duty there is to be no conferring
with flesh and blood — no pleasing of men at the cost of unfaithfulness to God. " He
that loveth father or mother," etc. (MnDt. x. 37). Besides these general lessons we draw
from the incident such instruction as tiie following : —

I. God often teaches us that he is akgbt with us by visiting us with

AFFLICTIVE DESPENSATIONS, LEAVING US TO FIND OUT Ti.E CAUSE. Even MoSCS, with

whom God had so often spoken, received on this occasion no other warning of his
displeasure than this severe illness which so unexpectedly overtook him. Huxley
remarks on Nature's system of education — " Nature's discipline is not even a word
and a blow, and the blow first ; but the blow without the word. It is left to you
to find out why jova ears are boxed." The words apply as fitly to the relation of
outward providences to moral and spiritual conditions — a class of relations which this
writer would reject, but which nevertheless exist.

II. Conscience, reminding us of neglected duties, ob other sins committed by
us, is a ready interpreter of many of God's afflictive providences. Zipporah
guessed at once the cause of this trouble, and the result showed her guess to be correct.
So Josepli's brethren (Gen. xlii. 21).

III. The holiest of God's servants are not exempted from severe chastisb-
MBNTS. We may wonder that God should have chosen this particular time to put a
valuable Ufe in peril. It was, however, the summons to depart which brought matters
to a crisis. Moses was not ignorant of this neglected duty, and to set out on so grave a
mission, and leave it still neglected, was a sin calling for sharp rebuke. This is another
illustration of the truth that God punishes sins in his own children with even greater
severity than he does the like sins in others. Do we ask. What if Moses had died ?
The question is needless. The Divine arrangements had all the facts in contemplation
from the first. Had it been foreseen that the anticipated effect would not have followed
from the stroke — that the trouble would have liad a different ending — everything else
would have been different to suit. Yet we may not doubt that Moses' life was for the
time really in peril, and that, had repentance not supervened, God would not have receded,
even at the cost of a Moses, from inflicting upon him the extreme penalty of his unfaith-
fulness.

IV. True repentance includes reparation for wrong, and where that n
POSSIBLE, performance OF NEGLECTED DUTIES. Exemplified in Zipporah.

V. God is zealous fob the observance of his own ordinances. It might be
pleaded, this is only a ceremony, an outward rite ; what great importance is to be attached
to it ? But God had commanded it, and had even made it the badge of his covenant ;
therefore neglect of it was an act of disob dience, and implied a low esteem of covenant-
privilege. The sacraments may be unduly and foolishly exalted ; but there is an opposite
sin of disesteeming and neglecting them. — J. 0,

Vers. 24 — 26. — Neglect of the covenant on its human side. In Gen. xvii. we find the
covenant between God and Abram stated with great particularity and emphasis. On
God's side there were large promises to Abram of an abundant posterity and an ever-
lasting possession, and on man's side there was to be the faithful and regular practice of
circumcision. Moses was going to Egypt now in virtue of this very covenant, and as
the agent of God to advance it considerably towards its full effect ; and yet, strange tc
»ay, he had with him an uncircumoised son. No wonder that God visited him by the
way, and — ^when we look into all the probabilities of the case — no wonder that God



OH. IV. 27, 28.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. lU

made as if he would kill Mm. The very obscurities of this strange incident help to
make it more impressive and admonitory. Consider —

I. What thekb may be in the narrative to throw light on the cause of the
OMISSION. It cannot have been that Moses was completely ignorant of OocPs requirement.
Had not God recalled the covenant to the particular attention of Moses ? He had done
so in a sufBciently suggestive way, not by repeating the terms of the covenant in full,
but simply by referring to himself as the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Having
thus been reminded of the covenant, Moses was bound to make himself correctly
acquainted with every provision and detail of it. This covenant had been delivered
to Abram once for all, and was of such a kind that nothing but the most flagrant
neglect could allow the sign of it on its human side to fall into disuse. It was a
■jovenant written in the very body of every true Israelite. Doubtless Moses himself
had been circumcised ; yet here he is, going as the messenger of God to make progress
in fulfilling God's part of the covenant, and yet his own part, as a member of Israel, he
is unmistakably neglecting. Hence we see that he could not have been ignorant ; and
more than that, neither could he have been forgetful. We are led to infer that easy-
going compliance with his Midianite wife, Zipporah, was at the bottom of this
neg'ected ddty. It would appear indeed as if Moses had circumcised one son and then
left the other uncircumcised. If so, he had shown gross inconsistency. More might
have been said for him if both had been uncircumcised. Probably Zipporah, having
seen the pain of her firstborn, had struggled and pleaded ordy too successfully for
exemption in'the case of the second.

II. The extremely menacing mode by which God brings Mobes to a sense of
THE omission. " He sought to kill him." When G'od proceeds to such an extremity
as this, it must be either because of some monstrous breach of duty, or to impress an
important commandment by the most efficacious means that can be adopted. There is
no need to suppose that Moses, knowing full well the importance of circumcision, yet
deliberately omitted it If so, his conduct would have been very bad indeed. There
is a more reasonable and instructive aspect. He was brought nigh to death so that he
might learn the truth — and learn it so as never to forget, never to neglect it — that no
human being, whatever its claims and whatever its supplications, was to come between
Otoi and him. Let Moses now take his choice between pleasing his wife and obejring
his God. He could only do God's work by the most hearty obedience and attention.
Nor was he here only as the messeager of God to Israel and Egypt ; he was also the
responsible head of a household. Leaders who are husbands and parents are watched
in all their home relations. If Moses was going to let Zipporah lale and prevail by her
womanly wiles in one instance, why not in others ? The only way to keep things rignt
was for Zipporah to take her orders from him, and as Moses was to choose between his
wife and his God, so Zipporali between her husband and her child. She has to put her
child to a passing pain in order that she may spare her husband from impending death.
Indeed, poor woman, she ha 1 bojn greatly tried of late : compelled to leave her father
and her dear native land, and go on an expedition the reasons of which would be but
indifferently comprehended 'ly her. Whichever way she turns, and whatever she does,
there is something to vex h.r soul. Dearly had she paid for that chivalrous service
which Moses had rendered her. and her sisters so many years before. The awkwardness
of being une<iually yoked is t dft by the unbeliever as much as the believer.— Y.



FXPOSITION.



Vers. 27, 28.— The scene sucUnif siiJts.
Moses is left in the wilderness t r «over Ms
juength and make such arrangei unts with
respect to his wile and children ai Hi thinks
best under the circumstances. We » e carried
away to Egypt and introduced t Aaron,
Moses' elder brother, of whom we he"«. only
heard previously that he could " speaJ mil,"
JXOPPS.



and was to assist Moses as spokesman tn
his enterprise (ch. iv. 14 — 16). We now
find God revealing himself to Aaron also,
and directing his movements, as he had those
of Moses. Aaron had perhaps already formed
the design of visiting his brother (see ver. 14),
and woid have sought him in Midian but
for the direction now given him. That

I



114



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CH. nr. 27, 2a



direction was probably more definite than is
expressed in the text, and enabled him
to set forth confidently, without the fear
of missing his brother. At any rate, under
God's guidance be went and met him in the
Sinaitic district. The joy of meeting is
briefly described in the single phrase "he
kissed him." The meeting was followed by a
full explanation, on the part of Moses, both of
the nature of bis own mission and of the part
which Aaron was to take in it

Ver. 27. — Go into the wilderness. It is
scarcely possible that this can have been the
whole of the direction given, since the wilder-
ness extended from the shores of the Mediter-
ranean to the extreme point of the Sinaitic
peninsula. The sacred writers study brevity,
and leave much to be supplied by the com-
mon-sense of the reader. He went and met
him in tbe mount of God. Compare above,



ch. iii. 1, which shows that Horeb is meant.
Horeb seems to have been the name for the
entire mountain region, of which Sinai was a
part. Kissed him. So Esau kissed Jacob
after their long separation (Gen. xxxiii. 4),
and Joseph, Benjamin and his other brethren
(ib. xlv. 14, 15). In the East men are more
demonstrative than with us. Aaron's kiss
showed the gladness that was in his heart
(supra, ver. 14).

V er. 28. — Moses told Aaron all the words
of the Lord, Perfect confidence between the
two brothers was absolutely necessary for the
success of their enterprise ; and Moses wisely,
at their very first interview, made Aaron
acquainted with the entire series of Divine
revelations that had been made to him, keep-
ing nothing back, but communicating to him
" all the words of the Lord." Who had sent
him. Rather, " which he had laid upon him."
(So the LXX., the Vulgate, Elnobel, Ealisch,
and others.) All the signs. Compare reises
3—9 and verse 23.



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 27. — Ood does not stint his help when he visits man. It miglit have seemed
that God had now done enough to set on foot the deliverance of his people. He had
appeared to Moses, overcome his reluctance to be leader, given him the power of
working some great miracles, and allowed him to devolve a portion of his duties upon
his brother ; Moses was on his way to Egypt to carry out his commission, and Aaron
was minded to go forth to meet and greet hiin. Humanly speaking, nothing more was
needed for the initiation of the work. But God, who " seeth not as man seeth," does
not stint his arm when he has taken a business in hand. It would expedite matters if
Aaron were to be directed where to meet Moses, and the two brothers were to have
their conference at once, and arrange their course of proceedings. So Aaron is visited,
probably by an angel, and sent to meet Moses, and told where he will find him ; and
by these means the meeting is brought about with all speed, Aaron enlightened as to
his duties, and plans arranged to be put in act as soon as Egypt is reached. The two
brothers gain the advantage of sweet companionship some days or weeks earlier than
they would have done if left to themselves, and their first interview with Pharaoh is
advanced correspondingly. And as with his miraculous, so vdth his ordinary help.
God does not stint it. His grace is ever sufficient for men. He gives them all that
they can possibly need, and more than they would ever think of asking. He loves to
pour out his blessings abundantly on those that are true to him ; makes " all things
work together for their good ; " goes out of his way to procure advanti^es for th«n ; loads
them with his favours.

Ver. 28. — FtiJl conpdence necessary between fellow-iBorkers. Moses told Aaron "all
the words of the Lord " — made " a clean breast " to him, kept back none of the counsel of
God, so far as he had been made acquainted with it. A kind, a loving, and a prudent
course. Half-confidences are valueless ; they irritate rather than satisfy. If known to
be half-confidences, they ofiend ; if mistaken for full ones, they mislead and conduct to
disaster. Those who are to be fellow-workers in any undertaking — more especially any
great one — should have entire confidence each in each, and be wholly unreserved one
towards the other. There is good sense and good advice in the motto, " Trust me not
at all or all in all."



OB. XV. :ii>— 31.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



lU



EXPOSITION.



Vets. 29 — 31. — ^Moses seems to have parted
with Zipporah aud his children in Horeh, and to
have sent them back to Jethro (ch. xviii. 2), per-
haps because they might have interfered with
the work which he had to do, perhaps because he
thought Egypt would be no pleasant residence
for them during the coming struggle. He
journeyed onward from Horeb with Aaron for
his sole companion, and had abundant time for
taking counsel with him, and exercising the
influence over him which high intellect and
education combined will always give to their
possessor. The journey from Horeb to Go-
shen occupied probably some weeks. On
arriving in Goshen, the two brothers, in obe-
dience to the divine command (ch. iii. 16),
proceeded at once to " gather together all the
elders of Israel " — ^that is, all those who exer-
cised local authority over their countrymen in
the various districts which they inhabited.
Through the mouth of Aaron, Moses declared
all that had been revealed to him at the burn-
ing bush and subsequently, exhibiting at the
game time the credentials which proved him
an ambassador from God, i.e. the three miracles
which he had been empowered to work at any
moment (ch. iv. 2 — 8). The elders, being them-
selves convinced, summoned an assembly of
the people, as is implied though not expressed
in ver. 30 ; and the people, having heard the
words of Aaron and seen the signs, were also
convinced, and bowing their heads, worshipped
the God whose ambassadors had appeared
before them.

Ver. 29. — On the elders of Israel, see note
npon ch. iii. 16. It is clear that the Israelitish
nation, though in bondage to the Egyptians,
had a certain internal organisation of its own,
and possessed a set of native oflBcers. These
were probably the hereditary heads of families.
Moses and Aaron could have no authority to
gather these persons together ; but they is-
sued an invitation, and it was accepted. The
" elders " came to the meeting.

Ver. 30. — Aaron spake. Aaron at once



entered on his office of " spokesman " (ver. 16),
declaring to the elders all God's dealings with
his brother. Aaron also, and not Moses, as we
should have expected (ver. 17), did the signs,
God, by allowing him to do them, sanctioning
this delegation of power. On later occasions,
we find Aaron more than once required by God
to work the miracles. (See below, ch. vii. 19 ;
viii. 5, 16.) In the sight of the people. It
is not probable that the people were present
at the first meeting of the elders ; but the
sacred historian, anxious to compress his nar-
rative, and bent simply on conveying to us the
fact of Aaron's success with both elders and
people, omits stages in the history which he
supposes that any reader can supply, e.g. the
doing of the signs in the sight of me elders,
their belief in them, and their subsequent
assembling of the people.

Ver. 31. — ^The people believed. This ready
faith stands in strong contrast with the ordi-
nary incredulous temper of the Israelitish
people, who were " a faithless and stubborn
generation " — a generation that " believed not
in God, and trusted not in his salvation"
(Ps. Ixxviii. 22). It would seem that under
the pressure of affliction — having, humanly
speaking, no hope — ^the stubborn spirit of the
people had given way, and they were content
to look to Jehovah and accept his promises,
and believe in his messengers, notwithstand-
ing their natural scepticism. No doubt the
novelty of miracles helped to produce this
state of feeling ; and the fact that they were
not called upon at present for any active exer-
tion made acquiescence in what Moses put
before them easier. When they heard that
the Lord had visited — i.e. when the message
contained in ch. iii. 16 was delivered to them.
And that he had looked upan their affliction.
Compare ch. iii. 7. They bowed their heads.
Bather " they bowed down " (Kalisch), or
" inclined themselves." And worshipped.
Some understand an act of respect and ho-
mage done to Moses and Aaron, in token of
their acceptance by the people as leaders ; but,
though the words employed are sometimes
used in this sense, the context is opposed to
their having this sense in this place. ■' When
the people heard that the Lord bad visited the
children of Israel, . . . they bowed down and
worshipped." Whom f Surely, the Lord



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 29 31. — The hltssing on obedience. Moses and Aaron, on their return to

Egypt in company, carried out exactly the Divine directions, doing neither less nor
more. They summoned the elders as commanded (ch. iii. 16) ; they delivered God's
message to them (ih.) ; they wrought the signs which they had been told to work
(ch. iv. 17); they severally kept to their appointed offices ; and the residt was comptet*



116



THE ,BOQK OF EXODUa;



[CH. V. 1-^-6.



•uccess so far. The elders and people hearkened unto them, believed, gave in their
unqualified assent and consent to all that was put before them. And this was
according to the promise of God, "they shall hearken to thy voice" (ch. iiL 18).
Moses had disbeheved the promise, and exclaimed, " Behold, they will not believe
ihe, nor hearken unto my voice" (ch. iv. 1); but Moses was now proved mistakeiU'
" The foolishne.ss of God is wiser than men " (1 Cor. i. 25). God knew better than -
Moses ; he was faithful ; he kept his word. As Moses and Aaron had been true to him, '
and followed exactly his conmiands, so he proved himself true to them, and amply
rewarded their obedience, Moses and Aaron were from this time the accepted leaders .
of the nation.

Ver. 31. — Worship the proper outcome of thankfulness. Israel, down-trodden,
oppressed, crushed beneath an intolerable tyranny, no sooner hears the promise of
deliverance, than it displays its gratitude by " bowing the head and worshipping."
Many Christians talk of being thankfiil for God's blessings vouchsafed to them, but'
never think of showing forth their thankfulness by any extra act of worship, or even ■
any increased intensity in that portion of their ordinary worship which consists in,
thanksgiving. A sad sign this of modern lukewarmness, an indication that the " last
times " are drawing near, when " the love of many shall wax cold." Time was when ,
each national success was at once celebrated by a " Te Deum," and when each blessing;
granted to an individual drew forth a special offering. The thankfulness that does not
show itself in some such overt act must be a very poor thankfulness, a very weak and
washed-out feeling.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 27, 28. — A meeting of brothers. 1. By Divine appointment (cf. ver. 14). 2. Ik
a sacred place. 3. As co-operators in a good work. 4. With affection. 5. To exchange
experiences. — J. 0.

Vers. 29 — 31. — Preaching and faith. I. The wobd spoken. 1. Should be the Word
of God. The preacher is not set to deUver his own speculations, but to convey a
message. 2. Should be exhibited with its appropriate evidence. 3. Should be declared
to all.

II. Thb W0Rr> BBLiEVBD. The people— 1. Appreciated the value of the word.
2. Believed the word. 3. Worshipped; a token of gratitude, submission, and obedi-
enge. — J. 0.



SECTION IIL— CHAPTBE V.

WjBBt APFKAL OF MOSBB TO FhARAOH, AITD INCBEASS OF THE 0PFBE8SI0H.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER V



Vers. 1 — 5. — ^Having secured the adhesion of
tbe Israelitish people, Moses and Aaron sought
in interview with the Egyptian monarch who
was now in possession of the throne According
to the bulk of modem authorities, and accord-
ing to our own views of Egyptian historj, this
was Menephthah, the son and successor of Barne-
ses n. Menephthah was a weak prince, whom
events had favoured, and who had been thus
led to have an exalted opinion of himself. A
peat invasion of Egypt had occqrred at the



beginning of his reign, which had been met
and completely repulsed, not by his own skill
or valour, but by the skill and valour of his
generals. Menephthah himself had pointedly,
avoided mcurrjng any danger He claimed, io
be in direct communication with the Egyptian
gods, who revealed themselves to him in vi-
sions,, and pleaded a distinct command of
Phthali a.s preventing him from putting him-
self at the head of his army. Stul, he counted
as his own all the successes gained' by hiff
generals, and was as vainglorious and arro-
gant as if he had himself performed prodigief.



OH. T. 1 — 5.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



lit



of valonc Such was the temper of the king
before whom we believe that Moses and Aaron
appeared. There would be no difficulty in
any Egyptian subject, who had a prayer to
make or a petition to present, obtaining an
audience of the monarch, for it was an ac-
cepted principle of the administration that
the kings were to hear all complaints, and
admit to their presence all classes of the
community.

Ver. 1. — And afterward. The interposition
' of some not inconsiderable space of time seems
to be implied. Menephthah resided partly
at Memphis, partly at Zoan (Tanis). Moses
I and Aaron may have had to wait until he re-
turned from his southern to his northern
capital. Hoses and Aaron went in, and told
Pharaoh. Aaron was, no doubt, the sole
spokesman, but as he spoke for both, the plural
'is used. Thus saith the Lord God of Israel.
'Literally, " Thus saith Jehovah, God of Israel."
Pliaraoh would understand Jehovah to be a
proper name, 'parallel to his own Phthah, Ba,
Anunon, etc. Let my people go. The ratio-
nale of the demand is given in ch. viii. 26.
The Israelites could not offer their proper
sacrificial animals in the presence of the
f Egyptians without the risk of provoking a burst
of rMigious animosity, since among the animals
would necessarily be some which all, or many,
of the Egyptians regarded as sacred, and under
no circumstances to be killed. The fanaticism
of the Egyptians on such occasions led to wars,
tumults, and massacres. (See Plutarch, ' De
Isid. et Osir.,' § 44.) To avoid this danger
the " feast " must be held beyond the bounds
of Egypt — in the adjacent " wilderness."

Ver. 2. — And Pharaoh said, Who is the
Lord t Bather, " Who is Jehovah ? " Either
Pharaoh is actually ignorant, or he pretends to
be. The former is possible, since Jehovah was
a name but little employed, until the return
of Moses to Egypt. The latter, however, is
mme probable. That I should obey his voice.
Why am I to obey his voice ? What is your
Jebc rah to me ? What authority has he over
nie ? He is,.at best, your god, not mine. I
imow not Jehovah, i acknowledge him not.
He is not within the range of my Pantheon.



Neither will I let Israel go, i.e. " nor even, il
he were, would I consent to such a request as
this from him." The Pharaohs assumed to be
themselves gods, on a par with the natioiial
gods, and not bound to obey them.

Ver. 3. — And they said. Moses and Aaron
are not abashed by a single refusal. They ex-
postulate, and urge fresh reasons why Pharaoh
should accede to their request. But first they
explain that Jehovah is the Ood of the He-
brews, by which name the Israelites seem to
have been generally known to the Egyptians
,(See ch. i. 15, 16, 19 ; ii. 6, 7.) Their God,
they say, has met with them — made, that is,
a special revelation of himself to them — an
idea quite familiar to the king, and which he
could not pretend to misunderstand and he has
laid on them an express command. They are
to go a three days' journey into the desert
— ^to be quite clear of interruption from the
Egyptians. WiH not Pharaoh allow them to
obey the order ? If they do not obey it, their
God will be angry, and will punish them,
either by sending a pestilence among them,
or causing an invader to fall upon them with
the sword. The eastern frontier of Egypt was
at this time very open to 'invasion, and was
actually threatened by a vast army some ten
or fifteen years later (Brugsch, ' History of
Egypt,' vol. ii., pp. 147 — 9).

Ver. 4. — The king makes no direct reply to
this appeal, but turns upon his petitioners, and
charges them with an offence against the
crown. Why do they, Moses and Aaron, by
summoning the people to meet together, and
exciting tlieir minds with vague hopes, " let
the people from their works." This is damage
to the crown, whose labourers the people are,
and he, the Pharaoh, wUl not have it. " Get
you — all of you, people and leaders together —
to your appointed tasks — your burdens."

Ver. 5. — The people are many. This is
added as an aggravation of the offence charged
in the last verse. The people are numerous.
Therefore the greater damage is done to the
crown by putting a stop to their labonrs.
With these words the first interview between
the Israelite leaders and the Egyptian monarch
ends. Moses and Aaron, we must suppose,
retired discomfited from the royal preseucft



HOMILETICS.

Vera. 1 5. God's will often opposed by the great of the earth, and his servants

rebuffed. Encouraged by their success with the elders and \7ith the people (ch. iv.
29^31), Moses and Aaron would step boldly into the presence of Pharaoh. It was,
no doubt, known that they represented the feelings of an eritil-e nation, a i.;.tion
morecver of whom^the Egyptians had begun to be afraid (ch. i. 9, 10). The courtitrs
would'treat them, at any rate, with outward politeness and respect. They knew also
"that God- was on their side, and would ultimately, if not at the first, give them success.



118 THE BOOK. OP EXODUS, [ca v. 1—21

god. If we are right in supposing him to be Menephthah, he was the son of a king
who had set up his own image to be worshipped side by side wiih those of Ammon,
Phthah, and Horus, three of the greatest Egyptian deities. He viewed the demand
made of him as preposterous, and had probably not the slightest belief in the power of
Jehovah to do him harm. Who was Jehovah? and what had he to fear from him?
A. god — ^if he was a pod — who had not been able to prevent his people from becoming
a nation of slaves. He therefore treated the petition of Moses with absolute contempt.
And so it has ever been, and will ever be, with the great of the earth. They are so
exalted above their fellows, that they think " no harm can happen unto them." They
do not set themselves to inquire what is renlly God's will, but determinatelv carry out
their own will in their own way. Even when they do not openly blaspheme, like this
Pharaoh, and Sennacherib (2 Kings xviii. 29 — 35), and Herod Antipas (Luke xxiii. 11),
they ignore God, reject the just demands of his ministers, refuse to be guided by their
advice. Thus his servants are ever being rebuffed. They ask that slavery should
everywhere cease, and are told that in some places it is a necessity. They plead
against the licensing of vice, and are bidden not to interfere with sanitary arrangements.
They ask for laws to restrain intoxication, and are denoimced as seeking to lessen the
national revenue. They cry for the abolition of vivisection, and are held up to ridicule
as sickly sentimentaUsts. All this is to be expected, and should not discourage them.
Let them, like Moses and Aaron, continually repeat their demands ; urge them, in
season and out of season. They may be sure that they wiU triumph at last. " The
Loid is on their side ; " they need not fear what flesh can do against iLem.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 1 — ^21. — Failure. " I know not Jehovah," etc. : Exod. v. 2. We now come

face to face with the king. As the king here becomes very prominent, we will keep
h im conspicuous in the outlining of this address.

I. Atjdiekce with the king. This is a convenient moment for introducing Pharaoh
as the terrestrial representative of the Sun, as the vicegerent of Deity upon earth. Does
it seem wonderful that men should receive a man in this capacity ? But millions of
professed Christians in this nineteenth century so receive the Pope. We will take the
suggestions of the story in the time-order of the narrative. We have — 1. A lesson in
courage. The two went to their audience with the king at the peril of their lives.
Some might have remembered Moses. Their demand touched the honour and revenues
of the king. Courage in facing responsibility is the lesson ; leave consequences to our
poor selves to God. 2. A suggestion as to the method of evangelic grace. Jehovah here
calls himself for the first time in relation to the nation, as distinguished from the man
Jacob, "the God of Israel." A crowd was just becoming a State and a Church, when
Jehovah calls himself their God. First he is their God : then aU possibilities are before
them. Their history begins well. So now: first adopted children, and then the
obedience of children. 3. A warning against want of catholicity. The tone of
Pharaoh is that of the vicegerent of Deity, as against a tutelary god" he deigned not to
acknowledge. But he was wrong even on the principles of enlightened pagandom,
which was forward to acknowledge the gods of all nations. Compare the policy of
imperial Home. 4. Teaching as to gradation in OocFs demands. Here maybe dis-
cussed the nature and propriety of the first demand for three days' absence. Looking
at things after the events, it may appear to some that here was a demand which
concealed the real intention, viz. to return no more. But this would be to impeach
the veracity of God ! The demand really was for " a whole day's prayer-meeting," with
a day to go, a day to return. In the desert, as in consideration of Egyptian feeling ;
but probably within the frontier, for there were Egyptian garrisons in parts of the
desert of Sinai. A moderate demand ! One that Pharaoh might well have complied
with. Compliance might have led to further negotiation ; and this Pharaoh might
have stood out in history as co-operating in the deliverance and formation of the Church
of God. Instead of that he set himself against the small demand, and was unready for
the greater (Exod. vi. 11) when it came. And so we see him through the mist of
ages, " moving ghost-like to his doom." It is a picture of the method of Ood. B»
uka first for the simple, reasonable, easv etc. etc.



CH. T. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 119

II. Obdbrs feom the king. " The very same day ! " Such is the restlessness o!
the tyrant-spirit. The orders were addressed to the " drivers," Egyptians, and to the
" clerks " of the works, Hebrews. Wote the large employment of " clerks," as evidenced
by the monuments. The appointment of these " clerks " would contribute much to the
organisation of Israel, and so prepare for the Exodus. As to the orders — explain them.
Bricks a government monopoly ; witness the royal mark on many to this day.
Same number of bricks as before, but people to gather in the corn-fields the straw (in
harvest only the ear cut off) previously allowed by the government, chop it, and mix it
■with the clay. Terrible cruelty of these orders-in-council in such a climate.

III. Obedience to the king. For the sake of vividly and pictorially bringing up
the condition of the people, note the time of straw-collecting : time of harvest— end of
April ; then a hot pestilential sand-wind often blows over the land of Egypt for fifty
days ; the effects on health, tone, skin, eyes (in the land of ophthalmia), of so working
in blazing sun, in clouds of dust, in hopeless slavery. They retvu:n to the horrid
brickfields ; fail ; fierce punishments, as to this day in the same land.

IV. Expostulation with the king. The "clerks" of the works constitute a depu-
tation to the king, perhaps by virtue of a " right of petition." The king accuses them
of being " idle." To understand this, think of the gigantic public works, the terrific
labour, the perishing of thousands, the likelihood that such a taunt would spring to
tyrannical lips. The king refuses, perhaps threatens the lives of the " clerks." Pee
ver. 21 — " to put a sword," etc. Here again, that which seemed most against the people
made for them. The treatment of the "clerks" brought them into sympathy with
their enslaved brethren. Israel closed its ranks. The fellowship of suffering prepared
for the companionship of pilgrimage. There was, too, a present blessing. Spiritual
feelings were quickened, heaven came nearer, the pitying love of God became mora
precious. One can ima^e such scenes as those in which the slaves of the Southern
States, through horrid swamps and over mighty rivers, in the dead of night "fitols
■way to Jesus."

" In that hour, when night is calmest,
Sing they from some Sacred Fsalmistt
In a voice so sweet and clear
That I cannot choose but hear.

" And the voice of their devotion
FUls my soul with strange emotion {
For its tones by turns are glad,
Sweetly solemn, wildly sad."

[Adapted from LoNaFBlxoW.]

V. Consequences to the ambassadoes of the King op kings. Moses and Aaron,
somewhere near the palace, were waiting to know the result of the audience of the
" clerks " with the king. The " clerks," irritated and angry, turned on the God-given
leaders: ver. 21. [Note in the Heb. the expression " to stink in the eyes," and the fact
that pungent odours do affect the eyes.] A dreadful trouble to Moses and Aaron !

In conclusion, observe — 1. Tlie cruelty thai is ever incident to sin. " Man's inhumanity
to man " a universal fact. " The dark places of the earth are ftiU," etc. ; so places alight
TPith modem civilisation. The incidents of any gin-palace ! There is, too, a cruelty of
word and manner. Soul- wounds deeper than sword-f;ashes. iN o cure save under the
sanctifying power of the Cross of self-abnegating love. 2. The pain that attends all
emancipations. The first efforts of Moses and Aaron led to nothing but disaster.
See vi. 9. So with the agony of emancipation in America. So always and everywhere.
So with reforms within the Church. So with crises of soul-history. 3. The discourago-
ment that may fill to leaders. 4. The encouragement we all have. Note here — (\) Tha
appointment of the " clerks ; " (2) The personal danger into which they came ; (3) Tha
uniting all Israel into a fellowship of grief that they might dare the desert. All this
camo out of the oppression ; but tended to salvation. Our darkest experiences may ha
•ur liest Mends. 5. Through what sorrow all come to the final emancipation. — B.

Chap. V. — ^The people of Jehovah detained and oppressed by the representative of tlw



1^ tMte boofe OF fixobus. [ca-t. i— 4.

prince of this world; no doubt as "to the strength of the latter — ^is it possible for his
gpoils to be wrested from him ? The strong man armed has thus far kept his palace
fljuke xi. 21), and his goods (cf. Eev. xviii. 13) have been in peace, so far as outward
disturbance is concerned. Now comes one who claims to be the stronger. Wliat may'
be expected to happen ?

I. The challenge dblivbkbd. 1. The tyrant. Picture the king. Wholly self-
satisfied, worshipped as a god, absolute ruler over the lives of thousands. Surrounded
by obsequious servants — none to contradict him, none to disobey. Enthroned in palace.
Enter/ — 2. The envoys. Two men — one grown old in slavery, one for forty years a
shepherd, looking now at all this pomp as a man who dimly recalls some dream. Does
he think of what might have been, perhaps he himself seated upon the throne
(cf. Heb. xi. 24) ? Greater honour to be the unknown envoy of Jehovah than to be the
Pharaoh who receives his message. 3. The message. Strange words for such a king to
hear (1) a command, not a request. The sender of the message speaks as to a servant.
(2) The slaves of Pharaoh claimed as the people of Jehovah ; his right denied to the
possession of his goods. 4. The reply. The demand met by a contemptuous refu»i^L
Who is Jehovah ? I know not Jehovah ! " If the message is authoritative, yet the
envoys are sufficiently humble — ^they even plead with him that, for the sake of the
people, he will grant them permission and opportunity to sacrifice (ver. 3). All to no
purpose ; the strong man is sec\ire in his possessions and means to keep them in i^s
grasp.

II. Hostilities COMMENCED. Pharaoh was not quite so indifferent as he seemed. If
there is to be war, he will gain such advantage as may be gained by making the first
hostile movement. His slaves at any rate shall be taught that rebellion is not likely to
be successful. Effect of his policy : — 1. On people. So long as he had been undisturbed
his goods were in peace ; now that he is disturbed the miserable peace of his chattels is
disturbed too. [Man in prison, treated with greater rigour on the rumour of an
attempted rescue.] Early spring, just after the corn has been cut ; chopped straw needed
to mix with the clay in brickmaking ; let these discontented rebels gather their own.
Israelites obliged to scatter themselves over the country ; all complaints stifled with
blows. Result, vers. 20, 21, great discouragement and distrust of Moses and Aaron.
" This comes of interfering." Six months' worse tyrannythan ever. 2. On himself.
Six months to realise the success of his policy ; feels more secure than ever ; heart ' is
harder ; pride greater (cf Rom. ii. 4, 5). 3. On Moses. Vers. 22, 23. Dislieartened,
but only for a little ; repulsed by Pharaoh, suspected by the people, he is driven back
on God ; like the giant who gained strength each time he clasped the ground, so
becoming more invincible with each new overthrow, finds God his refuge and his
ttrength also. God is pledged to secure final victory. The slaves must be freed ; not
because they can win freedom, but because Ood has promised to free them. Apply,

'from our Lord's parable, Luke xi. 21, 22. Satan the strong man who has many slaves.

'His power seems at first to increase when moved by the rumour of redemption we
ikttempt to follow the dictates of our Deliverer (cf. Rom. vii. 9 — 11). Content with

^shivery, there is quietude ; trying after freedom we find trouble and affliction, flllustr.

,A habit, not hard to endure, but hard to break. The chain of sin is easy to wear ; they
iOnly know how fast it holds who try to struggle free of it.] Cf again Rom. vii. with
St. Paul as with Israel ; the bondage seemed worse than ever when the hope of freedom
was the most alluring. In either case the ground of hope, not in the sufferer, but away
outside him. God prompts to the struggle against the oppressor, but he does not let
victory depend on us ; that rests with him. The promise to deliver is contained in the
call to freedom. It is not, "I will help you when you are strong," nothing said abou^t
tmr strength at all ; confidence rests on the fact that God is Jehovah, the changeless
One (cf Ex. vi. 2; Mai. iii. 6). Let Israel obey Moses, and God must redeem them
from Pharaoh. Let us obey Christ, and God must redeem us from the power of

'Satan. — G..

Vers. 1 — 4. — A first interview. Accompanied by Aaron, Moses passes agaui'thiough
the halls of the Pharaohs from which he has been so long a stranger. Kings, courtiers,
tad, people are different ;. but all else— gates and pillars, courts, corridors, and Teoept^on-
(Ooma — how unchanged since first' he kjaew them 1 The feelings of the quondam prinot



^V.1-^0 TltE 60015: Ot* B2iOt)tJB. t'ii



must ha-e been strangely mingled, as, after forty years of exile,' he trod the familiar
pavements, and looked upon the old splendours. But the narrative, absorbed in its
mightier theme, has no word to spare for the emotions of a Moses. The long contest
between Pharaoh and Jehovah is on the eve of its commencement, and the interest
centres in its opening scene. It is this which occupies the verses before us.

I. The request (vers. 1, 3). Behold Pharaoh on his throne of state, while the
brothers stand before him delivering Jehovah's message. The request preferred to him
was — 1. Eminently righteous and reasonable. No monarch has a right to deprive a
people of the opportunity of worshipping God according to their consciences. If he
Qoes, the people have a right to protest against it. Pharaoh could not be expected to
understand the modern views of rights of conscience, but even by the hght of his own
time people were entitled to be permitted to worship their own gods, and to honour them
by appropriate festivals. But not only had Pharaoh deprived the Hebrews of their
liberty, and ground them to the earth by cruel oppression — ^both offences against
righteousness, but he had taken from them, we may be certain, the opportunity of
observing in a proper manner the festivals of their Goi MOses and Aaron would have
been within their rights, even without Divine command, had they demanded that the
whole nation be set at hberty. Much more when they only asked that they be allowed for
a brief space to retire into the wilderness, there, unmolested by the Egyptians, to sacrifice
to the Lord. 2. Supported hy Divine command. " Thus saith the Lord God of Israel."
Pharaoh, it is true, could plead that he did not know Jehovah ; but when he saw these
men's sincerity, and how they dreaded incurring their God's anger (ver. 3), it was his
duty to have inquired further. The evil was that he did not care to know. He treated
the whole matter with impious and disdainfvil contempt. 3. Unaccompanied by signs.
Moses and Aaron had no occasion to exhibit signs. Pharaoh was not in a mood to pay
the slightest attention to them. He did not even dispute that this was a bona fide
message from Jehovah, but took the ground of simple refiisal to obey it. Yet there may
have been a reason for working no miracles at the opening of the conflict. God proceeds
with men step by step. The first appeal is to be made, not to the king's fears, but to
his sense of fairness, his humanity, and feeling of reUgion. He must be convicted on this
lower ground before sterner measures are used to coerce him to submission. It might
be true that purely moral considerations would have little effect upon him ; but if so,
this had to be made manifest. God deals with men first of all in the open court of
conscience, and it is there — in the region of ordinary morals — that hardening usually
begins.

' II. Pharaoh's reply (ver. 2). It was, as already stated, a haughty and angry

refiisal, showing total disregard of the rights and wishes of the Hebrews, and setting

" Jehovah at defiance. The king's disposition, as brought to light in it, is seen to bb —

1. Proud. He probably regarded the request of the brothers as an instance of astounding
audacity. Who were they, two slave-born men, that they should presume to ask from
him, the lord of mighty Egypt, that the people be allowed to rest from their labours ?
His pride may have blinded him to the righteousness of their demand; but it could not
lessen his responsibility. We are judged, not according to the impression which
righteous and merciful appeals make upon us — that may be nil — but by the inherent
righteousness of the appeals, and by the effects which they ought to have produced,

2. Headstrong. Before venturing so defiantly to scout Jehovah and his message, it wouid
surely have been well for Pharaoh to have inquired a Uttle further into the character and
powers of this Being of whom the Hebrews stood so much in awe. He had not the
excuse which many moderns would plead, that he did not believe in gods or in thti
supernatural in any shape. Pharaoh had no right, from his own point of view, to scout
the possibility of " the God of the Hebrews " having met with them ; and neither, so
far as appears from the nan-ative, did he, though he chose to regard the story as a
fiction. Many reject the Gospel, never having given its claims their serious attention ;
but this will not excuse them. They cannot plead that, had they believed it to
be true, they would have acted otherwise- Their sin is that in their headstrongness
they will not trouble themselves to inquire whether it is true. 3. Profane. After
all, what Pharaoh's reply amounted to was this, that, let Jehovah be who or what
he might, he (Pharaoh) set him at naught— would not obey him. The message might
or might not come from a God, he did not care. Thus he "set his mouth against
the heavens" (Ps. Ixxiii. 9), and "exalted himself above all that is called God"



122 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. toH. v. 1— &

(2 ThesB. U. 4)— not an uncommon phase of pride. But the presumptuously wicked
will do well to remember that, if Pharaoh thus exalted himself, it was to his owp
destruction. His very pride was a challenge to Jehovah to destroy him. — J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 5. — OocTs demand and Pharaoh'' s answer. — I. The demand. 1. Tti
modesty. They merely ask Uherty to depart on a three days' journey into the
wilderness. 2. It was asked in good faith ; it was not a cover for escape. God would
give deliverance ; but that was left in Grod's hand ; and meanwhile they asked only
for hberty to worship him. 3. Its reasonableness : they could not sacrifice the sacred
animals of the Egyptians before, their faces. 4. Its necessity. Pharaoh might not
know Jehovah, but they knew him, and must serve him, " lest he fall upon us with
the pestilence or the sword." The demand of the Church still is liberty to serve God
in lus own appointed way. It must be had. Luther's " God help me ; I can do no
other ! " " We ought to obey God rather than men " (Acts v. 29).

II. The refusal. 1. Its presumption. He did not know Jehovah, and therefore
the message was a lie ! Unbelief makes the bounds of its knowledge the bounds of
truth and possibility. The pretensions of modern agnosticism. 2. It was a refusal of
justice ; it was a resolve to continue oppression. Unbelief is the brother and helper
of wrong-doing. 3. It was made with reproach and insult. They were encouraging
idleness and sedition : " Get ye to your burdens." " These that have turned the world
upside down are come hither also." 4. The rage of the wicked is often the best
commendation of God's servants. It is a testimony to their faithfulness. — U.

Ver. 2. — Pharaoh's first response: his answer in word. Moses and Aaron, somehow
or other, have found their way into Pharaoh's presence. All things, so far, have hap-
pened as God said they would happen. The very brevity and compactness of the record
at the end of ch. iv. is an instructive comment on the way in which Moses had mistaken
comparative shadows for substantial difScuIties. The actual meeting of Moses with
Israel is dismissed in a few satisfactory and significant words ; as much as to say that
enough space had already been occupied in detailing the difticulties started by Moses in
his ignorance and alarm. It is when Moses and Pharaoh meet that the tug of war really
begins. Moses addresses to Pharaoh the commanded request, and is met, as was to be
expected, with a prompt and contemptuous defiance. Observe —

I. Pharaoh, in his rejoinder to Moses, puts a question which (Jod alone can
properly answer. " Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice to let Israel go ? "
This was evidently in Pharaoh's opinion a question which needed no answer at all. It
had nothing interrogative about it, except the fonn. Taking the form of a question, it
served to express more forcibly Pharaoh's defiant spirit. There was, in his opinion,
really no need to consider or confer at all. " Am I not the great Pharaoh, successor to
many great Pharaohs before me ? Is not my power accepted and undisputed far and
wide ? " He could not so much as comprehend any danger unless it took the form of
physical force ; and not only so, but a form plainly visible — near, threatening, over-
whelming. If only some great king had been approaching — strong with the strength
of a large and victorious army — to demand the liberation of Israel, Pharaoh would not
so have spoken. To him the invisible was as the unreal. Pharaoh listens to Moses,
and what does he hear ? — a claim that seems to dispute his supremacy, from this new
deity, whose image he has never seen, whose name mayhap his priests have told him is
not that of any deity worshipped in Canaan of which they have ever heard. Certainly
it looks a large claim upon the first presentation of it, small as it is in comparison with
what is to follow. This, then, is what he hears, and the audacity and presumption of it
are not diminished by what he sees. There stand Moses and Aaron, completely devoid
in person and surroundings of anything to impress the king with the peril of refusing
their request. Surely if the men who say they are sent look so contemptible, the unseen
being from whom they say they come may be safely neglected. Such is the reasoning,
silently powerful, if not openly expressed, of those who despise and reject the claims of
God. L'hr'st is judged of, not as he is in himself, but by the superficial aspect of
Christians. Because they are often low in station, or inconsistent in life, or lacking in
disposition and ability to make much outward show, the world thinks that there is little
or r')thing behind them. It is the folly of only too many to take Pharaoh's stand.
For be right reception of the things of God we need all possible humiUty and open>



«LT. 1— 5.] THE BOOK. OF EXODUS. 123

mindednesa ; what then is to be done, if upon the very first approach of religion, we
pooh-pooh it as mere superstition, folly, and delusion ? 2. This was a question to which
Moses could have given a very effective and alarming answer if only he had been allowed
oppiirtunity. Moses, fresh from the revelations and sanctities of Horeb, could have
told Pharaoh such a story of the workings of Jehovah as would have been enough, and
more than enough, to guide the steps of a right-minded listener. Is'ot only his own
personal experience ; not only the sight of the burning bush, the rod transformed, the
leprous hand, the blood where water ought to be ; but also the fulness, the terrible
fulness of Jehovah's power in the earlier days of the world, were within his reach to
speak about. He could have told Pharaoh very admonitory things concerning Sodom
and the Deluge if only he had been willing to listen. We may well believe that the
effect of Pharaoh'is defiant attitude would be to send Moses away striving to refresh and
sustain his mind with the evidences, so available and so abundant, that in spite of this
proud king's contempt, Jehovah, in his vast power and resources, was indeed no vam
imagination. When the proud and self-sufficient ask this Pharaoh-question, it is for ur
to make such answer as may be reassuring to ourselves ; not to doubt our own eyesight
because others are blind, our own hearing because others are deaf.

How few sometimes may know, when thousands err

The truth which we may not be able to make even probable to others, we must strive
60 to grasp and penetrate, that more and more it may be felt as certain and satisfying to
ourselves.

3. Thus we see how the Lord himself needed to deal with this question. Knowledge
of God is of many kinds, according to the disposition of the person who is to be taught,
and according to the use which God purposes to make ol him. Pharaoh was evidently
not going to be a docile scholar in God's school — one who comes to it willing and eager,
thirsting for a refreshing knowledge of the living God. But still he had to be a scholar,
willingly or not. He had to learn this much at least, that he was transgressing on the
peculiar possessions of God when he sported with Israel in his despotic caprice. It is
for no man to say that his present real ignorance gives assiurance that he will never
come to some knowledge of Ood. It may be as pitifully true of the atheist as it is
encouragingly true of the godly, that what he knows not now, he will know hereafter.
Now he knows not God, but in due time he will know him ; not dubiously, not distantly,
but in the most practical and it may be most painful and humiliating manner. Pharaoh
says, with a sneer on his face, and derision in his voice, " Who is Jehovah ? " That
question is duly answered by Jehovah in signs and plagues, and the last answer we hear
anything about on earth comes unmistakable and subhme, amid the roll of the Bed Sea's
returning waters.

II. But Pharaoh not only puts this defiant question ; He utters a most determined
RESOLUTION WHICH GoD ALONE CAN ALTER. " Neither will I let Israel go." What then
are Israel's chances for the future ? There was every certainty that, if left to himself,
Pharaoh would go on, tyrannous and oppressive as ever. From a human point of view
he had everything to help him in sticking to his resolution. His fears, if he had any —
the wealth which he and his people had gained from the incessant toils of Israel— the
great dislocations and changes which would have been produced by even a temporary
withdrawal of Israel— all these things helped to a firm maintenance of the resolution.
It was a resolution which had strong and active support in all the baser feelings of
his own breast. It is juat in the firmness and haughtiness of such a resolution, revealing
as it does the spirit of the man, that we get the reason for such an accumulation of
calamities as came upon his land. Here is another significant illustration of the
manifold power of God, that he could break down so much proud determination. There
was no change in Pharaoh's feeling; no conversion to an equitable and compassionate
mind • he simply yielded, because he could not help himself, to continuous and increasing
Tjressure, and God alone was able to exert that pressure. Pharaoh here is but the visible
and unconscious exponent of that dark Power which is behind all evil men and cruel
and s»lfish pohcies. That Power, holding men in all sorts ui bitter disappointments and
degrading rSiseries, virtually says, " 1 will not let them go/' Our confidence ought ever
to be that though we can do nothing to break this bitter bondage, God, who forced tha
foe of Israel to relax Ms voracious grasp, will by bis own means force freedom for ui



m



*tHE Booife oi^ EiobtJ&.



toH. V. fe-4>



from every interference of our spiritual foe. It was Pharaoh's sad prerogative to shut
his own heart, to shut it persistently, to shut it for ever, against the authority and
benedictions of Jehovah. But no one, though he be as mighty and arrogant as a
thousand Pharaohs, can fasten us up from God, if so be we are willing to go to him,
from whom alone we can gun a pure and eternal life. — ^Y.



EXPOSITION.



Vera. 6 — 8. — ^Btileis are not always content
rimply to refuse inconvenient demands. Some-
times they set to work with much ingenuity
and worldly wisdom to prevent their repeti-
tion. Tliis is especially the case where they
entertain a fear of their petitioners. The
Spartans removed Helots, who had earned their
freedom, by the Crypteia. The massacre of
St. Bartholomew was caused by the Huguenot
demand for freedom of worship and the diffi-
eidty of repressing it. The Pharaoh now iff
not content to let things take their course, but
devises a plan by which he hopes to crush
altogether the aspirations of the Hebrew
people, and secure himself against the recur-
rence of any such appeal as that which had
been made to him by Moses and Aaron. The
Israelites had recently been employed chiefly
in brickmaking. They had had to dig the
day and temper it, to mix it with straw, and
mould it into the form of bricks; but the
itiaw had been supplied to them. The king
determined that this should be no longer done ;
the Israelites should find the straw for them-
selves. It has been estimated that by this
change their labour was " more than doubled."
(Canon Cook.) It was a not unreasonable ex-
pectation that under this system popular
meetings would cease (ver. 9) ; and that Moses
and Aaron, not being backed up by the voice of
the people, would discontinue their agitation.

Ver. 6. — The same day. Pharaoh lost no
time. Having conceived his idea, he issued
his OTder at once — on the very day of the in-
terview with the two leaders. It would be well
if the children of light were as " wise " and
IS energetic on all occasions as the children of
darkness. Taskmasters and officers. The
word translated " taskmaster " here is not the
same as the expression similarly tendered in
ch. i. 11 ; and it is thought not to designate
the same class. The sarey mamm of the for-
mer passage are thought tj be general superin-
tendents of works, few in number and of high
rank, the nogSihim of the present place to be
gnbordinates, numerous and inferior in position.
Both of these classes were probably Egyptians.
The " officers " {thoterim) were undoubtedly
Hebrews. They were especially employed in



keeping the tale of the bricks, and seeing that
they reached the proper amoxmt. Literally,
the word shoterim means " scribes," and is so
rendered in most passages.

Ver. 7. — Straw to make brick. Straw was
used in Egypt to bind together the clay, or
mud, which was, of course, the main mate-
rial of the bricks. (See Wilkinson^ in the
author's ' Herodotus,' vol. ii. p. 2lS.) It is
usually chopped into small pieces. Let them
go and gather straw. This would involve the
leaving of the brickfields, and the scattering
of fee people over the harvest-grounds, where
alone they would be able to find straw ini any
quantity. There are so manj harvests in
Egypt, that straw would perhaps be obtainable
somewhere during the greater part of the jyear.

Ver, 8. — ^The tale of the bricks— i.e. tiie
number of the bricks. Exactly as many were
to be required of each batch of workmen under
the new regulation as previously. The demalid
was one with which, as the king well knew,
it would be impossible to comply. For
they be idle. There was so much ground for
the charge as this — ^that hitherto their forced
labours had not occupied the whole of theii
time. They had been able, apparently, to
cultivate their own plots of ground (Dent. xL
10), to raise crops of cucumbers, melons, leeks,
onions, and garUc (Num. xi. 5), to catch fi^h
(ibid.'), and attend public meetings (Ex. iy.
30, 31). They had, in fact, had time which
they could caU their own. Now this w4s to
be so no more. The Pharaoh, however, mis-
represents and exaggerates, speaking as if
their forced labours had been a mere nothing,
and mere want of occupation had led them to
raise the cry — " Let us go and sacrifice." It
would have been far nearer the truth to say,
that the severity and continuousness of their
labours had made the notion of festival time,
during which they would cease from their
toils, generally popular.

Ver. 9. — Let there more work be laid
upon the men. Bather, as in the margin,
" Let the work be heavy upon the men." Lbt
the tasks set them be such as to occupy all
their time, and not leave them any spare mo-
ments in which they may be tempted to listen
to mischievous talkers, like Moes and Aaron)
who flatter them wiib vain (literally, lying,
words. Pharaoh, no doubt, imagined that the
hopes raised by the two brothers were vajn
and illusive. iHe was utterly blind as to the
course which events were about to take



UHi.T,-«-^.3. ' ! '■I'H.Jl' BOOK. OF EXQDUa. 126



, HOMILETICS,, ; J ; j

Vers. 6 — 9,—rThe picture of a tyrant — crafty, energetic, and unsparing; Scripture
contains abundant portraitures, not only of good, but also of bad men, the Holy Spirit
seeming to be as desirous of arousing our indignation against vice as our sympatliy with
virtue. Portraits are given us, as more effectual than precepts or general descriptions,
appealing as they do to our feelings and imagination rather than to our intellect. The
dramatic exhibition of a Pharaoh, an Ahab, a Sennacherib, a Judas Iscariot, is calculated,
at once to strike the soul and to remain indelibly impressed upon it. Here we have the
portrait of a tyrant, characterised especially by three qualities — 1. Craft or cleverness ;
2. Energy ; and 3. Mercilessness. (1.) Pharaoh's craft is shown, first in the skilful way
in which he " turns the tables " upon Moses and Aaron, stopping their mouths with the
charge that they are "letting the people from their labours," and "endamaging the
king." (See Ezra iv. 13.) Secondly, it is shown in the rapidity and ingenuity of his
thought — ■" More work must be laid upon the Israelites — let them be given no straw."
Thirdly, it is shown further on in his attempts to secure the return of the Israelites by
the detention of their children (ch. x. 10) or of their cattle (ibid. 24). (2.) Pharaoh's
energy appears in the immediate steps that he took to carry his plan out by giving,
orders for the withholding of the straw without any diminution in the tale of bricks,
"the same day" (verse 6). Finally, (3) his mercilessness is seen, first, in his refusing;
a very moderate request (verses 1, 2) ; secondly, in his meeting the demand for a
relaxation of labour by an addition to it ; thirdly and especially, in his making such an
addition as was impossible of perfonnance, and involved a continued series of punish-
ments (verses 14—21). Pharaoh did not perhaps know the exact amount of misery
which he was inflicting ; but he was reckless in respect to it — he did not care what it
might cost; the sighs and the groans of a whole nation were as nothing to hun; and
he adds insult to injury by the reproach (verses 8 and 17) — " Ye are idle, ye are idle."

Ver. 7. — Bricks without straw. The requirement of " bricks without straw " is not
always made by a tyrannical king. All employers of labour who expect certain results
without allowing sufficient time for them, and then complain that the work is scamped,
are guilty of it. So is the father who expects his son to turn out a great scholar, without
giving him the necessary books and the necessary instruction to make him one. So is
the mistress who scolds her cook for not sending up a first-rate dinner, yet grudges
every penny for the kitchen expenses. There are congregations which demand perpetual
sermons of a high quahty, yet do not either provide their pastors with sufficient money to
buy byoks, or allow them sufficient leisure time for reading them. There are incumbents
who act siiuilarly by their curates, mercantile men who, mutatis mutandis, act so by
their clerks, officials of all kinds who so treat their subordinates. The demand for bricks
withrut straw is, unfortunately, far too common a demand. Let this note be set against
it, thai it is Phaiaonic and tyrannical.

Ver. 9. Vain, toords. There can be no doubt that "vain words" are unworthy of

attention, deserve contempt, are foolish, unjustifiable. But what are "vain words"?
What is the test whereby we are to know whether words are vam or not ? Simply, the
issue of them. Pharaoh thought that the promises of deUverance wherewith Moses and
Aaron had excited the people were " vain words." Sennacherib described similarly the
words of trust and confidence in God uttered by Ilezekiah (2 Kings xviii. 20). The
Athenians thought the same of St. Paul's words concerning the resurrection (Acts xvii. 32).
But we know that, in none of these cases, were the words uttered " vain." The event'
iustified or will justify them. When words then are uttered by any grave authority,
especially if they are uttered in the name of God, we should hesitate to call them " vain."
We should await the end. Full often, what the scoffer has called "vain words" turn
out "words of truth and soberness "—words which tell With terrible force against those
who have despised and rejected them— wot Js whicb *a have heard and despised ii
condemnation in the light of the Almighty.



126 IdE BOOK 01' JEXuUUtS. [cH. V. 4— 10.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES.

Vera. 4 — 10. — Increased cruelty. View Pharaoh's conduct as illustrative —

I. Of the view which a worldly man takes op religion. " Ye are idle " (ver. 8).
This way of putting the matter was partly a pretext — a tyrant's excuse for adding to
burdens already sufficiently heavy ; but it had so far a ground in Pharaoh's real way of
viewing things, that he doubtless regarded the desire to go and sacrifice as an idle,
foolish notion, one which would not have come into the people's heads had they been
worked hard enough, and which it was his interest to drive out again as soon as
possible. Observe in this — 1. A total inc 'pacity to understand the origin of religious
aspirations. Pharaoh had no better account to give of them than that they sprang
from idleness. They were the fruit of a roving, unsettled disposition. The cure for
them was harder work. This is precisely how the world looks on religion. It is the
unpractical dream of people whose wprking faculties are not in sufficiently vigorous
exercise. Of a true thirsting of the soul for God the world has not the slightest compre-
hension. 2. A total want of sympathy with these aspirations. Indulgence in them
would be idling — a foolish and profitless waste of time. It is not idling to watch the
markets, to speculate on stock, to read novels, to attend the Derby, to run to theatres,
to spend evenings in the ball-room, to hunt, fish, shoot, or travel on the Continent, to
waste hours in society gossip ; but it would be idling to pray, or worship God, or engage
in Christian work, or attend to the interests of the soul. To snatch an hour from
business to attend a prayer-meeting would be reckoned egregious folly, and as little are
the hours at one's disposal when business is over to be spent in such " foolishress."
Even the Sabbath, so far as it cannot be utilised for pleasure, is deemed a day
"wasted" — a weariness (Amos viii. 6 ; Mai. ii. 13). 3. A total disregard of the rights
of others in connection with these aspirations. Thoroughgoing men of the world neither
take pains to conceal their own contempt for religion (" vain words," ver. 9), nor trouble
themselves with any scruples as to the rights of others. They will, without hesitation,
take from the religiously-disposed their opportunities of serving God, if these stand
in the way of their own interests. Gladly, had they the power, would they turn the
Sabbath into a work-day for the many that it might become (as on the Continent)
a play-day for the few. Their own domestics and workpeople are over-driven, and
unscrupulously deprived of Sabbath and sanctuary privileges. Where even the plea of
humanity is disregarded, the plea of religion is not likely to be allowed much weight.

II. Of the alarms felt by a tyrant at the uprising of free aspirations in the
SUBJECTS OF HIS TYRANNY. Pharaoh shrewdly foresaw the consequences of a further
spread of these new-fangled ideas among the people. The request to go and sacrifice
would not be long in being followed by a demand for freedom. Despotism and the
spirit of liberty cannot coalesce. The tyrant knows that his power is put in peril the
moment people begin to think for themselves— to cherish dieams of freedom — to be
moved by religious enthusiasms. His rule can only be inaintained at the cost of the
extinction in his subjects of the last vestige of mental and spiritual independence.
If a spiritual movement like this which sprang up in Israel begins to show itself,
it must be stamped out at once, and at whatever cost of suffering and bloodshed.
Whatever tends to produce such movements is looked on with hostility. This applies

•to all kinds of despotisms — civil, ecclesiastical, industrial, social. Hence, under despotic
governments, the gagging of the press, suppression of free institutions, restriction of
liberty of speech, ostracism of men of public spirit, and opposition to progress and to
hberal ideas generally. Hence the antagonism of the Roman Church to learning and
science, with the baleful effects which have followed from that antagonism in countries
where her influence is supreme (see Laveleye on ' Protestantism and Catholicism in
their Bearings upon the liiberty and Prosperity of Nations'; and histories of the
Reformation in Spain and Italy). " It has been wittily said, that in Madrid, provided
you avoid saying anything concerning government, or religion, or politics, or morals,
or statesmen, or be dies of reputation, or the opera, or any other public amusement,
or any one who is engaged in any business, you may print what you please, under
correction of two or three censors " (M'Crie). Hence the antipathy of the slave-drivers
of industry — those who grind the fnces nf ih" |.ror, making their profit out of tbeil



OH.V. 4r-10.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS 127

poverty and helplessness — to the diffusion of intelligence among the masses. Hence,
in slave-holding countries, the laws against teaching slaves to read, etc. The slave-
holder cannot' afibrd to encourage the spread of intelligence, of anything which will
enable his slave to realise his manhood. But tyranny of this kind is self-condemned.
1. As unnaturai. It requires the extinction and suppression of everything noble and
good in human nature. It sets itself in opposition to intelligence, teedom, progiess,
religion, and all holy and spiritual aspirations. 2. As inhuman. In consolidating its
dominion, it stoops to perpetrate the grossest cruelties. Think of the work of the
Inquisition! Think of the blood that has been shed on the shrine of civil liberty!
Think of the George Harrises of slavery 1 " What business had his slave to be marching
round the country, inventing machines, and holding up his head among gentlemen ?
He'd soon put a stop to it. He'd take him back, and put him to hoeing and digging,
ind see if he'd step about so smart ? " (' Uncle Tom's Cabin.') See also, 3. Its weakness.
Cyranny of this kind cannot endure. Under the influence of ideas from without, a
niental and moral awakening is certain to come some day, and the tyrant's power is
doomed.

III. Op the pitiless cruelty of which men get to be capable in the pursuit
OF iniquitous ends : vers. 6 — 9. I'haraoh was determined to keep the Hebrews in
slavery ; and so, to suppress this new spirit of discontent which had broken out among
them, he must heat their furnace sevenfold, and heap cruelty on cruelty. He may
have urged the plea of state necessity, and justified himself by the reflection that less
severe measures would not have served his purpose — that he was driven to cruelty by
the logic of events. A vain plea in any case, and one which only a heart rendered
callous by a long course of inhumanity could have brought itself to entertain. Yet
Pharaoh was thus fiir right, that, once a career of inquity has been entered upon, events
take the matter out of the sinner's hands, and leave him no alternative but either to
abandon his evil courses, or be driven on from one cruelty to a worse. And, contem-
poraneously vpith the movement of events, there is going on a hardening of the heart,
which makes the cruelty possible. It is wonderful what pitiless deeds men get to
be capable of, who have others in their power, and who acknowledge no higher law than
their own interests. We have only to recall the iniquities of the slave-trade, connived
at by many of our most respectable merchants ; the inhumanities attendant on the em-
ployment of women and young children' in mines and factories, as brought to light by
Parliamentary Commissions ; the former semi-brutal condition of agricultural labourers ;
the underpaying of needle- women ; the horrors of the " sweating system ;" the instances
of cruelty and rapacity exhibited in the emigration trade, which are described as
" among the most atrocious that have ever disgraced human nature " (Chambers's
' Encyc.') ; the reckless disregard of the lives of sailors in their being sent to sea in
heavily laden and untrustworthy ships (PlimsoU) — to see how far, even in a civihsed
country, the thirst of gain vnll carry men, under circumstances where they can count
upon impunity, and evade the censure of pubhc opinion. A Pharaoh could hardly do
worse. " Small manufacturers, working with insufficient capital, and in times of dei les-
sion not having the wherewith to meet their engagements, are often obliged to becc.me
dependants on the wholesale houses with which they deal ; and are then cruelly taken
advantage of .... He (the manufacturer) is obliged to work at the wholesaler's teims,
and ruin almost certainly follows .... As was said to us by one of the larger silk-
hosiers, who had watched the destruction of many of his smaller brethren — ' They may
be spared for a while as a cat spares a mouse ; but they are sure to be eaten up in the
end . . . .' We read that in Hindostan, the ryots, when crops fall short, borrow from
the Jews to buy seed, and once in their clutches are doomed. It seems that our
commercial world can furnish parallels " (H. Spencer).

Learn : 1. To avoid the beginning of a course of injustice. 2. To guard against the
hardening of the heart by cruelty. 3. To have an open ear to the cry of the oppressed,
and a readiness to support every righteous measure for their protection and rehef.
4. See in Pharaoh's tyranny an image of the pitiless tyranny of Satan. He, too, is
absolutely merciless in the power he obtains over us. His service is one which grows
increasingly more rigorous. He, too, would have us make bricks without straw, driving
us on by our lusts and passions in pursuit of ends impossible (in his service) of attain-
ment. More acute than Pharaoh, he gets the sinner himself to believe that it is " idle"



128,



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CH. V. IP-7I4



to sacrifice to God, and by this means lures him to his service, where he soon binds lum
in chains more terrible and gaUing than any which earthly tyrant ever put upon his
slaves. — J. 0.

Vers. 6 — 14. — The increase of irouhlefor God's people no proof of thefailwe of his
purpose. I. The demands of God pkovoke the weath of the ungodly. The
mad persistence of Pharaoh in his injustice is marked — 1. In his haste : his commands
were issued " the same day." 2. In the severity of the decree : they should find theii
own straw, and yet deliver the same number of bricks. 3. In his detennination to have
his commands obeyed. It is not meant to be an idle threat : the overseers are " straitly
charged." When God's word is resisted the soul is inflamed to greater evil The
unregenerate spirit is the same everywhere. God's claim has only to be pressed home
to be repelled in the same fashion.

II. 1'he way to deliverance sometimes lies THROuaH DEEPER TROUBLE. Israel's
case was now harder than it was before (vers. 11 — 14), and solely because God had
arisen to fight for them : but it was the last struggle of a doomed foe. It is thus —
1. In the Church's struggle with the world of unbelief: God's message is met with
scorn, repression, and opposition of science falsely so called. But these shall vanish
away like smoke, and their utterances and deeds will at last be the monuments of their
infamy. 2. In the contest with the dominion of sin in the soul. The might of sii
is felt most when the Spirit's call is first heard ; but God has said, " Let my people go,"
and the wrath of the enemy will soon be swallowed up in his destruction. 3. In the
breaking of the yoke of death. When God's call is heard, " Come up higher," we
wrestle in pain and mortal weakness with the dread adversary. He seems to triumph.
Bat the last tie that bound us is broken, and we bid an eternal farewell to the bondage
and the grief. — U.



EXPOSITION



Vers. 10 — 14. — ^The command of Pharaoh had
gone forth — ^no straw was to be provided for the
Israelites, they were themselves to gather straw.
The taskmasters could not soften the edict ; they
could only promulgate it (vers. 10, 11). And
the Israelites could only choose between re-
belling and endeavouring to obey. To rebel
seemed hopeless ; Moses and Aaron did not
advise rebellion, and so the attempt was made
tocarry out Pharaoh's behest (ver. 12). But
experience proved that obedience to it was
impossible. Though the people did their best
and the native officers set over them did their
best, and the Egyptian taskmasters hurried
them on as much as possible (ver. 13), the
result was that the tale of bricks fell short.
Then, according to a barbarous practice said to
be even now not unknown in Egypt (Kalisch),
the native officers who had not delivered iu
the appointed "tale of bricks" were bastina-
doed, suffering agonies for no fault of their
own (ver. 16), but because the people had
been set an impossible task.

Ver. 10. — The taskmasters . . . went ont,
i.e. quitted the royal palace to which they had
been suimnoned (ver. 6), and proceeded to the
places where the people worked. The vicinity
of 2oaa was probably one great brickfield.



Thus aaith Fharaoh. The exact words of
Pharaoh (ver. 7) are not repeated, but modi-
fied, according to men's ordinary practice in
similar cases.

Ver. 11. — Get you straw where ye can
find it. Straw was not valued in Egypt.
Reaping was effected either by gathering the
ears, or by cutting the stalks of the com at a
short distance below the heads ; and the straw
was then left almost entirely upon the ground.
Grass was so plentiful that it was not re-
quired for fodder, and there was no employ-
ment of it as litter in farmyards. Thus
abundance of straw could be gathered in the
cornfields after harvest; and as there were
many harvests, some sort of straw was proba-
bly obtainable in the Delta at almost all
seasons of the year. To ccdlect it, however,
and chop it small, as required in briclanaking,
consumed much time, and left too little for the
actual making of the bricks.

Ver. 12. — The people were scattered abroad
throngbont all the land of Egypt. The ex-
pression used is hyperbolical, and not to be
understood literally. A tolerably wide disper-
sion over the central and eastern portions of
the Delta is probably intended. Stnbble in-
stead of straw. Bather, "stubble for the
straw." Teben, the word translated straw,
seems to be properly " chopped straw " (sira-
Tneuta miimtim concisa, Cook). Tb ! Israelites,
who had been accustomed to have this provided
for them, gathered now long stalks of stubble



ca. T. 10—15.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



129



in the fields, which thej had subsequently to
make into teben hj chopping it into short bits.
Vera. Id, 14. — The taskmasters hasted
them, The Egyptian overseers, armed with
rods, went about among the toiling Israelites
continually, and "hasted them" by dealing
out blows freely on aU who made any pause
in their work. The unceasing toil lasted from
morning to night ; yet still the required " tale "
could not be produced ; and consequently the
native officers, whose business it was to pro-



duce the " tale," were ^punished by the basti-
nado at the close of the day not giving in the
proper amount. Kalisch observes — " Even now
the Arabic fellahs, whose position is very ana-
logous to that of the Israelites described in
our text, are treated by the Turks in the same
manner. Arabic overseers have to give an
account of the labours of their countrymen to
the Turkish taskmasters, who often chastise
them mercilessly for the real or imputed of-
fences of the Arabic workmen."



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 10 — 14. — A Hind obedience to the commands of tyrants not laudable. The
Egyptian taskmasters seem to have carried out their monarch's orders to the full, if
not with inward satisfaction, at any rate without visible repugnance. They published
abroad the orders given without in any way softening them Arers. 10, 11), harassed
the Israelite people all day long by "hasting them" (ver. 13), and bastinadoed the
Israelite officers at night (ver. 14). How different their conduct from that of the
midwives, when another Pharaoh sought to make them the instruments of his cruelty I
Weak women defied the tyrant and disobeyed his commands. Strong sturdy men were
content to be his slavish tools and accomplices. But so it is often. " Out of weakness
God perfects strength." He " makes the weak things of the world to confound the
strong." And the consequence is, that the weak, who show themselves strong, obtain
his approval and the enduring praise of men, like the midwives ; while the strong, who
show themselves weak, are condemned by him, and covered with everlasting obloquy,
like these taskmasters.

Ver. 14. — Vicarioiis suffering. Vicarious suffering is a blessed thing only when
undergone voluntarily. In all other cases it is unjust, oppressive, crueL At the
English court under the early Stuarts there was a boy who had to receive all the
punishments deserved by the heir-apparent. This was a piece of detestable tyranny.
The execution of children for the offences of their parents, which prevailed under the
judges (Josh. vii. Z4, 25) and the kings of Israel (2 Kings ix. 26) was still worse ; and
had not even the show of justice about it, since it was not accepted in lieu of the
parents' suffering, but was additional to it. The Oriental system of punishing " head
men " for any offence or default of those under their jurisdiction, goes on the idea that
they can and ought to prevent such sins of commission or omission. But this idea is
not in accord with facts. Frequently they cannot; sometimes they neither can nor
ought. In all such cases the punishment inflicted is an injustice ; and the system
itself must consequently be regarded as no better than an organised and licensed tyranny.
Yet large tracts of Asia and j5rica groan under it. " How long, O Lord, how long ?"



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS,

Vers. 10 — 15. — Bricks without straw. Tyrants seldom lack suboriUn&tea, as cruel as
themselves, to execute their hateful mandates. Not only are these subordinates gene-
rally ready to curry favour with their lord by executing his orders with punctilious
rigour, but, when they get to know that particidar persons are in disfavour, they find
a positive delight in bullying and insulting the imliappy victims, and in subjecting
them to every species of vexatious interference. The callous taskmasters entered
heartily into Pharaoh's plans — withheld from the Israelites the straw, while requiring
of them the full tale of bricks, and then mercilessly beating the officers for failing to
get the people to accomplish the impossible. View in their behaviour —

I. A PIOTOBB OP THE NOT INFREQUENT TREATMENT OF MAN BY HIS FBLLOW-MAIT.

Society abounds in tyrants, who, like Pharaoh's taskmasters— 1, Demand the unreason-
KxaDua. ^



130 THE BOOK OF EXODUS, ch. v. 10—15.

able. 2. Expect the impossible. And the unreasonable in extreme cases is one with
the impossible. 3. Are insolent and violent in enforcing their unreasonable demands.
The workman, e.g., is scolded because he cannot, in a given time, produce work of given
quantity and quality, though production to the extent required is shown to involve a
physical impossibility. The public servant is abused because he has not wrought
miracles in his particular department, though perhaps he has received neither the
material nor the moral support to which he was entitled. The clergyman is blamed for
deficiency in pulpit power, while endless calls are made upon him for work of other
kinds, which dissipate his energies, and eat into his time for study. The wife is rated
by her husband, because comforts and luxuries are not forthcoming, which his wastefiil
expenditure in other directions prevents her firom obtaining. With like unreasonable-
ness, buyers in conmiercial houses are rated because 'they cannot buy, and sellers because
they cannot sell ; and it is broadly hinted to the latter that if means are not discovered
for effecting sales, and disposing of perhaps worthless goods, the penalty will be dis-
missal. And there are worse tyrannies behind. Most iniquitous of all is the system of
exacting work from the necessitous, which imposes an unnatvual and injurious strain
upon their bodily and mental powers, while renumerating it by a pittance barely suffi-
cient to keep soul and body together. The straw of which these bricks are made is
the flesh and blood of living human beings — the fibre of despairing hearts. In short,
bricks without straw are asked wherever work is required which overtaxes the strength
and capability of those firom whom it is sought, or where the time, means, or assistance
necessary for accomplishing it is denied. To rage, scold, threaten, or punish, because
feats wluch border on the impossible are not accomplished, is simply to play over again
the part of Pharaoh's taskmasters.

n. A CONTBAST TO THE TBBATMBNT WHICH MAN RECEIVES FBOM GoD. Unbelief and

dothfulness, indeed, would fain persuade us of the opposite. Their voice is, " I knew
thee that thou art a hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown," etc. (Matt. xxv. 24).
And it may be pleaded in support of this that God's demands in respect of obedience go
far beyond the sinner's powers. He inherits a depraved nature, yet he is held guilty
for its actings, and the demand stands unchanged, " Thou shalt love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart," etc. (Deut. vi. 5). The standard by which he is judged is that of
absolute holiness, while yet it is admitted that he is naturally incapable of a single holy
thought or resolve. But in this way of putting matters various things are forgotten.
1. The law of duty is a fixed quantity, and even God, by an act of will, cannot
remove a sinner from under its obligations. 2. There is an obvious distinction between
natural and moral inability. The hardened thief cannot plead his incorrigible thievish-
ness as an excuse for non-fulfilmeat of the duties of honesty. It is his sin that he it
thievish. 3. Depraved beings are condemned for being what they are (evil-disposed,
cruel, lustful, selfish, etc.), and for the bad things which they do, not for the good things
which they ought to do, but are now incapable of doing. The devil, e.g., is condemned
because he is a devil, and acts devilishly ; not because it is still expected of him that
he will love God with all his heart, etc., and because he fails to do this. But the true
answer, as respects God's treatment of mankind, is a very different one. The sinner
is not to be allowed to forget that if he has fallen and destroyed himself, God has
brought him help. The very God against whom he has sinned desires his recovery,
and has provided for it. He has made provision in Christ for the atonement (covering)
of his sins. He asks nothing firom him of a spiritual nature which his grace is not
promised to enable him to accomplish. God presents himself in the Gospel, not as
the sinner's exacting taskmaster, but as his friend and Saviour, ready, however
multiplied and aggravated his offences — though they be as scarlet and red like
crimson — to make them as the snow and wool (Is. L 18). True, the sinner catmot
renew his own heart, but surely he is answerable for the response he makes to the
outward word, and to the teachings and drawings of the Spirit, who, given his sub-
mission, will willingly renew it for him. True also he cannot, even in the gracious state,
render perfect obedience, but over and against this is to be put the truth that perfect
obedience is not required of any in order to justification, and that, if only he is faithful,
his imperfections will, for Christ's sake, be graciously forgiven him. And the same
jiut and gracious principles rule in God's actings with his servants. Service ii



OH. T. 15 — 19.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



ISl



accepted "according to what a man hath, and not according to that he hath not"
(2 Cor. viii, 12). No making bricks without straw here. The servant with the two
talents is held only responsible for the two, not for five (Matt. xxv. 23). Justi««^
tempered by grace, is the rule for alL — J. 0.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 15—19. — Smai-ting under the sense
of injustice, the Israelite officers "came
and cried to Pharaoh" (ver. 15), supposing
that be could not have intended such manifest
nufaimess and cruelty. They were conscious
to themselves of having done their utmost,
and of having failed simply because the
thing required was impossible. Surely the
king would understand this, if they pointed
it out, and would either allow straw es before,
or diminish the number of the bricks. But
the king had no desire for justice, and did
not even pretend to it. He asked for no par-
ticulars, ordered no inquiry into the ground of
complaint ; but turned upon the complainants
with the cuckoo cry — " Idle, idle yourselves —
else ye had no time to come here ; go, work —
go, work." Then the officers felt that they
were indeed "in evil case" (ver. 19) — ^the
king was determined not to do justice — ^no
hope remained — ^they must be beaten again
and again, until they died of the punishment
(ver. 21).

Ver. 15. — Came and oried. The shrill
" cry " of Orientals when making complaint
has often been noticed' by traveUers, and is



probably here alluded to. To Pharaoh. Se«

the " Introductory paragraph " at the begin-
ning of the chapter, where it has been noticed
that complainants had free access to the pre-
sence of Egyptian kings.

Ver. 16.— They say to M. Or, "they keep
saying to us." The participle is used, whidi
implies continuance or repetition. The fault
is in thine own people. Literally, " Thine
own people is in fault," or " sins."

Ver. 17. — ye are idle, etc. Compare ver. 8.
Pharaoh is evidently pleased with his " happy
thought." It seems to him clever, witty,
humorous, to tax overworked people with
idleness ; and equally clever to say to religious
people — "Your religion is a mere pretence.
You do not want to worship. You want a
holiday." We may remark further that idle-
ness and hypocrisy were two sius of the deep-
est dye, according to Egyptian notions.

Ver. 18. — Go therefore now and work — <.«.
" Off with you to the bnckfields at once, and get
to your own special work of superintendence,
which you are neglecting so long as yon re-
main here. It is useless to remain. 1 reject
both of your requests. Straw shall not be
given; and the tale of bricks required shall
be no less."

Ver. 19. — ^The officers ... did see that they
were in evil case. See the "Introductory
paragraph " to this section, and comp. ver. 21 .



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 15 — 18. — A wicked man't persistence in wrong-doing. Pharaoh when he &8t
gave the order to withhold straw (ver. 7), may not have known the amount of misery he
was causing. He may have meant no more than to give the people full occupation, and
so prevent such gatherings as that from which Moses and Aaron had come (ch. iv, 29—
31), when they appeared before him with their demands. He may not have realised to
himself the idea that he was setting his bondsmen an impossible task. But now this
(act was brought home to him, and he was asked, as a matter of simple justice, either to
let straw be fiimished as before, or to allow some diminution in the number of the
bricks. It can scarcely be doubted that he knew and felt the demand made to be just.
There were the officers before him with the wheals upon their backs. Would they have
incurred the severe punishment, could they by any possibility have avoided it ? Pharaoh
must have known that they would not. But he would not relent. As he had begun,
he would continue. He had been more cruel than he meant ; but he did not care — it
was only Hebrews and bondsmen who had suffered ; what mattered their agonies ? So he
dismisses the complainants with jeers and scoffs : " Ye are idle, ye are hypocrites ; go,
work." So bad men almost always go on from bad to worse by a " facile descent ;"
severity deepens into cruelty, unkindness into injustice, religious indifference into
impiety. Stop, then, the beginnings of wrong-doing. Frincipiis ohsta. Crush the nascent
germs of vice in thy heart, man I Master them, or they will master thee !



182 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. v. 15—20

Ver. 16. — Sufferings, even at the hand of lawful authorities, not always deserved.
" Thy servants are beaten ; but the fault is in tlune own people." Puniskment often
visits the wrong back. Kings commit injuries or follies, and their subjects ^uf^er,
Employers are greedy of gain, and their " hands " must work overtime, go without sleep,
trench on the Sunday rest. Wholesale tradesmen adulterate goods, and retail traders
are blamed and lose custom. Justice itself is often at fault, and punishes the wrong
person — sometimes by a mere mistake, as when the wrong man is hanged for a murder ;
but sometimes also through a defect in the law itself which judges have to administer;
as when Christians were delivered to the wild beasts for not sacrificing to the divinity
of the emperor, or Protestants were burnt at the stake for denying transubstantiation. It
is not to be assumed that the law is always right. The law of any country at any time
is only the expression of the will of those who are in authority at the time, and has no
more divinity or sacredness about it than they have. Those who transgress the law
will, of course, be punished for it ; but that fact proves nothing as to their good- or ill-
desert. The greatest benefactors of mankind have had to set human law at defiance,
and to endiire its penalties. Their answer to the authorities who persecute them might
oonatautly be, " Thy servants are beaten, but the fault is in thine own people."

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vera. 15 — ^20. — Unheeded expostulation. Pharaoh's treatment of the officers of the
children of Israel, when they appeared before him to expostulate with him on his cruelty,
betrays his consciousness of the injustice of his cause.

I. An ttnjcst cause bbteays itself — 1. By refusal to listen to reason. The
Hebrews had reason on their side, and Pharaoh had not. And because he had not, and
knew it, he would not hear them, would not enter into any argument with them. This
is the sure mark of a weak cause. People are usually willing enough to defend any of
then- doings which they think defensible. But when causes are indefensible, and they
know this, they do not care to have the light let in upon them. " Every one that doeth
evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved "
(John iii. 20). 2. By clutching at flimsy amd trumped-up pretexts. "Ye are idle; ye
are idle ; therefore ye say," etc. (ver. 17). Pharaoh knew as well as any that they were
not idle, but it served his purpose to put forward this pretence. 3. By falling back in
the end on the right of the sti ong hand (ver. 16). This is the tyrant's unfailing resort.
If he cannot argue, he can compel. If he cannot justify his courses, he can fall back
upon his power to enforce submission. His might is his right. Pharaoh had the power,
and he meant to use it, so the Israelites might save themselves the trouble of expostu-
lating. This sort of authority, resting on force, without support in righteousness or
reason, is necessarily precarious. It can, in the nature of things, only last so long as the
power to compel remains with it. No throne is so insecure as that propped up on
bayonets.

II. An unjust cause adhered to and defended — 1. Reacts injuriously upon the
moral nature. The refusal to listen to expostulation was a new stage in Pharaoh's
hardening. Besides fortifying his determination to brook no interference in his courses,
and strengthening the cruelty of his disposition — anew called into action by the increased
oppression of the Hebrews — it necessarily reacted to deprive him of a fresh portion of his
moral susceptibility. This is the Nemesis of sin ; it leaves the siimer less susceptible
with each new appeal that is resisted ; it darkens while it indurates ; not only
strengthens him m evil courses, but increasingly disqualifies him for perceiving the truth
and reasonableness of the dissuasives that are addressed to him. Pharaoh's harder ing still
moves in the region of ordinary morals (see on vers. 1 — 4). The first step in it was the
recoil of his pride and wilfulness against what he knew to be the righteous demand uf
Moses and Aaron. Another step is the rejection of this righteous appeal. 2. Exposes
the tyrant to the just judgment of Ood. The Hebrews were helpless to resist Pharaoh,
but there was Another, whose question, " Wherefore dealest thou thus with thy ser-
vants ? " he would not be able so easily to set aside. God was keeping the account, and
for aU these things would yet call him to judgment (EccL xL 9 ; xii. 14) ; while the
king's temporary success in his ways, building him up in a presumptuous wIA



08. V. +— 18;] THE BOUK Oi<' EXODUS. 138

confidence, and confirming him in his boast of superiority to Jehovah, was a further step
In his hardening — a ripening for destruction. 3. Is a fresh call for Ood to interfere on
behalf of the oppressed. This new wrong, instead of leading the Israelites to despair,
should only have lent fresh vehemence to their prayers, for it gave them a new plea with
which to urge their cause. " For shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry to him
day and night, though he hear long with them '' (Luke xviii. 7). — J. 0.

Vers. 4 — 18. — Pharaoh's first response : his answer in deed. Pharaoh has given •
proud verbal refusal to the request of Moses : but he is not contented to stop with worda.
The first result, discouraging and discrediting of Moses' application, is still further to
increase burdens and hardships already scarcely tolerable.

I. Consider how tuis additional severity to Israel originated — that is, how
it originated as far as Pharaoh's part in it was concerned. It came through his utterly
mistaken notions as to Moses and Isrnel. Pharaoh, as an alert politician, was bound to
inquire how it was that Moses had been led to prefer this request ; and he came to the
conclusion that the people had too much leisure time — did their worlv far too easily — and
thus left an opportunity for the success of any designing demagogue, such as he judged
Moses to be. And, indeed, Pharaoh's conjecture showed a very plausible appearance
of shrewd insight into human nature. All such readers of this narrative as utterly dis-
believe the reality of Divine intervention and supremacy in human affairs, will say that
Pharaoh was not far wrong; whereas he was utterly wrong. Moses went into the
prnsence of I'haraoh because the power of God constrained him. He would have gone any-
where to escape the task, if only he could have done it with safety and self-respect.
Pharaoh little knew what a profound sense of un worthiness dwelt in the breast of Moses.
Other feelings might come and go, mount to flow and sink to ebb ; that remained, more
penetrating and subduing the more he had to do with God, and the more he had to do
with Israel. Pharaoh was also utterly mistaken as to the people. The request for
liberty had not come from them. They of their own accord and carnal judgment would
Dever have thought of such a request. As soon might the helpless victim of a raging
beast of prey turn to it with a real expectation of mercy. The prisoner may devise
many plans of escape : but he would reckon it a mere provocative of more painful and
stringent captivity, if he addressed to his gaoler a formal request for liberty. Pharaoh
then, in his ignorance of God, proved ignorant and mistaken in the whole of his policy.
Every view is mistaken, egregiously mistaken, that leaves out the thought of God as a
living, intimate, ever-watchful Power.

II. Consider that all this cruel treatment did nothinq at all for
Pharaoh. Jf it had done anything, however little, to delay the final disaster, it would
have been something to say : but it did nothing at all. He treated Moses as a mere
politician, and Israel as being only in a state of incipient insurrection. If such had been
the reality of things, then his policy, however damnable for its cruelty, would have
merited at least this admission, that tliere was a real adaptation of means to ends. But
Pharaoh was as yet utterly unconscious of his real enemy. His mind was in a state of
darkness, deep as that outward darkness which later overspread his land. All his efforts,
summed up and stated in the largest way, simply came to this — that he was making very
bitter the temporal life of a fleeting generation. But he himself had not arrested by a
single step the advance of a righteous and omnipotent God. Struggling against the
visible Moses and the visible Israel, he knew nothing of how to resist the invisible God.
A man may rage about, putting out all candles and lamps, leaving us for awhile in dark-
ness, but he has not retarded the sunrise by even tbe minutest fragment of time. This
is our glory and our comfort, if we have the spirit of Christ dwelling in us, that we are
contending against one who has only carnal weapons. We are not allowed to take
carnal weapons ; they are of no use to us ; and never should we forget that they are of
no use to those who are against us. Pharaoh did not delay God's liberating work ; that
work went on in all the majestic ease of its divinity, amid the smitings of the
oppressor and the wailings of the oppressed. Mal-ing bricks without straw was mere
child's-play compared with the enterprise on which Pharaoh was now embarked. He
might as well have gone out with the sword and spear against the pestilence and the
femine, as against Israel with a mere increase of oppression and cruelty.

HI. This additional cruelty showed the imperative need op Divinu kteb-
T^Tio.N. If I'haraoh was powerless to delay the advance of God he was very powerfiil



134 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. v. 15-21.

to shut out interference from any otter quarter. Help in God, sure and suffident help,
but help only in God, was one of the great lessons which aU these painful years were
meant to teach Israel. Pharaoh had unmistakable power of the human, despotic, might-
makes-right sort over Israel As the inquisitor by an easy nod signifies to give the
thumbscrew another turn, so Pharaoh had only to send out his royi wish, and all the
taskmasters had Israel at once in fresh agony. And just so we have to be taught by a
bitter experience that as Christ is a Saviour from sin, with all its fatal fhiita, so he is the
only Saviotir. The first attempt at a real protest and resistance against sin brings out
aU its power. Though the sinners miseries do not begin when Christ the accredited
deliverer makes his first approach to deliver, there is nevertheless a distinct accession to
them. Christ cannot challenge the power of sin in any of us without rousing up into
intense activity the evil already working in our breasts. Pharaoh was not really a more
powerful ruler after the visit of Moses than he was before ; but the disposition and power
then became manifest. The hearts of the generation in the midst of which Christ lived
and died were not of exceptional malignity or obduracy. The generation immediately
before and the generation immediately after, would have treated him in exactly the
same way. But it was necessary for Mm to draw out sin into a full revelation of its
hideous potency, in order that it might be made perfectly clear that none but himself
could deal with it. True, Pharaoh was glorying in what was only a febric of delusions
and a refuge of lies ; but, frail though it was, no breath of man had strength enough to
blow it down. None but God could make the effectual and dissipating storm to descend
upon it. — Y.

Ver. 15 — chap. vL ver. 1. — The troubled find consolation in God only. The three
cries. I. Israel's expostulation with Phabaoh (15 — 19). They complain to him
of the wrongs they suffer ; but he who does not hear QoA will not listen to man. 1. It
was reasonable to expect that their remonstrance might lead to redress. Pharaoh's
decree might have been issued imder momentary irritation. 2. They came with
humility and modesty. They brought no railing accusation. They used no threats.
They did not even make a silent show of their strength. And yet the only outcome of
their appeal is deeper grief, more utter hopelessness (19). They who have no hope but
in man will find little to sustain them.

II. Theik upbbaidino of Moses and Aaron (20, 21). 1. They spoke truth. The
demand for liberty of worship had been seized by Pharaoh as a pretext for more
oppressive measures. 2. They did not speak the whole truth. God and his purpose
were kept out of sight. They were counted as nothing. How often is this done in our
despondency and murmuring ! 3. Their reproaches, though met by silence and grief
equal to their own, brought no help to them. There is as little help in upbraiding
friends for failure as in spreading their injustice before foes.

III. Moses' cet to God. 1. He " returned to the Lord." He did not seek to unburden
his soul even to Aaron. The first step to help is to seek God's presence. 2. The holy
boldness of his prayer. The grieved spirit is poured out. There is nothing kept back.
God does not complain of our boldness, but of our restraining prayer before him.
8. God's answer (vi. 1). (1) This very failure shows God's truth (iv. 21). (2) God
shall fight for them : " Now shalt thou see what / will do to Pharaoh." (3) Pharaoh's
wrath and power will serve only to make their deliverance perfect. He will " drive
them out of his land." Israel found no consolation ; Moses does. — U.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 20, 21. — On qnitting the presence of
Pharaoh, the officers of the IsraeUtes, burning
with the sense of the injustice done them, and
deeply apprehensive with respect to their own
fatnre, fonnd Moses and Aaron waiting in the
precincts of the court to know the result of
their application. It need cause no surprise that
they poured out their pent-up indignation



upon them Were not Moses and Aaron flte
sole cause of the existing state <rf things?
Did not the extreme affliction of the people,
did not their own sufierings in the past, did
not their apprehended sufferings in the fu-
ture, originate wholly in the seductive words
wiiich the two brothers had addressed to them
at the assembly of the people ? (ch. iv. 29 31).



(ra. T. 20—28.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



188



Aeeordingl/, they denounced, almost cuised
their officious would-be deliverers (ch. v. 21).
" The Lord look upon you, and judge " be-
tween yon and us, whether the blame of this
whole matter does not lie upon you, its initia-
tors — you have made us to be abhorred in the
sight of Pharaoh, and of the Egyptians gene-
rally — you have brought us into danger of our
lives — ^the Lord judge you t "

Ver. 20. — ^Who stood in the way. Bather,
"who waited to meet them." It was not
accident, but design, that had brought the
two brothers to tiie spot They were as
anxious as the officers to know what course
Pharaoh would take — ^whether he would relax
the burthens of the people or no — ^whether he
would have compassion or the contrary.

Ver. 21.^rhey said unto them. The offi-
cers were too full of their wrongs to wait
nntil questioned. They took the word, and,
without relating the result of their interview,
implied it. The Lord look upon you, and
Judge, they said, meaning " the Lord (Jehovah)



consider your conduct, and judge if — not
exactly, " condemn it and punish it " (Keil
and Delitzsch) — but "pass sentence on it,"
"judge whether it has been right or not*
We make this appeal because ye have at any
rate done its a great injury — ^ye have made
our savour to be abhorred in the eyes of
Pharaoh. (Note the mixed metaphor, which
shows perhaps rather that " in the eyes " had
lost its original meaning, and come to signify
no more than " with " or " in respect of," than
that the literal meaning of " making a personal
savour to stink " did not occur to the writer.)
Nay, ye have done more — ye have put a
sword in the hand of his servants to slay no.
That is to say, " ye have armed them with a
weapon wherewith we expect that they will
take our lives." Either tiiey will beat us to
death — and death is a not infrequent result of
a repeated employment of the bastinado— or
when they find that punishment unavailing
they will execute us as traitors. On the use of
the bastinado as a punishment in Egypt, see
Chabas, 'Melanges Egyptologiques,' §" eitrit^
voL L pp. 100—6.



HOMILETICa

Ver. 21. — The servanU of Ood liable to reproach from friends no less than tnemi«$.
Sloses and Aaron had borne the reproaches and scoffs of Pharaoh (vers. 4 — 8) without
flinching. It was natural that an enemy should revile them. Pharaoh might tax them
with idleness and insincerity in religion, if he pleased. The stab did not penetrate very
4eep, nor cause a very grievous smart. But when theii brethren turned upon them and
tittered reproaches, it was different. Then the wound went to the heart ; the pain wa«
bitter, scarce endurable. It made them misdoubt themselves. Had they really not
acted for the best ? Had they been self-seeking, or vainglorious, or reckless, or even
injudicious ? Such thoughts will always occur even to the best men, if on their plans
aeeming to have miscarried their friends reproach them. The best men best know their
own frailty, and how easy it is for man to mar Grod's work by his own imperfections. It
requires a very brave soul to bear up against the reproaches of friends, especially when
there seems to be a ground for them. The more careful therefore should friends be not
to reproach God's servants causelessly, or unless they can point out where they have
been wrong. Actions are not to be always judged by their results, or, at any rate, not
by their immediate results. Moses and Aaron had done quite right ; they had obeyed
God ; they were bound to act as they had acted. It had not pleased God to give success
to their efforts as yet. The officers should have had patience, should have prayed to
God for relief but should have forborne from reproaching the innocent.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 20—23. — Mwmwing and faith. The Israelites were naturally sorely dis-
appointed at the issue of the interview with Pharaoh ; and with the unreasonableness so
often seen in those whose expectations have received a check, they turned on Moses and
Aaron, and accused these innocent men of being the authors of their misfortune. Moses
and Aaron themselves were almost as dumbfounded as their accusers at the turn events
had taken ; but one of them, at least, behaved with wisdom. The Israelites accused
men : Moses took his complaint to God, and opened up to him all the soreness of his
heart. This portion of the narrative suggests the following reflections : —

I. God's peovidencb often assumes an aspect of great MysTBBT to us. It
did so to Moses and the Israelites (vers. 22, 23). They had concluded that now that



136 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. t, 20— 28L

God had taken up their cause, their trials and sorrows were at an end ; but in enter-
taining so comfortable a hope, they found they were deceived. The first step on the road
to the promised deliverance had plunged them into a worse plight than ever. They had
almost felt the breath of liberty on their cheeks, when suddenly their hopes are
dashed from them, and the situation darkens till in its pitiless rigour it becomes
well-nigh unendurable. So God's providence is often to the godliest a sore and
perplexing mystery. It is not merely that things are not going as we wish, or
as fast as we expect — ^this need not surprise us, though oftentimes it does — ^but
that Jehovah seems acting contrary to his own perfections, to his character, to his
revealed purpose, to the promise on which he has encouraged us to trust. 'I he
wicked prosper ; the righteous are afflicted (Ps. xxxvii. ; Ixxiii.). Prayers seem
unanswered, and the hopes we had begun to cherish, the expectations we had built
upon his Word, are bitterly disappointed. The race seems to the swift, and the battle
to the strong of this world, while " waters of a ftdl cup are wrung out " to the saints
whom Ood has pledged himself to bless and to protect. This is what distresses us, and
the distress is not surprising.

II. The mtstebt which meets us in God's ebovidencb acts as a test of
CHABAOTEB. It drove Moses to prayer, but the multitude to murmurings and reproaches.
As this storm burst over Israel, the thoughts of many hearts would be revealed
(Luke ii. 35). Doubters would curse themselves for trusting to one whom, they would
declare, they had always suspected of deceiving them ; the timid would be heard
reiterating, " We told you it would come to this ; we saw it from the first 1 " while the
profane would break out into open blasphemies, and the superficial crowd — those who had
been most carried away by the enthusiasm — ^would groan and weep in utter disconsolate-
ness, and pour out rash accusations against Heaven and against Moses and Aaron, who
had brought them into all this trouble. Yet with foolish inconsistency they would call
oa the God they were mistrusting to judge between them and the men who had brought
to them his message (ver. 21). Comp. Christian and Pliable at the Slough of Despond
in ' Pilgrim's Progress.' Mystery in God's providence, in itself a moral necessity and
inevitable, is thus used by him for important ends in the testing and disciplining of
character. It brings to light our weaknesses ; sifts the chaff from the wheat ; educates
Ufa to trust ; convinces us of ignorance ; disenchants us of illusive hopes ; leads us to
prayer and wrestling with God. Thus it prepares us for fiirther discoveries of the
Divine wisdom when the time comes for the veil being removed, and educates us for
higher service.

III. The mystebt which enshrouds God'b providence arises feom oub partial
AND IMPERFECT COMPREHENSION OP HIS PLAN. Had God's purposc been simply to get
Israel out of Egypt in the easiest way possible, and with least cost of suffering to the
people, the permission of this new cruelty would indeed have been inexplicable. But it
is not in this way, or for such ends, or on these terms, that God conducts the govern-
ment of his world. The error of Israel lay in looking on this one litth bit of an
unfinished work, and in judging of it without reference to the whole design of which it
was a part. For God's purpose was not merely that the people should be delivered, but
that they should be delivered in such a way, and with such accompaniments of power
•nd judgment, as should illustriously glorify his own perfections, and print the memory
of his goodness on their hearts for ever ; while, as regards Ph'araoh, his design was to
glorify his power upon him (ch. ix. 16), and make him an example to all after ages of
the folly of resisting the Almighty. This being the end, it was obviously indispensable
that events should not be unduly hastened, but allowed, as far as possible, to take a
natural course. Time and scope must be given to Pharaoh to develop his real disposi-
tion, and the development must not be prematurely interfered with. The people must
be led by a way they knew not, and in paths they had not known ; the way chosen
could not be the absolutely shortest, but must include many turnings and windings, and
even seem at times to be bending backwards ; but the end would be " to make darkness
light before them, and crooked things straight " (Is. xlii. 16). And this is truly the
explanation of all our difficulties with regard to Divine providence. It is not God who
is at fault, but our own haste and shortsightedness, that perceive not all the ends he has
in view, nor how wonderfidly he is working towards those ends by the very circumstances
which perplex and bafiBe us. Wo know but " in part " (1 Cor. xiii. 12). The thoughts
ef Infinite Wisdom cannot all be made plain to us. The little that is before us we see.



CH. V. 19— 21.] THE BOOK OF EXUDUS. 13'J

but how much lies beyond which is involved in the hiding of his power I (Hsb. iiL 4.)
Our walking must be " by faith," not " by sight " (2 Cor. v. 7).— J. O.

Vers. 19 — 21. — Thoughtless smiters of a hrother in adversity. This whole chapter
particularly abounds in illustrations of human ignorance and error. We have seen in
what dense darkness was the mind of Pharaoh ; and under what utter misapprehensions
he multiplied the sorrows of Israel, ^ow we are introduced to the leaders of Israel,
treating Moses with equal injustice, because they are not able to see the difference
between the human instrument and the Divine hand that holds it. No more than
Pharaoh can they pierce through Moses to the mighty Gk)d behind him. It says in
ch. iv. 31, that when the people saw the signs they believed ; here is conduct which
shows foi how little their faith counted. As soon as they were set to make bricks
without straw, their faith utterly vanished. Yet surely the truth of God remained.
Present hwman cruelty, let it press ever so hard, cannot alter past manifestations of
Divine power. The God who gave his Son the parable of the Sower was prepared for
such a lapse into unbelief on the part of his people. His signs were Uke the seeds
which found no depth of earth; when persecution arose because of the message of
Moses, the people were straightway offended. Consider —

I. In what a state of mind Moses would be when these officers attacked
HIM. We know from his own language (vers. 22, 23) what his state of mind was after
the attack ; but even before it he must have been a prey to deep grief and gloomy appre-
hensions. We may be sure that when these officers came upon him, they did not find
proofs of indifference and carelessness in his face. He must have been very popular ju'^t
after he had wrought the signs ; as popular as Jesus was after he had fed the five thou-
sand. Aaron, doubtless, had been instructed by him to enlarge on the history of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and bring out into the boldest relief the terms of the Divine
promises. Thus the confidence and expectation of the people — a reception altogether
beyond his hopes — ^would lift him also into a confidence and expectation all the more
precious because of his previous despondency. And now, as he sees the condition of his
brethren, that despondency is more painful than ever. No imagination of ours can
exaggerate the perplexity and sadness into which Moses would be thrown.

II. Thus we are called to notice the in difference of Moses' bretbbem to
BIB painful position. He thought a great deal more upon their sorrows than they
did upon his. The grief of selfish people, in the reckless abandonment with which it
speaks and acts, fiimishes as painful evidence as we can find of the extent to which
human nature has &llen firom its first estate. It is a greedy, insatiable feeling. It is an
awfiil thing to consider that the very concentration of our thoughts on our own suffer-
ings makes us to increase the sufferings of others. Why, even when others are to
blmne, we might safely leave them to the observant, unforgetting God, to their own
consciences, and to the ultimate harvest which every doer of wrong must reap ; and very
often they are not to blame at all. If only these smarting Israelites had been able
in a right spirit, to look at the heart of Moses, they would have seen occasion for
supporting him with the greatest tenderness, gratitude, and patient endurance. What
right had they to complain of Moses V He had told them a coherent, straightforward
story, given them the signs ; and they, in return, had believed him for the very works'
sake. If there is any time when we should be slow to speak, it is in our sorrow. We
do well then to be silent, until such times as God has purged out of our minds all selfish
desires and groundless expectations. When all these are gone, and the truth which he
alone can plant is also ripened, then we shall be able to say, " It was good for ua to be
afflicted;" at present Israel said that it was bad — as bad as bad could be — and Moses
was the convenient person on whom they could lay the blame.

III. These officers had not insight enough to look beyond first conse-
QUBNCEB. They could not look through the pain of the present to a future which was
only attainable through that present. Thus the disciples spoke in deep perplexity and
disappointment concerning their missing Master as if he had vanished like a dream of
the night. " We trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel" So
they spoke, not having appreciated his recent word, " Except a com of wheat fall into
the ground and die, it abideth alone." We shall do well to consider in every enter-
Diise, thsA first wnsequences are very deceptive. When they bring hardship we must
not, therefore, turn l»ck j when they bring pleasure, we must not therefore conclude



ISA



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



CH. V.



that still greater pleasures lie beyond. Israel had no right to make any assumptions
whatever as to the first consequences of Moses' visit to Pharaoh. The true and only
safe position for Israel to take up was this : " Here are these signs ; they are signs that
Jehovah has sent Moses, and is with him; let us accept them in full and patient
reliance." A man does not dispute the truth of the flnger-post which points him into
the right road, because soon after he has passed it he comes to a worse bit of travelling
than any he has had before. There is a profound and admonitory generalisation in that
way of indicating Christian experience which puts the Slough of Despond so early in the
pilgrim's journey : and if first consequences that bring hardship are to be mistrusted,
surely we must be even more cautious when the first consequences are full of pleasure.
Though we be told to remember our Creator in the days of our youth — ^his claims, his
expectations, and his judgment-day — ^the danger is that we shall only too easily forget
all this, and remember only that we are strong, ambitious, able to enjoy, and with
abundant opportunities for enjoyment. We must always mistrust the mere pleasure oi
our senses ; the pleasure of tastes and likings. Liking a thing is never a sufficient
reason for doing it; disliking never a sufficient reason for refiising to do it. God
appeals to our prudence, to our conscience, to our pity, to our fears, but never to our
tastes. And be it ever remembered that there is one first consequence which never
deceives nor disappoints those who put themselves in the way of it. Do that which 'n
right in the sight of God, and there is an immediate and pure pleasure at the heart,
which all the waves and billows of adversity cannot wash away. For instance, we
cannot believe for a moment that Moses regretted his comphance with the commands of
Jehovah. They had been clear and imperative, steady and unrelaxing in their pressure
on liis conscience. The pain from the reproach-ss of Israel was bad enough ; but
it would have been a far worse pain, if he had sought to flee from the test of the
burning bush, and, Jonah-like, buiy himself with his sheep in the very depths of the
wilderness. — If.



EXPOSITION.



Veis. 22, 23. — The two broiheiB made no reply

to the words of the officers. Perhaps their hearts
were too full for speech ; perhaps they knew
not what to say. Whatever faith they had, it
did no doubt seem a hard thing that their
interference, Divinely ordered as it was, should
have produced as yet nothing but an aggrava-
tion of their misery to the Israelite people.
They could not understand the course of the
Divine action. God had warned them not to
expect success at once (ch. iii. 19 ; iv. 21) ;
but he had said nothing of evil consequences
following upon their first efforts. Thus we
can well understand that the two brothers
(and especially Moses, the more impetuous of
them) were bitterly grieved and disappointed.
They felt their cup of sorrow to be full — ^the
reproaches of the officers made it overflow.
Hence the bitterness of the complaint with
which tliis chapter terminates, and which
introduces the long series of precious promise,
contained in the opening section of ch. vi.

Ver. 22. — Moses returned unto the Lord.
We are not to understand that Moses had
forsaken God and now " returned " to him
but simply that in his trouble he had recourse



to God, took his sorrow to the Tlmnie of

Grace, and poured it out before the Almighty
A good example truly, and one which Chris-
tians in all their trials would do well to foUow.
Lord, wherefore, etc. The words, no doubt,
are bold. They have been said to " approach
to irreverence." But there are parallels to
them, which have never been regarded as
irreverent, in the Psalms : e.g. " God, why
hast thou cast us off for ever? Why does
thine anger smoke against the sheep of thy
pasture ? " (Ps. bcxiv. 1.) " How lone wilt
thou hide thyself? Where are thy former
lovingkindnesses ? Wherefore hast thou made
all men for nought?" (Ps. bcxxix. 46-9), and
the like. Kalisch seems right in saying that
" the desponding complaint of Moses was not
the result of disbelief or doubt, but the effort
of a pious soul struggling after a deeper pene-
tration into the mysteries of the Almighty."

Ver. 23. — He hath done evil to this people.
See above, vers. 7—9, and ver. 14. Pharaoh
had increased the burdens of the whole nation,
and in this way " done evil " to them. He
had also brought the punishment of scourging
on a number of the chiefs. Neither hast thou
deUvered thy people at all. The promised
deliverance (ch. iii. 8, 20) had not come-
there was no sign of it— the people was suffer
ing under a more cruel bondage than ever.



. TI. 1— «.J



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



IN



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 22, 23. — The religious soul takes its griefs straight to Ood. When our hopes
kre disappointed, when matters fall out otherwise than as we wish, when our enemies
redst us, and our friends load us with reproach, how sweet to have a safe refuge whither
we may betake ourselves, even the bosom of our most loving God ! " Truly God is
loving unto Israel." His hand may be slack, " as men count slackness ; '' but it is not
crippled or paralysed — ^it is always " mighty to save." Worldlings take their difficulties
and their troubles to counsellors whom they deem wise, or to friends whom they regard
as powerful, or to subordinates whom they think to be crafty, but never to God- The
religious soul's first instinct in deep trouble is to seek solitude, to fiy from man, and to
pour out all its grief before the Lord. It will even venture, like Moses, to expostulate —
to ask to be shown the reason why God has disappointed it and troubled it — to demand
" Why is thy wrath so hot ? " and " When wilt thou comfort me ? " It does not doubt
but that in the end all will be right, that God will do as he has promised ; but it wants
to be sustained, upheld, comforted as to the intermediate time — to be assured that Gh>d
"has not forgotten to be gracious," that he is stiU nigh at hand, that he "will not
leave it nor forsake it."



SECTION IV.— CHAPTER VI. 1—27.
Dbfbbssioh or Mobiib, and oontibmation of his missiox.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTKB Vl



Yen. 1—8. — The expostulation of Moses
did not oSend God. God gave him, in reply
to it, a most gracious series of promises and
assurances, well calculated to calm his fears,
assuage his griefs, and comfort his heart ; and
he confirmed the whole to him by his name
JEHOVAH, "the Only Existent," and there-
fore » the Eternal and Immutable." This name
he Iiad previously revealed to Moses at Mount
Sinai, as his peouliar name, and the one by
which he would choose to be called (ch. iii.
13—15). He had also told hun to proclaim
this name to the people. This conmiand is
now repeated (ver. 6) very solemnly ; and with
it are coupled the promises above alluded to.
1. That God would certainly bring the Israel-
ites out, of Egypt, despite the unwillingnesi
of Pharaoh (vers. 1 and 6) , 2. That he would
da this " with a stretched-out arm," and by
means of " great judgments " (ver. 6) ; 3. That
he would keep the covenant which he had
made with the patriarchs to give their descen-
dants the land of Canaan (ver. 4) and would
assuredly "bring in" the Israelites to that
land, and "give it them for an heritage''
(ver. 8>



Ver. 1. — ^Now shalt then see. There wH
encouragement in the very word "Now."
Moses' complaint was, that God delayed bii
coming, would not show himself, was " slack
concerning his promise." In reply he is told
that there is to be no longer any delay — ^the
work is just about to commence. " Now shall
thou see." With a strong hand shall he let
them go. The " strong hand " is not Pharaoh's,
but God's. " By means of my strong hand "
(or •' overpowering might ") " laid upon him
shall he he induced to let them go," and simi-
larly with the other clause. Drive them out.
This phi'ase well expresses the final anxiety of
Pharaoh to he rid of the Israehtes. (See
ch. xii. 31, 22.)

Ver. 2. — And Ood spake. The promise of
the first verse was, apparently, given first, and
was quite distinct from all the others — -perhaps
separated from them by an interval of hours,
or days. It was especially addressed to Moses.
The rest was in the main (ver. 6 — 8) a mes-
sage to the people. I am the Lord. Or, " 1
am JEHOVAH." Ccinpare iii. 15, and note
ad Ice.

Ver. 3. — ^I appeared nnto Abraham, onto
Isaac, and nnto Jacob, by the name of God
Almighty. See Gen. xvii. 1 for the revela-
tion of this name to Abraham, and Gen.
XXXV. 11 for its repetition to Jacob. We do
not find the full name used by God in any
appearance to Isaac ; but Isaac himself uses it
in Gen. xxviii. 3. By my name Jehovah wai



140



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. VI. 1 — ft



I not known onto them. The explanation of
this passage is by no means easy. God him-
self, according to Gen. xy. 7, revealed himself
to Abraham as Jehovah before declaring his
name to be El-Shaddai (God Almighty) ; and
again revealed bimselfi'to Jacob as Jehovah-
Elohim (ti>. xxxviii. 13). Abraham named
the place where he had been about to sacrifice
baac, " Jehovah-jireh " (f6. xxii. 14). That
Moses regarded the name as known even
earliei, appears from Gen. iv. 1. It was pro-
bably as old as language. The apparent mean-
ing of the present passage cannot therefore be
its true meaning. No writer would so contra-
dict himself. Perhaps the true sense is, " I
was known to them as a Being of might and
power, not as mere absolute fand so eternal
and immutable) existence." This meaning of
the word, though its etymological and original
meaning, may have been unknown to the
patriarchs, who were not etymologists. It was
first distinctly declared to Moses at Sinai
(ch. iii. 14, 15).

Ver. 4. — I have established my covenant
with them. Compare Gen. xv. 18 — 21 ; xvii:
7, 8 ; xxvi. 3 ; xxviii. 13. The land of Canaan,
in a narrow acceptation, reached " from Sidon
onto Gaza " (Gen. x. 19) ; in a wider sense it
included the whole tract between " the river
of Egypt (TFodj^-el- Jn'sA) and the great river,
the river Euphrates " (»6. xv. 18). It was this
larger tract which was promised by God to
Abraham. The land of their pilgrimage,
wherein they were strangers. Literally, " the
land of their sojourns wherein they sojourned."
(So Kalisch.) It was by permission of the
lords of the soil — ^the Canaanites, Perizzites,
Hittites, and others, that Abraham and his
descendants dwelt in Canaan to the time of
Jacob's descent into Egypt. (See Gen. xii. 6 ;
xiii. 7 ; xxiii. 7 ; xxvil. 46, etc.)

Ver. 5. — ^I have also heard the groaning.
Compare ch. ii. 24 and iii. 9. The repetition
is in consequence of Moses' expostulation (ch.
V. 22, 23), and is to assure the Israelites that
God has not forgotten them, but will sustain
tiiem under their afflictions, and will shortly
deliver them.

Ver. 6. — Say nnto the children of Israel.
God felt for the disappointment which the
people had suffered in finding no alleviation of
their toils, but the reverse, after their hopes had
been raised high by the words of Moses (ch. iv.
81). He therefore sent them an inspiriting
and gracious message. "They«/iou2d be rid



of their bondage ; they should be brought out ;
they should be redeemed and delivered by hi»
mighty arm and miraculous intervention. He,
Jehovah, had said it." Faith would lay hold
on this assurance and cling to it, even though
God still delayed his coming, and did not pre-
cipitate matters. A stretehed-out arm. Amu
are stretched out by men to help and save. An
outstretched arm in the Egyptian writing meant
" action." The phrase, elsewhere so common,
is here used for the first time. (Compare,
however, ch. iii. 20.) It was siirnificant of
active, energetic help. Great judgments.
These had been previously hinted at (ch. iii.
20 and ch. iv. 22) but had not been previously
called " judgments." Compare Gen. xv. 14 :
" Also thai nation whom they serve will I
judge." The plagues of Egypt were not merely
"wonders," but punishments inflicted on a
proud and cruel nation by a Judge.

Vers. 7, 8. — The promises are continued,
heaped one upon another. 1. God will take
them for his own people. 2. He will be, in
a special sense, their God. 3. They shall
clearly know that it is he who brings them
forth out of Egypt. 4. They shall be brought
into the promised land. 5. llie land shall be
made over to them, and become their own in-
heritance. The Israelites were formally taken
to be God's people at Sinai (ch. xix. 5, 6) ;
where, at the same time, he became (specially
tut not exclusively) their God (ch. xx. 1 ;
xxix. 45, 46). They had evidence that it was
he who brought them forth in the piUar of
fire and of a cloud (ch. xiii. 21 ; xiv. 19, 20,
etc.). They were brought into the promised
laud by Joshua (Josh. iv. 1), and given the
fuU possession of it by him and his successors
— the various judges and kings, until at last,
under David and Solomon, they held the en-
tire tract that had been promised to Abraham
(see 1 Kings iv. 21 ; 2 Chron. ix. 26).

Ver. 8. — The land which I did Bwear to
give it to Abraham, etc. See Gen. xxii.
16 — 18 ; xxvi. 3, etc. The only formal oath
is recorded in Gen. xxii. 16 ; but an oath ia
perhaps implied in every covenant between
God and man. God's faithfulness is pledged
to the performance of the terms of the cove-
nant on his part. I will give it yon for an
heritage: I am the Lord. Rather, "I will

five it you for an heritage, I the Lord " (or " 1
ehovah," or " I the Eternal One "). " Ton
have the pledge of my Eternity and Immntk-
bility that it shall be youn."



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 1. — OocFs eondescension to a weak faith. As the Lord Jesus condescended to
Thomas, and bade him " reach hither his finger and behold his hands, and reach hithei
his hand and thrust it into his side," so that he might be no longer " faithless, but
believing " (John xx. 27), so Jehovah now declared to Moses that, if he could not walk



siL ¥1.1—9.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS 141

by Mth, right should be vouchsafed to him. "Now shalt thou see," etc. HumaL
infinmty is so great, man's faith is so weak, the best are so liable to accesses of distrust
and despondency, that, if God were extreme to mark what is in this way done amiss,
few indeed would be those who could " abide it." Therefore, in his mercy, he con-
descends. Well for man could he breathe continually the higher, rarer, atmosphere of
faith. But, if he cannot, yet has Godward aspirations, so that he takes his distrust and
his despondency to God, as Moses did, God will in no wise cast him out. He will not
" break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax." He will accept the imperfect
service that is still service, and allow his servant to work in a lower sphere. Henceforth
the faith of Moses was not much tried — he had soon sight to walk by. When once the
series of plagues began, he could no longer ask, " Why is it that thou hast sent me ? "
He could see that the end was being advanced — the deliverance being extorted from the
king — and that the day of final triumph was fast coming.

Vers. 2, 3. — Gotfs names and their importance. With men a name is simply a " mark of
difference " — a mode of distinguishing one individual from another ; and the particular name
that a man bears is, generally speaking, a matter of the very slightest importance. But
with God the case is otherwise. The names of God have always been among all mea
significant names. If their signification is clear, or generally known, then men's views
of the Supreme Being are vitally affected by the names under which they know him.
Persons whose only name for God is Dyaus or Tien — " the heaven " — ^are not likely to
be strongly apprehensive of the personality and spirituality of the Creator. If God is
known as Ammon, the main idea of him will be, that he is a riddle and a mystery ; if
as Shaddai, that he is powerful ; if as Mazda, that he is wise or bounteous. When
monotheism is firmly established, it is well that God should be known by many names,
as El, Elohim, Adonai, Eliun, Shaddai, Jehovah, because then his many and various
attributes are better apprehended. If, however, God is to be known by one name only,
or by one special name, while there is none more pure or lofty than Jehovah — " the
Self-Existent " — there is none more tender and loving than our own EngUsh name, God
— ».e. " the Good."

Vers. 4 — 8. — Ood a keeper of covenants. God is declared in Scripture to be one who
" keepeth covenant and mercy, yea, to a thousand generations " (Deut. vii. 9). He
is ever faithful. He cannot lie. He is not a man that he should repent. The bow
which he set in the cloud, when he covenanted with Noah that the waters should no
more become a flood to destroy all flesh, is still there, and the promise of which it was
the sign has been kept — there has come no repetition of the Flood, no second destruction
of mimkind by water. God has kept the covenant which he made with Israel at Sinai —
first, on the side of promise, in giving them all the good things which he said he would
give them ; and then, on the side of threatening, in bringing upon them all the calami-
ties which he said he would bring. With Christians, too, Oroi enters into covenant at
their baptism, promising them protection, spiritual aid, and eternal life in heaven, on
their maintaining faith and repentance. This covenant, Uke his others, he will assuredly
keep. Let them be but true to him, and they need have no fear but that he will be
true to theno. The Promised Land will be theirs — ^he will give it to them for an
heritage — ^he, Jehovah 1

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTH0B8.

Vers. 1 — ^9. — A Divine commentary on a Divine name. The antiquity of the name
Jehovah, setting aside direct testimonies to its occxirrence in earlier scriptures, is
sufBciently proved by its etymology (from havah, an old — and, in the days of Moses,
oosolete — form of the verb " to be "), and from its presence (in composition) in pre-
Mosaic proper names (e.g. ver. 20). It is absurd to press this passage in proof of the
ignorance of the patriarchs of this name of God, when one observes — 1. That the
context plainly relates to a commentary which God was about to give on this name in
deeds. 2. That the name is not here announced, but is presupposed as known — " My
name Jehovah." 3. That in ch. iii. 14 — 16, where it is announced, it is expressly
referred to as a name of -Ider date — God styUng himself repeatedly, " Jehovah God of



M2 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. vi. i— 3.

joai fathers." The knowledge of God by this name in the present passage has obTiou*
reference to a knowledge derived from manifestation of the attributes implied ia th*
meaning of the name.

I. " Jehovah " in conteast with " El-Shaddai " (ver. 3). 1. El-Shaddai meana,
as translated, "God Almighty." It denotes in God the simple attribute of power —
All-Mightiness — power exerted chiefly in the region of the natural life. 2. JehoTah,
on the other hand, has a deeper and wider, an infinitely fuller and richer meaning. It
denotes God as possessed of the perfections of the Absolute — self-identical and change-
less because seLT-existent and eternal. God ia eternally what he is (ch. iii. 14) — the
Being who is and remai is one with himself in all he thinks, purposes, and does. This
implies, together with inmiutability, the attribute of self-determining fieedom, and
that unlimited rule (dominion, sovereignty) in the worlds of matter and mind, which is
of the essence of the conception of the Absolute. Hence such passages as these : — " i
am Jehovah, I change not " (Mai. iii. 6) ; " Whatsoever Jehovah pleased, that did he in
heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and in all deep places " (Fs. cxxz. 6) ; " Jehovah, he
is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath ; there is none else " (Deut. iv. 39).
Jehovah is, moreover, the God of gracious purpose. It is this which gave the name its
depth of interest to the Hebrew bondsmen, who were not likely to be greatly influenced
by purely ontologioal conceptions. The chosen sphere for the manifestation of the
attributes denoted by these names of God was that marked out by the promises of the
C'ovi-nant. El-Shaddai, e.g., while declaring the possession by Uod of the attribute of
power in general, had immediate reference to the manifestations of power which Ctoi
would give in the birth of Isaac, and in the fulfilment of the promise to Abraham of a
numerous posterity (Gen. xvi. 1 — 7). It was power working in the interests of grace,
in subserviency to love. The same is true of the name Jehovah. A view of God
in his bare absoluteness would awaken only a speculative interest ; but it is different
when this self-existeut, eternal Being is seen entering into history, and revealing
himself as the God of compassionating love. Grace and mercy are felt to be no
longer foreign to the meaning of the name, but to be as much a part of it as
changelessness and freedom. This, accordingly, was what the name told to Israel ; not
simply that there was an Absolute, or even that he who had entered into covenant with
the Fathers, and was now about to undertake their deliverance, was this absolute Gkid ;
but rather, that it was in the work of their salvation that his perfections as Absolute
were to be surprisingly and surpassingly exhibited. Their redemption was to he a
chosen field for the manifestation of his Jehovah attributes. There would be given in
it a discovery and demonstration of these surpassing everything that had hitherto been
known. And was not this glorious comfort to a nation lying in darkness and the
shadow of death 1

U. The historical exhibition of this contbabt. 1. Ood revealed as El-Shaddai
(ver. 3). God was made known as El-Shaddai in the birth of Isaac (Bom. iv. 17 — 22),
in the care exercised over the patriarchs in their wanderings (Gen. xxviii. 15), in
the provision made for their temporal necessities (Gen. xlv. & — 9), in the increase
and preservation of the chosen race in Egypt (Ex. i. 7, 12, 20 ; iii. 2). This name,
however, was inadequate to express the richer aspects and relations of the Divine
character brought to light in the Exodus, and in the subsequent experiences of the
people. 2. J%e transition from El-Shaddai to Jehovah. Vers. 4 — 6 narrate the steps
by which the way was prepared for the new and higher manifestation. The preparation
involved — (1) The establishment of a covenant of promise (ver. 4). If God is revealed
as Jehovah when seen acting with unbounded freedom in fulfilment of a purpose, then
it was necessary, in ordOT that the freedom and sovereignty of the worker might be
rendered completely manifest, that the purpose should be previously declared. Only on
the basis of a previously declared purpose could the Jehovah attributes be conspicuously
and conclusively displayed. (See interesting remarks on this in Bnice's ' Chief End of
Revelation,' ch. iv.). (2) The development of a crisis in the situation of Israel (ver. 5).
This crisis was marl^ed on the human side by the sufferings of Israel reaching a pitch
of intensity which imperatively called for a Divine interposition ; and on the Divine
side, by God arousing himself, and determining himself to interlere on their behalf
(ch. ii. 23 — 25). We have already seen that the bondage was not without Divine, permis-
sion. We have traced it in — (1) A punishment for sins, (2) A trial of faith, and (3) i



CK. Ti 8— a] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 143

moral preparation. We have now to view in it a situation providentially prepared
with the design of affording the fullest possible scope for the display of the truth, grace,
power, and aU-embraoing sovereignty of the great Being who was revealing himself in
Israel's history. 3. Ood revealed as Jehovah (vers. &— 9). Tliis revelation would
embrace — (1) The deliverance of the people from the bondage and misery of Egypt, and
thii with great accompaniments of power and judgment (ver. 6). (2) Their adoptior
by God as a people to himself (ver. 7). (3) Their final settlement in Canaan, in
fiilfilment of promise (ver. 8). By such deeds would God make it manifest that he was
indeed Jehovah, their God. He would display his might; would demonstrate his
supremacy as Moral Buler; would magnify his covenant-keeping fiiithfiilness ; would
reveal himself as the Living Personal God, working freely in history in pursuance of
gracious purposes, and, in spite of all h\mian opposition, bringing them to pass.

Lessons : — 1. How wonderful to contemplate God in the majesty of his perfections as the
Great 1 Am — ^the absolute and unconditioned Being I But what language will express
the condescension and grace displayed in the stooping down of this absolute Being to
enter into covenant engagements with man, even to the extent of binding himself with
oaths to fulfil the promises given by his own free goodness. 2. The manifestation of the
Jehovah attributes in the deliverance of Israel from Egypt has its higher counterpart in
the discovery of them since made in the redemption of men from sin and Satan through
Christ. Christ redeems us from sin's burden and from Satan's tyranny. He does this
in virtue of the " stretched-out arm " and " mighty judgments " with which, while on
earth, he overcame the Prince of the power of this world ; himself also enduring the
judgment of God in being " made sin for us," " that we might be made the righteous-
ness of God in him." By this atonement and victory, in the might of which he has
now ascended on high, leading captivity captive, we, being reconciled to God, are formed
into a people for his praise, and he becomes oui God ; the same power that redeemed us
working in us to deliver us from sin in our members, and to prepare us for a heavenly
inheritance ; to which, as the goal of all God's leading of us, the promises immovably
point forward (Eom. viii. 1, 2 ; 2 Cor. v. 21 ; Eph. iv. 8 ; Col. L 12 — 15 ; ii. 15 ;
I Pet. i. 3—10 ; iL 9, 10).— J. 0.

Ver. 7. — A rich promise. The promise is as rich as it is wonderful, and as wonderful
•8 it is rich — " I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God." It
includes — 1. The highest honour. Who speaks? The absolute God. To whom? A
nation of bondsmen. Yet he says — " 1 will take you," etc. And he did it, even as he
still takes sinners in Christ into union and fellowship with himself — adopting them as
sons, admitting them to covenant, making them heirs, etc. 2. The highest privilege.
All promise and all blessing, for time and for eternity, are wrapped up in this single but
most comprehensive word — " I will be to you a God." 3. The most indissoluble oj
relations. It lasts through time, and extends into eternity, enduring as long as God
and the soul and Christ endure, and that is for ever (cf. Matt. xxii. 31, 32). — J. 0.

Ver. 8. — Ood encourages Moses in his despondency. We have here —
I. MoBES QUESTIONING THE PBOCEDDRE OP Jehovah. Observe — 1. Moses in all his
perplexity still acts upon the firm, assurance that there is a Jehovah to resort to. " He
returned unto the Lord." Neither the reproaches of the people nor his own disappoint-
ment made him at all to doubt that he was dealing with a glorious, awful, and Divine
existence outside of himself. It seems just as much a matter of course for Moses to meet
with Jehovah, as it had been for the Israelite officers to meet with Moses. This is one
good result of all the discussion (for hardly any other term will sufficiently indicate it)
which Moses has had with Jehovah concerning his own fitness. Every time God spoke
he stood out before the mind of his servant more distinctly and impressively as a real
existence. The troubled heart of Moses leads him here into a set of very ignorant
questions ; but these were a small evil compared with what might have happened, viz.
a lapse into utter atheism. 2. Moses, like the Israelite officers, makes the mistah*
of going by first consequences. He does not rebuke the officers for wrong expectation*
«nd hasty conclusions. By his language in approaching God, he admits to the full that
these officers have reason for their reproaches. They have ajipealed to Jehovah ai
agaiasi Muses; Moses in turn can only appeal to Jehovah, not against them, but — te



144 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. ti. S.

justify himself. How easy it is for a man, even though fully persuaded of Gkxl'B
existence, to have utterly erroneous thoughts of his purposes and of his ways of working.
Evidently it will need a gradual process — and not without temporary retrogressions — ^in
order to lift Moses ahove such conceptions of deity as he had gained in Egypt and
Midian, and by all his acquaintance with current idolatries. It is easier to remember
the name I Am than to understand the thing signified by the name. 3. In particular,
Moses blundered in thinking of deliverance, not as a process, hut as an act — something
to be achieved by a miracle as instantaneous and complete as those which he had
wrought before Israel. One of the most pernicious misapprehensions of the Gospel is
that which looks on salvation as an instantaneous tiling — ^which speaks of the saved,
instead of using the more exact description, " those who are being saved " (Bom. v. 10 ;
1 Cor. L 18 ; Philipp. ii. 12 ; 1 Pet. i. 9). First of all, we put our shallow, unspiritual
notions into the Word of God, and then turn round in amazement, because his actions
do not correspond with our ideas of what they should be. 4. We see from this utter-
ance of Moses, how a man may make the first step towards freedom and Divine fulfil-
ments of gracious purposes to him, and yet not know it. Moses having gone to Pharaoh,
had met with nothing but rebuff; and was further compelled to see his brethren treated
more cruelly than ever. He thinks nothing has been done, because he can see nothing,
but he is utterly mistaken. The Israelites, had they only known it, were nearer
salvation — a great deal nearer — ^than when they first believed. " Wherefore hast thou
so evil entreated this people ? " says Moses to Jehovah. Wherefore ? indeed !^-only we
should ever ask all-i nportant questions ia their proper order. First, " 7s it sof" and
then, " Why is it so ? " It was not true that Jehovah was evilly entreating the people.
The liberating work was really begun, even though Moses could see no sign of it.
When, from the point of view given by the catastrophe of the Red Sea, we look back on
this first interview,, then we see that it was also the first step in a solemn gradation —
for Moses and Israel, the first step upwards ; and just as surely for Pharaoh, the first
itep downwards.

II. QoD GIVES AN ANSWBB FULL OP BNOODEAGEMENT. 1. Notice the absence of
anything in the shape of rebuke. These words of Moses had a very oflensive and
dishonouring sovmd, but we do not read that Jehovah's anger was kindled against Mosei
(oh. iv. 14), or that he sought to kiU him (ch. iv. 24). When there is a want of due
and prompt submission to the commandments of God, especially when they are plain
and decisive ones, then God begins to threaten. But when the thing lacking is a want
of understanding as to God's way, then he patiently extends sympathy, and endeavours
to give light and truth. A commander severely punishes a subordinate when he
neglects plain orders at a critical juncture ; but he would be very unreasonable if he
expected him all at once to appreciate the plan of a campaign. Moses would have been
very differently treated, if, after the reproaches of the officers, he had shown a spirit of
disobedience towards Jehovah. 2. As to the substance of God's reply, what can be
said that he has not said already ; save that Jie puts the old truths and promises mor*
emphatically, more comprehensively than ever f The first appeal to Moses is, to rest at
fa/r as he can in an undisturbed sense of the power of Qod. That power belongs to
Jehovah is the one thing which Moses has seen most clearly, filt most deeply ; and God
began by assuring him that he will yet be convinced how strong the Divine hand is.
The strong man, violently and wastefuUy laying hold of Jehovah's possessions, will be
utterly subdued by a far stronger than himself The next point to be noticed is that
though, as we have said, there was no expressed rebuke, yet there are elements in this
reply of God, out of which Moses, reflecting on what was expressed, could construct a
rebuke for himself. Moses is not showing a faith equal to that of Abraham. Isaac, and
Jacob ; and yet they were Without the revelation of this name Jehovah. Moses, who
had been told more of the Divine nature than Abraham was told, ought to have
believed not less readily and steadily than Abraham. Best if you can, Moses, 'a all
the comforts that flow from a due consideration of this great and exhaustless Name !
Then God goes on to speak of his own faithfulness, of the covenant which was constantly
in the Divine mind. Was it for Moses to speak as if God was unmindful of that
covenant ; he to speak, who but lately had shown his own want of regard to the human
aide of it, and been in deadly peril because of his uncircumcised son 1 The God of
▲tmhom, Isaac, and Jacob, is Jehovah, the great I Am. If, then, he made a covenuol



cii. VI. 2—8.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS- 14£>

with all its promises yesterday, be sure that to-day he is doing something to oairy that
covenant out. If, yesterday, he expressed compassion for the oppressed, and wrath with
the oppressor, be sure that he has not relapsed into cold indifference to-day. 'ihese
cnpricious sympathies are reserved for men and women who will weep over the mimic
and exaggerated sorrows of the stage, and then go home to harden their hearts against
the terrible sorrows of real life. When we read over the words of Moses here, and
compare them with the words of God, we see how contracted were the views of Moses,
and how gloriously enlarged were the views of God. Moses is thinking simply of
deliverance — ^how to get the present generation from under the yoke of the oppressor;
but God has in his mind a great plan, of which the deliverance from Pharaoh is but one
sta;;e in the development, and that a very brief stage. To the completion of this plan
the hberation of Israel was necessary, and therefore this liberation would assuredly be
achieved. Moses, so to speak, was low down in a hollow ; he could get no proper view
of the distances ; he could not get a due impression of all this tract of time, from God's
first appearing to Abraham down to the securing of the inheritance ; and therefore he
may well be excused if he speaks hastily. But God looks down from his throne in
eternity. The whole stretch of the work lies before him, and thus beholding it, he can
but reiterate his promises, exhibit the great features of his plan, and counsel Moses and
Israel to do the one thing needful, i.e. continue obediently waiting upon him in the
generation in which they Bve. Let us do what God tells us, being perfectly sure that he
sees what we cannot see, and that, because he is the God who cannot lie, he sets all
things before us just as they are. 3. Another thing is to be considered here, which,
though omitted from Jehovah's answer to Moses, ought not to be neglected by us. For
typical purposes, the welfare and future of Israel is the great thing spoken of; Pharaoh
is looked at simply as the cruel adversary and oppressor of IsraeL Hence just those
things are stated which most effectively show his complete downfall. But we must
remember that the things which are stated at any particular time are only a small part
of what are in the mind of God. He states not all the considerations which inspire his
acts, but only such as it may be well for us to know. Pharaoh had to be dealt with as
a man, even though the record is emphatically constructed so as to set him forth
merely as a type. It would have been manifestly unjust to bring upon him sudden and
terrible destruction of all his power, without an appearance of appeal to his voluntary
action. — Y.

Vers. 2 — 8. — The message to afflicted Israel. I. The word to the leader: vers. 2 — 5.
The message must be from faith to faith. The heart of God's servant must first be
revived ere he can impart strength to the people. 1. He is reminded of God's faithful-
ness : " I am Jehovah." We cannot grasp this truth without deliverance from fear.
2. The darkness will only make God's glory shine out the more resplendently. Their
present sufferings will mark a new era in God's revelation of himself. Known before as
the Almighty, he will now reveal himself as Jehovah, " the faithful One," who remembers
and fulfils his promises. 3. Having grasped the truth regarding God's faithfulness he is
led back to the promises by which the Lord has bound himself. 4. The assurance of
present sympathy and speedy deliverance. He has heard their groaning and called to
remembrance his pledged word. To dwell in these truths is to possess light and power.
God's word will then be a joy to our hearts, and will be in our lips consolation and
strength for the fkinting ones around us.

II. The word to the people : vers. 6 — 8. 1. It is shut in between the reiterated
assurance, " / am Jehovah," vers. 6 — 9. For them, too, the truth to rest in is God's faith-
fulness. 2. The deliverance will be accompanied by the revelation of God's terribleness
(ver. 6). Israel never forgot those days, and never will. 3. God will wed them to him-
self. He does not deliver us and then leave us : "I will take you to me for a people and
1 will be to you a God." 4. He will fulfil all the promises and give them the land for
a heritage. This is the Gospel message : Our bonds will be broken — God will bind us to
himself and give us his people's heritage. Have we received it ? Is it a living hope, an
abiding joy to us ? — ^U.

Vers. 2 — 3. — The Lord Ihy God is one Qod. God appeared to the fathers of the raca
under one name ; to their successors under anothw. ^am? is more than title ; it 3b the
8»opus, ;,



ua



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[on. TI.9,



character, or aspect of character, denoted by the title. Jehovah would seem to have heeu
a title of God before the time of Moses ; but to him, and to the Israelites through him,
was first revealed that aspect of the Divine character which explained and justified tho
title Notice —

I. One may know God without knowino all about him. Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob certainly knew God. They believed in him as an Almighty Euler — one who was
ruUug them, and who would fulfil his promise to them. His power and his trustworthi-
ness were the characteristics they most relied on. Their faith centred in his name El-
Shaddai, and as a living practical faith it tended to secure the righteousness for which
— as seed for fruit— ^it was reckoned. [^Jllitatration : — Certain medicines, in earlier years,
were trusted and used successfully to produce certain effects ; yet other uses remained
imknown until long afterwards.] (Jod was trusted by the patriarchs to the extent ol
their then knowledge, though they knew nothing of other characteristics which were to
be afterwards revealed.

II. We mat know God undeb different aspects, and yet know the same God.
No doubt the revelation of a new name, the fixing of the attention upon a new aspect of
the Divine character, must have been, at first, somewhat startling to those who held by
the old traditions. Those taught to beUeve in El-Shaddai may have held the new
believers in Jehovah unorthodox. Yet both, in so fer as their belief was genuine, knew
and trusted the same God. Jehovah was £1-Shaddai only viewed firom a new standpoint.
There was no contradiction between the two names — one God owned both.

III. We may expect as the old ordeb changes to view God under other thah
THE old conditions. The new revelation resulted firom new conditions. The old order
having changed, a new standpoint was necessitated, whence God must be viewed under
a new aspect. [Illustration : — The properties of a medicine are discovered little by little,
as new diseases cause it to be applied in different ways.] New conditions must result
In new discoveries as to the " properties" of God.

Application: — God is one. Truth is one; yet God and Truth are many-sided — we see
them differently according to the position which we occupy. Some people are in a great
hurry to denounce all novelty as heresy ; but novelty may mean nothing more than a
new point of view, whereas heresy results from distorted vision ; it sees wrongly, through
personal idiosyncrasy, that which, firom the same standpoint, is seen clearly by the clear-
eyed. We do well to suspect ourselves when our conclusions differ from those of others.
We may test such conclusions in two ways : — 1. What are the conditions under which
they have been arrived at ? If the conditions have changed, we may expect the conclu-
sions to be different. 2. Do they contradict old beliefs ? If so, they should be suspected
— or, Do they merely embrace them within a wider faith ? If so, they may sufiBciently
justify themselves. We may expect new revelations, but we must not hurriedly accept
novelties. New names will be made known, but they are never really incoTisisfent with
the old.— G.



EXPOSITION.



Ver. 9. — ^Hope deferred maketh the heart
lick. The Israelites, who had expected a
Bpeedy deliverance, and found themselves only
the more down-trodden for Moses' interfer-
ence, were too much dispirited to be cheered
even by the giacions promises and assurances
which Moses was commissioned to give. They
had no longer any trust in one who they
thought had deceived them. He was a
dreamer, a visionary, if no worse. They did
not intend hearkening to him any more. " An-
guish of spirit" possessed their souls, and
"cruel bondage" claimed their bodies, day
after day. Xhey had not eren the time, had
they had tbe will, to hearken.



Ver. 9. — Anguish of spirit. Literally,
"shortness." Compare Job xxi. 4. Their
spirit was shortened — they had lost all heart,
as we say, so cruel had been their disappoint-
ment. The contrast between their feelings
now, and when Moses first addressed them
(ch. iv. 31), is strong, but " fully accounted
for by the change of circumstances" (Cook).
Cruel bondage. Bondage, i.e., far more op-
pressive and continuous than it had been
(ch. V. 9 — 14). The Samaritan version adds ;
" And they said to him, Let us alone, and let
us serve the Egyptians ; for it is better for ua
to serve the Egyptians, than die in a wilder
ness," an addition which receives some lup-
port from ch. xiv. 12.



ni.Ti.9J THE BOOK OP EXODUS. Uf



HOMlLE'riCS

Ver. 9. — Spirittial deadness produced by extreme physical need. It is the worst result
of long-continued oppression that it brings its victims into a state of apathy. Servile
insurrections are rare — servile wars all but unknown. Slavery so crushes men, so
brutalises, so deadens them, that they lose all heart, all spirit, all hope, almost aU feeling.
Defenders of slavery call the proper objects of the " institution " ZiVe mn,r,hines ; and
" live machines" is exactly what it tends to make them. What is to stir a mass so
sluggish and inert that it vegetates rather than lives ? Not the name of (rid (ver. 3).
It faJls on closed ears — it has no meaning to them, conveys no idea, arouses no thought.
Mot the mention of a covenant (vers. 4, 5). They cannot realise so complex a notion —
cannot understand what the word means. Not promises (vers. 6 — 8). A promise has
no power unless embraced by faith ; and the down-trodden have no faith, either in them-
selves or in others. So the most stirring appeals are made in vain — the brightest hopes
and prospects presented to no purpose. And as with oppression, so with all extreme
depression and destitution. Hopeless poverty, constant battle with the wolf at the door,
continual striving to keep off starvation from themselves, their wives, and children,
reduces a population to a condition in which it becomes dead to spiritual things, and not
only appears to be, but is, unimpressible. It is so occupied with the cares of this life
that it has no thought for another. It has bid farewell to hope, and with hope to fear.
It is reckless. The preacher can do nothing with it until he has changed the physical
conditions of its existence. He must first address himself to the people's physical wants.
Let these be provided for, let the struggle for existence slacken, let hope dawn on the
despairing souls, and all will at once be different. As the unboimd earth opens to receive
seed at the genial breath of spring, so these torpid souls may be brought to take in tha
seed of life, by having their bodies warmed and clothed and cared for.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 11, vi. 13. — The new commission. And Moses spoke so, etc. : Exod. vL 9.

L The audacity op faith. Describe the treatment of Moses and Aaron. They
acted under Divine direction, did their very best, but just because everything did not go
well instantly, and that through the frowardness and waywardness of others, the people
turned upon them, and upbraided them as accessories to their slavery. [See Matt. Henry for
some valuable practical notes on this and other parts of this passage from ch. v. 22 — vi. 13.]
Moses felt this keenly, and in a moral sense retreated upon his base — that is, upon God.
Compare Hezekiah and the letter. Alone with God, Moses complained. Moses is very
bold — tells God to his face that he has not delivered Israel at all ; that he has brought
evil upon the nation, abeady oppressed to the border of despair ; and challenges the
Etem^ as to his own commission. All this is high tragedy in the realms of spiritual
life, and may well demand consideration. Consider — 1. The audacity of Moses. See
chap. V. 22, 23. Is this the language of enquiry or entreaty ? Not at all. Of impetuosity,
of remonstrance ; it borders on the irreverent ; the tone is angry, and nearly rebellious.
[Note — Such a speech as this would never have been put into the mouth of Moses by
any later writer — sure mark this, that we have the history under the hand of Moses.]
Such expressions are not uncommon with Old Testament saints. See especially Jer. xx.
7, et seq. We learn that beUevers do not stand related to God as stones lying under a
cast-iron canopy of destiny. They are quivering sensibilities in the presence of the
Father of spirits. What they feel, they may say ; better to say it. And if an earthly
parent will make allowances for an angry, misapprehending child, shall not our Father
in heaven ? " Let us therefore come holdly," etc. 2. The error of Moses. God was all the
time wrking in the direction of salvation for the people and of extraordinary eminence
for Moses ; but he thought everything looked the other way. A similar error may be
ours. 3. 'ITie accomplishment of the Divine purpose in Moses. To draw him away
from all secondary causes, to dependence on and communion with God.

II. The coNrEscBNDiNG foebeaeanoe of God. In answer to the cry of Mosei)
Qod Bjade five announcements of the very first importance. They were made vritk

hi



t48 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. vi. 9t



distinctness, formality, and solemnity. Note — ^There may have been an interval o(
months between the cry and these announcements. Note also, that this is not a second
account of the revelation of the Burning Bush. The true explanation of the likeness
between the two revelations is, that Moses having fallen into a desponding state of mind,
God recalled to him first principles. So now, one cure at least for discouragement is
to fall back on elemental Gospel truths. God announced — 1. His resolve : ver. 1, sea
Hebrew ; and expound the true meaning. Pharaoh would be forced, not only to " send "
Israel out, but to " drive " them out. 2. Sis name. First, God gave again his proper
name, " Jehovah ;" and then we have a positive and a negative declaration — (1) Positive.
To the fathers God had been known as El-Shaddai — God all-sufficient — ^that is, to and
for them in their moving tents. (2) Negative. This may not mean that " Jehovah "
had never fallen on their ear ; but this, that all in that name had not dawned on their
intelligence. God's revelation of himself is always gradual. So it is in the gradual
unfolding of the successive Bible economies. And so it is still. Modem science
cannot give us a difi'erent idea of God ; but an enlarged idea, and one vastly
illuminated. Dr. Chalmers when dehvering his " Astronomical Discourses " had a
grander idea of God than John Milton. Geology tells us of the seons through which
he works. Microscopical revelations tell of the infinitude of his condescensions. At
Diderot said : " Elargissez Dieu" — Enlarge your idea of God. 3. His covenant : ver. 4.
4. IJis sympathy : ver. 5. With new sorrows. 5. /iis salvation : vers. 6, 7, 8. It
is impossible to read these verses without noting the parallel with a still greater
salvation. God promised — (1) Deliverance. Note the " burden-bearing " (see the Heb.)
of sin — its essential servitude — ^the redemption price — the power, the outstretched
arm, with which salvation is wrought — ^the judgment on powers of darkness. Col. ii.
15. (2) Adoption. (3) The land of rest. These blessings for us, as for them, on
the condition of implicit trust.

III. The deafening power of bobbow: ver. 9. The contrast now and ch. iv. 31.
" On a former occasion the people were comparatively at ease, accustomed to their lot,
sufficiently afflicted to long for deliverance, and sufficiently free in spirit to hope for it."
Now ! — ^ver. 9. Observe the Heb., " shortness of breath," i.e. such as comes with
anguish ; or may not the meaning be, " shortness of spirit," as we say " shortness of
temper"? This verse is against the theory that Israel, by sheer force of reli^ous
enthusiasm, emancipated itself For them, as for us, no salvation save in Jehovah their
God. Sorrow may shut out comfort. How many mistakenly stay away from the
sanctuary because of their grief 1

IV. The pebsistence op the dbliveeing God. In this extremity of woe, God
appears. The demand once was for a three days' absence ; now God uncovers all his
purpose. Ver. 11 is the ultimatum of God. This new commission overwhelms Moses
with a deeper sense of incompetence. He pleads — 1. The aversion of his ovm people.
Effective homiletic use may here be made of the fact, that much of the strength of
ministers, which might be used against the enemies of God, is used in dealing with the
frowardness.of his professed friends. 2. His own injirmity. There may be here a sense
of moral unfitness — " uncircumcised lips " — and a latent reference to the disobedience,
ch. iv. 24 — 26. God did not allow these pleas ; but put the two leaders forward once
more into the position of responsibility, peril, and honour (ver. 13). — E.

Ver. 9. — The pains of the lower life shutting out the blessings of the higher one.
" They hearkened not unto Moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage." Notice
that this reason, and not some other, is stated for the indifference of Israel to the
glorious words which Moses was commanded to repeat to them. We might fairly have
expected some other reason to be stated ; as, for instance, " Wo have been deceived
once, and are not again to be put off with fair words ;" or, " This array of promises is
very grand and imposing, but there is nothing in them." But they are emphatically
represented as not even attending to what Moses had to say. Their minds were
effectually closed by preoccupation with something else. They were so much harassed
in body and mind as to lack not only the inclination, but even the ability, to give Moses
a proper hearing. And so Pharaoh's policy had this efi'ect at least, that it prevented the
people,/or a while, from considering things belonging to their highest welfare. Only we
must btiar in mind that as the hberating advance of God was not in the least hindered
by the cruelty of Pharaoh, so neither was it hindered by the negligence of Isrj»el. A



OLYhd.] THE BOOK OF EXODtJS. 149

Pharaoh could not hinder, so the people could neither help nor hinder. When they
were yet without strength, utterly without strength, in due time God intervened te
deliver them.

I. There is thus suggested to us how we should keep in mind one great cause or
EiNDEANCB TO THE GospEL. A message like that of the Gospel of Christ finds great
difficulty in its way from preoccupation of any kind, seeing that the mind of man
cannot properly entertain two great topics of thought at the same time. Some one
thing must hold a first place in thought ; and when the heart is occupied with the
presence of worldly cares, whatever form they take, then it must be pecuHarly hard for
the Gospel to find a foothold. God, when he seeks love and service from us, looks to
find his rivals in ambition, in pleasure, in riches ; and we are used to hear frequent
warnings against these rivals. But what rival is more dangerous than (sa.y) poverty, that
cleaving, biting, pinching spirit, which, when once it gets hold of a man, never lets him
forget that it is near. What chance is there then to bring out of the heart a deep con-
viction of sin and spiritual need ? The difficulties of getting the natural man to attend
to spiritual concerns are immensely increased by poverty as well as by riches. If, upon
some considerations, it is seen to be hard for the rich to enter the kingdom of heaven,
upon other considerations it is seen to be equally hard for the poor. The poor have the
Gospel presented to them, but alas 1 it is often hard work to persuade them that it is a
Gospel. Go to them, and how are you often met ? It may be that your very exemp-
tion from a life-long struggle for daily bread bhnds you to their peculiar difficulties.
You are not able to see that grim wolf which is incessantly at the door, and never out of
their thoughts. What wonder if at first — and indeed habitually — the poor should think
that there is little or nothing in religion ! Often they show their feeling very plainly by
bitter and savage words. They want a gospel ; but not your gospel. They do not care
for a gospel which, while it makes large offers, makes also large demands. They do not
care to be asked for self-denial, self-respect, contentment, and patient submission to
hard conditions which cannot be easily or immediately altered. They want a gospel
which will give, and give just what they choose to ask. The privations, the struggles,
the agonies of the poor reduce them often nearer to the spirit of wild beasts than ol
human beings. Give them what indulges their appetites, and they will welcome you.
Minister to the cravings of the flesh, and they will wait as long as you are disposed to
supply. But proclaim unpalatable truths, and you might as well speak in a wilder-
ness. We might pursue a similar line of thought in considering the anguish of spirit
and cruel bondage of heathendom. The missionary often has to speak to those whose
minds are oppressed with terrible visions of deities who can only be propitiated by
laborious and agonising penances. Read what is said concerning the life-long austerities
of some Hindoo devotees, and then consider whether you have not In them a bondage
of spirit which may only too effectually shut out even the most attractive truths of
the Gospel. We might speak also of the cruel bondage of worldly conventions ; the
incessant and weary struggle to keep up social position — a struggle which, however
ridiculous It may be made to look, is, in the eyes of multitudes, a great necessity.
And if a man feels a thing a necessity, then you must, at least in your first approaches
to him, treat it as a necessity. And last, but not least, there is the anguish and
bondage of disease, physical pain, perhaps approaching d' ath. The sick send, or are
supposed to send, for ministers of religion, but how plain it is in the great bulk
of instances that such resorts are utterly ineft'ectual to bring the sick person to Godl
There may be an appearance of repentance, a pretence of understanding the way of
salvation ; but when we know that the actual motive is the fear of death, and not
the bitter consciousness of sin, then we cannot but distrust all the action following
upon the motive. When a human being, in youth, in health, and with the prospect
of a long hfe, professes to be smitten with convictions of sin, and begins to seek
for a Saviour, we know where we are in considering his position. His apparent
motive has everything in the circumstances to approve Itself as a real one. But
■when the appearance of interest in Divine things only comes consequent on the
alarms of a dangerous, perhaps a fatal illness, then we suspect that the cry for salvation
is a selfish and ignorant one ; and how can we be sure that it will be anything but a
vain one ? A courteous pretence of listening to the message of God when there is no
leal apprehension of it is practically the same thing as not hstening st all.

n. NOTK THE OBJSOTION WHICH 18 BROUGHT AGAINST THE Ck>BPEL FBOU ITS ISABIUTI



ito



THE BOOK OP EXODtrs.



[cH. VI. 10—12.



TO DEAL IMMEDIATELT WITH ALL THIS ANGTTISH AND BONDAGE OF MEN. There is ■

plausible argument — one very frequently urged, and alas ! very easily deceiving — that
the Gospel of Christ does nothing immediately for the social improvement of the world.
What is more common than the cry, when some hideous blot and ulcer of society it
■uddenly revealed, " Here we stand, having only got so far, after more than eighteen
centuries of Christianity I " And in hearing talk of this kind, which is sometimes
sincere, but oftener is mere cant, we have not so much to reply to others as to
enlighten and reassure ourselves. How easily it might have been said with respect
to these Israelites, " God is no deliverer, else he would at once take these people^
this living, suffering generation — out of all their pains." What God might have done
we cannot tell ; we only know what he actually did. The light of the whole
transaction shows that Jehovah was unquestionably a deliverer ; that however a
single generation might suffer, the whole nation was in due time, and at the best
time, fully redeemed. And in hke manner, by the consideration of ultimate results
as well as present experiences, we gain the assurance that God is truly the deliverer
of men from all spiritual bondage, all spiritual pain. Our frequent folly as defenders
of the faith is in saying more than there is any need to say. Let us keep within safe,
practical, provable assertions, and these will give an answer enough for the present
need. The Gospel of Christ, we knovi, does something, immediately, for every one who,
in response to its great invitation, believes in the Lord Jesus Christ as his Saviour.
Beal belief in him will at once irradiate the meanest hovel, the most squalid circum-
■tances, with a light which may most truly be described as

The light that never was on sea or land.

No combination of favourable social surroundings will ever bring that light ; nothing
will bring it but the soul's own free and intelligent admission of Jesus as Saviour and
Lord. His presence thus obtained gives joy in the midst of the bitterest anguish,
liberty in the midst of the most grinding bondage. The more that people believe in
Chiist, the more we shall have of his effectual presence in the world ; and the more we
have of his effectual presence, the nearer we shall come to that perpetual summer when
the ice that now wraps so many human hearts will be utterly and lastingly melted away.
Social reformers who are not also humble Christians, with all their pretensions and all
their zeal, are only touching secondary causes ; relieving symptoms without cutting at
the root of disease. No human being ever did or ever will get clear of anguish and
bondage except by submitting to Christ. And no one ever submitted to Christ without
having the certain assurance given, that in due time all sorrow and sighing would fi»r
ever flee away. — ^Y.



EXPOSITION



Vers. 10 — 12. — ^The Israelites having shown
themselves, for the time, nnimpressible, God
commands Moses to make his next effort
upon the Pharaoh. He is to enter into his
presence once more, and demand, without cir-
emnlocution or obscurity, that the Israelites
be allowed to quit the land (ver. 11). Moses,
however, demurs. He had done God's wiU
with respect to the people readily and at
once, expecting that, as he had persuaded
them before, so he would a second time But
he had been disappointed; the people had
refused to listen to him. Immediately aU his
original self -distrust and difSdence recurred —
even the old form of diffidence, distrust of his
ability to persuade men (ch. iv. 10). How
shall he expect to persuade Pharaoh, who had
ahready rejected him (ch. v. 2 — 5), when he
had fast failed with his own countiymen, who



previouslv had "believed"
81)?



his report (ch. it



Ver. 11. — Out of Ms land. Note the ad-
vance in the demand. No longer is there any
limitation to a three days' journey, as at first
(ch. iii. 18 ; v. 3). The children of Israel are
to be let go altogether " out of the land." So
generally, if God lays a light burthen upon us
and we refuse it, we may expect him to ex-
change our light burthen for a heavier one.
We had better accept the first cross he offers.

Ver. 12. — ITuoiroumoised lips, i.e. "lips
inefficient for the purpose for which lips are
given ; " as " uncircumcised ears " are ears that
cannot hearken (Jer. vi. 10), and an " uncur-
cumcised heart" a heart that cannot under-
stand (lb. Lx. 26). The meaning is the same
as in ch. iv. 10, where Moses says that he is
" slow of speech and of a slow tongue." No-
thing can be determined from the expressicai
as to the exact cause of the imperfection of
which complaint 18 made.



OLTI.*— 14.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. Iftl



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 11, — The servant of Ood must labour unceasingly. Scarcely has Moses made one
attempt at service and failed than God requires of him another service. " Go in, speak
unto Pharaoh." In the career of God's servants there is " no rest, no pause." Failure
here must be redeemed by effort there. And in this unceasing continuance of service
one thing is especially remarkable. After failure, not a lighter but a heavier duty ia
commonly imposed on men. If they prove unable to convince their kindred, they are
given a mission to strangers ; if they fail with men of low degree, they are appointed to
preach to princes. God will have them redeem failure by fresh effort. God knows the
causes of their failure, and introduces them to new spheres, where those causes will not
operate, or operate less. A man who has failed in a humble sphere not unfrequently
succeeds in a higher one. The servant of God must not care greatly about the sphere
to which he is called, but seek to do his best in each while he remains in it. He will
thus — 1. Be always labouring for God ; 2. Be always exercising and so improving his
own mental and spiritual gifts ; and 3. Be of far more benefit to others than if he sat
idle half his time waiting for such a call as seemed to him altogether fitting and suitable.
" The time is short." We must " work while it is day — the night cometh when no
man can work."

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 9 — 14, 28 — 30. — Shaken faith, and an unshaken purpose. In these verses we
have —

I. A PAINFUL RESULT OP AFFLICTIVE PBOVIDENCB. The children of Israel, hard-
driven by their taskmasters, and sunk in misery, were so stupefied with sorrow, as to
have no longer any heart for their cheering tidings brought to them by Moses. Their
despair had its ground in unbelief. They judged Moses a deceiver. They had trusted him
before, and they reflected that the only outcome of it had been this unprecedented
aggravation of their wretchedness. His fine promises must now go for what they were
worth ; they were past deriving comfort from them ! Yet observe how in all this —
I. They wronged God. God had not deserted them as they thought. He was on the
very eve of fulfilling every promise he had made them. We see the error in t?ieir case ;
it would be well if we could always see it as clearly in our own. 2. Made their trials
harder. For if trials are hard enough to bear even with faith in the goodness and help
of G«i, how much harder are they to bear without it ! 3. Shut themselves out from
Divinely-sent conso'ation. Their despondency led them to refuse the very message
which would have given them relief. How often is the same thing witnessed under
severe affliction I There is a Mud of perversity in grief, which leads it to " refuse to be
comforted." God is mistrusted. The heart abandons itself to its despair. It sinks in
gloom and wretchedness. It turns the very truth of God into a lie, and refuses Scrip-
ture and Gospel consolations. Unhappy condition I And as foolish as unhappy — for
God is never nearer to the suffering spirit, never more ready to hear its cry, probably
never nearer bringing it deliverance, than just when it is thus shutting out his con-
solations, and refusing him its confidence.

II. Typical discouragements in spibitual service (vers. 9, 13, 30). Moses wag
sorely discouraged — 1. At the unhelieving despair of the people. He could make no
impression on them. They seemed hardened in their misery. So swallowed up were
they in their grief, so crushed vnth sorrow, that their minds seemed to have lost all
elasticity, all power of responding to the gladdest of tidings. This is a difficulty one
has often to contend with in spiritual work — the spiritless, despairing condition induced
by long experience of misfortune. The city missionary, e.g., has fi-equently to encounter
it in going among the dwellings of the very poor. His heart sickens as he realises how
little chance his Gospel has of finding acceptance in homes where all the surroundings are
wretched, and where from year's end to year's end, there is being carried on the same
heartless, monotonous " struggle for existence." But this insensibility to religion induced
l^f suffering is not peculiar to the poor. Far from it. You will find it wherever men are
mm beset with trouble, and have no firm, rooted faith in God to support them under it



iSS -tHB feoOk Oi* EiODUS. [CH. VI. li— ^

AbsorDed in " the sorrow of the world," they have no ear for spiritual comfort, and almost
spurn it as a mockery. 2, At the prospect of having to go again hef ore Pharaoh. Having
failed with the people, how should he hope to prevail with Pharaoh, emboldened as that
monarch would be with the success of a previous refusal ? The element of discouragement
here is the depressing sense oi failure. Moses had failed in the part of the work which
seemed easiest, and in which on the former occasion he had succeeded ; how, then, should
he look for success in the more difficult part of it, where previously he had sustained
defeat ? Observe carefully that on this point Moses' plea was not admitted. (1) We are
bad judges of what is failure. What Moses counted defeats were not defeats at all, but
at most delays. The history of missions furnishes striking illustrations of the danger of
too hastily concluding that a work has failed because no immediate fruits are visible.
Nothing has been more common in missionary experience (South Seas, Madagascar,
Tinnivelly, the Eohls, etc.) than times of extraordinary fruitfulness following upon long
periods of seeming failure— ten, twenty, thirty years often passing without a single
convert. These were seasons of trial of faith, and had the missions been abandoned, as
timid counsellors advised, the whole blessing would have been lost. (2) It is the doing
of our duty we are held responsible for, not the failure or success which may attend it.
That remains with God. The lesson is that in spiritual work there must be no talk of
abandonment ; no putting of the hand to the plough and then looking back ; no flinging
away of our weapons because the outlook is discouraging. Our part is to labour on,
beUeving that "in due season we shaU reap if we faint not" (Gal. vl. 9). 3. By ike
revived sense of personal deficiencies. " How then shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of
uncircumcised lips ! " Moses had Aaron, it was true, to speak for him, but there was a
certain clumsiness in this method of two men going in, the one to speak for the
other, and Moses felt his deficiency only the more keenly on account of it. He
seems to have despaired of having any influence with Pharaoh, who wovdd look on
him with contempt. Moses forgot that in work of this kind no man " goeth a warfare
any time at his own charges" (I Cor. ix. 7), and that, if God sent him, God would
qualify and support him, would give him strength for every duty he had to perform
(cf. ch. vli. 1—7).

III. God's unshaken pubposb assebting itself in the midst of human unbelief
AND infiemitt (vots. 1 1, 13, 29). This is a most remarkable feature in the narrative —
how, high and clear above all notes of doubt and hesitancy on the side of man, and at
the very time when things are wearing their most untoward aspect, (iod expresses him-
self with perfect decision as to the deliverance of the people. Hope in the hearts
of the people seemed extinct ; even the faith of a Moses was staggering at the obstacles
to be encountered. These fears and tremblings, however, are all on the human side ; he
who names himself Jehovah is raised infinitely above them, and has clearly in his
view not only the certainty of his purpose being fulfilled, but all the steps by which
the fulfilment is to be brought about. How should this give us confidence when
we are trembling for the cause of Truth 1 We cannot see the end from the beginning,
but Jehovah can, and we can stay oiirselves on his knowledge of what is dark to us.
It is enough for us to know that no contingency can arise which he is not aware of and
has not prepared himself to cope with ; that no opposition can erect itself against his
counsel, which it is not within his power to overthrow. The counsel of the Lord
stands for ever — ^the one stable fact in the midst of earthly vicissitude and change, of
all ebb and flow of human hopes and fears. That surely is enough to lean upon,
in the dark and troubled hours of our own and of the world's existence.

IV. Fkesh evidence of the supernatural character op the deliverance.
Allusion has already been made to the theory that the Exodus had its origin, not in a
supernatural interposition of God, but in some gigantic spiritual movement springing up
among the people themselves. The facts in this chapter, if anything of the cha,racter
of history belongs to them, conclusively dispose of that theory. So far from the people
of Israel being in a state of hopeful enthusiasm, ready to make great efforts for their
own deliverance, they appear as utterly crushed and broken-spirited — totally " without
strength." There was doubtless a profound purpose in God's permitting them to be
brought into this condition. 1. It made more manifest the fact that their deliverance
did nti originate with themselves. And 2. it furnishes a striking image of Gospd
truth. We too were "without strength" when, "in due time, Christ died for Um



ba.*i.i6.i fHE i^ook oi" filobtjs. 181

ungodly" (Rom. v. 6). There was the want of will as well as of power to do anything
of ourselves. Uod has interposed, and done all for us. — J. 0.

Ver. 10 — chap. vii. 7. — The uncircumcised lips. I. " XJNCniccrMCiiBED lips." Enquire
what the significance of this strange expnssion, may be, as coming from Moses. It can
hardly have been a current proverbial phrase adopted for the occasion by Moses, as a
stUl more forcible statement of what he had said before on his felt inability as a speakef .
There is no reason to suppose that up to this time there was any such feeling among
the Israehtes as would originate the expression "uncircumcised lips." They had,
indeed, in one instance professed themselves .very tenacious of the outward form

SGen. xxxiv. 15), but a general appreciation of the inward and spiritual meaning of this
orm was not to be expected. Hence we may take these words of Moses as giving a
fresh, original and emphatic expression of how deeply Moses felt himself lacking in
qualification for this serious enterprise. And evidently also, Moses was doing more
than give a forcible variation of the old tale. The new expression goes deeper in its
significance than " slow of speech and slow of tongue." It indicates that Moses had
been pondering, as indeed he had reason to ponder, the meaning of circumcision. Cir-
cumcision was a separating sign, the sign of a peculiar destiny and inheritance,
of peculiar duties and privileges. But so far it seemed only to have produced
outward separation without inward differences, differences of feeling and disposition.
Moses could not see that circumcision had done anything to give him ability for his
peculiar task. His way of speaking may therefore be taken as a sign of advance in
his appreciation of what was necessary to do Jehovah's work. Hitherto his groat
concern had been because of natural defects in mere organs of action. He had not
thought so much of what was lacking in the hfe that lay behind the organs, and acted
through them. But now we gain some hint thai Moses sees what is really wanted.
The thing wanted is not simply to be Ufted up to the level of men who have all
natural qualifications for effective speech, but to be lifted altogether above the ordinary
level. Though Moses was " slow of speech, and of a slow tongue," others were not ;
but they were all of " uncircumcised lips." Moses, we may take it, has now got beyond
the personal reluctance which actuated iiim in his pleas at Horeb. The avengers of the
slain Egyptian no longer fi:own upon him from the horizon of memory. But now comes
in this new plea, urged in a worthier spirit, and with a mournfiil consciousness of its
permanent force. It is a plea which is not a mere excuse, but possesses more of the
dignity of a reason.

11. Jehovah in his reply makes no direct rkebrenob to this circumcision op
THE LIPS. When Moses aforetime had spoken of his vocal defects, God at once reminded
him that defects of this sort were beyond human responsibility, and he also indicated
the clear provision through Aaron for tho supply of them. Here, indeed, he again takes
the opportunity of repeating to Moses that so far as vocal defects are concerned, Aaron will
amply compensate for them. But as to the lips being uncircumcised, while this is indeed
true, it is a state of things which does not hear upon the prment need. Suppose the Ups
are circumcised — that is, suppose that Moses in his words is brought into full sympathy
with the purposes of God — it will make no difference in the immediate results. Pharaoh's
heart is being hardened ; his ears are being closed. It matters not with what purity,
simplicity, devotion, and faithfulness we speak, if we speak to that which is insensible.
Let us by all means blame ourselves for the faulty way in which we speak and live the
message of God, but our faults do not account for the indifference and the rejections of
other men. These faults bring us under censure for our unfaithfulness, but they do not
excuse the imbeliever for his neglect. If but one clear word concerning ,Jesus be
spoken — spoken only once — ^it is enough to fix responsibility on the auditor. " He
that hath ears to hear, let him hear." If ever being on earth spoke with circumcised
lips, it was Jesus himself, yet how idly fell aU his solemn, weighty, truthful words upon
the ear of Pharisee and Badducee. Moses will have blame enough by-and-by, first,
cruel and undeserved blame from Israel ; and next, the censure and penalty from
Jehovah for the lapse at Meribah. At present, though he is speaking of an unquestion-
able defect, he is speaking of it in a premature and inapplicable way. He must indeed
know the circumcision of the lip and of all other natural faculties ; for this is consequent
OB thti circumcision of the heart. But the great object of all this circumcision is not tc



154 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [ch. vi. 9— 12.



secure Ms acceptance with Pharaoh or with any other sinful or rebellious man. It is
rather to secure his acceptance with God, and especially his full enjoyment of all that
comes through this acceptance.

III. Jehovah points out the way in which Phahaoh shall be effectually
BROUGHT TO SUBMISSION. 1. In the sight of Pharaoh, Moses is to become a Ood. In
effect Pharaoh has said that Jehovah is no God, and in his heart he thinks Moses a pre-
sumptuous impostor. Pharaoh is therefore in a state of mind in which it is impossible
to reveal Jehovah to him, but Moses in his own person shall set forth — shall incarnate,
so to speak — all that Pharaoh can understand or needs to understand of the Divine
power. He shall be compelled to respect the ever-increasing power of Moses. He may
hate it, he may make some attempts to resist it, but at the same time the very force of
circumstances will bear it in on his mind as a tremendous reality. _ He shall see how all
these successive devastations of his land are connected in some inscrutable way with
the presence of Moses and the waving of his rod. Whatever the bhndness of his heart
so that seeing he does not perceive, he will be obliged to perceive that the strength of
Moses does not lie in any visible, terrestrial forces. With all his obduracy, Pharaoh hag
a certsun sense of awe before Moses, and doubtless this is the reason why no attempt is
made to treat the person of Moses with violence. 2. Notice the way in which Ood here
applies the method of mediation. Moses was not a mediator as from Pharaoh upwards
to Jehovah, but he was a mediator from Jehovah downwards to Pharaoh. God thus
seizes upon the disposition among the ignorant to venerate inscrutable power. Pharaoi
will not listen to Moses speaking, but when the signs begin, and especially when they
advance far beyond anything which his own magicians can simulate, he is ready to look
on Moses as having something of a Divine nature. God looked for the impressible part
in Pharaoh's mind and found it here. The way in which Pharaoh evidently came to
regard Moses (God's word in ver. 1 being the voucher for the feeling) is illustrated by
the attitude towards Paul and Barnabas of the Lystrans (Acts xiv. 8—13) and towards
Paul of the Melitans (Acts xxviii. 6). 3. Notice how God lays emphasis on PharaoWt
continued indifference to any verbal message. " Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you."
The thoughts of Moses are to be turned away more and more from his own lips or from
any other faculty. He is to see that the great antagonists in this contest — evan though
he is made as a God to Pharaoh — are Jehovah and Pharaoh themselves. It is necessary
that Pharaoh should have ample opportunity to show the extent of his passive strength,
how long and how stiflSy he can resist the constraints of Divine omnipotence. God
stoops to a patient struggle with this obdurate monarch that he may thereby present, to
all who read the Scriptures, an illustration of the complete way in which his power deals
with the most stubborn assertions of human power. The Israelites, even >vith all their
sufferings, bad as yet seen only a part of what Pharaoh could do. They had seen him
in cruel action ; they had also to see him in stolid endurance. Bo Moses had seen signs
of Divine power ; but he had yet to see that power itself in extensive and awful operation.
On the one liand Pharaoh is to be revealed, bringing out all his resources again and
again, until at last they are swallowed in the catastrophe of the Bed Sea. Then, he is
done with, but the operations of Divine power are only as it were beginning. It is a
great matter that we should thus see the powers arrayed against God,- working at
the utmost of their strength; that we may feel how immeasurably the power of God
transcends them. — Y.

Vers. 9 — 12. — The contagion of despair. I. Israel's rejection or thb peoffebkd
consolation. 'J hey hearkened not " for anguish of spirit and for cruel bondage."
1. The sympathy of the Word of God. Their case stated not only fairly but with
infinite compassion. 2. Israel's folly. Their anguish is permitted to stand between
them and God thei: only helper — their sickness between them and the great Physician ;
multitudes will not hear because they have no sense of need, and multitudes again
because their need is so very great. Israel in their folly typical: (1) The poor—
" the lapsed masses." (2) Those passing through heavy trial. (3) The bereaved.
(4) Those battUng despairingly with besetting sin. How often have these no ear Ibl
the rich consolations of the promises of God !

II. The weakness op Moses. 1. Failure among his own people crushes utterly
hope of success among strangers and foes. If Israel will not hear, who hnve everything



Oft. *i. 13—27.]



THE BOOK Ol!" EXODUS.



136



to gain, will Pharaoh, who haa everything to lose ? 2. The old sense of his insuf*
ficiency agun overpowers him. Deaf ears, unmoved hearts, unconsecrated lives in th*
Church, ^ralyse the preacher in his appeals to those that are without. — U



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 18 — 27. — At this point the narrative
is interrupted The author, or (it may be)
the final compiler — perhaps Joshua — thought
it desirable to insert here a genealogical sec-
tion, taking up the family history of Israel
from the point at which it was left in ch. i. 5,
where the sons of Jacob were enumerated.
The whole political system of Israel was based
upon the tribal relation; and it was of the
last importance, politically, to hand down the
divisions and subdivisions of families. The
lists here given, probably prepared by Moses
in a separate document, had to be inserted
somewhere. The present seemed a fitting
place. The narrative had reached a turning-
point. All the preliminaries were over — ^the
action of the Exodus itself was about to begin.
A dramatist would have made Act i. end and
Act n. otanmence A poet would have begun
a new canto In the imperfect bibliography
of the time, it was thought best to make a
division by a parenthetic insertion.

Ver. 13 seems to belong to what follows
Bither than to what precedes. There is no
emphasis on the words and to Aaron, as if
God, having found Moses singly to be irre-
sponsive, had now given a charge to both the
brothers conjointly (Bashi). Bather the verse
is a concise summary of chs. iii. — ^v., prefixed
to the genealogy when it was a separate docu-
ment, and preserved when the compiler placed
the document in the text

Yer. 14. — These be the heads of their
fathers' houses. By "fathers' houses" are
meant " families " (see 1 Chr. iv. 38 ; v. 13 ;
vii. 40 ; ix. 9, etc.) ; and " the heads of fathers'
houses " are simply the acknowledged chiefs
and founders of families. The main families
of the tribe of Reuben were those of Hanooh,
Fallu, Hezron, and Caimi, actual sons of the
patriarch (See Gen. xlvi. 9 ; and compare
1 Chr. V. 3.)

Ver. 15. — ^The sons of Simeon. The list
coiresponds exactly, both in the names and in
the order, with that given in Gen. xlvi. 10,
but differs considerably from 1 Chr. iv. 24, and
Num. xxvi. 12. In both the latter places
Jemuel appears as Nemuel, and Zohar as Zerah,
while Obad is omitted. In 1 Chr. iv. 24, Jachin
appears as Jarib. It would seem that the
family of Obad died out and disappeared soon
after the Israelite* quitted Egypt. l?he family



of Sbanl, on the other hand, increased and
multiplied (1 Chr. iv. 25—27).

Ver. 16. — The sons of Levi. The same
three sons are given in Gen. xlvi. 11 ; Num.
iii. 17 ; and 1 Chr. vi. 2. According to their
generations. This phrase is introduced be-
cause the writer does not here stop at the sons,
but proceeds on to the grandsons, great-grand-
sons, and other descendants. (See vers. 17 —
25.) He is concerned especially in this place
with the descent of Moses, and therefore with
the genealogy of the tribe of Levi, and has
only inserted any account of the families de-
scended from Beuben and Simeon, that h«
might not seem to disregard the claims of pri-
mogeniture. The years of the life of Levi.
These began about forty or fifty years before
the descent into Egypt, which took place after
the birth of all his three sons, as appears from
Gen. xlvi. 8 — 11. The length of Levi's life is
recorded, not from any chronological conside-
rations, but to show God's blessing upon the
family of Moses, which gave such length ci
days to so many of his ancestors.

Ver. 17. — Ihe sons of Gershon. The line
of Gershon, as the eldest, is taken first. Moses
and Aaron are descended from the second son.
Shimi is called "Shunei"in 1 Chr. vi. 17;
but there is no difference in the original.

Ver. 18. — The sons of Kohath. The same
names are given in 1 Chr. vi. 2 and IS. Ths
years of the life of Kohath. Kohath,. who
was probably about twenty at the time of the
descent into Egypt, must have considerably
outlived Joseph, who died about seventy yeara
after the descent. His eldest son, Amram, is
not likely to have been born much later than his
father's thirtieth year. (See Gen. xi. 12 — 24.)
Amram would thus have been contemporary
with Joseph for above fifty years.

Ver. 19. — The sons of Merari. The same
names occur in 1 Chr. vi. 19 and xxiii. 21,
Mahali, by a difference of pointing, becoming
Mahli. The Mahlites and Mushites were
among the most important of the Levitical
families (Num. iii. 33 ; xxvi. 58).

Ver. 20. — Amram. That this Amram is
the " man of the house of Levi " mentioned in
ch. ii. 1, cannot be doubted ; but it is scarcely
possible that he should be the Amram of
ver. 18, the actual sou of Kohath and contem-
porary of Joseph. He is probably a descen-
dant of the sixth or seventh generation, who
bore the same name, and was Qie head of tha
Amramite house. That house, at the trine ol
the Exin'us, numbered above two thousand
males (Num. iii. 27, 28). See the excellent



m



tHB BOOS; of texotous.



toH. VI. 13—27.



ramarks of Keil and Delitzsch, • Biblical Com-
mentaiy,' vol. i. p. 470, E. T. ; and compare
Kurtz, ' History of Old Covenant,' vol. ii. p. 144,
and Cook, in ' Speaker's Commentary,' vol. i.
p. 274. Joohebed his father'8 sister. Mar-
riages with aunts and nieces have been com-
mon in many countries, and are not forbidden
by any natural instin(^. They first became
unlawful by the positive command recorded
in Lev. xviii. 12 The name Jochebed is
the earliest known componnded with Jah, or
Jehovah. It means " the glory of Jehovah."
She bare ^™ Aaron and Moses. Aaron is
placed first, as being older than Moses (ch. vii.
7). Miriam is omitted, since the object of the
writer is confined to tracing descent in the
male line.

Ver. 21. — ^Ihe sons of Izhar. Eorah is
mentioned as a " son (descendant) of Izhar " in
Num. xvi. 1 and 1 Chr. vi. 38. The other
" sons " are not elsewhere mentioned. Zithri
in this verse should be Zichri.

Yer. 22. — The sons of Uzziel. Mishael
and Elzaphan are again mentioned as "sons
of Uzziel " in Lev. x. 4. They were employed
by Moses to carry the bodies of Nadab and
Abihu out of the camp. Elzaphan, called
Elizaphan, is mentioned as head of the Ko-
hathites in Num. iii. 30.

Ver. 23. — Elisheba, daughter of Anuni-
Badab. Amminadab had not been previously
mentioned. He was a descendant of Judah,
through Pbarez and Hezron, and held a place
in the line of our Lord's ancestry. (See 1 Chr.
ii. 8 — 10 ■ Matt. i. 5.) Naashon was at this



time "prince of the tribe of Judah" (Num
ii. 3). Nadab and Abihn. On their fate, set
Lev. X. 1, 2. Eleazar became high-priest
apon the death of Aaron (Num. xx. 23-— 28).
His death is related in Josh. xxiv. 33.

Ver. 24.— The sons of Korah. AH Korah's
sons were not cut oS with him (Num. xxvL
11). Three at least survived, and became the
heads of " families of the Korhites."

Ver. 25. — £leazar. . .took him one of the
danghters of Futiel to wife. Futiel is not
elsewhere mentioned. The name is thought
to be half Egyptian (compare Poti-phar) and
to mean " dedicated to God." She bare him
Phinehas. This Phinehas became high priest
on the death of Eleazar (Judg. xx. 28). The
heads of the fathera I.e. "the patriarchal
chiefs."

Vers. 26, 27. — The genealogy being concluded
as a separate document, its author appends a
notice that the Aaron and Moses mentioned in
it (ver. 20) are the very Aaron and Moses who
received the Divine command to lead the chil-
dren of Israel out of Egypt, and who appeared
before Pharaoh, and " spoke to bim " on their
behalf. As the heading of the document was
kept upon its insertion into the narrative of
the Exodus (see the comment on ver. 13), so
its concluding sentences were kept, though
(according to modem ideas) superfluous.

Ver. 26. — According to tiieir armies. The
term " armies " had not been previously used of
the Israelitish people ; but it occurs in ch. vii. 4,
which was probably in the mind of the writer
who drew up the genealogy



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 13 — ^27. — The historical character of real revelation. Among the religions of
the world which are based on the contents of a written volume, none has such an
historical character as the religion of Christians. Most nations have evolved their
religion out of their internal consciousness, and have then, after a certain lapse of time,
thrown into a narrative form the supposed revelations made to this or that individual
secretly, and by him committed to writing. These revelations — to give them the name
— are not connected with any series of events, are not, properly speaking, historical at
all, but belong to the domain of thought, contemplation, philosophy. It is quite other-
wise with the religion of the Bible. Both in the Old Testament and in the New our
attention is directed primarily and mainly to a series of facts. Religion is not put
before us in an abstract, but in a concrete form. The Bible represents to us "God in
history." We learn the nature and the will of God from his dealings with nations and
individuals at definite times and in definite places. It is a necessary consequence of
such a mode of inculcating religious truth, that very dry and mundane details must
from time to time be obtruded upon the reader, in order that the narrative may be clear,
And that he may understand the circumstances of time and place with which each
writer in his turn has to deal. In this way fienealogies come in. History cannot be
understood without them. We want to know who the individuals are who are intro-
duced afresh at each new stage in the narrative, and in what relation they stand to
those other individuals with whom the narrative is concerned before and after. Genea-
logies convey this knowledge. Many think them uninteresting ; but they are not so tc
any thoughtful person. For (1) they raise the salutary thought of the rapid flight of
time and the sneedy passing away of one generation after another. Ouj ircp <;bvXXwr



tm. yn. 2S—S0.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



in



ytvhi, To/i)8( Koi avipav. (2) They show us how good men and bad, great men and
tittle, are intermixed in the world, arise under the same conditions, seem produced by
the same circumstances : and thus they force us to see what a vast power the human
will has in shaping human character, and even in determining the course of earthly events.
Hence they remind us of our responsibilities. (3) They hold up to us warnings and examplei
— ^warnings in the names to which there is attached the savour of evil deeds never to be
forgotten so long as the world endures — Nadabs, Abihus, Korahs ; examples in those,
familiar to us as household words, which we no sooner hear or see than there rush to our
thought a crowd of glorious and heroic actions. Being dead, these men still speak to
us — theirs ia a death " full of immortality."



EXPOSITION.



Yen. 28 — 80 — The remainder of this
chapter is scarcely more than a recapitu-
lation. The author, or compiler, having in-
terposed his genealogical section, has to take
up the narrative from verse 12, where he
broke oS, and does so by almost repeating
the words of verses 10 — 12. The only, im-
portant addition is the insertion of the words
—'•I am the Lord" (ver. 29), and the only
important variation, the substitution of " Speak
thou unto Fharaoh all that I tay unto thee "
(ibid.)t for " Speak onto Fhaiaoh . . . that he



let the children of brad go ont of his Ind*
(ver. 11).

Ver. 29. — ^I am the Lord. It is not im-
probable that every revelation made to Moses
was authenticated by these initial word&^
which have the force of that initialphrase, so
constant in the later prophets — "Thus saith
the Lord."

Ver. 80.— All that I say nnto thee. To
the general command thus expressed, was
probably appended the particular injunction
of verse 11, not here repeated—'' Speak then
unto Fharaoh, that he let the children of Israel
go out of his land." The sacred historisM
continually abbreviate



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 14^-28. — The genealogy of Moses and Aarm. Beside its direct interest m
setting in an exact light the descent and relationship of the two principal figures in the
succeeding history — Moses, the Lawgiver of Israel, and Aaron, the head of the priesthood
— ^this genealogical register presents us with several points deserving of attention. We
•re taught by it —

I. To EECOGNISB THE DiVINB SOVEEEIONTT IN THE SELECTION OF ITS IN8TBUMBNTS.

1. The men selected— Mosea and Aaron (vers. 26, 27). Selection, as implying the pre-
vious or foreseen existence of variously qualified objects from which the selection ia
made is scarcely the fitting term to express the fact we have in view, viz. the preparing
and raising up at this particular time and place, and fiom this particular stock, of a man
of the special mould of Moses, with an eye to the accomplishment by him of a certain
work. The appearance of great men at particular junctures of history is assuredly not
to be attributed to chance. It is a shallow view of the Divine election which regards
it as simply availing itself of happy varieties of character spontaneously presenting
themselves in the course of natural development ; as a workman might choose from a
set of ready-made tools those best suited for his purpose. Election, if one may so speak,
presides at the making of its object (Isaac, Jacob, Uavid, etc.) as well as uses it when
made (see I-ange's ' Dogmatics '). The question is not simply how, a man of Moses'
gifts and qualifications being given, God should use him in the way he did, but
rather, how a man of this spuitual build came at that precise juncture to be there at
all— broke out at that point in the genealogical tree and not at another. This
is the true problem, and the solution can only be found in the Divine arrangements.

2. The sovereignty of the selection. We cannot but be struck by the almost studious
departure in this list from the lines of descent which would imply natural pre-eminence.
(1) Moses is not descended from Reuben and Simeon, the eldest sons of Jacob (vers.
14, 15). The only purpose, apparently, served by the introduction of these two namei
m the genealogy is to show tlwt Mosea did not spring from them. (2) Neither did h«



158 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. vj. 14r—i&



■pring ftom Judah or Joseph — ^the sons of Jacob who fell heirs to the birthright fop.
felted by the sin of Reuben (1 Chron. v. 1, 2). The genealogy stops, as having attained
its end, before it gets their length.. (3) He sprang from Levi— a tribe originally
united with Simeon under a curse (Gen. xUx. 7) — yet not from the oldest branch of it,
but from Kohath, the second son (vers. 16 — 19). (4) Moses himself was not the
eldest son of Amram, but stop<1 by descent in a secondary relation to Aaron, who was
afterwards to occupy so secondary a position in relation to him. _ What are we taught
by these facts, if not the lessop so strongly emphasised in Rom. ix., that mere natural
advantages constitute no ground of pre-eminence in the kingdom of God; that the
spiritual everywhere rules and controls the natural. Examples may be drawn from
every part of Scripture history. Isaac, not Ishmael; Jacob, not Esau; Ephraim, not
Manasseh ; David, not his elder brothers ; etc. The Jehovah attributes of freedom and
sovereignty, to which this chapter introduces us, find not their least conspicuous illus-
tration in this section of it.

II. To TRACE, NOTWITHSTANDING, IN THE EXERCISR OP THE DiVINE 80VBBEIGNTT,

VARIOUS SPIRITUAL LAWS. The Sovereignty of God is degraded whenever it is viewed
as mere arbitrariness or caprice, as a liberty of indifference, or as anything else than the
perfectly free and self-determined action of an all-wise, all-holy, all-good Will, working
at every moment for the accomplishment of wise and good ends. Studied in this light,
it will be recognised that it has not only (1) its inherent laws of operation, but (2) its
self-imposed limitations. Partial glimpses of some of these laws are here afforded us.
1. The natural, while subordinate to the spiritual, is taken as the basis of it. There is
to be recognised a congruity between the instrument and the use to which it is to be
put ; between the man, in respect of his physical, mental, and moral endowments, and
the work for which he is designed. Election works in the natural sphere prior to its
being revealed in the spiritual. Moses, for example, was, on his natural side, the pro-
duct of a long line of causes operating through successive generations for the production
of just such a man as he was. He was a descendant of Levi, as truly as any other.
Inherited organisation was a fact of quite as capital importance in his case as in the
case of any of his contemporaries. It had as much to do with the kind and
quality of his manhood. Compare also Paul, separated from his mother's womb (GaL
i. 15), and essentially the same man after his conversion as before it. The mould in
which he was cast by nature was that which specially fitted him for the work he had to
do as an apostle. 2. The purpose of Ood is wrought out not fatalistically, but in
harmony with the laws of human freedom, and through man's moral self-determinations.
This principle also receives striking illustration in the names of this list. The deriva-
tion of Moses from Levi, and not from Reuben or Simeon, has a connection with facts in
the moral history of the respective tribes. Reuben, Simeon, and Levi, the progenitors, were
all three originally of so wicked a disposition as virtually to undergo their father's curse.
Reuben lost the birthright, a!jd Simeon and Levi were denied an inheritance with their
brethren (Gen. xlix. 3 — 8). The descendants of the two former followed closely in the
footsteps of their ancestors, and consequently never recovered themselves. It was
different with the tribe of Levi, which by earnest piety and zeal seems to have risen to
the rank of moral leadership even in Egypt, and was honoured to give birth to Moses
and Aaron. And greater honour still was in reserve for it ; for while in its letter —
" I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel" — the curse was not repealed, an
entirely new turn was given to it by the election of the tribe to the priesthood and'
service of the sanctuary. The curse was changed into a blessing. Had Reuben ana
Simeon followed in Levi's footsteps, who can doubt but that mercy would have been
shown to them also ? 3. Election flows by preference in the lines of pious descent.
Moses and Aaron were the children of pious parents. The names of Moses' father —
Amram, " the kindred of the lofty one " — and of his mother — she " whose glory is
Jehovah " (ver. 20), testify to the piety of his ancestry. The instruction he received
from them in early life, and during the visits he paid to their home, would not be
without an important influence upon his character, and he had the benefit of their un-
ceasing prayers. Aaron had even greater home advantages, in being with his parents
till chaiacter was fully formed. This also is an important fact in its bearing on God's
election of them to special service. The faith and prayers of parcTits have an iituwirtant
influence on the salvation of their children. I'y far the larger number of pious uiun au^



OL vn. 1— 9.J



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



1&9



women in the world have come firom pious homes. (See numerous illustrations of this
in Dr. Norman MacLeod's 'Home School.') The Church historian, Neander, has
noticed in how many cases " pious mothers" had to do with the planting of the seeds of
Christianity in the souls of those who afterwards produced great effects as teachers of
the Church. He instances Nonna, the mother of Gregory of Nazianzum ; Arethusa of
Antioch, the mother of Chrysostom ; the mother of Theodoret ; and Monica, the mother
of Augustine. (See the whole passage in ' Church History,' vol. iii. sect. 2, l)

III. That honoub in God's sight is determined by spiritual considbeatiokb.
1. As regards position. The true centre point of honour in this genealogy is ver. 20 —
that which includes the names of Moses and Aaron. It was the spiritual greatness of
these men which secured for them this honour. 2. As regards rise and fall, Beuhen
was "the firstborn of Israel" (ver. 14), but he lost through sin the prerogatives of
birth. He is eclipsed by Levi, who, through piety, rose from a degraded position to one
of honour. Korah, whose name, from considerations of relationship, is honourably
prominent in this select list (vers. 21 — 24), subsequently destroyed himself by his
rebellion (Num. xvi.). His posterity, however (another illustration of the same law),
rose to high spiritual honour in the minstrelsy of the temple. 3. As regards relation-
shipt The families of the tribe of Levi, grouped around the names of Moses and Aaron,
some in nearer, some in more distant relations, draw honour from the association. The
chief prominence is given to the Kohathites, as most nearly related to the sons of
Amram. This distinction was subsequently confirmed by the appointment of this
family to the charge of the sacred Ark, and of the vessels of the sanctuary (Num. iv.
4 — 16). lielationship with the good thus confers honoiu:, and secures privilege. The
highest of all examples of this is the honour and privilege conferred through relationship
to Christ.— J. O.



BXPOSITIOH.



CHAPTEB Vn.



Vera. 1 — ^9. — Once more God made allow-
ance for the weakness and self-distrust of
Moses, severely tried as he had been by his
former failure to persuade Pharaoh (ch. v.
1 — 5) and his recent rejection by the people
of Israel (ch. vi. 9). He made allowance, and
raised his courage and his spirits by fresh
promises, and by a call upon him for imme-
diate action. The process of deliverance, God
assured him, was just about to begin. Mira-
eles would be wrought until Pharaoh's stub-
bornness was overcome. He was himself to
begin the series at once by casting his rod
upon the ground, that it might become a
serpent (ver. 9). From this point Moses'
diffidence wholly disappears. Once launched
upon his Heaven-directed course, assured of his
miraculous powers, committed to a struggle
with the powerful Egyptian king, he per-
severed without blenching or wavering until
success crowned his efforts.

Yer. 1. — ^I have made thee a god to
Pharaoh. Moses was diffident of appearing a
second time before Pharaoh, who was so much
his worldly superior. God reminds him that
he is in truth very much Pharaoh's superior.
If Pharaoh has earthly, he has unearthly
power He is to Pharaoh '■ as a god," with a



right to command his obedience, and with
strength to enforce his commands. Aaron
shall be thy prophet, i.e. " thy spokesman " —
the interpreter of thy wiU to others. Com-
pare ch. iv. 16.

Ver. 2. — Thou shalt speak. The Septuagint
and the Vulgate have, " Thou shalt speak to
him," which undoubtedly gives the true sense.
Moses was to speak to Aaron, Aaron to
Pharaoh. (See ch. Iv. In, 16.)

Ver. 3. — I will harden Pharaoh's heart.
See the comment on ch. iv. 21. And multiply
my signs and my wonders. The idea of a
long series of miracles is here, for the first
time, distinctly introduced. Three signs had
been given (ch. iv. 3 — 9) ; one further miracle
had been mentioned (ib. 23). Now a multi-
plication of signs and wonders is promised.
Compare ch. iii. 20, and ch. vi. 6, which,
however, are not so explicit as the present
passage.

Ver. 4. — ^That I may lay my hand on
Egypt. Pharaoh's obstinacy was foreseen and
foreknown. He was allowed to set his will
against God's, in order that there might be a
great display of Almighty power, such as
would attract the attention both of the Egyp-
tians generally and of all the surrounding
nations. God's glory would be thereby pro-
moted, and there would be a general dread of
interfering with his people. (See ch. xv.
14 — 16; Deut. ii. 25; xi. 25, etc.) Bring
forth my armies. See the comment on ch. vi
26. Great jadgmenti. See above, ch. vi. ft



160



TEB BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. vn. 1— I».



Ver. 5. — The Egyptians shall know that I
■m the Lord. Kather, " that I am Jehovah "
— i.e. that I answer to my Name — that I am
the only God who is truly existent, other so-
called gods being nonentities. They will
know this and feel this when I stretch forth
mine hand upon Egypt, as I am about to
stretch it forth.

Ver. 6. — Moses and Aaron did as the Lord
commanded them. This statement is general,
and anticipative of the entire series of inter-
views beginning here (verse 10), and termi-
nating (ch. X. 29) with the words, " I will see
thy face no more." The obedience of Moses
and Aaron was perfect and continuous from
this time forward untU Egypt was quitted.

Ver. 7. — Fourscore years old. This age is
coniirmed by the statement (in Deut. xxxi. 2 ;
xxxiv. 7) that Moses was a hundred and
twenty at his death. It is also accepted as
toact by St. Stephen (Acts vii. 23, 30).



Modems are surprised thai at such an age •
man could nndertake and cany throngh ■
difficult and dangerous enterprise; but in
Egypt one hundred and ten years was not
considered a very exceptionally long life, and
men frequently retained their full vigour till
seventy or eighty

Ver. 9. — When Pharaoh shall speak to
you, saying, Shew a miracle. It is obviou
that there would have been an impropriety
in Moses and Aaron offering a sign to Pnaraoh
until he a^ked for one. They claimed to be
ambassadors of Jehovah, and to speak in his
name (ch. v. 1). Unless they were mis-
doubted, it was not for them to produce their
credentials. Hence they worked no miracle
at their former interview. Now, however,
the time was come when their credentials
would be demanded, and an express com-
mand was given them to exhibit the fint
"sign."



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1, 2. — Ood assigns to each man his intellectual grade. Three different intel-
lectual grades are here set before us — that of the thinker, that of the expounder, and
that of the mere recipient. Pharaoh, notwithstanding his exalted earthly rank, occupias
the lowest position. He is to hang on the words of Aaron, who is to be to him as a
prophet of the Most High. Aaron himself is to hang on the words of Moses, and to be
simply his mouthpiece. Moses is to stand to both (compare ch. iv. 16) as God. And
here note, that the positions are not self-assumed — God assigns them. So there are
leaders of thought in all ages, to whom God has given their intellectual gifts, whom he
has marked out for intellectual pre-eminency, and whom he makes to stand to the rest
of men as gods. Sometimes they are their own prophets — they combine, that is, the
power of utterance with the power of thought. But very often they need an interpreter.
Their lips are imcircumcised. They lack eloquence ; or they even lack the power of
putting their thoughts into words, and require a " prophet," to publish their views to
the world. The " prophet-interpreter " occupies a position very much below theirs, but
still one requiring important and peculiar gifts, such as God alone can give. He must
have the intelligence to catch the true bearing, connection, and force of the ideas pre-
sented to him, often in rude and uncouth language, like statues rough-hewn. He must
be able to work up the rough material into presentable form. He must have a gift
of language, if not a gift of speech. The great mass of men occupy a lower rank than
either of these ; they can neither originate, nor skilfully interpret ; it remains that they
be content to receive. Gfod has given to them their humble position, as he has given to
the others their loftier ones. They should cultivate their receptivity. They should be
•atisfied to listen and learn. They should remember that if, on the one hand, of rot
fiev iravdpioTos, 6s aiirlis itavra vo^ajj — on the other, f<rffK6s d' aS KaKeivos &s ti tlirovrt
nWrjTai,

Vers. 3 — 5. — The fierceness of man turns to OocFs praise. The most signal tiiumpha
of Divine power are those in which the resistance to it is the most determined. The
greatest of all victories was probably that which was gained when — after "war in
heaven" — Satan was seen, like lightning, falling from heaven to earth. Since then,
great triumphs, tending to God's praise, occur whenever the right and the truth succeed
against seemingly insuperable opposition. When the boy shepherd with his sling and
Btone smites to the earth the gigantic Philistine — ^when the proud Sennacherib after all
his boasts has to leave Jerusalem unhurt and fly to Nineveh — ^when Bpiphanes is defied
•nd baffled by a handful of Jewish mountaineers — ^when victory is finally gained by
"Atbanasius 000^1^4 mundum," God's might is se^n itnd recognised, as it would uot h«Te



«B.Tn.l— ».] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 161

been, unless overwhelming strength had seemed to be arrayed agsunst comparativa
weakness. When the " heathen rage," and the " kings of the earth and rulers " are on
their side, and the cry of defiance goes forth : " Let us break God's bands asunder, and
cast away his cords from us " — ^then God is most apt to show his might — to " refrain the
spirit of princes," and make it manifest that he " is wonderful among the kings of the
earth." The longer and fiercer the opposition, the more conspicuously is God's praise
shown forth. Blow follows blow until the opposing power is shattered, smitten to the
ground, laid prostrate. Then is the time for the song of triumph : " Be wise now there-
fore, ye kings : be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the right
way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust
in him I" (Ps. ii. 10— 12).

Ver. 9. — Miracles the credentials of aji ambassador from Ood. It is not easy to see
*ny way in which God could authenticate a message as coming from him, except by
giving the messenger supernatural powers. Conceivably, he might proclaim his vfill
from heaven directly, in terms of human speech. But even then doubts would be
raised as to the words uttered ; men's recollections of them would diflfer ; some would
question whether words were used at all, and would hold that it had " thundered "
(John xii. 29). If, to avoid such results, he speaks to man through man, how is he to
make it clear that his prophet has indeed been sent by him ? He cannot make hia
messenger impeccable, if he is still to be man. He cannot give him irresistible eloquence,
for eloquence is at once suspected ; the reason rises up against it and resists it. What
other course is there, but to impart to his messenger a portion of his own command over
nature — ^in other words, to give him the power of working miracles? The light of
nature seenis to have taught Pharaoh to ask for this proof The same light taught
Nicodemus to accept it — " No man can do these miracles that thou doest, except God b«
with him " (46. iii. 2). So it will ever be with simple men in simple times. It Is only
when men have become sopliistioated, when they have darkened the light that is in
them by " foolish questioijings " and " oppositions of science falsely so called," that they
begin to see specious objections to miracles, and regard them as " difficulties in the way
of receiving a revelation " rather than as convincing evidences of it. We may properly
call upon an opponent to tell us what evidence of a Divine mission he would accept, if
he rejects miracles as an evidence, and wait for his answer. We shall probably find
that 6 avaipav ravTtjv Trjv jriWix oi iravi TriaroTepa tpu (" he who destroys this basis of

belief will not discover a surer one "). — Aristotle.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 8. — A god to Pharaoh. Moses was in the trying position of being sent out
anew upon a mission in which hitherto he had not had the slightest particle of success.
His discouragement was natural. Pharaoh, on a previous occasion, had repulsed him.
He had lost the ear even of his own people. The situation, since his former interview
with the monarch, had altered for the worse. To proceed further was like rowing
against wind and tide, with little prospect of ever reaching shore. Discouragement
wrought in the usual way. It led him to magnify difficulties. Es brought up again
his old objection of his deficiencies of speech. Even with Aaron as an intermediary, he
felt how awkward it would be to appear in the presence of Pharaoh, and not be able to
deliver his own message. His inability of speech would certainly, he thought, expose
him to contempt. Yet observe, God forebore with him. His reluctance was not with-
out sin, but G}d, who knows our frame, does not expect to find in us all at once the
perfection of angels, and is compassionate of our weakness. We have here, therefore —

I. A DISHEARTEKBD SEEVANT SUITABLY ENCOURAGED. God told MoseS 1. That h»

would clothe him with an authority which even Pharaoh would be compelled to respect.
" See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh " (ver. 1). It was not with words only that
Moses was sent to Pharaoh. Powers would be given him to enforce his words vvith
deeds. The judgments he would bring upon the land would clothe him with a super-
luttural terror — ^make him a superhuman and almost a divine person — ^in the eyes ot
SZODns. M



l«2 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [ch. vn. 3.

Pharaoh and his servants. (Cf. ch. xii. 3.) So God gives attestation to his servants
still, making it evident by the power of the Holy Ghost upon them, that they come in
his name, and speak with his authority. He accompanies their word with Divine
power, giving it efficacy to arrest, convict, and convert, and compelling the haughtiest
of the earth to acknowledge the source of their message. So Felix trembled before Paul
(Acts xxiv. 25). Paul's Gospel came to the Thessalonians, " not in word only, but also
in power, and In the Holy Gnost, and in much assurance" (1 Thess. i. 5). 2. That the
tvor/c of deliverance would be no longer delayed. This also was implied in what God
said to Moses : the time had come for speech to be exchanged for action. Everything
indicated that the " charge " with which Moses was now entrusted was to be the final
one. It should encourage desponding servants to reflect that God has his " set time "
for the fulfilment of every promise ; and that, when this period arrives, all their
mourning will be turned into joy.

H. The course of Iskael's dblivekance foretold. 1. Foretold hecause foreseen.
It is God's prerogative that he knows the end from the beginning (Is. xlii. 9). Nothing
ean take ijim by surprise. He knows all the way his purposes are to travel. The
whole future lies mapped out, as in a clear-drawn chart, before Ijim. 2. Foreseen because
pre-ordained. God, like Christ in the miracle of the loaves, knew in himself what he
would do (John vi. 6). Nothing was left to chance in his arrangements. The steps
in his plan were fixed beforehand. What would be done would be according to God's
"determinate counsel and foreknowledge " (Acts ii. 23) — would be " whatsoever (his)
hand and (his) counsel determined before to be done " (Acts iv. 28). The deliverance
was arranged in such a way as most to glorify the power and greatness of the Deliverer,
and demonstrate his superiority to heathen idols. This in no wise implies that violence
was in the very least done to human freedom, though it suggests that God can so
mterweave the volitions of men, in the situations in which he places them, into his
purposes, as to leave not one of them outside his settled plan. The chief difficulty is in
the hardening of Pharaoh's heart, here (ver. 3) represented as an ordained link in the
ehain of God's designs. But if this hardening simply means that God will place
Pharaoh, already a bad man, in circumstances which he knows infallibly vrill harden
his heart, and if this is done justly, and in punishment of former sins, the hardening
taking effect through unalterable laws of the moral nature, which also are of God's
ordainraent, it is difficult to see what righteous objection can be taken to it. 3. Fore-
told for wise ends. Similar predictions of the course of the deliverance had been made
at earlier stages (cf. ch. iii. 19 — 22 ; iv. 21 — 24 ; vi. 1 — 9). They are here repeated —

(1) For the instruction of Moses, tliat he might be prepared for all that was to happen —
that he might understand and co-operate with God in the execution of his designs.

(2) For the re-invigoration of Moses' faith. (3) Tliat it might be evidenced by the
working-out of this fore-announced plan, that the God of Israel was indeed Jehovah, a
free, personal Being, working in history for the accomplishment of gracious purposes.
" The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him " (Ps. xxv. 14). God takes Moses
into his counsel, and discovers to him something of his plan of operation. So he does
in the Scriptures with his Church (Rev. i. 1).

II. A GLIMPSE OF God's end in providential government (vers. 3, 4). The end
is twofold — 1. The manifestation of the utterly free and unconstrained character of his
grace and mercy in the salvation of man ; and 2. What is the necessary counterpart of
this, the manifestation of his power and justice in the infliction of judgments upon his
enemies. Even evil is thus made to contribute indirectly to the ultimate and eternal
establishment of the righteousness of God. — J. 0,

Ver. 3. — Heart-hardening. On this subject, see above, and on ch. iv. 21. The pre-
sent seems an appropriate place for a somewhat fuller treatment.

I. Hardening as proceeding from God. " I will harden Pharaoh's heart." This,
assuredly, is more than simple permission. God hardens the heart — 1. Through the
operation of the laws of our moral constitution. These laws, of which God is the
author, and through which he operates in the soul, ordain hardening as the penalty of
evil conduct, of resistance to truth, and of all misimprovement and abuse of privilege.
8._ Through his providence — as when God, in the execution of his judgments, places a
wicked mam ta situations which he knows can only have a hardening effect upon him.



cH-vaa.] THE BOOK, ui' EXODUS- 168

He does this in righteousness. "God, having permitted evil to exist, must thereafter
of necessity permit it also to run its whole course in the way of showing itself to be
what it really is, as that which aims at the defeat of the Divine purpose, and the
consequent dissolution of the universe." This involves hardening. 3. Through a
direct judgment in the send of the individual, God smiting him with a spirit of blind-
ness and infatuation in punishment of obstinate resistance to the truth. This is the
most difficult of all aspects of hardening, but it only cuts the knot, does not untie it, to
put superficial meanings upon the scriptures which allege the reality of the judgment
(e.^. Deut. xxviii. 28 ; 2 Thess. ii. 11). It is to be viewed as connected with what may
be called the internal providence of God in the workings of the human mind; his
government of the mind in the wide and obscure regions of its involuntary activities.
The direction taken by these activities, seeing that they do not spring from man's own
will, must be as truly under the regulation of Providence, and be determined in quite as
special a manner, as are the outward circumstances of our lot, or those so-c&WsH fortuities
concerning which we are assured : " Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing ? and one
of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father " (Matt. x. 29). It is a signi-
ficant fact that, as sin advances, the sinner becomes less and less a free agent, falls
increasingly under the di)minion of necessity. The involuntary activities of the soul
gain ground upon the voluntary. The hardening may be conceived of, partly as the
result of a withdrawal of light and restraining grace ; partly as a giving of the soul
up to the delusions of the adversary, " the spirit that now worketh in the children of
disobedience" (Eph. ii. 2), whose. will gradually occupies the region in the moral life
vacated by the human will, and asserts there a correspondingly greater power of control ;
and partly as the result of a direct Divine ordering of the course of thought, feeling, and
imagination. Hengstenberg acutely remarks : " It appears to proceed from design, that
the hardening at the beginning of the plagues is attributed, in a preponderating degree,
to Pharaoh, and towards the end to ■Uod. The higher the plagues rise, so much the
more does Pharaoh's hardening assume a supernatural character, so much the mora
obvious is it to refer it to its supernatural causality."

II. Haedeniko in itself considered. The heart is the centre of personality, the
source of moral life, the seat of the will, the conscience, and the affections (Prov. It. 2.3 ;
Matt. XV. 18). The hardening of the heart may be viewed under two aspects : 1. More
generally as the result of growth in sin, with consequent loss of moral and religious
susceptibility ; and 2. As hardening against God, the author of its moral life. We
have but to put these two things together — the heart, the seat of moral life,
hardening itself against the Author of its moral life — to see that such hardening is of
necessity fatal, an act of moral suicide. It may elucidate the subject to remark that
in every process of hardening there is something which the heart parts with, some-
thing which it resists, and something which it becomes. There is, in other words —
(1) That which the heart hardens itself in, viz. some evil quality, say injustice,
cruelty, lust, hate, secret enmity to God, which quality gradually becomes a fixed
element in character ; (2) that which the heart hardens itself against, viz. the influ-
ences of truth, love, and righteousness, in whatever ways these are brought to bear
upon it, whether in the promptings of conscience, the movements of natural sensi-
bility, the remonstrances of parents and Iriends, the Word of God, the internal strivings
of the Spirit ; and (3) that which the heart parts with in hardening, viz. with its
original susceptibility to truth, with its sensitiveness to moral influences, with its
religious feeling, with its natural generosity, etc. The result is blindness, callousness,
lostness to the feeling of right, to the sense of shame, to the authority of God, to the
voice of truth, even to true self-interest. All hardening is thus double-sided ; harden-
ing in hate, e.g., being at the same time hardening against love, with a loss of the
capacity of love ; hardening in injustice being a hardening against justice, with a loss
cf the capacity for moral discernment ; hardening in cruelty being a hardening against
kindliness, with a corresponding destruction of the benevolent sensibilities ; hardening
against God being at the same time hardening in self-hood, in egoism, with a loss of
the capacity of faith. We hence conclude : 1. All evil hardens, and all hardetdng in
moral evil is in principle hardening against Ood. The hardening may begin at the
circumference of the moral nature, and involve the centre, or it may begin at the centre,
and work out to the circumference. Men may be enemies to God in their mind 6y

M 2



164 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. ^iH. vii. 3.

wicked works (Col. i. 21), they may have "the understanding darkened," and In

" alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of th«
blindness (marg, hardness) of their hearts," and being " past feeling " may give " them-
selves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness" (Eph. iv. 17 — 19),
and yet be strangers to God's revealed truth. All sin, all resistance to light, all dis-
obedience to conscience, has this hardening effect (cf. Eom. i. 19 — 32). But it is a
will which has broken from God which is thus in various ways hardening itself, and
enmity to God is latent in the process. The moment the truth of God is brought to
bear on such a nature, this latent enmity is made manifest, and, as in the case of
Pharaoh, further hardening is the result. Conversely, 2. Hardening against Qod is har-
dening in moral evil. The hardening may begin at the centre, in resistance to God's
known will, and to the strivings of his Spirit, and thence spread through the whole
moral nature. This is the deepest and fundamental hardening, and of itself gives a
character to the being. A heart hardened in its interior against its Maker would be
entitled to be called hard, no matter what superficial qualities of a pleasant kind
remained to it, and no matter how correct the moral conduct. 3. Hardening results in a
very special degree from resistance to the Word of Qod, to Divine revelation. This is
the type of hardening which is chiefly spoken of in Scripture, and which gives rise to
what it specially calls " the hard and impenitent heart " (Rom. ii. 5). All revelation
of God, especially his revelation in Christ, has a testing power, and if resisted produces
a hardness which speedily becomes obduracy. God may be resisted in his Word, his
Spirit, his servants, his chastisements, and in the testimony to his existence and
authority written on the soul itself. But the highest form of resistance — the worst and
deadliest — is resistance to the Spirit drawing to Christ.

III. The HARDENiNa of Phabaou compared with hardening under the Gospel.
Pharaoh stands out in Scripture as the typical instance of hardening of the heart.
1. He and Jehovah stood in direct opposition to each other. 2. God's will was made
known to him in a way he could not mit^take. He pretended at first to doubt, but
doubt soon became impossible. 3. He resisted to the last. And the longer- lie resisted,
his heart grew harder. 4. His resistance was his ruin. In considerinj; the case of this
monarch, however, and comparing it with our own, we have to remember — 1. That
Pharaoh was a heathen king. He was naturally prejudiced in favour of the gods of
Egypt. He had at first no knowledge of Jehovah. But we have had from infancy the
advantage of a knowledge of the true God, of his existence, his attributes, and his
demands. 2. Pharaoh had a heathen upbringing. His moral training was vastly
inferior to that which most have enjoyed who hear the Gospel. 3. The influences he
resisted were outward influences — strokes of judgment. The hardening produced by
resistance to the inward influences of Christianity, strivings of the Spirit, etc., is
necessarily of a deeper kind. 4. What was demanded of Pharaoh was the liberation
of a nation of slaves — in our case it is required that we part with sins, and yield up
heart and will to the Creator and Eedeemer. Outward compliance would have sufficed
in his case ; in ours, the compliance must be inward and spiritual. Here, again, inas-
much as the demand goes deeper, the hardening produced by resistance is of necessity
deeper also. There is now possible to man the unpardonable sin of blasphemy against
the Holy Ghost (Matt. xii. 32 ; Heb. vi. 4 — 6). 5. The motives in the two cases are not
comparable. In the one case, God revealed in judgments ; in the other, in transcendent
love and mercy.

Conclusion ; — " To-day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not yonr hearts " (Heb.- iii. 7,
8, 13, 15, iv. 7). Beware, in connection with this hardening, of " the deceitfiilness of
sm." The heart has many ways of disguising from itself the fact that it is resisting
God, and hardening itself in opposition to him. One form ia procrastination. Not yet
— a more convenient season. A second is compromise. We shall find attempts at this
with Pharaoh. By conceding part of what is asked — giving up some sin to which the
heart is less attached — we hide from ourselves the fact that we are resisting the chief
demand. Herod observed John the Baptist, and " when he heard him, he did many
things, and heard him gladly" (Mark vi. 20). The forms of godliness, as in the
Pharisees, may conceal from the heart its denial of the power thereof. Conscience if
quieted by church-membership, by a reUgious profession. There is disguised resistance
ui M- insincere repentance. This is seen in Pharaoh's relentings. Even when the



OH. TIL 10— l&i]



THE BOOK OP- EXODUS.



1«6



Ksistance becomes more avowed, there are ways of partially disguising the fact that it ii
indeed Ood we are resisting. Possibly the heart tries to wriggle out of the duty of
aubmission by cavilling at the evidence of revelation. Or, objection is perhaps taken to
something in the Tnanner or form in which tne truth has been presented ; some alleged
defect of taste, or infelicity of illustration, or rashness of statement, or blunder in science,
or possibly a slip in grammar. Any straw will serve which admits of being clutched at.
So conviction is pushed off, decision is delayed, resistance is kept up, and all the while
the heart is getting harder — ^less sensible of the truth, more ensnared in error. It ia
well also to remember that even failure to profit by the word, without active resistance
to it (if such a thing is possible)— simple want of care in the cherishing of good impres-
sions, and too rash an exposure to the influences which tend to dissipate and destroy
them — will result in their disappearance, and in a consequent hardening of the heart.
The impressions will not readily return with the same vividness. To-day, then, and
ttow, hear and obey the voice of God. — J. 0.

Chap. vi. ver. 28— chap. vii. ver. 7. — Ood still glorified amid human weakness and
tin. 1. MosEs' WEAKNESS (chap. vi. vers. 28 — 30). 'Ihe command was — " Speak thorn
unto Pharaoh." Moses in his despondency is overpowered by the sense of his infirmity.
He fears the ridicule of the Egyptian court. There are times when the sense of our
unfitness for speaking God's words crushes us. Let us take heed lest lowly self-
judgment pass into unbelief and disobedience. The loss of faith in ourselves is no
reason why we should cease to trust God.

II. God's remedy (chap. vii. vers. 1, 2). Moses' slowness of speech is veiled by
unthought-of glory. He that feared the derision of Pharaoh is surrounded with dreadful
majesty and made as God to him. To obedient faith, felt incompetency for the task
God calls us to, will only be the occasion of his bestowing upon us more abundant
honour. Our very defects can be transformed into power. A man's very awkwardness
often disarms criticism and appeals to the heart as the most faultless elegance can
never do.

IlL Jehovah will be glorified in Pharaoh's unbelief (vers. 3 — 6). 1. lliey art
forewarned of Pharaoh's stubborn refusal. We are not sent on God's errand with falsa
expectations. 2. God's purpose will be accomplished, not defeated, by that opposition.
His defiance will only call forth the revelation of God's terribleness. Where sin has
sought to dwell and to reign, the terrors of God's judgment will alone be remembered.
3. Egypt will also know that God is Jehovah — the faithful One. God's name will be
written in their punishment as well as in Israel's redemption.

IV. The very age op God's servants will fbaisb him (ver. 7). The childhood
of Samuel, the youth of Daniel, the old age of Moses and Aaron are arguments of
unconquerable strength for the feeble and despised to trust and toil. 1. There is ft
place for all. 2. No man's day is over if he will only yield to God. The dying thief
who believed in his dying agonies has been among the mightiest preachers of God's
infinite grace. — U.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 10 — 13. — The first sign, and its
FAiLXtBE TO OONVINOB. Obeying the command
given them (vera 2, 9), Moses and Aaron
went to the court a second time, and enter-
ing into the royal presence, probably repeated
their demand — as from God — that the king
would let the Children of Israel go (ch. vi. 11),
when Pharaoh objected that they had no
anthority tp speak to him in God's name, and
required an evidence of their authority, either
in the actual words of verse 9 (" Shew a
miracle for you"), or in some equivalent
ones Aaron hereupon cast down on the



ground the rod which Moses had bronght from
Midian, and it became a serpent (ver. 10).
Possibly Pharaoh may have been prepared
for this. He may have been told that this
was one among the signs which had been
done in the sight of the elders and people of
Israel when the two brothers first came back
from Midian (ch. iv. 30). If he knew of it,
no doubt the " magicians " knew of it, and
had prepared themselves. Pharaoh sum-
moned them, as was natural, to his presence,
and consulted them with respect to the
portent, whereupon they too cast dovn the



1«6



THE BOOK. OF EXODUS.



[CH. VII. 10—12.



tois which they were carrying in their hands,
and they " became serpents ; but Aaron's rod
fwallowed up their rods " (ver. 12). (For the
explanation of these facts, see the comment
below). Pharaoh was to some extent im-
pressed by the miracle, but not so as to yield.
His heart remained hard, and he refused to let
the people go.

Ver. 10. — Aaion oast down hia rod. The
lod is called indifferently " Aaron's rod " and
"Moses' rod," because, though properly the
rod of Moses (ch. iv. 2), yet ordinarily it was
placed in the hands of Aaron (vers. 19, 20 ;
ch. viii. 5, 17, etc.) It became a serpent.
The word for " serpent " is not the same as
was used before (ch. iv. 3) ; but it is not clear
that a different species is meant. More
probably it is regarded by the writer as a
lynonym.

Yer. II. — Pharaoh also called the wise
men and the sorcerers. That magic was an
object of much attention and study in Egypt
16 abundantly evident from " The tale of
Setnau " (' Records of the Past,' vol. iv. pp.
133—148), " The Magic Papyrus " (ibid. vol. x.
pp. 137-158), and many other writings. It
consisted, to a large extent, in charms, which
were thought to have power over men and
beasts, especially over reptiles. What amount
of skill and power the Egyptian magicians
possessed may perhaps be doubted. Many
commentators believe them to have been in
actual communication with the unseen world,
and to have worked their wonders by the
assistance of evil spirits. Others, who reject
this explanation, believe that they themselves
were in possession of certain supernatural
gifts. But the commonest view at the present
day regards them as simply persons who had
• knowledge of many secrets of nature which
were generally unknown, and who osed this



knowledge to impress men with a belief in
their supernatural power. The words used to
express "magicians" and "enchantments"
support this view. The magicians are called
khskdmim, " wise men," " men educated in
human and divine wisdom" (Keil and Delitzsch) ;
mikasTisMphim, "charmers," "mutterers of
migic words " (Gesenius) ; and kliarlummim,
which is thought to mean either "sacred
scribes " or " bearers of sacred words " (Cook).
The word translated " enchantments " is
lehdtim, which means "secret" or "hidden
arts " (Gesenius). On the whole, we regard it
as most probable that the Egyptian " magi-
cians " of this time were jugglers of a high
class, well skilled in serpent-charming and
other kindred arts, but not possessed of any
supernatural powers. The magicians of Sgypt
did in like manner with theii enchantments.
The magicians, aware of the wonder which
would probably be wrought, had prepared
themselves; they had brought serpents,
charmed and stiffened so as to look like rods
(a common trick in Egypt: 'Description de
I'Egypte,' vol. i. p. 159) in their hands ; and
when Aaron's rod became a serpent, they
threw their stiffened snakes upon the ground,
and disenchanted them, so that they were
seen to be what they were — snakes, and not
really rods.

Ver. 12. — But Aaron's rod swallowed up
their rods. Aaron's serpent turned upon its
rivals and devoured them, thus exhibiting a
marked superiority.

Ver. 13. — And he hardened Pharaoh's
heart. Bather, " But Pharaoh's heart wai
hard." The verb employed is not active, but
neuter ; and " his heart " is not the accusative,
but the nominative. Pharaoh's heart was too
hard for the sign to make much impression on
it. He did not see that Moses had done much
more than his own magicians could do A*
the Lord had said. See ver. 4



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 10 — 12. — False imitations of things Divine not difficult of detection. — It is Satan'i
wont, in all ages and on all possible occasions, to set up counterfeits of things Divine,
hi order to confuse men's minds, and make them mistake the false for the true. Aaron
no sooner works a true miracle, a real iiroof that he is a prophet of Ood (verse 1), than
Satan's instruments, the magicians of Egypt, are ready with an imitation of the miracle,
on which they base a claim that Pharaoh is not to listen to Aaron, but to them.
"Curious arts" (Acts xix. 19) and "lying wonders" (2 'I'hess. ii. 9) were employed to
discredit the genuine miracles of the Apostles. Kalse Christs rose up in various places,
soon after the lifetime of our Lord, claiming to be the Messiah spoken of by the
prophets, who " showed great signs and wonders," capable of deceiving, if it had been
possible, even " the very elect " (Matt. xxiv. 24). Apocryphal gospels were put out by
the Bide of the true ones. A new and mystic philosophy was set up as the real " know-
ledge " which the Son of God had come to reveal, and new relijiions, like Gnosticism an4
Maniohasism, disputed with real' Christianity the ri^ht to be viewed as the actual
religion of Jesus. Fanatics, at the time of the Beformation, parodied the Betormud



OH. TIL 8— 14] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. IflV

religion, and established " Churches of the True Saints," which while affecting extrenw
purity fell practically into fearful excesses. Even at the present day rivals are set up
to the revelation of (iod given us in the Bible — and the religious books of the
Egyptians, or the Hindoos, or the Persians, or the Buddhists, or the Mahometans, are
declared to be just as good, just as much from God, just as deserving of our attention,
as the Old and New Testaments. But, if men are honest and do not wish to be
deceived, it is easy, with a little patience, to detect each spurious imitation. Aaron's
rod swallowed up the rods of the magicians. It remained — they ceased to exist altogether.
The " curious arts " and " lying wonders " of those who opposed the Apostles, if examined
into, would have been found either luere tricks, or weak devices of Satan, with none of
the power, the dignity, the awiuluess, of a true miracle. And time brought them to
nought — they built up nothing — eifected nothing. So with the " false Christs," and
the apocryphal gospels, and the religions of Gnosticism and Manichasism, and the
fanatical sects of the Reformation period : they took no hold on the world — the truth
" swallowed them up " — they vanished away. With the spurious " revelations," if the
case is not the same, it is nearly the same — ^if they have not, all of them, vanished, they
are all of them, vanishing. Brought into contact with the truth — placed side by side
with it — they cannot maintain themselves — they are " swallowed up " after a while.
The ancient pantheism of Kgypt perished in the fourth century ; the religion of
Zoroaster is almost non-existent ; that of the Vedas is now crumbling to decay in the
schools of Calcutta and Benares. Mahometanism shows signs of breaking up. When
Thibet and China are freely opened to Christian missions, the last day of Buddhism will
not be far off. The Divine sweeps away the human — ^Aaron's rod swallows up Ito
rivals.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vera. 8 — 14. — The rod turned into a serpent. On tliis sign, notice —

I. Its siGKiFiOAtroB. 1. Its distinctness from the similar sign wrought /or the co»'
viction of the Israelites. On the meaning of the latter, see chap. iv. 1 — 6. There the
serpent into which the rod was turned seemed to denote the power of the monarch — the
royal and divine power of Egypt — of which the serpent was an Egyptian emblem.
However threatening the aspect of this power to Moses and the Israelites, the sign
taught them not to fear it, and promised victory over it. Here, on the contrary, the
serpent is a menace to Pharaoh. It speaks to him in his own language, and tells him of
a royal and Divine power opposed to his which he will do well not to provoke. The
sign was harmless in itself, but menacing in its import. 2. Its relation to Egypti'.m
magic. On this, see the exposition. The magicians produced an imitation of the
miracle, but this very circumstance was turned into an occasion of greater humiliation
to them. " Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods." The truth taught was the impotence
of magic arts as opposed to the power of Jehovah. Royalty, divinity, magic, all arc
represented as overthrown in this significant marvel. Note — God seldom destroys a
sinner without first warning him. The warnings are such that, if taken in time, worse
consequences may be escaped. Conscience warns, the Spirit warns, providence warns.
Red danger-signals stand at the opening of every path of crime, if the deluded trans-
gressor would but take heed to them.

II. Its evidential value. It was ordered to be wrought in answer to Pharaoh's
demand for a miracle (ver. 9). Presmnably, Pharaoh made the request, then the wonder
was performed. Note here — 1. The human mind naturally craves for miracle as an
evidence of revelation. The evidence of outward miracle is not the highest, but neither
should it be disparaged. It is the kind of evidence which minds at an inferior stage of
development are most capable of appreciating, while, in connection with other circum-
stances, it is a powerful confirmation to the faith even of those who might possibly dispense
with it. Christ's repeated refusal of a sign was not based upon the principle that signs
were unnecessary, but upon the fact that a superabundance of signs had already been given.
A faith resting merely on miracles (John ii. 23, 24) may be destitute of moral worth, but
miracles had their value in certifying the source of the message, as well as in arousing
attention, and they were themselves vehicles of moral teaching. 2. Ood satisfies this
craving of the mimi by granting the evidence required. It does not lessen, but greatly



l«g THE BOOK OP EXODUS. oh- ▼n- 8-li.

enliances, the value of this evidence that most of the miracles of Scripture are not merely
eredentials of the revelation, but constitutive parts of it. See this truth wrought out in
the chapter on " The Function of Miracle in Revelation " in Dr. Alex. Bruoe's book,
' The Chief End of Revelation.' This able writer, however, is unnecessarily vehement
in his polemic against the view that miracles are also wrought in proof of revelation ;
especi^y as in the latter part of his discussion he really admits all that the advocates
of the so-called " traditional " view would think worth contending for. " Take away
miracle from a revelation of grace, and the revelation can hardly be known for what it is.
. . . With the miracles retained as an essential part of the story, a gracious purpose towards
a chosen people is indubitable ; without them, it is very doubtfm indeed. . . . Retain the
miracles, and the gracious purpose is stringently proved^ and the contrary opinion excluded
as untenable. The miracles and the purpose thus stand or fall together. To certify,
beyond all doubt, a gracious purpose, miracle is necessary " (pp. 175 — 177). In the case
before us, the evidential function must be allowed to be the leading one. 3. Pharaoh's
request for the miracle. It is a significant circumstance that whereas on the previous
occasion (chap. v. 1 — .5) Pharaoh made no request for a sign, he asks for one at this
second interview. The unexpected reappearance of these two men, renewing their
former demand, and doing so with even more emphasis and decision than at first, must
have produced a startling effect upon him. Truth, to a certain extent, carries its own
credentials with it. There must have been that in the manner and speech of these
grave and aged men (ver. 7) which repelled the hypothesis that they were impostors.
Probably Pharaoh had never been quite swe that their mission was mere pretence. A
secret fear of the God whose worshippers he knew he was maltreating may have mingled
with his thoughts, and kept him in vague uneasiness. He may thus have been more
disturbed by the former demand than he cared to allow, and now thought it prudent to
satisfy himself further. Professed disbelief in the Bible is in the same way often
accompanied by a lurking suspicion that there is more in its teaching than is admitted.
III. Its effect upon the monakch. 1. Ee permitted Mmsdf to be imposed on hy
the counterfeit of the magicians. Their imitation of the miracle furnished him with
a plausible excuse for ascribing the work to magic. It gave him a pretext for imbelief.
He wished one, and he got it. He ignored the strong points in the evidence, and fixed
on the partial resemblance to the miracle in the feats of his tricksters. There were at
least three circumstances which should have made him pause, and, if not convinced, ask
for further proof. (1) The miracle of Moses and Aaron was not done by enchantments.
v2) The men who did the wonder themselves asserted that it was wrought by Divine
power. (3) The superiority of their power to that of the magicians was evinced by
Aaron's rod swallowing up the rods of the others. And seeing that the miracle of God';^
messengers was real, while that of the magicians was (so far as we can judge) but a
juggler's trick, there were probably numerous other circumstances of difference between
them, on which, had Pharaoh been anxious to ascertain the truth, his mind would
aaturally have rested. But Pharaoh's mind was not honest. He wished to disbelieve,
and he did it. 2. / e refused the request. He hardened himself, i.e. the unwillingness
of his heart to look at the truth, now that it had got something to stay itself upon,
solidified into a fixed, hard determination to resist the demand made upon him. Note —
(1) God tries men's dispositions by furnishing them with evidence which, while abundantly
sufficient to convince minds that are honest, leaves numerous loopholes of escape to
those indisposed to receive it. (2) It is the easiest thing in the world, if one wants to
do it, to find pretexts for unbelief. We are far from asserting that oM doubt is dishonest,
but it is unquestionable that under the cloak of honest intellectual inquiry a great deal
that is not honest is frequently concealed. To a mind unwilling to be convinced, there
is nothing easier than to evade evidence. Specious counter-arguments are never far
to seek. Any specious reply to Christian books, any naturalistic hypothesis, any flimsy
parallel, will serve the purpose. The text directs attention to the method of false
parallels — a favourite one with modern sceptics. Parallels are hunted up between
Christianity and the ethnic religions. Superficial resemblances in ethics, doctrine
and ritual, are laid hold upon and magnified. Christ is compared with Buddha and
Confucius, or his miracles are put in comparison with the ecclesiastical miracles of th«
cniddle ages. And thus his religion is supposed to be reduced to the naturalistic teveL
The defeat of all such attempts is shadowed forth in the miracle before us. — J. 0.



«B. Tn. »— 13.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. IM

Vers. 8 — 13. — The credentials of Ood^i ambassadors to the froward. 1. Thi

DEUAND8 OF GtOD, THOUGH BEJEOTED, OANKOT BE BANISHED. The rod whlch Fbaraoh

refuses to be shepherded by, cast down before him, springs into life. To those who
refuse obedience to God's Word, that Word will cling and become a living thing. Israel
thought to have done with God and to be like the heathen : it was a vain dream. Pharaoh
would shake oflf care, and become like one of whom God had asked nothing : the dream
was equally vain. We may deny God, but his words will live and pursue us.

II. The REJECTED GUIDANCE WILL BE THE DESTRUCTION OF THE FROWARD. The rod

cast from the hand becomes a serpent. The vain demand for righteousness will at last
become the sentence of condemnation, and the sin that is clung to, the sting of death.

III. The WARNING BECOMES THE LOUDER, THE GREATER THE EFFORT TO DEADEN

ITS EFFECT. The rods of the magicians were swallowed up and the rod of God left
more terrible than it was before. The Divine retribution will swallow up every comfort
and stay which the sinful may summon to sustain them. — TJ.

Vers. 8 — 13. The first sign to Pharaoh : the rod becomes a serpent. I. Notice th«

EBMAEKABLB REQUEST WHICH JeHOVAH INDICATES THAT PhAEAOH MAT MAKE.

Perhaps we might even say, will make. " When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying,
Shew a miracle for you." This is a great change from his former attitude, that he should
be capable of stooping to such a request. But men who have despotic power sometimes
do strange and contradictory things. The freaks of tyrants in the way of a seeming
liberality and kindliness are among the curiosities of history. Pharaoh may have said
to himself, " It will be rare sport to give this monomaniac full scope ; let him with
his own failure expose the delusion under which he is suffering ; it may be the shortest
way out of the difiBculty." On the other hand, it is not at tjl improbable that soma
news of the signs wrought before Israel had percolated through all the barriers which
stand between a palace and the life of the common people ; and Pharaoh may have
wished to discover how far the rumour was founded in reality. Though when we have
said all by way of suggesting secondary causes for the request, we must come in the
end to this feeling, that the only sufficient way of accounting for it is to treat it as an
impulse from Jehovah himself. Certainly his providence must have much to do with
gaining access to Pharaoh and keeping up the communications of Moses with him.
God can lead Pharaoh, even when he ■ knows not that he is led. Men are walking in
the way of God's providence and serving his purposes, even when quite satisfied in ths
ignorance of their hearts that they are walking in their own way.

II. Notice the miracle itself. Doubtless the rod in question was the same which
had been a serpent twice already ; so that by this time Moses must have looked upon
it with great serenity of confidence. It is now impossible for us to say why the Lord
began his manifestations of power to Pharaoh with this rather than with some other
sign. Reasons discernible at the time are not discernible now ; the light which would
have revealed them has long since died away. We can but see that there was much in
the miracle which would have taught valuable lessons to Pharaoh, if only he had
received it in the simplicity of one who is really looking for truth and guidance. Ha
would have learned not to despise the absence of promise in the external appearance of
things. He would have learned that a thing is not ridiculous because it is laughed at.
He wotild have felt, too, that as the innocent and unimposing rod became suddenly •
dangerous serpent, so this Moses — humble, unsustained and impotent as he seemed —
might also become all at once a destroying force utterly beyond resistance by any Egyptian
defence. Nor must we forget that the choice of this particular sign may have been
influenced by the fact that the magicians had a favourite and imposing trvk of their
art wh ch, to the uninstructed eye, resembled it. They seemed to do, by their magic,
what Moses really did by Divine power, and so their skill, while it had for one result
a renewed defiance of Jehovah on the part of Pharaoh, had another result in this, that
it led up to a strengthening of the faith of Moses. He might not be able to explain
how the magicians did their wonders ; but he knew very well that he was no magician
himself, and that his rod had been Divinely changed, whatever cause had been at work
to change the others. And then, at last, whatever perplexity remained in his mind
was swept away when he saw the power of God rising supreme over mere trickery, and
the serpent from his rod swallowing up the serpents from the other rods.



170



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CH. VIL 14 — 21.



III. Notice the thobouoh wickedness op these magiouks. They know that
their wonders are lying wonders. Powers great by nature, trained and increased with
the utmost ingenuity, and which were intended to be and might have been for the good
of their fellow-men, they turn without any compunction into instruments for the
promotion of their selfish glory. They know that, whatever their pretences may be,
they are not acting in a straightforward and humble service of supernatural power.
They know that when Pharaoh [mis confidence in them, he is putting confidence in a lie.
Furthermore, they must have known that there was something in the transformation of
Moses' rod which wanted accounting for. Magicians understand each other's tricks quite
weU, and it must have been evident to them that Moses was no magician. They know in
their consciences that he is greater than themselves ; but what can they say ? Committed
to lies, they must go on with them. They must pretend to have as much power as Moses,
even if they have it not ; and thus the induced necessities of their dark and secret arts
compel them to hide the truth from Pharaoh. Nor was it any real excuse that Pharaoh
was vpilling to be deceived. His destruction ultimately came from his own perversity ;
but he also presents the melancholy spectacle of being surrounded by those who, if
only they had been truthful, might have interposed some obstacles in his downward
way.

IV. Notice the state in which Phakaoh was left, even after the comple-
tion OF THE MIRACLE. When Aaron's rod had swallowed up the others, he still
remained unimpressed. It seems as if he had allowed his attention to be fixed on one
part of the miracle, while another he regarded but carelessly. When his magicians
seemed to produce serpents from rods, this was just according to his inclinations, and
he made much of it. Moses could do nothing more than the magicians could do. But
when their serpents were swallowed up — well, it was not a very encouraging sight — but
Btill it might be accounted for. And so we are in danger of depreciating the significance
of God's works by not looking at them in every part. Every part is to be regarded, if
we are to get the full impression of the whole. If the magicians did what Moses did,
it was equally evident that Moses did what the magicians did. A child could see that
his power was at least equal to theirs. If Pharaoh had not been blinded by vanity and
by traditional reliance on his magicians, he would have demanded that these magicians
should do something more than Moses had done. What an illustration we have here,
of how, when a man gets away from right thoughts of God, he soon comes to call evil
good and good evil (Isa. v. 20). Pharaoh believes his lying magicians, though he will
not believe the truthful servant of a true God. He has no discriminating power to find
the difference between things, which, however they may resemble each other outwardly,
are yet inwardly quite opposed. He thinks that he has power enough with his gods
to meet whatever power has yet been brought against him. It has been already made
evident that there is no sense of pity or justice in him ; and it is now made plain that
he is not to be reached by the exhibition before him of a significant symbol of pain and
destruction. Pharaoh must he touched more closely still — must be made to suffer, and
■uffer most dreadfully, before he wiU consent to let Israel go. — Y.



EXPOSITION,



Vera. 14 — 21. — The first plague. The
first miracle had been exhibited, and Iiad failed.
It had been a mere " sign," and in no respect
a " judgment." Now the " judgments " were
to begin. God manifests himself again to
Moses, and gives him exact directions what he
is to do. He is to meet Pharaoh on the banks
of the Nile, and to warn him tbat a plague is
coining upon all Egypt on account of his
obstinacy ; that the waters of the Nile will be
turned to blood, bo ttiat the fish will die, and



the river stink, and the Egyptians loathe to
drink of the water of the river (vera. 15 — 18).
Pharaoh not yielding, making no sign, the
threat is to be immediately followed by the
act. In the sight of Pharaoh and his court,
or at any rate of his train of attendants
(ver. 20), Aaron is to stietch his rod over
the Nile, and the water is at once to become
Mooa, tne fish to die, and the river in a short
time to become offensive, or, in the simple and
durect language of the Bible, to stink. The



, vn. 1*— 19,]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



171



eOmmand^ given by God are executed, and
the result is as declared beforehand by Moses
(vers. 20, 21).

Ver. 11. — Pharaoh's heart is hardened.
Bather, "is hard," "is duU." The adjective
used is entirely unconnected with the verb of
the preceding verse.

Ver. 15. — In the morning. The expression
used both here and again in ch. viii. 20 seems
rather to imply a daily custom of the Pharaoh.
It is conjectured, not without reason, that
among the recognised duties of the monarch
at this time was the offering of a morning
sacrifice to the NUe on the banks of the river
(KeU and Delitzsch, Kalisch, etc.). Possibly,
however, this may not have been the case,
and God may have chosen for certain miracles
particular days, on which the king was about
to proceed to the river in view of some special
ceremony connected with the annual inunda-
tion. Against he come. Literally, " to meet
him." £i their hand. When the time came
for smiting the waters, the rod was transferred
to Aaron's hand (ver. 19).

Yer. 16. — ^Ihe Lord Ood . . . hath sent me
onto thee. Bather, "eent me unto thee."
The reference is to the original sending
(ch. v. 1). Thonwonldest not hear. Literally,
" Thou hast not heard," t.«. up to this time
thou hast not obeyed the conmia.nd given to
thee.

Ver. 17. — ^In this thon shalt know that I
am the Lord. Pharaoh had declared on the
occasion specially referred to, " I know not
Jehovah, neither will I let Israel go " (ch. v. 2).
He is now told that he shall " know Jehovah "
in the coming visitation ; he shall kno^, i.e.,
that there is a great and truly existent God
who controls nature, does as he will even with
the Nile, which the Egyptians regarded as a
great deity ; and can turn, if he see fit, the
greatest blessings into curses. Behold, I will
imite. God here speaks of the acts of Moses
and Aaron as his own acts, and of their hands
as his hand, because they were mere instru-
ments through which he worked. The Eoman
law said : " Qui facit per alium, facit per se."
The waters . . . shaU be turned to blood.
Not simply, " shall be of the colour of blood,"
as Bosenmiiller paraphrases, but shall become
and be, to all intents and purposes, blood. It
is idle to ask whether the water would have
answered to aU the modem tests, microscopic
and other, by which blood is known. The
question cannot be answered. All that we are
entitled to conclude from the words of the text
is, that the water had all the physical appear-
ance — ^the look, taste, smell, texture of blood ;
and hence, that it was certainly not merely
discoloured by the red soil of Abyssinia, nor
by cryptogamic plants and infusoria. Water
thus changed would neither kill fish, nor
" stink," nor be utterly undrinkable.



Ver. 18.— The fish ... shall die. Thic
would increase the greatness of the calamity,
for the Egyptians lived to a very large
extent upon fish (Birch, ' Egypt from the
Earliest Times,' p. 45), which was taken in
the NUe, in the canals, and the Lake Moeris
(Herod, ii. 149). The river shall stink.
As KeU and Delitzsch observe, " this seems to
indicate putrefaction." The Egyptians shall
loathe to drink. The expression is strongei
in verse 24, where we find that " they could
not drink." We may presume that at first,
not supposing that the fluid could reaUy be
blood, they tried to drink it, took it into their
mouths, and possibly swaUowed some, but that
very soon they found they could not continue
to do so.

Ver. 19. — Say unto Aaron, There is an
omission here (and generally throughout the
account of the plagues) of the performance by
Moses of God's behest. The Samaritan Pen-
tateuch in each case supplies the omission. It
has been argued (Kennicott) that the Hebrew
narrative has been contracted ; but most critics
agree that the incomplete form is the early
one, and that, in the Sam«r. version, the
original narrative has been expanded. The
waters of Egypt , , . streams . . . rivers . . .
ponds . . . pools of water. The waters of
Lower Egypt, where this miracle was wrought,
consisted of (I) the various branches of the
Nile, natural and artificial, which were seven
when Herodotus wrote (Herod, ii. 17), whence
the NUe was called " septemfluus," or " sep-
temgeminus ; " (2) the canals derived from
each branch to fertUise the lands along its
banks ; (3) ponds, marshes, and pools, the
results of the oveiflowing of the NUe, or of
its percolation through its banks on either
side; and (4) artificial reservoirs, wherein
water was stored for use after the inundation
was over. The four terms of the text seem
applicable to this four-fold division, and
" show an accurate knowledge of Egypt "
(Cook), and of its water system. The
" streams " are the NUe branches ; the " rivers "
correspond to the canals ; the " ponds " are
the natural accumulations of waters in per-
manent lakes or in temporary pools and
marshes ; whUe the " pools,'^or " gatherings of
waters " (margin), are the reservoirs made by
art. Aaron was to stretch out his rod over the
NUe, but with the intent to smite all the
Egyptian waters, and aU the waters would at
once be smitten, the streams and the canals
and the natural lakes and the reservoirs. The
miracle would even extend to private dwell-
ings, and the change would take place throngh-
out all the land of Egypt, not only in respect
of the open waters spread over the country,
but even in respect of that stored, as was
usual, in houses, and contained either in
vessels of wood or in vessels of stone. With
respect to these, it is to be observed that the



ITS



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. vn. 17— 2L



Nile water was much improred by keeping,
since the sediment subsided ; and that tanks,
sometimes of wood, sometimes of stone, were
usual adjuncts of all the better class of houses.
Ver. 20.— He lifted up the rod. " He "
must be understood to mean " Aaron " (see
ver. 19) ; but the writer is too much engr- ssed
with the general nm of his narrative to be
careful about minutise. AE that he wants to
impress upon us is, that the rod was used as
an instnunent for the worliing of the miracle.
He is not thinking of who it was that used it.
In the eight of Pharaoh. See the comment



on ver. 15. And of his seryanti. Either
"his courtiers generally," or, at any rate, a
large troop of attendants.

Ver. 21. — The fish that was in the river
died. It is most natural to understand " all
the fish." There was blood, etc. Literally,
" and file blood was throughout all the land of
Egypt." The exact intention of the phrase is
doubtful, since undoubtedly "in numberless
instances, the Hebrew terms which imply
universality must be understood in a limited
sense " (Cook). " All the land " may mean no
more than "all the Delta."



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 17 — ^20. — Ooc^s punishments appropriate and terribh (vers. 17 — ^20). There wa«
something peculiarly apiiropriate in the first judgment falling upon the Nile. The Nile
had been made the instrument of destruction to the Israelites by the first tyrannical
Pharaoh (probably Seti I.). It had been defiled with the blood of thousands of innocent
victims. Crocodiles had in its waters crushed the tender hmb.s of those helpless infants,
and had stained them with a goro that in God's sight could never be forgotten, 'i'he
king, and the persons who were his instrumeuts, had in so doing polluted their own
holy river, transgressed their own law, offered insults to one of the holiest of their own
deities. And all for the destruction of God's people. So, now that destruction was
coming upon themselves, now that the urstborn were doomed (ch. iv. 23), and the
catastrophe of the Red Sea was impending, the appropriate sign, which threatened
carnage, was given — the Nile was made to run with blood. The Egyptians had among
their traditions one which said that the Nile had once for eleven days flowed with honey
(Manetho ap. Syncell. ' Chronograph.' p. 55 a). As this supposed mu-acle indicated a
timi* of peace and prosperity, so the present actual one boded war and destruction.
Again, Pharaoh's especial crime at this time was, that he despised God. God therefore
caused his own chief deity to be despised. There are indications that, about this
period, a special Nile-worship had set in. Hapi, the Nile-god, was identified with
Phthah and Ammon — ^he was declared to stand " alone and self-created " — to be " the
Father of all the gods," " the Chief on the waters," " the Creator of all good things,"
" the Lord of terrors and of choicest joys." " Mortals " were said to " extol him, and
the cycle of Oods " — ^he stood above them all as the One Unseen and Inscrutable Being.
" He is not graven in marble," it was said ; " he is not beheld ; he hath neither
ministrants nor offerings ; he is not adored in sanctuaries ; his abode is not known ; no
shrine of his is found with painted figures ; there is no building that can contain him ; "
and again, " unknovm is his name in heaven ; he doth not manifest his forms ; vain are
all representations." (' Eecords of the Past,' vol. iv. pp. 107 — 113 ; vol. x. pp. 41 — 2.)
Menephthah was a special devotee of Hftpi (ib. vol. x. p. 38). Nothing could have
seemed to him more terrible and shocking, than the conversion of his pure, clean,
refreshing, life-giving, god-like stream, into a mass of revolting putridity. And on the
people the judgment was still more terrible. Under ordinary circumstances, the whole
nation depended on the Nile for its water supply. There were no streams in the country
other than the Nile branches, no brooks, no riUs, no springs or fountains. The sudden
conversion of all the readily accessible water — even such as was stored in houses — into
blood, was sickening, horrible, tremendous. Scarcely could any severer punishment of
the people have been devised. If a partial remedy had not been found (verse 24), it
would have been impossible for them to endure through the " seven d»l (verge 25^
8o fearful are the judgments of God upon those who offend him I



OB. TU. 14—26.] THE BUUK OF EXODUS. 171



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ten. 14 — 25. — 2%« NUe twrned into blood. The first of the series of places which
fell on Egypt was of a truly terrific character. At the stretching out of (he rod of
Aaron, the broad, swift-flowing current of the rising Nile suddenly assumed the hue and
qualities of blood. The stroke fell also on the reservoirs, canals, and ponds. What-
ever connection may be traced between this plague and natural phenomena (see Heng-
stenberg) it is plain that it stood on an entirely different footing from changes pro-
duced under purely natural conditions. 1. The water was rendered wholly unfit for use.
Si. It became deadly in its properties (ver. 18). 3. The stroke was instantaneous.
4. It was pro-announced. 5. It descended on the river at the summons of Moses and
Aaron. 6. It lasted exactly seven days (ver. 25). An event of this kind was palpably
of supernatural origin. Contrast Moses with Christ, the one beginning the series of
wonders by turning the river into blood ; the other, in his first miracle, turning the
water into wiue (John ii. 1 — 12). The contrast of judgment and mercy, of law and
Gospel. Consider —

I. The demand renewed with the accompaniment of threat (vers. 16 — 19).
1. The demand was that which Fharaoh had hitherto resisted. It was a demand
righteous and reasonable in itself — " Let my people go," etc. It had come to him, more-
over, as the command of Jehovah, and proof had been given him that such was its
character. Still he had resisted it. This, however, did not dispose of the demand, which
now confronts him again. 2. 'I'he demand which Pharaoh would not freely grant, fie i$
now to be compelled to grant. If he will not bow to reason, to persuasion, to evidence,
he must bow to power. An unprecedented calamity would overtake his land : " In this
shalt thou know that I am the Lord ; behold, 1 will smite with the rod," etc. (ver. 17).
Note — (1) Reasonable means are exhausted with the sinner before compulsion is
resorted to. God is unwilling to proceed to extremities. (2) Nevertheless, if gentler
methods fail, .means, will be used which will compel submission. "As I live, saith the
Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God " (Rom. xiv. 11 ;
Phil. ii. 10, 11). (3) Excuses are not admitted for wilful unbelief. Pharaoh would
probably have pleaded as a ground for his refusal, that he did not believe that the
•ommand in question proceeded from Jehovah. No such plea will be admitted in the
court of heaven. Every allowance will be made for involuntary ignorance, but none for
wilful unbelief. What the sinner is asked to do is righteous and reasonable in itself; is
made known to him as God's will ; and is evidenced to be such by many infallible proofs.
Refusal to acknowledge the sufBciency of this evidence does not exculpate from the
guilt of disobedience. The question is not — Does he, or will he, admit its sufficiency,
but is it sufficient? Not, Boea it convince him? but, Ought it to convince him?
Our errors, follies, and mistakes will not hinder the Almighty from executing his
purposes. If we stand in the way of them, and will not bend, we must be crushed.

II. The plaque as a bion to Egypt. The smiting of the Nile was — 1. A proof
af the power of Jehovah (ver. 17). It showed him to be an actually existing Being,
demonstrated his supremacy in nature, and made manifest his determination to punish
resistance to his will. 2. A blow at Egyptian idolatry. It turned the river Nile,
which itself was worshipped as a divinity, into an object of loathsomeness and source
of death to its worshippers. They were the chief gods of Egypt, too, who were supposed
to be embodied in the river. How clear the proof of the vanity of the idols, and of the
unchallengeable superiority of Jehovah ! Yet we do not learn that one idol the less was
worshipp^ in Egypt as the result of it. 3. A warning of worse evil to come. The
Nile was in a sense sjrmbolioal of Egypt, of whose prosperity it was the source. The
turning of this river into blood was in fact a prophecy or threat of utter ruin to the
state. The succeeding plagues are merely the unfolding of the threat contained in this
one. 4. 'The removal of the plague at the end of seven days betokened the unwillingness
•f Ood to proceed to extremities. It is very noticeable that the plague was removed
unasked, and while Pharaoh was still hardening his heart. So long-suffering is God
that he will try all means with sinners before finally giving them up. The lessons for
ourselves firom this plague are these— (1) The certainty of God's threatenings being
•xoouted. (2^ The terrible punishments in reserve for disobedience. (3) The ease



174 THE BOOK OF EXi DUS. [cH. rn. 14— 25.

with which God can smite a nation, and bring it to the point of ruin. The smiting of
the Nile meant the immediate paralysis of all industry, commerce, and agriculture
throughout the land of Kgypt, while, had the plague lasted a few days longer, the result
wjuld have been the death of the whole population. We call this "miracle," but
miracle is only the coming forth into visibility of-the hand which is at all times
working in the phenomena of nature, and in the affairs of history. By famine, by
pestilence, by blight of crops, by clap of war, turning the river of a nation's life into
very literal blood (so France in 1870), by the simplest natural agencies, if so it pleasei
him — could Jehovah speedily reduce our national pride, and smite at the fountain-heads
the sources of our national prosperity. A very sensible proof was given of this — of
the readiness with which the trade of a whole country could be paralysed, and great
cities reduced in no long period to absolute starvation, by a slight change in natural
conditions — in the great snowstorm of January lb81. (See the hpectator of
29th January, 1881.) Had the storm lasted but a week or two longer, the effects would
have been as serious to cities like London, and to the country as a whole, as this smiting
of the Nile in Egypt. (4) God's judgments are anticipative. Judgments in this life
forewarn of judgments beyond.

III. The puerile imitation of the magiciaks (ver. 22). 1. The magicians
could not remove the plague ; they could only with the few drops of water at their
command produce a feeble imitation of it. How futile is this as a disproof of God's
i^ency I So it is a pitiable way of disposing of God's judgments to show that some-
thing like them can be produced by undivine means. The savant, e.g., may produce in
his laboratory an imitation of rain or thunder, and may think that he has thereby
disproved God's agency in any infliction he may send upon a land through these
instrumentalities ; but this is small comfort to the country that is being smitten by
them. 2. The attempts of the magicians to refute the pretensions of Moses only
resulted in making the supernatural character of the plague more manifest. In the
game way, the ettbrts of sceptics to disprove, e.g., the Divine origin of the religion of the
Bible, or of the book itself, only end in making its Divinity more apparent. " The
mote conclusively you demonstrate to the human reason that that which exists ought
not to exist, so much the more do you enhance the miracle of its existence. That
must be the most astounding of all facts that still exists notwithstanding the gravest
objections to its existence."

IV. The haedbnino of Pharaoh (vers. 22, 23). ' The hardening of Pharaoh here
enters on a new phase. It was — 1. Hardening against conviction. Pharaoh must have
felt in this case that he was in presence of a true work of God. The puny efforts of
his magicians could not possibly impose upon him. But he would not yield. He would
not obey conviction. 2. Hardening under punishment. Pharaoh was in the position of
one who, being often reproved, hardeneth his neck (Prov. xxix. 1). He had risked,
even after this last warning, the chances of the threatening turning out to be untrue.
Now, to his utter discomfiture, the stroke descends, and his empire is on the point of
ruin. Yet he hardened himself in resistance. 3. Hardening which was deliberate.
" Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set his heart to this also "
^ver. '/S). He had reached a point at which he could only stiffen himself in his
determination to resist God, by re/using to think, by deliberately turning away from
the light and resolving not to face the question of his duty. The monarch knows his
duty, and knows that he knows it, yet he will not obey. 4. Hardening obstinately
j^severed in. He held out through all the seven days of the duration of the plague.
Hardening of this kind speedily robs the soul of its few remaining sparks of gusceDti-
bility to truth.— J. 0. art

Vers. 14 — 25. — T/ie first plague : the water turned to blood. I. The place where
Moses was to meet Pharaoh. Moses was not always to be put to it to find his
entrance into the palace. God can arrange things so that Pharaoh shall come to meet
him. The instructions given to Moses at once call to our minds how Pharaoh's daughter
wghty years before, had come down to the river to find and protect a helpless babe, and
how that same babe — having passed through many chequered years, and many strange
^peiiences at the hands both of God and men — has to meet with another Pharaoh.
We are not told whj Pharaoh went down to the water ; it may have been to worship



OH. vn. 14— 25. J THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 17fc

for the Egyptians held the Nile in pious regard. But as the narrative says nothing on
this point, we had better not assume it. It is sufScient to observe that Pharaoh was
led down to the stream, to see it, the great benefactor of his land, turned into a curse
(that is, if it was down to the Nile that he went. M. de Lesseps maintains that the
city of the Pharaohs was not on the Nile, but on a tributary of it. See Hunter's ' Life
of Lord Mayo,' vol. i. p. 132).

II. The distinct waknino uivbn to Pharaoh op what is about to happen.
This warning is not peculiar to the first plague. Warning is mentioned as having been
given along with most of the others, and possibly it was given where it is not mentioned.
But it is of course a thing to be specially noted that God did not begin this succession
of disasters without due and solemn warning. Not that there was any formal appeal to
Pharaoh. It rather seems to be taken for granted that an appeal will be of no use.
But even though Pharaoh disregarded, it was a good thing to say beforehand what was
about to happen. Moses himself, and Aaron, and all devout Israelites who had eyes to
perceive, could thus see God's plan opening out more and more. All information is
good that makes us feel how God is working upon an ascertained and settled plan.

III. Thb plague itself. Water is changed to blood. Two of the great elements
that belong to life are thus put in sharp contrast. Water is an element scarcely less
distributed than the air itself. It is one of those common blessings which are so
common that we take them with no manner of doubt that we are perfectly sure of them,
come what may. The importance of water is seen by nothing more than by the
frequent references to it in Scripture as illustrative of spiritual blessings. There is water
to drink ; water to cleanse ; water to fertilise vegetation. This element God takes, and
aU at once, over a wide stretch of territory, turns it to blood. Thus we see how he can
make mere natural things a blessing or a curse according to his will. Water is a
blessing, and blood a blessing, according to circumstances of time and place. There is
suffering when blood is where water ought to be ; and equally there is suffering if water
is where blood ought to be. Here there was great suffering because blood was where
water was meant to be. When the people came for water to drink, to cook, to wash, to
water plants, they found only blood ; and yet that very blood was the same in its
composition with the liquid which flowed incessantly through their own bodies. Their
health depended on its richness, its purity, and the regularity of its flow. On the other
hand, consider the poor man who came to Christ to be cured of the dropsy (Luke xiv. 2).
He had to complain, not that blood was where water ought to be, but that water was
where blood ought to be. And here we claim that this miracle is not sufficiently
explained by saying that the water was turned into something like blood. We must
cake it that there was a conversion of the water literally into blood. , We are here just
at the beginning of a critical and sublime exhibition of signs and wonders. Why, then,
needlessly make admissions which will diminish the force of these? Granting the
nupematural at all, let us be ready to grant it to the full where the statements of the
text require it. The Being who changed a rod to a serpent could change, if need were,
the waters of the whole globe into blood. We should be careful not to admit, without
sufficient reason, anything to diminish the horrors of this plague. What a poor picture
it presents to the imagination to think of streams stained with red earth or microscopic
infiisoria ! How much more impressive in every way — how much more consistent with
high conceptions of the anger of Jehovah, and of the punitive aspect of his power — to
think of blood, real blood everywhere, " vast rolling streams, florid and high-coloured,"
and becoming after a while, a stagnating, clotting, putrescent mass. Very fitly does
Matthew Henry remark on this plague : — " One of the first miracles Moses wrought was
turning water into blood, but one of the first miracles our Lord Jesus wrought was
turning water into wine ; for the law was given by Moses, and it was a dispensation of
death and terror ; but grace and truth, which, like wine, make glad the heart, came by
Jesus Christ."

IV. The apparently successful rivalry of the magicians. They also were able,
or seemed to be able, to turn water into blood. There are, indeed, some difficulties in
understanding the nature of their action here — whether it was mere trickery and decep-
tion, or whether Wod did allow water, as it passed through their hands, to be changed to
blood. An understanding of these points is, however, of secondary importance. '1 he
thing of moment is to mark how unimpressed the magicians themselves seem to have



17«



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[CH. vit 22, 23.



been with the terrible spectacle presented to them. It was not for Pharaoh only to
take heed to this river of blood ; the intimation was for them also. But they clung, a*
privileged men almost always do cling, to their position and influence. Not only was
Pharaoh's kingdom in danger, but their standing as the professed agents of supernatural
powers. They went on, vainly contending against this new manifestation of po\i'er,
though surely in their hearts they must have felt it was destined to prevail. And their
conduct was made worse by the fact that they were pursuing it in the midst of general
suffering.

v. The intbbvai, to the next plaqtje. What was this interval for ? Surely to
give Pharaoh time — time to consider the miracle in all its bearings, and get over the
rashness and pride which prompted his first thoughts of continued resistance. We know
not if, during these seven days, the river slowly returned to its natural state. Perhaps
there was no sharp dividing line between the plagues ; one may have come on as
another faded away. Seven days, then, were given to Pharaoh to change his mind; but
it is very hard for a man, even in seven days, to say he has been utterly wrong. And
then there is the success of these magicians to keep him astray. Yet what was there
in them to give satisfaction ? It seemed they could do the same thing which Moses was
doing, viz. change water into blood. J/ only they could have changed blood into vjater
again, then they might have been of some use and comfort to Pharaoh. — Y,

Ver. 14 — 25. The water turned into blood. I. The punishment. There were two
elements in it. 1. The deprivation : water, one of the most essential of aU God's gifts,
was suddenly made useless. 2. The horror. Had all the water of Egypt suddenly
disappeared, the punishment had been infinitely less. Instead of water, there was blood
and corruption. 3. It was a judgment on Egypt's idolatry. The things we set in
God's stead will be made an abomination and a horror to us. 4. It was the revelation
of Egypt's guilt ; beneath these waters the babes of Israel had sunk in their hopeless
struggle with death. The abused gifts of God will be removed, but the horror of their
abuse wUl abide.

I. The attempt to discbedit God's agency in the calamitt. The magician*
could increase the plague, and therefore it was not from the hand of God ! The same
argument is used stiU to prevent misfortune being considered as a chastisement and
waming.from God. Men can see in it chance only, or man's hand, not the Lord's.

III. Pharaoh's DOGaBD refusal to obey. He " turned and went into his house "
(ver. 23). This would prolong his punishment, but could not conquer God. Instead
of bowing to God's word, we may shut ourselves in with our sin, but we inly bind
judgment upon us, and tempt God to inflict a heavier blow. — U.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 22, 23. — On the occurrence of the
■eo«nd sign and first plague, the magicians
were again consulted ; and, by means which
it is impossible to do more than conjecture,
they produced a seeming transformation into
blood of a certain quantity of water. The
inquiry, whence they procured the water, is
answered by ver. 24. That they actually turned
water into blood is scarcely asserted in the
▼ague " did so " of ver. 22. Perhaps they had
recourse to sleight of hand, and made a sub-
stitution, like modem conjurors ; perhaps they
merely turned the water of a red colour. All
that was necessary was to convince Pharaoh
(hat they were able to do what Moses and
Aaron had done— there was no one to watch.



and test, and examine their pretended miracle
which consequently passed muster, though it
may have been no more than a trick.
Pharaoh, however, suffered himself to be con-
vinced, and " turned and went into his house,'
without paying any attention to the marvel
wrought (ver. 23).

"Ver. 22.— The magicians of Egypt did so.
They could not do what Moses and Aaron had
done— stretch out, that is, a rod over the Nile,
and turn it and all its liranches, and ponds,
and pools, into blood, for thi> was already
dime. They could only show their skill upon
some small quantity of water in a cup or other
vessel. No doubt they produced some apparent
change, which was accepted by Pharadi as an
equivalent to what had been effected by th*



m. Tn. 22—25.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



17T



Israelite chiefs, bnt which most have fallen
far short of it. Pharaoh would not be a severe
critic.

Ver. 23. — ^Pharaoh turned — t.e. " returned "
— quined the river-bank, satisfied with what
the magicians had done, and went back to the



palace. Neither did he set his heart to thii
also. A better translation is that of Booth-
royd — "Nor did he lay even this to heart."
In the expression "even this" there is an
allusion to the previous neglect of the first
sign (ver. 13).



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 22, 23. — The ■power of Satan is with all deceivahleness. Satan himself, and
wicked men, his instruments, are especially strong in the power of deception. Satan
deceived Eve (1 Tim. ii. 14). The lying spirit deceived Ahab (1 Kings xxii. 22).
Bebekah and Jacob together deceived Isaac. Uehazi deceived Naaman. Bad men are
clever and plausible, and keensighted, and painstaking, and careful — they lay their plana
skilfully, and carry them out boldly, and are usually successful. The magicians had
not only their own credit at stake, but also that of the priests, who were in league with
them. They would not be very scrupulous what means they used, so that they could
persuade the Pharaoh that whatever Moses and Aaron could do, they could do : and they
succeeded. The " father of lies " no doubt suggested to them some clever method of
seeming to perform the same sort of miracle as the Israelitish leaders had performed —
they adopted it, and cheated the eyes of the beholders. When men wished to nip the
religion of Christ in the bud, they called its Founder " that deceiver " (Matt, xxvii. 63).
Deceit is a device of Satan. In nothing are the powers of light and darkness more
contrasted than in the simpleness, the straightforward sincerity that characterises the
former, and the crookedness, the tortuousness, the insincerity that goes with tke latter.
He who is "the Way" and "the Life," is also "the Truth." All who would have
fellowship with him must " walk in truth."



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 24 — 25. — ^Necessity is the mother of
invention. Finding the Nile water continue
utterly nndrinkable, the Egyptians bethought
themselves of a means of obtaining water to
which they never had recourse in ordinary
times. This was to dig pits or wells at some
distance from the river, and so obtain the
moisture that lay in the ground, no doubt
derived from the river originally, but already
there before the change .of the water into
blood took place. This, it appears, remained
water, and was drinkable, though probably
not very agreeable, since, owing to the nitrous
(jualitj of the soil in Egypt, well-water has
always a bitter and brackish taste. It sufficed,
however, for drinking and culinary purposes
during the " seven days " that the plague con-
tinued (ver. 25).



Ver. 24. — All the Egyptians digged. Not
the Hebrews. The water stored in the houses
of the Hebrews in reservoirs, cisterns, and the
like, was (it would seem) not vitiated; and
this would suffice for the consumption of
seven days. Water to drink. Blood would
not become water bf percolation through
earth, as Canon Co-jk appears to think
(' Speaker's Commentary,' vol. i. p. 278) ; but
there might have beer, sufficient water in the
ground before the pUgue began, to fill the
wells dug, for seven rays.

Ver. 25. — And seven days were fulfilled.
This note of time hjs been regarded as merelv
fixing tne intervoj between the first plague
and the second. But it is more natural to
regard it as marKing the duration of the first
plague. The intervals between one plague
and another are nowhere estimated.



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 24. — God allows men to seek and obtain alleviations of his Judgments. We
are not intended to sit down under the judgments of God, and fold our hands, and
do nothing. Whether it be war, or pestilence, or famine, or any other Heaven-sent
calamity that comes upon us for our sins and those of our nation, we must beware of
sinking into apathy under the infliction, and allowing it simply to run its course. God

KXOOUS. H



W8 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. Tit 1— Sfc

Ams not desire that we should show our submission in this way. He ^ves tia thought,
uid ingenuity, and inventiveness, thaU in every difficulty we may devise remedies, and
80 lessen our own and our neighbours' sufferings. Oriental nations view each calamity
that comes upon them as Kismet, " fate," and make no exertions to meet it, stem it,
minimise it. Christians should act otherwise. They should so far imitate the Egyptians
as to set to work actively, to do what can be done in the way of relief and alleviation.
God freely allows this. He did not punish the Egyptians for digging, or frustrate their
efforts by preventing the water that was in the ground from filling the wells, or by
rendering it undrinkable. And so he allows cholera or plague, or even ordinary
sickness, which is his judgment on an individual, to be met by care, attention, cleanli-
ness, remedial measures, and is so far from interfering against such exertions, that
he blesses them, and for the most part renders them effectual.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Chaps, vii. — x. — 7%e great conflict. " For I will at this time send all my plagues,"
etc. : Ex. ix. 14. Keeping the last tremendous visitation apart, for it stands out in
lone grandeur in the story, it is well to take the other nine plagues together in any
homiletic use we make of them ; for — 1. They have many features in common. 2. And
are closely connected with one another. A landscape should not be cut up, when we
can see at a sweep the whole panorama. The subject, then, is Jehovah's conflict with
this great idolatrous world-power.

I. The agent. What was Moses ? What was his Divine legation ? 1. He was a
patriot-deliverer, ranking with Tell, Bruce, etc. etc., as the saviour of his nation — but
more ! 2. A statesman — the creator (under God) of first a polity, and then a nation.
He taught free men to govern themselves, under God. But Moses was more ! 3. A
prophet of the living Ood. Moses was intensely religious. He ranks with the greatest
spiritual leaders of the world. His peer is Elijah, though Elijah was not quite equaL
So great are they both that they appear on Tabor with the transfigured Lord. God,
eternity, the soul, law, salvation, religion are the master motives of this great spirit.
All that Moses was besides is to be traced to this deep root. The lesson is obvious :
religion first — then the things that accompany salvation.

±i. His deeds. 1. Their historic reality. Two facts certain — (1) Israel in Egypt.
(2) Israel in Canaan. The liistoric problem is : How was the transition made ? (1)
Kings are not in the habit of emancipating races (note ! apparent exceptions — ^William
III. and Revolution of 1688. Emancipation of serfs by the Russian Czar. Lincoln
and the freedom of the four millions of slaves.) (2) Israel never won its own freedom.
Nor (3) was Egypt overthrown by a foreign power, and so in the confusion Israel
emerged to liberty. (4) The Deliverer was God, and the mode, that described in the
book. 2. Their exact nature. Exposition here of the miracles seriatim, with a carefid
note of the specialities of each. This as a foundation for the discussion of the question :
Were the plagues natural or supernatural? They were either (1) natural; or (2)
supernatural ; or (3) natural in kind, but supernatural in degree, in circumstances and
in concomitants. See oh. x. 12, 19 ; xiv. 21. Our view is the last. But that the
visitations were direct from the hand of God is clear from — (1) Their colossal propor-
tions. (2) Their concentration upon one epoch. (3) Their relation to the mor^l
controversy. (4) Their gradation. (5) Dependence on the word of Moses. [On the
evidential value of the plagues, see ' Speaker's Commentary,' vol. i. 241.] 3. Their
objective. This word here used in a military sense. What was the Divine object in
these visitations ? To hurl thunderbolts against the idolatries of Egypt : Ex. xii. 12.
For detail, see Dr. Alexander's Kitto's Cyclo., p. 751, vol. i. 4. Their superiority to
the acts of the magicians. Full discussion of the questions — What the magician*
really did, and how thoy did it, will be found in tlie Cougregatioual Lectures by
Rev. Walter Scott, of Airedale College, on " The Existence of Evil Sphits," 145—156.
The conclusion, sustained by argument, is that they were adepts in sleight of hand.
But, for homiletic purposes, show the grandeur of the scale on which Moses acted,
and the imposing character of his deeds as a moral demonstration to the idolaters of
Egypt. 5. Their dimacttric character. When God deals with sinners, he begins afer



OH. vn. 1—25.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. ITi

off, and only very gradually draws near and close to their deepest life and acuteat
feeling. So here he touches first the river — then comfort (frogs, lice, flies)— then
cattle — then the skin of the people — then food (hail and locusts) — then threatens life
by the suffocating effects of the fifty days' sand-storm darkness — at last life itself.
" 1 will sing of mercy " as well as " of judgment," etc.

III. His words. Fine homiletic use may he made of the verbal controversy which
went on between Moses and Pharaoh all the time of these visitations, and which
increased in tragic vehemence as blow after blow descended. Note Pharaoh's waverings,
relentings, and anon persistence ; and also the occasional passionate entreaties of the
hardened sinner on behalf of the awestruck and repentant people. But " whom the
gods purpose to destroy they first of all madden."

IV. Effects. 1. Un the Egyptians. Leading some finally to attach themselves to
the redeemed of the Lord. 2. On Moses. Called to a stupendous work. Timid.
Trained to confidence in God, and obedience to his slightest word. Note ! — So God is
«ver training his senrants. 3. On Israel, through Moses.

V. Lessons. The main ones of this great controversy. 1. The object of Ood in
dealing with men. To beat down the idolatries of the human heart — to reveal himself
— his law — ^his salvation — to reconcile men with himself. 2. The inevitable conflict, i.e.
until God's purpose be accomplished. Show the reality of this conflict in the case of
every sinner. Message after message, mercy after mercy, judgment after judgment. If
men wiU not be reconciled, then there must be antagonism ; to that antagonism there
can be but one end. It is in this sense that Amos challenges Israel — " Prepare to meet
thy God, Israel." 'I his is the word of the Lord as "a man of war." 3. Th" futility
cf the repentance of fear. Case of Pharaoh. Case ot every sinner. Fear, however, has
its mission — to awaken to concern. But no repentance is solid, lasting in its effect,
but that which takes place in view of the love of our Father as seen in the cross of
Jesus Christ our Lord. — E.

Chaps, vii. — x. — " The Lord, he is the God." Egypt was a pleasant land — " tha
garden of the Lord " (Gen. xiii. 10). The river, the source of its fertility, was fenced
off from desert on either side by cliff ranges — canopied from morning to evening by tha
ever blue, bright sky. No wonder that the inhabitants should think much of such a
land, that they should come to say of ri^er, land, sky, "These be thy gods, Egypt!"
The veil of nature, which should reveal — as by shadow cast on sheet — ^may hide, the
anseen God : cf. Eom. i. 20. The struggle with Pharaoh shows us God asserting
himself — ^proving himself " God of gods " as well as " Lord of lords." Regarding
the river as the source of fertility ; the land as the sphere for fertility ; the sTcy as the
guardian of fertility — see how God openly manifests the dependence of each and all
on him.

I. The river. " The beneficent Nile, the very Hfe of the state and of the people "
(Stanley). (1) Middle of June — season of annual overflow. To all appearance more
than ever divine — Pharaoh (ch. vii. 15) probably openly acknowledging its divinity.
Suddenly turned into blood — loathsome ; no longer a source of fertUity, but a source of
corruption and death — at the command of Jehovah, the unrecognised invisible Somca
whence the fertiUsing power had been derived. (2) Later. Subsidence of the water.
The river mud seems to breed frogs. Compelled at the Divine command to fiiuctify not
grain but reptiles. (3) Later. Even the dust of the sun-dried mud turned by Jehovah
into a tormenting pest. " The river is mine, and the soil which it deposits is mine ; even
the very dust which it leaves is mine. Have not I, the Lord, made all these things? "

II. The land. So far the river has been made to plague the land; but Jehovah
needs no intermediary. He has direct power over the land also. (1) Chap. viii. 21, 22.
Swarms of flies (gnats) coming up as it were out of the ground. Yet land severed from
land — Goshen spared, " so that thou mayest know that I am Jehovah in the midst of the
land." (2) Chap. ix. 3. Murrain in the cattle — the creatures most nearly connected
with the land ; identified with its prosperity ; deified as its representatives — at a set
time, within appointed limits. (3) Chap. ix. 9. Pestilence on man and bea,st. The
furnace-ash strewed heavenwards. The land as modified by human agency turned into
• plague upon the men who used it. " The land is mine, and the cattle are mine, the

■ 2



IM



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[en. vm. 1 — ^7,



T«y furnace-ash which ye might almost claim as se?^-made is mine. Have not I, the
Lord, made all these things ? "

III. The sky. The previous plague (chap. ix. 8) " toward the heaven,*" seems to chal-
lenge the sky divinities. Now they also are to be proved subject. 1. Chap. ix. 22.
At the word of Jehovah the protector becomes the devastator. Clouds gather and pour
out water. Pharaoh and Egypt, too, shall know that the earth belongs to no sky
divinity, but to Jehovah : chap. v. 29. 2- Chap. x. 13. The winds, compelled into
Jehovah's service, become charioteers for his locust armies. 3. Chap. x. 21. The
Siin, source of light, chief of the gods — even he is draped in darkness at the word of
Jehovah. " The sky is mine with its clouds and winds, even the sun in all his glory.
Have not I, the Lord, made all these things V "

Application : — People still forget God — still, practically, deify his gifts, and so plant
them as to hide the Giver of them. The world, our respectable every-day world, not
\mlike Egypt. Health (life, fai?), the river that fertilises it. Circumstances (life, ffios),
the land fertilised. Thougiit, intelligence, wisdom, the sky which seems to canopy and

Srotect both. Deify them and forget the God above them, and God will yet manifest
imself by strange plagues on your divinities. Your river shall be turned into blood,
and your sun into darkness [cf. Tennyson, " Palace of Art."] These things, too — ^health,
happiness, intelligence — ^he will surely show that he and no other has made them alL — G.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB VUL



Vers. 1 — 7. — The second plagtje. After an
iaterval which there are no means of estimating,
^e second plague followed the fiist Again,
while the main purpose of the plague was to
pnnish the nation by which Israel had been so
long oppressed, the secondary object of throw-
ing contempt upon their religion was main-
tained. Frogs were among the Egyptian
cacred animals. One of their deities, Heka,
was a frog-headed goddess ; and they seem to
have regarded the frog as a sacred emblem of
creative power. The great multiplication of
frogs, whereby they became an annoyance and
a curse, was a trial and strain to the entire
Egyptian religious system. The Egyptians
might not kill them ; yet they destroyed all
their comfort, aU their happiness. Their
animal-worship was thus proved absurd and
ridiculous. They were obliged to respect the
creatures which they hated — to preserve the
animals they would fain have swept from the
face of the earth. It is perhaps somewhat
difficult for modern Europeans to imagine the
plague that frogs might be. The peculiar
kind, which has the scientific name of Ratm
Motaica, resembles our toad, and is a disgust-
ing object, which crawls rather than leaps, and
croaks perpetually . To have the whole country
filled with these disgusting reptiles, to be un-
able to walk in the streets without treading
an them, to find them not only occupying



one's doorstep but in possession of one's house,
in one's bed-chamber, and upon one's bed, to
hear their dismal croak perpetually, to se»
nothing but their loathsome forms whither-
soever one looked, to be in perpetual contact
with them and feel the repulsion of their cold,
rough, clammy skin, would bo perhaps «■
severe a punishment as can well be conceived.
Nations are known to have deserted their
homes, and fled to a foreign land to escape
from it. "In Paeouia and Dardania," says
Phoenias. a disciple of Aristotle, " there ap-
peared once suddenly such a number of frogs,
that they fiUed the houses and the streete.
Therefore — as killing them, or shutting th»
doors, was of no avail ; as even the vessels were
full of them, the water infected, and all food un-
eatable ; as they could scarcely set their foot
upon the ground without treading on heaps of
them, and as they were vexed by the smell of
the great numbers which died — ^they fled from
that region altogether" (Eustath. ad Horn. 11.
1. p. 35). In Egypt, the young frogs come
out of the waters in the month of September,
when the inundation is beginning to subside.
Even now they sometimes amount to a severe
visitation.

Ver. 1.— Go unto Pharaoh. The secona
plague IS given simply as a plague, not as a
sign. It is first thieateued (ver. 2), and then
accomplished (ver. 6), an interval being al-
lowed, that Pharaoh might change his mind,
and escape the plague, if he chose.

Ver. 2.— Frogs. The word used for " frog,*



OH, Tin. 1—8.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



lai



viz. M^arda, is thonght to be Egyptian, and
to remain (abbreviated) in tbe modern dufda,
which is in conmion use, and designates the
species known to natuialists as " Bana
Musaica."

Yer. 3. — The river shall bring forth frogs.
Th« frogs dc not often come directly out of
the river. They are bred in the pools and
marshes which the Nile leaves as it is retiring.
These, however, may be viewed as detached
fragments of the river. Thine house . . . thy
bed-chamber . . . thy bed. The extreme
cleanliness of the Egyptians (Herod, ii. 37)
rendered this visitation peculiarly disagreeable
to them. The frogs under ordinary circum-
stances do not think of entering houses. Ovens
it Egypt were probably baking-pans. These
were heated from within by a fire of wood,
which was withdrawn after a time and the



dough attached by pressure to the interior of
the vessels. Eneading-tronghs were vessel*
in which the dough was prepared. Both these
and ovens are represented in the Egyptian
tombs. (See Eosellini, ' Mon. Civ.' pi. 84, 85.)

Ver. 5. — Over the streams . . . rivers . . .
ponds. See the comment on ch. vii. 19.

Ver. 6. — The frogs came np. Literally,
" The frog came up," the word being used to
designate the class or species.

Ver. 7. — The magicians did so . . , and
brought np frogs. Here again, as in their
imitation of the first plague (ch. vii. 22),
sleight of hand may have been the means
employed by the magicians ; or possibly they
may have merely claimed that their enchant-
ments " brought up " frogs, which were in
reality the consequence of Aaron's act (ver. 2).



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 8. — Ood can scourge men heyond endurance with a whip of straw. A frog
■eems an innocent and harmless reptile enough, not pleasing nor attractive, but scarcely
calculated to cause much suflenng. When the Kgyptians made frogs sacred, they had
no notion of one day finding them an intolerable annoyance, But God can make, of the
least of his creatures, a weapon to wound, a whip to scourge men. Minute microscopic
fungi and entozoa destroy crops and wither up the human frame. Huge ships are
utterly ruined by the working of the Teredo navalis. White ants bring down houses.
And so, on this occasion, poor weak frogs made the lives of the Egyptians a burthen to
them. Forced to tread on them as they walked, to feel them crawling upon their
naked feet, to see them covering the floors of their chambers and the soft cushions of
their beds, finding them in their ovens, their kneading-troughs, the culinary and other
vessels, scarcely able to keep them out of their food, always hearing their melancholy
croak; the unfortunate wretches had not a moment's comfort or peace. Constant dropping
wears out a stone. A trivial annoyance becomes intolerable by repetition and persis-
tence. Thus, even the obdurate Pharaoh, who had borne the first plague till God chos«
to remove it without a symptom of yielding, is cowed by the second plague, and " calla
for Moses and Aaron " (ver. 8).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 39. — Three plagues— frogt, lice, flies. On the precise character of these
three plagues, see the exposition. They are to be viewed in their relation to the
Egyptians — 1. As an intensification of the natural plagues of the land. 2. As a proof
of the almightiness of Jehovah (see on ch- vii. 17), and of the folly of further contest
with him (vers. 10, 22). 3. As a demonstration of the vanity of the idols. The
Egyptian gods were utterly powerless to aid their worshippers. There was not the
shadow of help to be derived from them. This was the more remarkable that several of
the gods were worshipped as protectors from the very classes of plagues which were here
brought upon the country. There were fly-gods, to protect against flies, deities to pro-
tect against frogs, etc. AM the defeat of the idols was remarkable from this other fact,
tliat several of the agents employed as scourges of Kgypt were themselves ranked as
deities. This was the case with the river, and with many of the creatures, e.g. the
beetle, probably included under " flies." 4. The removal of the plagues when Pharaoh
showed signs of submission, was a proof of God's mercy, and a token to t1ic nionarch of
his sincerity in his dealings vrith him generally. Taken in connection uitu' i^haraoh'e
behaviour under them, the three plagues read us valuable lessons. They teach —

L Tbk bupbemaoy ov God in the KmaDou of satdbe. AU creatures, all agenciaii



182 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. vin. 1- -39.

are under his control. They come and go, march and countermarch, act in Beparation
or combination, at his pleasure. He sent the hornets before the Israelites to drive out
the Amorites from their strong castles (ch. xxii. 28). He frequently punished Israel by
sending armies of locusts to devour the produce of the fields (Joel i., ii. ; Amos iv.).
Jehov^ was at the head of these armies (Joel ii. 11), and so was he at the head of the
armies of frogs, gnats, flies, and other noxious insects that drove the Egyptians to a
state of desperation. This is a striking thought, in as full accordance with a sound
philosophy and with the facts presented to us in nature, as with the teaching of Christ,
who bids us see the Father's hand even in the fall of a sparrow. What account can be
given, e.g., of the migratory instincts of birds, save that suggested by this thought of
Jehovah's rule, regulating their motions, and guiding them in their long and perilous
journeys (Jer. viii. 7). He rules. He alone rules. " An idol is nothing " (1 Cor. vlii. ■!).
11. The impotence of man in the hands of Jehovah. 1. Qod's entire control of
all things in creation gioes him command of exhaustless resources for the punishment of
his enemies. When the river was healed at the end of seven days, Pharaoh may have
thought that his trouble had blown past — that the plagues were at an end. But lo ! a
new plague is brought upon him, of which he had never dreamed, a plague of " frogs,"
also from the river. Then in swift successive strokes came the plagues of gnats, of
mixed insects, of murrain of beasts, of boils, etc., each breaking out from some new and
totally unexpected quarter. If ever the Egyptians thought, Surely the arrows in the
quiver of this mighty god are at length all spent, they were speedily undeceived by the
breaking forth upon them of some fresh plague. The Almighty's quiver is not thus
easily exhausted. There is at every stage in his chastisements an infinite reserve of
power to chastise us further, and in new forms. 2. Natural agents are afregnent means
by which God chastises the rebellious. It is really a truer philosophy which sees God
behind all action of natural force, and all movements of the irrational creatures, than
that which sees only second causes, only laws and instincts, and refuses to recognise the
Supreme ( )rderer in their movements and combinations. There need be no scruple in
acknowledging second causes, or even, in a sense, a reign oi unvarying law ; but the
" laws " of nature are one thing, and the " course " of nature another, and this latter the
Theist believes to be no more of chance than the former, while the Christian is taught
to toace a Divine purpose and end in its minutest ramifications. Hail, snow, fire, and
rapour ; stormy wind ; rain and thunder ; insect and reptile life ; plague and famine ;
disease in its myriad forms — all are weapons in the hands of God by which he can fulfil
his righteous will to punish. 3. The minutest forms of life are used hy God as his
sorest scourges. Thomas Scott acutely remarks that the plagues would have been easier
to bear, and would not have been felt to be so humiliating, had the agents in them been
lions and tigers, or other animals of the nobler sort ; or perhaps foreign enemies. 'J here
would at least have been dignity in succumbing to the attacks of hordes of powerful
foes. But how intolerably humiliating to be conquered by shoals of frogs or by insignifi-
cant and contemptible creatures like lice and flies ! Yet Pharaoh could more easily
have contended with the former classes of enemies than vidth these latter. One army
can charge another with at least some chance of success ; and protection is possible
against enemies that are of a size which admits of their being shot, hunted, trapped, or
kept out by walls and defences ; but nothing of this kind is possible with the minuter
creatures. It was impossible to erect defences against locusts ; and to this hour, man
is helpless against their ravages. A stray Colorado beetle may be put to death ; but
if that form of life were developed to but a small extent among us, it would be
impossible to shield oxnselves effectually from its destructive operations. Numbers
of diseases have now been traced to the presence of germs in the atmosphere and in our
food and drink, and it is the very minuteness of these germs — their microscopic and
infinitesimal character — which makes them so deadly and so difficult to cope with.
When the potato disease appeared in 1846, nothing could be done to check its spread,
and little can be done yet to guard against its assaults ! The fungus is of a kind which
eludes our efforts to deal with it. Plague and pestilence (Plague of London, Black
Death, Cholera, etc.), while depending to a very large extent on material condition*
for their development, yet seem connected in their origin with similar organic germs.
In tlus whole wide region, accordingly, God has under his control potent invisible
ligencieB, which ordinarily his providence keeps in check, but which at any hour might



CH. vin. 1— 39.] THE BOOK OF EXoDUS. 183

be converted into most terrific scourges. He has at command a literally exhaustlesg
array of weapons with which to assail us, if we provoke his chastiseinents ; armies
countless in numbers, invisible in form, unseen in their modes of attack, and against
which no weapons can be forged likely to secure safety. As knowledge advances,
means are discovered for partially protecting ourselves against this or that disorder
(sanitary science, vaccination, etc.); but just as, perhaps, we are beginning to think
with the Egyptians that the evil day is past, some new plague develops itself (e.g. the
potato murrain) of which formerly we had no conception. We are still in God's hands
and as helpless as ever. The "last days" will probably be marked by a singular
intensification of natural plagues (Luke xxi. 25 ; Kev. xvi. 1 — 12).

III. The possibilities or ebsistancb to God that lib in human nature. It
might have been judged Impossible that, after being convinced, as Pharaoh at an early
Btage in these proceedings must have been, of the reality and power of the Being with
whom he was contending — that he was indeed Jehovah, the God of the whole earth —
the monarch should still have persevered in his mad resistance, 'i'wioe, in the course di
this chapter, he is brought to the point of acknowledging the futility of further opposi-
tion ; yet, immediately on the pla.;ue being removed, he reverts to the pohcy of non-
submission. He must have known that he had nothina; to gain by it. If he was
infatuated enough at first to think that the Almighty, having removed one plague, could
not, or would not, send another, he must have been speedily disabused of that impres-
sion. It was no longer a question of self-interest with him, for the loss and pain
caused by these successive plagues more than counterbalanced any gain he could hope to
derive from the retention of the Israelites. Neither had he on his side, in opposition to
this command of the Hebrews' God, the least shadow of right or reason, with which to
sustain himself. Yet without one conceivable motive save that furnished by his own
pride and obstinacy, and by hatred of the Being who was thus coercing him, Pharaoh
continued to resist. Conquered for the moment, he returned to his defiant attitude the
instant pressure was removed. And this defiant attitude he maintained, with increasing
hardness of heart till the very end. Here then we see the possibility of a being finally
resisting grace. It appals us to think of the possibilities of resistance to the
Almighty thus lying in the constitution of our wills, but the fact is not to be ignored.
It is a proof of our original greatness. It reveals to us our immortality. It shows ug
the possibility of a final loss of the soul. If it be thought that Gospel influences are
certain to accomplish that which could not be expected by terrors and judgments, and
that changes may be wrought in eternity, which cannot be wrought in time, we have to
remember that an even worse hardening is possible under the dispensation of the Son
and Spirit than was possible to Pharaoh, and that human nature in the future state is
essentially the same as human nature now. No good reason can be shown why a will
which resists all that God can do to subdue it here may not from the same motives
resist all gracious influences brought to bear on it hereafter. No one, at least,
looking to the possibilities of resistance manifested on earth, could guarantee that it
will not do so. The tendency to a fixed state of the will in evil as in good, renders the
possibility of an ultimate recovery of those who habitually resist light here extremely
problematical, even on the grounds of philosophy. If we turn to Scripture, it is difficult
to see what warrant we have to expect it. The dream of a future dispensation of grace,
and of universal restoration, must find support,, somewhere else than in its statements.
If we accept the plain teaching of Christ and the Apostles, there are those who will
finally resist, and their number will not be few. The gift of will is a great, but it is
also an infinitely perilous one. Even Dr. Farrar says, " I cannot tell whether some
souls may not resist God for ever, and therefore may not be for ever shut out fi:om his
presence " {Mercy and Jvdgment, p. 485).

IV. God's kbadiness to be bntkeated of the sinner. Though Pharaoh had
hardened himself so obstinately, yet, on the first signs of his relenting, mercy was shown
to him (ver. 9). There was on God's part, even a hastening to he gracious. Pharaoh
was taken at his word. He was trusted. No guarantees were taken from him that ho
would fulfil his word, save his simple promise. God might have delayed the removal of
the plague till the actual order for Israel's departure from the land had been given.
But the plague was removed at once, that Pharaoh might be left to his freedom, and
that his heart might be won ^ the exhibition of the divine goodness to him. And thia



18« THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. viu. 1—16.



was done, not merely on the first, but on the second occasion of his entreaty, and aft«
his first promise had been broken (ver. 29). So willing is God to do the sinoer every
justice, and to grant him every opportunity, which may result in his salvation. He
does not wait for complete conversion, but welcomes in man the first signs of a disposi-
tion to return to Him. He is as plenteous in mercy as He is severe in judgment, il
mercy is de.-pised.

V. The effect of continued impenitence in pkoducino inceeased hardness
OF heabt. It is obvious from this chapter that Pharaoh was making rapid progress in
hardening himself. Groing back a stage or two, we can trace that progress in very
marked degrees. We find him hardening himself — 1. Against a miracle which was
plainly from God, but which he tried to persuade himself was only a work of magic —
the conversion of the rod into a serpent. 2. Against a miracle which he knew to be
from God, but against the influence of which his obstinacy enabled him to hold out —
the turning of the Nile into blood. 3. Against a miracle which he not only knew to
be from God, but which convinced him of the hopelessness of further resistance, and
which was removed from him at his own request — the plague of frogs. 4. Against
his own promise to release the Israelites. 5. Against a miracle which even his
wagicians failed to imitate, and declared to be the finger of God, (ver. 19) — ^the plague
of lice. Having broken his promise, Pharaoh now felt, probably, that he must brave it
out. 6. Against a miracle which showed yet more distinctly that the work was God's
by the difierence which was put between the Egyptians and the Israelites dwelling in
Goshen — the plague of flies (vers. 22, 23). This seems to have produced a powerful
impression upon the king, and he again besought the removal of the plague. 7. Against
a second solemn promise, and after being expressly warned against deceitful dealing
(ver. 29). As the result of all, Pharaoh was acquiring facility in hardening himself,
was rapidly losing his susceptibility to truth, was becoming infatuated in his obstinacy,
and was strengthening his wiU in the hMt of resistance. Thus fatally does hardening
make progress ! — J. O.

Vers. 1 — 16. — The plague of frogs. Observe on this plague, in addition to what has
been said above.

I. Phaeaoh's hardness under the first plague vtrought no escape, either
FROM the DrviNB COMMAND OR FROM THE DIVINE POWER (ver. 1). He probably
thought, now that the river was healed, that he had done with Jehovah's demand,
and perhaps congratulated himself that he had succeeded in holding out. But divine
commands are not thus to be got rid of. They are not to be got rid of by resistance.
They are not to be got rid of even by braving out the penalty. They come back and
back to us, and always with the old alternative, obey, or incur new punishment. Our
most furious opposition cannot rid us of the obligation of rendering to Jesus in the Gospel
" the obedience of faith," nor shall we escape judgment if we refuse.

II. The second plague induced a submission which the first failed to
EXTORT (ver. 8). It was submission under compulsion, but it testified to a remarkable
change in the king's views about Moses and Jehovah. It was not long since he had
been erecting himself in his pride in supreme defiance of both. Moses and Aaron he
had treated as base-born slaves, and had ordered them back to their burdens (ch. v. 4).
He had scorned the message of their God, and had shown his contempt for it by heaping
new insults on Jehovah's worshippers. So impressed was even Moses by his lordly
greatness, that he had shrimk from exposing himself to the proud king's despite. He
thought it was useless for him to attempt to go to Pharaoh. Very different were
Pharaoh's ideas about Moses and Jehovah now he had been smitten by the invioiUe
hand of this God with these two reeling blows, and already he was on bis knees asking for
deliverance. The vaunting sinner will change his views of the living God when once
he fidls into His hands.

IIL The second plague reversed the relations of Moses and Phabaoh, making
Phabaoh thb suitor, and Moses the person sued to (ver. 8). What a humilia-
tion to this haughty monarch 1 How much better for himself had he yielded at first, and
with a good grace, to the righteous demand made upon him I Nothing is gained by
resistance to God, but ultimate ptun and humiliation. As Pharaoh was humbled, m
Moses was exalted. He began to be " a god " to Pharaoh. Like reveisals of th«



OH. vm. 1 -1S.J THE BOOK OF EXODUS. IM

positions of the great ones of the world and despised servants of God have frequently
been witnessed. Compare Paul and Felix (Acts xxiv. '/5) ; Paul and the centurion, in
the shipwreck at Malta (Acts xxviii.).

IV. The second plague raised Moses to new honoubb by makiko his inteb-
CESSION THE MEDIUM ov DELivEKANCB (vers. 9 — 12). Gud 7niyht have removed the
plague at Pharaoh's simple request, conveyed to him by Moses. In point of fact, be
made the intercession of Moses the condition and medium of it. The same thing is teen
in the history of Elijah (1 Kings xviii. 41 — 46). This, 1. Put honour upon Moses.
2. Taught the value of " the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man " (Gen . xviii.
23 — 33; Jas. i. 15 — 18). 3. Gave Moses himself a deeper interest in the event.
4. Trained him for the higher function of mediation on behalf of Israel. It would
give him confidence in intercession, would enable him to realise the reality of hiS power
with God, would help in developing the faculty of earnest and sustained prayer. 5. It
shadowed forth the higher mediation. Pharaoh was so abandoned in evil, so insincere
even in his repentance, that his request, as it were, could only become prevailing when
taken up by a holier nature and presented as its own. This is the key to all spiritual
intercession, and involves the principle which reaches its full expression in the mediation
of our Saviour.

V. The removal op the plague resulted in Pharaoh'b brbakino op his
PROMISE, AND IN HIS FURTHER HARDENING. The severity of the plague had for the
moment unmanned him. His power of further resistance had broken down. But the
will to resist was not in the least altered, and when the plague was removed, his
obstinate disposition reasserted itself, and produced new rebellion. Kage and pride
must at this crisis have overpowered reason, as well as con.science, for Pharaoh could
hardly doubt but that his breach of promise would bring new trouble upon him. He
did, however, return to his contumacy, and by the act cut down another of the bridges
which might have conducted him back to peace with God, and to safety and honom' in
his kingdom. Terror of any kind, the approach, perhaps, of death, or of what seems to
threaten death, often produces quakings of soul, and transient repentances. If these are
not followed up on recovery — if recovery or escape is granted — they react to induce a
very special hardening. A heart seldom gets the better of vows made in a season of
deep sorrow, and afterwards, with the return of health and prosperity, renounced.

V(. Minor lessons. 1. God's visitations are not vague and general. They will find
us out in every sphere and department of our lives. His stroke will be felt in everything
(vers. 3, 4). 2. The power of God's servants (vers. 5, 6 : 12, 13). The stretching out
of the rod brought, frpgs on Egypt. The intercession of Moses removed them. The
prayers of a good man are both to be feared and to be desired. Feared, if they are
against us ; desired, if they are for us. It is lawful to pray, not for the ruin of our
enemies' souls, but for the discomfiture of their projects, and the overthrow of their un-
godly schemes (Rev. xi. 5, 6). 3. The duty of courtesy, and of returning good for evil
(vers. 9, 10). Moses, at the very time of his triumph over Pharaoh, treated him with
studious respect, and was ready to pray, at his request, for the removal of the plague.
4. The power of life and death as vested in God (vers. 13, 14). 5. Man's abuse nf
God's kindness (yer. 15). A respite granted ; there/ore Pharaoh hardened himself (cf.
Horn. ii. 4).-^. 0.

Vers. 1 — 15. The second plague : the frogs. In intimating the first plague, Moses
made no formal demand upon Phairaoh to liberate Israel, though of course the demand
was really contained in the intimation. But now as the second plague approaches, the
formal demand once again is heard. Pharaoh is left for no long time without a distinct
appeal which he must face either with consent or refusal. And so now Moses addresses
him in the same words as on his first visit : " Let my people go." It is a challenge to
the man who holds by violence and brute force that which is not his own. It is not a
mere combat between potentate and potentate. " That they may serve me," — awful is
the wickedness of hindering Qod's people from serving him.

I. Notice the characteristics of this second plague. Hitherto there has been
•omething evidently sublime in God's treatment of Pharaoh. God's treatment is of
eotirse always sublime ; but up to this point even I'haraoh must have felt that he was
being traated as a king ought to be treated. The messengers of .Jehovan were only



iB6 THE BOOK OF EXODOB. [cH. vm. 8— IS,

mean mea in appearance, but the first plague itself -was certainly an impressive one.
We may imagine tiiat Piiaraoh would even say to himself with a sort of proud satisfac-
tion, " How great my power must be when aU the waters of my land are turned to
blood in order to coerce me." He would feel flattered by what we may call the dignity
of the attack upon him. But now observe how God changes his mode of working, and
proceeds to use little things to humiliate Pharaoh. As he uses those who are reckoned the
feeble and contemptible among men, so he uses the feeble and contemptible among th»
lower creation. He sends out frogs all over the land of Egypt. If only it had been
an incursion of lions from the desert, roaring through the streets of the city and tearing
down the people, or if it had been a host of mighty beasts trampling down his fields,
then Pharaoh would have felt there was dignity in such a mode of attack ; — ^but frogs !
frogs followed by gnats, and gnats by flies 1 A plague to be made out of frogs seems
almost too absurd to think of; and yet we see from the event that these despised littlo
creatures forced Pharaoh to an appeal which not all the evident Fablimity of the first
plague could extort. More curses could come out of the river thai the conversion of it
into blood. This plague of the frogs we may judge to have been felt as inconvenient
and irritating rather than dangerous. How ridiculous it must have been to
have these agile little animals, millions of them, finding their way everywhere. No-
place safe from them, not even the well-guarded chambers of Pharaoh himself. Here
was a plague that did not wait for the people to make acquaintance with it, as when
they went to the streams and pools and found them blood. Jt forced itself upon them
by day and by night, as they sat at their meals and as they lay in their beds. Tho
thing that is constantly inconvenient and troublesome, may bring a man to his knees
sooner even than a peril which more closely concerns his life.

II. Thus we come to observe Pharaoh's first sign op yielding. Notice that
as to what will actuidly have power to produce a certain result, Ood is a fair better judge
than we can he. We should have said, " put the frogs first and the blood afterwards ;
Pharaoh wiU yield to the blood what he will not yield to the frogs." But when it
comes to a trial, it is quite the contrary. The frogs are so tormenting that they
must be got rid of, even at a cost of a humiliating promise. Not even the success of
the magicians in bringing up frogs, makes the torment more endurable ; and so,
perhaps somewhat to the astonishment of Moses, who might hardly expect such a
sudden change, Pharaoh makes a promise in the most general terms to let the people
forth for sacrifice. But mark, the moment Moses begins to press him and fix for a
day, he procrastinates. The moment there is any relaxation of pressure upon him,
he takes advantage of it. Already he begins to show that he will yield as little as
he can. Give him a chance of fixing his time, and he naturally says " to-morrow."
Unpleasant things are always put off until to-morrow, either on a supposition that the
unpleasantness may be diminished, or on a chance that it may be escaped altogether.
And then when to-morrow comes, " to-morrow " is again the cry. Notice that Moset
complies with PharaoKs wish for this slight delay. One day is nothing so far as 1 srael
is concerned. They can easily wait, if only the granting of this one day will make
Pharaoh's yielding more agreeable to himself. God never humiliates for the sake of
humiliating. He chooses the humiliation of his enemies — as when he sends a plague of
frogs, — because it is the most effectual means to his own ends. But the moment there
is a profession of repentance, the humiliation stops, and opportunity is given to mak«
the profession a reality. — Y.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 8 — 15. — How long the plague of frogs
endured, we are not told. Probably every
fffort was made, short of intentionally killing
them, to get rid of them. Snakes, and chame-
leons, and ibises would destroy many — others
would be crashed beneath wheels, trampled on



of doors, unintentionally killed by men. But
the vacancies made were constantly iilled;
and there seemed no prospect of the infliction
passing away. The influence of his counsel-
lors would under these circumstances be
brought to bear upon the mind of the Pharaoh'



by animals, squeezed to death by the opening — ^he would be warned that his subjects were



OH. vm. 8— IS.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



181



attribnting their sufferings to his obstinacy

he would be reconunended— perhaps pressed —
to yield, and would find in the annoyance
which he individually endured a strong motive
for compliance. Accordingly, he after a while
sent for the two Israelite chiefs, and made the
request recorded in the text.

Ver. 8.— Intreat the lord— f.e., "Intreat
your God, Jehovah, who has sent this plague,
And can doubtless take it away." An acknow-
ledgment of Jehovah's power is now for the
first time forced from the reluctant king, who
has hitherto boasted that "he knew not
Jehovah " (ch. v. 2). I will let the people go.
The royal word is passed. A positive promise
is made. If the Pharaoh does not keep his
word, he will outrage even Egyptian morality
—he will be without excuse.

Ver. 9. — Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory
over me. Probably a phrase of ordinary cour-
tesy, meaning — " I submit to thy will — have
the honour of my submission." When shall I
intreat 1 Literally "For when" — i.e., "for
what date shall I make my prayer to God ? "
And so Pharaoh's answer is not " To-morrow,''
as in the Authorised Version, but " For to-
morrow." Thy houses. It would seem that
the frogs had invaded more than one palace of
the Pharaoh. He had perhaps quitted Tanis,
and gone to Memphis, when the plague came ;
but the frogs pursued him there.

Ver. 10. — ^To-morrow. See the comment on
ver. 9. That thou mayest know. Moses
accepts the date fixed by the Pharaoh, and
makes an appeal to him to recognise the «n-
approaehaUa power and glory of Jehovah, if



the event corresponds with the time agreed
upon.
Ver. 12. — Moses oried unto the lord. The

expression used is a strong one, and seems to
imply special earnestness in the prayer. Moses
had ventured to fix a definite time for the
removal of the plague, without (so far as
appears) any special command of God. Hence
earnest prayer (as Kalisch notes) was doubly
necessary. (Compare 1 Kings xviii. 36, 37.)

Ver. 13.— The viUages. The translation
"courts" or "court-yards," is preferred by
some. Houses in Egypt had generally a
court-yard attached to them.

Ver. 14.— They gathered them together
upon heaps. Literally " heaps upon heaps."
And the laud stank. Even when the reliel
came, it was not entire relief. The putrefac-
tion of the dead bodies filled the whole land
with a fetid odour.

Ver. 15. — When Pharaoh saw that thero
was respite. Literally, " a taking of breath,"
».e., "a breathing-space." He hardened his
heart. He became hard and merciless once
more, believing that the danger was past, and
not expecting any fresh visitation. As
Isaiah says — "Let favour be shewed to the
wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness "
(xxvi. 10). Bad men " despise the riches of
God's goodness and forbearance, and long-
suffering, not knowing that the goodness of
God leadeth them to repentance." In this
way, they " treasure up to themselves wrath
against the day of wrath and revelation of the
righteous judgment of God " (Rom. ii. 4, 5),
either in this world or in the world to come.
As the Lord had said. See di. iii. 19 ; iv. 21 ;
vii. 4.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 8 — 13. — GocCs mercy when men repent ever so little. The object of the judg-
ments, as well as of the goodness of God is " to lead men to repentance " (Rom. ii. 4).
He "wouldeth not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and
live " (Ezek. xxxiii. 11). His cry is ever, " Why will ye die, house of Israel ? " And
sometimes His judgments have their proper effect on men, partially at any rate. Ahab
repented to some extent when woe was denounced upon his house by Elijah — he " rent
his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went
Boftly " (1 Kings xxi. 27). The Ninevites " repented at tie preaching of Jonah " — the
king "proclaimed afast," and ''rose from his throne, and put his robe from him, and
covered him with sackcloth, and lay in ashes" — the people moreover, " put on sackcloth
from the greatest to the least of them " (Jon. iii. 5 — 7). And so Pharaoh seems to have
repented, in a certain sense, at this time. He abated his pride, and came down from the
high position which he had assumed, sent for Ood's ministers, begged their prayers, and
promised compliance with the Divine commands. Probably he was not conscious to
himself of insincerity. His spirit was humbled — ^he was convinced of the power of
Jehovah — ^he believed in the Divine mission of Moses and Aaron— he promised, intend-
ing to Perform ; and God, though knowing well how short-lived his repentance would be,
inhered himself to be intreated, took away His heavy hand, and gave to Pharaoh, as H«
gave to Ahab and to the Ninevites, " a breathing space." We see by this, that such is
the mercy of God, such His love for sinners who are not yet wholly hardened, that E»



18B



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. vm. 16— IS.



looks with favour on the highest relenting, the least indication of a desire to turn away
from sin, forsake it, and tui-n to righteousness. And this divine pattern must be followed
by His ministers. They must not assume that any professed repentance is insincere.
They may have their own private belief, as Moses doubtless had ; but it is their business
to welcome the first show of penitence ; to come when the sinner asks their aid, to give
him the benefit of their prayers, to seek to obtain for him a remission or alleviation ol
God's judgments. And further, they will do well to imitate the humility and courtesy
of Moses. " A proud look and high stomach " on their part are imsuitable when the
sinner abases himself. It is their duty, and their highest wisdom, to be " all things to
•11 men" — to meet repentance half-way — to assist it, forward it, encourage it. No
doubt, repentance under the pressm-e of judgment — such, e.g., as sickness — is in itself
suspicious and doubtful ; but the wise minister will keep his doubts to himself, and bend
his whole mind to the fixing, furthering, and deepening of the repentance, so that (if
possible) it may isBue in a real conversion of the soul to God.

Ver. 15. — DouihJe-minded men, unstaWe in all their ways. An Egyptian king WM
not likely, unless exceptionally gifted by nature, to be firm, fixed, and stable in his con-
duqt. Flattered and indulged from infancy, no sooner did he obtain the crown, than he
found himself recognised as a divinity by the great mass of his subjects, and regarded as
one who " could do no wrong." Occasionally, he may have been so fortunate as to fall
under the influence of a wise counsellor, but in general he would have been surrounded
by advisers only anxious to please by echoing to him his own wishes and ideas. This
Pharaoh — whether he was Menephthah, or any one else — ^was evidently a weak,
impulsive, double-minded monarch. He wavered between good and bad impulses, now
inclining one way, now another. He was sure therefore to be unstable in his ways.
Similar, though (it may be) less pronounced, instability attaches to all those whose
souls are not anchored upon the firm and imchangeable basis of fixed principles. It is
fatal to the consistency of a career that a man should be double-minded. No man can
serve God and Mammon. There is no fellowship between light and darkness, or between
Christ and Belial. A man should make his choice, and not " halt between two
opinions." If Jehovah be God, follow Him ; but if Baal, then follow him. Shifting,
unstable, uncertain, variable souls earn universal contempt, and are powerless to effect
•nything but their own ruin.

EXPOSITION.



Yen. IS— 19.— The TmitD Plague. The
breach of promise on the part of Pliaraoh
(ver. 15), was punished by the third plague,
which was inflicted without being announced.
It is disputed among the best critics whether
the plague was really one of " lice " (as given
in the Authorised Version) or of mosquitoes
To the present writer the arguments in favour
•f mosquitoes seem to preponderate ; and he
believes the kinnim to represent those subtle
pests. Such is the view of the LXZ. trans-
lators, of Philo, Artapanus, Origen, Bosen-
miiller, Gesenius, Geddes, Boothroyd, Keil,
and Kalisch. Mosquitoes are, under ordinary
eircomstances, a terrible annoyance in Egypt,
when the inundation is going off, especially
•boat October. Their power to annoy is
witnessed to in ancient times by Herodotus
(ii. 95), Philo (Vit. Mot. ii. p. 97), and
St. Augustine j fa modem by Wilkinson and
others. That Aaron was ordered to produce



them out of "the dust of the land,* whereu
mosquitoes come from larva deposited m
stagnant waters (Cook), is only a proof that
Grod can transform any kind of matter into
any other. He who made man of the dust vt
the ground (Gen. ii. 7) could with still greater
ease have transformed that dust into gnats.
It is undoubtedly remarkable that the magi-
cians coold not produce the hinnim ; but this
disability does not help us to deteimine what
exactly the kinnim were. Conceivably, the
magicians were tired of the contest, and feeling-
that they would ultimately be worsted fa it,
withdrew before the eircomstances compelled
them to withdraw.

Ver. 16.— Lloe. Kinnim^-Vke word is only
found here and fa the Psalms which celebrate
the Exodus (Ps. Ixzviii. 46 ; cv. 81 It was
nnderstood as "Uce" by Josephus, the Tal->
mudical writers, Bochart, Pool, and out trans*
Istors fa the reign of James I. But the great



OH. vm, 16—19.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



189



' weight of authority is in favour of the render-
• ing " gnats " or " mosquitoes." See the pre-
ceding paragiaph. It must also be borne in
mind that the nearest Egyptian equivalent,
hhennema, has the signification of " mosquito "
(Speaker's Commentary, vol. i. p. 490).

Ver. 17. — And in beast. Kafisch notes that
mosquitoes " molest especially beasts, as oxen
and horses, flying into their eyes and nostrils,
driving them to madness and fury, and some-
times even torturing them to death." He
quotes Theodoret, Mist. Eceles. viii. 26.

Ver. 18. — The magicians did so with their
enchantments. The magicians stretched out
their rods over certain collections of dust, but
no gnats were produced ; which would be the
natural result, if they had made no secret
arrangements. No reason can be assigned
why they should not have seemed to produce
gnats, as easily as frogs, if they had employed
all the arts of which they were masters in so
doing. But events had convinced them that
they could not cope with Moses and Aaron ;
and it would seem that they therefore declined
further contest



Ver. 19. — The magicians said ant«
Pharaoh, This is the finger of God. Ot
"of a God." It is not probable that ths
magicians believed in a single God, or intended
in what they said to express any monotheistic
idea. All that they meant to say was — " This
is beyond the power of man — it is supernatural
—some god must be helping the Israelites"
No doubt they had come to l£is cdnclusibn by
a careful scrutiny of all the miracles hitherto
wrought by Aaron. He hearkened not unto
them. The magicians were minded to resist
no longer ; but Pharaoh was otherwise minded.
It is quite possible that the mosquito plague
did not greatly annoy him. He would proba-
bly possess lofty apartments above the height
to which the mosquito ascends (Herod, ii. 95) ;
or he may have guarded himself by mosquito
curtains of the finest Egyptian muslin. His
subjects would naturally suffer from such a
plague far more than he. As the Lord had
said. See the comment on the same phrase in
ver. 11



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 19. — Moral avalanches not easily arrested when once set in motion. The
'magicians had begun by exciting Pharaoh to obstinate unbelief and resistance to the
Divine Will. They had, by artifice or otherwise, persuaded him that there was nothing
so very marvellous in the wonders wrought by Moses and Aaron, nothing that indicated a
Divine author of the wonders. They had thus encouraged and stimulatSi him to embark
upon a fatal course. Now, they would fain have stopped him, but they could not. His
pdde and self-conceit — ^his honour, as no doubt he thought it, were concerned in the
Btluggle upon which he had entered — to give way would be to acknowledge himself
worsted in a contest with two contemptible Hebrews. In vain did the magicians change
their tone, and make the acknowledgment — " This is the finger of God " — their altered
spirit had no efi'eet upon him. No — whoever changed or blenched — ^he would persevere
—his heart had become hardened — if now and then he quailed, and seemed on the verge
of yielding, yet after a time he drew back — always provoking God more and more by
Jiis continual perverseness, until at last all Egypt was involved in destruction (ch. xii.
29, 30 ; xiv. 27-30). Tlie magicians, who had had a large share in causing his entrance
upon an evil course, found themselves unable to arrest his steps, and must be regarded
as in part responsiljle for the final catastrophe. So nations are often urged by evil
counsellors into wars or rebellions, which they soon bitterly regret ; but it is too late to
'Stop the evil. Men in business are recommended to adopt questionable means of
pushing or retrieving their fortunes, and embark on courses from which their advisers
would fain withdraw them ; but it is impossible. Advisers should recognise the great-
' ness of their responsibility from the first, and set themselves against the very beginning
of evil, else they will find the course of affairs soon get beyond their control — they
will be utterly powerless to stop the avalanche which they have set in motion.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 16 — 19. — Tlie plague of lice. The precise nature of the visitation is matter <rf
dispute. The word "Kinnim" seems to include various kinds of poisonous flies and
insects (Geikie ; and see Exposition). Some take it to denote mosquitoes. The plagiw
stands at any rate in immediate relation to the natural troubles of the country. Travel-
leis tell how, as the Kile waters spread over the surface of the land, and moistem its ia§



190 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. vm IC— 19.

dust, gnats and flies burst from their pupas, and spring into perfect existence. They
" vivify instantaneously on the dust absorbing moisture enough to discolour it. As the
flood advances slowly onwards, a black line of moving insects on the extreme verge
moves with it " (Osbum). There is a terrible " tick " described by Sir Samuel Baker,
which Uves in hot sand and dust, and preys on the blood of animals. " From the size
of a grain of sand, in its natural state, it swells to the size of a hazel nut," and is " the
greatest enemy to man and beast." Here, then, was a new horror, the intolerableness of
the plague being increased by the insignificance of the enemy, and the hopelessness of
fighting it down. Note —

I. This plague came from the land, as the two foembb fbom the river.
Aaron " smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice (Kinnhn) in man, and in beast "
{ver. 17). This was a new blow at Egyptian idolatry, the earth being worshipped as
well as the river. The suddenness, extent, and fearfully aggravated character of the
plague, and its appearance in immediate connection with Aaron's act in smiting the
earth, proved it to be of supernatural origin, while cognate with the phenomena of the
country. 1. At the stroke of God's anger, trouble may be made to break forth upon
us from any quarter of our existence. Now, the river ; again, the dust. The quarter
it comes from is not likely to uO that from which we are expecting it. 2. Troubles
spring not from the dust (Job v. 6) ; but they may be made to rise so thickly around us
that it may almost seem as if they did spring from it. 3. The most insignificant
agencies (and circumstances) may be made the means of severe retribution, it ia
intensely painful to be made to suffer through things which we despise. 4. God's
retributions are often such as strike home to our tenderest points. The Egyptians —
especially the priestly classes — were extremely cleanly, and tins plague, if it was one of
vermin, must have been a grievous infliction to them.

II. The third plague came unannounced. We forfeit our claim to warnings by
acting presumptuously (Prov. xxix. 1).

III. It led the MA(iiciANs TO GIVE UP THE CONTEST (ver. 19). We find them
still standing before Pliaraoh (ch. ix. 11), but from this point we hear of no more
attempts at imitation. They may have abandoned the contest — 1. h'rom a sense of
thame. The paltriness of their attempts at imitating the miracles of Moses and Aaron
was so apparent, that the magicians must almost have blushed at them. They would
rather give up the attempt than expose themselves to more humiliations. 2. From
astonishment. As experts in magical arts, they knew very weU. the difierence between
false miracles and real ones. They are confounded to find men who can work wonders
of so stupendous a character, and this, manifestly, by the real assistance of Deity.
3. From fear and pain. They had no interest in courting a continuance of these
terrible plagues, which they recognised as true works of God. They were as painful to
them as to others, and they dreaded the consequences of perseverance in so unequal a
conflict. We see from this (1) That involuntary testimony to the truth is often
extracted from those whose inclinations would lead them to oppose it. There are
remarkable examples in the hfe of Christ, e.g. " Then gathered the chief priests and the
Pharisees a council, and said, What do weV for this man doeth many miracles. If we
let him thus alone, all men wiU believe on him," etc. (John xi. 47, 48) ; and in the lives
of the Apostles, e.g. Acts iv. 16 ; xvi. 17. The confessions of the demons in Christ's
history are of the same order. Many testimonies of an extraordinary kind have come
from unbelievers. (2) That there are great differences in degree of moral hardihood.
Pharaoh held out, but the magicians gave in. They were not converted to the truth, in
the sense of becoming servants of Jehovah, but they thought it prudent not to go further
in open opposition. Even this degree of submission saved them from being hardened as
Pharaoh was subsequently.

IV. The plague had no good effect on Pharaoh (ver. 19). In itself, it was aa
likely to have produced submission as the previous one, and Pharaoh had now, in addition,
the testimony of his own magicians to the reality of the wonder. But to place against
this, there was the fact that he had already submitted, and had broken his promise. It
was doubly hard to submit again, and stronger means would be required to bring him to
the point of a second entreaty. Thus do the influences that work for our good 'Gradually
lose their power over us, because so frequently resisted. Every time a vcw is made vaA
broken, a good resolution formed, and not kept, it is renderea naraer to repeat the act. J. O,



oA. Tm. 16— 19.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. Ifl

Vers. 16 — 19. — The third plague — the gnats ; the finger of Ood. I. Considbb jm
PLAQUE ITSELF. From the water God comes to the land. He who has power over erery
drop of water has power over every grain of dust. Everywhere at his touch the inorganio
becomes the organic. And he still keeps in the same line of action which has been begun
with the frogs. He produces small creatures in immense numbers, rather than larger
creatures in fewer numbers ; that thus he may the more irritate and humiliate Pharaoh.
Individually, the gnats are nothing ; their delicate little bodies may be crushed out of
existence betT^sen thumb and finger. Collectively, they amount to the dimensions of s
plague.

II. Considbb the vebdiot op the magicians upon this plaque. The noticeabla
thing in the plague of the gnats is not so much the new agents of chastisement
as the discomfiture of the magicians. Not that they had been really successful before.
Ou any view of their proceedings they were deceivers, for what they did was done either
by trickery or by the power of God working through them ; whereas they took it all to
their own credit and the credit of Egypt's deities. This was not success. No man can
be called successful when he has the daily fear that his resources are coming to an end.
Much that is reckoned success is only failure after all, ingeniously and impudently
delayed. The verdict of the magician! was worthless so far as it seemed to indicate the
real state of affairs. They say, " This is the finger of God," but we see only too clearly
the motive of their admission. When an admission is extorted, as theirs was, it is
deprived of all virtue and grace. That the magicians talked of the finger of God was no
proof that the finger of God was present. They talked thus because they had no other
way of cloaking their own shame, and accounting for their failure. The finger of God
was not more evident in the gnats than in the frogs or in the bloody streams, or in the
converted rod. He who could really see the finger of God in one of these, could see it in
«ill the rest. That finger had been pointing all the time just as it pointed now. It was
a question of hand rather than finger ; and the hand was certainly pressing more heavily.
Still, though the magicians took up this way of speaking merely for excuse, we have to
thank them for an expressive and appropriate phrase. They, in their blind selfishness,
Bpeak of the finger pf God, not knowing all they say ; but the finger of God is a great
and helpful reality to those who will look for it and be guided by it. It should ever be
our business to look for this great finger. In a world of weathercocks, blown about with
changing and conflicting opinions, that finger ever points in one direction ; and yet while
it teaches us to maintain a rigorous adhesion to Christian principles, teaches us at
the same time to maintain them in a spirit of wise expediency. He has no true eye for
the finger of God who knows not when to bend that he may not break. I'haraoh would
not recognise the finger even when his own magicians were compelled to make a show of
recognition. When they were defeated he seemed to think they were no longer of any
account among his advisers. Thus we have to notice again what poor judges we are of
the relative severity of the plagues. Pharaoh was more affected by the frogs than by the
goats. Perhaps he was so disgusted with the failure of the magicians as to be filled with
a more rebellious spirit than ever. They said they saw the finger of God ; he stubbornly
refused to see it. Whether a man will really see this fing-r depends on what he is looking
for. Equally pernicious is it to see Divine power where it is not, and to fail in seeing it
where it is. — Y.

Vers. 10 — 19. — ^I. There is a limit to the Divine merot. This, like every third
plague, came without warning. Opportunity was given twice to avert coming judgment.
None is given now. Unannounced it startles them in the midst of their fancied security.
1. When men have bafded the servants of God by unrepentant stubbornness and broken
TOWS the matter is not ended. God who has spoken vrill also act. 2. God will not
always strive. Those who resist mercy pass on to meet sudden destruction.

II. The judgment upon the idolatry op Egypt. In the two first plagues God's
hand was laid upon the river which the Egyptians worshipped as the giver or life. In
this it was laid upon the land — also an Egyptian god and the giver of their food, etc.
God proves that these are his servants, and that they will bless or harm according t«
his word. The works of God's hands — earth, sea, etc. — are still regarded as bestowing
goou independently of his will. Let us not need Egypt's chastisements to tearh us that
all are serving him, both in blessing and in judgment.



19S



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[cH. vm. 20— 24»



IIT. The world's wisdom turned into foolishness. They who have hitherto con-
tended BO proudly with God are confounded before the basest of all the miracles. 1. The
■wjsdom that seeks to rob man's heart of God is brought to nothing before the gospeL
With all its vaunted power it could not bring peace to a sinner's heart nor change to his
Ufe. 2. Atheistic science, that can see God nowhere, will yet be confounded before his
judgments. — U.



EXPOSITION.



THEFomtTHPLAGOB. Vers. 20—24. — It has
keen noticed that — setting apart the last and
most terrible of the plagues, which stands as it
were by itself — ^the remainder divide themselves
into three groups of three each — ^two in each
group coming with a warning, and the third
without. (See ch. viii. 16 ; ix. 8 ; x. 21.) In
other respects, no great regularity is observable.
There is a general principle of increasing
severity in the alHictions, but it does not ob-
tain throughout the entire series. The first
three caused annoyance, rather than actual
injury, either to persons or property. Of the
■ext three, two were upon property, one upon
both property and person (ch. ix. 10). Of the
remaining three, two again inflicted injury on
property, while one (the plague of darkness)
was a mere personal annoyance. The exact
(ikuacter of the fourth plague depends on the
proper translation of the word 'arSb. The
Jewish commentators connected this word with
'Ereb and 'Arab, words meaning " mingled "
or " mixed ;" and supposed a mixed multitude
of animals — ^beasts, reptiles, and insects — to be
meant. But the expression used tlnoughout,
which is ha-'arob, "the 'ardb," marks very
clearly a single definite species. So much was
clear to the LXX., who rendered the word by
umd/jivm, "the dog-fly," which is not the
common house-fly (Musca domesiica), but a
distinct species (ilfusca canina). Flies of this
kind are said to constitute a terrible affliction
in Egypt (Philo, De vit. Mos. ii. p. 101 ; Munk,
Palestine, p. 120 ; etc.) ; but they attack men
chiefly, and do no harm to houses or to the
fruits of the field, whereas the 'arSb is spoken
of as a pest in the houses, and as " destroying
the land " (verse 24). It has been, therefore,
suggested that the Blatta orientalis, or kaker-
laquc, a kind of beetle, is really intended.
These creatures suddenly appear upon the
Kile in great numbers ; they " inflict very
painful bites with their jaws ; gnaw and
destroy clothes, household furniture, leather,
■nd articles of every kind, and either consmne
or fender ouavaUable all eatables " (Kalisch).



They sometimes drive persons out of their

houses ; and they also devastate the fields.

Vcr. 20. — lo, he oometh forth to the water.

See ch. vii. 15, and comment. It is suspected
that on this occasion Pharaoh " went to the
Nile with a procession to open the solemn
festival " held in the autumn when the inun-
dation was beginning to abate (Cook). Say
unto him. Repeat, i.e., the Divine command
so often given (ch. v. 1 ; vii. 16 ; viii. 1).

Ver. 21. — Swarms of flies is an unfortunate
translation of a single substantive in the
singular number, accompanied by the article.
A mixture, etc., is neaily as bad. The writer
must mean some one definite species of animal,
which he called ^' the 'arob." On the probable
identification of the animal, see the -lutro-
ductury paragraph to this Chapter. And also
the ground. The 'arSb, like the frogs, was to
plague them both inside their houses and out-
side, but especially inside.

Ver. 22. — I will sever in that day th*
land of Goshen. On the position of the
land of Goshen, see the Excursus on the
Geography. The "severance" is a new
feature, and one distinguishing the later
from the earlier plagues. It was an additional
mark of the miraculous character of the visita-
tions, well calculated to impress all thoughtful
and honest minds. By all such it would be
seen that the God who conld make this sever-
ance was no local God of the Hebrews only,
but one whose power extended over the whole
earth.

Ver. 23. — A division. Literally " a redemp-
tion," i.e., a sign that they are redeemed
from bondage, and are " My people," not thine
any longer. To-morrow. Particulars of time
and place are fixed beforehand, to mark clearly
that the visitation does not take place by
chance, or by mere natural law, but by God s
positive decree and by his agency.

Ver. 24. — A grievous swarm of flies.
Bather " a mulbitude of beetles." As with the
frogs, so with the beetles, it aggravated the
infliction, that, being sacred an.uials, they
might not be de-';troyed or injured. Beetles
were sacred to Ra, the sun-god ; and one form
of Ba, Chepra, was ordinarily rei>reseute(l
under the form of a beetle, or as a man with ■
beetle for his head. The land was corrupted.
Bather " destroyed ;'' i.e. grievously injined, «r
" devastated " (as Kalisch renders). The
beetlp.s seriously damaged the growing crops.



OB. vm. 20— 32.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. M'^



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 22, 23. — God puts division hetween the good and had, hath here and hereafter.—
In some respects the good and the bad appear to be treated alike in this life, and
no difference to be made between them. " God maketh his sun to rise on the evil and
on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust " (Matt. t. 46). The
Preacher's experience was that " all things come alike to all ; there is one event to the
righteous and to the wicked ; to the clean and to the unclean ; to him that sacrificeth
and to him that sacrificeth not ; as is the good, so is the sinner ; and he that sweareth
as he that feareth an oath " (Eccles. ix. 2). If God sends a pestilence upon a land, or a
drought, or an excess of rain, or any other calamity, the good and the bad seem to suffer
equally ; no difference to be put between them. This is the first impression of the con-
templative philosopher when he looks upon human life ; and it is a true impression to a
great extent. But there are limitations, which, though easily oveiluoked at the first
glance, become apparent upon more carefiil examination. God does not treat all nations
alike-^he favoiws those which observe his laws ; punishes those who disobey them. Ha
■eems sometimes especially to bless cer'.ain faithful families, as that of David, and to
rain plagues upon others, as those of Saul, Herod the Great, and Napoleon. He gives,
on the whole, to good men certain temporal advantages over bad men, as those which
flow naturally (i.e. by his appointment) from industry, honesty, prudence, sobriety, and
other virtues. The result is that " godliness " is said in Scripture to " have the promise
of this life" (1 Tim. iv. 8). And if we take into consideration the satisfaction of a good
conscience, the confidence towards God, the calm trust, and the certain hope which
sustain the good, and set in the opposite scale the doubts and fears and horrors of an evil
conscience which afflict the bad, we shall have little doubt that the balance of happiness,
even in this life, is jrith the servants of God. Still, no doubt the great " division " is put
hereafter. " When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with
him, before him shall be gathered all nations ; and he shall separate them one from
another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats — and he shall set the sheep on
bis right hand, but the goats on the left " (Matt. xxv. 31 — 3). Awful the separation,
where between the two " there is a great gulf fixed" (Luke xvi. 26)^-on the one side
heavenly joy and perfect fehcity — on the other, " the blackness of darknwM for ever "
(Jude 13>

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 20 — 32. — The plague of fliet. This torment is thought by many to have
embraced winged pests of all kinds. In this case, it would include the mosquito,
cattle-fiy, beetles, dog-flies, and numbers of others. But see the exposition. We have
to note regarding it —

I. PhABAOH finds as BEFOBE that THBBE 18 NO ESCAPING FROM THE HAKDS OF

GJoD. He is met at the brink of the river, and confronted with the old alternative —
" Let my people go . . . else," etc. (vers. 20, 21). The king, when he saw Moses, would
have no difficulty in anticipating what was coming. The bitter greeting he would give
him would be akin to that of Ahab to Elijah — " Hast thou found me, mine enemy ? "
^1 Kings xxi. 20) ; nor would Moses' reply be very different from that given by the
prophet — " I have found thee ; because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight
of the Lord." What madness in the king to keep up this foolish, this suicidal contest 1
But the conflict of every sinner with Jehovah is of the same infatuated character. Stroke
after stroke descends, yet impenitence is persevered in. Well may God say, "Why
should ye be stricken any more 1 " (Is. i. 6.) Eis demand, through all, abides un-
changed.

II. The focbth plague spbinhb fbom the aib. The sphere of judgment ia
widening and extending, taking in constantly new regions — ^water, earth, air. The
Toioes that summon to repentance are heard from every side. A new demonstration ot
the universality of Jehovah's rule — of the unlimited sweep of his dominion (ver. 22).
Flies are agents which Gkid can employ as a scourge of nations still. We read of
lingular feats in the way of insect-taming ; of flies, bees, and even lice being trained to

KXODUS. o



W THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. vm. 20— 32.,

obey orders, and go through wonderful evolutions. Man's power of control over these
minute creatures is but a feeble image of the power exercised over them by God. H»
enrols them among his battalions, and uses them to execute his commissions.

III. A KBW SIGN 18 THIS TIME GIVEN-THE gEVERAKCE OP THE LAND OP GoSHEN

FBOM THE BEST OP EoYPT (vcrs. 22, 23). The Israelites had probably been made
feUow-sufferers with the Egyptians, at least in part, in the inconvenience experienced
from the first three plagues. This was permitted, at once as a chastisement for their
unbelief and murmurings, and as a purifying discipline. Nothing has been said as to
the effect produced upon their minds by the outbreak of these terrific plagues ; but they
must have shown the Israelites the folly of their recent conduct, and wrought them up
to a high pitch of expectation in the confidence that the day of their redemption was
drawing near. With the production of this change of mind in the dwellers in Goshen,
the need for further inflictions upon them, ceased, and a difference was thereafter put
between them and the Egyptians. This astonishing separation was as clear a proof as
could have been given of Jehovah's absoluteness in the government of the creatures, of
the extent of his rule, and of the care he exercised over his chosen people. Possibly,
Pharaoh had hitherto been taking encouragement from the fact that Israel was involved
in the calamities. He may have been led to question : 1. God's power, seeing that he
could not protect his own worshippers. It may have suggested itself to him that
Jehovah's power was limited, and therefore might successfiiUy be braved. 2. God's Ime
for Israel. For if he loved them so much, why did he allow them to suffer? And if
his interest in them was as weak as facts seemed to show, it was not impossible, if resist-
ance was continued, that he might abandon them altogether. 3. The likdihood of God's
proceeding to extremities. God, I'haraoh may have thought, must stop somewhere, else
his own people will be destroyed together with mine. The need of protecting them is a
safeguard against his proceeding to extremes with me. The severance now effected
between Goshen and the rest of Egypt was a cruel blow to all such hopes. Thence-
forward it was plain that God did care for Israel, that his power was as great as his love,
and that whatever happeiied to Egypt, Israel was as safe as the pavilion of the Divine
protection could make it. The fact is not without significance to ourselves. It teaches
us that a deep and broad line of demarcation is really being pijt in God's thoughts
beween his own people and the rest of mankind, and that, whatever be the nature of his
outward providence, he has their interests and weU-being continually at heart. Those
who encourage themselves in sin because they see that the righteous suffer with the
wicked, and judge that this proves an absence of interest or care on the part of God,
must submit to a great undeceiving. The last judgment will make a final separation
(Matt. XXV. 31—85).

IV. The foukth PLAQtrE bbouqht Phabaoh a second time to the point or.
SUBMISSION TO God's COMMANDS. The Separation of the territory of Israel seems greatly
to have startled him, and he sent anew for Moses. The unwillingness of his mind to
grant the required consent to the departure of the people is apparent from the interview!
1. Pharaoh proposes a compromise (v. 25). This is a common expedient with those who
are hard pushed with questions of religion. It is, however, only a veil for the spirit of
disobedience working underneath. The compromise proposed was unhesitatingly
rejected by Moses. He had no authority to accept it. it was in its own nature an
untenable one (ver. 26). Nothing was to be gained by accepting it. By standing firm
to his demand, he was certain to get the whole of what he wanted (ver. 28), why then
take a part ? Had he accepted the compromise, it would probably only have emboldened
Pharaoh to further resistance. God's servants will do well to imitate Moses in this
distrust of compromises. Little good ever comes of them. Principle, not expediency,
should rule the Christiaji's conduct. The intrusion of expediency into matters
ecclesiastical has been a grievous source of weakness, of scandal, and of loss of spiritual
power. 2. Be ultimutely yields. He concedes the whole demand; qualified only by
the injunction not to go far away (ver. 28). The interview leaves on one's mind the
impression of sincerity — of a real relenting, of however short a duration, on the part of
Pharaoh. Just so much the more fatal to his spiritual life was the subsequent hardening.

V. Though wakned by Moses of the peril of acting deoeitfitli.y, Pharaoh
anew HAiiDBNED HIS HEART (ver. 32). Hardening, after the experieace just de-
loribed, may be regaided as almost setiiiua Phmaoh'a doom. He would noon he, if ha



OB. nn. 2a-r«2.3 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 19fi

wu not already, iirecoverable. God had trusted him a second time, and this was the
■esult. Obstinacy was passing into obduracy. — J. O.

Vers, 20 — 32. — The fourth plague — the flies: the immunities of Goshen. The mei»
change from one chastising agent to another is not a matter to be dwelt on in consider-
ing this plague. We note that Grod makes the change from gnats to flies, and that
Pharaoh, who was obdurate before the gnats, is so far affected before the flies as to make
an offer of submission ; but it is obviously impossible for us to see why the flies should
be more efficacious than the gnats. The important thing is, not the gradation from
gnats to. flies, but the way in which Goshen was protected by Jehovah, and thereby pro-
claimed as under his favour. As in the third plague we are to notice the discomfiture of
the magicians, rather than the gnats themselves, so in the fourth plague we are to notice
the immunities that were secured to Goshen, rather than the flies. Thus we mark how
majestically and how worthily of himself Jehovah moves on from point to point towards
the climax of his visitations on Pharaoh. To say that these plaguesincreasedin severity
is not.to say much. Their succession in this respect is not so traceable as the succession
of the events which happened in connection with them. In considering these events in
their succession, we see more clearly how far this narrative of the plagues is from being
the construction of a mere . story-teller. There is a certain Divine art as to what is
inserted and what omitted ; but of this we may he sure, that nothing is invented. Under-
neath the condensed and pregnant record there is a tremendous and bitter reality. Con-
sider then —

1. This protection of Goshen. 1. Note what this protection did for the Israelites,
Had they then up to this time been sharers in the inconveniences and perils of the first
three plagues? We must conclude that they had been; and that Jehovah only now
deemed it fitting to extend special exemption to them. It was well foi them to share
somewhat of the sufferings of the Egyptians. (And we must bear in mind that however
much they shared of these sufferings, yet afterwards, in the wilderness, the recollection '
of the comforts and delicacies of Egypt rose above all the recollection of the sufferings.
Oh. xvi. 3 ; Num. xi. 4 — 6.) But now, with the fourth plague, the time has come to make
a perceptible difference between Israelite and Egyptian. '1 rue, the contest is advancing,
but there is still much to be done ; and it is well to give Israel timely encouragements.
They must wait a while to be libei-ated from Pharaoh's thraldom, yet surely it must
rejoice and comfort their hearts to see themselves, even though in bondage, free from the
afflictions which are coming ever more thickly upon Egypt. Though they have not all
they want, it is something to have such a clear sign that God has marked them for his own.
Even in tins world, with all his sufferings, temporal disadvantages, and opportunities of ,
gain missed, because he is a Christian, the Christian has that which makes the world to -
envy and to fear. .For a while we must share in the world's sufferings, but the world cannot
share in our joys. Israel has to suffer with. Pharaoh in the beginning, but presently it
escapes ; whereas Pharaoh cannot by any plan extend Goshen among the habitations of •
his own people. If we would have the comforts of Goshen we must go there, fraternise
with them that dwell there, and join ourselves on to them. 2. Note what' this protection
may have done for the Egyptians. It may have done much in the way of revelation as
to the cause of their troubles. Up to this point, most of them, even while the}'
experienced great sufferings, had no knowledge of what caused the sufferings. It is very
improbable that the demands of Moses had become known to the gi'eat bulk of thp
people. To national troubles they were doubtless used at times — such troubles as had
come to their ancestors in the seven years of famine — but these plagues were altogether ■
beyond precedent, and must have provoked much active enquiry as to what possible
cause could. pro4uce them. And now when this sharp division is made betv/eeii Egypt -
and Goshen, this line evidently not of man's making, the Egyptian people cannot but
feel at once that there must be some connection between tneir sufferings and the state^f
the Israelites. Hence — 3. It is possible that here we have the real reason why Pharaoh-
is now driven again into a sort of submission. What if he were more concerned at the
absence of the flies from Goshen than at the presence of them among his own people I-
Might not this extraordinary exetnption set his o\'.-n people thinking too much, and caoN
hisiiouse to be divided against itseli ?

IL His feofobitioks to Moses of oomfbouisb. Pharaoh, on the occasion of his I

2



IW THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. vm. 20-32.

yielding (ver. 10), proposed to let the people go " to-morrow." Now he varies the terms
of compromise. The people shall offer their sacrifices in the land. Tliis offer he seem*
to have made in complete ignorance of the difficulties which lay in the way from the
feelings of his own people. A fine man this, to be the ruler of a great kingdom 1 One
who had to be taught the feelings of his own people by a stranger. Like most despots,
he did not understand how vain it was to contend against the strength of custom and
popular sentiment, particularly in matters of religion. Not only were the rites of
Israelitish worship difleient from those of Egyptian worship, but one of the animals
most frequently used for Israelitish sacrifice, would if so used before the Egyptians, have
been viewed by them with the utmost repugnance. It was no visionary peril which
Moses indicated. Whateiy, in his annotated edition of Bacon's Essays (p. 126), speaking
on this very subject of tho strength of popular custom, illustrates it, curiously enough,
fi-om the conduct of the Alexandrian populace at a much later time. " When the
Bomans took possession of Egypt, the people submitted without the least resistance to
have their lives a/nd property at the mercy of a foreign nation : but one of the Boman
soldiers happening to kill a cat in the streets of Alexandria, they rose on him and tore
him limb from limb , and the excitement was so violent, that the generals overlooked
the outrage for fear of insurrection." — In the land of Egypt then, says Moses, the sacr.-
fices of Israel cannot be ; and of course beyond the sufficient reason stated by Moses, there
were others which there was no need to state, and which Pharaoh could not have undei.--
stood, even if they had been stated. — ^But Pharaoh is driven from one proviso only to seek
reftige in another. If the people go out, they are not to go very far. And yet this offer,
con£tional as it seemed, was not conditional in reaUty. It was enough to serve the
purpose of Moses, and he could readily accept it. Once a bird is outside of the cage, a
very few minutes will take it clear away from the risk of re-capture. If Pharaoh only
lets Israel out of his hands, it matters not how far, the rest will settle itself. This pro-
mise was enough to justify Moses, in interceding for a withdrawal of the heavy hand of
Jehovah ; and Jehovah, in granting the request. Thus a second time was Pharaoh taken
at his word. God, we see, takes men at their word when they make right resolutions.
If they make wrong, selfish resolutions, he would have them alter them. But once they
have resolved rightly, he holds them to the resolution, and gives opportunity to carry it
out. God withdrew the files, as he had withdrawn the frogs. There seems even some-
thing as niraculous about the withdrawal as about the ori^nal infliction. It might
have been expected that a few of the files would remain, just one here and there, but
there remaiiied not one. Lastly, notice what is now coming to be tA« regular result
of Pharaoh's temporary yieldings. He gives way a little to pressure, but as soon as the
pressure is removed, he returns to his original position. All these yieldings of his are
but as the sli^^ht appearance of thaw when the sun is at his best on a keen winter's day.
Pharaoh was thawed just a little on the surface of his nature. As soon as the heat of
the present plague departed, the frost in his proud heart set in with more severity than
•ver. — ^Y.

Vers. 20 — S2.—The Fourth Plague. — ^I. The superstition or Eqtpt n uade.itb
scouBOE. 1, The land was covered with the sacred beetle. It swarmed upon the
ground and in their homes. No movement was possible without crushing or treading
under foot the insect they adored. When God overthrows idolatries the very reverenun
with which the idols have been regarded deepens the chastisement. When the covetous
sink under the loss of wealth, they themselves have given its weight to the blow whicn
crushes them. 2. The land was destroyed by it. No prayer or propitiation served to
•vert the judgment. A land is ever corrupted by its idolatry. With the knowledge
•nd worship of the true Gt}d, purity and righteousness and truth are put far from it.
The soul is marred and wasted by covetousness.

II. The SEPARATION BETWEEN GosHEN AND EoTFT. 1. Hitherto there had been
no separation. Up ^ a certain point the just and the unjust suffer in common.
2. Beyond this, Qou shields his loved ones. They are alike vis'.ied by sorrow, &c ;
Init while there is darkness and the ministration of death in the abodes of the \m-
npentont, there is light and the ministration of life m. the dwellings of the righteous.

III. The bejeoted coupboiuse. Nothing less than God's demand can be accepted
If we are to go free and to obtain the inheritance, we must moke no compromise



, vm. 2S— 32.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



191



with the world or with sin; we must offer to Grod the full unfettered worship he
dem«jids. There must be full and complete separation between Egypt and Israel,
the Church and the world, else it will be impossible to present before God the sacrifice*
he asks for. A Church unseparated from the world will be a worldly Church.

IV. Phabaoh's broken faith. We have no reason to doubt that he was sincere
when he made the promise (ver. 28). How many vows sincerely made in trouble
tre forgotten in the ease they sought to purchase ! Under the pressure of affliction men
are ready to sacrifice much to which, when God's hand is removed, they cling as to theii
life.— U.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 25 — 32. — The fourth plague moves the
Pharaoh more than any preceding one. He
still cannot bring himself to grant the demand
of Moses; but he offers a compromise. The
Israelites shall have a respite from their toils,
and be permitted to hold their festival, and
offer the needful sacrifices in Egypt (ver. 25).
When this offer is for good reasons not ac-
cepted, he yields even farther — he will let the
people go and sacrifice in the leildemets — only
thejr must not " go far away " (ver. 28). Hav-
ing made this promise, he obtains for the
second time the intercession of Moses and the
discontinuance of the plague in consequence
of it But then, as before, when he saw that
there was respite (ver. 15), he retracted his
promise, hardened himself, and refused to
allow the people to quit Egypt (ver. 32).

Ver. 25. — ^In the land — i.e., in Egypt with-
in the limits of my dominions, so that I may
not lose sight of you — for less run the risk of
losing you altogether.

Ver. 26. — It is not meet bo to do. So many
animals were held sacred by the Egyptians,
some universally, some partially, that, if they
held a great festival anywhere in Egypt, the
IsraeUtes could not avoid offending the re-
ligious feelings of their neighbours. Some
animals would be sure to be sacrificed — white
cows, or heifers, for instance — by some of the
people, which the Egyptians regarded it as
sacnlegious to put to death. A bloody con-
flict, or even a civil war, might be the conse-
quence. By the abomination of the Egyp-
tians seems to be meant animals of which the
Egyptians would abominate the killing. It
has generally been supposed that either cows
alone, or " cows, bulls and oxen " are meant ;
bnt recent researches seem to show that it was
only white cows which it was absolutely un-
lawful to sacrifice. (See ' Records of the Past,'
vol. ii. pp. 90, 96, 99 ; vol. x. pp. 44, 62, etc.)
Will they not stone ns ? Death was the legal
penalty for wilfully killing any sacred animal



in Egypt (Herod, ii. 65). On one occasion
even a Boman ambassador was put to death
for accidentally killing a cat (Died. Sic. 1. 83).
Stoning does not appear to have been a legal

Sunishment in Egypt, so that we must suppose
loses to have feared the people present taking
the law into their own hands, seizing the sacri-
ficers, and killing them by this ready method.

Ver. 27. — Three days' jonmey into the
wilderness. This was the demand made from
the first (ch. v. 3) by Divine direction (ch. iii.
18). Its object was to secure the absence of
Egyptians as witnesses. As he shall command
ns. Compare ch. x. 26, where Moses observes
— "We know not with what we must serve
the Lord until we come thither." Divine
directions were expected as to the number and
the selection of the victims.

Ver. 28.— Only ye shall not go very fat
away. Here for the first time Pharaoh shows
his real objection to letting the Israelites go —
he is afraid that they will escape him. So he
suggests the compromise, that they shall just
enter the wilderness on his eastern border, re-
maining near the frontier, and therefore with-
in his reach. Moses seems to have made no
objection to this proviso. As Ealisch says,
" he committed himself entirely to the guid-
ance and direction of God." The three days'
journey which he had requested by Divine
command (ch. iii. 18) would not take him far
beyond the Egyptian frontier. Entreat for
me. Compare ver. 8. An abbreviated form
is now used, as sufficiently intelligible.

Ver. 29. — To-morrow. As Pharaoh had
fixed the " morrow " for the departure of the
second plague (ver. 10), so Moses now an-
nounces a similar date for the departure of tho
fourth. He adds a remonstrance against any
further deceit or tergiversation, which Pharaoh
must have felt to be well deserved.

Ver. 31. — There remained not one. The
hand of God was shewn in the removal no less
than in the infiiction of the plagues. The
complete disappearance was as abnormal oi
the sudden coming.

Ver. 32. — ^At this time alio. Campare ek
Tills, 22; ch.viiLl&



1*4 THE BOOK OP EXODtJS. [oH.n;.l-^;



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 25, 26. — Compromise not allowable in religions matters. The struggles at
political and social life, the conflicting claims of races, nations, states, classes, parties,
are usually terminated, and perhaps, under the existing condition of things, are best
terminated, by compromise. Let neither side get all it wants — let both yield some-
thing to the other — let the prudent and the moderate on each side seek an intermediate
course between the two extremes advocated — and the result is often peace and some-
thing approaching to contentment. Compromise is the soul of diplomacy— ^the Idol
of clever Parliamentary leaders and party managers — the oil, as has been said, whereby
the wheels of the world are made to run smoothly.' But in religion, compromise is out
of place. (1) There must be no compromise on any question of morality. If a tl^ng
is wrong, it must be got rid of, not toleiated under certain restrictions ; e.g., slavery,
prostitution, vivisection, intemperance. A compromise between vice and virtue is a^
insult to virtue.; (2) There must be no compromise with respect to doctrine. Doctrine
is either false or true ; and between truth and falsity there is no half-way house. Halt
a truth is a lie. To compromise the truth, is to give place to a he. (3) There must be
no compromise with respect to any Christian duty. The laws of God are plain and
must be obeyed. Not to obey them is to disobey them. Moses was ordered to lead
his people out of Egypt. To have accepted Pharaoh's offer would have been a flagrant
))reach of the command given to him. It was not necessary for him to see any iH
consequences, in order that he should feel bound to reject it. Ill consequences — even
could none have been foreseen — would have been sure to follow. For he would have
forfeited God's blessing — he would have entered on the path of disobedience — to curry
fovour with an earthly monarch he would have offended against the King of Heaven.

Vers. 29. — 7'Ae duty of GocTs servants to rebuke the great of the earth. " Let not
Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more." Deceit is despicable in the meanest of men. How
much more in a king 1 Subterfuge, tricks, lies, are said to be the refuge of the weak,
the only resource whereby they can meet and defend themselves against the violence
and oppressiveness of the strong. What need has a king of them? A king drags
his honour in the dust when he forfeits his word, and does more to lower the dignity of
kings in general than fifty rebels or revolutionists. Our own " King Charles the Martyr "
has lost half the sympathy which he would otherwise have obtained, by his lamentable
want of straightforwardness and steadfastness. And when kings err, in this or any other
way, it is the duty of those who have the opportunity, to rebuke them. Elijah
rebuked Ahab ; Azariah, son of Oded, rebuked Asa ; Eliezer, Jehoshaphat ; Azariah the
high priest, Uzziah; John Baptist, Herod Antipas. Jesus himself spoke of Herod
as "that fox." The great are very apt to urge that whoever says a word in their
dispraise is "speaking evil of dignities" (Jude 8), and so offending against the law
of God. But the examples cited show that "dignities" have no ckim to exemption
from the rebukes and reproofs of God's servants. Dignities ought to be above needing
rebuke. They ought to set an example of virtue and highmindedness, and, above aU,
of regard for their word, when once they have pledged it. What might be forgiven
in inferior men, cannot be pardoned in them. " Be wise, O ye kings ; be instructed, yo
judges of the earth." "A city set on a hiU cannot be hid."

EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER IX,

The Fifth Plagub. Vers. 1 — 7. — ^Hitherto
the plagues liad been directed rather against
the persons of the Bg^ptions than against
their property. Property had perhaps suffered
lomewhat in the preceding plague, if it was
really ona of the Blatta orientalit ; but other-



wise the rarions afflictions had caused nothii^
but pain and annoyance to the person. No*
this was to be changed. Property was to he
made to suffer. It remained to be seen
whether the Pharaoh would be impressed more
deeply by calamities which impoverished his
subjects than by those which merely caused
thenr personal annoyance aud snfEering. Th«



OH.rx. 1 — 7.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



IW



baii<! of God was first laid upon the cattle, or
rather upon the domesticated animals in
general (ver. 3). These were made to sufier
from a "murrain" or epidemic pestilence,
which carried off vast numbers. Such visita-
tions are not uncommon in Egypt, and gener-
ally fall with especial force on the Delta,
where the existing Pharaoh and the Hebrew
people resided. The miraculous character of
the visitation at this time was indicated, 1. By
its announcement, and appearance on the day
appointed (vers. 3 — 6) ; 2. By its severity (ver.
6); and 3. By its attacking the Egyptian
cattle only (ver. 7). Pharaoh seems, however,
to have been almost less moved by this plague
than by any other.

Ver. 1. — ^Excepting in the desimation of
Jehovah as " the Lord God of the Hebrews,"
this verse is an almost exact repetition of
the first verse of ch. viii. Such repetitions
are very characteristic of the most ancient
■writings.

Yer. S.^Ihy cattle which is in the field.
The word " cattle " here is to be taken gener-
ally, as including under it the various kinds
particularised. The cattle are mentioned as
being at this time "in the field," because
during the inundation aU of them were
brought in and housed, while, after the waters
had retired, and the laud had dried, most of
them were turned out to graze. This is always
the time at which epidemics break put. The
horses, the asses, etc. Horses, which had
been unknown prior to the Hyksos invasion,
and which consequently do not appear in the
list of animals presented to Abraham (Gen.
xii. 16), iirst became common under the
eighteenth dynasty, when they seem to have
been employed exclusively in war. Their use
for agricultural purposes, which is perhaps
here indicated, was not till later. (See
Chabas, Muda utr VAntiqaitf Biatorique, p.



421.) The ass was employed in great numben
at all times in Egypt. Women and children
rode on them, men sometimes in a sort of litter
between two of them. They were chiefly
used for carrying burthens, which were some-
times of enormous size (Lepsius, Denhmdler,
Part ii. pis. 42 a, 47, 56, 80 c, etc.). The
oamels. Camels are not represented on any
Egyptian monument ; but they are occasion-
ally mentioned in the inscriptions (Chabas,
Etudes, pp. 400 — 13). They are called fcaari
or kamaru. There is no doubt of their em-
ployment by the Egyptians as beasts of
burthen in the traffic witii Syria and with the
Sinaitic peninsula.

Ver. . 4. — The Lord shall sever. Compare
ch. viii. 22. Theie shall nothing die, etc
The original is more emphatic, and might be
rendered literally — " There shall not die of all
that is the children's of Israel a thing."

Ver. 5. — To-morrow. God may have inter-
posed the interval in order that such as be-
lieved the announcement might save their
animals by bringing them in out of the fields.
All the cattle ditid — t.e. all that were " in the
field " (ver. 3).

Ver. 7. — And Pharaoh ssnt. This time the
king had the curiosity to send out and see
whether the Israelites had been spared.
Though he found the fact correspond to the
announcement, he was not seriously impressed.
Perhaps he thought the Israelites took better
care of their cattle and were better cattle
doctors than his own people. (The doctoring
of cattle is represented on the monuments.
Kosellini, Mon. Civ. pi. 31.) Or he may have
attributed the escape of their animals to
the more healthy air of Goshen. Fharaoh's
heart was hardened. The plague affected him
less than others had done, rather than more.
He was so rich that an affliction which touched
nothing but property seemed a trivial matter
What cared he for the sufferings of the poor
beasts, or the ruin of those who depended
npon the breeding and feeding of cattle t



HOMILBTICS.

Vers. 1 — 7. — ITie hurthen of man's sin presses ore the hrute creation, as well as on man
himself. "The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together untU now'-
(Rom. viii. 22). Brutes are to a large extent co-partners with man in his sorrows
and his wretchedness. But brute suffering is the product of man's sin. Mostly it
is directly caused by man. Man not only kills animals for his food, but he chases
them for his diversion, mutilates them for his convenience, vivisects them for his
supposed benefit. In chasing them, he wounds more than he kills; in mutilating
them, he often removes parts necessary for their comfort; in vivisecting them, he
knowingly makes them suffer excruciating pain. His use of them as beasts of draught
and burden is a lighter form of evil than any of these ; but in the aggregate it cause.s,
perhaps, as much suffering. Again, man makes the horse his companion in war,
tod exposes him to the most hideous wounds, the most horrid deaths. ITor does
the list of Mb misdoings as respects the animal world end here. To children the
wanton torture of insects seems to be a chief delight. For the produrtion of certais



aOO THE BOOK OF EXOUUS. [oh. IX. 1— ft

delicacies of tlie table, turkeys and otiier animals are made to undergo untold agonies.
Slow death is inflicted on calves, to make the veal white. Finally, animals are often
involved in the Divine judgments by which nations are visited for their sins. " Much
cattle" would have perished miserably, if Nineveh had not repented at Jonah's
preaching. The beasts endure as much as the men when cities are blockaded.
Occasionally, as in this plague, the beasts themselves are the direct sufferers, and
God punishes man through them. No doubt there is a mystery in this. The suffering
of innocent dumb animals is hard to reconcile with the goodness of God. Sis causing
pain to them for man's fault is even more strange. How persons who have a fixed
beUef that the brute creation enjoys no future life, overcome the difficulty, we knew
not. But the solution of it may, we think, be found in the Scripture which telU
of "the spirit of the beast which goeth downward" (Eccles. iii. 21). If the spirit
of a beast survives, it may find compensation in another life for what it has suffered
here. Man's coldness and deadness with respect to animal suffering is as marvellous as
anything in his nature and history. " Pharaoh's heart " was utterly hard to it. He did
not even ask that the plague should be removed. The sufferings and miserable death of
thousands of beasts made not the slightest impression upon him. Probably he did not
give their sufferings a thought. And even among Christians, is it not much the same?
How few protest against even such enormities as promiscuous vivisection 1 How few, in
grievuig over the horrors of war, think of the pain which is borne by the animals
engaged in it I How few give so much as a sigh to the labour, the weariness, the
Bufiering of millions of poor dumb brute beasts engaged in ministering to their pleasures,
amusements, convenience I We grieve bitterly for our own troubles. We have a tear of
sympathy, perhaps, for the griefs of humanity generally. But for the rest of creation,
"groaning and travailing in pain together until now," we have scarcely a thought.
How different from him who was led to spare Nineveh (Jonah iv. 11) because therein
were " more than six score thousand persons that could not discern between their right
hand and their left hand, and also much cattle 1"

HOMaiBS BY VARIOUS AUTH0E8.

Vers. 1 — 8. — The plague of murrain of beasts. L The altebnativb aoaik (vera.
1, 2). Surely Pharaoh was weU warned. The analogy of the third plague would have led
U8 to expect that on this occasion — after a second and glaring breach of faith — there would
have been no warning. Yet mercy waits upon him. Faithless though he had been, if
even yet he will let the people go, all wiU be forgiven. If not — then judgments. Mark
how sacredly, in all this, the freedom of Pharaoh is respected. " He was not put on the
actual rack or held over a slow fire till his cruel hand relaxed, and let the Hebrew
bondmen go. The appeal was loud, and each time it was repeated he and his people
were shaken more severely than before ; but after every demand there was a respite, a
pause, an opportunity to ponder, and either yield the point or recall a past concession."
(Hamilton.)

II. A MUBRAiN OF CATTLE (vers. 3 — 7). This was the form assumed by the fifth
plague. It is to be viewed, 1. As a new blow at Egyptian idolatry. The sacredness of
the cow and ox are hinted at in ch. viii. 26. It may weU have been that the sacred
beasts themselves, the bull Apis, the calf Mnevis, and the rest, were smitten by the
pestilence. 2. As a fresh illustration of the manifold resources of Jehovah. The
mortality which came upon the cattle was universal in its sweep, carrying off, not only
sheep and oxen, but horses, asses, and camels; destructive in its effects, the greater
proportion of the cattle of each class falling victims to it ; yet carefully discriminative,
attacking the cattle of the Egyptians, but leaving unharmed those of the Israelites (ver.
6). 3. As a, plague of increased severity. The loss sustained by the Egyptians in this
mowing down of their cattle was the greatest they had yet experienced. Cattle consti-
tute a large part of the wealth of every nation. They are of importance for food, for
burden, and for the produce of the dairy. What a loss it would be to our own nation
were onr sheep, cows, oxen, horses, and asses, all suddenly destroyed I In the East the
oxen were employed for draught, and in the operations of agriculture. Yet the plague
was Vut the mtensification of a natural calamity— one with the effects of which we



inLix.1— 7.] THE bOOK OP EXODUS. 201

•re not wholly unfamiliar. It may seem " advanced " to scoff at the agency of God in
cattle-plague visi'ations, hut the truer philosophy will reverently recognise the fact of
such s^ency, and will not regard it as in the least incompatihle with any secondaiy
causes which may be shown to be involved in the production and spread of the disorder.
God has this weapon equally with others at his command for chastening a disobedient
people. Our wisdom, surely, is to be at peace with him. 4. As a forewarning of
greater judgment. As yet the persons of the Egyptians had escaped. The plagues,
however, were coming nearer and nearer them. Their cattle had been smitten, anc*
vhat could the next stroke be, but an infliction upon themselves ?

III. TmB PLAGUE ALSO INEFFECTUAL (ver. 7). Pharaoh sent to see if any of the
cattle of the children of Israel had died. The connection seems to indicate that his
hardening was partly the result of the news that they had all escaped. This, instead
of softening, maddened and embittered him. Hitherto Pharaoh has been seen
hardening himself in spite of the influences brought to bear on him. The fact is to
be noted that the plagues here begin to produce a positively evil effect. That which
ought to have softened and converted, now only enrages, and confirms in tiie bad
tesolution. — J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 7. — The fiffh plague — the murrain among the beasts. I. The usb which
God HEBE MAKES OF THE LOWER OBEATioN. In the three plagues immediately preceding
God made the lower creation his scourges. He took little creatures, the bare existence
of which many, not perceiving the wisdom of God, think to be unnecessary ; and these
he increased into a vast and most vexatious multitude. The killing of a frog, a gnat, a
fly, we are accustomed in our heedlessness to make nothing of; such killing is but sport
to thoughtless lads. But we think very differently of such animals as are spoken of in
this fifth plague ; horses, oxen, asses, sheep, all animals comprehended here imder the
general term cattle. We should feel it hardly possible to have too many of them. This
certainly was the view in ancient times in Scriptural countries, for we read of the wealth
of men as being generally measured by the nmnber of animals they possessed. Thus
we are led to notice in the course of these plagues, how Ood, in his view of -the lower
creation, rises high above <ywr view. We look at the lower animals according to their use
to us, and thus classify them as helpful or hurtful; God looks at them according
to their use to him,, and in his hands they all become abundantly helpful to further his
ends. He uses the frogs, gnats, and flies (or beetles) to inconvenience Pharaoh and
his people, if thereby a change of mind may be wrought, and when this fails he takes
the cattle and causes them to be destroyed in order to bring about, if possible, the same
result. Thus creation serves Jehovah ; whether living or dying, destroying or destroyed.

II. A MELANCHOLY ILLUSTBATION OF THE UNITY IN WHICH ALL CKEATION 18 BODNDk

A question may be raised as to the goodness of God in thus destroying those creatures
because of the wickedness of man. Why should they suffer because of Pharaoh's
obduracy ? The answer is that the whole creation of God is bound up in a marvellous
unity, from the lowest thing that has life, right up to man himself. It is for man
himself to help in settling how far the lower creation shall suffer for his sake. It is no
more possible for man to do wrong and the rest of sentient creatures to escape the
consequences of his wrong-doing, than it is for man to Uve recklessly in his own
person and expect the organs and limbs of his body to escape suffering. Animals
are not to be looked at in themselves, but as being created for the comfort and service
of man, and especially that in his use of them it may be shown what his own notions of
a right use are. Let man do right, and aU Uving creatures within the circle of hia
influence share in the blessed consequences ; let hun do wrong, and their lives must also
be disarranged.

HI. Observe in this plague how foecible the illustration is of IsbaWs
EXEMPTION FROM THE MURRAIN. The Wealth of Israel was pecuUarly pastoral wealth ;
of the very kind, therefore, which was smitten in this plague. Hence all the mora
noticeable is the exemption of the Israelites and all the more. impressive. If it had been
a pestilence coming down upon the country generally, irrespective of territory and of
special Divine control, it would have injured Israel a great deal more than Egypt.

IV. What a clear manifestation there is in this plague of how BEASONLESa

axD OTFATU^TED THE OBDURACY OF Phabaoh IB BEcoMiNO. He is inflexible, not onjly



B02



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CH. nt. 8r-^2-



withotit reason, but agamst reason. Not content with dismissing the rumours that com*
to ids ears concerning the exemption of Israel's cattle from the pestilence, he sends to
certify himself of the fact, which makes his continued obduracy m the more evidently
imreasonable. What excuse was there for a man who asked in the way Pharaoh asked,
even after it had been made clear to him that of the cattle of the childien of Israel not
one had died ? It is sad when a man dismisses in this way even the appearance of
having reason for what he does, when he says, " I will not, because I wiU not, and there
i^ an. end of it." — Y.

Vers. 1 — 7. — God'b merot es temporal jtjdsments. Hitherto no great loss had
been inflicted ; now their cattle is taken. In God's mercy the aiBictions deepen that
Egypt may forsake the path of death. When the Lord's hand falls in heavier blows it
is to save from something worse which lies beyond. Israel's calamities preceded her
captivity. God's chastisements fall that we may not be condemned with the world
(1 Cor. xi. 32).

: II. Conviction dobs not always compel obedience. Pharaoh had already two
proofs that the murrain was from the hand of God. He had foretold it, and it came at
the time he said it would come. He himself seeks a third proof; he sends to Goshen,
and finds that there was "not one of the cattle of the Israelites dead." Yet ho does not
bow vmder the hand of God. Conviction may co-exist with impenitence and stubborn
persistence in sin, but, when it does, it is the mark of a soul given over to destruction.
The devils believe and tremble. — U.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 8— 12.— The Sixth Plague. The
■ixth plague was sent, like the third, without
notice given. It was also, like the thurd, a
plague which inflicted direct injury upon the
person. There was a very solemn warning in
it ; for the same power that could afflict the
body with " boils and hlains," i.e., with a
severe cutaneous disease accompanied by pus-
tulous ulcers — could also (it must have been
felt) smite it with death. It is uncertain what
exactly the malady was. Some have supposed
plephantiasis, some " black leprosy," some
merely an eruptive disease such as is even now
common m Egypt during the autmnn. But it
is, at any rate, evident that the malady was
exceedingly severe — " the magicians could not
stand before Moses'' because of it (ver. 11).
If it was " the botch of Egypt " (Deut. xxviii.
27), as seems probable, since the name in the
Hebrew is the same, it was incurable. Pharaoh
and his people were warned by it that God's
power would be shown on themselves, not in
the way of mere annoyance — as with the
earlier plagues — but of serious injury — and if
so, why not of death ? Thus, the sixth plague
heralded the tenth, and, except the tenth, was
&e most severe of alL

1 Ver. 8. — Ashes of the furnace. Rather
''soot from the f umaca " The word commonly
used in Hebrew for " ashes " is different.
Many recondite reasons have been brought



forward for the directions here ^ven. But
perhaps the object was simply to show that as
water, and earth (ch. viii. 13) and air Cch. x.
13) could be turned into plagues, so fire could
be. The " soot of the furnace " might well
represent fire, and was peculiarly appropriate
for the production of a disease which was in
the main an " inflammation." It is not likely
that Hoses imitated any superstitious practice
of the priests of Egypt. Toward the heaven.
The act indicated that the plague would come
from heaven — i.e. from God. In the sight of
Pharaoh. Compare ch. vii. 20 It is probable
that the symbolic act which brought the
plague was performed " in the sight of
Pharaoh " in every case, except where the
plague was unannounced, though the fact is
not always recorded.

Ver. 9. — ^It shall become imall dust.
Rather, "It shall be as dust" No physical
change is intended by the expression used,
but simply that the " soot " or " ash " should
be spread by the air throughout all Egypt, as
dust was wont to be spread. And shall be a
boil breaking forth with blains. Literally,
" an inflammation, begetting pustules." The
description would apply to almost any eruptive
disease. The attempts definitely to determine
what exactly the malady was, seem to bo
futile — more especially as diseases are con-
tinually changing their forms, and a malady
which belongs to the fourteentn or fifteenth
century before our era is almost certain tc
have been different from any now pievalenv
The word " blains " — ^now obsolete aa > sepa-
rate word — appears in " chilbUuns."



OR. n. 8—12.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



ao8



Ver 10. — The fdmace. It is perhaps not
veiy important what kind of "furnace" is
meant. But the point has been seriously
debated. Some suppose a fiunace for the
consumption of victims, human or other ; some
a baking oven, or cooking stove ; others a
furnace for smelting metal ; others again a
limekiln. The ordinary meaning of the word
used, kibshon, is a "brick-kiln;" biit bricks
were not often baked in Egypt; Nor is it at
all clear that any victims were ever consumed
in furnaces. Probably either a briok-kibi or a
furnace for the smelting of metals is meant.

Ver., 11. — The magicians could not stand.
It is gathered from this that the magicians
had,' up to this time, been always in attendance
when the miracles were wrought, though they



had now for some time failed to produce any
counterfeits of them. On this occasion theii
persistency was punished by the sudden falling
of the pestilence upon themselves with such
severity that they were forced to quit the
royal presence and hasten to their homes to be
nursed.

Ver. 12. — And the Lord hardened Fharaoh'i
heart. Up to this time the hardening ol
Pharaoh's heart has been ascribed to himself,
or expressed indefinitely as a process that was
continually going on — now for the first time
it is positively stated that God hardened his
heart, as he had threatened that he would (ch.
iv. 21). On the general law of God's dealings
with wicked men, see the comment on the
above passage



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 8 — 12. — Sin punished hy physical suffering, hut such suffering not always a
punishment for sin. God has many weapons in his quiver wherewith to chastise sin.
One of them is physical pain. He can ci ise the limbs to ache, the temples to throb,
the blood to be inflamed, the breathing to labour, the head to be racked, the nerves to
thrijl and tingle — ^the whole body, from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, to
be nothing but a mass of " wounds and bruises, and putrifying sores." There is no part
of our frame, no process, no function, but can be made the seat of an Intolerable agony,
God, lor the most part, spares us, in the hope that his goodness and long-suffering will
lead us to repentance. He had long spared Pharaoh and the Egyptians — had shown
them his power in ways that annoyed and harassed, but did not seriously hurt. Now
he must adopt, severer , measures. So, ,hi3 hand is laid upon their bodies, vfhioh are
smitten with diseasej disfigured, made loathsome to the eye, and racked with physical
suffering. Here we may note three things : —

I, God punishes sin to a large extent in this way. Many sins have physical
consequences attached: , to them ' by a natural law, which are in the highest degree
painful, which injure the health, destroy the tissues, produce disease, madness, idiocy.
MenknoW these consequences, but hope that they may individually escape them, ■ As
Moses and Aaron warned in vain, so now vain too often are the uplifted voices of God's
ministers. Nine-tenths, probably, of the physical suffering in England at the present
day is caused by those sins of intemperance and uncleanness which are the crying
evils of our age and country, and which nothing seems able to uproot or even seriously to
diminish. Children are born now for the most part with the seeds of disease in them,
which are the consequence of their parents' vices. They lack the physical stamina and
the moral vigour which they vpould have possessed, had their parents led good, pious,
consistent, religious lives, 'i'hey have unhealthy appetites, desires, cravings, which they
would not have had but for their parents' sins. Too often, to all this is added the force
of bad example. Intemperance and uncleanness follow, and the inborn germs of disease
are stimulated into activity ; pain follows pain, agony follows agony. A wretched life
is terminated by an early death. If they leave children behind them, their case is even
more hopeless. The physical taint is deepened. The moral strength to resist is
weaker. Happy is it if God takes the little ones away from the evil to come.

II. God dobs not exempt from this punishment either the wealthy or the
HiaHLT educated. " 'I'hc boil was on the magicians." The taint of uncleanness, the
mental weakness which results from habits of intemperance afflict the great, the
rich, the " upper ten thousand," as surely as their humbler fellow-subjects who herd in
courts and alleys. There are great families in which it is a well-known fact that
intemperance has become hereditary. There are others where the heir never lives to the
age of thirty. No rank — not even royal rank — exempts from subjection to hygienic laws.
Neither does intellect nor education. It may be that the intellectual and highly
educated are less likely than othei^s to plunge into dissipation and sensual vices. But i^



204 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. tx. 8— la

In spile of their higher nature, they give the reins to their lower, the same results
follow as in the case of the least gifted of their fellow-men. Retribution reaches them.
They " receive within themselves the reward of their iniquity." Their physical nature,
no less than their moral, is tainted ; and pain, suffering, often agony, are their portion.
III. Those who receive the punishment often harden themselves. The boil
was on the magicians ; but we do noi hear that the magicians submitted themselves, or
owned the supremacy of Jehovah. Uo now, those whose sin draws down upon them
suffering rarely repent, rarely forsake their sin, rarely humble themselves beneath the
chastening rod of the Almighty. No doubt drunkards are occasionally reformed and
profligates reclaimed. But for one lost sheep thus recovered, how many scores perish in
their evil courses, and descend the rapid incline which conducts to the gulf of
destruction ? We are amazed at the obstinacy of Pharaoh ; but we are most of us just
as obstinate. Nothing will induce us to give up our pet vices. We cling to them,
even when the boil is upon us. If we give them up for a time, we recur to them. If
we leave them off in act, we dwell fondly upon them in thought and imagination.
hard human hearts, that will not yield to God's discipline of pain, when sent as
chastisement I What can ye expect, but that chastisement will give place to vengeance ?
Physical suffering is sometimes sent, not to punish, but to refine and purify. Job's
comforters supposed that one so afflicted must have committed some great crime, or be
concealing some habitual vice of a grave character. But it was not so. The sufFerint^s
of saints are blessings. They give a fellowship with Christ, which nothing else can give.
They make the saint rehearse in thought, over and over again, each step of that
grievous, yet blessed via dolmosa, along which he went upon his way to the Cross
of Calvary. They intensify faith and love — they give assurance of acceptance (Heb.
xii. 6) — they elevate, purify, sanctify. Earth has no lovelier sight than that not
imcommon one of a crippled suft'erer, stretched day after day and year after year upon a
bed of pain, yet always cheerful, always thoughtful for others, always helpful by advice,
kind word, even (if their strength allows) kind acts. Such blessed ones live with
Christ, suffer with Christ, feel themselves to be in Christ ; as St. Paul says, they " fill
up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in their flesh" (CoL L 24), and "are
joyful in their tribulation" (2 Cor. vii. 4),

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 8— 13.— 7%e plague of hoih and hlains. This plague, like the third, was
unannounced. God varies his methods. There was need for some token being given
rf God's severe displeasure at Pharaoh's gross abuse of his goodness and forbearance.
This plague is distinguished from the rest by being introduced with a significant action.

I. The action mTRODUciNO the plague (vers. 8 — 10). Hitherto the only actions
employed had been the stretching out of Aaron's rod, and in the case of the third
plague, the smiting of the dust with it. Now, Moses is instructed to take handfuls of
the ashes from the furnace and sprinkle them towards heaven in the sight of Pharaoh
and his servants, 'i'he performance of so solemn an act implied that a new stage
was being reached in Pharaoh's hardening, as also in God's punitive dealings with him.
From this point onwards matters are rapidly developed to a crisis, 'ihe act was
symbolical, and may be variously interpreted. 1. As a challenge to the Egyptian Deities
specially Neit, « who bore the designation of ' The Great Mother of the highest heaven '
and was worshipped as the tutelary goddess of Lower Egypt" (Canon Cook). 2. As
connected with the scattering of the ashes of human victims to avert evil from the land.
This was done, or had been done, in the days of the Shepherds, in the worship of
Sutech or Typhon. The victims were usually foreigners, perhaps often Hebrews.
"After being burnt alive on a high altar, their ashes were scattered in the air by
the priests, in the belief that they would avert evil from all parts whither they
were blown" (Geikie). The sprinkling of ashes by Moses, and their descent, not m
blessmg, but in boils and blains, would thus have a terrible sign'ficance. 3. As
lymbolical of the laying of a curse upon the people. It is, at least in some parts n(
the East, a practice to take ashes and throw them into the air, in token of givmg
effect to an imprecation. Most probable of all,— t. As a symbol </ retribution for tM



4n.B.8— 12.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 206

sufferings of Israel. The "furnace" is a common Scripture emblem for the bitter
slavery of the Hebrews (G-en. xv. 17 ; Deut. iv. 20 ; 1 Kings viii. 57 ; Is. xlviii. 10 ;
Jer. xi. 4). Ashes taken from the furnace and sprinkled towards heaven, whence
they descended in a plague, woiild thus naturally symbolise the return upon Pharaoh
and his servants of the cruelties with which they had afflicted Israel. The cry ol
the sufferers in the furnace had entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth. The
evil deeds of the afSicters were now to come back upon them in retribution. It was as
though the ashes of the victims sacrificed in the long tyranny were rising in vengeanc«
against the oppressor.

II. 'I HE PECULIARITY OF THE PLAQUE IN THE SMITING OP THE PEBSONB (vOf. 10).

The disease with which the Egyptians were smitten was painful, loathsome, and
excruciatingly severe as compared with ordinary inflictions of a similar nature. Tortured
in their bodies, they were " receiving in themselves that recompense of their error which
was meet " (Bom. i. 27). This experience of sore personal suffering ought surely to
have arrested their folly. It showed them how absolutely helpless they were in the
hands of God. The plague was universal (ver. 11). Not one could boast against
another. The plague was peculiarly afflictive to a people which prided itself on its
cleanliness. It smote beasts as well as men. What a terrible calamity 1 The whole
head was sick, and the whole heart faint. From the sole of the foot even to the crown
of the head there was no soundness in it ; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores
(Is. i. 6). Yet, instead of repenting, the people appear only to have been stung to
further revolt. So it was, at least, with their king. 1. An image of the condition
of the sinner. 2. A new proof of the power of God. The hand of God is to be
seen in the infliction of diseases. God threatens, in Deuteronomy, to lay the evil
diseases of Egypt upon the Israelites if they should prove disobedient (Deut. xxix. 60).
3. An instance of the inefficacy of bodily sufierings to produce repentance. Cf. Rev. xvi.
10, 11, "They gnawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven
because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds."

III. The DEFEAT OF THE MAGICIANS (ver. 11). 'I hey could not now even stand
uefore Moses. Pharaoh is being left more and more alone in his resistance.

IV. Phabaoh still hardened (ver. 12). Before, one plague was the utmost he
could hold out against. He yielded under the second and the fourth. Now he main-
tains his attitude of resistance under two plagues in succession.— J. 0.

Vers. 8 — 12. — The sixth plague — the boils and Wains. Only the barest conjectures
are possible as to why these ashes of the furnace were taken as materials whence to
draw this sixth plague. If we look at the first two plagues we see that they come
out of the water. The next plague, that of the gnats, comes out of the dust of the
earth, and the flies may be taken as having the same origin. The murrain probably
arose through a vitiating change in the food of the animals; and here again we are
directed to look downwards to the earth, out of which comes the food both for man and
beast. Next comes this sixth plague, and by the mention of ashes of the furnace it
would almost seem as if God meant his people to understand that all the useful
elements in nature were to do their part in plaguing Pharaoh. Water has had its share,
the earth its share, fire now gets its share; and there only remains the air above
and around, and out of this, sure enough, there presently came the hail, the locusts,

Warping on the Eastern wind,

and the thick darkness. TTius, m all visible directions where man looks for blessing,
God meets him with a stern intimation that he can turn the blessing into a curse.
So much for the origin of this plague ; now with regard to its form. — Note,

I. That God'b pohishments now advance to take up their abode in the
BODIES OF Phabaoh and his people. As God can take the lower animals, which
he has made for our use, and turn them at his pleasure into a blessing or a curse,
80 he can come nearer still, and make our bodies, which are agonts of the most
exquisite pleasures, into agents of pain just as exquisite. Notice that in the very
mode of infliction ihtre was a mixture of severity and mercy. Severity, becaxisi
imdoubtedly there would be terrible pain ; mercy, because probably the pain w*«



206 THE BOOK OF EXODUS, [qh. ix. J3::r26.

confiDcd to the Burfa(;e of the twdy; none the easier to bear, certainly; and yet easier
i^ this, that it did not belong to an affliction of the great vital organs. Severity
again, on the other hand, just because it affected the sensitive sm-face of the body.
It is through our sensations that God has caused so sauch both of pleasure and informa-
tion to come. Thus God, who had given so much delight to Pliaraoh and his people,
through making them so sensitive to the outward world,, now deranges all the minute
nerves and vessels, and by spreading boils and Mains over the surface of the body
he effectually stops all enjoyment of life. We know that it is possible for a person to
be seriously ill — even fatally so, perhaps confined as a hopeless in valid, for years —
and yet to get considerable enjoyment out of life, as in reading and in light occupations
for the mind. But what pleasure can be got when, froni head to foot, the body is
covered with boils and blainsV As long as this sort of pain lasts, little else can be
thought of than how to get rid of it.

II. As in the plague of the gnats, so here in the plague of the boils and blains,
DUB ATTENTION IS SPECIALLY DIRECTED TO THE MAGICIANS. On the former oocasion,
with or without sincerity, they had said, "'J'his is the finger of God;" now they
are in themselves, so to speak, the finger of God. They can neither avert nor dis-
semble their subjection to the power that works through Moses. At first, doubtless,
♦hey had looked upon him with haughtiness, audacity, and scorn, as being hardly worth
a moment's attention. Very likely it was counted a great condescension to turn the
rods into serpents. But now, whatever feeling be in their hearts, the hold that Jehovah
has on their bodies is only too evident. Silence and outward serenity are impossible
under such suffering as this. The twitchings of the face cannot be concealed, the groan
cannot be suppressed, the unquailing attitude cannot .be maintained. Who shall teU
what individual humiliations and defeats Me behind this brief expression : " The magi-
cians could not stand before Moses because of the boils." Becauxe of the hoils 1 It was
not a very dignified sort of disaster ; not very pleasant to recall in after times. These
magicians, we may imagine, had scorned the very name of Jehovah, worse, mayhap,
than Pharaoh himself. And now in these boils and blains there is, suppressed as it
were, scorn and mockery from Jehovah in return. Opposers of God may not only have
to be brought down from their pride, but in such a way as will involve them in ridicule
and shame. The exposure of falsehood is only a work of time, and as we see here,
it can be accomplished in a comparatively short time. Pain effectually drives away
all dissembling, and nature proves too much even for the man to whom art has become
second nature. — Y.

Vers. 8 — 12. — I. The Sixth Plague. The means used. Ashes were taken from the
brick-kiln in which the Israelites toiled, and in Pharaoh's presence sprinkled in mute
appeal toward heaven. The memorials of oppression hfted up before God will fall
in anguish upon the oppressors (James v. 1 — 5). The French Revolution and the ages
of giant wrong that had gone before. American slavery and its punishment.

II. The suddenness of the infliction. 'J'here was no warning. Tie dust was
cast up, and immediately the plague was upon man and beast. The judgment of
wickediiess will come as in a moment. Sodom. The flood.

III. The shame of the magicians. 1. Upon them the plague seems to have been
more severe than upon others. Upon the abettors of other men's tjrranny and wrong,
Gtod's judgment will fall heaviest. The deep responsibihty of Christian teachers and
men of influence and talent. Let them see to it that they are on the side of righteous-
ness, and not of the world's class — selfishness and manifold wrong. 2. They were
brought to shame in the presence of those who trusted in them, 'ilie falsehood cf
their pretensions was exposed by their inability to defend tl^ernselves. When God
visits for the world's sin, there wUl be everlasting confusion and shame for its apologists
and abettors. — U. , . ,

EXPOSITION.



Vers. 13—26. — The Seventh Plaque. The
sixth plague hal had no effect at all upon the
hard heart of tlie Pharaoh, who cared nothing



for the physical sufferings of his subjeda, and
apparently was not himself afflicted by Ihe
malady. Moses was therefore ordered fa> ap-



CH. IX. 13—26.]



THE BOOK OF. EXODUS.



207



pear before him once more, and warn him of
further and yet more terrible visitations which
were impending. The long message (vers.
13 — 19) is without any previous parallel, and
contains matter calculated to make an impres-
sion even upon the most callous of moi-tals.
First there is an announcement that God is
about to send "aU his plagues " upon king and
people (vor. 14) ; then a solemn warning that
a pestilence might have been sent which would
have swept both king and people from the
face of the earth (ver. 15) ; and finally (ver.
18) an announcement of the actual judgment
immediately impending, which is to be a hail-
storm of a severity never previously known in
Egypt, and but rarely experienced elsewhere.
Pharaoh is moreover told that the whole ob-
ject of his having been allowed by God to con-
tinue in existence is the glory about to accrue
to his name from the exhibition of his power
in the deliverance of his people (ver. 16). A
peculiar featiu-e of the plague is the warning
(ver. 19) whereby those who believed the words
of Moses, were enabled to escape a great part
of the iU effects of the storm. - It is a remark-
able indication of the impression made by the
previous plagues, that the warning was taken
by a considerable number of the Egyptians,
who by this means saved their cattle and their
slaves (ver. 20). The injury caused by
the plague was very great. The flax and
barley crops, which were the most advanced,
suffered complete destruction. Men and beasts
were wounded by the hail-stones, which might
have been — as hail-stones sometimes are —
jagged pieces of ice; and some were even
killed, either by the hail (see Josh. x. 11^, or
by the lightning which accompanied it. Even
trees were damaged by the force of the storm,
which destroyed the foliage and broke the
branches.

Ver. 13. — Else up early. Compare ch. vii.
15, and viii. 20. The practice of the Egyptian
kings to rise parly and proceed at once to the
dispatch of business is noted by Herodotus
(ii. 173). It is a common practice of oriental
monarchs. And say unto him. The same
message is constantly repeated in the same
words as a token of God's unchangingness.
See ch. viii. 1 — 20 ; ix. 1 ; x. 3 ; etc.

Ver. 14. — ^I will at this time send all my
plagues upon thine heart. A very emphatic
announcement. At this time contrasts the
immediate future with the past, and tells
Pharaoh that the hour of mild warnings and
alight plagues is gone by. Now he is to ex-



pect something far more terrible God will
send all his plagues — every worst form of evil
— in rapid succession; and will send thpin
against his heart. Each will strike a blow
on that perverse and obdurate heart — each
will stir his nature to its inmost depths. Con-
science will wake up and insist on being heard.
All the numerous brood of selfish fears and
alarms will bestir themselves. He will tremble,
and be amazed and perplexed. He will forego
his pride and humble himself, and beg the Is-
raelites to be gone, and even intreat that, ere
they depart, the leaders whom he has so long
opposed, will give him their blessing (ch. x j.
32). That thou mayest know. Pharaoh was
himself to be convinced that the Lord God of
Israel was, at any rate, the greatest of all gods.
He was not likely to desert at once and alto-
gether the religion in which he had been
brought up, or to regard its gods as non-
existent. But he might be persuaded of one
thing — that Jehovah was far above them.
And this he practically acknowledges in vers,
27 and 28.

Ver. 15.— For now I will stretch ont my
hand. It is generally agreed by modem
writers that this translation fails to give the
true sense of the original God does not here
announce what he is going to do, but what
he might have done, and wouid have done, but
for certain considerations. Translate, "For
now might I have stretched out my hand, and
smitten thee and thy people with pestilence ;
and then thou hadst been cut off from the
earth." Scripture shows that pestilence is
always in God's power, and may at any time
be let loose to scourge his foes, and sweep
them into the pit of destruction. (See Lev.
xxvi. 25; Num. xi. 33; xiv. 12; xvi. 46;
2 Sam. xxiv. 13 — 15, etc.) He had not done
now what he might have done, and what
Pharaoh's obstinacy might well have pro-
voked him to do ; and why ? On account of
the considerations contained in the next
verse.

Ver. 16. — And in very deed, etc. Bather,
" But truly for this cause have I caused thee to
stand," i.e., " kept thee alive and sustained thee
in the position thou occupiest," for to shew
to thee my power — i.e., to impress thee, i* it
is possible that thou canst be impressed, with
the greatness of my power, and the foolishness
of any attempt to resist it, and also that my
name may be declared thronghout aU the
earth — i.e., that attention may be called
widely among the neighbouring nations to
the great truth that there is really but one
God, who alone can deliver, and whom it il
impossible to resist.

Ver. 17.— As yet. Rather "stiU." And
the whole verse should be rendered — "Dost
thou still oppose thyself against my people, so
as not to let them go." The verb translated
" oppose "— (" exalt " in the A. V >— is strietlT



206



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[cH. IX. 18—25



"to raise a mound, or liank," thence •' to ob-
•truct," " oppose."

Ver. 18. — To-morrow about this time. As
it might have been thought that Moses had
done nothing very extraordinary in predicting
a storm for the next day, a more exact note of
time than usual was here given. Compare
ch viii. 23 ; ix. 5. I will cause it to rain a
very grievous hail. Earn, and, still more,
hail are comparatively rare in Egypt, though
not so rare as stated by some ancient authors
(^erod. iii. 10 ; Pomp. Mela, De Situ Orbit,
i. 9). A good deal of rain falls in the Lower
Country, where the north wind brings aur
loaded with vapour from the Mediterranean ;
particularly in the winter months from Decem-
ber to March. Snow, and hail, and thunder
are during those months not very uncommon,
having been witnessed by many modem tra-
vellers, as Pococke, Wansleben, Seetzen, Perry,
Tooke, and others. They are seldom, how-
ever, of any great severity. Such a storm as
here described (see especially vers. 23, 24)
would be quite strange and abnormal; no
Egyptian would have experienced anything
approaching to it, and hence the deep impres-
sion that it made (ver. 27). Since the fonn-
dation thereof. Not " since the original for-
mation of the country" at the Creation, or by
•ubsequent alluvial deposits, as Herodotus
thought (ii. S — 11), but " since Egypt became
a nation (see ver. 24). Modem Egyptolo-
gists, or at any rate a large number of them,
cairy back this event to a date completely
irreconcilable with the Biblical chronology —
Bbckh to B.C. 5702, Unger to B.C. 5613, Ma-
riette and Lenormant to B.C. 5004, Brugsch
to B.C. 4455, Lepsius to B.C. 3852, and Bunsen
(in one place) to B.C. 3623. The early Egyp-
tian chronology is, however, altogether uncer-
tain, as the variety in these dates sufficiently
intimates. Of the dynasties before the (so-
called) eighteenth, only seven are proved to
be historical, and the time that the Old and
Middle Empires lasted is exceedingly doubt-
ful All the known facts are sufficiently met
by such a date as B.o. 2500 — 2400 for the
Pyramid Kings, before whose time we have
nothing authentic. This is a date which comes
well within the period allowed for the forma-
tion of nations by the chronology of the Sep-
tnagint and Samaritan versions.

Ver. 19. — Thy cattle, and all that thon hast
in the field. During winter and early spring,
the Egyptians kept their cattle " in the field,"
as other nations commonly do. When the
inundation began (June or July), they were
obliged to bring them into the cities and en-
closed villages, and house them. The time of
the " Plague of Hail " appears by all the indi-
cations to have been the middle of February.
They shall die. Human life was now for the
first time threatened. Any herdsmen that
remained with the cattle in the open field and



did not seek the shelter of houses or sheds
would be smitten by the huge jagged hail-
stones with such force that they would bo
killed outright, or else die of their wounds.

Ver. 2U — He that feared the word of the
Lord among the servants of Pharaoh. It is a
new fact that any of the Egyptians had been
brought to " fear the word of Jehovah." Pro-
bably, the effect of the plagues had been gra-
dually to convince a considerable number, not
so much that Jehovah was the one Tree God
as that he was a great and powerful god,
whose chastisements were to be feared. Con-
sequently there were now a certain number
among the " servants of Pharaoh " who pro-
fited by the warning given (ver. 19), and
housed their cattle and herdsmen, in anticipa-
tion of the coming storm.

Ver. 21. — He that regarded not. K there
were men who believed in the power and truth-
fulness of Jehovah, there were probably more
who did not believe. As Lot " seemed as one
that mocked unto his sons-in-law " (Gen. xix
14), so Moses and Aaron appeared to the great
mass of the Egyptians. As observed above, a
hail-storm that could endanger life, either of
man or beast, was beyond all Egyptian expe-
rience, and must have seemed ahnost impos-
sible.

Ver. 22. — Stretch forth thine hand toward
heaven. The action was appropriate, as the
plague was to come from the heaven. Simi-
larly, in the first and second plagues, Aaron's
hand had been stretched out upon the waters
(ch. vii. 19, 20 ; viii. 6) ; and in the third upon
" the dust of the ground " (ch. viii. 17). And
upon every herb of the field — i.e., upon all
forms of vegetable life. (Compare Gen. i. 30 ;
ix. 3.)

Ver. 23. — Hoses stretched forth his rod.
In the last set of three plagues, the earthly
agent was Moses (ch. ix. 10 ; ch. x. 13, 22),
whose diffidence seems to have wom off as time
went on, and he became accustomed to put
himself forward. Thunder and hail. Thun-
der had not been predicted ; but it is a common
accompaniment of a hail-storm, the change
of temperature produced by the discharge of
electricity no doubt conducing to the forma-
tion of hailstones. The fire ran along upon
the ground. Some very peculiar electrical
display seems to be intended — something cor-
responding to the phenomena called " fire-
balls," where the electric fluid does not merely
flash momentarily, but remains for several
seconds, or even minutes, before it disappears.

Ver. 24. — Fire mingled with the haiL
Bather, " There was hail, and in the midst of
the hail a fire infolding itself." The expres-
sion used is the same which occurs in Ezek. i.
4. It seems to mean a fire that was not a
mere flash, but collected itself into a mass and
was seen for some considerable time.

Ver. 25.— The haU smote. It is to the bail



OH. IX. IS— 19.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



209



aad not to the lightning that the great destruc-
tion of men and beasts is attributed. Such light-
ning, however, as is spoken of, would probably
kill some. All that was in the field. According
to the warning given (ver, 19), the herdsmen
and cattle left in the open air and not brought
into the sheds were killed. The hail smote
every herb of the field. Even in our own
temperate climate, which is free from all at-
mospheric extremes, hailstorms occasionally do
■0 much damage to crops that it has been



found desirable to organise a special Insurance
against loss from this cause. Such hail as
that described in the text would greatly injure
every crop thit was many inches above the
soil, and entirely destroy such as had gone to
ear. (See below, ver. 31.) Broke every tree —
j.e., damaged the smaller branches and twigs,
thus destroying the prospect of fruit.

Ver. 26. — Only in the land of Goshen, etc.
Compare ch. viii. 22 ; ix. 4 ; x. 23.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 18 — 19. — The method of the Divine Hide over had men illmtrated hy OocFs
message to Pharaoh. The message illustrates,

I. The lonq-suffebing of God towabds sinnebb. " For now might I have stretched
out my hand and smitten thee and thy people with pestilence " (ver. 15). Pharaoh had
opposed himself to God so long, had shown himself in various ways so wicked, that
he well deserved to have been stricken with plague and made to perish miserably. Ho
had been insolent and blasphemous, when first appealed to in the name of Jehovah
(ch. V. 2) ; cruel and vindictive, when he increased the Israelites' burdens (ib. 7 — 9) ;
hard-hearted, when the taskmasters complained to him (ib. 15 — 18); obdurate and
perverse, in resisting so many signs and wonders wrought for the purpose of movinof
him (ch. vii. 10—13, 20—23; viii. 5, 6, 16—19, 20—24; ix. 6, 7, 10—12); pitiless
and false, in twice breaking his promises (ch. viii. 8 — 15, 28—32). Yet God had
spared him. He had " made him to stand " (ver. 16) — i.e., preserved him in being
— and had retained him in his high station, when he might readily have caused his
overthrow by conspiracy or otherwise. So long-suffering was he, that he even n^vf
addressed to him freah warnings, and gave him fresh signs of his power, thus h;'
his goodness striving to lead him to repentance.

II. The power of God to break the will even or the most detekmi^ed
srauEE. God can so multiply, and vary, and prolong his judgments, that at last
the power of endurance, even in the case of the most obdurate sinner, is worn out
First he sends comparatively slight afflictions, then more serious ones ; finally, if the
stubborn will stiU refuses to bend, he visits the offender with " all his plagues " (ver. 14).
Man cannot triumph over God. Kings may oppose their wills to his, but they cannot
make him supeumb. He " refrains the spirit of princes," and shows himself " wonderful
among the kings of the earth" (Ps. Ixxvi. 12). Even the greatest monarchs — tins
present Pharaoh, Sennacherib, Nebuchadnezzar — are powerless against him. He
" refrains " them, breaks them, humbles them, works his will in spite of them. And
at what a cost to themselves 1 Unfortunately kings, and even less exalted sinners,
will rarely learn wisdom tiU too late. He has to send "all his plagues" upon them;
whereas, if they had been vrise, they might have escaped with a light chastisement.

III. The fact that all bbbistance of God's will bt sinnehb tends to ikcbbase,
AND IS DESIGNED TO INCBEASE, HIS QLOET. " The fierceness of man turns to God's
praise." He has endowed men with free will, and allows them the free exercise of
their free will, because, do as they like, they cannot thwart his purposes. Beins,
as he is, the God of order, and not of confusion or anarchy, he could not have allowed
free will at all to his creatures, if their employment of it prevented the accomplishment
of his own designs and intentions. But it does not ; it is foreseen, taken into account,
provided for. And the only result of men's opposition to his will is the increase of
his glory and of his praise. Great kings are seen arraying themselves against God,
determining to take Jerusalem, like Sennacherib (2 Kings xviii. 35), or to destrc^y
the infant Church, like Herod Agrippa (Acts xii. 1 — 3), or to rebuild Jerusalem, lilid
the apostate Julian, or to crush the Beformation, like Philip II. of Spain — and they
do their utmost; they levy armies, or man fleets, or collect materials and engage
thousands of workmen, or murder and imprison at their pleasure — but nothing comes of
it. Their efforts fail utterly. And the sole result of all their exertions is, that men see

EXODUS, , r



210 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. ix. 13—35.

and recognise God's hand in their overthrow, and that his glory is thereby increased.
All this is commonly declared in Scripture, and especially in the Psalms (Ps. ii. 4 ;
V. 10 ; vii. 11 — 17 ; ix. 15 — 20, &c.). The message sent by God to Pharaoh through
Moses adds, that the result is designed. "For this cause have I made thee stand
(marg.), for to show to thee my power ; and that my name may be declared throughout
all the earth" (ver. 16). Compare ch. xiv. 17, 18.; xv. 14^16 ; Josh. iL 9—11.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers, 13 — 35. — TJie plague of hail. This plague was introduced with ampler
remonstrance. Moses was commanded to proceed to Pharaoh, and to warn him in
stronger and more decisive language than he had yet employed of the folly of this insane
resistance. Ver. 15 should probably be translated, " For now indeed hid I stretched
forth my hand, and smitten thee and thy people with the pestilence, thou hadst then
been cut oif from the earth ; " and then ver. 16 will give the reason why God had not
cut Pharaoh off, but had " made him stand" (marg.), viz. : that he might show forth in
him his power. It does not follow that God would not have preferred to use Pharaoh
for his glory in another way than that of destroying him. This strong representation
of God's purpose was itself designed to influence the king for good, and had a spark of
sense remained to him, it would have wrought an immediate change in his volitions. In
that case God's procedure would have imdergone a corresponding alteration. For God
wiUs not the death of any sinner (Ez. xviii. 23 — 32), and threatenings of this kind, as
shown by the case of the Ninevites, are always conditional (Jonah iv.). At the same
time, God's sovereignty is seen in the way in which he utilizes the wicked man whose
persistence in his wickedness is foreseen by him. " God might have caused Pharaoh to
be bom in a cabin, where his proud obstinacy would have been displayed with no less
self-will, but without any historical consequence; on the other hand, he might have
placed on the throne of Egypt at that time a weak, easy-going man, who would have
yielded at the first shock. What would have happened? Pharaoh in his obscure
position would not have been less arrogant and perverse, but Israel would have gone
forth from Egypt without edat .... God did not therefore create the indomitable pride
of Pharaoh as it were to gain a point of resistance, and reflect his glory ; he was content
to use it for this purpose" (Godet on Rom. iv. 17, 18). Notice —

I. The teebible BAisma up (ver. 16). We are tauglit, 1. That God can find a use
even for the wicked (Prov. xvi. 4). 2. That God places wicked men in positions in
which their true character is maiufested, and his own power and righteousness are
glorified in their judgment. 3. That this is not the primary desire of God in relation
to any wicked man. He would prefer his conversion. If it beinrgedthat the situations
in which men are placed are not always those most favourable to their conversion, this
may be conceded. But they are not placed in these positions arbitrarily, but under
a system of administration which regards each individual, not simply as an end in him-
self, but as a means to a yet higher end, the carrying forward of the world purpose as
a whole. God cannot deal with the individual as if there were no such thing as history,
or as if that individual constituted the sum-total of humanity, or as if his salvation
were the only and the all-ruling consideration in the arrangement of the world. God
disposes of the evil of the world, decrees the lines and directions of its developments, the
persons in whom, and the sitxiations under which, it wiU be permitted to reveal and
concentrate itself; but he neither creates the evU, nor delights in it, and is all the while
working for its final and effectual overthrow. No situation in which God places man
necessitates him to be evil. 4. That the sinner's evil, accordingly, is his own, and his
ruin self-wrought. This is shown — and notably in the case of Pharaoh — ^by the
fact that God's dealings with him are fitted to change him if he wiU be changed
(Matt, xxiii. 37).

II. A PLAGUE WITH APPALLINO ATTENDANT CXRCUMSTANOEB (verSO Xviii. 23 26).

This plague, like many of its predecessors, was, 1. Severe in its character (ver. 24).
2. Destructive in its effects (ver. 25). 3. Distinguishing in its ranjie. It spared the
land of Goshet (ver. 26), But the peculiar circumstance connected with it — that whicli



CH. nt. 13— 35.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 211

marked it as the first of a new order of plagues — was, 4. Its combination of terror with
itiblimity, its power to appal as well as to puiiish. A last attempt was to be made to
break down the opposition of the monarch by displays of God's majesty and omnipotence
which should shake his very heart (ver. 14). Instead of frogs, lice, flies, pestilence, and
boils on man and beast, Pharaoh was now to be made to hear " voices of God " in the
thunder (ver. 28, Heb.) ; was to see dreadful lightnings, masses of fire, descending from
the sky, and rolling in balls of fire along the ground (ver. 23) ; was to witness his land
smitten with terrific hail "very grievous," the Hke of which had never been seen in
Egypt " since it became a nation " (ver. 24). A thunderstorm is at all times terrible, and
when very severe, inspires an awe which few natures can resist. Accompanied by
preternatural terrors, its effect would be simply overwhelming. This was the intention
here. The strokes of God were to go to the king's heart. They were to convince hiin that
there was " none like Jehovah in all the earth " (ver. 14). They were to be plagues, as
Calvin says, " that would not only strike the head and arms, but penetrate the very
heart, and inflict a mortal woimd." The thunder is introduced as being " the mightiest
manifestation of the omnipotence of God, which speaks therein to men (Rev. x. 3, 4),
and warns them of the terrors of judgment " (Keil). On the peculiar effect of the
thunderstorm in awakening the religious nature, see a paper on "God in Nature and
History," Expositor, March, 1881. To the superstitious minds of the heathen these
unexampled terrors would seem of awful significance.

III. Twofold effects of waenings (vers. 20, 21). 1. God's judgments, like his
overtures of grace, are seldom wholly ineffectual. If the king was hardened, there were
at least some in Egypt who had become alive to the gravity of the situation, " who
feared the word of the Lord." Such were to be found even among the servants of Pharaoh,
in the palace itself. The preaching of the Gospel, even under the most unpropitiouj
circumstances, will seldom fail of some fruit. There were " certain men " which " clave "
to Paul, " and believed " at Athens ; " among the which was Dionysius, the Areopagite,
and a woman named Damaris, and others with them" (Acts xvii. 34). 'Ihere wer«
"saints" — mirabile dictu — even in Nero's palace (PhU. iv. 22). 2. The division of
men, in their relation to the Word of God, is a very simple one. There are those who
fear and regard it, and there are those who disregard and disobey it. Paul speaks of
those to whom Gospel-preaching is a savour of death unto death, and of those to whoa
it is a savour of life unto life (2 Cor. ii. 16). Between the two classes there is no
third. The effects of his own preaching are thus summed up, " And some believed the
things which were spoken, and some believed not " (Acts xxviii. 24). 3. Faith reveal*
itself in obedience. He that feared God's word brought in his cattle ; he that disregarded
it left them in the fi.elds. 4. The wisdom of regardiug God, and the folly of disregarding
him, were made manifest by the result.

IV. Pharaoh's capitulation (vers. 27, 28). The supernatural concomitants of thii
appalling visitation so unnerved the king that he was induced again to send for Moses.
He did not yield till the plague was actually on the land, and only then, because he
could not help it. The terms in which he makes his submission show, 1. His
undisguised terror. 2. His thorough conviction that he was in the hands of the God
of the whole earth. Pharaoh had by this time had a course of instruction in the
" evidences," which left no room for further doubt. The most striking feature in his
Bubmission, however, is, 8. His confession of sin. " I have sinned this time ; the Lord is
righteous, and I and my people are wicked" (ver. 27). It was good that I'haraoh should
be brought to see that it was a righteous demand he was resisting, and that he was
inexcusable in resisting it. This much at least the plagues had forced him to
acknowledge, and it gave his hardening a yet graver character when subsequently
he retracted his word given. But the superficiality of the repentance is very obvious.
" 1 have sinned this time ; " there is here no adequate sense of the sin he had been guilty
of. FaL«e repentances have theiR root in superficial views of sin. They may be produced
by terro;, under compulsion ; but they are accompanied by no real change of heart ; and
renewed hardening is the only possible outcome of them. " As for thee and thy servants,
I know that ye will not yet fear the Lord God " (ver. 30).

V. Judgment tempebed with meect. God's mercy in connection with this plague
it conspicuous — 1. In giving the warning, so that those who regarded his word had the
opportunity of removing their servants and cattle (vers. 20, 21). 2. In sparing the



212 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. dc. 13—35,

wheat and rye (vers. 31, 32). 3. In removing the plague at the request of Pharaoh,
presented through Moses (vers. 28, 29).

VI. Habdening notwithstandikq. 1. Pharaoh, hardened himself (vers. 34, 35).
We ask, in surprise, how was such a thing possible? Pride, hate, anger, obstinacy
furnish the explanation, though it is truly difficult to conceive how they could so
madden a mind as to make it capable of persevering in a course of resistance. There is
the fact, however, and it is full of terrible warning to us. The hardening was obviously
now of the most serious possible kind. Pharaoh's nature had been thoroughly awakened.
He was no longer sinning in ignorance, but against clear light and conviction. He had
confessed his sin, and promised to obey. Hardening, under these circumstances, was as
nearly " sin against the Holy Ghost " as was then possible (John ix. 41). 2. His servants
hardened themselves (vers. 34). This is a fact which should be well pondered. It
might have been thought that only a Pharaoh was capable of such fatuousness. We
learn here that there were natures among his servants as susceptible of hardening
as his own. We do not need to be Pharaohs to be capable of hardening our hearts
against God. Persons in obscure positions can do it as readily as those on the pinnacles
of greatness. The king's influence, however, had doubtless much to do with his
servants' conduct. They took their cue from their lord. Had he submitted himself,
they would have done so also. Because he hardened himself, they must follow suit.
What folly ! to destroy themselves for the sake of being like a king — of being in the
fashion. Learn also the potency of example. Those in high positions have a powerful
influence over those dependent upon them. Well for them if they use that influence
for God's glory, and not to ruin souls 1 — J. 0.

Ver. 16. — The road to ruin. " And in very deed for this cause," &c. (Ex. ix. 16). The
character and conduct of Pharaoh as a probationer under the moral govermnent of the
Ever Living God is worthy of special and separate consideration. That he was such a
probationer should not be simply assumed, but made clearly manifest. All the great
light of natural religion shone upon his path (Eom. i. 19 — 25), hke stars in heaven upon
the path of every soul. Then there is the inward witness that speaks of the soul, of
God, of duty, of immortality (Eom. ii. 14, 15). Within the confines of his empire
existed a nation of no less than two millions, to whom had already been confided a part,
at least, of the " oracles of God." They were the recipients of such revelations as God
had already vouchsafed. Their beliefs ought not to have been unknown to him. Two
missionaries, direct from God, Moses and Aaron, were his teachers. They came with full
credentials. Providential judgments, not untempered with mercy (for warning after
warning came), spake with trumpet tongue. Some of his own people, convinced,
probably penitent, pleaded for the right. And yet this soul went from bad to worse.
We indicate the stages on the road to ruin. It is only necessary to premise that though
the stages are broadly manifest enough, they, in so complicated a character, occasionally
overlap, and are blended with each other.

I. Ukbeliep. Pharaoh's of the blankest kind (ver. 2). [Bead correctly, " Who is
Jehovah" i] The man a God unto himself, as all infidels practically are. The
representative of the Sun-God. Note the independent stand he takes all through this
controversy, as against Jehovah. [On this see Kurtz, Hist, of Old Gov. ii. 292.]

II. SuPEBSTiTioN. So docs the pendulum ever swing back from the extremes of belief
or non-belief. No soul can rest in that infidelity which virtually deifies self. Hence
Pharaoh played off against the representatives of Jehovah, the representatives of the
jjolytheism of Egypt — the magicians. So in modern times. There are the credulities
of atheism. Men who will not believe in the sublime truths of revelation fall to
intellectual drivelling. Notable instance, Comte's " Religion of Humanity." After all,
this is a witness that man cannot live without religion. [In this connection note the
connection between magic and idolatry, and of that, possibly, with demons, Kurtz, iL
246—259.]

HI. AiiAEM. In Pharaoh's case this was especially manifest after the secona (viii.
8), fourth (viii. 25), seventh (ix. 27), and eighth (x. 16) visitations.

IV. Confession. After the seventh (ix. 27). No wonder, for God had said before thig
judgment, " I will at this time send all my plagues upon thy heart." Coming calamity
WHS to be of a deeper and more searching kind. The man seems to iuive hqd an accesg vt



ea. li. IS— 16.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 213

real and honest feeling. Sees the sin of the people as well as his own. Confesses. But
the confession was not followed up.

V. Pbomise — VIOLATION. After second (viii. 8 — 15), fourth (viii. 28 — 32), and seventh
(ix. 28 — 35) plagues. A very common thing with sinners under Divine discipline — ■
promises of amendment — ^but the sweep onward of the bias toward iniquity is like that
of a mighty river, and carries the most earnest vows into the gulf of oblivion.

VI. Disposition to compromise. See viii. 25 — 28, x. 8 — 11, x. 24. Such penitence
as Pharaoh had was one of conditions and compromise. Israel's festival must be " in
the land ; " then not " far away ; " then only the men should go ; then all might go, but
the cattle must stay behind. So " We will give up sin, but only part of it. We will
yield ninety-nine points, not the hundredth. We will give up what we do not care for
so much, but keep what we peculiarly like. We will keep all the commandments,
but not give up our money. * • We will gain the credit and reputation of religion, but
shun the pain and denial of it." (See on " Pharaoh," in Munro's " Sermons on
Characters of the Old Testament," vol. i. ser. xv.)

VII. Indiffbeencb. Stolidity in matters of such high import as religion is a very
dangerous condition. Pharaoh assumed after fifth and sixth visitations an attitude of
hardened indifference (ix. 7 — 12).

VIII. Hardness of heart. Except in the objective announcement made to Moses
•t the first, there is no statement that Grod hardened Pharaoh's heart till after the sixth
plague (ix. 12). Up to that time Pharaoh hardened his own heart, or the fact simply is
stated, that his heart was hardened. In this matter man acts first sinfully, then God
judicially.

IX. Besistancg to appeal of others. See ix. 20, and x. 7.

X. Ruin.— E.

Vers. 13 — 16. — The earth is the hordes and the fulness of it. In this comprehensive
message from Jehovah, standing as it does about midway in the course of his judgments
upon Pharaoh, we have a peculiar and impressive application of the foregoing word
of the Psalmist (Ps. xxiv. 1). The word " earth," it wUl be noticed, stands in a very
prominent position in each of the verses 14, 15, 16. Evidently, then, we should give
the word an equally prominent position in our thoughts, and connect with it the
truths to be drawn out of this message. It wiU then be seen that Jehovah has many
ways of showing that the earth is his and the fulness of it. It is all his ; not Pharaoh's,
not any other potentate's, not even Israel's — except as Israel is chosen by Jehovah,
duly trained and prepared by him, subjected and obedient to him. We have to consider
this message, then, under three heads, as suggested by the occurrence of the word
" earth " in these three verses. Note, however, first, the way in which Moses approaches
Pharaoh on this occasion. In ch. vii. 15, he is told to get to Pharaoh in the morning
and meet him by the river's brink; thus there is a general indication of time and
a particular indication of place. In ch. viii. 20, he is told to go early in the morning,
as Pharaoh comes forth to the water ; thus there is a more particular indication of time.
Now, in ch. ix. 13, there is the same particular indication of time, but no reference
to place. Thus it seems as if we got a gradation, a sign of increasing pressure and
urgency upon Pharaoh. Moses has to be ready for Pharaoh at the very beginning
of the day, and then, whenever and wherever he may meet with him, he can deliver his
message at once. Pharaoh had the whole day to consider as to the things which
were about to happen on the morrow. And now —

I. There is no one like Jehovah in the whole earth, and Pharaoh is to
BE MADE to KNOW THIS. Buoh is the Statement of ver. 14 ; and of course the whole
gist of it lies in the bringing of Pharaoh to a clear and unmistakable knowledge
of the supremacy of God over aU terrestrial powers. That there is none like Gud
in all the earth may be true, but the thing wanted is to bring that truth distinctly
and practically before our minds, and if profitably for us also, then so much the better.
This end had to be achieved in the instance of Ptiaraoh by persistent attacks of Jehovah
upon him, attacks ever increasing in effective force, tiU at last they proved irresistible.
It was not enough for others to be assured by Pharaoh's doom that there was none
like God in all the earth. Pharaoh must know it for himself, and confess it, not
\gg the ambiguous channel of speech, but by a most decisive act, the comriittal of



214 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. a. 13-16.

which ho cannot avoid (ch. xii. 31 — 33). And that he may be brought to such a
knowledge is the reason of the severe plagues that remain. We might, indeed, count it
enough to be told that Jehovah had sent all his plagues. We might rest upon Jehovah's
character, and say that whatever he does is right, even though there be much that
at first staggers us, and that continues to perplex. But the reason for all these plagues
is plainly stated, and if it be looked into it will be seen an ample, cheering, and
encouraging reason. 1'hough Jehovah is Sovereign of the universe, he does not treat
Pharaoh in an arbitrary way ; he acts, not as one who says that might makes right, but
as using his might in order to secure the attainment of right. Pharaoh's way, on
the contrary, is an arbitrary one, without the slightest mitigation or concealment.
Everything rests simply on his will ; and yet will is too dignified a word — ^whim would
be nearer the mark. And now that proud will is to be subdued and dissolved, so
far, at least, as to flow forth in the liberation of Israel, even though immediately
they be liberated it hardens again to its former rigidity. The announcement Moses
was now to make to Pharaoh we may fairly say would have been inappropriate at
an earlier time. It becomes God, in his first approaches to men, to draw them, if
perchance for their own sakes they may willingly submit ; afterwards, when they will
not be drawn, then for the sake of others they have to be driven. It is not until
Pharaoh fully manifests his selfishness, his malignity, and the reasonless persistency
of his refusal, that God indicates the approach of all his plagues. The man has been
humbled in his circumstances, but his pride of heart remains as erect as ever; and
Bo the full force of Jehovah has to be brought upon it in order to lay it low. He
18 at last to feel in himself, whatever he may say, that the true question is not
" Who is Jehovah, that Pharaoh should let Israel go ? " but, " Who is Pharaoh, that he
should keep Israel back?" He has gotten some rudiments and beginnings of this
knowledge already, even though they have made no difference in his practice. Every
time he has opened his eyes he has seen something fresh, which, however quickly
he might close his eyes again, he could not unsee. And now he is on the very point of
getting more knowledge, and that in a way very disagreeable to a despot. With
alarming rapidity, his people are about to he impressed with the supremacy of JehovaJi
(oh. be. 20; X. 7).

II. Notice the peculiar reference in ver. 15 to the destruction op Phabaoh. It
is spoken of as a being cut off from the earth. It seems that our English version
does not give the right tense-rendering in this verse, and that the reference is not
to what will happen in the future, but to what might have already happened in the
papt. If Pharaoh was not already a dead man, and Israel a free people, there was
nothing in this delay for Pharaoh to plume himself upon. Jehovah might have smitten
him with pestilence, and slain the strong, proud man on his bed, amid humiliations and
pains which would have been aggravated by the vanity of the regal splendours around
him. He might have made Egypt one great expanse of the dead, a land which the
Israelites could have spoiled at their leisure, and then gone forth at any time most
convenient to themselves. And if Jehovah did not thus slay Pharaoh and liberate
Israel, it was because he had purposes of his own to accomplish by the lengthened
life of the one and the intensified sufferings of the other. But apart from the question
of time, what awful significance there is in the expression, " cut off from the earth ! "
To this separation, made most eflectual, Pharaoh came at last. In considering this
expression, notice first of all the suggestion of our connection with the earth. A thing
cannot be cut off from the earth unless first of all it is connected with it. In respect of
many things the connection may seem very slight and unimportant ; but in the instance
of a human being, the connection is evidently intimate and important; and, until
our connection with heaven is established, not only important, but all-important. We
are connected with the earth by what we get from it. The very limitations of our
bodily constitution remind us of our dependence upon the earth. We are not like
the birds with wings to soar away from it, nor like fishes who can breathe vital
air under water ; we are emphatically of the solid earth. To its kindly fruits we look
for our sustenance, and out of it also comes our clothing and shelter. And then from
the earth in its still larger sense, " the great globe itself," consider what comes to us in
the way of occupation, instruction, interest, pleasure, opi^ortunities of getting aiid giving
in all sorts of ways. Item aU this Fhajaoh was at last cut off; and from all tbii



oa. a. 13— 16.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 215

we Also must one day be cut off. Gut off from the earth, as the tree, at the looti
of which the axe has long lain. When the tree has fallen it is still near the earth,
but it gets nothing from it. 'I he question for us to ask is, whether, while the tree
of our natural earthly life still stands, we are having the roots of a nobler, richer life,
even a Divine one, striliing down into the heavenly places? The cutting off from earth
will matter little, if the vanished life is found elsewhere, more flourishing and fruitful
than ever it was here.
III. Notice from ver. 16 that the vbbt pubposb of Phabaoh's bminencb is to

MAKE A UNIVBBSAL DECLABATION OF THE POWEB AND, SLOEY OF GoD. God did not

treat Pharaoh differently from thousands of others, as far as the essence of his dealing
with him is concerned. All who act as Pharaoh acted will suffer as Pharaoh suffered.
He was not a throned puppet, a mere machine in the hands of Divine power ; if he had
been, no instruction and no warning could be got from him for the guidance of voluntary
beings like ourselves. But being a downright selfish, proud, malignant man, God
put him in this high position that he might effectually publish both his folly and
his doom, and the power and name of that great Being whom he had so pertinaciously
defied. He was born a Pharaoh, put in royal prerogative and possessions by no choice
of his own, but we may most truly say, by the sovereign disposal of Jehovah. Thousands
have been as stubborn against chastisement as he, and have gone down to a destruction
as real, even though its circumstances have not been miraculous, imposing and memo-
rable. The difference is that Pharaoh's career was to be known ; and not only known,
but known as is the course of the sun and the moon, all round the earth. One such
career is enough to be recorded in a way so prominent ; one capital instance of human
folly and weakness and Divine wisdom and power, blazing up like a beacon-fire out
of the darkness of that distant past. Little did Pharaoh dream that, by his very
perversity and humiliation, he was making a name for himself such as none made
who went before or followed him, either in peace or in war. His memory is dragged in
a perpetual procession of triumph at Jehovah's chariot-wheels. And as it is wth
evil men, so it is with good. As there have been many of the Pharaoh stubborn-
ness, though only one of the Pharaoh notoriety, so there have been many meek and
gentle as Moses, though only Moses has been set for the whole world to gaze upon.
It is more important to have Abraham's faith than .it is to have Abraham's fame ;
more important to have the spiritual susceptibilities, experiences and aspirations of
David, than the power which could put them into immortal I salms. A man is not to
be reckoned more wicked because the story of his execrable deeds is borne on every
wind. A man is not better because he is better known. A few are taken for examples
and located in history, as only Crod in his wisdom is able to locate them. He ia a God
who presides not only over life, but over biography as well. — Y.

Ver. 13. — Harden not your hearts. Our position in considering the dealings of
God with men, resembles the position of scholars in some school observing and criticizing
the conduct of the master. Certain inferences cannot be drawn from partial know-
ledge. Moreover, God's dealings with us resemble, to some extent, the dealings of
a tutor with his scholars. Where intelligent appreciation is impossible through im-
maturity of intelligence, then action must seem arbitrary, however perfect may b«
the justification. Consider —

I. God's dealings with Phabaoh. We cannot, in this view, separate Pharaoh
from the social conditions which shaped his life. Great king as he was, yet, in God's
sight, he was but a man with great influence — a man intimately connected with other
men whose training and destiny were as important as his own. [^Illustration : In school
— one boy specially influential. The oonduct of the master towards him must be regu-
lated by considerations as to what is due to the whole body of scholars. The master
must act for the general welfare, without partiality towards any.] Had Pharaoh been
the sole occupant of Egypt, he might have been treated differently. As one amongst
many, the treatment he received is justified, if it can be shown to have tended to
the benefit of the community of which he formed a parti llllustration : Suppose boy
in school, bigger and stronger than other scholars, exerting a bad influence, bullying.
Teacher wUl speak to him. Knowing, however, his character, may foresee that speeai
will irritate, m^e-him more obstinate. Still, speech ignored, must go on to eoforc*



iii *hJ! book o^ fexoDuS. [ch, ix. it— 3lk

it by punishment, well knowing, all the while, that punishment will increase the
obstinacy of the individual recipient. Finally, may have to expel; yet, in justicf
to the rest, only finally, seeing that premature expulsion would but weaken hia
authority.] So God (1) spoke to Pharaoh by Moses (v. 1), then (2) punished him
again and again (ix. 14), only (3) finally expelled him ; foreseeing sul the while that
h^ treatment would but harden the offender, yet persisting in it for the good of others,
to strengthen and maintain his own authority (ix. l(j).

II. Effect on Pharaoh of God's dbalings with him. Keeping to illustration,
the effect on Pharaoh was just what might have been, and was, anticipated. 1. Effect
»f speech. Warnings and threats alike disregarded. The man so full of his own
importance that he would not listen ; would not allow the existence of a superior ;
only irritated ; made more obstinate (cf. chapter v.). 2. Effect of punishment. Pain
inflicted proves power to inflict pain. Pain felt prompts to any action which may
bring relief. Hence we find : — (1) Verbal confession, " 1 have sinned " [just like boy,
feeling punishment, ready to say anything which may remit the pain]. (2) A hardened
heart. The disposition was not altered by the infliction. " I have sinned " only meant
" I have suffered." Once remove the siuffering, and the sufferer showed himself more
obdurate than ever. It would have been easy to remove Pharaoh at once; but he
occupied an exemplary position, and must, for the sake of others, be treated in an
exemplary manner. Expulsion came at last, but God retained him in his position
80 long as it was needful thereby to teach others his power (ix. 16). Perfectly just
to ail; for even Pharaoh, though his conduct was foreseen, yet had it in his own
power to alter it. Hardened like clay beneath the sun's heat, his own self-determination
made him like the clay ; it might have made him hke the snow, in which case his
obduracy would have melted.

Amly. Many hke Pharaoh, yet aU do not act as he did under like treatment.
(Cf. Jonah iii. ; Daniel iv. 31 — 34.) The same treatment may soften as well as harden.
The heart, the self-wUl, the seat of the mischief — and there is a remedy for that
(cf. Ezek. xxxvi.), but not whether we wUl or no (Heb. iii. 7, 8). Other ways in which
hearts are hardened — Pharaoh's by active resistance, others by persistent inattention.
[lUustration — the disregarded alarum.] So Israel got used to God's dealing with them ■
10, too often we do (cf. Bom. ii. 4, 5 ; Fs. xcv. 8). — G.

Ters. 17 — 35. — The seventh plague — the hail mingled with fire. I. Consider the
PLAGUE ITSELF. 1. Ood has his " to-morrow " (ver. 18) as well as Pharaoh (ch. viii. 10).
Only when Pharaoh's " to-morrow " comes, there comes with it the evidence that he
means not what he says. But when God's " to-morrow " comes there is the evidence of hia
perfect stability, how he settles everything beforehand, even to the very hour. " To-
morrow, about this time." A whole twenty-four hours then Pharaoh gets for considera-
tion, although reaUy he needs it not, and cannot be expected to profit by it. But as we
gee presently, it is serviceable to protect the right-minded among his people. I'erhaps
the very period of consideration would make Pharaoh even to despise the prediction. He
would say to himself that a hailstorm, however severe, could be lived through, and the
damage from it soon made right again. 2. This plague comes from a new direction.
The heavens join the earth in serving God against Pharaoh. Our minds are at once
directed to the opening of the windows of heaven (Gen. vii. 11), and the raining upon
Sodom and Gomorrah of brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven. But we see
at once the great difference between these two visitations and this one. Terrible as it
was, it was not destructive as they, nor was it meant to be. God never acts so that
obliteration comes instead of chastisement, or chastisement instead of obliteration. He
nicely graduates his agencies so as to attain the desired results. And yet, though this
plague was not a Sodom experience, it was a sufficiently dreadful one. There was
nothing in Egyptian annals to dwarf it. All the power which God has stored up in the
atmosphere, and which, by its wide a/nd minute diffusion, he makes such a blessing, is
now concentrated so as to become correspondingly destructive. When man will not
obey, God can show the rest of his creation in remarkable obedience. Man is seen
becoming more and more repugnant to Divine control, while over against him other
things are seen becoming more and more amenable. What an impressive reminder ia
thus given to us, concerning our departure from God, and the discord that departuxa hai



produced. God sent thunder, and hail, and lightning. Even a slight thunder-stonn
disturbs the mind, and what a profound commotion of the soul this unequalled storm
must have produced. The sound of that thunder, one would think, remained in the ears
of those who heard it down to their latest hour. As to the lightning, we know more of
its causes than did the Egyptians ; but all our science will never rob it of its wonder
and terror. Franklin has taken away the mystery of it to our intellects, but God has
taken care that its power over our hearts should remain. When flash after flash fills the
heavens, the most vulgar and sensual of men is awed out of his sordid composure, at
least, for the time.

II. CONBIDEK THB REMARKABLE DISCRIMINATION OF GOD IN THIS PLAGUE. 1. Thl

txemption of Ooshenfrom the storm. " Where the children of Israel were, there was no
hail." This exemption now comes almost as a matter of course. (For though Goshen
is not mentioned as exempted from the ravages of the locusts, we may fairly conclude
that it was exempted.) How clear it thus becomes to those who receive this miracle
of the hail in spirit and in truth, that God has complete power over all the order of the
sky, sending rain, snow, hail, as it pleases him, gathering the most dreadful of tempests
over one district, and leaving another district that skirted it — perhaps even lay inside of
it as an inner circle — perfectly secure. In Goshen they heard the thunder, saw the
lightnmg, marked the fall of the bruising hail-stones, but these things touched them
not. Here is the oft quoted suave mari magno of Lucretius to perfection. God having
thus shown here, as elsewhere, his control of the heavens, it is a rational thing enough
to supplicate changes of the weather. We are then supplicating for what is quite
possible of attainment, even though it might possibly be better in such things
to take humbly and trustfully what God may send. 2. But much more notable here
than the exemption of Goshen, is t!ie discriminating way in which Ood treats the
Egyptian people. More and more have they been getting the opportunity to discover
whence and wherefore these visitations have come on their land. A certain preparation
was necessary to give them the power fairly and fully to appreciate the appeal of
Jehovah in ver. 19. The very exemptions of Goshen already would have done much to
lead them to some perception of the real state of aftairs, and all along indeed each
wonder had said, " He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." There are some who are
deaf, even to thunder, and others to whom the still, small voice speaks in the clearest ol
tones and the plainest of words concerning all truth and duty, is'otice with what
wisdom God acted in taking a plague of this sort to discriminate among the Egyptians.
They had the chance of sheltering themselves from its worst consequences by a timely
attention to his warning. The test was effectual as to who feared the word of Jehovah.
AU that he wanted was that the fear should lead to belief in the prediction, and action
corresponding with the belief. When it becomes needful to exempt Goshen, then
assuredly it is also just to give right-minded, open-minded, and prudent Egyptians the
chance, if not of exemption, at aU events, of relief. They are not all Egypt who are of
Egypt, as they are not all Israel who are of Israel. Among the nominal believers there
are the worst of infidels ; and among the nominal infidels there may be, not, of course,
{he best of believers, but those whose germinant faith may grow up into the most
abundant and glorious fruit-bearing. Kotioe how this was the experience of the
Apostles; they constantly found faith and unbelief side by side (Acts xiii. 42 — i5;
xiv. 1 — 4 ; xvii. 4, 12, 34 ; xix. 8, 9). Nowhere is this stated more impressively and
antithetically than at the very close of the apostolic story ; " Some believed the things
which' were spoken, and some believed not " (Acts xxviii. 24). Men themselves are
continually making preliminary and unconscious separation between the sheep and the



,ts.

III. Consider the fresh confession and promise which this plague at last
EXTORTS from Pharaoh. This confession has a very hopeful appearance upon the
surface ; but then we suddenly remember how hopeless God himself is of any permanent
yielding from Pharaoh, any surrender of his entire nature. Nothing is easier than to
■ay, " I have sinned ; " nothing is harder than to say it with right knowledge of what
■in is, and deep contrition and humiliation, because of its all-dominating presence in tha
lifb. Pharaoh uses strong words here, and there is a great appearance of spontaneity and
•incerity, but God is not deceived ; and we only need to look into the words to be very
quickly undeceived ourselves. Indeed, as we examine Pharaoh's utterance, we find that



218 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [ca. li. 1»~21.

by a most effective contrast it shows us how to discern the elements of an adequate and
acceptable confession of sin. 1. Such a confession must have reference to a permanent
itate of the character. Sin is not a mere outward act, so that a man may sometimes be
sinning, and sometimes not sinning. " 1 have sinned this time." This time ! There
you have the mark of a mere lip acknowledgment ; of one who confounds the mere
selfish dangers and discomforts that grow out of sin with sin itself. The right confession
therefore, is the word of one who has come to a knowledge of the deep and accursed
fountain within, of those reservoirs in the thoughts and intents of the heart whence all
particular actions flow. He who rightly confesses knows that it is a life that needs
to be cleansed, and not a mere limb that needs to be amputated. 2. Ft must be
dbsorhingly personal. It must occupy in the most imperative fashion all the individual
consciousness. If there is any time when, as one may say, it is a man's duty to look
on his own things, and not the things of others, it is when he is labouring to get the
proper conviction of sin. He is not to lose himself in the crowd ; he is to st^d out
before his own mind's eye — self so unsparingly revealed to self — ^that nothing less will
do to say than, " I am the chief of sinners." For not till a man knows what it is to be
the chief of sinners is he in the way of discovering what it is to be the chief of saints
" 1 and my people are wicked," says Pharaoh. It was a false unity ; a claim of unity
dictated even by pride, for he had become incapable of thinking of his people apart
from himself. He calls them one in wickedness, when they were not one ; for some
had this possibiUty of goodness at least, that they feared Jehovah enough to
follow his covmsels (ver. 20). And later, when the mixed multitude went out with
Israel (ch. xii. 38), what then became of the boast, " I and my people " ? 3. It must
desire the removal of sin itself; of the guilty conscience, the depraved imagination, the
unbrotherly and unneighbourly feelings, the intellect darkened with ignorance and error.
Above all, it will desire to have the life reconciled, filial, and serviceable towards God.
What is the avoidance of physical sufi^ering and loss, compared with the sweeping away
of far more intimate elements of misery ? Only when there are such desires in the heart
will the word " 1 have sinned " operate to secure an immediate reversal of the life. Israel
said "we have sinned," when they had rebelled against Jehovah because of the
distasteful report of the spies. What their confession was worth is seen in the
immediate sequel (Num. xiv. 40 — 45). Balaam said to the angel in the way, " I have
sinned," but for all that he did not turn back ; he was only too glad to go forward and
work for the wages of unrighteousness (Num. xxii. 34). 4. It must be a confession to God
himself, and not a mere talk to others about God being righteous. All that Pharaoh
wanted was to have Moses entreat for the withdrawal of present suffering. ITie
acknowledgment, such as it was, was to Moses and not to Jehovah. Now confessions
of this sort are useless. The thing wanted is, not a supplication to possible intercessors,
but to the Holy One on high, seen through and above the mediating s^ent, It is not
enough to be brought to a knowledge of Jesus as saving from sin ; indeed, we may only
be deluding ourselves with mere words, except as we gain that glorious part of the
salvation which consists in the knowledge of him whom Jesus himself knew so well, and
desired, with such earnest desire, to reveal to his disciples also. — Y.

Vers. 13 — 21. Mercy in Judgment. — I. God's pukpose ts dealhto with the

WICKED BY CHASTISEMENT AND NOT BY JUDGMENT (13 — 16). God might have dcSolatcd

the land, and let Israel pass imquestioned through the midst of it. But in Pharaoh and
his people the Lord would, by foretold, contiaued, deepening chastisements, reveal the
terror and resistlessness of his power. He would make the heart of the oppressor quail
in every age and nation, and stir Up the oppressed to hope and prayer. But for this
prolonged contest with Pharaoh we should have lacked much that 1ms gone to deepen
holy fear of God and trust in him.

II. How God leads up the weakest faith into strength (20, 21). 1. Warning
was given, and those who had merely faith enough to believe that God's word might be
kept, had time to save their servants and their cattle. 2. In the after contrast between
themselves and those who had despised the warning, faith would spring up into full
assurance. 'J'he trust we give to God, like the seed we cast into the soil, is given back
to us an hundiedfold. How God answers the prayer, " Lord increase our faith." — ^U.



OS. nt 27-^.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



21S



EXPOSITION.



V«n. 37 — S5. — ^The plagne of hail impressed
tha Fhaiaoh more than any previous one. It
was the first which had inflicted death on men.
It was a most striking and terrible manifes-
tation. It was quite onlike anything which the
Egyptians had ever experienced before (vers.
18, 24). It was, by manifest miracle, made
to fall on the Egyptians only (ver. 26).
Pharaoh was therefore more humbled than
ever previously. He acknowledged that he
" had sinned " (ver. 27) ; he added a confession
that " Jehovah [alone] was righteous, he and
his people wicked" (find.). And, as twice
before, he expressed his willingness to let the
Israelites take their departure if the plague
were removed (ver. 28). The ultimate results,
however, were not any better than before.
No sooner had Moses prayed to God, and pro-
enred the cessation of the plague, than the
king repented of his repentance, "hardened
his heart ; " and, once more casting bis promise
to the winds, refused to permit the Israelites
to depart (vers. 83 — 35). His people joined
him in this act of obduracy (ver. 84), perhaps
thinking that they had now suffered the worst
that could befall them.

Ver. 27. — And Pharaoh sent. Compare
eh. viii. 8, and 2S — ^28. Pharaoh had been
driven to entreat only twice before. I have
ginned this time. The meaning is, "I ac-
knowledge this time that I have sinned "
(Kaliscb, Cook). " I do not any longer main-
tain that my condnct has been right." The
confession is made for the first time, and seems
to have been extorted by the terrible nature
of the plague, which, instead of passing off,
like most storms, continued. The Lord is
righteous, etc. Literally, "Jehovah is the
Just One ; and I and my people are (he
sinners." The confession seems, at first sight,
ample and satisfactory ; but there is perhaps
some shifting of sin, that was all b^ own,
npon the Egyptian " people," which indicates
disingenuousness

Ver. 28. — Mighty thnnderings. Literally,
M in the margin, " voices of God." Thunder
was regarded by many nations of antiquity
as the actual voice of a god. In the Yedic
theology, Indra spoke in thunder. The Egyp-
tian view on the subject has not been ascer-
tained.

Ver. 29. — ^Ab soon as I am gone ont of the
dty. "Tbecity" is probably Tanis (Zoan).
We may gather from the expression of this
vene, and again of verse 33, that Moses and
Aaron did not live in the city, hot in the



eonntry with the other Israehtes. When it
was necessary for them to have an interview
with the king, they sought the city: when
their interview was over they quitted it. To
obtain for Pharaoh a speedy accomplishment
of his wish, Moses undertakes to pray for
the removal of the plagne as soon as he it
outside the city walls. That thoa mayest
know that the earth is the Lord's. The
phrase used is ambiguous. It may mean
either " that the earth is Jehovah's," or " that
the land (of Egypt) is his." On the whole,
perhaps tiie former rendering is the best
The other plagues sufiSciently showed that
Egypt was Jehovah's ; this, which came from
the open heaven that surrounds and embraces
the whole world, indicated that the entire
earth was his. (Comp. Ps. xxiv. 1 : " The
earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof : the
world, and they that dwell therein.")

Ver. 80. — I know that ye will not yet fear
the Lord. True fear of God is shown by
obedience to his commands. Pharaoh and his
servants had the sort of fear which devils
have — "they believed and trembled." But
they had not yet that real reverential fear
which is joined with love, and has, as its
fruit, obedience. So the event showed (See
verses 34, 35.)

Vers. 31, 32. — ^These verses seem ont of
place, containing, as they do, an account of
the damage done by the hail, and being thns
exegeticai of verse 25. They are a sort of
afterthought, inserted parenthetically, and pre-
pare the way for the understanding of the
next plague; since, if the damage done by the
hail had extended to all the crops, there would
have been nothing left for the locusts to
devour.

Ver. 31. — ^The flax and the barley was
smitten. Flax was largely cultivated by the
Egyptians, who preferred linen garments to
any other (Herod, ii. 37), and allowed the
priests to wear nothing but linen. Several
kinds of flax are mentioned as grown in
Egypt (Plin. H. N. xix. 1) ; and the neigh-
bourhood of Tanis is expressly said to have
been one of the places where the flax was
produced. The flax is boiled, i.e. blossoms
towards the end of January or beginning of
February, and the barley comes into ear about
the same tune, being commonly cut in March.
Barley was employed largely as the food of
horses, and was used also for the manufacture
of beer, which was a common Egyptian
beverage. A certain quantity was made by
the poorer classes into bread.

Ver. 32. — ^The wheat and the rie were
not smitten, for they were not grown up.
In Egypt the wheat harvest is at least a
month later than the barley harvest, coming
in April, whereas the barley harvest jf finiiliai



tHB teooS OP tixoDiJS.



[cH. a. 27 — 3&.



Inr the end of March. Bye ^na not grown in
Egypt ; and it is generally agreed that the
Hebrew word here translated " rie " means the
Eolcus torghum, or doora, which is the only
grain besides wheat and barley represented
on the Egyptian monuments. The do-va is
now raised commonly as an after-crop ; b <t, if
sown late in the autumn, it would ripen about
the same time as the wheat.

Yer. 33. — The rain was not poured upon
the earth. Bain had not been previously
mentioned, as it was no part of the plague,
that is, it caused no damage. But Moses,
recording the cessation as an eye-witness,
recollects that rain was mingled with the hail,
and that, at his prayer, the thnnder, the hail,
and the rain all ceased. The touch is one
which no later writer would have introduced.

Yer. 34. — He sinned yet more, and har-
dened his heart. Altogether there are three
different Hebrew verbs, which our translators
haTe rendered hj "harden," or "hardened" —



kdbad, qashdh, and khazaq. The first o(
these, which occurs in ch. vii. 14 ; viii. 15, 32 ;
ix. 7 and 34, is the weakest of the three, and
means to be " dull " or " heavy," rather than
" to be hard." The secolid, which appears in
ch. vii. 3, and xiii. 15, is a stronger term, and
means "to be hard," or, in the HiphU, "to
make hard." But the third has the most in-
tensive sense, implying fixed and stubborn
resolution. It occurs in ch. iv. 21 ; vii. 22 ;
viii. 19 ; iz. 35 ; and elsewhere. He and his
servants. Pharaoh's " servants," t.e. the
officers of his court, still, it would seem,
upheld the king in his impious and mad
course, either out of complaisance, or because
they were really not yet convinced of the
resistless might of Jehovah. After the eighth
plague, we shall find their tone change
(ch. X. 7).

Yer 35. — ^As the Lord had spoken by
Uoses. Compare ch. iii. 19 ; iv 21 ; and vii
8,4



HOMILETICS.

Vers, 27 — 30. The mock repentance of a half-awakened sinner counterfeits the true,
hut has features hy which it may he known. It is not always easy to distinguish
between a true and a mock repentance. Here was the Pharaoh at this time very visibly —
l* might have seemed deeply — ^impressed. He was disquieted — he was alarmed — he was
ready to humble himself — to make confession — to promise obedience in the future. In
what did his repentance differ from true, godly penitence ? What points did it possess
in common with such penitence ? What points did it lack ?

I. It possessed the featubb ov self-humiliation. " I have sinned this time — ^I
and my people are wicked." Confession of sin is a very important point in true
penitence. There can be no true penitence without it. " I said, 1 will confess my sin
unto the LoriJ, and so thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin " (Ps. xxxii. 5). But it
may be made, under a sort of compulsion, as a necessity, without the rightful feeling of
contrition, or sorrow for sin, out of which it should spring, and apart from which it is
yalueless. We may doubt whether Pharaoh's confession sprang from a true, contrite
heart. There was a ring of insincerity in it. "I, and my people" he said, "are
wicked." True penitence leads us to confess our own sins, not those of others. There
was no occasion for introducing the mention of his people's sins, and, as it were,
merging his own in theirs. The people had not been appealed to, in order that they
might say whether the Israelites should be allowed to depart or not. They had no
doubt many sins of their own to answer for ; but they had had no part in this particular
tm. There is a covert self-justification in the introduction of the words " and my
people," as if the national sentiment had been too strong for him, and he had only
" refused to let Israel go " in consequonoe of it.

II. It possessed the fbatore of vindicating God's honour. "The Lord ia
righteous," or "Jehovah is the righteous one," was such a full and frank acknow-
ledgment of the perfect justice and righteousness of God as the heart of man does
not very readily make, unless in moments of exaltation. We need not suppose that
the monarch was insincere in his utterance. He was temporarily lifted up out of
himself — so impressed with the power and greatness of Jehovah, that he had for the
time true thoughts and high thoughts concerning him. He had doubtless a very
insufficient feeling or appreciation of the awful purity and holiness of God; but he
did feel his justice. He knew in his inmost heart that he had deserved the judgments
gent upon him, and meant to acknowledge thin. He was willing that God should
be "justified in his sayings, and overcome when He was judged" (Eom. iii. 4). He
niky hot have bad an adequate sense of the full meanmg of his own words, but he



CH. a. 27— 36.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 221

had some sense of their meaning, and did not merely repeat, parrot-like, phrases from •
ntuaL

III. It posbbssbd the pbatubbs op sblp-distrdst and op appeal to the ministers
OP God roB aid. Pharaoh " sent and called for Moses and Aaron." Not very long
before, he had dismissed them from his presence as impertinent intruders, with the
words, " Get you to your burdens " (ch. v. 4). Now he appeals to them for succour.
He asks their prayers — "Intieat for me." ISuch appeals are constantly made, both
by the true and by the mock penitent. Reliance on self disappears. God's ministers
take their due place as ambassadors for him and stewards of his mysteries. 1'hey
are asked to intercede for the sinner, to frame a prayer for him, and ofl'er it on his
behalf. All this is fitting mider the circumstances; for lips long unaccustomed to
prayer cannot at once otier it acceptably, and intercessory prayer is especially valuable
at the time when the half-awakened soul feels a yearning towards God, to which, if
miassisted, it is unable to give effect.

IV. It possessed the featube op making promise of amkxdment. "I will let
you go." Let but his prayer be granted, let but tlie plague be removed, and the
king promises that all his opposition to the will of Jehovah shall cease — the children of
Israel shall be " let go," they shall not be detained any longer. Amendment of life
is the crown and apex of repentance, and is rightly first resolved upon, then professed,
finally practised by the true penitent. But profession alone is no criterion of the
nature of the repentance. The sole certain criterion is the result. If the resolutions
made are kept, if the profession is carried out in act, then the repentance is proved
to have been genuine ; if the reverse is the case, then it was spuiious. The event,
however, can alone show how the case stands. Meanwhile, as we must "judge notliing
before the time," it would seem to be best that in every case a professed repentance
should be treated as real when it is put forward, whatever suspicions may be enter-
tained respecting it. No harm is done by treating a mock "penitent as if he were
a real one. Great harm might be done by a mistaken rejection of a true penitent.

V. It lacked, however, the peatuke of intense hatred of sin. The sinner
who truly repents desires above all things the pardon and removal of his sin. He
cares little, comparatively, for the removal of its chastisement. Sin, which separates
him from God, is the great object of his abhorrence ; and when he asks the prayers
of ministers or other pious persons, he requests them to intercede for him, that he
may find pardon and cleansing, may have his past sins forgiven, and strength granted
him to forsake sin in the futm-e. When Pharaoh, instead of such t. prayer as this,
asked for nothing but the removal of the temporal evil which had been sent upon
him as a punishment, it was easy for one experienced in the words of man to see
that his was not a real, genuine repentance. And this Moses seems to have perceived.
" As for thee and thy servants," he said to the king, " i know that ye will not yet fear
the Lord God." 1 know that the fear which now fills your hearts is not the true
fear of God — not a dread of his displeasure, but of the pains and sufierings that he can
inflict. 1 know that what you seek is not reconcilement with God, but exemption
from calamity. You are driven upon your course by alarm and terror, not drawn
by love. 1 know that when the affliction is removed you will relapse into your former
condition. Some more terrible judgment will be needed to make you really yield.
Note, then, that the minister, if he possesses spiritual discernment, may generally
detect an unreal repentance, and, however closely it apes the true, may escape being
deceived by it

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 22 35. I. The terrors of God's might. In that awful war of elements

any moment might have been his last, and I haraoh trembled. This plague evoked
from him the first confession of sin. Hitherto he had reluctantly granted the request of
Moses: now he casts himself as a sinner (27, 28) on God's mercy, and entreats the
prayers of God's servant for himself and his people. There is a point at which the
stoutest heart will be broken, and the cry be wrung from the lips, " I have sinned."
" Can liine heart endure," etc. (Ezek. xxii. 14).

II. The valuelessness of repentance born only of terror. God might thus
^w all men und?r him, but the conquest would be wortn nothing: men's hearts wonl(J



222



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. X. 1— 2a



not be won. When the terror is gone, Pharaoh's confession fails (30, 34, 35), for it hal
no root in any true knowledge of himself. He sees the darkness of God's frown, not
the vileness of his transgressions. God is met with, not in the tempest and the fire,
but in the still small voice which speaks within the breast. Many pass through gates
of terror to hear this ; but till God's voice is heard there, speaking of sin and righteous-
ness and judgment, there is no true return of the soul to him.

III. The fulness op God's merct. God knows the worthlessness of the confession,
yet he is entreated for Pharaoh and the Egyptians. God's pity rests where men will
have none upon themselvea. Though they believe not, he cannot deny himself. — U.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER X.
Vers. 1 — 20.— The Eighth Plague. Not-
withstanding his self-condemnation and ac-
knowledgment of the righteousness of God in
all the judgments that had been sent upon
htm (ch. ix. 27), Pharaoh no sooner found
that the seventh plague had ceased than he
reverted to his old obstinacy. He both wil-
fully hardened his own heart (ch. ix. 34) ;
and God, by the unfailing operation of his
moral laws, further blunted or hardened it
(ch. X. 1). Accordingly, it became necessary
that his stubbornness should be punished by
one other severe infliction. Locusts, God's
" great army," as they are elsewhere called
(Joel ii. 25), were the instrument chosen, so
that once more the judgment should seem to
come from heaven, and that it should be
exactly fitted to complete the destruction
which the hail had left unaccomplished (ver.
5). Locusts, when they come in fuU force,
are among the most terrible of all the judg-
ments that can befall a country. " A fire
devoureth before them ; and behind them a
flame burneth : the laud is as the garden of
Eden before them, and behind them a desolate
wilderness " (Joel ii. 3). They destroy every
atom of foliage— crops, vegetables, shrubs,
trees — even the bark of the fruit-trees suffers
— the stems are injured, the smaller branches
completely peeled and " made white " (iUd. i.
7). "When Moses threatened this infliction,
his words produced at once a great effect.
The ofScers of the court — "Pharaoh's ser-
vants," as they are called — for the first time
endeavoured to exert an influence over the
king — " Let the men go," they said ; " know-
est thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed ?"
(ver. 7). And the king so far yielded that —
also for the first time — he let himself be in-
fluenced by the mere threat of a judgment.
Qe would have let the Israelites depart, before



the locusts came, if only they would have left
then " HtUe ones " behind them (vers. 8—11).
Moses, however, could not consent to this
limitation; and so the plague came in full
severity — ^the locusts covered the whole face
of the earth, so that the land was darkened
with them (ver. 15) ; and all that the hail had
left, including the whole of the wheat and
doora harvests, was destroyed. Then Pharaoh
made fresh acknowledgment of his sin, and
fresh appeals for intercession — with the old
result that the plague wa5 removed, and that
he remained as obdurate as ever (vers. 16 —
20).

Ver 1.— Go in unto Pharaoh, for I have
hardened his heart. The word "I" is ex-
pressed in the original and is emphatic. It is
not merely that Pharaoh has hardened himself
(ch. ix. 34) ; but I have " dulled " or " har-
dened " him. Therefore condescend to see
him once more, and to bear my message to
him. The heart of his servants. Compare
ch. ix. 34. As Pharaoh's determination
began to waver the influence of the court
oSicers increased. Hence the frequent men-
tion of them in this part of the narrative.
That I might shew them my signs. The
" fierceness of man " was being " turned to
God's praise." It resulted from the obstinacy
of Pharaoh that more and greater miracles
were wrought, more wonderful signs shown,
and that by these means both the Israelites
themselves, and the heathen nations in contact
with them, were the more deeply impressed.

Yer. 2. — That thou mayest tell in the ean
of thy son, and of thy son's ton. The Psalms
show how after generations dwelt in thought
upon the memory of the great deeds done in
Egypt and the deliverance wrought there.
(See especially Ps. Ixxviii. cv. and ovi ; but
compare also Ps. Ixviii. 6, 7; Ixxvii. 14 —
20 ; Ixxxi. 5, 6 ; cxiv. 1 — 3 ; cxxxv. 8, 9 ;
cxxxvi. 10 — 15.)

Ver. 3. — How long wilt thou refuse to
humble thyself 1 The confession recorded in
ch. ix. 27 had bfifn a distmrt act of solf-
humiliation •, but it liad be'u caucelled by
subsequent self -assertion {fb. 31, 35), Ag\



oo. z. 1—20.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



moreoTer, humility of speech was not what
God had heen for months requiring of Pharaoh,
but submission in act. He would not really
"humble himself" until he gave the oft-
demanded permission to the Israelites, that
they might depart from Egypt

Ver. 4. —To-morrow. Again a warning is
given, and a space of time interposed, during
which the king may repent and submit him-
self, if he chooses. The locusts. The species
intended is probably either the AcHdium
peregrimun or the (Edipoda migratoria.
Soth are common in Arabia and Syria, and
both are known in Egypt. They are said to
be equally destructive. The Hebrew name,
arheh, points to the " multitudinous " character
of the visitation. A traveller in Syria says —
" It is diiBcnlt to express the effect produced
on us by the sight of the whole atmosphere
AUed on aU sides and to a great height by
an innumerable quantity of these insects,
whose flight was slow and uniform, and whose
noise resembled that of rain; the sky was
darkened, and the light of the sun consider-
ably weakened. In a moment the terraces of
the houses, the streets, and all the fields were
covered by these insects." (Ollivier, Voyage
dans r Empire Ottoman, vol. ii. p. 424.) Into
thy coast — i.e. "across thy border, into thy
territories." The locust is only an occasional
visitant in Egypt, and seems always to arrive
from some foreign country.

Ver. 5. — They shall cover the face of the
earth, that one cannot he able to see the
earth. This is one of the points most fre-
quently noticed by travellers. " The ground
is covered with them for several leagues," says
Vdney. " The steppes," says Clarke, " were
entirely covered by their bodies." " Over an
area of 1600 or 1800 square mUes,'' observes
Barrow, " the whole surface might literally be
said to be covered with them." They shall
eat the residue of that which escaped.
Locusts eat every atom of verdure in the
district attacked by them " In a.d. 1004,"
says Barhebrseus, "a large swarm of locusts
appeared in the land of Mosul and Baghdad,
and it was very grievous in Shiraz. It left
no herb nor even leaf on the trees." " When
thek swarms appear," writes Volney, " every-
thing green vanishes instantaneously from the
fields, as if a curtain were rolled up ; the trees
und plants stand leafless, and nothing is seen
but naked boughs and stalks." And shall eat
every tree. The damage done by locusts to
trees is very great. "He (the locust) has laid
my vine waste, and barked my fig-tree ; he bath
made it clean bare and east it away; the
branches thereof are made white " (Joel i. 7).
Travellers constantly notice this fact. " When
they have devoured all other vegetables," says
one, "they attack the trees, consuming first
the leaves, then the bark." "After having
"ODsamed herbage, fruit, leaves of trees," says



another, " they attacked even their young shoots
and their bark." " They are particularly in-
jurious to the palm-trees," writes a third;
" these they strip of every leaf and green
particle, the trees remaining like skeletons
with bare branches." A fourth notes that
" the bushes were eaten quite bare, though the
animals could not have been long on the spot.
They sat by hundreds on a bush, gnawing the
rind and the woody fibres." (See Pusey's
Minor Prophets, p. 106.)

Ver. 6.— They shall fill thy houses. Com-
pare Joel ii. 9. The witness of modem
travellers is .to the same effect. Morier says —
" They entered the inmost recesses of the
houses, were found in every corner, stuck to
our clothes, and infested our food" (Second
Journey, p. 100). Burckhardt observes—
"They overwhelm the province of Nedjd
sometimes to such a degree that, having
destroyed the harvest, they penetrate by
thousands into the private dwellings, and
devour whatsoever they can find, even the
leather of the water vessels" (Notes, vol. ii.
p. 90). An older traveller, Beauplan, writes
as follows : — " In June 1646, at Novgorod, it
was prodigious to behold them, be-;ause they
were hatched there that spring, and being as
yet scarce able to fly, the ground was all
covered, and the air so full of them that I
could not eat in my chamber without a candle,
aU the houses being fuU of them, even the
stables, barns, chambers, garrets, and ccUai's.
I caused cannon-powder and sulphur to be
burnt to expel them, but all to no purpose ;
for when the door was opened, an infinite
number came in, and the others went flutter-
ing about; and it was a troublesome thing,
when a man went abroad, to be hit on the face
by those creatures, on the nose, eyes, or cheeks,
so that there was no opening one's mouth but
some would get in. Yet all this was nothing ;
for when we were to eat they gave us no
respite ; and when we went to cut a piece of
meat, we cut a locust with it, and when a
man opened his mouth to put in a morsel, he
was sure to chew one of them." Oriental
houses, it is to be borne in mind, have no
better protection than lattice-work in the
windows, so that locusts have free access to
the apartments, even when the doors are shut.
Which neither thy fathe.-s, nor thy fathers'
fathers have seen. Inroads of locusts are not
common in Egypt. Only one reference has
been found to tiiem in the native records.
When they occur, they are as destructive an
elsewhere. Denon witnessed one in the early
part of the present century. Two others were
witnessed by Carsten Niebuhr and Forsk41 in
1761 and 1762 (Description de VAratne, p.
148) ; and another by Tischendorf compara-
tively recently. The meaning in the text is
probably that no gach visitation as that no>T
sent had been seen previously, not that Bgypi



2M



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



tcK. X.7— 15



kad been hitherto free from the sconrge. He
tamed himself and went ont. Moses did not
wait to learn what efiect his announcement
would have. He " knew " that Pharaoh would
not fear the Lord. (See ch. ix. 30.)

Ver. 7. — ^And Pharaoh's servants said unto
him. This marks quite a new phase in the
proceedings. Hitherto the courtiers generally
had been dumb. Once the magicians baJd
ventured to say — " This is the finger of God "
(ch. viii. 19); but otherwise the entire court
had been passive, and left the king to himself.
They are even said to have " hardened their
hearts" like him (ch. ix. 34). But now at
last they break their silence and interfere.
Having lost most of their cattle, and a large
part of the year's crops, the great men became
alarmed — ^they were large landed" proprietors,
and the destruction of the wheat and doora
crops would seriously impoverish, if not
actually ruin them. Moreover, it is to be
noted that they interfere before the plague
has begun, when it is simply threatened,
which shows that they had come to believe in
the power of Moses. Such a belief on the
part of some had s^prared, when the plague
of hail was threatened (ch. ix. 20) ; now it
would seem to have become general. A snare
to ns — i.e. " a peril " — " a source of danger,"
the species being put for the genus.

Ver. 8. — Hoses and Aaron were brought
again nnto Fharach. Pharaoh did not con-
descend so far as to send for them, but he
allowed his coortieis to bring them to him.
And he so far took the advice of his courtiers,
that he began by a general permission to the
Israelites to take their departure. This con-
cession, however, he almost immediately re-
tracted by a question, which implied that all
were not to depart. Who are they that shall
go t It seems somewhat strange that the king
had not yet clearly understood what the
demand made of him was. But perhaps he
had not cared to know, since he had had no
intention of granting it.

Ver. 9. — And Mosea said, We will go with
our young, and with our old. This state-
ment was at any rate unambiguous, and no
doubt could henceforth be even pretended as
to what the demand was. The whole nation,
with its flocks and herds, was to take its
departure, since a feast was to be held in
which all the nation ought to participate.
The Egyptians were accustomed to the atten-
dance of children at national festivals (Herod,
u. 60).

Ver. 10. — And he said, eto. Pharaoh's
reply to the plain statement of Moses is full of
scum and anger, as if he would say — " When
was ever so extravagant and outrageous a
demand made ? How can it be supposed that
I would listen to it ? So may Jehovah help
you, as I will help you in this — to let you go,
with ;|rour families." (TapA is " family," or



household, not " little ones." See Ex. L 1.)
Look to it ; for evil is before you. Or, " Look
to it; for you have evU in view." Beware,
i.e., of what you are about. You entertain
the evU design of robbing me of my slaves —
a design which I shall not allow yon to carry
out. There is no direct threat, only an in-
direct one, implied in " Look to it."

Ver. 11. — Go now ye that are men. Or,
"ye that are adult males." The word is
different from that used in ver. 7, which in-
cludes women and children. And serve the
Lord ; for that ye did desire. Pharaoh seems
to argue that the request to " serve the Lord "
implied the departure of the men only, as if
women and children could not offer an accep-
table service. Bat be must have known that
women and children attended his own national
festivals. (See the comment on ver. 9.)
Probably, he knew that his argument was
sophistical And they were driven cut.
Literally, " One drove them out." Pharaoh's
manifest displeasure was an indication to the
court officials that he wished the interview
ended, and as the brothers did not at once
voluntarily quit the presence, an officer thrust
them out. This was an insult not previously
offered them, and shows how Pharaoh's rage
increased as he saw more and more clearly
that he would have to yield and allow the
departure of the entire nation.

ver. 13. — The Lord brought an east win<l.
Locusts generally come with a wind; and,
indeed, cannot fly far without one. An east
wind would in this case have brought them
from northern Arabia, which is a tract where
they are often bred in large numbers. Denon,
the French traveller, notes that an enormous
cloud of locusts which invaded Egypt during
his stay, came from the east. AU that day.
The rest of the day on which Moses and Aaron
had had their interview with the Pharaoh.

Ver. 14. — ^Ihe locusts went up over all the
land of £gypt, and rested in all the coasts of
Egypt. This statement is very emphatic, and
seems to imply that the plague was more
widely extended than any that had preceded
it. Egypt extends about 520 miles from north
to south, but except in the Delta is not more
than about 20 miles wide. Columns of locusts
of the length of 500 miles have been noticed
by travellers (Moor in Kirby on Entomoluyy,
letter vi.), and 20 miles is not an unusual
width for them. But such a length and such
a breadth are not elsewhere recorded in com-
Bijotiou. 2hus the visitation was, in its
extent as well as in its circumstances, plainly
abnormal.

Ver. IS. — ^Ihe land was darkened. It is
not quite «lear whether the darkness here
spoken of was caused by ihe locusts when
they were still on the wing or after they had
settled. It is a fact that the insects come in
such deuse c}ouds tb»t while on the wing tbej



OH. X. 1—20.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



225



cbecnre tbe light of the sun, and turn noonday
into twilight. And it is also a fact that with
their doll brownish bodies and wings they
darken the ground after they have settled.
Perhaps it is most probable that this last is
the fact noticed. (CJompare ver. 5.) All
the fmit of the trees which the hail had left.
Injury to fruit by the hail had not been ex-
pressly mentioned in the account of that
plague, though perhaps it may be regarded as
implied in the expression— that the hail
" brake every tree of the field " (ver. 25).
The damage which locusts do to fruit is well
known. They devour it with the green
crops, the herbage, and the foliage, before
setting to work upon the harder materials, as
reeds, twigs, and the bark of trees. In Egypt
the principal fruits would be figs, pomegran-
ates, mulberries, grapes, olives, peaches, pears,
plums, and apples ; together with dates, and
the produce of thepersea, and the nebk or sidr.
The f nit of the nebk is ripe in March. There
remained not any green thing. '■ It is suffi-
cient," observes one writ'^r, " if these terrible
rolumns stop half an hour on a spot, for every-
thing growing on it, vines, olive-trees, and
com, to be entirely destroyed. After they
have passed, nothing remains but the large
branches and the roots, which, being under-
ground, have escaped their voracity." " Where-
ever they settle," says another, " it looks as if
fire had burnt up everything." " The country
did not seem to be burnt," declares a third,
"but to be covered with snow, through the
whiteness of the trees and the dryness of the
herbs." A fourth simis up his account of the
ravages committed by locusts thus — " Accord-
ing to all accounts, wherever the swarms of
locusts arrive, the vegetables are entirely con-
sumed and destroyed, appearing as if they had
been burnt by fire."

Ver. 16. — Then Pharaoh called for Moces
and Aaron in haste. Literally, as in the
margin, " hasted to call for M. and A." He
had made similtir appeals before (ch. viii. 8,
25; ix. 2Tj, but never with such haste and
urgency. Evidently, the locusts were felt as
a severer infliction than any previous one. I
have sianed. So, after the plague of hail (ix.
27) ; but here we have the further acknow-
ledgment, against the Lord your God and
against yon ; " against the Lord," in disobey-
ing his commands ; " against you," in making
you promises and then refuting to keep them
(ch. viii. 15, 32 ; ch. ix. 34, 35).

Ver. 17. — Only this once. Compare Gen.
zriiL 32. Pharaoh kept this promise. He



did not ask any more for the removal of a
plague. This death only — i.e. "this fatal
visitation " — this visitation, which, by produc-
ing famine, causes numerous deaths in a iiation
Pharaoh feels now, as his courtiers had felt
when the plague was first threatened, that
" Egypt is destroyed " (ver. 7).

Ver. 18. — He . . . intreated the Lord. Moses
complied, though Pharaoh had this time made
no distinct promise of releasing the people.
He had learnt that no dependence was to be
placed on such promises, and that it was idle to
exact them. If anything could have touched the
dull aad hard heart of the king, it would have
been the gentleness and magnanimity shown
by Moses in uttering no word of reproach,
making no conditions, but simply granting hit
request as soon a^ it was made, and obtaining
the removal of the plague.

Ver. 19. — And the iiord turned a mighty
strong west wind. Literally, " a very strong
sea-wind " — i.e. one which blew from the
Mediterranean, and which might, therefore,
so far, be north, north-west, or north-east.
As it blew the locusts into the " Sea of
Weeds," i.e, the Bed Sea, it must have been
actually a north-west wind, and so passing
obliquely over Egypt, have carried the locusts
in a south-easterly direction. Cast them into
the Bed Sea, Literally, " the Sea of Weeds.'
No commentator doubts that the Red Sea is
here meant. It seems to have received its
Hebrew appellation. Tarn Suph, " Sea of
Weeds," either from the quantity of sea-weed
which it throws up, or, more probably, from
the fact that anciently its north-western recess
was connected with a marshy tract extending
from the present head of the Gulf of Suez
nearly to the Bitter Lakes, in whicn ' grew
abundant weeds and water-plants. There
remained not one locust. The sudden and
entire departure of locusts is as remarkable as
their coming. " At the nour of prime," says
one writer, "they began to depart, and at
midday there was not one remaining." "A
wind from the south-west," says another,
"which had brought them, so completely
drove them forwards that not a vestige of
them was to be seen two hours afterwards "
(Morier, ' Second Journey,' p. 98).

Ver. 20. — But the Lord hardened Pharaoh's
heart. The word used here is the intensi\e
one, hhazoq, instead of the milder kdbod of
ver. 1. Pharaoh's prolonged obstinacy and
impenitence was receiving aggravation by the
working of the just laws of God. (See the
comment on ch. iv, 21,)



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1, 2. — GWs mercies and wondrous works to he kept m perpetual renvemorawm.
Man's forgetfulness of God's benefits is one of the saddest features of his existing con-
dition and character. He needs continual urging and exhortation to the duty of remem-
toing them.

■Kiorns. q



22d THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. x. 1— 2a

I, Hb fobgets especially those benefits which aee constant and continttous.
(a) Temporal benefits. Life, strength, health, intellect, the power to act, the capacity to
enjoy, the ability to think, speak, write, are God's gifts, bestowed lavishly on the
human race, and in civilised countries possessed in some measure by almost every
member of the community. And, for the most part, they are possessed contmuou,^ly.
At any moment any one of them might be withdrawn; but, as it pleases God to
make them constant, they are scarcely viewed as gifts at all. The Church would
have men thank God, at least twice a day, for their " creation, preservation, and all
the blessings of this life." But how few perform this duty ! Creation, preservation,
daily sustenance, even health, are taken as matters of course, which come to us natu-
rally; not considered to be, as they are, precious gifts bestowed upon us by God.
(i) (spiritual benefits. Atonement, redemption, reconciliation, effected for us once for
all by our Lord's death upon the Cross ; and pardon, assisting grace, spiritual strength,
given us continually, are equally ignored and forgotten. At any rate, the lively sense
of them is wanting. Few say, with David, constantly, " Bless the Lord, my soul,
and all that is within me bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, my soul, and forget
not all his benefits ; who forgiveth all thine iniquities ; who healeth all thy diseases ;
who redeemeth thy life from destruction ; who crowneth thee with loving-kindness
and tender mercies ; who satisfieth thy mouth with good things ; so that thy youth
is renewed like the eagle's " (Fs. ciii. 1 — 5).

II. He FoitGETS even bstbaordinabt MEitciES. A man escapes with life from an
accident that might have been fatal ; recovers from an illness in which his life was
despaired of; is awakened suddenly to a sense of religion when he had long gone on
in coldness and utter deadness ; and he thinks at first that nothing can ever take
the thought of the blessing which he has received out of his remembrance. He is
ready to exclaim, ten times a day, " Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and 1 will tell
you what he hath done for my soul 1 " But soon all fades away and grows dim ; the
vivid remembrance passes from him ; he thinks less and less of what seems now a
distant time; he neglects to speak of it, even to his children. Instead of "telling
in the ears of his son, and of his son's son, what things God wrought for him
in the old time," he does not so much as think of them. Very offensive to God
must be this foi'getfulness. He works his works of mercy and of power for the
VLiy purpose " that men may tell of them and have them in remembrance," may
" tuach them to their sons and their sons' sons," may keep them " as tokens upon
their hands, and as frontlets between their eyes," may " tell them to the following
generation."

IIL Pekpztual kemembranoe of bxtraoedinart mercies is best secoeed by
THE OBSEitvANOE OF ANNIVERSARIES. God instituted the Passover, and other Jewish
feasts, that the memoiy of his great mercies to his people in Egypt and the wilderness
should not pass away (Ex. x:ii. 24 — 27). So the Christian Church has observed Christ-
mas I lay. Good Friday, Ascension Day. Such occasions are properly called " com-
memorations." And individuals may well follow the Church, by commemorating
important events in their own lives, so they do it — (1) Gratefully ; (2) Prayerfully ;
and (3) Unostentatiously.

Vers. 3^6. — Qod's long-sufering towards the wicked has a limit. " How long wilt
thou refuse to humble thyself? " (ver. 3). " The goodness of God endureth yet daily."
His forbearance and long-suffering are wonderful. Yet they have a limit. God will
not proceed to judgment —

I. Until the "sinner has had full oppoRTrrNiTY roR repentance. Pharaoh
had been first warned (ch. v. 3), then shown a sign (eh. vii. 10 — 12); after this,
punished by seven distinct plagues, each of which was well calculated to strike terror
into the soul, and thereby to stir it to repentance. He had been told by his own
magicians that one of them, at any rate, could be ascribed to nothing but " the finger
of God" (ch. viii. 19). He had been impressed, alarmed, humbled so far as to make
confession of sin (oh. ix. 27), and to promise three several times that he would let
tne Israelites depart from Egypt (ch. viii. 8, 2ri ; oh.'ix. 2ri). But all had been of
Dci avail. No sooner was a plague removed at his bumble entreaty than he res\imed all
ui» old pride and arrogance, retracted his promise, aud showed himself as .stiil'-Mrked »*



cat 1—20.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 227

at tbo first. The time during which his trial had lasted, and God's patience euduredi
must have been more than a year — surely ample opportunity !

II. Until it is manifest that there is no hope that he will bepent. " What
could hftve been done more in my vineyard, that I have not done to it ? " God asks
in Iaa:ah (v. 4). And what more could he have done to turn Pharaoh from his evil
ways, that he had not done on this occasion ? Exhortations, warnings, miracles, light
plagues, heavy plagues, had all been tried, and no real, permanent impression made
The worst of all was, that when some kind of impression was made, no good result ensued.
Pear — abject, servile, cowardly fear — was the dominant feeling aroused ; and even this
did not last, but disappeared the moment that the plague was removed. Pharaoh
was thus constantly " sinning yet more " (ch. ix. 34). Instead of improving under
the chastening hand of God, he was continually gi'owing worse. His heart was becoming
harder. His reformation was more hopeless.

III. Until God's pukposbs in allowino the resistance of his will by thk
SINNER are accomplished. God intended that through Pharaoh's resistance to his
will, and the final failure of his resistance, his own name should be glorified and
" declared throughout all the earth " (ch. ix. 16). It required a period of some length —
a tolerably prolonged contest — to rivet the attention both of the Egyptians generally,
and of the surrounding nations. After somewhat more than a year this result had been
attained. There was, consequently, no need of further delay ; and the last three
plagues, which followed rapidly the one upon the other, were of the nature of judgments.

Ver. 7 — 11. — Man's interposition with good advice may come too late. It is im-
possible to say what effect the opposition and remonstrances of his nobles and chief
ofBcers might not have had upon Pharaoh, if they had been persistently offered from
the first. But his magicians had for some time aided and abetted his resistance to
God's will, as declared by Moses; and had even used the arts whereof they were
masters to make ;the miracles which Moses wrought seem trifles. And the rest of
the Court oflScials had held their peace, neither actively supporting the monarch,
nor opposing him. It was only when the land had been afflicted by seven plagues,
and an eighth was impending, that they summoned courage to express disapproval
of the king's past conduct, and to recommend a different course. " How long shall this
man be a snare unto us ? Let the men go," they said. But the advice came too late.
Pharaoh had, so to speak, committed himself. He had engaged in ^a contest from
which he could not retire without disgrace. He had become heated and hardened;
and, the more the conviction came home to him that he must yield the main demand,
the more did it seem to him a point of honour not to grant the whole of what had been
asked. But practically, this was the same thing as granting nothing, since Moses
would not be content with less than the whole. The interposition of the Court
officials was therefore futile. Let those whose position^entitles them to offer advice
to men in power bear in mind four things — (1) The importance of promptness in
bringing their influence to bear; (2) the advantage of taking a consistent line from
first to last ; (3) the danger of inaction and neutrality ; and (4) the necessity of
pressing their advice when it has been once given, and of not allowing it to be set
aside. If the " servants of Pharaoh " had followed up the interposition recorded in
verse 7 by further representations and remonstrances, they would have had some slight
chance of producing an effect. But a single isolated remonstrance was valueless.

Vers. 12 — 15. — The terribleness of God's severer Judgments. " It is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of tlae living God." " Our God is a consuming fire." " If the
wicked turn not, God will whet his sword ; he hath bent his bow and made it ready.
He hath also prepared for him the instruments of death ; he ordaineth his arrows
against the persecutors " (Ps. vii. 11 — 13). Every calamity which can visit man is at
his disposal. God's punishments are terrible —

I. Because he is omnipotent. He can smite with a thousand weapons — ^with all the
varieties of physical pain — aches, sores, wounds, boils, nerve affections, inflammation, short
breath, imperfect heart action, faintings, palpitations, weakness, cramps, chills,
Bhiverings — with mental sufferings, bad spirits, deprcKsion, despondency, giief, anguish,
fear, want of brain power, loss of self-control, distaste for exertion, &c. ; with

42



828 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. x. 1— 2a

misfortunes — ^siokaess, mutilation, loss of friends, ill-health, bereavement, death. Ha
can accumulate sorrows, reiterate blows, allow no respite, proceed from bad to worse,
utterly crush and destroy those who have offended him and made themselves hii
enemies.

n. Because he is absolutblt just. God's judgments are the outcome of his justice,
and therefore most temble. What have we not deserved at his hands ? If, after all his
gentle teachings, all his mild persuadings, the preaching of his ministers, the promptings
of his Holy Spirit, the warnings furnished by the circumstances of life, the special
chastisements sent to evoke repentance, men continue obdurate — what remains but a
" fearful looking for of judgment and of fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries " ? (Heb. x. 27.) If each sin committed is to receive its full, due, and
appropriate penalty, what suffering can be sufficient ? Even in this life, the vengeances
that have overtaken the impenitent, have sometimes been most fearful ; what must the
full tale be if we take in the consideration of another?

1 1 1. Because he is faithful, akd cannot lib or repent. God in his Word has
plainly, clearly, unmistakably, over and over again, declared that the impenitent sinner
shall be punished everlastingly. In vain men attempt to escape the manifest force of the
words and to turn them to another meaning. As surely as the life of the blessed is never-
ending, so is the " death " of the wicked. Vainly says one, that he would willingly give
up his hope of everlasting life, if so be that by such sacrifice he could end the eternal
Bufferings of the lost ones. It is not what man feels, what he thinks he would do, or even
what he would actually do, were it in his power, that proves anything ; the question is
one of fact. God tells us what he is about to do, and he will assuredly do it, whatever
we may think or feel. " These (the wicked) shall go into everlasting punishment ; but
the righteous into life everlasting " (Matt. xxv. 46). Oh 1 terrible voice of most just
judgment which shall be pronounced on those to whom it shall be said, " Depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels " (Matt. xxv.
41) ! The cro^vning terror of the judgment of God is the perpetuity which he has
declared attaches to it.

Vers. 16 — 20. — The agency cf nature used hy God both in inflicting and removing
judgments. God's footsteps are not known. Since Eden was lost to us it has pleased him,
for inscrutable reasons, to withdraw himself behind the screen of nature, and to work
out his pm-poses — in the main, through natural agencies. He punishes idleness and
imprudence by poverty and contempt ; intemperance and uncleanness, by disease ;
Inordinate ambition, by collapse of schemes, loss of battles, deposition, exile, early death.
Civil government is one of the agencies which he uses for punishing a whole class of
offences ; hygienic laws are another. It is comparatively seldom that he descends visibly
to judgment, as when he burnt up the cities of the plains. So, even when he was
miraculously punishing Egypt' and Pharaoh, he used, as far as was possible, the agency
of nature. Frogs, mosquitoes, beetles, thunder, hail, locusts, worked his will — natural
agents, suited to the season and the country — only known by faith to have come at his
bidding, and departed when he gave the order. And he brought the locusts and took
them away, by a wind. So the temporal punishments of the wicked came constantly
tlong the ordinary channels of life, rash speculation producing bankruptcy ; profligacy,
disease ; dishonesty, distrust ; ill-temper, general aversion. Men curse their ill-luck when
calamity comes on them, and attribute to chance what is really the doing of God's
retributive hand. The east wind, they say, brought the locusts on them ; but they do
not ask who brought the east wind out of his treasury. God uses natural means also to
remove judgments. " A wind takes the locusts away." A severe winter stops a
pestilence. An invasion of their own territory recalls devastating hordes to its defence
and frees the land which they were ravaging. Eeaction sets in when revolution goes too
far, and the guillotine makes short work of the revolutionists. Want stimulates
industry, and industry removes the pressure of want. Even when men's prayers are
manifestly answered by the cessation of di ought, or rain, or the recovery from sickness
of one given over by the physicians, the change comes about in a natural way. A little
cloud rises up out of the deep, and overspreads the heavens, and the drought is gone.
He wind shifts a few points, and the " plague of rain " ceases. The fever abates.little
by little, the patient finds that he can take nourishment ; so the crisis is past, and



CH. X. i—20.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. a»

nature, or " the strength of his constitution," as men say, has saved him. The cbangea
•re natural ones ; but God, who is behind nature, has caused the changes, and, as much
M miracles, they are hia work.

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 1 — 7. — A new Message. Even yet God had not done with the King of
Egypt. He sends Moses again to ply him with reproof and threatening. The final
stroke is put off as long as possible. If" by aU means " (1 Cor. ix. 22) Pharaoh can be
saved, he will not be lost for want of the opportunity. God tells Moses his design in
dealing with the monarch as he did, and gives him a new message to carry to the roya]
presence.

I. God's desi&n (vers. 1, 2). He had hardened Pharaoh's heart and the heart of his
servants, that he might show these his signs before him, and that he might secure their
being had in remembrance through all succeeding generations in Israel. This bespeaks,
on God's part — 1. Definite purpose in the shaping of the events which culminated in the
Exodus. As Jehovah, the all-ruling one, it lay with him to determine what shape
these events would assume, so as best to accomplish the end he had in view in the
deliverance. It was of his ordering that a ruler of Pharaoh's stamp occupied the throne
of Egypt at that particular time ; that the king was able to hold out as he did against
his often reiterated, and powerfully enforced, command ; that the monarch's life was
spared, when he might have been smitten and destroyed (ch. ix. 15, 16); that the
Exodus was of so glorious and memorable a character. 2. It indicates the nature of the
design. " That ye may know how that I am the Lord " (ver. 2). We have alreaily
seen (oh. vi.) that the central motive in this whole series of events was the manifestation
of God In his character of Jehovah — the absolute, all-ruling, omnipotent Lord, who
works in history, in mercy, and judgment, for the accomplishment of gracious ends.
The design was (1) To demonstrate the fact that such a Being as is denoted by the
name Jehovah, existed ; that there is an absolute, all-ruling, omnipotent, gracious God ;
(2) to raise the mind to a proper conception of his greatness, by giving an exhibition,
on a scale of impressive magnitude, of his actual working in mercy and judgment for the
salvation of his people ; and (3) to make thereby a revelation of himself which would
lay the foundation of future covenant relations with Israel, and ultimately of an
universal religion reposing on the truths of his unity, spirituality, sanctity, omni-
potence, and love. Subordinate objects were the making known of his power and
greatness to Pharaoh himself (ch. vii. 17 ; viii. 22 ; ix. 13, 29), and to the surrounding
nations (ch. ix. 16). 1'he design thus indicated required that the facts should be of a kind
which admitted of no dispute ; that they should palpably and conclusively demonstrate
the character of God to be as asserted ; and that they should be of so striking and awful si
description, as to print themselves indelibly upon the memory of the nation. These
conditions were fulfilled in the events of the Exodus. (3) It shows how God intended his
mighty works to be kept in remernbrance. " That thou mayest tell in the ears of thy
son, and of thy son's son," &o. (ver. 2). God provided for the handing down of a
knowledge of these wonders (1) By giving them a character which secured that they
should not be forgotten. '1 ne memory of these " wonders in the land of Ham "
(Ps. cv. 27) rings down in Israel to the latest generations (see Ps. Lxxviii. ; cv. ; cvi. ;
cxxxv. ; cxxvi., &o.) ; (2) by embodying them in a written record ; (3) by enjoining
on parents the duty of faithfully narrating them to their children (ch. xiii. 14; Deut.
iv. 9 ; V. 7, 20 — 23 ; xi. 19 ; Ps. Ixxviii. 3 — 7). Bible history will soon get to be
forgotten if the story is not taken up and diligently taught by loving parental lips.

II. God's bequibembnt — humility. " How long wilt thou refuse to humble tliyself
before me ? " (ver. 3.) This lays the finger on the root principle of Pharaoh's opposition,
pride. Pride, the undue exaltation of the ego, is a hateful quality of character, even as
between man and man. How much more, as between man and God ! It is described
as " the condemnation of the devil " (1 Tim. iv. 6). Pride puffs the soul up in undue
conceit of itself, and leads it to spurn at God's dictation and control. It aims at a false
independence. It would wish to be as God. In the worldly spirit it manifests itself as
"the pride of life" (1 John ii. 16). In the self-righteous spirit it manifests itself u



230 THE BOOK Ot EXODUS. [ch. x. I— 20

spiritual pride. It excludes every quality which ought to exist in a soul rightly
exercised towards its Creator. Faith, love, humility, the feeling of dependence,
gratitude for benefits, regard for the Creator's glory — it shuts out all. It is incompatible
with the sense of sin, with the spirit of contrition, with humble acceptance of salvation
through another. It is the great barrier to the submission of the heart to God and
Christ, inciting instead to naked and impious rebellion. The degree and persistency of
the opposition to God which pride is able to inspire may be well studied in the case of
Pharaoh.

III. God's thbbat (vers. 4-^-7). He would bring upon the land a plague of locusts.
The magnitude of the visitation would place it beyond comparison with anything that
had ever been known. See below.

rV. Moses going out from Pharaoh. " And he turned himself, and went out from
Pharaoh " (ver. 6). He delivered his message, and did not wait for an answer. This
should have told Pharaoh that the bow was now stretched to its utmost, and that to
strain it further by continued resistance would be to break it. His courtiers seem to
have perceived this (ver. 7). Moses' going out was a prelude to the final breaking off of
negotiations (ver. 29). View it also as a studied intimation — 1. Of his Indignation at the
past conduct of the king (cf. ch. xi. 8). 2. Of his conviction of the hopelessness of
producing any good impression on his hardened nature. 3. Of the certainty of God's
purpose being fulfilled, whether Pharaoh willed it or no. It was for Pharaoh's interest to
attend to the warning which had now again been given him, but his refusal to attend to
it would only injure himself and his people ; it wovild not prevent God's will from being
accomplished. — J. 0.

Vers. 7 — 21. — The plague of locusts. Of the two principal terms used to denote
" hardening," one means " to strengthen, or make firm," the other, " to make heavy, or
obtuse." It is the latter of these (used also in ch. viii. 15, 32 ; ix. 7) which is used in
ch. ix. 34, and ch. x. 1. The growing obtuseness of Pharaoh's mind is very apparent
from the narrative. He is losing the power of right judgment. He began by hardening
himself (making his heart strong and firm) against Jehovah, and he is reaping the
penalty in a blinded understanding. This obtuseness shows itself in various ways,
notably in the want of unity in his conduct. He is like a man at bay, who feels that
he is powerless to resist, but cannot bring himself to yield. His power of self-control is
leaving him, and his action, in consequence, consists of a succession of mad rushes, now
in one direction, now in another. External influences — the remonstrance of courtiers,
the terrors occasioned by the [ Ingues — produce immediate effects upon him ; but the
recoil of pride and rage, which speedily supervenes, carries him further from reason than
ever. Now he is suing in pitiable self-humiUation for forgiveness ; again he is fimous
and unrestrained in his defiance. Passion is usurping the place of reason, and drives
him to and fro with ungovernable violence. We are reminded of the heathen saying,
"Whom the gods wisli to destroy, they first madden;" but it is not God who is
destroying Pharaoh ; it is Pharaoh who is destroying himself. If God maddens him, it
is by plying him with the influences which ought to have had a directly opposite effect.
Pharaoh, like every other sinner, must bear the responsibility of his own niin.

I. The intervention of I'haeaoh's servants (ver. 7). '^I'hese may be the same
servants who up to this time had hardened themselves (ch. ix. 34). If so, they now
see the folly of further contest. More and more Pharaoh is being left to stand alone.
First, his magicians gave in (ch. viii. 19), then a portion of his servants (ch. ix. 20) ;
now, apparently, his courtiers are deserting him in a body. It shows the indomitable
stubbornness of the king, that under these circumstances he should still hold out.
Observe, I. The subjects of a government have often a truer perception of what is needed
for the safety of a country than their rulers and leaders. Pharaoh's servants saw the
fall gravity of the situation, to which the monarch was so blind. " Knowest thou not
yet that Egypt is destroyed ? " Rulers are frequently blinded by their pride, passion,
prejudices, and private wishes, to the real necessities of a poUtical situation. 2.
Hardening against God makes the heart indifferent to the interests of others. The
ungodly mind is at bottom selfish. We have seen already (ch. v.) to what lengths in
cruelty ungodly men will go in pursuit of their personal ends. We have also seen
that Wdening at the centre of the nature is bound to spread till it embraces the whols



m. X. 1—20.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 2»

man (on oh. vii. 3). Pharaoh is an illustration of this. He was unboundedly proud;
aud " pride," says Miiller, " is the basest and most glaring form that selfishness con
assume." It is an egoistic sin ; a sin of the will more than of the affections ; a em
rooted in the centre of the personality. But Pharaoh was more than proud ; he was
God-defying. He had consciously and wilfuUy hardened himself against the Almighty,
under most terrible displays of his omnipotence. Driven to bay in such a contest, it
was not to be expected that he would be much influenced by the thought of the
suffering he was bringing upon others. Egypt might be destroyed, but Pharaoh recked
little of that, or, possibly, still tried to persuade himself that the worst might be averted.
The remonstrance of his courtiers produced a momentary wavering, but defiance breaks
out again in ver. 10 in stronger terms than ever.

n. A RENEWED ATTEMPT AT COMPROMISE (vcrs. 8 — 12). Pharaoh sends for Moses
and Aaron, and asks who they are that are to go to sacrifice (ver. 8) : the reply was
decisive ; " we will go with our young and with our old," etc. (ver. 9). At this Pharaoh
is transported with ungovernable rage. He accuses the Hebrew brothers of desiring to
take an evil advantage of his permission, and practically challenges Jehovah to do his
worst against him (ver. 10). He will consent to the men going to serve the Lord, but
to nothing more (ver. 11). Moses and Aaron were then " driven " from his presence. We
are reminded here of the transports of Saul, and his malicious rage at David (1 Sam. xix.).
Notice on this, 1. Wicked men distrust God. Pharaoh had no reason to question Jehovah's
sinserity. God had proved his sincerity by his previous dealings with him. And had God
actually demanded — what ultimately would have been required — the entire departure of
the people from the land, what right had he, their oppressor, to object? 2. Wicked
men would fain compound with God. They will give up something, if God will let
them retain the rest. There is a sweetness to a proud nature in being able to get even
part of its own way. 3. The thing wicked men will not do is to concede the whole
demand which God makes on them. What God requires supremely is the surrender of
the will, and this the recalcitrant heart will not stoop to yield. Part it will surrender,
but not the whole. Outward vices, pleasures, worldly possessions, friendships, these, at
a pinch, may be given up ; but not the heart's love and obedience, which is the thing
chiefly asked for ; not the " little ones " of the heart's secret sins, or the " flocks and
herds " for the pure inward sacrifice (see Pusey on Micah vi. 6 — 9).

III. The locust judgment (ver. 12 — 16). The predicted plague was accordingly
brought upon the land. It was the second of what we may call the greater plagues —
the plagues that were to be laid upon the king's " heart " (ch. ix. 14). They were
plagues of a character to appal and overirhelm ; to lay hold of the nature on the side on
which it is susceptible of impressions from the awful and terrific ; to awaken into intense
activity its slumbering sense of the infinite ; to rouse in the soul the apprehension of
present Deity. The first was the plague of hail, thunderings, and lightnings ; the second
was this plague of locusts. The points on which stress is laid in this second plague are —
1. The supernatural character of the visitation. 2. The appalling numbers of the
enemy. 3. The havoc wrought by them. We may compare the language here with
the description of the locusts in Joel ii., and it may be concluded that the effects
described as following from the latter visitation were more than paralleled by the terror
and anguish created by the descent of this scourge on Egypt. " Before their face the
people would be much pained ; all faces would gather blackness " (Joel ii. 6). It would
seem as if the earth quaked before them; as if the heavens trembled; as if sun and
moon had become dark, and the stars had withdrawn their shining (ver. 10) ! The
devastation was rapid and complete. " The land is as the garden of Eden before
them, and behind them a desolate wilderness" (ver. 3). Had the plague not
speedily been removed Egypt verily woul'l, have been destroyed. How mighty is
Jehovah ! How universal his empire 1 These locusts were brought from afar (ver. 13).
All agents in nature serve him ; winds (east and west), locusts (cf. Joel ii. 11), as well
as hail and thunder. He has but to speak the word, and all we have will "be taken
from us (ver. 15).

IV. Phabaoh's pitiable plight and further hardening (vers. 16 — 21). What wa
have here is a specimen of one of those violent contrasts in Pharaoh's later moods ta
which reference has been made above. Nothing could be more humiliating, more abject,
more truly painful, in its self-effacement than this new appeal of the king to Mose*.



«32 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oa. X. 1— 20

He had sinned, sinned both against God, and against Moses and Aaron ; would they forgive
him this once, only this once, and entreat God that he would take away from him this
death only ? (vers. 16, 17.) Contrast this with ver. 10, or with ver. 28, and it can hardly
be believed that we are looking on the same man. Pharaoh had never humbled
himself so far before. He beseeches for mercy ; almost cringes before Moses and Aaron
in his anxiety to have this dreadful plague removed. Yet there is no real change of
heart. The moment the locusts are gone pride reasserts its sway, and he hardens
himself as formerly. Learn — 1. That/aZse repentance may he connected with other than
tv/perjkial states of feeling. Phai-aoh was here in real terror, in mortal anguish of
spirit. The pains of hell had truly got hold on him (Ps. cxvi. 3). Yet his repentance was
a false one. 2. That fahe repentance may ape every outward symptom of real
repentanee. Who that saw Pharaoh in that bath of anguish, and heard him pouring
out those impassioned entreaties and confessions, but would have supposed that the
hard heart had at length been subdued? The confession of sin is vmreserved and
unqualified. The submission is absolute. Pharaoh was aware of how little he deserved
to be further trusted, and pled to be tried again, " only this once." Yet the repentance
was through and through a false one — ^the product of mere natural terror — the
repentance of a heart, not one fibre of which was altered in its moral quality. 3. That
false repentance may not he consciously insincere. There is no reason to question that
Pharaoh was for the time sincere enough in the promises he made. They were wrung
from him, but he meant to give effect to them. But the momentary willingness he
felt to purchase exemption from trouble by granting Jehovah's demand had quite
disappeared by the time the plague was removed. The repentance was false. 4. The
test of a repentance being false or true is the fruits yielded by it. The test is not the
depth of aui convictions, the anguish of our minds, the profuseness of our confessions,
the apparent sincerity of our vows, it is the kind of deeds which follow (Matt. iii. 8),
We have need in this matter of repentance to distrust ourselves, to beware of being
imposed on by others, and to be careful in public instruction that the real nature of
repentance is lucidly expounded. — J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 19. — Tlie Eighth Plague : the locusts. I. Consider the emphatic state-
ment WITH RESPECT TO THE HARDENING OF THE HEART. In ch. ix. 34 WC SIC told

that when the hail and the thunder ceased, Pharaoh hardened his heart, he and his
servants. Note here two things: 1. How Pharaoh's heart was hardened just after
he had made a confession of sin ; from which we see how little he understood by
the word " sin," and how little he meant by the confession. 2. The combination of
his servants with him in this hardening ; from which we may judge that just as some
among his servants had been taken further away from him by their prudent and
believing action when the hail was threatened (oh. ix. 20), so others had been drawn
still nearer to their master, and made larger sharers in his obstinacy and pride. The
unbelieving, who left their servants and their cattle in the fields, not only lost their
property when the hail descended, but afterwards they became worse men. And now
in ch. X. 1, not only is there a statement that the hearts of Pharaoh and his servants
were hardened, but God in his own person says, " 1 have hardened his heart," &c.
Then after this statement, so emphatic in the expression of it, however difficult to
understand in the meaning of it, God goes on to explain why he has thus hardened the
heart of Pharaoh and his servants. In the first place, it gives an opportunity for show-
ing Ood's signs before Pharaoh — " all my plagues " (ch. ix. 14). Thus God would turn
our attention here to the thing of chief importance, namely, what he was doing himself.
Important it certainly is to notice what Pharaoh is doing, but far more important
to notice what Jehovah is doing. We may easily give too much time to thinking
of Pharaoh, and too little to thinking of Jehovah. Thus God would ever direct us
mto the steps of practical wisdom. We are constantly tempted to ask questions which
cannot be answered, while we as constantly neglect to ask questions which both can
be answered and ought to be answered. The conduct of Pharaoh is mdeed a fascinating
problem for those who love to consider the play of motives in the human heart. In
considering him there is ample room for the imagination to work out the conception of
a very impressive character. Thus, we might come to many conclusions with respect
to Pharaon, some of them right, but in in likelihood most of them wrong, perhapa



ca. X, 1—20.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 23i

egregiously wrong" These are matters in which God has not given opportunity for
knowledge ; the depths of Pharaoh's personality are concealed from us. There is tru»
tmd important knowledge to be gained, but it is in another direction. The marvellous,
exhaustless power of God is to be more prominent in our thoughts than the erratic
and violent plunging of Pharaoh from one extreme to another. Amid all that is dark,
densely dark, one thing is clear — and clear because God meant it to be clear, and took
care to make it so — namely, that all this conduct of Pharaoh was the occasion for
unmistakable and multiplied signs of the power of God. One is here reminded of
the question of the disciples to .lesus (John ix. 2), " Who did sin, this man, or his
parents, that he was born blind ? " To this question more answers than one were
possible ; but Jesus gave the answer that was appropriate to the occasion. The man
was born blind, that the works of God should be made manifest in him. So not
only was Pharaoh's heart hardened, but God himself hardened that heart, in order
that these signs might be shown before him. Then, in the second place, these signs
being wrought before Pharaoh, became also matters for consideration, recollection, and
tradition to the Israelites themselves. Moses, taken as the representative of Israel,
is to tell to his son, and to his son's son, what things God had done in Egypt.
Here is ample occasion given for the observant and devout in Isi-ael to note the doings
ot Jehovah and communicate them with all earnestness and reverence from age to age.
Surely it was worth a little waiting, a little temporal suffering, to have such chapters
written as these which record Israel's experiences in Egypt ! AVhat are the sufferings,
merely in body and in circumstances, of one generation, compared with the ennobling
thoughts of God, and the consequent inspiration and comfort which may through
these very sufferings be transmitted to many generations following ! Why it is even a
great privilege for one generation to be poor, that through its poverty many generations
may become rich.

II. CJONBIDEB HOW THE TERRIBLE MAGNITUDE OP THE LOCDST-PLAGUE IS SHOWN BT

THE EFFECTS FOLLOWING ON THE ANNOUNCEMENT OF IT. 1. There are the expostula-
tions if Pharaoh's servants with him (ver. 7). Thfy, at all events, are not disposed to
wait for the coming of the locusts. That the locust-plague was a very dreadful one,
we may partly gather from other intimations in the Scriptures with respect to these
voracious insects, advancing in their innumerable hosts (Deut. xxviii. 38, 42 ; 1 Kings
viii. 37 ; 2 Chron. vii. 13 ; Joel i. 4 ; Nah. iii. 15). The experiences of modern travellers
in the East are also such as to assure us that the expectation of a visit from the locust
is enough to excite the most alarming thoughts (see in particular Dr. Thomson's obser-
vations on the locust in The Land and the Book). But in truth we hardly need to go
beyond the conduct of Pharaoh's servants themselves. The very name locust was
enough to startle them into precautionary activity ; they did not wait for the reality.
Some of them, indeed, had anticipated the destructive effect of the hail, and taken
suitable precautions ; but others felt there was room for question whether, after all,
the hail would be so pernicious. In their presumption they guessed that a hailstorm
could inflict only a slight and reparable damage. £ut what could escape the locusts t
Every green thing was well known to perish before their voracity. Even what might
be called an ordinary visitation from them would be no trifle ; how much more such a
visitation as Pharaoh's servants had now every reason to believe would come upon
them ! For the time was long past when they doubted concerning the power of Moses
to bring what he threatened. It is no longer a question of the power of Moses, but of
the endurance of Egypt. In all likelihood the thought now prevailing in the minds of
Pharaoh's servants — possib'y in Pharaoh's own mind — was that this run of calamity
would presently come to an end, if only it was patiently endured. For in ancient
Egypt there was doubtless some such proverb as might be Englished into our common
saying, " It is a long lane that has no turning." Egypt has known the long lane
of seven plagues ; surely it cannot be much longer. And yet it may easily be long
enough to destroy them before they get out of it. Locusts to come, when Moses
speaks about them, may be reckoned as good as come, if something be not done promptly
to avert their approach ; and once come, then how long will the food of Egypt remain,
either for man or beast ! No wondei', then, that Pharaoh's servants turned upon him
with such wann — one may almost say threatening — expostulations. The prospect cl
an immediate and almost instantaneous stoppage of supplies was enough to bring them



234 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. x. 1— 20

hastening, as with one consent, to beg a timely submission from their master. 2. Tltert
it the extraordinary yielding of Pharaoh to these expostulations. Nothing less than
extraordinary can it be called. His yieldings hitherto have been under actual chastise-
ment. He has waited for the blow to be struck before he begged for mercy. But now,
upon the mere threutening of the blow, he is moved to make overtures of submission.
We shall have to notice of what a partial and worthless sort this submission was ;
at present, the main thing to mark is that there was a submission at all. He could not
afford to trifle with the warnings of his servants. Hitherto, in all probability, they
had been largely flatterers, men who fooled Pharaoh to the top of his bent with oompli-
meuts as to his absolute power ; but now they are turned into speakers of plain and
bitter truth; and though Pharaoh may not like it, the very fact that he is thus
addressed is enough to show him that he must arrange terms of surrender before
another battle has even begun. Thus, by merely studying the conduct of Pharaoh and
his servants before the locusts came, we see very clearly what a terrible plague they
were. The plague of the locusts was a great deal more than a variation from the
plagues of the frogs, the gnats and the flies.

III. Consider how, in spite of all the dread inspired by the thought of these locusts,
Pharaoh's pride still hinders complete submission. It was in an emergency of
his government, and under pressure from his panic-stricken servants, that he consented
to treat with Moses. Moses comes, and Pharaoh makes him an offer, which Moses
of course cannot accept, seeing that he really has no power to treat ; he has but the
one unchangeable demand ; it is a righteous demand, and therefore the righteous
Jehovah cannot permit it to be diminished. But the rejection of Pharaoh's offer gives
him a convenient loophole of escape into his former stubbornness. He can turn to his
servants and say, " See what an unreasonable man this is. He comes expecting that in
the terms of peace I am to yield all, and he is to yield nothing. Better to risk the
locusts, and if need be, perish in the midst of our desolated fields, than live dishonoured
by yielding up all Israel at his inexorable request." Speaking in some such spirit
as this, we may well believe that Pharaoh stirred up his servants, and won them to
support him in continuing his dogged resistance. It is a noble principle to die with
honour rather than live with shame ; it is the very principle that in its holiest illustra-
tion has crowded the ranks of Christian martyrdom. But when a principle of this sort
gets into the mouth of a L'haraoh, he may so pervert it as to bring about the worst
results. There is no manlier way of closing life than to die for truth and Christ;
but it is a poor thing to become, as Pharaoh evidently would have his servants become,
the victims of a degraded patriotism. It was all very well to talk loud and drive Moses
and Aaron from his presence ; but what was the good 1 the locusts were coming none
the less. The fact is, that all suggestions of prudent and timely surrender were cast to
the winds. The pride of the tyrant is touched, and it makes him blind to everything
else. He rushes ahead, reckless of what may come on the morrow, if only he can gain
the passionate satisfaction of driving Moses out of his presence to-day. There is no
reasoning with a man in a passion ; all arguments are alike to him.

IV. Consider Pharaoh's ultimate submission and the consequence or rr. He
drove Moses and Aaron out of his presence, but nevertheless he had to yield, and that
in a peculiarly humiliating way. When he saw the locusts actually at work, then he
came face to face with reality ; and reality sobers a man. He had to send in haste for
the men whom he had driven away, for the locusts were in haste. Every minute he
delayed brought Egypt nearer and nearer to starvation. Oh, foolish Pharaoh 1 just for
the pleasure, the sweet, momentary pleasure of driving Moses out of your presence,
to risk the horrors of this ravaging host. Notice further, for it is a remarkable thing,
Shat while Pharaoh begs most humbly for mercy, he makes no formtU promise of libera^
tion. The promise, we feel, was really there, all the more emphatic and more evidently
unconditional, just because unspoken. Any way, the time had come when formal
promises from Pharaoh mattered little, seeing they were never kept. The great thing
was that he should be made to feel the pressure of God's hand upon him, so that he
could not but cry to escape from it. Every time he thus cried and begged, as he here so
piteously does — all his stubbornness for the time melted away into invisibility — ^he showed
in the clearest manner the power of Jehovah. Jehovah's end, in this particular plague
of the locusts, was gained when Pharaoh begged that they might be driven away>»T



OH. X. 1—20.] THE BOOK OF EXODUb. 23«

Ver. 2. — The tales of a grandfather. — Jehovah tells Moses, as the representativ*
of Israel, that these glorious Divine actions in Egypt are to be matters of careful instruc-
tion in after ages. Each parent is to speak of them to his children, and each grand-
parent to his grandchildren. And is there not something particularly suggestive in
111 is expression, " thy son's son " ? It brings before us the aged Israelite, his own part
in the toil and strife of the world accomplished, his strength exhausted, the scene
of his occupations left to a younger generation, and he himself quietly waiting for
the close. How is he to occupy his time ? Not in utter idleness, for that is good
for no man, however long and hard he may have worked. Some part of his thoughts,
it may be hoped, goes out in anticipations of the full and unmixed eternity now so
near ; but some part also will go backward into time, not without pensive and painful
interest. He looks from the eminence he has attained, and two generations are behind
him, his children and his children's children. His own children are busy. The world
is with them constantly, and its demands are very pressing. They hardly see their
offspring from Monday morning till Saturday night. It is only too easy for a man
to get so absorbed in seeking the good of strangers, as to have no time for his own
household. The following extract from the biography of Wilberforce bears in a very
instructive way on this point. " It is said that his children seldom got a quiet minute
with him during the sitting of Parliament. So long as they were infants he had not
time to seek amusement from them. Even whilst they were of this age, it made a
deep impression on his mind when, one of them beginning to cry as he took him up,
the nurse said naturally, by way of explanation, ' He always is afraid of strangers.' "
And if this danger of distance between him and his children came to a man like
Wilberforce, we may be sure that it comes to thousands who are less sensitive and
conscientious than he was. What a field of usefulness, then, is here indicated for a
grandfather 1 In his retirement, and out of his long experience, he may speak of
principles the soundness of which he has amply established, and errors which he has
had painfnlJy to correct ; he may point to a rich harvest gathered from good seed he
has been able to sow. Thus the grandfather finds opportunities for useful instruction
which the father, alas ! may not even seek. Of such it may be truly said, " They shall
bring forth fruit in old age" (Ps. xcii. 14). Notice here two points:—

I. It is well fob the younger to look forward with concern to the occd-
PATIONS OF A POSSIBLE OLD AGE. The very fact that life is uncertain dictates the
prudence of a consideration like tliis. Life may be shorter than we expect it to be, but
it may also be longer. We must not reckon on old age, but that is no reason why we
should not prepare for it. Boys and girl.s can hardly be expected to look so far ahead ;
but those who have come to manhood and womanhood and some exercise of reflective
power, may well ask the question, '• How .shall I occupy old age if it comes ? " And
surely it is much to remember that if each stage in life is occupied as it ought
to be, then this very fidelity and carefulness will help to provide congenial occupation
for the last stage of all. Who would wish to spend the closing years of life in such
stupor and lethargy as come over only too many, when there are sources of interest and
usefulness such as Jehovah indicates to Moses here ? Old age might be a brighter and
more profitable scene than it usually is. Who can tell, indeed, whether much of the
physical prostration, pain, and sensitive decay, which belong to the aged and tend
to shut them out from the world, might not be spared, if there were but a wiser life
in earlier years, a life spent in obedience to the laws which God has given for life
Many of the most important of these laws we either misunderstand or ignore altogether.
Old age is a season into which we should not drift, but advance with a calm considera-
tion of what we may be able to do in it, for the glory of God and the good of men. Ij
we live to be old, what are our reminiscences to be ? You who are on the climbing side
of life, ask yourselves what sort of life you are making, what chapters of autobiography
you may hereafter be able to'write. Can anything be sadder than some autobiographies
and reminiscences y There are such Vioks, sad with expressed sadness, where the
vanity of life is confessed and bewailed on every page. But there are other books,
far sadder even than the former sort, just because of the very satisfaction with life
which they contain. The men who have written them seem to look back in much the
same spirit as once they looked forward. They looked forward with all the eagerness
and enjoying power of youth, and they look back without having discovered how selfish,



«Se THE BOOK OF EXODtJS. [«»•»• 1—20

frivolous and unworthy their lives have been. At eighty they are as well pleased
with their notion that man has come into this world to enjoy himself as they were
at eighteen. Whether we shall live into old age is not for us to settle, nor what
our state of body and circumstances may be if we do so live. But one thing at all
events we may seek to avoid, namely, a state of mind in old age such as that in which
Wesley tells us he found a certaiii old man at Okehampton. " Our landlord here
informed us that he was upwards of nuety, yet had not lost either his sight, hearing, or
teeth. Nor had he found that for which he was bom. Indeed he did not seem to have
any more thought about it than a child of six years old."

n. Observe, concbrninq what things dj particulab God wouid have the old
BPBAK TO THE YOUNG. Not SO much concerning what they have done, but concerning
what Ood has done for them. Every old man, however foolish, blundering and wasted
his own career may have been, has this resort — that he can look back on the dealings
of God. It may be that he has to think of a late repentance on his own part ; it
may be that he has to" think a great deal more of God's mercy to him after years
of utter negligence, than God's help to him through years of struggling obedience.
Even so, he can magnify God most abundantly and instructively. Magnifying Gbd
is the thing which all Christians should aim at when they look back on the time
covered by their own individual life, or over that long, large tract through which
authentic history extends. " Tell what things I have wrought in Egypt, and my signs
which I have done among them." There will never be lack of voices to celebrate
the achievements of men. But what a grand occupation for the aged Christian to
turn the thoughts of children to the achievements of God, such works as the overthrow
of I'haraoh and the guiding into Canaan, and, alwve all, the work which he does in the
hearts of those who believe in his Son. To look on the works of men, on all their
selfishness and rivalry, to see how the success of the few involves the failure of the
many — all this is very humiliating. But how glorious to speak of the works of God,
to point him out in Creation, in Providence, in Eedemption ; and then to call on the
young, aU their life through, to be fellow-labourers together with him — what an occu-
pation is here suggested for old age ! The " grey-headed and very aged men " (Job xv. 10)
may thus do much for us. When Boaz became the nourisher of Naomi's grey hairs,
Naomi took the child of Boaz and Euth, laid it in her bosom, and became nurse unto it.
And surely her nursing would Uiclude instruction, the telling of her own personal expe-
riences to the growing Obed, fuU as these experiences were of things fitted to guide the
youth to a good and noble manhood. A friend who called on C. M. Young, the cele-
brated actor, a few months before his death, reported that he gave a miserable accoimt
of himself, and wound up by saying, " Seventy-nine is telling its tale." True 1 Seventy-
nine must tell a tale of exhausted physical energy, but the tale need not therefore
be altogether doleful. Serious it must be, and not without touches of shame ; but it
will be the fault of the teller if it does not contain much to guide, inspire, and invigorate
the young. (Job xxxii. 9 ; Ps. xxxvii. 25 ; Titus ii. 2 — 5 ; 1 Kings xii. 6 — 8).— Y.

Vers. 1 — 11. — God^s Judgments on sin and their results for the righteous and the
wicked. I. The fruits for God's people of his judgments upon his enemies.
1. The plagues of Egypt were to be an example to all the generations of Israel (ver. 2).
(1) It drew them nearer God. They were his: he gave Egypt for them. (2) It
deepened their trust and fear. 2. It was the prophecy of how God will sanctify his
people in the latter days. 3. How God sanctifies his people now. Their prolonged
waiting and suffering is storing up power for the future. The night of trial makes
the day of deliverance brighter and more fruitful.

II. The way of the unrepentant is one of deependjo loss. Pharaoh will not
retain what God's mercy has left him. The locusts eat what the hail has spared. The
path darkens evermore till the night falls to which no day succeeds.

III. God's judgments awaken fear in the hearts of the unrighteous, but
NO repentance. The advice of Pharaoh's counsellors. 1. Its selfishness. It was
inspired not by love of righteousness, but by self interest. If it does not answer to
enslave and persecute God's jieople ; the world will desist ; and if there is wealth and
honour to be got by it, they will even favour them and desire to be numbered with
them. 2. Its insufficiency. " Let the men go." They will not yield the whole ol



*. X. 21—29.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



what God demands. They will not give up sin or resign the heart. The service of
the selfish is as deficient in full ohedience, as it is hateful in motive.

Vers. 12 — ^20. — The plague of locusts. I. (Jod's judgment. 1. Though restrained
for a time, it will surely fall. It is no argument that the threatening is vain, because,
while the servants of God try to persuade, there is no token of the coming judgment.
2. When it does come, it is not less than was foretold (14, 15). God's deed is his
comment on his Word, and reveals the terror whose shadow lay in it. The flood was
not less than Noah's warnings painted it, nor Jerusalem's judgment than the prophecies
which predicted it. Nor shall the woes coming upon the nations, nor the end of sin,
he less than God's Word has said.

II. Pharaoh's cky. It was sincere, both in confession and entreaty. He saw his
folly, he desired relief, he purposed amendment. Good visits him, but it will not abide
with him. The self-delusion of repentance born of the visitation of God and the need
of heart-searching.

III. Pharaoh's heart hardened throuoh delivbrakce. With the outward blessing
we need inward grace. If we wait upon the Lord he will increase fear, and zeal, and
tenderness of heart, but if we still keep far from him we are reserved only for heavier
pvmishment. Instead of forsaking evil we shall build upon God's readiness to forgive,
bnd repentance itself will become impossible through the soul's deep insincerity. Have
we received no warnings which have been forgotten ? Have we made no vowa as yet
unfulfilled ? God's word says, " Flee from the wrath to come." Sin cries, " Tarry,
there is no danger ; wait for a more convenient season." — U.



EXPOSITION



Vers. 21— 29— The Ninth Plague. The
ninth plague, like the third and the sixth,
was inflicted without special warning. God
had announced, after the plague of boils, that
he was about to " send all his plagues upon
the heart " of the king ; and so a succession of
inflictions was to be expected. The ninth
plague probably followed the eighth after a
very short interval. It is rightly regarded as
an isjgravation of a well-known natural pheno-
menon — the Khamsin, or " Wind of the
Desert," which commonly visits Egypt about
the time of the vernal equinox, and is accom-
panied by an awful and weird darkness. This
IS caused by the dense clouds of fine sand
which the wind brings with it, which inter-
cept the sun's light, and produce a darkness
beyond that of our worst fogs, and compared
by some travellers to " the most gloomy
night." The wind is depressing and annoy-
ing to an extreme degree. " While it lasts
no man rises from his place ; men and beasts
hide themselves ; the inhabitants of towns and
villages shut themselves up in their houses, in
underground apartments, or vaults." It
usually blows for a space of two, or at most
three, days, and sometimes with great violence,
though more often with only moderate force.
The visit itinn here recorded was peculiar, 1. In



its extent, covering as it did " aD the land of

Egypt;" 2. In its intensity— "they saw not
one another" (ver. 23) — " darkness which may
be felt " (ver. 21) ; 3. In its circumscription,
extending, as it did, to all Egypt except only
the land of Goshen (ver. 23). These circum-
stances made Pharaoh at once recognise its
heaven-sent character, and request its removal
of Moses, whom he sought to persuade by con-
ceding the departure of the Israelites with
their families. He marred, however, the
whole grace of this concession by a proviso
that they should leave behind them their flocks
and herds, viewing these as, equally with their
families, a security for their return. Mosea
therefore indignantly rejected his offer — the
flocljs and the herds should go with them —
he would not have a hoof left behind — ^they
did not know what sacrifices would be required
at the feast which they were about to keep,
or how many (ver. 25, 26) —therefore they
must take all Pharaoh, greatly angered,
forthwith broke up the conference (ver 28),
but not, as it would seem, before Moses,
equally displeased, bad announced the. tenth
plague, and the results which would follow it
(ch. xi. 4—8).

Ver. 21. — Barknesa which may he felt
Literally, " and one Shall feel, or grasp, dark-



138



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CH. X. 21—29.



■ess." The hyporbole is no doubt extreme ;
but the general sentiment of mankind has
approved the phrase, which exactly expresses
what men feel in absolute and complete dark-
ness. Kalisch renders, " a darkness in which
men grope." But the grammatical construc-
tion does not allow of this.

Ver. 22. — A thick darkness. — Literally,
" An obscurity of darkness." The phrase is
intensitive.

Ver. 23. — They saw not one another. Or,
" Man did not see his brother." The descrip-
tive phrases previously used are poetic, and
might imply many different degrees of ob-
scurity. This seems distinctly to shew that
pitch darkness is meant. Such absolute
obscurity is far beyond anything which the
khamsin produces, even when it is most
severe, and indicates the miraculous character
of the visitation. Neither rose any from his
place for three days. It is not meant that no
one moved about his house, but that no one
quitted it. (Compare ch. xvi. 29, where the
phrase used is similar.) No one went out
mto the unnatural darl^ness out of doors, which
he dreaded. All stayed at home, and did
what they had to do by the artificial light of
lamps or torches. All the children of Israel
had light in their dwellings. It is not ex-
plained how this was effected. Some suppose
that the sand-storm did not extend to the
land of Goshen. But in that case, such
Egyptians as lived among the Israelites — their
neighbours (ch. xi. 2) — would have shared the
benefit, which seems not to have been the
case. I should rather suppose that the storm
was general, and that the Israelites were sup-
plied with a light, not that of the sun, by
miracle.

Ver. 24. — Only let your flocks and your
herds be stayed. The pitch darkness is more
than Pharaoh can bear. On the third day of
its duration probably, he sends a messenger
who succeeds in finding Moses, and conducting
him to the monarch's presence. He has made
up his mind to yield another point — that on
miich he insisted so strongly at the last inter-
view (vers. 10, 11) — he will let the Israelites
go vjiih their families — only, their flocks and
herds must remain behind. This will be, he
considers, a sufficient security for their return ;
since without cattle they would be unable to
support life for many days in the wilderness.
Tour little ones. Bather, " your families."

Ver. 25, 26. — ^Moses absolutely refuses the



suggested compromise. He had already de-
clared on a former occasion, " With our young
and with our old we will go ; with our sons
and with our daughters, with our flocks and
with our herds we will go " (ver. 9). He is
not inclmed to retract now, after two addi-
tional plagues, what he had demanded before
them. He does not refuse, however, to set
forth his reasons. The cattle must go because
the feast which they are about to keep requires
sacrifices — they must all go, because the
Israelites do not as yet know what animals, or
how many of each, wiU be required of them.
The feast was a new thing, without precedent ;
its ritual was not yet laid down. No exact
directions were to be expected, until the place
was reached wheie God intended that it
should be celebrated.

Ver. 27. — Hardened. — Again the strong
expression, yekliazak, is used, as in ver. 20.

Ver. 28. — And Pharaoh said, etc. The
reply of Pharaoh indicates violent anger. No
doubt he thought that now the intention of
Moses to deprive him altogether of the ser-
vices of so many hundred thousand slaves was
palpable, and scarcely concealed. Greatly
enraged, he gives vent to his rage, with the
want of self-control common among Oriental
monarchs — ^rudely bids Moses be gone (flet
thee from me), threatens him (take heed to
thyself), and bids hims never more seek his
presence, under the penalty of instant death,
if he makes his appearance. Considering the
degree of civilization, refinement, and polite-
ness to which the Egyptians had attained
under the eighteenth and nineteenth dynas-
ties, such an outbreak must be regarded as
abnormal, and as implying violent excitement.

Ver. 29.— And Moses said, etc. The reply
of Moses, so far, is simple and dignified. Ihon
hast spoken well, he says — " thou hast made
a right decision — further interviews between
me and thee are useless, can lead to no result,
only waste time. This shall be our last inter-
view — I wiU see thy face no more." It is
generally agreed however that Moses did not
quit the presence with these words ; but con-
tinued to address Pharaoh for some little time,
making his'parting speech in the tenns which
are recorded in vers. 4 — 8 of the next chapter.
Having announced the Tenth Plague, the
coming destruction of the first-bom, he turned
and " went out from Pharaoh in a great
anger " (ch. xi. 8)



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 21 — 23. — The children of darkness have darkness, and the children of tight have
light as their portion. From the beginning of the creation God " divided tho light from
the darkness " (Gen. i. 4) ; and ever since the two have been antagonistic the one to the
other. Angels as well as men are divided into two classes — bright and glorious spirit^
that dwell in the lipht of God's presence, and are called " angels of light " (2 Cor. xi. 14),



.X.21— 29.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 239



and gloomy spirits of eTil, whom God has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness
for final judgment (Jude 6). So Scripture speaks of man as divided into those who are
" of the night and of darkness," and those who are " children of light and of the day "
(1 Thess. V. 5). '

I. The childben of daeknbss, those who love dabkness bathbb than light, hatb
DARKNESS ASSIGNED TO THEM. 1. bpiritml darkness. " Because they do not like to
retain God in their knowledge, God gives them- over to a reprobate mind" (Rom. i. 28).
Their " foohsh heart is darkened " (ib. ver. 21). They grow continually more blind
and more ignorant, more incapable ot seeing and understanding the things of the Spirit,
since these are " spiritually discerned." Their senses not being " exercised by reason of
use to discern both good and evil," they lose the power of discernment, and " put bitter
for sweet, and sweet for bitter." " The light that is within them " — i. e., the conscience
— shaving " become darkness, how great is that darkness " 1 2. Mental darkness. They
" grope as the blind in darkness " (Deut. xxviii. 29). They have no clue to the real
nature of the universe of which they are a part, or of the world in which they live.
They are mentally sightless, unable to perceive the force of arguments and evidences
which would convince any one whose mental vision God had not judicially blinded.
They sometimes in these days call themselves " Agnostics," implying thereby that they
know nothing, see nothing, have no convictions. Not unfrequently they allow them-
selves to be imposed upon by the most gross illusions, giving that faith to the ravings
of Spiritualists which they refuse to the Word of God. Or they accept as certain truth
the unverified speculations and hypotheses of so-caUed scientific men, and consider
Eevelation to be overruled and set aside by the guesses of a few physiologists. 3.
Ultimately, as it would seem, they receive as their portion, physical darkness. " Cast
ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness " (Matt. xxv. 30). " The children of the
kingdom shall be cast into outer darkness " (ib. viii. 12). " Woe unto them ! for they
have gone in the way of Cain. .... to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness foi
ever" (Jude 13).

II. The. CHILDREN OF LIGHT, THOSE WHO LOVE LIGHT, HAVE LIGHT FOB THBIB PORTION.

" Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light."
Christ gives his followers, 1. Spiritual liyht. " The commandment is a lamp, the law
is light " (Prov. vi. 23). " By -doing the will of God, men come to know of the doctrine,
whether it is of God" (John vii. 17). Their spiritual discernment is continually
increased. Whatever the amount of spiritual darkness around them — in the midst of
the clouds of Deism, Pantheism, Agnosticism, scientific materialism, and Atheism, they
" have light in their dwellings." Theirs is the true enlightenment. The Lord their
God enUghtens their darkness (Ps. xviii. 28) ; opens the eyes of their understanding
(Eph. i. 18) ; fills them with knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual under-
standing (Col. i. 9). 2. Mental light. The true Christian " has a right judgment in
aU things." God gives to those who are his " the spirit of a sound mind " (2 Tim. i. 7).
Not that Christians are always clever — they may be slow, dull, devoid of all quickness
or mental brightness. But they will be soberminded, not easily misled ; they will see
through sophisms, even if they cannot expose them ; they wiU not be imposed upon by
charlatans or soi-disant " philosophers." They will " try the spirits " that seek to
lead them astray, and not very often be deceived by them. 3. A final reward
of heavenly, ineffable, soul-satisfying light. After the resurrection of the dead,
" they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament" (Dan. xii. 3). They
shall dwell where there is light, and " no darkness at all." " The nations of them which
are saved shall walk in the light " of that city which shall have " no need of the sun,
neither of the moon to shine in it ; for the glory of God will lighten it, and the Lamb
is the light thereof " (Rev. xxi. 23, 24). " There shall be no night there ; and they
need no candle, neither light of the sun, for the Lord God giveth them light, and they
shall reign for ever and ever " (ib. xxii. 5).

Vers. 24 — 26. — Compromise the favowrite resort of the worldly-minded, the abomi-
nation of the spiritually-minded. Pharaoh had tried compromise more than once and
failed (ch. viii. 25 — 28 ; x. 8 — 11) ; but he must needs try it again. This marks the
tenacity with which the worldly-minded cling to what they think the height of policy,
but what is, in reality, a weak and unworthy subterfuge. Pharaoh did not wish to grant



840 THE BOOK OP BXODUa [ch. j_ 24— 2d.



any part of the request of Moses ; but, if he must yield to some extent, he would sava
his dignity and his interest, he thought, by yielding less than what -vas demanded. On
four occasions he makes four different offers.

I. Thet mat worship God whereveb they please within the limits of Botpt
(ch. viii. 25). A foolish offer, which, if accepted, would certainly have led to a riot and
possibly to a civil war (ib. 26). But Pharaoh had only thought of his own dignity, not
of the consequences. So civil rulers frequently ask the Church of Christ to concede this
or that for the honour of the State, when the concession would do the State the greatest
possible injury. In their short-sightedness they do not see that in stril-ing at the
Church they will wound themselves. In their zeal for their own honour, they do not
care how much the Church, or even how much the State suffers.

n. Thet mat wobship God in the wildeeness, only thet must not go vert fab
AWAY (ch. viii. 28). This offer was an improvement ; it did not require a plain violation
of the express command of God. But it was insidious. It was made with the view of
compelling a return. Pharaoh suspected from the first that the message, "Let my
people go," meant " let them go altogether." This, until stunned by the dread infliction
of the last plague, he was fully resolved not to do. He would let them go as a cat lets
a mouse go, so far but not further — ^not out of his reach. So kings will give their people
liberty, or the Church liberty, but only within narrow limits — in seeming rather than
in reality — to such an extent as will not interfere with their being the real master,
and re-asserting their absolute power at their pleasure. Once more Pharaoh was
short-sighted. Had his offer been accepted, and had he then attempted to compel a
return, he would only have precipitated some such catastrophe as befel his army at the
Bed Sea.

III. Thet mat go the theeb days' joubnet into the wildbbness,-onlt thet must
LEAVE THEIB PAMILIB8 BEHIND (ch. I. 8 — 11). The rejection of his first and second
offers left Pharaoh no choice but to allow of the Israelites departing beyond his reach.
So he devises a compromise, by which he thinks to lure them back. They shall leave
their families behind. But God had said, " Let my people go," and children are aa
essential an element in the composition of a nation as either women or men. This offer
was therefore more contrary to the Divine message which he had received than his
second one. Worldly-minded men will frequently, while pretending to offer a better
compromise, offer a worse ; and, both in private and public dealings, it behoves prudent
persons to be on their guard, and not imagine that every fresh bid that is made must be
an advance. The law of auction does not hold good either in private or in parliamentary
bargaining.

IV. Thet mat go the thebe days' joubnet into the wilderness, and take theib
families, if they will only leave theik cattle behind (ch. X. 24). This was the
most crafty suggestion of all. The cattle had not been mentioned in the Divine
message, nor could it be said that they were part of the nation. The king could require
the detention of the cattle without infringing the letter of the Divine command. But
he secured the return of the nation to Egypt as certainly by this plan as by the
retention of the families. A nomadic people could not subsist for many weeks — scarcely
for many days, without its flocks and herds. The Israelites would have been starved
into surrender. Moses, however, without taking this objection, was able to point out
that the terms of the message, rightly weighed with reference to all the circumstances,
embraced the cattle, since sacrifice was spoken of, unaccompanied by any limitation.
Once more, therefore, he was enabled to decline the compromise suggested as an
infraction of the command which he had received, when its terms were rightly under-
stood. Worldly men are continually placing their own construction on the words of
God's messages, and saying tha.t this or that should be given up as not plainly contained
in them. The example of Moses justifies Christians in scanning narrowly the whole
bearing and intention of each message, and insisting on what it implies as much as upon
what it expresses. True wisdom will teach them not to be driven to a compromise by
worldly men's explanations of the Divine Word. They will study it for themselves,
and guide their conduct by their own reading (under God's guidance) of the commands
given them. Further, the example of Moses in rejecting all the four offers of Pharaoh,
may teach us to suspect, misdoubt, and carefully examine every proposed compromise;
th« essence of oompromise in reli^on bdng tbe surrender of somelthing Divinely oxdeiM



CH.X. 21-29.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 241

or instituted fof the sake of some supposed temporal conTenience or advantage. It cao
really never be right to give up the smallest fragment of revealed truth, or to allow the
infraction of the least of God's commandments for even the greatest conceivable amount
of temporal benefit either to ourselves or others.

Ver. 25. — Bad men, when unable to overcome good metis seruphs, throw off the mask
of friendliness, and show themselves in their tnie colours. The circumstances of human
life are continually bringing good men and bad men into contact and intercourse.
'I'hree results may follow : — ^1. The bad may corrupt the good. This is the result too
often. " Evil communications corrupt good manners." Few can touch pitch and not
be defiled. 2. The good may convert the bad. The first Christians converted a world
that lay in wickedness. Esther softened the heart of Ahasuerus. St. Ambrose, by long
withstanding his will, converted Theodosius. 3. Neither may make any impression
upon the other. In this case, while the good man merely regrets his inability to turn
the bad man to righteousness, the bad man, baffled in his attempts to overcome the
scruples of the good man and lead him astray, is apt to be greatly provoked, and to
threaten, or even proceed to violence. "Take heed to thyself — in the day thou
seest my face thou shalt die." What a spring of bitterness wells up from the evil heart
of the sinner who feels himself opposed successfully, thwarted in his schemes, and
baffled I While he still hopes to succeed all is smooth speaking. "I have sinned."
" Forgive my sin this once only." " Go ye, serve the Lord." When he finds that he
cannot prevail, there is a sudden and complete change. Benefits are forgotten;
friendliness is a thing of the past ; even the prescribed forms of politeness are set aside.
The wild beast that lies hid in each unregenerate man shows itself, and the friendly
acquaintance of months or years is ready to tear his opposer to pieces.

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 21 — 29. — The plague of darkness. This was the third of the great plagues, and
It came, as in certain previous instances, unannounced.

L The last of the admonitokt plaques (vers. 21 — 24). The plagues, viewed as
trials of Pharaoh's character, end with this one. The death of the first-born was a
judgment, and gave PharaOh no further space for repentance. We may view this last
of the nine plagues : 1. As awful in itself. Whatever its natural basis, the preter-
natural intensity of the darkness now brought upon the land told plainly enough
that it was one of the wonders of Jehovah. For three whole days no one human being
in Egypt saw another, even artificial light, it would appear, failing them in their
necessity. The fearfulness of the plague was heightened to those stricken by it by the
fact that the Israelites " had light in their dwellings " ; also by the fact that the sun
in his different phases was the chief object of their worship. When one reflects on the
terrors which accompany darkness in any case ; on the singular effect it has in working
on the imagination, and in intensifying its alarms, it will be feJt how truly this was a
plague laid upon the heart (ch. ix. 14). Darkness suddenly descending on a land in-
variably awakens superstitious fears, fills multitudes with forebodings of calamity, creates
apprehensions of the near approach of the day of judgment ; what, then, would be the effect
on the Egyptians when they " saw their crystal atmosphere and resplendent heavens
suddenly compelled to wear an aspect of indescribable terror and apjialling gloom " ?
We may gather how great was the distress from the fact of the king being compelled,
after all that had happened, again to send for Moses (ver. '/4). •^. As symbolic tf a
spiritual condition. Egypt was enveloped in the wrath of God. The stroke of that
wrath, which might have been averted by timely repentance, was about to desccna
in the destruction of the first-bom. Darkness was in the king's soul. The darkness of
doom was weaving itself around his fortunes. Of all this, surely the physical darkness,
which, like a dread funeral pall, descended on the land, must be taken as a symbol.
When Christ, the sin-bearer, hung on Calvary, a great darkness, in like manner, covered
the whole laud (Matt, xxvii. 45). The darkness without was but the symbol of a
deeper darkness in which Christ's spirit was enveloped. The sinner's condition is one of
darkness altogether. He is dark spiritually (2 Cor. iv. 4, 6). He is dark, as under the

BX0DU8 £



M2 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. x- 20-29

wrath of God (Eph. ii. 3). God's people are " children of light," hut the transgressor's
soul is buried in deadliest gloom (Eph. v. 8). The place of woe is described as " the
outer darkness " (Matt. xxv. 30).

II. Pharaoh's last attempt (vers. 24 — 27). 1. It was made under dire compulsion.
The darkness had shaken his heart to its foundations. It is noteworthy that each of
these three last plagues extorted from him a full or partial consent. The lesser plagues,
severe though they were, had not had this effect, tie could hold out under two, and in
one case under three of them. 2. It was, like the former, an attempt at compromise.
He would let the "little ones" go, but the flocks and herds were to be left; an absurd
prohibition, when the object was to sacrifice. It is made painfully evident that Pharaoh's
judgment has left him ; that he has become absolutely reckless ; that he is no longer
his own master; that he is being driven by his passions in opposition to all right
reason and prudence; that the end, accordingly, is very near. 3. It texttfes to hit
increasing hardness. (1) There is on this occasion no confession of sin. (2) Neither
does Pharaoh concede the whole demand. (3) He ends the scene with violence, order-
ing Moses never to appear again before him, under penalty of death.

III. Pharaoh's reprobation (ver. 29). Moses took I'haraoh at his word. " Thou hast
spoken well ; I will see thy face no more." God's work with this great, bad man was
ended, save as the judgment for which he had prepared himself was now to be inflicted
upon him. He had not been given up till every conceivable means had been exhausted
to bring him to repentance. He had been tried with reason and with threatening;
with gentleness and with severity ; with mercy and with judgments. He had been
reproved, expostulated with, warned, and frequently chastised. His prayers for respite
had in every case been heard. He had been trusted in his promises to let Israel go,
and when he had broken them was still forborne with and trusted again. Plagues of
every kind had been sent upon him. He had suffered incalculable loss, had endured
sore bodily pain, had been shaken in his soul with supernatural terrors. His first plea,
of ignorance, and his second, of want of evidence, had been completely shattered. He
had been made to confess that he had sinned, and that Jehovah was righteous. Yet
under all and through all he had gone on hardening himself, till, finally, even God
could wring no confession of sin from him, and his mind had become utterly fatuous,
and regardless of consequences. What more was to be done with Pharaoh? Even
that which must be done with ourselves under like circumstances — he was rejected,
reprobated, given over to destruction. " Cut it down ; why cumbereth it the ground? "
(Luke xiii. 7). It was the same fate which overtook Israel when the nation became
finally corrupt and hardened. — J. 0.

Vers. 20 — 29. — The Ninth Plague — the darkness. I. Consider the plaoue itseut.
As with the plagues of the gnats and of the boils and blains, so with this plague-
there is no record of any formal intimation of its coming. If such an intimation
was absent, we feel that there was good reason for the absence. Though Pharaoh
had abased himself in great fear and consternation, so that he might get rid of the
locusts, yet the moment they were gone all his stubbornness returned in full force.
What use was it, then, any longer to hold threatenings over a man of this sort?
Indeed, the proper way of considering this ninth plague seems to be to regard it chiefly
as a stepping-stone to the last and decisive visitation. An announcement beforeh'^nd
would not have been wanting, if at all likely to make any serious difference in Pharaoh's
conduct. With respect to the plague itself, four points are noticeable — the kind of it,
the degree, the duration, and the customary exemption of the Israelites. 1. The kind
of it. It was a plague of darkness. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. He
is light, and light continually streams forth from him ; and without him the minds of
men are in dense darkness as to all that is best in knowledge and most substantial in
hope for the time to come. When we consider how much is said about spiritual li<j-ht
and spiritual darkness in the Scriptures, it will be seen how appropriate it was that
before -lehovah closed his earthly dealings with Pharaoh he should bring his land under
this impenetrable cloud. It was a fitting scourge to come upon a king and people wliose
minds were so darkened to the perception of God. The light and truth which bieak
forth from God vainly struggled to shine through into Pharaoh's heart. This plague
was a sort of approach to the primal chaos, a movement towards dissolving the cosrao?



OH. X. 20-29.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 24

into the formless, umUummed mass from which it sprang. God's first great Word
in making order was to say, " Let there be light " ; now we almost imagine a corre-
sponding word, " Let there \x darkness." The sun, though it may pass over Egypt as
usual, no longer rules the day ; not a ray penetrates to accommodate and cheer the
bewildered land. 2. The degree of this darkness. Jehovah tells Moses it will be a
darkness which may be felt. Not that it was literally palpable, but rather that the
darkness was so dense, so utterly beyond all experience, that it could not possibly be
described by language taken from the use of the sense of vision. It was not enough to
my, as with respect to the hail and the locusts, that there had been no "uch experience
in Egypt since it became a nation. A new sort of darkness required a new mode
of expression to indicate it ; and thus by a bold figure the darkness is introduced as
affecting not only the usual sense of sight, but the sense of touch as well. The priva-
tion of light was in the highest conceivable degree. And here it is surely well to
dismiss from our minds all attempts, however well intended, to find a natural basis for
this plague. That Jehovah might have made a darkness, and a very terrible one, by
increasing and intensifying natural elements and causes is quite true ; but somehow,
such a view of this plague does not satisfy the demands of the strong terms which are
used. Far better is it to suppose that in some mysterious way light lost its radiating
power when it came into the Egyptian atmosphere. Doubtless even artificial lights
proved useless. If the sun could not pierce into Egypt, little lamps and earth-lights
were not likely to succeed. 3. The duration of it. It lasted for three days. In this
duration lay its peculiar severity. Even a darkness that might be felt would not be
much if it was a momentary visitation. But when it extended for three days, dis-
arranging and paralyzing all work, then the magnitude of the visitation would fully
appear. It was indeed a plague more terrible in reality than in threatening, and in
continuance than in its first embrace. In itself it was not a painful thing ; it did not
irritate like the frogs, the gnats, and the flies ; it did not destroy like the murrain, the
hail, and the locusts. It simply settled down on the land, and while it lasted made
one of the most informing and gladdening of the senses utterly useless. Even those
who loved the darkness because their deeds were evil, would feel, after three days of ii,
that they were having too much of a good thing. It was just the kind of plague that
by the very continuance of it would grow in horror, and at last precipitate a panic.
Darkness is the time favomable to all temfying imaginations. 4. !/ he exemption of the
laraelites. The district where they dwelt had light in their dwellings. Here was,
indeed, a more impressive and significant separation than any Jehovah had yet made ;
and that he should thus separate between Israel and Egypt, as between light and the
deepest darkness, was a thing to be expected, considering how soon the Israelites were
to go out of the land altogether.

II. Consider the consequent proposition by Pharaoh and the reception or rr
BT Moses. After three days of the darkness that might be felt, Pharaoh is again
brought to his knees, suing for mercy, and, as usual, he offers something which formerly
he had refused. Only a little while ago he had set his face against liberating the little
ones of Israel. Now he has got so far as to say all the people may depart — all the
human beings — but the flocks and herds must stay behind ; and these, of course, weit
the very substance of Israel's wealth (Gen. xlvi. 31 ; xlvii. 6). And not only so, but
at present they would look all the more considerable in comparison with the murrain-
swept flocks and herds of Egypt. K Pharaoh can only get this request, he thinks he
will both serve his dignity and do something to retrieve his fortunes. "What a difference
between this last interview with Moses and the first ! Pharaoh, who began with refusiag
to yield anything, nay, who by way of answer made the existing bondage even more
oppressive, is now, after a course of nine plagues, willing to yield everything — every-
thing hut th property of Israel. This, indeed, has been a great way to bring him, but
it has all been done by a kind of main force. Pharaoh's ignorance of Jehovah's character
and demands remains unabated, amid all his experience of Jehovah's power. He cannot
yet understand that Jehovah is not to be bargained with. He wants the flocks and
herds, as if it were a small matter to keep them back, whereas just one reason why. the
flocks and herds are so abundant is that there may be enough for sacrifice. Jehovah
had a use and place for every Israelite, the oldest and the youngest, and all their
belongings. It was tm answer of Moses, profoundly suitable to the occasion, when he



m THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. «. 21-2».



laid, " We know not with what we must serve the Lord, until we come thither. ' He
had been sent to Pharaoh to demand all, and he could take nothing less. Interesting
questions arise here, but there is no information by which we can answer them.
Pharaoh called to Moses (ver. 24) — but how came they together in this dense darkness ?
or was it that Moses waited there in the darkness these tliree days ? Then when
Pharaoh spoke, did the darkness at once begin to pass away ? We must almost assume
that it did, the purpose of its coming having been served the moment Pharaoh is got
another step onward in his yielding. But on all these points we have no direct infor-
mation. Jehovah now hastens the readers of the narrative to the final catastrophe.
Where we, in our curiosity, desire particulars, he omits, in order that he may be
particular and exact in matters of abiding importance. He is presently to speak of the
Passover with great minuteness. Details of future and continuous duty are of more
moment than mere picturesque embellishments of a passing judgment on Egypt. Thus
we are left to infer that the darkness had vanished when for the last time Pharaoh
refused to let Israel go. And it must be admitted that there was everything in the
Inflexible answer of Moses to make Pharaoh, being such a man as he was, equally
Inflexible. " There shall not a hoof be left behind." Israel moves altogether, if it
moves at all. This was a very exasperating way for a despot to be spoken to, especially
one who felt that he had yielded so much. Indeed, it must have been veiy astonishing
to him to reflect how far he had gone in a path where once it would have seemed
ridiculous to suppose that he could take a single step. But now once again h« says—
in the same reasonless, passionate way that has marked him all along — " Not a step
further." ' After nine plagues he is still the same man at heart. The slightest provoca-
tion, and his pride is all aflame, more sensitive than gunpowder to the spark. Nay,
most marvellous of all, from the depth of nine successive humiliations he begins to
threaten Moses with death. Surely this was the very quintessence of passion and blind
rage. The only parallel we can find for it is in the furious, final rush of some great,
savage brute, maddened by the shots of the hunter, and making recklessly towards him.
What gains he by this advance ? He simply comes within easy reach, and another
shot from the same weapon, held with perfect coolaess and control, lays him dead in
the dust. The saddest part of the reflection on Pharaoh's career is, that it gives the
essence of so many human lives beside. The hand with which God would clear our
corruption away — were we only willing for it to be cleared — stirs it up into a more
■elf-destroying energy and efficacy, if we in our perversity and ignorance determine
that the corruption should remain. — Y.

Ver. 21. — A darkness which might be felt suggests the existence of a darkness which
k not felt. Consider : —

I. The unfelt darkness. [^Illustration. Stream in summer on sunny day reflects
gun, sky, &c. Contrast with condition in winter, hard, dull, icebound ; it has Itardened
and no longer reflects. If it could be conscious, still flowing on, it might not feel
much difference, scarcely aware of the strange casing shutting it out from warmth and
beauty.] Pharaoh and his people, like the stream, once had light (cf. John i. 9 ; Eom.
i. 1 9, 20). Then " hardened their hearts." So self-conditioned them that beneath God's
influence they could not but harden (x. 1). The hard heart, like the hard ice-coating,
shuts out the light and ensmres darkness (Rom. i. 21), none the less such darkness not
felt (cf. Eph. iv. 17, 18). A terrible judgment, moral darkness, usually resulting from
a man's own fault ; little by little it grows and dee^iens until it shuts out not merely
liglit, but even the memory of vanished light (cf. John ix. 39 — il). The immediate
precursor of ruin, that "quenching of the Spirit," which paves the way for
" blasphemy."

II. The darkness that was pelt. Pharaoh would not recognise Jehovah. He
shut out the light from him and gloried in his moral darkness. Again and again did
Jehovah flash home the truth of his existence to hearts which seemed almost judgment
proof. Each new judgment was but followed by deeper darkness, the crack through
which light seemed to pierce being deliberately blocked up when the fright was over.
Self-chosen moral darkness is met by God-sent physical darkness ; the darkness of the
tempest, the darkness of the locust clouds, lastly, the concentrated darkness of this
nir.th plague. Through all, the object is to pierce and, if it may be, dispel the mor^



Cil. XL 1-8.]



THE BOOK OF EXODtJS.



245



darkness; a kind of homceopathic treatment, which, if it do not cure, may kilL
\llliistraiii(m. The frozen stream. Light fire upon the surface. Clouds and flame shut
out the sunlight more than ever, yet heat may melt the ice covering, and, if so, then
light can enter. If not, when fire is extinguished, the ash-strewn surface more
impervious to light than ever.] Pharaoh at first seemed to be thawing (x. 24), but he
only felt the heat, he did not recognise the light. When the heat passed, darker than
ever (27 — 29). The last chance gone, what left ? (Jade 13). God still meets this self-
chosen moral darkness by similar methods. Judgments which may be felt flash
momentary light upon the self-iaflicted darkness which is not felt. He wUh that all
men should come to repentance ; if we shut our hearts to the inner voice, he summons
us by outer voices, which cannot but attract attention. They may, however, be
disregarded ; the power of man's self-will in this world seems strong enough to ret-iiit
anything.

in. Light in the dwellings. 1. Physical. Egyptians naa made a difference
between themselves and Israel, a difference which had driven Israel to seek help from
God. Now God confirms that difference. The light, perhaps, not perfect. [If darkness
caused by sand-storm from S.W. may have been such light as was obtainable at the
fringe of the storm cloud.] Still it was sufficient, a sign of God's care and watchfulness
for those who were prepared to receive and recognise it. And this the Israelites were
prepared to do, for the light in the dwelling was the type of light in the heart. 2.
Moral. They had been " in darkness," the darkness of slavery and idolatry (cf. Josh.
xxiv. 14) ; but the light had dawned upon them, and, however imperfectly, they had
recognised and welcomed it. The cry in the darkness (Ps. cxxx. 6) had been heard and
answered. By God's help the inner light had been quickened and fostered ; and to
those who have the inner light, however feeble, he gives help that it may grow brighter.
He will not quench the smoking flax, but fan it to a flame (cf. Ps. xviii. 27 — 28).

Application. There is one who is the Light of the World. The great thing for us is
to walk in the light (1 John i. 5 — 7). If we do not, darkness can but deepen till the
night come (John ix. 4 ; cf. Job xviii. 18). Yet even those in darkness of their own
making, God, in his love, still tries to lighten (cf. his dealings with the Egyptians ; also
our Lord's with the Jews, John ix. 39). If the light is still resisted, then cf. Matt. xxv.
30. If we do walk in the light so far as we know it, then cf. Prov. iv. 18. Even when
dark for others, still light for us, Is. Ix. 1, 2 ; and if the darkness does, as it sometimes
will, overshadow us even so Fs. cxii. 4 ; Is. L 10. — G.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XI



Vers. 1 — 3. — We have here ■* parenthetic
•tatement of something that had previously
happened. Before Moses was summoned to
appear in the presence of Pharaoh as related
in ch. z. 24, it had been expressly revealed to
him by God, 1. That one more plague, and
one only, was impending ; 2. That this inflic-
tion would be effectual, and be followed by
the departure of the Israelites ; and, 3. That
instead of reluctantly allowing them to with-
draw from his kingdom, the monarch would
be eager for their departure and would actually
hasten it. He had also been told that the
lime was now come when the promise made
to him in Mount Horeb, that his people should
"spoil the Egyptians" (eh. iii. 22), would
receive its accomplishment. The Israelites,
More departing, were to ask their Egyptian



neighbours for any articles of gold and silver
that they possessed, and would receive them
(ver. 2). The reasons for this extraordinary
generosity on the part of the Egyptians are
then mentioned, in prolongation of the paren-
thesis. 1. God " gave the people favour in
the sight of the Egyptians " ; and 2. The cir-
cumstances of the time had exalted Moses,
and made him be looked upon as " very great "
(ver. 3), so that there was a general inclina-
tion to carry out his wishes.

Ver. 1. — And the Lord spake unto Hose*.
Bather, " Now the Lord had said unto Moses."
The Hebrew has no form for the pluperfect
tense, and is consequently obUged to make up
for the granmiatical deiiciency by using the
simple preterite in a pluperfect sense. We
cannot definitely fix the time when Moses Iiad
received this revelation; but the expression,
one plague more, shows that it was after the
commencement of the "plagne of darkneK,"



34«



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oB. XL 1-&



When he ihall let yon go, he shall sorely
thrnst yon out altogether. The Hebrew will
not bear this rendering. It runs distinctly
thus — " When he shall let you go altogether,
he will assuredly thrust you out hence. " As
Canon Cook notes, " the meaning is — ^when at
last he lets you depart, with children, flocks,
herds, and aU your possessions, he will compel
you to depart in haste " (^Speaker'i Commen-
tary, vol. i. p. 290). It has been well noticed
by the same writer that both this announce-
ment, and the previous relentings of Pharaoh,
would have caused Moses to have preparations
made, and to hold the Israelites in readiness
for a start upon their journey almost at any
moment. No doubt a most careful and elabo-
rate organization of the people must have been
necessary ; but there had been abundant time
for such arrangements during the twelvemonth
that had elapsed since the return of Moses
from Midian.

Ver. 2. — Every man . . . every woman. In
ch. iii. 22 only women had been mentioned.
Now the terms of the direction were enlarged.
It is worthy of notice that gold and silver
ornaments — ear-rings, collai's, armlets, brace-
lets, and anklets, were worn almost as much
by the Egyptian men of the Eameside period
as by the women. Borrow. On this faulty
translation, see the comment on ch. iii. 22.
Jewels. Literally, "articles." The word is
one of a very wide meaning, and might in-
clude drinking-cups and other vessels; but
from the statement in ch. iii. 22, that they



were to " put them on their sons and on their
daughters, it is clear that personal ornaments
are especially meant.

Ver. 3. — And the lord gave the people
favour — i.e. When the time came. See below,
ch. xii. 86. Moreover the man Moses, etc
It has been supposed that this is an interpola-
tion, and argued that Moses, being so " meek "'
as he was (Num. xii. 3), would not have
spoken of himself in the terms here used. But
very great here only means "very influen-
tial ; " and the fact is stated, not to glorify
Moses, but to account for the ornaments being
so generally given. Moreover, it is highly
improbable that any other writer than himself
would have so baldly and bluntly designated
Moses as the man Moses. (Compare Deut
xxxiii. 1 ; xxxiv. 5 ; Josh. i. 1, 13, 15 ; xiv.
6, 7; xxii. 2, 4; etc.) The "greatness"
which Moses had now attained was due to the

Eowers which he had shown. First of all, he
ad confounded the magicians (ch. viii. 18,
19) ; then he had so far impressed the cour-
tiers that a number of them took advantage of
one of his warnings and thereby saved their
cattle and slaves (ch. ix. 20). Finally, he had
forced the entire Court to acknowledge that it
lay in his power to destroy or save Egypt
(ch. X. 7). He had after that parleyed with
the king very much as an equal (£6. 8—11 ;
16 -18). It is no wonder that the Egyptians,
who regarded their king as a "great god,"
were deeply impressed.



HOMILETICS

Vers. 1 — 3. — Crises hring out men's characters, and cause them to fc properly

appreciated. It is evident that, as the crisis approached, Pharaoh sank in the estimation
of his subjects, while Moses rose. Pharaoh showed himself changeable, faithless, careless of
his subjects' good, rude, violent. He was about to show himself ready to rush from one
extreme into the other (ver. 1), and to " thrust out " the people whom he had so long
detained. The conduct of Moses had been consistent, dignified, patriotic, bold, and
courageous. He had come to be regarded by the Egyptians as " very great," and the
conduct of the Israelite people had also obtained approval. Their patience, fortitude,
submission to their leaders, and quiet endurance of suffering, had won upon the
Egyptians, and caused them to be regarded with favour. So it is generally in crises.

I. Crises beino out the chakacteks of the bad, iktensifying their defects.
Under the pressure of circumstances obstinacy becomes infatuation, indifference to
human suffering develops into active cruelty, self-conceit into overbearing presumption,
ill-temper into violence. At the near approach of danger the rash grow reckless, the
timid cowardly, the hesitating wholly imstable, the selfish utterly egoist. In quiet times
defects escape notice, which become palpable when a man is in difficulties. Many a
king has reigned with credit till a crisis came, and then lost all his reputation, because
his character could not bear the strain put upon it. Such times are like bursts of hot
weather, under which " ill weeds grow apace."

II. The characters of the better sort op men are elevated and impboved
under crises. All the higher powers of the mind, all the nobler elements of the moral
character, are brought into play by crises, and through their exercise strengthened and
developed. Promptitude, resolution, boldness, trust in God, come with the call for
them ; and the discinline of a vear under such circumstances does the work of tweaty.



oaxLl-4.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 247

The Moses of ohs. x. xi. is a very different man from the Moses of ch. iii. He is firm,
resolute, self-reliant, may we not add, eloquent ? No wonder that he was " very great " in
the eyes both of the great officers of Pharaoh's court and of the people. He had with-
stood and baffled the magicians ; he had withstood rharaoh ; he had never blenched
nor wavered; he had never lost his temper. With a calm, equable, unfailing
persistence, he had gone on preferring the same demand, threatening punishments if it
were not granted, inflicting them, removing them on the slightest show of repentanca
and relenting. He had thus won the respect both of the Court and of the commom
people, as much as Pliaraoh had lost it, and was now generally looked up to and regarded
with feelings of admiration and approval. So the true character of the Christian
minister is often brought out, tested, and recognised in times of severe trial and
calamity, in a siege, a famine, a pestilence, a strike ; and a respect is won, which twenty
years of ordinary quiet work would not have elicited. Let ministers see to it, that they
make the most of such occasions, not for their own honour, but for Gbd's.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 1 — 4. — The beginning of the end. I. The stroke still in reserve (Yet. 1).
Gk)d would bring on Pharaoh " one plague more." This would be effectual. It would
lead him to let the people go from Egypt. So eager would he be for their departure,
that he would even thrnut them out in haste. The nature of this final stroke is
described in vers. 4 — 7. It would be the death in one night of the first-born of man
and beast throughout all the land of Egypt. This stroke might have been delivered
earlier, but, 1. It might not at an earlier stage have had the same eifect. 2. There was
mercy to Pharaoh in giving him the opportunity of yielding under less severe inflictions
before visiting him with this last and decisive one. 3. The previous plagues gave
Pharaoh, moreover, an opportunity of Aovag freely what he now was driven to do under
irresistible compulsion. 4. The final stroke was delayed that by the succession of
plagues which were brought on Egypt, the deliverance might be rendered more
imposing, and made more memorable. The object was not simply to get Israel out of
Egypt in the easiest way possible, but to bring them forth in the way most glorifying
to God's justice, holiness, and power. This has been already shown (ch. vi. ; vii. 3, 5 ;
ii. 15, 16 ; X. 1, 2).

n. The command to ask from the Eotptians (vers. 2, 3). 1. The request. The
Israelites were to borrow, or ask, from the Egyptians "jewels of silver, and jewels of
gold ; " " raiment " also, and whatever else they required (ch. iii. 22 ; xii. 35, 36). (1)
The people were entitled to these gifts in repayment for past unrequited services ; as
compensation for losses and sufferings during the century of slavery. 'I he principle of
" compensation " is a prominent one in modern legislation. Grovernments have been
mindful, in decreeing slave-emancipation, of compensation to the owners ; God
bethought himself of compensation to the situ es. Which is the more reasonable ? (2)
God authorisd the people to demand these gifts. A demand, coming under the
circumstances from Jehovah, was equivalent to a command. And after what had
happened, it was impossible for any reasonable mind to doubt that the demand hud
come from God. This was sanction sufficient. The Lord gives, and the Lord is entitled
to take away (Job i. 21). " 'I'he Lord hath need of it " is sufficient reason for giving up
anything (Li^e xix. 34). 2. The response. The plague would be influential in
leading the Egyptians to give of their wealth to the Israelites (cf. ch. xii. 36). God
would so incline their hearts. This willingness to part with their valuables arose not so
much (1) From gratitude for past benefits, as (2) From a desire to stand well with a people
who were so eminently favoured of God, and (3) From /ear of God, and a desire to get rid
of this people, who had proved so terrible a snare to them, as quickly and as peaceably
as possible. Suggestions of the passage : (1) The hearts of men are in God's hands
(Prov. xxi. 1). He rules in hearts as well m in the midst of worlds. Without
interfering with freedom, or employing other than natural motives, he can secretly
incline the heart in the direction he desires. (2) The time will come when the world
will be glad to stand well with the Church. (3.) There is much in the world that the
Church may legitimately covet to possess. The "world" U a much abused term. "A»



m



Me Boofe OP ExoDtra,



toB. XL4^



the Church m ita collective capacity is the region of holiness, 80 the world is that of sin.
But it must be carefully observed, that the view is taken of it in its totality, not of each
of the parts. As a whole, moral corruption was (in New Testament times) so inter-
woven with its entire civilisation that it imparted to it the general aspect of evil. Ai
the teaching of the New Testament by no means asserts that all the various elements
which meet in the kingdom of God are good, so it is equally far from intending to afSrm
that every portion of human civilisation, as it then existed, was the contrary. Manj
things were only rendered evil by their connection with the prevailing moral coiTuption.
(Rev. 0. A. Eow.) 4. The Church will ultimately be enriched with the spoils of the
world (Be.v. xxi. 24 — 26). 5. Whatever service God requires of his people, ho will see
that they are suitably equipped for it, and that their needs are, ui his providence,
abundantly supplied (I'hil. iv. 18). 6. The people of God will not ultimately suffer
loss from adherence to him. 7. God can make even the enemy a means of benefit to
his cause.

III. The obeatnbss op Mobbs. " Moreover, the man Moses was very great," &e.
(ver. 3). The promise was thus fulfilled. " See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh "
(oh. vii. 1). This greatness of Moses was, 1. Got without his seeking for it. Like
Jesus, he came not doing his own will, but the will of him that sent him (John v. 38).
2. Got without his expecHmj it. Moses looked for anything but honour in the service
to which he had been called. Remember his deep despondency at the entrance on his
task, and for long after (ch. iii. 11 ; iv. 10—13 ; v. 22, 23 ; vi. 12, 30). 3. Got in
doing God's work. 4. Got by Ood's power resting on him (of. Deut. xxxiv. 10 — 12).
The service of God is the path of true greatness, and leads to undying honour (Bom. iL
7, 10).-^. 0.

Bow Ood justifies the trust of all who hope in his mercy. I. The cebtainty op thk
DELIVEBANCB OF God's PEOPLE. 1. The preceding plagues had terrified for a moment ;
this will crush resistance. The stroke long delayed was now at length to fall. The last
awful pause had come, during which Egypt waited in dread, and Israel in hope mingled
with awe. 2. The like moment will come in God's contest with sin. There will bo a
last awful pause, and then the trump of God shall sound. 3. The last hour of this
earthly life of ours will also come, and the soul be fireed fi:om the grasp of sorrow, and
pass up through the pearly gates into the father's home.

II. Its COMPLETENESS. " He shall surely thrust you out hence altogether." Every
bond wiU be broken. 1. The churches of God shall no more feel the world's afflicting
hand. 2. Sin shall have no more dominion over God's redeemed. God's deliverance
comes slowly, but when it does come it is full and lasting.

III. It will be attended with great enrichment. It will not be an escape with
mere life. To their own shall be added the wealth of their foes. 1. The riches of the
nations will yet be the possession of the people of God. 2. This will be only the type
of the true riches with which the redeemed shall be endowed.

IV. And with great honohb. The despised bondsmen were girt with reverence
and awe, such as had never encircled the throne of the Pharaohs. The true kings of
the earth for whose manifestation the world waits are the sons of God. They will be,
too, the princes of heaven, co-heirs with Christ, sharers of the throne of the Son of
God.— U.

EXPOSITION,



Vers. 4 — 8. — The writer returns here to his
account of the last interview between Moses
and Pharaoh, repeating the introductory words
of ch X 29 — "and Moses said." Having
accepted his dismissal, and declared that he
would not see the face of Pharaoh any more
{ibid.), Moses, before quitting the presence,
proceeded to announce the last plague, pre-
facing the announcement, as usual (ch. vii.
17 ; viii. 2 ; -x. 1, 13 ; x. 3), with the solemn



declaration, which showed that he acted in the
matter merely as God's instrument — "Thus
saith Jehovah." He makes the announcement
with the utmost plainness, noting the exact
time of the visitation Qver. 4) — its extent
(ver. 5) — ^the terrible " cry " that would follow
Cver. 6) —r the complete exemption of the
Israelites (ver. 7) — ^the message which Pharaoh
would send him by his servants, to depart at
once — and his own intentioB of aotiiig on it



ca.^ 4-8.3



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



24i



(ver. 8). Then, without waiting for a reply, I
in hot anger at the prolonged obstinacy of the
monarch, he went out

Ver. 4. — ^About midnight. — Compare ch.
zii. 29. It would add to the horror of the
inSiction that it should come in the depth of
the night. Probably the night intended was
not the next night, but one left purposely
indefinite, that terror and suspense might work
upon the mind of Pharaoh. Shall I go ont.
"Hie word "I" is repressed in the original,
and is emphatic. This crowning plague Jeho-
vah inflicts by no instrumentality, but takes
wholly upon himself. (See ch. xiL 12, 13,
23, 27, 29.)

Ver. 5.— All the first-born. The law of
primogeniture prevailed in Egypt, as among
most of the nations of antiquity. The mon-
archy (under the New Empire, at any rate)
was hereditary, and the eldest son was known
as erpa mten «a, or " hereditary Crown Prince."
Estates descended to the eldest son, and in
many cases high dignities also. No severer
blow could have been sent on the nation, if it
were not to be annihilated, than the loss in
each house of the hope of the family — the
parents' stay, the other children's guardian and
protector. Who sitteth. " Sitteth " refers to
" Pharaoh," not to " first-bom." The meaning
is, " from the first-born of the king who occu-
pies the throne to the first-born of the humblest
slave or servant." This last is represented by
the handmaid who is behind the mill, since
grinding at a mill was regarded as one of the
severest and most irksome forms of labour.
The work was commonly assigned to captives
(Is. xlvii. 1, 2 ; Judg. xvi. 21). It was done
by either one or two persons sitting, and con-
sisted in rotating rapidly the upper mUlstone
npon the lower by means of a handle. All the
first-bom of beasts. Not the first-bom of
cattle only, but of all beasts. The Egyptians
had pet animals in most houses, dogs, apes,
monkeys, perhaps cat^ and ichneumons. Most
temples had sacred animals, and in most dis-
tricts of Egypt, some beasts were regarded as
■acred, and might not be kiUed, their death
being viewed as a calamity. The loss of so
nuuy animals would consequently be felt by



the Egyptians as a sensible aggravation of tha
mfliction. It would wound them both in their
domestic and in their religious sensibilities.

Ver. 6. — There shall be a great cry. The
violence of Oriental emotions, and the freedom
with which they are vented are well known.
Herodotus relates that the Egyptians stript
themselves and beat their breasts at funerals
(ii. 85) No doubt they also uttered shiill
lamentations, as did the Greeks (Lucian, De
Ludu, § 12) and the Persians (Herod, ix. 24).
With bitter mourning in every house, the
" cry " might well be one, such as there had
been none like before, neither would there be
any like again.

Ver. 7. — Shall not a dog move his tongue.
So far from a sudden destruction coming upon
them, there shall not so much as a dog bark at
them. They shall incur no hurt — ^no danger.
(Compare Josh. x. 21.) That ye may know
how that the Lord doUi put a difference — i.e.,
" that both ye courtiers and all Egypt may
know how great a difference God puts between
us — his peculiar people — and you wretched
idolaters.

Ver. 8. — ^All these thy seirants — «'.«., all
these courtiers here present. Shall come.
Literally, "shall descend." Kalisoh observei
that by the Hebrew idiom "going from a
nobler place to one of less distinction is called
descending" (Comment, p. 133). And bow
down. Make obeisance to me, as if I were a
king. The last of the plagues would cause
the courtiers to look on Moses as the real king
of the land, and pay him royal honours. All
the people that follow thee. Literally, as in
the margin, " that is at thy feet ; " «.«., that
follows and obeys thee." The Egyptians
looked on Moses as king, or at any rate prince
of his nation. In a great anger. Literally,
"in heat of anger." The abrupt dismissal
(ch. X. 28), the threat against his life (ibid.)
and the announcement that no more inter-
views would be granted him moved the indig-
nation of Moses, who was not conscious to him-
self of having done anything to deserve such
treatment. He had answered the king calmly
and temperately (ch. x. 29 ; xi. 4 — 8) ; but
knew what his feelings had been, and here
records them.



HOMILETICS.

Vera. 6 — 7. — The issues of life and death, are in the hand of God. For the most part
there is, or there seems to be, one event to the righteous and to the wicked (Eccles, ix.
2). Death happens alike to all, and does not appear to choose his victims on any
principle of sparing good and punishing ill desert. War, famine, pestilence, sweep away
equally the good and the bad. This is the general law of God's providence ; but he
makes occasional exceptions. The issues of life and death are really his. Not a sparrow
falls to the ground without our Father. If he see fit, he can " put a difference " between
his own people and others. He can strike with death whomsoever he pleases ; he can
spare those whom hr chooses to spare. We see him here : —



280 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. 3U. 4-41

L Makinq death an instrument op vengeance, not on those who die, but OS
THOSE who bubvivb. i haraoh is punished, and the Egyptians generally are punished,
by the sudden death of the first-bom. They had deserved this retribution by their
cruelty to the Hebrews, and especially by the drowning of the Hebrew male children
(ch. i. 22). It afSicted all, however, alike, whether they had taken part in the above-
mentioned cruelties or not. This was because it was a national chastisement ; and the
case had been the same with almost all the other plagues.

II. Stbiking tbbrob into a whole community by visiting with death a ceetain
NUMbbb. Death is the main fear of worldly men. Anything else may bo endured,
made up for, made the best of. But for death there is no help, no remedy. The awful
phantom is, as far as possible, kept out of sight, unthought of, unprepared for, thrust
into the background. Men live as if they had a freehold of life, not a leasehold. When
the gaunt spectre draws near ; when, in the shape of cholera or fever, he makes his
entrance upon the scene and challenges attention, the result is, for the most part, a
panic. So it was in Egypt. The Egyptians wrote much of death, reminded each other
of death (Herod, ii. 78), prepared tombs for themselves with great care speculated largely
upon the condition of souls in another world ; but it would seem that they shrank, as
much as ordinary men, from near contact with the grisly phantom. It was now about
to be suddenly brought home to them how thin a barrier separates between the two
worlds. In the presence of death they would wake up to the realities of life. They
would be conquered, submissive, ready to do whatever was God's will. Some such
results are traceable whenever and wherever imminent death threatens a large number,
and are to be watched for by the minister, who will find his opportunity at such seasons,
and should take advantage of it.

III. Showing his favour to his own people bt exempting them whollt from tbb
visitation. Against the Israelites not even a dog would move his tongue (ver. 7).
With mortality all around them, with a corpse in each Egyptian house, with animals
lying dead on all sides, in the open country as well as in the towns and houses, they
would be completely free from the visitation; a special providence would save and
protect them. Such an exemption was, of course, miraculous, and is well nigh
unparalleled. But still there have been cases where God's people have suffered
marvellously little in a time of pestilence, when it has seemed to strike almost none but
reckless and vicious lives, when an arm has appeared to be extended over the righteous.
At such times what praise and gratitude are not due to God for " putting a difference
between the Egyptians and Israel I " He spares when we deserve punishment, and
in his wrath thinks upon mercy. He gives a token of his approval to men of regular
lives and temperate habits, by " passing them over " when he walks through the land
dealing out destruction.

Ver. 8. — Righteous anger. It seems to be supposed by some that the true Christian
ought never to be angry. St. Paul certainly says in one place, "Let all bitterness,
and wrath, and anger, and clamour be put away from you " (Eph. iv. 31) ; and in
another, " Put ye off all these, anger, wrath, malice " (Col. iii. 8). But he guards
himself from being misunderstood by giving a command in one of these very chapters
(Eph. iv. 26), " Be ye angry, and sin not." He was himself angry when he said to the
High Priest, " God shall smite thee, thou whited wall " (Acts xxiii. 3), and to the jailer
at Philippi, " They have beaten us openly, uncondemned, being Romans, and have cast
us into prison ; and now do they thrust us out privily ? Nay, verily : but let them
come themselves and fetch us out"(i6. xvi. 37). There is such a thing as " righteous
anger ; " and it was righteous anger which Moses felt at this time. He was
indignant —

I. Because God was spurned and his commandments made op no account.
Pharaoh, after temporising, and professing contrition, and . ..i;,gesting a variety of
compromises, had declared himself finally against God — oast his words behind his back —
and resolved on following out his own will, and defying the Almighty. Bold, unblush-
ing wickedness may well make the minister of God angry. It is an insult to God's
majesty. It is a contradiction of man's moral nature. It is an open enlisting in the
■ervice of Satan.

II. Because ma oountbtmem were wronged, bt beino dibapfointed or thxib



0H.xi.4-lft.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 2ft|

JDBT HOPES. Pharaoh's professions, his promises, his attempts at compromise had
given the Israelites a right to expect that he would yield in the end. His sudden
stiffness was an injury to them, with which Moses did well to sympathise. How
should he not be indignant, when the just rights of his nation were wholly ignored,
their patience despised, and their legitimate expectations baulked ? His anger, so far
as it arose out of sympathy for them, was justified — (a) by the bitterness of theit
feelings; (h) by the heartiness in which he had thrown himself into their cause;
(c) by the apparent hopelessness of their case, if the king now drew back.

III. Because he had been himself insulted and ill-used. The anger which
springs from a sense of wrong done to oneself is less noble than that which arises from
a sense of wrong done to our fellows, and still less noble than that which has its origin
in zeal for the honour of God ; but still it is not illegitimate. Wrong done to oneself
is nevertheless wiong, and, as wrong, properly stirs up anger within us. Moses had
been ill-used by Pharaoh from first to last, derided (oh. v. 4), trifled with (ch. viii.
26 — 32 ; X. 16 — 20), driven from his presence (ch. x. 11) ; and now at last had been
deprived of his right to make personal representations to the monarch, and even
threatened with death (ib. ver. 28). And why ? What evil had he done ? He had
simply delivered God's messages to Pharaoh, and inflicted the plagues at God's com-
mand. Of his own mere notion he had done nothing but shorten the duration of the
plagues by entreating God from time to time at I'haraoh's request. Even, therefore, if
his " heat of anger " had been caused solely by the wion? done to himself, it would
have been justified.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 4 — 10. — A finale. These verses end the story of how God wrought with
Pharaoh to subdue him to his will. They prepare us for the catastrophe which brought
the long conflict to a termination, and forced a way of egress for two millions of
Hebrews through the barred gates of Egypt.

I. Last words to Fharaoh (vers. 4—9). Vers. 1 — 3 of this chapter are obviously
parenthetical. They relate to a communication made to Moses prior to the visit to
Pharaoh recorded in oh. x. 24 — 29, and in anticipation of it. The substance of that
communication is now conveyed to the king. Having delivered his message as God had
directed, Moses finally leaves the royal presence (ver. 9). The present passage is there-
fore to be read in immediate connection with ch. x. 29. Pharaoh would see the face of
Moses no more — i.e., as a commissioner from Jehovah — but before leaving, Moses
has words to speak which are to Pharaoh the knell of doom. The judgment he
announces is the death of the first-born. On this observe — 1. It was a judgment-stroke
more terrible than any which had preceded. This is plain from the nature of it. What,
put one with the other in the balance, was the discomfort, pain, loss, terror, devastation
of crops, and darkening of the earth, caused by the previous plagues, to this tremendous
horror of finding in one night, in each home throughout the land, a dead first-born ?
The wound here was truly mortal. The first-bom is the special joy of parents. He is
loved, fondled, tended, admired, as few of the children are which come after him. The
pride of the parents centres in him. Their hopes are largely built up on what he may
become. He has drawn to himself, and embodies, a larger share of their thought,
interest, svmpathy, and affection than perhaps they are well aware of. He is the pillar
of their household. They look to him to bear up its honour when their own heads are
laid in the dust. To touch him is to touch the apple of their eye, to quench the
central illumination of their home. They are proud of him as a babe, the first occupant
of the cradle ; they are proud of him as a boy, unfolding his mental and physical
powers in rivalry with his youthful peers ; they are proud of him as a young man,
when thought and decision begin to stamp their lines upon his brow, and manly dignity
gives a new grace to his deportment. With the help of such considerations, try to
estimate the wrench to the heart's tenderest affection'^, in the million homes of Egypt,
by the simultaneous discovery that in each there is a ghastly corpse, and that the
corpse of the first-born. No wonder there was " a great cry throughout all the land of
Egypt, such as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more" (ver. 6). Natural
■fiectiou retains a mighty hold of natures often otherwise very depraved. And there ii



262 tHS BOOK OF EXODOS. [ch. «i. 4-10

no reason to suppose that, taken in the mass, the people of Egypt were characterised
by a greater want of it than others. Even the tiger has a tigerish love of his cubs,
and, wicked man though he was, the pride of Pharaoh in his first-bom may have been
of no ordinary intensity. Note then the following circumstances as indicative of the
especial horror of this judgment. (1) It would be supernatural. Natural causes
were more or less involved in thi other plagues, but this judgment was to be
inflicted by the direct stroke of the Almighty. (2) It would be sudden. There would
be no preliminary symptoms, no warning of approaching death. (3) It would be at
midnight. The darkest and " eeriest " hour of the whole twenty-four, the hour specially
associated with the gasping out of the spirit in death. (4) It would be universal.
There would not be a house in which there was not one dead (ch. xii. 30). Not one
left to comfort another. All alike swallowed up in indescribable sorrow, in blackest
grief and bitterest lamentation — the woe of each intensifying the woe of all the rest.
What a horror was this ! Death in a house is always oppressive to the spirit. The
muffled steps and woe-disflgm-ed faces tell the melancholy tale to every visitor. When
the death is of one high in rank, the mourning is proportionately deep and widely
spread. But death in every city, in every street, in every house, among high and low
alike, who will unfold the misery which this implied, or do justice to the ghastly
sense of mortality with which it would fill the breasts of the survivors I The
nearest image we can form of it is the state of a town or district where a pestilence
is rising, and corpses are being hurried to the dead-house in hundi-eds. And even this
falls immeasui'ably short of the reality. (5) It would embrace all ranks and ages.
Palace and hovel would have its dead son. The first-bom of beasts would be added to the
slain. But in the general mourning over dead men this would be but little regarded.
2. It was a Judgment-stroke bearing reference to Qod's relation to Israel. The key
to the form which it assumed is furnished in ch. iv. 22, 23. " Thus saith the Lord,
Israel is my son, even my first-bom ; and I say unto thee, Let my son go that he may
servn me ; and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will slay thy son, even thy first-
born." See Homily on ch. xii. 29 — 31. Israel was God's first-bom in relation to the
"many nations" of the redeemed world, which in its fulness was to embrace "all
kindreds, peoples, and tongues " (Gen. xvii. 5 ; Rom. iv. 16 — 19 ; liev. vii. 9). " As
the first-bom in God's elect is to be spared and rescued, so the first-born in the house
of the enemy, the beginning of his increase and the heir of his substance, must be
destroyed — the one a proof that the whole family were appointed to life and blessing,
the other, in like manner, a proof that all who were aliens from God's covenant of
grace equally deserved, and should certainly in due time inherit, the evils of perdition"
(Fairbairn). We may connect the judgment more simply with that law of symmetry
which appears in so many of God's judgments, the retribution being modelled after the
pattern of the crime to which it is related. Examples : Haman hanged on his own
gallows (Esther v. 14) ; Adoni-bezek mutilated in his thumbs and great toes (Jud. i. 6, 7) ;
Uavid punished for adultery by dishonour done to his own concubines (2 Sam. xvi.
20 — 23), &c. So Pharaoh, the would-be destroyer of God's first-born, is punished in
the destruction of his own first-bom. The /as talionis has a startling field of operations
in the Divine judgments. 3. It was a judgment involving the whule of Egypt in suffer-
ing for the sin </ the ruler. This was the case in all the plagues ; but it is specially
noticeable in this, where the judgment strikes a direct blow at every hearth. It may
be said, doubtless with truth, that Egypt, in this severe judgment, was punished also for
its own wickedness, the people, in the matter of the oppression of the Israelites, having been
active partners in the guilt of the monarch. It is obvious, however, that the immediate
occasion of this terrible blow falling on the land was the continued hardness of heart of
Pharaoh. Had he relented, the judgment would not have fallen ; it was because he did
not relent that it actually fell. We come back here to that principle of solidarity
which rules so widely in God's moral administration. The many rise or fall with the
one; the rewards of righteousness and the penalties of transgression alike overfow
upon those related to the immediate agent. The widest applications of this principle
are those stated in Bom. v. 12 — 21 — the ruin of the race in Adam ; the redemption of
the race in Christ. 4. It was a Judgment in which a marked distinction was to be put
between the Egyptians and the Hebrews (ver. 7). Israel, however, was only exempted
from like doom by resort to the blood of atonement — a lesson as to their natural state



!«. XI. 4r-10.] THE BOOK OP EXODUa 258

of condemnation, and as to the channel through which alone redeeming grace ooxild
flow to them.

II. The wiTHDitAWAL OF MosEB. " Moses went out from Pharaoh in a great anger"
(ver. 8). 1. There are occasions on which it is lawful to he angry. This was one
of them. He would have been a man utterly without soul who would not have been
roused to indignation by the towering pride and extraordinary ingratitude and faithless-
ness of Pharaoh, not to speak of the insults he was heaping on Jehovah, and the
violence threatened against Moses himself. 2. The meekest nature is that which, on
proper occasions, is capable of the most burning and vehement <myer. On the relation
of the anger of Moses to his meekness, see Homily on ch. ii. 12. Another example is
found in the apostle John — the apostle of love. The highest example of all is the
Son of Man, " meek and lowly in heart," yet capable of terrible and scathing wrath
—"the wrath of the Lamb" (Matt. xi. 29 ; Mark iii. 5 ; Eev. vi. 16, 17).

m. A SUMMING UP (vers. 9, 10). The conclusion of the series of plagues having
been reached, and negotiations with Pharaoh having been finally broken off, Moses
sums up the results. The notable point is, that it was all as the Lord had said. It
had been foretold that Pharaoh would not hearken, and neither had he hearkened ; but
his hardening had been the occasion of God's multiplying his wonders in the land
of Egypt. The climax of the hardening was reached under this last warning. Infuriated
by his passion, Pharaoh appears to have paid no heed to it. Vet the fact that he
did not, illustrates a point already dwelt upon — the tendency of hardening against God
to involve the whole moral nature, extending at last to the destruction even of the
natural affections. We have seen how reckless Pharaoh had become of the well-being
of his subjects (ch. x. 7). See him now perilling the life of his own son, not to speak
of the lives of the first-bom throughout the whole land, that he may be spared the
humiliation of submitting to Jehovah ! Perilling, even, is too weak a word, for expe-
rience had taught him that God's threatenings in no case went unfulfilled. " Sacrificing "
would be the more proper term. Even to this length was Pharaoh ultimately driven
by his enmity against God, and his example remains as a melancholy warning to
ourselves. — J. 0.

Chap. xi. vers. 4 — 10; chap. xii. vers. 29 — 36. — The tenth plague and its decisivt
result— the destruction of the first-born. In ch. x. 29, Moses says to Pharaoh, " I will
see thy face again no more," while in ch. xi. 4 — 8, he is represented as making to
Pharaoh an announcement of the last plague. Perhaps the best way of clearmg this
apparent contradiction is to suppose that in the narrative as it originally stood there
was really no break between ch. x. 29 and ch. xi. 4, and that the three intervening verses
were afterwards introduced in some way which we cannot now explain. So taking the
narrative, all is made straightforward and additionally impressive. Moses followed up
his intimation that Pharauh should see his face no more, with a statement which
plainly showed the reason why. No more would he come into Pharaoh's presence
uninvited by Pharaoh, simply because there would no more be need to do so. Jehovah
was about to deal the last blow without any human instrumentality whatever.

I. TbY to estimate somewhat op the combination of FOIICBS IN THIS LAST

PLAOUB, WHICH MADE IT SO EFFECTIVE FOE ITS PUBPOSB. 1. 'Jhere was the hour chosen
— midnight. It was not like the rest of the plagues, which extended over a more
or less period of time ; but, being a momentary blow, the most impressive moment could
be chosen for striking it. This was midnight, the time of security, repose, and deep
silence. Each family was gathered together under its own roof; not separated, as
might have been the case during the day, each one at his appointed work. There was
no bustle of business, as there might have been at noon, to help in drowning and quali-
fying the horror of the transaction. 2. There was an element of peculiar force in the
very class of persons who were smifttn. Not only had Jehovah advanced to take away
the lives of human beings, but he had directed his destructions, with evident and
unerring purpose, upon one particular class. The destruction was not as a mere deci-
mation, the taking of one out of so many, it mattered not who, so long as one was
taken. In every household it was the first-born who lay dead. No regard was shown
to personal character or special circumstances. All the first-bom were stricken, the
TirtupiiB V well 48 the vicious ; the amiable, promising youth from whom much w«f



864 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. n. 4-ia

expected, and the scapegrace who was bringing a father's grey hairs with sorrow to the
grave ; the young man who might be the only son of his mother and she a widow, alike
with him who was the first-born among many brethren. The first-born is the centre
of so many hopes and calculations, that when he is stricken there may be the in-
stantaneous reaction of an irretrievable despair. Zechariah speaks very emphatically of
those who are in bitterness for their first-bom (ch. xii. 10). In many cases the fu'st-
born would also be the just-bom. 3. There was an element that helped to bring decision
in the very greatness of the cry that was elicited. How far the announcement made to
Pharaoh had travelled we know not; but it must have gone far enough to produce
a consentaneous cry of recognition when the blow was struck. Pharaoh would know,
and also his courtiers, and many at different points through the city, even before they
came out of their houses, that it was by no ordinary death the first-bom had died.
Bach one, thus already infonned, would suspect the whole terrible truth with respect
to all the first-born of the land. In this way certainty would come that the prediction
was fulfilled, even before information on the point was actually obtained. Bad news
travels quickly, and all the quicker when special facilities have been prepared by
Jehovah himself, as they evidently were in this instance. Remember, also, the demon-
strative, vociferous mode of expressing sorrow in bereavement which prevails among
Eastern nations. There was hardly an hour of the day or night but from some home
in Egypt there went up the wail of the bereaved ; but here was a simultaneous wail
from every home, and that not over the aged or the sick whose death was expected,
but over those the great majority of whom wovild be young, strong, and vivacious.
Thus the very emotions which produced this extraordinary cry, the cry itself seized in
turn to intensify, and thus to exalt into complete mastery. What wonder, then, that
from the king downward the people were swept away by their emotions, and, without
thought of past gains or future losses, hurried Israel out of their land in the precipitate
way here recorded ! Avarice, pride, worldly consequence — all the motives which hold
dominion in selfish human breasts — ^lost their seats for the moment. It was only
for a moment, but that moment was time long enough effectually to serve the
purposes of God. 4. There was the fact that with all these elements of force and
terror in the tenth plague itself, tfiere had been nine such serious visitations be/ore
it. It was like the last blow of the battering-ram, which, though it may havi in
itself more force than preceding blows, yet gains not the least part of its efficiency
from the shaking which these preceding blows have produced. It is by no iiieaub
certain that if this destruction of the first-born had come at first it would have hail the
same effect.

II. Notice, as illustrated by this announcement to Pharaoh, how differently the
SAME FACTS ABB STATED TO DiFFEEEUT PEOPLE. Pharaoh is plainly told, that amid
all this great smiting of Egypt's first-bom, Israel will continue perfectly secure. The
impression we get is, that not only will there be freedom for Israel from the specific
effects of this plague, but even an unusual exemption from ordinary mischances. Not
a dog is to move his tongue against any living creature in Israel. The protection would
be complete ; the favour and discrimination of Jehovah most manifest. But whence
all this came, and in what it consisted, Pharaoh cannot be informed. The difference
between Israel and Kgypt will be plain enough ; but the virtue of the slain lamb and
the sprinkled blood are hidden from his eyes — all this could not be explained to kim.
If it could have been explained to him, it would never have needed to be explained.
In other words, Pharaoh would never have come into such an extremity as that where
the death of the first-born landed him. Thus we are helped to see the reason why to
some tliere come revelations producing security and gladness of heart, and to others
nothing but tidings of disaster and disappointment. Every great fact of God's dealings
has a bright side and a dark side ; and if we will not live so that the bright side may
be revealed to us, then inevitably we must come face to face with the dark one. Moses
told rharaoh that the death of the first-bom was coming, but he only turned away
more scornful, stubborn, and infatuated than ever; he told the children of Israel to
make the Paschal preparations, and, minute and exact as these preparations were, they
at once went away and made them. God might have told Pharaoh all about how Israel
was protected, but what would have been the use ? If we would discover why preal
Divine revelatioas are hidden frum us, we must look in our own nearts. A mao can



OH. XL 9, 10.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



2S5



never know the comforts and beauties that belong to the tem^ierate zone as long as he
stubbornly abides in tne frigid one.

III. Consider this last plaque in the actual effects op it. 1. It produced
immediate action on the part of Pharaoh, and, what is very noticeable, on the part oj
the people also, Pharaoh called for Moaes and Aaron by niyht. He had sent them
away with a menace of death, if they ventured again into his presence ; but only a few
short hoxirs pass and he has to beg them to hurry and save him. We should never
threaten and bluster, for we know not how soon we may have to swallow our words
again. He did not wait till morning, even till the early morning. Every moment
would bring to him news from a widening circle, and quicken him into the promptest
lotion possible. And yet, immediate as this action appears, we know that it had been
led up to very gradually. Jehovah had been for a long time undermining the strength
of Pharaoh ; and if it now coUapsed in a moment instead of crumbling away, it was
because the massive fabric had lost, bit by bit, the foundation on which it had been
raised. And in the same way we may be sure that everything in the world which is
unjust, ungodly, and tyrannical, is being undermined. There is no proud and stubborn
soul but God is working upon it by something substantially the same as the nine
plagues ; and the tenth plague will come in due time to produce its immediate and
decisive effect. 2. The action took the shape of complete and eager liberation. Egypt
was filled with panic and terror to the exclusion of every other motive. The full signi-
ficance of Pharaoh's words in vers. 31, 32, can only be seen by comparing them,^s<,
with his contemptuous treatment of Moses in the beginning (ch. v. 2) ; ami next, with his
procrastinating, half-giving, half-grasping attitude during the course of tlie plagues
(ch. viii. 10, 25 ; x. 8 — 11, 24). Pharaoh began as one whose foot was on the rock —
he was sure he could not be shaken ; then he was made to feel himself as more and
more in a state of unstable equilibrium ; and now at last he is utterly prostrate at
Moses' feet. He who said he would grant nothing, now grants everything. He who,
in response to the first request of Moses, added to the severities of the bondage already
existing, now, when all requests have ceased, not only undoes the fetters, but hurries
the captives out of his realm, as if each of them was a mass of fatal infection. — Y.



EXPOSITION.



Ven. 9 — ^10. — ^Before proceeding to relate
the last and greatest of the plagues, the
author allows himself a momentary pause
while he casts his eye back on the whole series
of miracles hitherto wrought in Egypt, on the
circumstances under which they had been
wrought, their failure to move the stubborn
will of Pharaoh, and the cause of that failure,
the hardening of his heart, which hardening
the author once more ascribes to Jehovah.
With this summary he terminates the second
great division of his work, that which began
with ch. ii., and which traces the history of
Moses from his birth to the close of his dhrect
dealings with Pharaoh.

Ver. 9.— And the Lord said. EaUier, " had
uaid." God had forewarned Moses that
Pharaoh's heart would be hardened (ch. iv.
21 ; vii. 3), and that, in spite of all the
miracles which he was empowered to perform
before him, he would not let 'the people go
(ch. iii. 19; iv. 21). It was not until God
took Pharaoh's punishment altogether into his
own bauds, and himself came down and



smote all tiie first-bom, that the king's obsti-
nacy was overcome, and he proceeded to
" tlunist the people out." That my wonders
may he multiplied. Compare ch. iii. 20 ;
vii. 3. If Pharaoh had yielded at the first,
or even after two or three miracles, God's
greatness and power would not have been
shown forth very remarkably. Neither the
Egyptians nor the neighbour.ng nations would
have been much impressed. The circum-
stances would soon have been forgotten. As
it was, the hardness of Pharaoh's heart, while
it delayed the departure of the Israelites for a
year, and so added to their sufferings, ^as of
advantage to them in various ways : — 1. It
gave them time to organise them elves, and
make all necessary preparations for a sudden
departure. 2. It deeply impressed the Egyp-
tians, and led them to abstain from all inter-
ference with the Israelites for above three
centuries. 3. It impressed the neighbouring
nations also to some extent, and either pre-
vented them from offering opposition to the
Israelites, or made them contend with less
heart, and so with less success against them.

Ver. 10.— Moses and Aaron did all thei*
plagues before Fharaoh. Aaron's tf^ewcj m



256



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[cB. XL 9, lu



not always mentioned, and seems to have been
less marked in the later than in the earlier
miracles, Moses gradually gaining self-reliance.
In passing from the subject of the plagues
wrought by the two brothers, it may be useful
to give a synopsis of them, distinguishing



those which came without warning from those
which were announced beforehand, and noting,
where possible, their actual worker, their
duration, their physical source, and the hurt
which they did.



Plagne*.


Announced
or Not.


Actual
Worker.


Dar&tion.


Physical
Source.


Hurt which they did.


1. Elver tnmed'l

into blood /

2. Frogs

3. Mosquitoet

4. Beetles

5. Murrain

6. Boils

7. Haa

8w Locnsti
•l Darkness


announced
do.
not

announced
do.

not

announced
do.
not


Aaron
do.
do.

God
do.

Moses

do.
do.
do.


7 days

unknown
do.

do.
do.

do.

do.

do.

3 days


water

do.

fdust of the\
\ earth /

«r(?)

do.

/ashes of thel
\ fui-nace /

air

east wind

air(?)


annoyance to man and beast
annoyance to man.
annoyance to man and beast.

annoyance and loss to man.
loss to man.

suffering to man and beast.

loss to man.

do.
annoyance and horror to ma&



HOMILETICS.

MaiCt d-dmng hut eause$ God's wonders to he multiplied (ver. 9). Gfod's wonders
are either such as occur in the general course of his providence, or such as are abnormal
and extraordinary. It is these last of which Moses especially speaks to us in the Book
of Exodus. But the same law which applies to the abnormal wonders, applies also to
those which are constant and ordinary. Men's perverseness leads to their multiplication.

I. Pardon of sin is multiplied thbouqh human transgression. Nothing is a
greater marvel than God's pardon of sin. How " the High and Holy One who inhabiteth
eternity " — ^he who " is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity " — can pardon sin, is one
of those mysteries which must ever remain — in this life, at any rate — unfathomalile.
Man pardons his fellow-sinner without much difficulty, because he is his fellow-sinnet
— because he feels that he is himself so much in need of forgiveness. But for a perfect
Being to pardon what is utterly alien to his own nature, what he must despise and
abhor, what in his eyes is vile, base, mean, wicked, despicable, detestable — is a truth
which faith may accept, but which reason is quite incompetent to imderstand. Yet
God does pardon. St. Paul must have been pardoned his persecution of the saints,
before he was called to be " a chosen vessel." God bids us ask for pardon, and he
would not bid us ask for that which he could not or would not give. And the marvel
of pardon is being daily augmented, heaped up, multiplied, by the ever-increasing sum
of human transgression.

II. God the Spirit's condescension grows asd increases through the same.
God the Father declared once upon a time, " My Spirit shall not always strive with
man" (Gen. vi. 3). Yet near five thousand years have elapsed, and his Spirit strives
stilL Man turns away from his Spirit, " grieves " him, vexes him, is deaf to h's plead-
ili^ sets at ftought hiis counsel, wiljs none of his repi of (Prov. i. 25) — yet be does bo*



OH. ra. 1—20.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



257



withdraw himself. He " gives us the comfort of his help again " — he " will not leave
us, nor forsake us." We may, no doubt, if we persist in evil courses, and set to work
determinedly to drive him from us, in course of time cause him to withdraw, alienate
him wholly, " quench " him. But, short of such aMenation, our sins do but cause him
to multiply the wonders of his love and his long-suffering, to be ever more gracious and
more merciful, to plead vrith us more persuasively, more constantly, and save us, as
it were, in spit« of ourselves.

III. Chkist's protection of his Chuech is shown moee and more marvellously
AS its assailants increase in power and boldness. In prosperous times God seems
to do little for his Church ; but let danger come, let men rise up against it, let Gebal
and Ammon and Amalek be confederate together, and raise the cry, " Down with it,
down with it, even to the ground," and the wonders which he proceeds to work on
its behalf are simply astounding. Arius would corrupt its doctrine with the Court
at his back, and Arius is smitten in the dead of the night by a ileath as silent, sudden,
and inscrutable as that which came in the time of Moses on all the first-born of the
Egyptians. Julian would crush it by depriving its ministers of support and its members
of education, and Julian is cut off in the flower of his age by the javelin of an unknown
enemy. Atheism, Agnosticism, Bationalism, Materialism, and open immorality league
themselves against it at the present day, and lo ! from without evidences are made to
rise up out of crumbling heaps of rubbish in Assyria, Babylonia, ^nd Egypt ; while
from within is developed a new life, a new zeal, a new vigour and activity, which give
sure promise of triumph over the coalition. Man's opposition to God provokes God to
arise and show forth his might, to confound and scatter his foes. So men may be led
at last to know that he, whose name is Jehovah, ia truly " the Most High over all the
earth" (Ps. IxxxUi. 18).



SECTION VL

Fmsx Institution of the FassoveBi



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER Xn.



Kb Institution of the Passover and
THE Reasons for it. — In the interval
allowed by God, according to the precedent
of former announced plagnes, between the
wamisg concerning the first-bom and the
execution, Moses received instructions for the
institution of a new religious rite, founded
possibly upon some previous national usage,
but sore-shaped, re-cast, and remodelled as to
aave an entirely new and fresh character. In
all Eastern nations, the coming in of spring
was observed as a jocund and festive time,
with offerings, processions, and songs of re-
joicings. When the date of the vernal equi-
nox was known, it was naturally made the
duuiimg-point for these festivities. Early
Uowers and fruits, the fresh ears of the most
forward kinds of grain, or the grain itself ex-
tracted from the ears, were presented as
thank-offerings in the temples ; hymns were
rang, and acknowledgments made of God's
goodness. Sach a festival was celebrated

BXOJICJS.



each year in Egypt ; and it is so consonant to
man's natural feelings, that, if the family of
Jacob did not bring the observance with them
from Palestine, they are likely to have
adopted it, when they became to some extent
agriculturists (Deut. xi. 10) under the
Pharaohs. It is, however, a pure conjecture
(Bwald) that the name given to this festival
was Feeach, from the sun's " passing over " at
this time into the sign of Aries. The real
name is unknown, and there is every reason
to believe that the term Feaach was now for
the first time given a religious sense (upon
the ground noticed in verses 11, 12) to what
was in reality a new rite. God, being about
to smite with death the first-bom in each
Egyptian house, required the Israelites to
save themselves by means of a sacrifice. Each
Israelite householder was to select a lamb (or
a kid) on the tenth day of the current month
(ver. 3), and to keep it separate from the
fiock until the foorteenth day at even, when
he was to kill it, to dip some hyssop in the
blood (ver. 22) and to strike with the hys-

8



268



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. ra. 1 — i>



>op on the two posts and lintel of his door-
way (ver. 7), so leaving the mark of the
Mood on it. He was then the same night to
roast the Iamb whole, and eat it with un-
leavened bread and bitter herbs (vers. 8 — 10).
He was to have his dress close girt about him,
bis sandals on his feet, and his staff in his
hand ; to be prepared, that is, for a journey.
If he did all this, God, when he went through
the land to smite and destroy, would " pass
over " the house upon which there was the
blood, and spare all that dwelt in it. Other-
wise the plague would be npon them to
destroy them (vers. 11, 13). Such were the
directions given for immediate observance,
and such was the Passover proper. The lamb
itself was primarily the Fesach (ver. 11), the
" pass," which secured safety. From this the
Bame spread to the entire festival. Having,
by the du'ections recorded in verses 3 — 13
instituted the festival, God proceeded, in
verses 14 — 20, to require its continued celebra-
tion year after year, and to give additional
rules as to the mode of its annual observance.
1. The festival was to last seven days. 2.
No leavened bread was to be eaten during
that space, and leaven was even to be put
away altogether out of all houses. 3. On the
6rst day of the seven and on the last, there
was to be " a holy convocation " or gathering
for worship. 4. No work not strictly neces-
sary was to be done on these days. Other
directions were given at a later date. 1. Be-
sides the Paschal lamb, with which the festi-
val commenced, and which was to be a
domestic rite, public sacrifices were appointed
for each day of the seven — ^to consist of two
young bullocks, one ram, seven lambs, and
one goat, with appropriate " meat-offerings "
(Num. xxviii. 19-24). 2. On the second day
of the feast, " the morrow after the sabbath,"
the first fruits of the harvest were to be pre-
sented in the shape of a ripe sheaf (of barley)
which was to be a wave-offering, and to he
accompanied by the sacrifice of a lamb with
meat and drink offerings (Lev. xxiii. 10-14).
By this regulation the festival was made to
embody the old spring feast, and to have thns
• double aspect.

Ver. 1. — The Lord spake. — ^According to
the Biblical record, neither Moses nor Aaron
introduced any legislation of their own,
either at this time or later. The whole sys-
tem, relijpoui, political, and ecclesiastical.



was received by Divine Revelation, com-
manded by God, and merely established by
the agency of the two brothers. In the land
of Egypt. The introduction of these words
seems to show that we have here a separate
document on the subject of the Passover,
written independently of what has preceded,
some time after the exodus, and placed here
without alteration, when Moses gathered
together his various writings into a single
work.

Ver. 2. — This month shall be nnto you Cfaa
beginning of months. The Israelite year
would seem to have hitherto commenced with
the autumnal equinox (Ex. xxiii. 16), or at
any rate with the month Tisri (or Etnanim),
which corresponded to our October. Hence-
forth two reckonings were employed, one for
sacred, the other for civil purposes, the first
month of each year, sacred or civU, being the
seventh month of the other. Abib, "the
month of ears " — our April, nearly — became
now the first month of the ecclesiastical year,
while Tisri became its seventh or sabbatical
month. It is remarkable that neither the
Egyptians nor the Babylonians agreed with
the original Israelite practice, the Egyptians
commencing their year with Thoth, or July;
and the Babylonians and Assyrians theirs with
Nisannu, or April.

Ver. 3. — Speak ye unto all the congrega-
tion. Under the existing circumstances
Moses could only venture to summon the
elders of Israel to a meeting. He necessarily
left it to them to signify his wishes to the
people. (See ver. 21.) A lamb. The He-
brew word is one of much wider meaning
than our " lamb." It is applicable to both
sheep and goats, and to either animal without
limit of age. In the present case the age
was fixed at a year by subsequent enactment
(ver. 5) ; but the offerer was left free with
respect to the species. It is curious that, such
being the case, the lamb alone should, so far
as appears, ever have been offered. Accord-
ing to the house of theii fathers. Literally,
" for a father's house," i. e. for a family.

Ver. 4. — If the household he too Uttle for
the lamb — i. e., " too few to consume it at •
sitting." Usage in course of time fixed the
minimum number at ten. (Joseph. Bdl. Jttd
vi. 9, § 3.) The whole family, men, women
and children participated. The lamb was
generally slain between the ninth hour (3
p.m.) and the eleventh (5 p.m.). let him
and his neighbour take it according to the
number of the sonls. If there were a liouse-
hold of only five, which could not possibly con-
sume the lamb, any large neighbouring family
was to send five or six of its number, to make up
the deficiency. Every man according to hit
eating, etc. It is difficult to see what sense
our translators intended. The real direction
is that, in providing » proper number of



ou.xa.6 — 8.J



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



268



guests, coiisideration shonld be had of the
amount which they would be likely to eat.
Children and the very aged were not to be
reckoned as if they were men in the vigour of
life. Translate — "Each man according to
his eating shall ye count towards the lamb."

Ver 5 — ^Tour lamb shall be without
blemish. Natural piety would teaoh that
" the blind, the lame, and the sick " should
not be selected for sacrifice (Mai. i. 8).
The Law afterwards expressly forbade any
blemished animals — " blind, or broken, or
manned, or having a wen, or scurvy, or
scabbed" — ^to be offered for any of the stated
sacrifices, though they might be given as
free-wiU offerings (Lev. xxii. 20 — 25). The
absence of blemish was especially important
in a victim which was to typify One " holy,
harmless, nudefiled, separate from sinners."
A male. As standing in place of and redeem-
ing the first-bom of the males in each family.
Of the first year. Perhaps as then more
approaching to the ideal of perfect innocence.
The requirement was not a usual one. Or
from the goats. Theodoret says the proviso
was made for the relief of the poorer class of
persons ; but practically it seems not to have
taken effect. When people were poor, their
richer neighbours supplied them with lambs
(Kalisch).

Ver. 6. — Ye shall keep it vp until the
fourteenth day. The interval of four days
(see ver. 3) was probably intended to give
ample time for the thorough inspection of the
lamb, and for obtaining another, if any defect
was discovered. The precept is not observed
by the modem Jews ; and the later Targum
(which belongs to the sixth century after
Christ) teaches that it was only intended to
apply to the first institution ; but the text
of Exodus is wholly against this. The whole
assembly of the congregation of Israel shall
kill it. One of the main peculiarities of the
Pa*chal sacrifice was this — that the head of
each famUy was entitled — in the early times
was required — ^to offer the sacrifice for him-
self. In it no one intervened between the indi-
vidual and Grod. Thus it was recognised that
the whole nation was a nation of priests, as are
Christians also, according to St. John (Eev. i. 6)
and St. Peter (1 Pet. ii. 5). The interven-
tion of Levites at a late date (2 Chron. xxx.
17 ; XXXV. S, &c.) was contrary to the original
institutioiL In the evening. Literally, " be-
tween the two evenings." This phrase has
been explained in two ways. Some regard
the first evening as commencing when the
sun bep-ins visibly to decline from the zenith,
».e. about two or three o'clock ; and the second
as following the sunset. Others sav, that the
sunset introduces the first evening, and that
the second begins when the twilight ends,
which they consider to have been " au h^ur
kud twentT' minutes Uter " (Ebn Ezra, quoteo



by Kalisch). The use of the phrase in eh.
zvi. 12, and the command in Deut. xvi. &—
" Thou shalt sacrifice the passover at even, at
{he going dawn of the sv/n," seem to be deci-
sive in favour of the second explanation. The
first arose out of the later practice. When
the lambs were sacrificed in the temple by a
continual succession of offerers, it became
impossible to complete the sacrifices in the
short time originally allowed. Of necessity
the work of killing the victims was com-
menced pretty early in the afternoon, and
continued till after sunset. The interpreta-
tion of the direction was then altered, to bring
it into accord with the altered practice.

Ver. 7.— They shall take of the blood. The
blood, which, according to Hebrew ideas, " is
the liJEe," and so the very essence of the sacri-
fice, was always regarded as the special
symbol of that expiation and atonement, with
a view to which sacrifice was instituted. As
by the Paschal sacrifice atonement was made
for the house, which was therefore to escape
unscathed, the sign of atonement was to be con-
spicuously placed upon it. And strike. The
" striking " was to be by means of a bunch of
hyssop dipped in the blood (ver. 22). The
selection of the doorway as the part of the
house to receive the stains of blood is pro-
bably to be connected with the idea that the
secondary agency producing death, whatever
it was, would enter by the door^— and if the
door showed the house to have been atoned
for, would not enter. The npper door-post
The word used is elsewhere translated
" lintel " (ch. xii. 22, 23) ; but it seems pro-
perly to mean the latticed window which
was commonly placed over a doorway in
Egyptian houses, and which is often repre-
sented in the facades of tombs. (See Lepsias,
Denkmdler, pt. ii. pis. 16, 17, 147, etc.) It is
derived from a root signifying " to look out."

Ver. 8. — Eoast with fire. The meat of
sacrificial meals was commonly boiled by the
Hebrews (1 Sam. ii. 14, 15). The command
to roast the Paschal lamb is accounted for :
1. By its being a simpler and quicker process
than boiling ; 2. By a special sanctity being
regarded as attaching to fire ; 3. By the difli-
culty of cooking the animal whole unless it
were roasted. Justin Martyr's statement
that for roasting two wooden spits were
required, placed at right angles the one to
the other, and thus extending the victim un
a cross, wiU seem to many a better ground
for the direction than any of these. And
nnleavened bread. See below, ver. 1 8
With hitter herbs. Literally, "with bitter-
nesses." That herbs, or vegetables of some
kind, are intended, there is no reasonable
doubt. The Mishna enumerates endive,
chicory, wild lettuce, and nettles among the
herbs that might be eaten It is a strange
notion of Kurtz's, that the bitter herlis wer«

8 2



•no



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[cH. XII. 9—12.



a, condiment, and "communicated s more
agreeable flavour to the food." Undoubtedly
they were a disagreeable accompaniment, and
represented at once the bitterness of the
Egyptian bondage (ch. i. 14) and the need of
«df-denial, if we would feed on Christ.

Ver. 9. — ^Eat not of it raw. The injune-
tifln appears to modems superfluous ; but an
ifi/Mpayla, or eating of the raw flesh of
victims sacrificed, seems to have been prac-
tised by several heathen nations in ancient
times, more especially in the worship of
Dionysus or Bacchus. Its head with its legs.
The Iamb was to be roasted whole — according
to some, as a symbol of the unity of Israel,
and especially of the political unit which they
were to become so soon as they quitted
Egypt ; but, as we learn from St. John (xix.
86), still more to prefigure the unbroken body
of Him whom the lamb especially repre-
sented, the true propitiation and atonement
and deliverer of His people from the de-
stroyer, our Lord Jesus Christ. The pnrte-
nance thereof. Bather, "the intestines
thereof." The Jewish commentators say that
the intestines were first taken ont, washed,
and cleansed, after which they were replaced,
and the Iamb roasted in a sort of oven.

Ver. 10. — Ye shall let nothing of it re-
main till the morning. The whole of the
flesh was to be consumed by the guests, and
at one sittmg, lest there should be any even
accidental profanation of the food by man or
animal, if part were put away. The English
Church, acting on the same principle of care-
ful reverence, declines to allow any reserva-
tion of the Eucharistic elements, requiring
the whole of the consecrated bread and wine
to be consumed by the Priest and communi-
cants in the Church immediately after the
service. That which remaineth — i.e., the
bones, and any small fragments of the flesh
necessarily adhering to them. Te shall bum
with Are. Thus only could its complete dis-
appearance, and seeming annihilation be se-
cured. It does not appear that this bm-ning
was viewed as a sacrificial act.

Ver. 11.— With your loins girded, etc.
Completely prepared, i.e., to st^ on your
Journey — ^with the loose wrapper (beged),
ordinarily worn, collected together and fas-
tened by a girdle about the waist; with
sandals on the feet, which were not com-
monly worn in houses ; and with walking-
sticks in the hand. There were some Jews
who regarded these directions as of perpetual
obligation; but the general view was that
the^ applied to the first occasion only, wheu
alone they would have answered any useful
pnipose. Ton shall eat it in haste. As not
knovring at what moment you may be sum-
moned to start on your journey, and as having
to see to the burning of the bones after the
€Mh was eaten, which would take some time.



It is the lord's Passover. Very emphatic
words ! " This is no common meal, they
seem to say, "it is not even an ordmary
sacrificial repast. The lamb is Jehovah's.
It is his pass-sign — ^the mark of his protec-
tion, the precious means of your preservation
from death. As such view it; and though
ye eat it in haste, eat it with reverence."

Ver. 12. — For I will pass through, etc.
God now proceeds to give the reason tor the
institution of the new ceremony, and to ex-
plain the new termpesacft. "I have com-
manded this rite," BTe says, "because I am
about to go through the whole land of Egypt
as a destroyer, executing judgment ; I am
about to smite and kill every one of the first-
bom both of man and beast. I shall enter
into every house, and slay the first-born in it,
unless I see upon the house the token of the
blood of the lamb. In that case I shall past
over the house, and you will escape the
plague." It would clear the sense if the
opening words of verse 12 were translated
— "For I shall go through," instead of
" pass through." The word translated " pass
tmough " has no connection at all with that
rendered " pass over." Against all the gods
of Egypt I win ezeoute judgment. These
words are exegetical of the word "beast,"
which immediately precedes. Animal wor-
ship was an important part of the religion of
the Egyptians. At four great cities, Mem-
phis, Heliopolis, Hermonthis, a sort of subuib
of Thebes, and Momemphis in the Western
Delta, animals were maintained, which were
viewed as actual incarnations of deity — the
Apis BuU at Memphis, a bull called Mnevis
st Heliopolis, one termed Bacis or Pacis at
Hermonthis, and at Momemphis a White
Cow. If any of these were at the time
animals that had " opened the womb," death
must have fallen upon them. Thus would
judgment have been executed, literally, upon
Egyptian "gods." But, besides these, the
whole country was filled with sacred animals,
regarded as emblematic of certain particular
deities, and as belonging to them. Sheep
were sacred to Kneph, goats to Khem, cows
to Athor, cats to Pasht, dogs and jackals to
Anubis, lions to Horus, crocodiles to Set and
Sabak, hippopotami to Taouris, cynocephalous
apes to Thoth, frogs to Heka. A sudden
mortality among the sacred animals would be
felt by the Egyptians as a blow stmck against
the gods to whom they belonged, and as
a judgment upon (hem. It is scarcely neces-
sary to understand literally the expression
" all the gods," and to defend it by the as-
sertion that "not a single deity of Egypt
but was represented by some beast." Such
an assertion cannot be proved; and is pro-
bably not correct. It has often been re-
marked, and is generally allowed, that Scrip-
ture uses nuivarsal expressions, where most



OB. tn. Id— 16.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



iSi



or eren many, of a class are meant. I am
the Lord. Bather as in ch. vi. 8, " Against
all the gods of Egypt I will execate judg-
ment, I, Jehovah."

Ver. 13. — The blood shall be to yon for a
token, etc. The blood was not to be a token
to the Israelites, but to God for them. Trans-
late — " and the blood shall be as a token for
you upon the houses that you are there." It
shall distinguish the houses in which you
dwell from the others, I will pass over you,
This is the emphatic clause. God would pass
by, or over the house on which the lilood was,
spare it, slay none of its inmates ; and from
this action of His, the lamb itself, and the
feast whereof it was the principal part, were
to be termed "the Passover." It has been
proposed to connect the Hebrew peiach with
the Egyptian pesh, "to stretch, or extend
(protection)"; but the name "Tiphsach,"
borne by the place of passage over the Eu-
phrates (1 Kings iv. 24), would seem to
indicate that "crossing," or "passing over"
is the primary meaning of the root.

Vers. 14-20. — Hitherto the directions given
have had reference, primarily and mainly, if
tiot vfholly, to the first celebration of the
Passover on the night preceding the Exodus.
Now, it is announced, (1) That the obser-
vance is to be an annual one ; and (2) That
it is to be accompanied with certain addi-
tional features in the future. These are (a)
the eating of unleavened bread for seven
days after the killing of the Passover; (6)
the putting away of leaven out of the
houses; (o) the holding of meetings for
worship on the first day and the last ; and
(d) the observance on these days of a sabba-
tical rest.

Ver. 14. — This day shall be to you for a
memorial. Annual festivals, in commemora-
tion of events believed to have happened,
were common in the religion of Egypt, and
probably not wholly strange to the religious
ideas of the Hebrews. (See the "Introduc-
tion " to this chapter.) They were now re-
quired to make the 14th of Abib such a day,
and to observe it continually year after year
"throughout their generations." There is
commendable faithfulness in the obedience
still rendered to the command at the pre-
sent day ; and it must be confessed that the
strong expression — throughout your genera-
tions and as an ordinance for ever — excuse
to a great extent the reluctance of the Jews
to accept Christianity. They have already,
however, considerably varied from the terms
of the original appointment. May they not
one day see that the Passover will still be
Iruly kept by participation in the Easter
eucharist, wherein Christians feed upon " the
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world "
— ^the antitype, of which the Paschal lamb
was the type — ^the true sustenance of souls —



the centre and source of all real unity — tha
one " perfect and sufficient sacrifice, and obla-
tion, and satisfaction for the sins of the
whole world"? The Church requires an
Easter communion of all her members, pro-
claims that on that day, Christ our passuver
being slain, we are to keep the feast ; and
thus, so far as in her lies, maintains the festi-
val as " an ordinance for ever," to be observed
through all her generations.

Ver. 19. — Seven days There is no indi-
cation that the week of seven days was ad-
mitted by the ancient Egyptians, or even
known to them. Apparently, the nation
which first adopted it was that of the Babv-
lonians. Abraham may have brpught it with
him from " Ur of the Chaldees ; " aad from
him it may have pa.<ised to Jacob, and so to
Moses. That the week was known in the
family of Abraham before the giving of the
law, appears from Gen. xxix. 27, 28. Un-
leavened bread is typical of purity of heart,
leaven being an emblem of corruption (Matt.
xvi. e — 12; 1 Cor. v. 7). "Leaven," says
Plutarch, "comes from corruption, aad cor-
rupts the dough with which it is mixed ; and
every fermentation seems to be a putrefac-
tion." The primary command to celebrate
the first passover with unleavened instead of
leavened bread (ver. 8), must be attributed
wholly to this symbolism. But the perma-
nent institution of a " feast of unleavened
bread," to last a week, had a double bearing.
Partly, it was designed to deepen and inten-
sify the conviction that corruption and im-
purity disqualify for religious service ; but it
was also partly intended as a commemoralioo
of the fact, that in their hasty flight from
Egypt the bread which they took with them
was unleavened (ver. 34), and that they were
forced to subsist on this for several days.
(Compare the double meaning of the " bitter
herbs, ' noticed in the comment on verse 8. ad
fin.} The requirement to " put away leaven
out of their houses " is probably intended to
teach, that for family worship to be accept-
able, the entire household must be pure, and
that to effect this result the head of the
household must, so far as he can, eject the
leaven of sin from his establishment. Who-
soever eateth . . . shall be cat off &am
Israel. Expelled, i.e., from the congregation,
or excommunicated. If a man wilfully trans-
gresses any plain precept of God, even though
it be a positive one, he should be severed from
the Church, until he confess his fault, and
repent, and do penance for it. Such was the
" godly discipline " of the primitive Ohurcli ;
and it were well if the Churches of these
modem times had more of it.

Ver. 16. — On the first day there shall be
an holy convooation. After the Paschal meal
on the evening of the Itthof Abib, there was
to be a solemn assembly of tne people on the



262



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[cH. XII. 17—20.



next day for religions worship. The name
"convocation," applied to these gatherings,
seems to show that originally the people were
tmamoned to such meetings, as they still are
bj the mueziin from the minarets of mosques
in Mahommedan countries, and bj bells from
the steeples of churches in Christian ones.
And on the seventh day. On the 22ad of
Abib— the seventh day after the first holy-
convocation on the 15th (see Lev. xxiii.
4 — 8). Only two of the Jewish festivals were
of this duration — the feast of unleavened
bread, and the feast of tabernacles (t&.89 — 42).
The Christian Church has adopted the usage
for Christmas, Easter, Ascension, and Whit-
suntide, where the last day of the week is
known technically as " the octave." No man-
ner of work shall be done in them. Festival-
days were in all countries days of abstention
from the ordinary business of Uf e, which could
not conveniently be carried on conjomtly with
attendance at the services, meetings, proces-
sions, etc., wherein the festival consisted. But
absolute cessation from all work was nowhere
strictly commanded except among the He-
brews, where it appears to have been con-
nected with the belief in God's absolute rest
after the six days of creation. The command
here given was solemnly repeated in the law
(Lev. xxiii. 6 - 8).

Ver. 17. — In this self-same day. The 15th
of Abib — ^the first day of the feast of un-
leavened bread. Have I brought your hosts
out. This expression seems to prove that we
have in the injunctions of verses 14 — 20, not
the exact words of the revelation on the sub-
ject made by God to Moses before the insti-
tution of the Passover, but a re-casting of the
words after the exodus had taken place.
Otherwise, the expression must have been,
"I will bring your hosts out." As an ordi-
nance for ever. Easter eve, the day on which
Satan was despoiled by the preaching of Jesus
to the spirits in prison (1 Pet. iii. 1 9), and on
which the Church first realises its deliverance
from the bondage of sin by the Atonement of
Good Friday, is the Christian continuance of
the first day of unleavened bread, and so
answers to this text, as Good Friday to the
similar command in ver. 14.

Ver. 18. — In the first month. The word
« month " seems to have accidentally dropt



out of the Hebrew text. In the evening.
The Hebrew day commenced with the evening
(Gen. i. 5) ; but the evening here intended is
that at the close of the 14th of Abib, which
began the 15th. Similarly, the evening of
the 21st is here that whidi commenced the
22ad.

Ver. 19. — This is not a mere " vain repeti-
tion" of verse 15. It adds an important
extension of the punitive clause — " that soul
shall be cut off from Israel " — from Israelites
proper to proselytes. We are thus reminded,
at the very time when Israel is about to
become a nation and to enter upon its inherit-
ance of exclusive privileges, that no exclusion
of the Gentiles by reason of race or descent
was ever contemplated by God, either at the
giving of the law, or at any other time. In
Abraham " all the families of them were to
be blessed" (Gen. xii. 3). It was ^ways
open to any Gentiles to join themselves to
Israel by becoming "proselytes of justice,"
adopting circumcision and the general ob-
servance of the law, and joining the Israelite
community. The whole law is full of refer-
ences to persons of this class (Ex. xx. 10:
xxiii. 12 ; Lev. xvi. 29 ; xvii. 10 ; xviii. 26
XX. 2 ; xxiv. 16 ; Num. xxxv. 15 ; Deut. v. 14 ;
xvi. 11—14 ; xxiv. 17, 19 ; xxvii. 19 ; xxix.
11, etc.). It must have been largely recruited
in the times immediately following the exodus
from the "mixed multitude" which accom-
panied the Israelites out of Egypt (Ex. xii.
38), and from the Kenites who joined them
in the wUderuess (Num. x. 29-31 ; Jud. i.
16). Bom in the land — i.e., an Israelite by
birth — "the land" is, no doubt, Canaan,
which is regarded as the true "Land of
Israel " from the time when it was assigned
by God to the posterity of Abraham (Gen.
XV. 18).

Ver. 20. — Here again there is no repetition,
but an extension. "Te shall eat nothing
leavened," not only no leavened bread (ver.
15), but no leavened cake of any kind. And
"in all your habitations shall ye eat un-
leavened bread," i.e., wherever ye dwell,
whether in Egypt, or in the wilderness, or in
Palestine, or in Babylonia, or in Media, thij
law shall be observed. So the Jews observe
it everywhere to this day, though they no
longer sacrifice the Fasch^ lamb.



HOMILBTICS.

Vers. 1 — 2. — The advantages of an ecclesiastical calendar. With their new position
as an Independent nation, and their new privileges as God's redeemed people (eh. vi. 6)
the Israelites received the gift of a new ecclesiastical calendar. Their civil calendar
remaining as before, their civil year commencing with Tisri, about the time of the
autumnal equinox, and consisting of twelve months of alternately twenty-nine and
thirty days, they were now commanded to adopt a new departure for their sacred year,
and to reckon its commencement from Abib or Nisan, which began about the time of
thft vernal equinox, or March 21. This was advantageous to them in several ways.



OH. XII. 1—20.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 263

I. It bboubeo teem a timb ov belisioitb betbosfeot and oontemflatioit, ho*
ALREADY OCCUPIED BY woBLDLY OABES. The Commencement of a civil year naturally
b.ings with it various civil and worldly cares, which occupy the mind, demand th*
attention, and distract the thoughts. The worldly position has to be reviewed,
accounts made up, stock taken, debts claimed and paid, subscriptions renewed or dis-
continued, agents communicated with, orders given, arrangements made in some
instances for the whole of the coming twelvemonth ; and the result is, that the mind
of most men is then so occupied, not to say harassed, that it cannot turn itself with any
vigour or freshness to the contemplation of things heavenly and spiritual. Of great
value then, and importance, is it that religion should have a separate time to itself for
a review of the spiritual position, for the taking of stock in a religious sense, the
balancing of the account with heaven, the forming of plans for the spiritual life before-
hand, since that life has as much need to be carefully provided for as the worldly life.
The opening of a year being the natural time for such a review, the new arrangement
made naturally suggested it, and provided a quiet time for it.

II. It GAVE THE IDEAS CONNECTED. WITH THE FESTIVAL ABOUT TO BE INBTITUTED A
GEBATBB HOLD ON MEN'S THOUGHTS THAN MIGHT 0THEBWI8E HAVE BEEN THE CASK.

Kveryone recognises the importance of a new beginning. A religion naturally strikes
its key-note at the commencement of its round of services. As the coming of Christ
into the world is the very essence of Christianity, the ecclesiastical year of Christendom
commences with Advent. Thus Christians are taught that the foundation-stone of their
religion, the root out of which it all springs, is the Incarnation. For Mosaism the
key-note was deliverance from Egypt, and covenant relationship with God as His people
by means of sacrifice. Deliverance from Egypt was redemption from servitude, and tha
commencement of a free national life. Sacrifice was the appointed means of keeping
up and renewing the covenant relationship begun in circumcision. In the Pass-
over these two thoughts were blended together, and Israel had to meditate on both.
The one thought was necessary to call forth that loving trust in the favour and good-
ness of God, which lies at the root of all acceptable service ; the other was needed to give
ease to the conscience, to reassure the trembling sinner, and remove his sense of a guilt
that separated him from God, and made his circumcision unavailing. The prominence
given tj these ideas by the position of the Paschal Festival, impressed them upon tha
minds of the Israelites as fundamental and vital truths.

III. It gave THE RELIGION GENERALLY A 8TATD8 AND A POSITION OP INDEPENDENCE,

WHICH XNOBEASED juan's RESPECT FOB IT. In all times and countries the suspicion
occurs to some, that religion is but a form of statecraft, a politic invention of governors
to render government more easy. Anything that marks the co-ordinate authority of
Church and State in their separate spheres, and especially the independence of the
Church, is valuable, as an obstacle to Erastianism, and an indication of the Church's
inherent right to regulate Church affairs. An ecclesiastical calendar distinct from tha
civil calendar is no doubt a little matter ; but it implies an important principle, and is
perhaps not without some influence over the general tone of thought and feeling in •
country.

Vers. 3 — 20. — The Passover Proper. The Passover may be viewed ^—
I. As A coMMEMOBATivE RITE. Instituted with reference to the tenth plague, and
as a means by which the first-bom of the Israelites might be saved from destruction,
but accompanied by ceremonies which were connected with the prospective departure of
the whole nation out of Egypt, the Passover feast, as established " by an ordinance for
ever," commemorated two distinct and different things. (1) The passmg over of tha
houses of the Israelites by Jehovah, when he went through the land in the character of
" destroyer " (ver. 23), to smite the first-born ; and (2) the hurried departure of the
nation out of Egypt in the night, with bread for their journey, which they had not had
time to leaven (ver. 34). It was thus intended to remind them of two great mercies ;
the lesser one being the escape of their first-born from sudden death, and the greater one
the deliverance of the whole people from the bondage and affliction ol Egypt, vvith tne
consequence of sucn deliverance, the establisbment of them as a nation under the diiect
government of God, and under laws which were communicated to tnem by God himself
at Sinai. Man is so apt to forget the benefits which God comers upon him, that it ha*



264 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. xu. 3— 2a



been found necessar/, or at least desirable, in almost all countries, to establish, by
authority, days of commemoration, when national deliverances, national triumphs,
national recoveries, shall be brought prominently before the mind of the nation, and
pressed upon its attention. The Passover must be regarded as one of the most
effective of such commemorative ceremonies. It has continued to be celebrated for
above three thousand years. It brings vividly to the recollection of the Jew that
night of trepidation and excitement, when the lamb was first killed, the blood dashed
upon the doorposts, and the sequel waited for — that night, when "about midnight"
was heard " a great cry," and in every house the Egyptians bewailed one dead — that
night, in which, after the cry, a murmur arose, and the Egyptians became " urgent "
(ver. 33), and insisted that the Israelites should quit the land forthwith. It has all the
political advantage of a great national celebration ; and it exalts the political idea by
uniting it with religious enthusiasm.

n. As A FEAST OF THANEsaiviNa. The sacrifices of the Paschal week, with the
exception of the Paschal lamb and the daily goat, must be viewed as thank-offerings.
They consisted of fourteen bullocks, seven rams, ahd forty-nine lambs of the first year,
provided by the priests, and offered to Grod in the name of the nation. They were
burnt on the altar as holocausts, accompanied by meat-offerings of flour mingled with oiL
At the same time individuals offered their own private thank-offerings. So far, the
special object of the thanksgiving was the great deliverance, with which might be
conjoined, in thought, God's further mercies in the history of the nation. On the second
day of the feast, however, another subject of thankfulness was introduced. The season
of the year was that in which the earliest grain ripened in Palestine ; according to a
ccnjecture already made, it was the time when the return of spring had been long
celebrated among the Semites by a traditional observance. As " each return of the Pass-
over festival was intended to remind the Israelites of their national regeneration"
(Ealisch), it was thought appropriate to bring the festival into connection with the
regeneration of nature, and the return of vernal vegetation. On the second day, there-
fore, a sheaf of the first ripe barley was offered as the first-fruits of the coming harvest,
and thanks were rendered to God for his bounty in once more bringing to perfection the
fruits of the earth. During the remainder of the week, both subjects occupied the
thoughts of the worshippers, who passed the time in innocent festivities, as songs,
music, and dancing.

III. As A SYMBOLICAL CEBEMONT. We havc not to guess at the symbolical meaning
of the Passover, as of so much that is contained in the Jewish law. Scripture distinctly
declares it. " Christ, our Pasaover, is slain," says St. Paul ; " therefore let us keep the
feast." Christ, who was prefigured and foreshown in every sacrifice, was symbolised
especially by the Paschal victim. He was " the Lamb of God " (John i. 29), " without
spot or blemish" (1 Peter i. 19), "holy, harmless, undefiled" (Heb. vii. 26); offered
to keep off " the destroyer," saving us by His blood from death (Acts xx. 28) ; slain that
we might feed upon His flesh (John vi. 51). The Paschal lamb, when prepared for
iacrifice, presented, as Justin Martyr informs us, a lively image of the Saviour
upon " the accvirsed tree," being extended on a cross formed of two wooden spits, one
longitudinal, and one transverse, placed at right angles each to the other. " Not a bone of
it was to be broken," that it might the better typify Him whom God preserved from
this indignity (Ps. xxxiv. 20 ; John xix. 33). It was to be consumed entirely, as
Christ is to be taken entire into the heart of the faithful (Gal. iv. 19). Scripture also
distinctly declares the symbolical meaning of the unleavened bread. " Let us keep the
feast," says St. Paul, " not with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth." He who would feed on Christ must first put
away from him all corruption and impurity, eject all leaven out of the house wherein his
spirit dwells, make himself fit to sit down at that heavenly banquet, by getting rid of all
those " evU things which come from within, and defile the man " (Mark vii. 23). There
may be some doubt, however, as to the symbolism of the " bitter herbs," whioh Scrip-
ture leaves unexplained. The exegesis, that the bitter herbs symbolised the sufferings
of the Israelites in Egypt, if taken as exhausting the meaning, is unsatisfactory. The
memory of past sufferings inflicted by others is not a necessary accompaniment of
present festal joy, though it may enhance that joy by contrast. The "bitterness"
•bould be something that is always requisite before tiie soul can ind in Qirist lesL



DH.XII.3— 20.] THE BOOK OF EXOCUS. i6l



peace, and enjoyment— something that must ever accompaay that rest, peace, and
enjoyment, and, so long as we are in the flesh, remain inseparable from it. Two tliingg
of this kind suggest themselves — repentance and self-denial. The bitter herbs may
perhaps symbolise both, pointing on the one hand to the important truth, that reaJ
repentance is a continuous act, never ceasing, while we live below, and on the other ot
the necessity of men's " taking up their cross daily" and striving towa^rds perfectness
through Buffering.

Ver, 14. — Tht Passover eontintied in the Eucharist. — It was expressly declared that
the Passover was instituted to be observed as a feast " by an ordinance for ever." Jews
are justified in remaining Jews, if they cannot otherwise continue to celebrate it. But
they can. The Passover is continued in the Eucharist. Hence St. Paul's words at
Easter time — "Christ, our Passover, is crucified for us; therefore let us keep the feast"
(1. Cor. V. 7, 8).

I. The Eucharist is the after commeuobation of the event, which the Pabs-
OVBB PBEFIGCHED AND FOBESHADOWBD. The reality Underlying both bemg the Lord's
death upon the cross as a propitiation for the sins of man, this death was set forth in
anticipation by the Paschal sacrifice ; it is now " shown forth " after the event, in the
Eucharist, " until Christ come " (1 Cor. xi. 26). The bread and wine rep'esent the
humanity of Christ as truly as the Paschal lamb represented it. The Eucharistic
ceremony is "a perpetual memory (avafivrjo-ii) of his precious death," and in some
respects a more lively setting forth of that central event of history than ever was
the Paschal ceremony.

II. The Euchabist sets fobth the Chbistian's dbliveeancb from bondase, as
THE Fabsoveb did THE Jew'b. The true bondage is the bondage of sin. This is the
" Egypt " from which man requires to be delivered. The death of Christ, which the
Eucharist " shews forth," is the one and only remedy for sin, the one and only means
whereby it becomes possible for man to shake off the grievous yoke from his shoulders,
and become free. By His meritorious sacrifice the guilt of sin is removed ; by His
assisting grace, given most abundantly through the Eucharist, the power of sin ia
destroyed, and its taint gradually purged out of our nature.

III. The Euchabist is a feast of thanksgivino to the Chbibtian, as the Pass-
OVBB festival WAS TO THE Jew. The very name of Eucharist, which became the usual
name of the Holy Communion as early as the second century, indicates how essential a
feature of it thanksgiving was felt to be. " We praise thee, we bless thee, we worship
thee, we glorify thee, we give thee thanks for thy great glory, Lord God" — this is the
general key-note of Eucharistic services. And naturally. For, if the Jew had much
to thank God for, the Christian has more. Redemption, justification, assisting grace,
sanctification, union with Christ — clear and distinct promise of everlasting life — are his,
and crowd upon his mind in connection with this sacrament.

IV. The Euchabist, like the Passovee, is a feast upon a bacbifioe. In the Pass-
over, as generally in sacrifices, the victim was first offered on behalf of the sacriflcers — ^in
this case the household, and then the flesh of the victim furnished a solemn sacrificial
meal to the members of the household. In the Eucharist, where the true victim is Christ
himself, whose sacrifice upon the cross is alone propitiatory, a commemoration of the
death of Christ is made, and then there follows a feast of the most sacred kind. What-
ever benefits may have flowed from participation in the Paschal festival are far exceeded
by those attached to the " Supper of the Lord." The Jew felt himself by participa-
tion in the Passover festival incorporated anew into the community of Israel; tho
Christian, by worthy participation in the Eucharist, is engrafted anew into Christ.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 2. — The beginning of months. The exodus from Egypt was the birthday of the
nation of Israel. In commemoration of this great event, the day from which the
(leUgious) year began was changed. The month Abib was thenceforth to be " the
beginning of months." The civil year continued to begin with Tisri (cf. ch. xxiii. 16).

1. Bkdemi'tion, thk tbdb sTAETiNG-poiirr OF human exibtenok. The day when



2M THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [ch. jui. 1—29.

salvation comes to a man's Loase (Luke xix. 9 ; Acta xvi. 34) is the true " begimiing of
days" to him. 1. It is the commencement of a new life. "Born again" (John iii. 3);
" passed from death into life " (John v. 24) ; " a new creature " (2 Cor. v. 17). " The
years we spent before we turned to the Lord are not worth counting ; the best that can
happen to them is to be buried out of sight " (Dr. J. M. Gibson). 2. It is the day of
separation from the world. Some think that up to this time the Israelites had used
the Egyptian calendar, which began about the time of the summer solstice.
• Iiom this time, however, all connection with Egypt was to be troken off, and the
commencement of the sacred year was to commemorate the time when Jehovah led
them forth to liberty and independence " (Geikie). 3. It is the day which hegins the
journey to heaven. Redemption is the beginning of the new life : it is, however, but
the beginning. The wilderness journey follows it. Conversion is not a resting-place,
but a starting-point. It begins, but does not complete, salvation.

n. Time, a memorialist of God's mighty wokks. Even on so immaterial a thing
as time, God has inscribed a memorial of His three greatest works. 1. Creation. He
has built into the structure of the week an imperishable record of the six days' work.
2. The Exodus. The order of the year in Israel was made to testify to the deliverance
from Egypt. 3. The Christian redemption. The advent of Chi-ist has founded an era.
The bitterest enemy of the Gospel is compelled to do it, at least, the involuntary
homage of dating his years from the Lord's advent. By his use of the Christian
calendar, the infidel testifies unwittingly to the power of the religion which he seeks to
overthrow.

III. The spheres of the saobbd and the civil abe distinct. One indication of
this, even in the polity of Israel, is seen in the fact that the sacred year began in one
month, and the civil in another. — J. 0.

Vers, 1 — 29. — The Passover. God's last and overwhelming blow was about to be
struck at Egypt. In anticipation of that blow, and in immediate connection with the
exodus, God gave directions for the observance of a Passover.

I. The Passoveb in its connection with the hihtoet. For details of the
ritual, see the verses of the chapter. 1. The design of the Passover was to make plain
to Israel the ground on which its salvation was bestowed — the ground, viz., of Atone-
ment. " The more recent plagues had fallen on Egypt alone. The children of Israel
were saved from them. But though the salvation was obvious, the way of salvation
had not yet been indicated. But now that the last and heaviest plague is about to
fall, not only will Israel be saved from it, but the ground on which (the whole)
salvation is bestowed will be made plain." 2. The connection of the Passover mth
the exodus. In this relation it is to be viewed more especially as a purificatory
sacrifice. Such a sacrifice was peculiarly appropriate on the night of leaving Egypt,
and one would probably have been appointed, even had no such special reason existed
for it as the judgment on the first-born. 3. The connection of the Passover with the
judgment on the first-bom. Israel was God's Son, His firstborn (oh. x. 22), and is in
turn represented by his first-bom ; and so with Egypt. Because Pharaoh would not let
Israel (God's first-born) go, God had declared his purpose of smiting " all the first-born
in the land of Egypt, both man and beast " (ver. 12) ; the punishment in this case, as
frequently in God's Providence (of. Is. xxx. 16), taking a form analogous to the sin it
is designed to chastise. " The first-born represented the family, so that judgment of the
first-bom stood for judgment upon all, and redemption of the first-born stood for the
redemption of all" (Dr. Gibson). Accordingly, not the firstborn merely, but the
entire household, as represented in him, was redeemed by the blood of the Passover, and
joined in the subsequent feast upon the lamb (ver. 8). Note, there was a peculiar fitness
in the Passover being instituted at this particular crisis. (1) The death of the first-
bom was a judgment pure and simple ; not, like the hail, locusts, etc., an admonitory
plague. (2) It gave a heightened and impressive character to the salvation that
redemption by blood, redemption by power, and the emergence of the people from
slavery into distinct existence as a people of God, were thus seen going hand in hand.
The analogy with the Christian redemption is obvious. 4. The teaching of the Pass-
over. It taught the people (1) that naturally they were as justly exposed to wrath at
ihe people of Egypt. " Whether viewed in their individua-l or in their collective



OH. xa. 1— 29.J THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 267

»pacity, they were themselves of Egypt — collectively, a part of the nation, without
any separate and independent existence of their own, vassals of the enemy, and inhabi-
tants of tlie doomed territory — individually, also, partakers of the guilt and corruption
of ISgypt " (Fairbaim). " If the test had been one of character, it is quite certain that
the line would not have been run so as to range all Egypt on the one side, and all
Israel on the other. No one can suppose that all the real worth and excellence were on
the side of the latter, and all the meanness and wickedness on the side of the
former. In fact, the children of Israel had shared only too deeply in the sins of
Egypt, and, accordingly, if they are to be saved, it must be on some other ground than
their own merits" (Gibson). (2) That the medium of their salvation— the ground on
which it was bestowed — was Wood of atonement. It is vain to deny that the Passover
victim was truly a propitiatory sacrifice. The use made of its blood is proof sufficient
of that. The lamb died in room of the first-bom. Sprinkled on the door-posts and
linteld, its blood sheltered the inmates of the dwelling from the stroke of the destroyer
(vers. 21 — 24). " A sinless victim, the household might, as it were, hide behind it,
and escape the just punishment of their sins " (Kohler in Geikie). The Passover thus
emphatically taught the necessity of atonement for the covering of guilt. Ko thoughtful
Israelite but must have deeply realised the truth, " Without shedding of blood is no
remission " (Heb. ix. 22). (3) The solidarity of the nation. The observance of the
Passover was to be an act, not of individuals, but of households and groups of house-
holds, and in a wider sense, of the nation as a whole. The Israelites were thus taught
to feel theii unity as before God — their oneness in guilt as in redemption, (a) In guilt.
Each was involved in guilt and doom, not only through his own sins, but through the
sins of the nation of which he formed a part (cf. Is. vi. 5 ; Matt, xxiii. 35). (b) In
redemption. This was beautifully symbolised in the eating of the lamb. The lamb
was to be roasted entire, and placed on the table undivided (ver. 9). " By avoiding the
breaking of the bones (ver. 46), the animal was preserved in complete integrity, undis-
turbed and entire (Ps. xxxiv. 20) . . . There was no other reason for this than that all
who took part in this one animal, i.e. all who ate of it, should look upon themselves as
one whole, one community, like those who eat the New Testament Passover, the body
of Christ (1 Cor. v. 7), of whom the apostle says (1 Cor. x. 17), ' We being many are
one bread, and one body ; for we are all partakers of that one bread.' " (Bahr.) (4) It
pointed to an atonement in the future. For, manifestly, there lay in the blood of the
lamb no real virtue to take away sin. It declared the necessity of atonement, but
could not adequately provide it. The life of a beast was no proper substitute for the
life of a first-bom son. The Passover, therefore, from its very nature, is to be viewed as
a type. It pointed on to Christ, in whom all the types of sacrifices find complete
fulfilment. (5) The various features of the ritual were symbolic. The unleavened
bread was indicative of haste (Deut. xvi. 3) ; the bitter herbs of the affliction of Egypt,
etc. These circumstances, like the blamelessness of the victim, the sprinkling of th«
blood, etc., had aJso spiritual significance. See below. Homily on vers. 21 — 29. It is
to be remarked, in general, that " the earthly relations then existing, and the opera-
tions of God in connection with them, were framed on purpose to represent and
foreshadow corresponding but immensely superior ones, connected with the work and
kingdom of Christ." (Fairbaim.)

II. The Passovbe as an obdinakob fob lateb generations (vers. 14, 24 — ^28).
In this respect, the Passover is to be viewed — 1. As an historical witness to the reality
of the events of the exodus. See below ; also Homily on Deut. xvi. 1 — 9. The Pass-
over, like the Lord's Supper, was an institution which, in the nature of things, could
not have been set up later than the event professedly commemorated. 2. As a per-
petuation of the original sacrifice. The blood of the lambs was year by year presented
to God. This marked that the true sacrifice had not yet been offered (Heb. x. 1 — 3).
Now that Christ has died, and has " put away sin by the sacrifice of himself" (Heb. ix. 26 ;
X. 12), there is no room for further sacrifice, and the Lord's Supper is to be regarded as
simply a commemorative ordinance and means of grace. The doctrine of the mass
has no foundation in true scriptural analogy. 3. As a means of grace. It was a feast,
collecting the Israelites in great numbers at the sanctuary, and reviving in their minds
the memory of the great deliverance, in which had been laid the foundation of their
natioDal existence. The lamb, slain on their behalf, roasted with fire, and set on tba



268 THE BOOK OJ BXODtS. (cB.xa.l—i8.

table before their eyes, to be bAndled and eaten by them, in solemn observance of a
Divine command, gave them a vivid sense of the reality of the facts they were com-
memorating. The Lord's Supper, in like manner, is a powerfid means of impressing
mind and heart, an act of commimion on the part of Christian believers, and a true
source of nourishment (through spiritual participation in Christ) to the soul. 4. The
observance of the Passover zoos com '-cted with oral instruction (vers. 26, 27). This
was a further guarantee for the handiiig down of a faithful, ungarbled tradition of the
meaning of the ceremony ; added to the interest of the service ; took advantage of a
favourable opportunity to impress the minds of the young ; and helped to keep alive in
all classes of the community a vivid remembrance of God's mighty works.

III. The feast or unleavened beead (vers. 14 — 21). The ordinance for this
feast was probably given at Succoth, on the day succeeding the exodus (see ver. 17,
and ch. ziii. 5 — 8). It is inserted here on account of its internal connection with the
Passover. It is to be viewed — 1. As a memorial of the haste with which the Jsradites
left Egypt. The Israelites had evidently intended to leaven their dough on the night of
the exodus, but were prevented by the haste (ver. 34). " For thou earnest out of the
land in haste " (Deut. xvi. 3). This is the historical groundwork of the institution.
2. As a symiol of ^ritual truth, (1) The feast lasted seven days, a complete circle
of time. (2) It was rounded off at the beginning and end by an holy convocation.
This marked it as a sacred period. (3) Sacrifices were offered during its course (Num.
ziii. 16 — 26 ; Deut. xv. 2). (4) The bread eaten was to be unleavened. So strict was
the injunction on this point that the Israelite found eating leaven during these seven
days was to be " cut off," i.e., excommunicated. The general idea of the feast was,
therefore, to represent what redeemed life in its entirety ought to be — a life purged
from the leaven of " malice and wickedness," and devoted to God's service in " sincerity
and truth " (1 Cor. v. 8). " The exodus formed the groundwork of the feast, because
it was by this that Israel had been introduced into a new vital element " (Eeil). The
"walk in newness of life" follows on redemption. We may apply the precept about
"cutting off from Israel" to the exclusion of immoral and impure members from the
Church.— J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 28. — The institution of the Passover. Moses has now done with requesting
and threatening Pharaoh. He leaves Pharaoh to the terrible smiting hand of Jehovah,
and turns, when it is quite time to turn, to his own people. He who would not listen
had to be left for those who would listen. It is now manifest that Moses is to be pro-
fitably occupied with matters which cannot any longer be delayed. It was needful to
give warning concerning the death of the first-born to the Israelites quite as much as to
Pharaoh. For seme time they had been the passive, the scarcely conscious objects of
Divine mercy and power. Painfully conscious they were of the physical hardships
which Pharaoh inflicted on them, but they had little or no thought of deprivations and
hindrances with respect to higher things. God had been leading them forward by a
way they knew not, and now the hour has come for them to know the way and walk in
it with understanding, choice, circumspection, and diligence. All at once, from being
passive spectators in the background, they came forward to be prime actors in the very
front ; and God is here telling them thi-ough Moses what to do, and how they are to do
it. More is to be done than simply wait fur God's coming at midnight : that coming
has to be made ready for with great solemnity and minuteness of preparation.

L Notice how Jehovah here beings the voldntaby element into the
deliverance of His peoplb and their connection with Him. They are to he
delivered, only as they are witling to be delivered. They are to signify their willing
regard to conform with the will of God. The matter is made almost a personal one ; if
not brought before every Israelite, it is brought before every head of a household.
Hitherto the immunities of the people during the course of the plagues had been secured
in a mere external way. The protection belonged to a certain tdrritory, and the
Israelites had to exert no attention, take no trouble, in order to secure the protection.
God kept the flies, the hail, and the darkness out of Goshen without requiring any
mark upon the habitations and property of His people. But now, as the last visitation
from God draws nigh, they have to take a part, and a very decided part, in makmg
their exemption effectuaL Jehovah comes, treating all who are in Egypt lu belonging



««. xn. 1— 28.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. £69



fully to Egypt, and it is for the Israelites to show by some significant act the deep
difference which separates between them and the Egyptians. There had been, up to
this time, certain differences between the Egyptian and the Israelite which did not
depend upon the Israelite's choice. The Egyptian was master, and the Israelite slave ;
assuredly the Israelite had not chosen that. An Egyptian might soon lose all trace of
his personal ancestry, but every Israelite could trace his ancestry back to Jacob, to
Isaac, to Abraham ; and this was a matter he had not chosen. The Egyptian belonged
to a nation which had been smitten with nine plagues, but from the later and severer of
these the Israelite dwelling in Goshen had been free ; yet this freedom had been
secured without making it to depend on the Israelite's own action. But now, as the
day of redemption draws near, Jehovah reminds every IsraeUte that underneath all the
differences which, in carrying out His purposes, He may make to exist among men,
there is a common hvmcmity. Before Him who comes smiting at midnight there Is
neither Israelite nor Egyptian, bond nor free; everything depends on the sprinkled
blood ; and the sprinkled blood depends on whether the Israelite has put it on his door
of Ms own accord. K, that night, the Israelite did not of his own accord make a
difference between himself and the Egyptian, then no natural distinction or past im-
munity was of the slightest avail. Even already it is being shown that circumcision
availeth nothing, but a new creature. Israel can only be truly Israel as he is Israel
inwardly. The mark upon the door without must come from the perfect heart and
willing mind within. The only great abiding differences between man and man are
such as we, fully considering our position, concur in making of our own free wilL True
it is that we cannot establish and complete these differences in our own strength ; but it
is very certain that God will not do this — indeed, by the very limitations of tlie thing
to be done, he cannot — except as we willingly and with alacrity give him opportunity.
n. In these instructions for the Passover, God bbinqs the fundamental element
OF PUEE faith into ACTIVE EXBBCisE. In Heb. xi. 28 we are told that by faith Moses
kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that destroyed the first-born should
touch them. And this faith extended from Moses to every head of a household in
Israel. The whole instructions imply a trustful, disciplined spirit, on the part of those
receiving them. Up to this time nothing had been required of them except to stand
still and wait while God dealt with Pharaoh. They are left on one side, treated as
helpless captives, whom it is vain to ask for what they cannot give. But now they are
asked for something, and they have not only to render it willingly, but with the
obedience of faUh (Bom. xvi. 26). They are asked to slay a mmiber of lambs, the
number being determined according to a settled proportion. When the lambs are slain,
the blood is to be sprinkled on the doors of each Israelite dwelling, and the flesh, pre-
pared in a peculiar and exact way, is to be eaten by the inhabitants. Wdl,what
should ail this have to do with the protection of Israel t How should it advance the
captives towards deliverance ? If God had told them to get ready swords and spears,
and discipline themselves for battle there would have been something intelligible in
such instructions, something according to the schemes of human wisdom. But God
does not deliver as men woiSd deliver. It pleased him, in the fulness of time and by
the foolishness of a slain lamb and sprinkled blood to save Israel. And yet it was not
the slain lamb and sprinkled blood that saved by themselves. Moses and Aaron might
have slain so many lambs and sprinkled their blood, and yet there would have been no
efficacy in them. Their efficacy as protectors was not a natural efficacy. The efficacy
lay in this: that the lambs were slain and the blood sprinkled in the obedience of faith.
The thing done and the spirit in which it is done — truth and faith — go together in
resistless power. There must he truth ; faith by itself does nothing ; for a man may
believe a lie and then where is he? There must le faith ; truth by itself does nothing ;
just as food does nothing unless a man takes it into his stomach. Of course it was
quite possible for a sceptical Israelite to say, " What can there be in this sprinkled
blood?" — and the very fact that such a question was possible shows how God wag
shutting his people up to pure faith. He asks them to act simply on the word of Moses.
That word was now to be a sufficient reason for their conduct. Moses had done enough
to show from whom he came. It is inteiresting to notice how faith stands here, asked
lor, the first thing, by Moses, even as it was afterwards by Je^us. As the Israeuiei
bdieved because Moses spoke, so we must believe because Jesus speaks. Jesus speak*



170 THE BOOK OF EXODXJS. [ch. ml 1— 2«.

truth because it is true ; but we must receive it and believe it, not because in our
natural reason we can see it as true, but because of the ascertained and well-accredited
character of him who speaks it. And we must show our faith hy our woiks, as these
Israelites did. It was not required of them to understand how this sprinkled blood
operated. They acted as believing that it would operate, and the indisputable fact is
that they were saved. It is a great deal more important to have a thing done, than to
be able to understand all the ins and outs by which it is done. A man does not refuse
to wind up his watch, because he cannot understand its intricate mechanism. His
purposes are served, if he understands enough to turn the key. And so our purposes
are served, if we have enough practical faith in Jesus to gain actual salvation through
him. Exactly how Jesus saves, is a question which we may ask again and again, and
vainly ask. Let us not, in asking it, waste time and risk eternity, when by the
prompt and full obedience of faith, we may know in our experience, that however obscure
the process may be, the result itself is a real and abiding one.

in. Looking back on this passover lamb in the light of the finished work of Jesus,
we see how ample a tipe it is of Him who was to come after and stand between
THE BELiEviNQ 8INNEB AND THE AVENGiNO GrOD. 1. The lamh was taken so as to
bind families and neighhows together. This reminds us of Him, who gathers roimd
himself, in every place, those who form the true family, the new family ; joined
together not after the temporary, dissolving order of nature, but after the abiding, ever-
consolidating order of grace. Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in the
name of Jesus, there the true Lamb of God is present in all those relations of which the
passover lamb gave but a foreshadowing. The true families are made by the coalescence
of those who, living in one neighbourhood, have one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one
God and Father of all. 2. The passover lamb was without blemish. Consider what is
said in this respect of Jesus (Matt. iii. 17 ; Mark i. H ; Luke iii. 22 ; xxiii. 4 — 14 ;
John xix. 4—6 ; 2 Oor. v. 21 ; Eph. iv. 13 ; Col. i. 19 ; Heb. ix. 14 ; 1 Pet. ii. 22).
3. It was a male of the first year. So Jesus was taken in the freshness and strength ol
his manhood (Luke iii. 23). 4. The flesh of the lamb was eaten in the company for
which it had been slain. It is only when we bear in mind the first passover in Egypt,
that we reach the significance of all that was said and done on the night when Jesus
eat down for the last passover feast with his disciples. Jesus took the bread and said :
" Take, eat ; this is my body." There was to be no more killing of the lamb ; the
bread, easily made and easily portioned out, took its place. But still the Lord hsid to
say " this is my body." A body had to be thought of as eaten, and not mere bread.
Really, when we look into the matter, we find that the sprinkling of the blood was only
part of the protection; the eating was protective also. Assuredly the sprinkling by
Itself would have counted for nothing, if the eating had been omitted. When the blood
was sprinkled, it illustrated faith in him who comes between God and the sinner.
Wheu the flesh was eaten, it illustrated faith in him whose life becomes our life. Being
unblemished, he makes us unblemished, and being acceptable to God, he makes us
acceptable also.

IV. We observe that even before the event to be commemorated was accomplished
Jehovah made careful provision fob a memorial observance. Thus another
indication is given to us, as to the completeness and order with which his plans were
laid. Directions are given for the present need, and along with them are combined
directions by which the record of this great liberating event may be transmitted to the
remotest generations. Henceforth, the beginning of the year is to date from the month
of these dealings with the first-born. Then there was also the appointment of the feast
of unleavened bread. So crushing was the blow of Jehovah, and so precipitate the
consequent action of Pharaoh and the Egyptians, that the Israelites were hurried
out of the land with their dough before it was leavened. Here then in this domestic
operation of preparipg the daily bread was an opportunity given of setting forth once
tt year the complete separation which God had effected between the Israelites and the
Egyptians. When for seven days no leaven was put in the bread, the great fact to be
called up was this : that the Egyptians had hastened the Israelites out of the land.
ITiis memorial act CjUcd up at once the great change which God had produced, and in
a comparatively short tinie- But a little while before and the Egyptians were spoiling
the Israelites, demanding from them bricks without straw j now the Israelites ara



aH.ziLl— la.] THE BOOK Of EXUUUS. 271

Bpoiling the Egyptians, getting gold and silver and raiment from them in profusion, and
irith the utmost good-will.

V. All thb otheb fbefabationb fob Jehovah's visit webe to be obowned bt
MAKINO ruLL FBEFABATloNS FOB DEPABTUBE. Jehovah was coming to Open the prison-
doors and strike off the fetters ; and he would have the captives ready to march on the
instant. He is the God who makes all things to work together for good to them who
are called according to his purpose. To him who is truly and devoutly obeying
God, nothing comes but he is able to meet it. The obedient is never taken at a dis-
advantage ; he is never defrauded of a great opportunity. The children of Israel were
to eat the lamb in full readiness for the journey ; even though it might plausibly
be said that it was a making ready before the time. The lesson is, obey God in every-
thing where as here the terms of his requirement are plain to the understanding and
imperative to the conscience. Reasons are not for you, who know only in part, but for
him to whom the darkness and the light are both alike. — Y.

L The dat of deuvebahoe the beqinnino of a new eba m the hibtobt of God's
PEOPLE (vers. 1, 2). 1, It was then only that the history of the nation as the people of
God began. Before they had been told of God's favour towards them ; they now knew it.
" Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard him ourselves " (John iv.
42). 2. God's final deliverance begins a new era for his people. " iJehold I make all
things new." 3. This has its correlative type in Christian experience now. The true
life of the servant of God dates from the hour of his deliverance from the bondage of sin.
" If any man be in Christ Jesus he is a new creature : old things are passed away :
behold all things are become new." Before Israel lay the experience of God's care and
love, Sinai, the giving of the law, etc. Before us lies the deepening knowledge of his
love, and of his will, the priestly service, etc.

IL The command to make it tub beginning of months. 1. The remembrance of
God's grace makes the soul the dwelling-place of humbleness and trust. 2. It is joy
and strength for service. 3. It is consecration ; in the brightness of that unmerited
grace the life is claimed for God ; the ear is opened, the heart is touched and changed ;
we forget things that are behind, and reach forth to things that are before. — U.

Vers. 3 — 6. — The Passover lamb a prophetic picture of Christ and his salvation. I.
Fob whom the sacrifice avails. 1. The families of Israel, the household of faith.
There is no other bulwark against the visitation of the angel of death, and it shields
these only. 2. Those who feed upon him. Saving faith must be a real, appropriating
faith. Mere assent to a form of words avails nothing, neither can a mere intellectual
conviction of the truth of Christianity or apprehension of the plan of salvation ; it
must be the soul's food.

U. The charactbe op the sacrifice. A lamb without blemish; gentleness and
blamelessness. He who dies for us is accepted, because he is faultless. The sin-bearer
must be sinliM. This is redemption's great central mystery. But though the eternal
reasrn of it may not be understood, the wisdom of it is shown in our experience. The
power which changes ua Ues in this, that Christ died not for sins of his own, but solely
for ours. " He bore our sins, in his own body on the tree."

HI. His stoby. 1. The lamb kept for four days within the house foretold that
God's accepted sacrifice should come forth from the homes of Israel. The four days
may symbolise the nearly four years of our Lord's ministry. 2. The day and hour of the
Saviour's death (ver. 6). 3. His death was to be Israel's act ; " the whole assembly "
were to slay it. (1) Our sins nailed him to the tree. He was slain by our iniquities.
(2) Israel's act in the murder of the holy and just one was the expression of the sin
which is in us all. None are free from this awful blood guiltiness, save the repentant
and pardoned. — U.

Vers. 7 — 13. — Christ his people's salvation and strength. I. The means of bafett
(vers. 7 — 13). 1. They took the blood and struck it on the door posts and the lintel
Wo must appropriate Christ's atonement. We must say by faith, " he died for me."
2. They passed within the blood-stained portals. Christ's blood must stand between
OS and coudeumation, between us and sin. Our safety lies m setting that between our
soul and them. The realismg of Christ's death /or our sins is salvatica.



272 I'HE BOOK OP EXODUS. [ch. xii. 1—51.

n. The mbakb op strenosth foe the okward way. Feeding upon Christ. While
Egypt was slumbering Israel was feasting. While the world is busy with its dreams
we must feast upon the joy of eternity, and, comprehending with all saints the infinite
love of Christ, be filled with all the fulness of God. " Except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you."

III. How Christ must be partaken of. 1. With unleavened bread and bitter herbs.
The old leaven of malice and wickedness must be put away, and the feasting on Christ's
love must be accompanied with repentance and self denial. There may be now and
again a momentary glimpse of Christ's love where sin is not parted with, but there can
be no communion, no enduring vision. 2. Christ must be taken as God has set him
before us, in the simplicity of the Gospel, with nothing of man's invention, addition, or
diminution. The Gospel remedy avails only when taken in the Gospel way (vers. 9,
10). 3. He must be partaken of in the union of love. The Passover is a social, a
family feast. Those who refuse to seek church-fellowship are despising God's
arrangements for their own salvation, and proving themselves devoid of the spirit which,
loving him that begat, loveth him also that is begotten of him. 4. He must be
partaken of with the pilgrim spirit and preparedness (ver. 11). They who will be
saved by Jesus must take up their cross and follow him. — U.

Vera. 14 — ^20. — The Passover feast the type of the Christian life. I. The Christian's
LIFE IS AS UNOBASINQ FESTIVAL. 1. It is Unending, deepening joy. Other joys fade, this
brightens. 2. It is a growing appropriation of the Lamb of God. Our union with him
grows ever closer, fuller. Is this our experience ? A nominal Christianity will never
save us. Are we feeding on Jesus ? Are we in bim and he in us ?

n. It is the keepinq m remembrance of a past dblivbranob, and the anticipa-
tion OF A OBEATBR. 1. There was present safety from the destroyer. 2. On the
morrow there was to be the passing out from amidst the broken bonds of Egypt to the
promised inheritance. The feast pointed backward, the types onward. We have
forgiveness through the blood of Jesus, and the expectation of his coming the second
time without sin unto salvation. Faith, and love, and hope the threefold glory of
Christ's people.

III. It IS A LIFE OF HOLINESS. From the beginning to the end of the feast the old
leaven was not to be found in the dwellings of Israel. The soul that turns back to sin
is cut off (vers. 15, 18 — 20). What was a mere accompaniment in the type, is a fruit
of life in Christ.

lY. It IS A FELLOWSHIP OF ALL BELIEVERS. It was not Only a family feast. It began
and it closed with an assembly of the whole congregation. There are separate churches
still, as there were families then. But the union of all believers must be recognised
and rejoiced in. — ^U.

Vers. 1—28; 43— 51.— The Pastover. "It is the Lord's Passover" (Ex. xii. 11).
After Pharaoh's refusal to see Moses again, Jehovah comes more manifestly into the
history, in the last judgment and deliverance of his people. Three great events crowd
now into a single night, the Passover, the slaying of the first-bom, the inarch out.
Consider now the Passover.

L Its necessity. 1. Israel must he separated from Egypt. This idea of separation
runs through all Hebrew history from the time of Abraham to this hour. But to a
large extent Israel had now become merged into the Egyptian race, catching the plagues
♦f its idolatry and sins. Great separating acts necessary — e. g., as in some of the
earlier visitations, in the tenth, in the passover, in the exodus, in the Bed Sea. 2. To
this ena Israel must he atoned qfresh with Qod. The tenth plague was a miracle of
pure judgment : for Israel to escape the penalty of its sin, an atonement necessary.
That atonement was the passover.

II. Its designations. They were these : " A pass-over unto Jehovah :" "a saerifl-
eial-slaying of pass-over unto Jehovah : " " The sacrifice of the fi:ast of the pass-
over," xii. 11, 27 ; xxxiv. 25. Here we have four distinctive ideas. 1. The Objective
of the pass-over was God. " Unto Jehovah." Like prayer intended to benefit man,
but its objective God. Herein lies the distinction between Scriptural and unscriptural
deas of atonement. 2. The pass-over was a Sacrifice. [For the argument, soe



OK.ziLa— IL] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. ff78

Esrtz, vol. ii. 297, 298, Eng. ed.] 8. The result was a Passing-over. The stained
lintel a bridge over which Jehovah was to pass in dread judicial progress through the
land. 4. And a more remote result, the ushering in of a Festal Life for Israel. The
festival of the passover foreshadowed the coming life of liberty.

III. The laub. After expository development of the leading incidents, the
following truths will emerge in relation to the antitype. 1. The objective of the death
of Ohrist is Ood. The Socinian formula runs : " The death of Christ was not to
reconcile Qod to man, but man to Glod." The scriptural doctrine is that the atonement
does both : but reconciles man to God, by first atoning God with man. 2. Ohrist is
'^ without blemish and without spot." 3. The atoning Ohrist was deliberately selected,
and fore-appointed. 4. Kept in view of the world, that His worth, beauty and destiny
might suitably affect men ; as the lamb went in and out, for four days, the homes of
Israel, 5. Sfam. 6. The death was Sacrificial. 7. The result a Passing-over of
judicial wrath. 8. But the sacrifice must be appropriated. The blood on the posts of
the door a sign of the appropriating faith of the people. Here may be brought out the
idea, that the door was the only possible altar at that moment of history. The idea
of sacrifice bad come down from patriarchal times ; but there was no law of sacrifice, for
as yet there was no nation to which to give it, and therefore there was no temple, and so
no altar. Every family must be atoned for apart ; every house was then a temple, and
every door an altar. 9. Then, faith in Christ's atonement begins for us high Festival.

IV. The meal. Show that the meal was much more than a mere supper to prepare
for a journey. It had in it spiritual significance, in relation to the Christ. 1. The
Atoning Christ is the Food of the Soul (John vi. 51). This for the very simple reason,
that the truth of the atonement is central, supreme, and comprehensive. 2. An
wncwrupted Christ. The lamb was masted, t.e., was pure flesh acted on by fire ; not
sodden, diluted with water, or any way corrupted. 3. A perfect Christ, no bone broken.
So on the cross a Christ divided is not sufficient for the nourishment of the soul, e.g.,
Christ as an " elect spirit of the race ; " or as one in whom the " God-consciousness "
received high development ; or as example ; Teacher, etc. Ohrist in his whole nature,
character and office. 4. The enjoyment of Christ and of his salvation will depend on
the memory of the slavery of sin. " Bitter herbs." 5. The christian life is to be
characterised by simplicity and sincerity. Note that unleavened bread is simply pure
meal, all water parched out by the action of fire. For the significance see the Christian
Eabbi, Paul, 1 Cor. i. 6-8. 6. The end of soul nutriment is the Pilgrim-Life. Each
with staff in haad that night. 7. To the banquet, to the Exodus, to the Pilgrim-Life,
all are welcome, on conditions, xii. 43-45. In that case, first circumcision ; then coming
under the sj rinkled blood, were needfiil. The analogy is clear. Note 1 at the moment,
when the distinction between Israel and Egypt was most marked, then did the
oatholicity of true Judaism most appear. !Di Abraham all mankind was to be
Ijfessed. — R.

Vers. 3 — 11. If one died for all then all died. Pharaoh's heart still hardened-
The crowning judgment needs no intermediary ; Jehovah will reveal His own right arm.
Kx. xi. 4. "Who shall live when God doeth this?" He who obeying His word
slielters himself beneath His shadow. See : —

I. The prepabation. 1. A carefully selected victim. Ver. 5, deliberately set apart
f .ur days beforehand. Pure within ; innocence typified by inexperience, " the first year."
Pure without, "no blemish." 2. A carefvMy conducted purification. The partaker of
tlie saorifici^ feast must endeavour after a purity resembling that of the victim.
Leaven, evil, must be purged out that he may offer and receive worthily.

II. The Passoveb. A sacrifice to save from death, v. 6, 7. Notice (1) Obedience
ensured safety. The judgment was to go forth against the fii-st-bom ; but the lamb
slain — ^his blood duly sprinkled — would be accepted as a substitute. Obedience all that
was demanded. (2) The meaning of the command. Pew types are arbitrary; almost
always some ground of relation between them and the thing typified, even though we
may not see it. Here the pure lamb represents the offerer as he ought to be ; it says
in his name " I would be pure ; I would dedicate myself wholly to thy service ; accept
me, not for what I am but for what Thou canst make me. Take this lamb for me;
make me as this lamb I " Obedience saves, but that whteh is commanded shadows forth

VXflDvn, x



iU



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CH. XII. 21— 2a



the final result to be acUeved by obedience. 2. Sustenance to nerve for duty. Lamb
not merely to be killed but eaten. The people saved from the destroyer are to be
released also from the oppressor ; to commence at once the life of liberty. Strength
needed for the march. That which saves is that vrhich supports. If the lamb
represents the offerer as he otight to he, feeding upon the lamb will represent feeding
by faith upon the ideal thus figured. To become righteous we must hunger and thirst
after righteousness, Matt. v. 6. Dedication is the starting-point, but the road is
persistent obedience, and they only can walk that road who feed upon the ideal first set
before them (PhU. iii. 12—14).

ni. Chbist cub Passover. The type leads naturally to the great antitype. 1. Our
tacrifiee. (1) Pure, perfect. Slain for us. By faith accepting his work, peace with
God ; shelter from the avenging angel. This is what we mean by suhstituiion — Christ
died for me. Notice however : — (2) Accepting this sacrifice we must still regard it as
representative. Pleading its efficacy, we not merely mean " Forgive me for Christ's
sake," but also, " I would be like Ulirist, I would give myself up wholly to Thy will
even as he has done — ^Accept me in him, make me like him!" The doctrine of
tubstitution is only explained by this underlying doctrine of identity, it could not other-
wise be a doctrine of salvation. 2. Our sustenance. We too, saved in Christ, have to
march on along the road which leads from slavery to freedom. To do this we must
feed upon our ideal, " inwardly digest " it. What we ought to be j what we hope to be ;
what Christ is. Our great advantage over the Jew is that our ideal is realised in a
person. To feed upon it is to feed upon Christ. To attain it is to be like Christ, to bo
one with him.

Application. Christ died for us. True, but Christ dying for us implies that we also
die with him. Dedication of a substitute not enough unless self is dedicated in the
substitute. Very well wishing to be happy, and the hope of many is little more than
this. God, however, means us to be holy, and there is no easy road to holiness.
Accept the ideal, accept Christ out and out, we shall find him more than an ideal : he
will strengthen and sustain us till we attain it. Forget what the ideal is ; forget what
dedication means ; we may yet find that it is possible for those who are saved from
bondage to perish' in the wilderness. — Q-



EXPOSITION.



Ver. 21— 88.— The PmsT Passovbb. Hav-
ing received the Divine directions as to the
new rite, if not with all the fulness ultimately
given them, yet with sufficient fulness for the
immediate purpose, Moses proceeded to com-
municate the Divine Will to the people under
his protection. Having aheady aroused the
jealousy and hatred of Pharaoh, he could not
summon a general assembly of the people, but
he ventured to call a maetlug of the elders, or
heads of principal families, and through them
communicated the orders which he had re-
ceived to the entire nation. We find, in the
directions which he gave, two small points
which are not comprised in the record of
God's words to him. 1. The designation of
the " hyssop," as the instrument by which the
blood was to be placed on the side-posts and
Imtel (ver. 22) ; and, 2. The injunction not
to qnit the house " until the morning." These
points may have been contained in the original
directions, thongh omitted from the record for



brevity; or they may have been added by
Moses of his own authority. On the other
hand, several very main points of the original
directions are not repeated in the injunctions
given to the elders, though there can be no
doubt that they were communicated

Ver. 21.— Draw out— i.e., "Withdraw
from the flock." (See ver. 3.) A lamb. The
word used is generic, and would not exclude
the offering of a goat.

Ver. 22. - A bunch of hyssop. The hyssop
was regarded as having purging or purifying
qualities, and was used in the cleansing of the
leper (Lev. xiv. i), and of the leprous house
(ibid. 51 — 52), and also formed an element in
the "water of separation" (Num. xix. 6).
It was a species of plant which grew on
walls, and was generally low and insignificant
(1 Kings iv. 33), yet which could furnish a
stick or stalk of some length (John xix. 29j.
It must also have been a common plant in
Egypt, the wilderness, and Palestine. Two
suggestions are made with respect to it. Onei
that it was a species of marjoram (Origanum



OL xn. 21—28.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



278



Xgjgptiaeum, or O. Syriaeum) common in both
Egypt and ayiia, ; the other tiiat it -waa the
caper plant (Vapparit spinosa), which abounds
especially in the Desert. (Stanley, Sinai and
Paleitine, p. 21.) It is in favonr of this
latter identification, that the modem Arabic
name for the caper plant is ataf or asuf,
which excellently represents the Hebrew ezdb,
the word tmiformly rendered in our version
by " hyssop." The blood that is in the basin.
The Septuagint and Vulgate render — "that
is on the threshold." 8aph — ^the word trans-
lated " basin " has the double meaning. If one
of yon shall go out. Hoses may well have
given this advice on his own authority, with-
out any Divine command. (See introductory
paragraph.) He would feel that beyond the
protection of the blood of the lamb, there was
no assurance of safety.

Ver. 23. — Compare verses 12, 13 which
•re closely followed. The only important
difference is, the new expression, " The Lord
will not suffer the destroyer to come in,"
which has generally been regarded as imply-
ing, that the actual agent in the killing of the
fiist-bom was a " destroying angel." But it
is to be noted that elsewhere Jehovah himself
is everywhere spoken of as the sole agent ;
and that in the present passage the word used
has the moaning of " destruction " no less than
that of " destroyer." Bishop Lowth's idea of
•n opposition between God and the destroying
angel (Comment on Isaiah xxxi. 5) is scarcely
teutble.

Ver. 24.— lo thee and to thy ohildien.



The change from the plural to the singular is
curious. Perhaps, we are to understand thai
Moses insisted on the perpetuity of the ordi-
nance to each of the elders severally.

Ver. 25.— The land which the lord will
give yon, according as he hath promised.
See above, ch. iii. a — 17 ; vi. 4 ; and compare
Gen. xvii. 8 ; xxviii. 4, etc.

Ver. 26. — When your children shall say
unto you, what mean ye by this service.
Apparently, Moses adds these injunctions by
his own sole authority. He assumes that
curiosity will be aroused by the strange and
peculiar features of the Paschal ceremony,
and that each generation in succession wUl
wish to know its meaning and origin.

Ver. 27. — It is the sacrifice. It has been
denied that the Paschal lamb was, in the true
sense of the word, a sacrifice (Carpzov and
others). But this passage alone is decisive on
the question, and proves that it was. More-
over, it was offered in the holy place (Deut.
xvi. 5, 6 ) ; the blood of it was sprinkled
upon the altar, and the fat was burnt (2 Chr.
XXX. 16 ; XXXV. 11). Compare also Ex. xxiii.
18 ; Num. ix. 7 ; Dent. xvi. 2. The people
bowed the head and worshipped. Bather,
" and made obeisance." Compare ch. iv. 31.
By " the people " seems to be meant' " the
elders of the people." (See ver. 21.)

Ver. 28. — So did they. The long series ol
miracles wrought by Moses and Aaron had so
impre^jsed the people, that they yielded ■■
undoubting and ready obedience



EOMILETICS.

Ter. 22. — No safety for man heyond the limits protected hy (he LamVs atoning blood.

Ko Israelite was to pass beyond the door of his house until the morning, lest he should
be destroyed by the destroyer. Within the precincts, protected by the blood of the
lamb, he was safe. Let Christians beware of stepping beyond the limits whereto
the atoning blood extends. Those step beyond the limits —

I. Who tempt God by dallying with sin. Atonement has been made for us,
we feel. We have had moments of assurance that atonement and forgiveness are ours.
We have had an impression that we were safe. At once the Evil One begins to whisper
to our hents that there is no longer any need of our walking warily, of our being afraid
to put ourselves in temptation's way, of our flying all contact with evil ; and we are too
apt to listen to his suggestions, to regard the danger of falling from grace as past, and to
allow ourselves a liberty in which there is too often awful periL We draw near the
confines of sin, confident that we shall sin no more ; and lo I we are entangled in the
meshes. And why ? Because we have gone heyond the limits protected hy the atoning
blood. We have opened the door and stepped out. We have turned our backs upon the
redeeming marks and put them behind us. We have been over-trustful in our
own strength.

n. Who ABE PUFFED UP BY THE THOUGHT OF THEIR SPIRITUAL ATTAINMENTS AND

FBIVILEQE8. " Pride goeth before a fall." Pride was the great temptation of the Jew,
■who felt himself one of God's peculiar people, to whom pertained " the adoption, and the
glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the
promises" (l!om. ix. 4). And pride often tempts the Christian, who has realised ths
work of Christ on his behalf, and the greatness of the salvation wrought for him. But

T 2



27* THE BOOK OF EXODUa [oh. xn. 22— 27.

pride is one of the deadly sins, and at once severs the soul from Christ. The blood of
the covenant does not extend its protection over the paths which are trodden by the foot
of pride. He who enters on them has wandered beyond the door which bears the
redemption-marks, and is open to the assaults of the destroyer.

III. Who fold theib hands and obase to be zealous of oood wobks, as
■SHOUQH THEY HAD ALBBADT ATTAINED. Though we oannot, by anything that we can
do, merit our own salvation, or redeem ourselves or others (Ps. xlix. 7), yet God will
have us " work while it is day," and the atoning blood of Christ atones for those only
who are " careful to maintain good works " (Tit. iii. 8). Idleness, apathy, sloth, are
eontrary to his will and his word ; and the man who indulges in them has strayed
beyond the prescribed limits and lost the needful protection. Well for him if he
discovers his mistake in time to return, and " do again the first works " (Eev. ii. 5), and
80 regain the lost shelter I It is needless to say that the atoning blood can avail none
who (1) reject the atonement ; or, (2) despise it, by giving it no thought ; or, (3) trample
it under foet by leading an immoral and ungodly life. These are as £ar removed from
its protection as were the Egyptians.

Vers. 26, 27. — The obligation of men to teach the true meaning of rites and cer^
monies to their children. The rites and ceremonies of a religion are liable to be
misunderstood in two ways. 1. They may be regarded as unimportant, trifling, nay,
even as superstitioiis — a weight and an encumbrance on true vital religion. Or,
2. They may be assigned more importance than is their due ; considered to be that in
which religion mainly consists, believed to have an inherent power and efficacy which ig
far from belonging to them. Men are prone to extremes ; and most persons are naturally
inclined either unduly to exalt, or unduly to depreciate religious ceremonies. Of the
two evils, undue depreciation would seem to be the worse, for the following reason : —

I. Undue depbeciation of oebbmonies (a) tends to make them of little service to
men when they actually take part in them, since they neither prepare themselves
poperly beforehand, so as to derive from them the benefit they might, nor enter into
tiiem with much heart at the time of their occurrence, nor help their effect by devout
meditation upon them afterwards, (li) It causes an infrequent participation in the
ceremonies by the depreciators, who, expecting but little benefit in the future, and
being conscious of but little benefit in the past, allow small obstacles to prevent their
attendance at services which they do not value, (c) In extreme cases, it produces
either complete abstention from, or sometimes actual abrogation of the rite, whereby
advantages are forfeited on the part of whole sections of believers which would other-
wise have been enjoyed by them. Thus the Society of Friends loses the benefit of both
sacraments, with sad resiilts to the spiritual lif'i of numbers.

II. Undue exaltation op oeeemonies has the advantage of at any rate retaining
them in use, so that their benefit is not wholly lost. It often, however, greatly lessens
the benefit (a) by exaggerated and superstitious views of its nature, and (6) by the
attribution of the benefit to the mere formal participation in the rite irrespective of the
participator's preparation, attention, and dovoutness at the time. Fm-ther, it is apt to
produce such a reliance on the ceremonies as is unfavourable to practical efforts at
improving the moral character and making advances towards Christian perfection.
Careful instruction in the true natur« and value of ceremonial obsei-vances is thus
of the highest importance ; and parents should perhaps scarcely wait till their children
" ask the meaning " of public worship, baptism, confirmation, the Lord's supper, etc.,
before enlightening them on the true nature and value of each. In so doing, it will
always be of use to set forth the historical origin of each usage, to show when and how
it arose, and to draw attention to what Scripture says on the subject. Men's private
views are various, and may be mistaken, but the Scriptures cannot but be true ; and a
knowledge of what is contained in the Bible with respect to each Christian rite or
ceremony will be an excellent basis for the formation of a sound and healthy opinion
on the subject when, in the course of time, the different views of different sections cl
believers come to be known



nft. MI. 21- 29.J THE BOOK OP EXODUB. 2»t



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 21 — ^29. — " Christ our Passover." The I'assover was an eminent type of Christ.
It was probably to it the Baptist referred when he said, " Behold the Lamb of God,
which taketh away the sin of the world " (John i. 29). Paul gives a decisive utterance
on the question in the words : " Christ our passover is sacrificed for us " (1 Cor. v. 7).

I. Points of analogy between the true passoveb and its type. 1. In both
the death of a blameless victim. The lamb, physically blameless (vcr. 5); Christ,
morally faultless. A sinful world needs a sinless Saviour. It has one in Christ. The
sinlessness of Christ, a moral miracle. Proofs of this sinlessness. (1) Christ asserts his
own freedom from sin (John viii. 29—46 ; xiv. 30). (2) In no part of his conduct does
he betray the least consciousness of guilt. Yet it is admitted that Jesus possessed t^e
finest moral insight of any man who has ever lived. (3) His 'postles, cue and all,
believed him to be sinless (2 Cor. v. 21; Hel i. 15; 1 Pet. liT 22; 1 John iii. 5)!
(4) His enemies could find no fault in him (Mau. xxvi. 60 ; xxvii. 23, 24). (5) The
very traitor confessed the innocence of Christ (Matt, xxvii. 4). (6) The delineation of
his character in the gospels bears out the averment of his moral blamelessness. (7) The
captious efforts which have been made, by fixing on a few paltry points in the gospel
narratives to impeach Christ's sinlessness, indirectly prove it. " As if sin could ever
need to be made out against a real sinner in this small way of special pleading ; or as if
it were ever the way of sin to err in single particles, or homoBopathic quantities of
wrong" (Bushnell). 2. In both, the di:sign is to secure redemption from a dreadful evil.
In the one case, from the wrath of God revealed against Egypt in the smiting of its
first-bom. In the other, from the yet more terrible wrath of God revealed against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men (Rom. i. 18). " Jesus, which delivered us from
the wrath to come" (1 Thess. i. 10). "Saved from wrath through him" (Kom. v. 9).
3. In both, the principle of the deliverance is that of vicarious sacrifice. The lamb was
substituted for the first-born. It protected the house, on whose door-posts the blood
was sprinkled, from the stroke of the avenger. The substitutionary character of the
death of Christ is, in like manner, affirmed in innumerable Scriptures. Jesus " died for
the ungodly " (Kom. v. 6). He " suflered for sins, the just for the unjust " (1 Pet. iii. 18).
He gave " his life a ransom for many " (Matt. xix. 28). His blood is a propitiation
(Kom. iii. 25). There is just ground for the remark of Coleridge (we quote from
memory) that a man who would deal with the language of his fathers will, as
Unitarians on this and other points do with the language of the New Testament, would
be liable to an action at law. 4. In both, there was need for an act of personal, appro-
priating faith. " The people bowed the head, and worshipped. And the children of
Israel went away, and did as the Lordhad commanded " (vers. 27, 28). " Through faith
(they) kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood," etc. (Heb. xi. 28). Their faith
showed itself in sprinkling the blood on their door-posts and lintels, and in sheltering
themselves under it. Nothing short of this would have availed to save them. So it is
not knowledge about Christ, but faith in him ; personal application to his blood, and
trust in it as the means of salvation, which secures our safety. Faith is the bunch of
hyssop. 5. In both, the slain lamb bi-comes the food of the new life. There was, on tha
part of the Israelites, a sacrificial feast upon the flesh of the lamb. This denoted,
indeed, peace and fellowship with God, but it was also an act of nourishment. Simi-
larly, under the Gospel, the new life is nourished by feeding upon Christ. We make
him ours by inward appropriation and assimilation, and so are spiritually nourished for
tdl holy service (cf. John vi.). Minor typical features might be insisted upon (male of
the first year, roast with fire, not a bone broken, unleavened bread, bitter herbs of con-
trition, etc.), but tue above are the broad and outstanding ones.

II. The suKPASsiNd excellence or the true passover. It belongs to the nature
of a type that it should be surpassed by the antitype. The type is taken from a
lower sphere than the thing which it represents. So completely, in the case of the pass-
over, does the reality rise above the type, that when we begin to reflect on it the sense
of likeness is all but swallowed up in the sense of disproportion. How great, 1. The
contrast in the redemptions. The redemption from Egypt, though spiritual elements
were involved in it, was irimarily a redemption from the power of Pharaoh, and from •



IffS THE BOOK OP EXODtTS. [ch. xu, 26, 27.

temporal judgment about to fall on Egypt. TToderlying it, there was the need for a yet
greater redemption — a redemption from the curse of a broken law, and from the tyranny
of Bin and Satan ; from death spiritual, temporal, and eternal. It is this higher redemp-
tion which Christ has achieved, altering, through his death, the whole relation of God to
nun, and of (believing) man to God. 2. The contrast in the victims. That, an
irrational lamb ; this, the Eternal Son of God in human nature, the Lord's ovfn Christ.
3. The contrast in the efficaci/ of the blood. The blood of the passover lamb had no
inherent virtue to talie away sin. Whatever virtue it possessed arose from God'i
appointment, or from its typical relation to the sacrifice of Christ. Its imperfection as
a sacrifice was seen (1) In the multitude of the victims. (2) In the repetition of the
service (Heb. x. 1 — 3). But what the flowing of the blood of millions of lambs, year
by year slain in atonement for sin could not achieve, Christ has achieved once for all by
the offering up of his holy body and soul. The dignity of his person, the greatness of
his love, his holy will, the spirit of perfect self-sacrifice in which he, himself sinless,
offered himself up to bear the curse of sin for the unholy, confers upon his oblation an
exhaustless meritoriousness. Its worth and sufficiency are infinite (Heb. x. 10 — 15 ;
1 Pet. i. 19 ; 1 John ii. 2). 4. The contrast in the specific hUssings obtained. The
difference in these springs from the contrast in the redemptions. Israel obtained (1)
Escape from judgment. (2) Outward liberty. (3) Guidance, care, and instruction in
the desert. (4) Ultimately, an earthly inheritance. He receive, through Christ,
(1) Pardon of all sins. (2) A complete justifying righteousness, carrying with it the
title to eternal life. (3) Renewal and sanctifi cation by the Spirit. (4) Every needed
temporal and spiritual blessing in liFe. (5) Heaven at the close, with triumph OT«r
death, the hope of a resurrection, and of final perfecting in glory. — J. O.

Ver. 26, 27. — " What mean ye by this service?" Apply to the Lord's Supper.

I. A QUESTION TO BE PUT BT THE COMMUNICANT TO HIMSELF. Qualification for the
Lord's table includes " knowledge to discern the Lord's body," as well as " faith to feed
upon him."

II. A QUESTION LIKELY TO BE PUT TO THE COMMUNICANT BY HIS CHILDKEN. 1.

The children are presumed to be spectators of the ordinance. It is well that children
should be present during the administration of the sacraments. It awakens their
interest. It leads them to inquire. 2. The ordinance isfittcl to attract attention. An ,
external interest attaches to it. It appeals to the senses. The symbohc acts and
movements prompt to inquiry. 3. It furnishes an excellent opportunity for imparting
Instruction. Children wUl attend to an explanation of the sacraments, who will pay
little attention to a book or a sermon. The symbolism of the ordinance aids instruc-
tion ; makes it vivid and impressive.

III. A QUESTION WHICH THE CHRISTIAN PARENT SHOULD BE ABLE TO ANSWEB TO

HIS CHILDREN. It is a sad matter when a parent is incapable of sitting down, and
instructing his children in the meaning of the sacramental symbol. It betrays some-
thing worse than ignorance ; not improbably, a total want of spiritual religion.
■ IV. The answer to this question involves a statement of the greatest
TERiTiES OF ouB FAITH. The Jew had to answer to his child — " It is the sacrifice of
the Lord's passover," etc. (ver. 27). The Christian has to answer, " It is the memorial
of our Lord's death, in atonement for our sins." He has to tell — 1. How we were in
guilt and danger. 2. How, for the love wherewith he loved us, Christ gave himself up
to the death for our redemption. 3. How, for his sake, we are forgiven and accepted.
' 4. How the ungodly world has still God's wrath resting upon it. It is wonderful to
reflect how simply, yet how perfectly, God has provided for the handing down of a
testimony to these great truths in the ordinance of the Lord's Supper. The pulpit
may fail to preach the doctrine of atonement ; Rationalistic and Unitarian teachers may
deny it ; but as often as the Lord's Supper is observed, on the model of the New Testa-
ment, the truth is anew proclaimed in unmistakable symbols. To give a child a satis-
factory explanation of the Lord's Supper, embodying the words of institution, would be
"almost of necessity, to preach a sermon on the atonement. — J. 0.

Vers, 26 — 27. — I%e children's question in Canaan. 1. It was a question to bi
■XfcOTED. The service was one to provoke curiosity. It was not some daily action of



OB. XII. 26, 27.] THE BOOK OF EXODUa 279

the household, of which the children learned the meaning and purpose almost uncon-
sciously. The grinding of the com, the kneading of the dough, in a very short tim«
explained themselves. But when as the be^nning of the year drew round, it brought
with it these special observances, the slaying and eating of the lamb and the seven days
of unleavened bread, there was everything to make a child ask, " What is this being
done for?" God makes one thing to fit into another. He institutes services of such a
kind, with such elements of novelty and impressiveness in them, that the children maks
it easier for them to be instructed in the things that belong to his will. And what waa
true concerning this passover service, is also true, more or less, concerning all that is
revealed in the Scriptures. The great facts of Divine revelation are such as to provoke
curiosity, even in a child's mind. If it be true that the Scriptures are ^ven to guids
OB all the Way through life, then what is more reasonable to expect than that God will
have placed much in them to stir up attention and inquiry &om those who are jiut at
the beginning of life ?

n. Hence this was a question to be bncoukaged. Every advantage was to b«
taken of childish curiosity. Inquisitive children are often reckoned a nuisance, and told
to be qvuet ; yet such a policy as this, though it may save trouble in the present, may
lead to a great deal more trouble in the future. A stupid child who never asks ques-
tions, is to be reckoned an object of pity and a source of peril. God has always in mind
how to make each generation better instructed than the one going before ; more obedient
to him, and more serviceable for his purposes. The temptation of the grown people in
Israel was to undervalue what was going on in the minds of their children. Remember
how Mary and Joseph suffered through their want of forethought on this point. Ths
God who watches human beings all the way from the cradle to the grave knows well
how children, even very little children, have their own thoughts about things; and ha
wanted the people to give them every encouragement and information. One question
wisely answered leads to the asking of other questions. Thus, by the continuance of aa
inquiring mood in the mind, and thus only, is profitable information to be given. Infor-
mation is not to be poured into the mind as into a bucket ; it must be taken as food,
with appetite, and digestive and assimilating power. Thus if the question were not
asked, if, while the passover preparations were being made, a child stood by in stolid
unconcern, or ran away heedlessly to play, such conduct would fill a wise parent with
solicitude. He would look upon it as being even more serious than a faitoe of physical
health. He would do all he could by timely suggestions to bring the question forth.
Ingenuity and patience may do much to bring curiosity into action, and tf the question
were not asked it would have to be assumed. The narrative of the passover was a most
important one for every Israelite child to hear and remember ; and if only the narrative
was begun, it might soon excite the requisite and much desired interest.

III. It was a question which gave great scope for usefulness to the childbeh
IN THE ANSWERING OF IT. God, indeed, directs how it is to be answered ; but of course
it is not meant that there was to be a formal, parrot-like confinement to these words.
What, for instance, could be more gratifying to the children, who in after times asked
this question, than to begin by pointing out to them, how God himself expected them
to ask this question ? Then the words he had directed Moses to provide for an answer,
might be repeated. But it would have been a poor spiritless answer, unpleasing to God,
and profitless to the children, if it had stopped with the bare utterance of the words in
ver. 27. There was room for much to be said, that would very peculiarly impress the
mind of a thoughtful child. It might be reminded that whereas, mow, little children
were boni in the freedom of Canaan, some among their forefathers had been born in the
bondage of Egypt. It might be told of that Pharaoh who had threatened the men-
children with destruction. In particular, the story of the infant Moses might be told.
So now, in those parts of the world where the idols are abolished, and former idolaters
are gathered round the throne of grace for Christian worship, an opportunity is given
for explaining to the children, in how much better a state, and with how much better
smroundings they are brought up. " What mean ye by this service?" was a question
which could be answered in form, and yet with such absence of heart, as utterly to chill
and thwart the eager inquirer. Whereas, if it were only answered with evident care,
with amplitude of detail, with loving desire to interest and satisfy, then the child thus
fovouNd. would be laid under great obligations to be thankful in feeling, and devoted



280 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [ch. xii. 21— 28.

in service. A question of this sort gave great opportunity. Happy those who could
seize the opportunity at once, and use it to the full.
IV. It was a question which came to call evert Israelite, at the annual

OBSERVANCE OP THE PaSSOVER, TO A CAREFUL CONSIDERATION OP HIS OWN FEELINGS WITH

RESPECT TO IT. It was a question which helped to guard against formality. A little
child may render a great service, without knowing it, even to a grown man. God can
send the little ones, to test, to rebuke, to warn, to stir out of lethargy. ' ' "What mean
ye by this service ? " How is the Israelite of the grown generation to answer this
question ? He may tell the child what the service is intended for, the historical facts
out of which it arose, and the Divine appointments concerning it ; but after all, this is
no real answer to the question. It may be an answer to satisfy the inquiring child, and
yet leave the person who has to give it, with a barbed arrow in his memory and con-
science. Notice the precise terms of the question. WTiat mean ye by this service ? How
should the child ask in any other terms ? It looks and sees the parents doing some-
thing new and strange ; and to them it naturally looks for explanation and guidance.
The question is not simply, " Why is this thing being done ? " but " Why are you
doing it, and what do you mean by it ? " It became only too possible in the lapse of
ages, to go through this service in a cold, mechanical, utterly unproiitable way. Not
so, we may be sure, was it observed the first time in Egypt, on the night of deliverance.
Then all was excitement, novelty, and overflowing emotion. Be it ours, in considering
all outward and visible acts in connection with religion, all symbolic and commemorative
institutions, to ask ourselves in great closeness and candour of personal self-application.
" What mean we by this service ? " Do we mean anything at all, and if so, what is it
that we mean ? To answer this is not easy : it is not meant to be easy. Perhaps one
' great reason why there are such marked and unabated differences of opinion with
respect to Baptism and the Lord's Supper is, that we have never sufficiently considered
the question, " What mean ye by these services ? " It is hard work to be quit of mere
superstition, mere clinging to outward observances as matters of custom, tradition, and
respectability. It is very certain that to this question of the children, put in all its
particular emphasis, only too many fathers in Israel would have been forced to reply, " We
do this thing because our fathers did it." Remember that forms are, in themselves,
nothing to the invisible, spiritual God. Their value is as containing, protecting and
expressing what we have to present. That which pleased Jehovah and profited Israel
was not the outward passover service, but the intelligence, the perceptions, the gratitude,
the aspirations, and the hopes that lay behind it. — Y.

Vers. 21 — 28. — Israel and the sacrifice for sin. I. Christ slain by us. The
lamb's blood was not only shed for them, but also ly them. The crucifying of Jesus
by the Jews, the revelation of what lies in every um-enewed heart. " They shall look
upon him whom they have pierced."

II. What is needful for salvation. 1. Appropriating faith. It was the blood
applied with their own hands to the door of the dwelling that eaved those within. It
is not enough that the blood be shed. Is it ttpore our gates 1 Have we set it by faith
between us and destruction? 2. It must be applied as God directs us. It was
sprinkled on the lintel and doorposts — not within, but without. It is not enough that
we believe. We must make open profession of our faith. 3. We must abide within
until the day dawn and salvation come. To put that blood (which should be between
us and the world) behind us, no longer to hide within it but to forget it, is to renounce
salvation. Are we without or within the blood-stained gateway ? We are saved if we
hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end.

III. God's covenant gives perfect security (ver. 25;. The shed blood stands
between us and death. The awe and joy of redeemed Israel, a faint emblem of the awe
and joy which we shall feel, who shall see the judgment of sin but only from afar.

IV. The duty op the redeemed. 1. Perpetual remembrance (ver. 23). We must,
in the ordinance of Christ's own appointment, shew his death tiU he come. 2. The
handing down the knowledge of aalvaciou (vers. 26, 27'). Christians should glory in tha
story of the Cross.



«&. in. 2"9, 30.]



tHE Book ol' teioDus.



mi



EXPOSITION.



Vera. 29, 80.— Thb Tenth Plaoths. At last
the time had come for the dealing of the final
blow. Nine plagues had been sent, nine in-
flictions endured, and no serious effect had
been produced. Once or twice Pharaoh had
wavered, bad made profession of submitting
himself, had even acknowledged his sin. But
each time he had relapsed into obstinacy.
Now at length the fiat had gone forth for that
last plague which had been announced the
first (ch. iv. 23). Pharaoh's own son, his
firstborn, the heir to his throne, was smitten
with death, in common with all the other
male Egyptians who had " opened the womb."
What the effect on the king would have been,
had he alone suffered, we cannot certainly say.
As it was, the whole population of the country,
nobles, tradesmen, peasants, suffered with
him ; and the feeling aroused was so intense
that the popular movement left him no
choice. The Egyptians everywhere " rose up
in the night" (ver 30), and raised "a great
ery," and insisted that the Israelites should
depart at once (ver. 83). Each man feared
for himself, and felt his life insecure, so long
as a single Israelite remained in the land.

Ver. 29. — At midnight. As prophesied by
Moses (ch. xi. 4). The day had not been
fixed, and this uncertainty must have added
to the horror of the situation. The first-bom
of Pharaoh. We have no proof that the
eldest son of Menephthah died before his
father, unless we take this passage as proving
it. He left a son, called Seti-Meuephthah, or
Seti II., who either succeeded him, or reigned
after a short interval, during which the throne



was held by Ammonmes, a usurper. Tha
first-bom of the captive who was in the dun-
geon. This phrase takes the place of
another expression, viz. " the first-bom of the
maid-servant that is behind the mill " (ch. xi
5). In both cases, the general meaning is,
"all, from the highest to the lowest." This
is perhaps the whole that is in the writer's
thought ; but it is also true that captives in
dungeons were in some cases employed in
turning hand-mills (Judg. xvi. 21). And all
the first-bom of cattle. Bather, " of beasts."
There is no limitation of the plague ti
domesticated animals.

Ver. 30. — And Fharaoll rose up in the
night, and all his servants. This general
disturbance differentiates the present visita-
tions from that which came upon the host of
Sennacherib (2 Kings xix. 35). Then, the
calamity came with such silence and secrecy,
that the deaths were not suspected until men
rose to go about their various tasks in the
morning Now, every household seems to
have been aroused from its sleep in the night.
We must suppose sharp and painful illness,
terminating after a few hours in death. The
disaster itself may have been one from which
Egypt often suffers in the spring of the year
(Kalisch) : but its attacking all the firstborn
and no others, and no Israelites, as well as itl
announcement, plainly showed it to be miracu-
lous. There was a great cry. See the com-
ment on ch. xi. 6. For there was not a house
where there was not one dead. This is per-
haps a slight hyperbole. There would be
many families in which there was no son ;
and some houses might contain no male who
had opened the womb. It is always to be
home in mind, that the language of Scripture
— especially where exciting and tragical events
are narrated — is poetical, or at the least highly
rhetorical



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 29, 30. — The death of the first-horn. From the death of the first-bom we
may learn : —

I. The severity op God's long deferred jtjdqments. That punishment will over-
take the wicked sooner or later was the conviction of heathendom no less than of the
Jewish and Christian worlds. Horace says — " Judgment may halt, but yet it rarely
fails to overtake the guilty one at last." TibuUus — " Wretch, though at first thy sin
no judgment meet, vengeance will come at length with silent feet." But the greater
heaviness of the punishment that is long deferred does not appear to have attracted
their notice. Yet experience might have taught it them. Who has not seen the long
triumphant career of a thoroughly bad man, crowned with success for years, seeming to
turn aU he touched to gold, " flourishing," as the Psalmist has it, " like a green bay
tree," yet ending in calamities and misfortunes so striking, and so heaped one upon
mother, as to draw general attention? It is invidious, perhaps, to note instances; but
the present generation has seen at least one example among the crowned heads at



284 THE BOOK OF BXODtTS. [ch. ml 29, 30k



Europe. And Scripture is full of examples. How long God's Spirit strove with men in
the antediluvian world, as they proceeded from one wickedness to another, heaping up
to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, tiU the flood came and swept away th«
ungodly ! For what a prolonged term of years must the long-suffering of God have
borne with the cities of the plain, as they more and more corrupted themselves, till in
all Sodom there were not ten godly men left I And then, how signal the punishment I
Again, what an instance is Ahab of the operation of the law 1 Flourishing in every
way, in spite of his numerous sins — his idolatries, cruelties, selfishness, meanness,
hatred of God's servants — ^victorious over Benhadad, supported by all the forces of
Jehoshaphat, encouraged by his successes to undertake an aggressive war against Syris
— and then struck down In a moment, slajn by an arrow shot at a venture (1 Kings xxii.
34) — his blood licked up by dogs — ^his wife and seventy sons murdered I The Pharaohs
and the Egyptians had now worked their wicked wiU on Israel for a century or more,
since the king arose "who knew not Joseph" — all this time they had been treasuring
up to themselves wrath (Bom. ii. 5)— and now it had fallen upon them in full force.
Let sinners beware of trying the forbearance and long-suffering of God too far — ^let
them tremble when all goes well with them, and no punishment comes. Let them be
assured that the account of their offences is strictly kept, and that for each they will
have to suffer. Delay does but mean accumulation. However long suspended, the
bolt will fall at last, and it will be proportioned in its severity to the length of the
delay, and the amount of the wrath stored up.

II. The suddenness with which they come upon men. It was night— it was the
hour of repose, of peace, silence, tranquillity. All had gone to rest unsuspectingly.
No one anticipated evil. Each said to himself, as he lay do^vn, " To-morrow shall be
as this day, and much mi. re abundant," when suddenly, without warning, there was
death everywhere. Fathers saw the light of their eyes snatched from them — mothers
beheld their darlings struggling in the agonies of dissolution. A shrill, prolonged cry
sounded throughout the land. So the flood came upon man unawares (Luke xviL 27)
— and a sudden destruction overthrew the cities of the plain (tb. 28, 29) — and Ahab
found himself mortally wounded when he was thinking of nothing but victory — and in
the height of his pride Herod Agrippa was seized with a fearful malady — and Uzziah's
leprosy smote him in a moment — and in the night of his feast was Belshazzar slain.
Wicked men are for the most part thinking of nothing less when the judgments of God
fall upon them. They have said to their soul — " Soul, thou hast much goods laid up
for many years ; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry," when the dread sentence
goes forth—" Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee." God's judg-
ments often come in the night. We know not what a day, nor what a night may
bring forth. Let us commend our souls to God when we he down to rest, and repeat
the prayer of the Litany against sudden death.

III. The impartiality with which they are dealt out upon all conditions op
MEN. " Pale death smites equally the poor man's hut and the king's palace," says a
heathen moralist. And .so it is with all God's judgments. He is no respecter of persons.
" Without respect of persons he judgeth according to every man's work " (1 Pet. i. 17).
Greatness furnishes no security against him. His messengers can enter the palace,
elude the sentinels, pass the locked doors, make their way into the secret chamber,
smite the monarch, sleeping or waking, with disease, or death, or frenzy. Nor can
obscurity escape him'; " All things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with
whom we have to do." The lowest dungeon, the most wretched garret, the obscurest
cellars are within his ken, their inmates known, the moral condition of each and all of
them noted. His judgments find men out as easily in the darkest haunts of vice, or
the most wretched abodes of poverty, as in royal mansions. And as greatness wiU not
prevent him from chastising, so neither will meanness. The "woman behind the
mill," the " captive in the dungeon " are his creatures and his servants, no less than
the great, and must be either his true servants, or rebels against his authority. If
they are the latter, their obscurity and insignificance will not save them from hia
judgments, any more than the great man's greatness will save him. Vice must not
look for impunity because it is low-p'aced. and hides itself in » comer.



ca. xn. 29— 31.] THK BOOK OF EXODUS.



aaa



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vera. 29 — 31. — The death of the first-born. On this see ch. xi. 4 7. Observ*

here —

I. TmS JUDOMENT IS BASED ON TUB PRINCIPLE OP REPRESENTATION. Hitherto, the

plagues had fallen on the Egyptians indiscriminately. Now, a change is made to the
principle of representation. Egypt, Israel also, is represented in its first-born. When
a death-penalty was to be inflicted, the lines had tti be drawn more sharp and clear.
We are reminded that this principle of representation holds a vitally important plaue
in God's moral government. The illustrations which more immediately affect ourselves
are, first, the representation of the race in Adam, and second, its representation in
Christ (Rom. v. 12—21). Hence it is not altogether fanciful to trace a relation to
Christ even in this judgment on the first-born. 1. Christ is the great first-born of tht
race. We catch some glimpse of this by looking at the matter from the side of IsraeL
Israel, as God's son, his first-born, is admitted to have been a type of Christ (cf. Matt.
ii. 15). Much more were the first-horn in Israel — the special representatives of this
peculiar feature in the calling of the nation — types of Christ. They resembled him in
that they bore the guilt of the rest of the people. But Christ, as the Son of man,
sustained a relation to more than Israel. He is, we may say, the great First-born of the
race. Egypt as well as Israel was represented in him. 2. The death of Christ is not
only OocPs great means of saving the world, but it is hod's great judgment upon the sin
of the world. It is indeed the one, because it is the other. There is thus iu the death
of Christ, both the Israel side and the Egypt side. There is some shadow of vicarious

endurance of penalty — of the one suffering for, and bearing the guilt of, the many

even in the destruction of Egypt's first-bom. 3. The death of Christ, which brings
taivation to the believing, is the earnest of final doom to the unbelieving portion of the
race. This also is exhibited in principle in the history of the exodus. In strictness,
the first-bom were viewed as having died, both in Israel and Egypt. The Egyptian
first-bom died in person ; the Israelitish first-born in the substituted lamb. The death
of a first-born in person could typify judgment in the room, or in the name, of others ;
but the first-born being himself one of the guilty, his death could not (even in type)
properly redeem. Hence the substitution of the lamb, which held forth in prophecy
the coining of the true and sinless first-bom, whose death would redeem. But Christ's
death, to the vmbelieving part of mankind— the wilfully and obstinately unbelieving —
is a prophecy, not of salvation, but of judgment. Grod's judgment on sin in the person
of Christ, the first-bom, is the earnest of the doom which will descend on all who refuse
him as a Saviour. And this was the meaning of the death of the first-born in Egypt.
That death did not redeem, but forewarned Egypt of yet worse doom in store for it if it
continued in its sins. The first-bom endured, passed under, God's judgment, for the
sin of the nation ; and so has Christ passed under, endured God's judgment, for the sin
even of the unbelieving. Egypt, not less than Israel, was represented in him ; but to
the one (Egypt as representative of hostility to the kingdom of God) his death means
doom ; to the other (Israel as representative of the people of God) it means salvation.

IL This judgment compelled Pharaoh to belax his hold on Israel. It wai
the consummating blow. Imag^ation fails in the attempt to realise it. As we write,
accounts come to hand of the terrific storm of Oct. 14 (1881), attended by a lamentable
loss of life on the Berwickshire coast of Scotland. The storm was sudden, and preluded
by an awful and ominous darkness. Cf. with remarks on ninth plague the following :
— " I noticed a black-looking cloud over by the school, which shortly spread over all
the sky out by the Head. Sea, sky and ground all seemed to be turning one universal
grey-blue tint, and a horrible sort of stillness feU over everything. The women were
all gathering at their doors, feeling that something awful was coming. No fewer than
200 fishermen and others are believed to have perished, the village of Eyemouth alune
losing 129. So connected by intermarriage is the popidation of the villages and
hamlets, that there is scarcely a family in any of them which is not called to mourn its
dead. 'The scenes are heart-rending. Business in every shape and form is paralysed."
An image this, and yet how faint, of the cry that went up in Egypt that night, when
in avwy bouse there was found one dead. Yet no stroke less severe wovid hare served



284



THiE BOOK OP fiXODtrS.



tori. xii. 31--3B-



the purpose, and this one is to be studied in view of the fact that it did prove effectual
for its end. Observe, 1. It was a death-stroke. Death has a singular power in sub-
duing and melting the heart. It is the most powerful solvent God can apply to a
rebelhous nature. It is sometimes tried when gentler means have failed. God removes
your idoL He lays your dear one in the dust. You have resisted milder influences,
will you yield to this ? Your heart is for the moment bowed and broken, will the
repentance prove lasting, or will it be, like Pharaoh's, only for a time ? 2. It is a
death-grip upon the sovd which is needed to make sin relax its hold upon it. " The
sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me; I found
trouble and sorrow. Then called I upon the name of the Lord : Lord, I beseech thee,
deliver my soul " (Ps. cxvi. 3, 4). God comes in the preaching of his law, and lays
his hand, a hand carrying death in it, upon the soul of the trembling transgressor, who
then for the first time realises the fatal and unspeakably awful position in which he has
placed himself by sin. It is a death-sentence which is written in his conscience.
3. That which completes the liberation of the soul is a view of the meaning of the death
of Christ. Terror alone will not melt the heart. There is needed to effect this the
influence of love. And where is love to be seen in such wonderful manifestation as at
the Cross of Christ ? What see we there ? The first-bom of the race expiring in awful
agony under the judgment of God for otir sins. Is not this a spectacle to melt the
heart ? It is powerful enough, if earnestly contemplated, to make the Pharaoh that is
within us all relinquish his grip upon the captive spirit. What read we of the pro
speotive conversion of Israel? — " They shall look on Me whom they have pierced, a'jd
they shall mourn for him, as one moumeth for his only son ; and shall be in bitterness
for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first-born " (Zech. xii. 10). See again, Acts
ii. 36, 37, " Let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made that same
Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. Now when they heard this, they
were pricked in their hearts," etc. Cf. also Bev. L 7. The Cross inspires mourning —
(1) By the spectacle it presents of holy suffering. (2) By the recollection of who it is
that there suffers. (3) By the thought that it is our own sins which are the cause of
this suffering. (4) By the thought that it is the judgment of God in the infliction of
the curse of sin which the Holy one is thus enduring. (5) By the conviction of sin,
and the diead of Divine justice, thus awakened. (6) Above aii, by the inflnite love
shown in this gift of the Son, and in the Son's willingness to endure this awful agony
and shame for our salvation.— J.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 31— 36.— The Dismissal. The first
action seems to have been taken by Pharaoh.
The "cry" of the people had no doubt been
heard in the palace, and he was aware that
the blow had not fallen on himself alone, and
may have anticipated what the people's feel-
ings would be ; but he did not wait for any
direct pressure to be put upon him before
yielding. He sent his chief officers (ch. xi.
8) whUe it was still night (ch. xii. 31), to in-
form Moses and Aaron, not only that they
might, but that they must take their depar-
ture immediately, with all the people, and
added that they might take with them their
flocks and herds. The surrender was thus
complete ; and it was accompanied by a
request which we should scarcely have
•zpected. Pharaoh craved at the hands
of the two brothers a blessing 1 We are



not told how his request was received;

but that it should have been made is ■
striking indication of how his pride was
humbled. The overture from Pharaoh was
followed rapidly by a popular movement,
which was universal and irresistible The
Egyptians ."rose up" everywhere, and "were
urgent upon the people," to " send them out
of the land in haste " (ver. 33) ; and to expe-
dite their departure readily supplied them at
their request with gold and silver and rai-
ment (ver. 35), thus voluntarily spoiling
themselves for the benefit of the foreigners.
The Israelites, long previously prepared for
the moment which had now arrived, made
their final arrangements, and before the day
was over a lengthy column was set in motion
and proceeded from Eameses, which seams tc
have been a suburb of Tanis (Brugsish, Hid.



OH. xu. 31 —36.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



285



tf Egypt, vol. ii. pp. 96 — 99), to an nnknown
place called Saccotli, which mnst have lain
towards the south-east, and was probably not
very remote from the capital.

Ver. 31. — And he called for Moses and
Aaron, Kalisch miderstands this as a sum-
mons to the King's presence (fiommentary, p.
130), and even supposes that the two bi\,t»iCis
complied, notwithstanding what Moses hud
said (ch. x. 29). Bat perhaps no more is
mea.it than at Pharaoh's instance Moses and
Aaron were smumoned to an interview with
some of the Court oificials (see ch. xi. 8).
As ya have said. Literally, "according to
your words" The reference is to such pas-
sages as ch. viii. 1, 20 ; ix. 1, 13.

Ver. 32. — Al&o take your flacks and your
herds. Pharaoh thus retracted the prohibi-
tion of ch. X. 21, and " gave the sacrifices and
burnt-offerings " which Moses had required
(ib. ver. 25y. Bless me also. Pharaoh was
probably accustomed to receive blessings from
his own priests, and had thus been led to
value them. Ilis desire for a blessing from
Moses and Aaron, ere they departed, probably
sprang from a conviction — based on the
miracles which he had witnessed — that their
intercession would avail more with Grod than
that of his own hierarchy.

Ver. 33. — The Egyptians were urgent upon
the people. The Egyptians feared that, if
any further delay took place, the God of the
Hebrews might not be content with slaying
all the first-born, but might punish with death
the whole nation, or at any rate all the males.
It is easy to see how their desire to get rid of
the Israelites would expedite matters, and
enable all to set out upon the journey on the
same day,

Ver. SI,— The people took their dough.



They probably regarded dough is more con-
venient for a journey than flour, and sa made
their flour into dough before starting; but
they had no time to add leaven. Their
kneading-troughs. This rendering is correct,
both here and in the two other places where
the word occurs (ch. viii. 3, and Dent, xxviii.
5). Kneading-troughs would be a necessity
in the desert, and, if like those of the modem
Arabs, which are merely small wooden bowls,
would be light and portable. The dough and
kneading-troughs, with perhaps other neces-
saries, were carried, as the Arabs still carry
many small objects, bound up in their clothes
(i.e., in the heged or ample shawl) upon their
shoulders,

Ver. 35. — The children of Israel did accord-
ing to the word of Hoses. See above, ch,
xi. 2. They borrowed. On this mistrans-
lation, see the comment upon ch, iii. 22. It
is plain that the gold and silver articles and
the raiuient, were free-will gifts, which the
Egypt ans never expected to see again, and
which the Hebrews asked and took, but in no
sense " borrowed." Hengstenberg and Kurtz
have shown clearly that the primary meaning
of the words translated " borrowed " and
" leut," is " asked " and " granted," and that
the sense of " borrowing " and " lending " is
only to be assigned them when it is required
by the context.

Ver. 36. — So that they lent unto them
such things as they required. Bather, " So
that they granted them what they asked."
They spoiled the Egyptians. See the com-
ment on ch. iii. 22, ad fin. The result was
that the Israelites went forth, not as slaves,
but as conquerors, decked with the jewels of
the Egyptians, as though they had conquered
and despoiled them.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 81 — 36, — IsraeVs going forth from Egypt a pattern to oppremd Ohwreket.

Churches are sometimes enslaved and oppressed by the civil power. In unsuspecting
confidenoe they have accepted the State's protection, and entered into certain relations
with it, supposed to be mutually advantageous. But, as time has gone on, the terms
of the origmal arraagement have been disregarded ; the civil power has made encroach-
meuta, has narrowed the Church's liberties, has behaved oppressively towards it, has
reduced it to actual slavery. A time comes at last when the bondage is felt to be
intolerable; and the Church demands its liberty, claims to go out from under the
yoke of the oppressor. Under such circumstances the following analogies are noticeable :
I, The oppressed Church, lono refused the liberty which it has bees

DRIVEN to claim, IS APT AT LAST TO BE "THRUST OUT " BY ITB OPPRESSOR. The

early efforts of a down-trodden church after freedom are strenuously opposed, denounced
as at once wrongfiil, foolish, and futile, sometimes punished by an increase in the
oppression. The Church is set to " make bricks without straw." K this process fkils,
and the demand for freedom continues, the claims made are perhaps at the next stag*
derided. (See ch. v. 2.) They are then for a long time determinedly and persistently
i9^i4s«4. |f occasionally a seeming concession is loade, it is scarcely made befpre it is



28« THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xn. 31—36.

retracted. If still the Cliurch will not give way, but continues tlie struggle, a crisis
uriTea. The State finds itself in difficulties. One inconvenience after another befall
it in consequence of the prolonged conflict. At length it comes to be felt that the
inconveniences of the struggle exceed the benefits of the connection; and a sudden
change of policy takes place. The Church is sent adrift ; cut away like an encumber-
ing mass of wreck ; bidden to shift for itself, and trouble the State no more. The Stata
is glad to be rid of it.

n. The emancipated Ghdboh finds itself, on euanoifation, subbounsed by
DIFFICULTIES AND PEEPLEXiTiBS. In the first place, the attitude of the State towards
it is apt to be hostile ; and an attempt may even be made to coerce it and force it to
resume its old position. Apart from this, it labours under many disadvantages. It has
recollections of the " flesh-pots of Egypt," which offer a strong contrast to the fare
whereto it is reduced. It has to enter on a dull and wearisome course ; to plod forward
toilsomely, painfully. It finds its movements hampered by encumbrances. All these
things are against it. But if the nerves be braced to bear, if the will be resolute to
turn away from all thought of the " flesh-pots," if the fact of freedom be kept before
the mind's eye and the old ills of slavery held in recollection, the difficulties of the early
Journey will pass away, the presence of God wiU be revealed, and after (it may be) forty
years of trial, the wilderness wUl have been passed through, and there will be a
triumphant entrance into Canaan.

III. The emancipated Church has a bioht to take with it all its owa

PBOPBBTY, AND 18 ENTITLED, IP OCCASION ABISE, TO " SPOIL THE EoTPTIANS." MoseS

and Aaron would not stir without their flocks and herds — the main wealth of a pastoral
nation. " Not a hoof," they said, " should be left behind " (oh. x. 26). So the eman-
cipated Church should take with her whatever is her own into the wilderness. Sh«
must not relinquish her property to the oppressor. It is really not hers, but God's :
she is trustee to God for it. She is entitled to say that she " knows not with what
she must serve the Lord till she is come out." And she is entitled to ask for parting
gifts when she is about to quit a known shelter and to confront the perils and dangers
of an unknown future. If God gives her favour in the eyes of those whom she is
leaving, she will do well to require of them their silver and their gold and their raiment
— all that they have most precious — and take it with her, not as "borrowed"
wealth, but as endowment freely " given," intentionally made over for a permanence^
out of goodwill and affection, or out of compassion and pity. She will find a proper UM
for all that is most rich and most rare in the service of the sanctuaiy.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

7eT. 32. — Pharaoh's prayer. It has come then to this, that Pharaoh is glad to beg
a blessing from the man whom at first he had so contemptuously spumed. " And bless
me also."

I. The wicked man is often made painfully aware op the miserablbnesb of
HIS OWN portion, AS COMPARED WITH THAT OF THE GoDLT. He may be, often is,
even when he refuses to acknowledge it, secretly conscious of the superior happiness of
the good man. There come times, however, when severe affliction, the sense of a
gnawing inward dissatisfaction, or special contact of some kind with a man of genuine
piety, extorts the confession from him. He owns that the good man has a standing in
the Divine favour ; enjoys an invisible Divine protection; and is the possessor of a peace,
happiness, and inward support, to which his own wretched life is utterly a stranger.

II. The wicked man has sometimes desires after a share in the good of
God's pbuplb. He envies them. He feels in his heart tliat he is wretched and
miserable beside them, and that it would be happiness to be like them. He says with
Balaam, "Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his"
(Num. xxiii. 10).

III. The wicked man, in his time of trouble, will oftek humble himself
TO BEO the prayers OF THE GoDLT. And this, though but a little before, he has
been persecuting them. He feels that the good man has power with God.

IV. Thebb fbbunob of the wicked man are usually transient. — J. 0,



OB. xn. 81— 37.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 281

Vers. 31 — 37. — The dismissal. The blow had been so measured by infinite wisdom
u to produce precisely the desired effect. Pharaoh " called for Moses and Aaron by
night," etc. Observe —

I. Fhabaob is now as anxious to get bid of the Isbablites as fokmeblt
BK WAS TO KEEP THEM. It had been predicted at the beginning that this would be
the issue of God's dealings with him (oh. vi. 1). Note, 1. Fhara^h's folly in resisting
the demand of Ood so long. He has to concede everything at last. Had he yielded at
the beginning, he could have done so with honour, and with the happiest results to his
dynasty and kingdom. As it is, he has gained nothing, and has lust much, nearly alL
He has ruined Egypt, suffered severely in his own person, lost his first-born, and irre-
trievably forfeited his prestige in the eyes of his subjects. Foolish king I and yet the
same unequal and profitless contest is being repeated in the history of every sinner 1

2. 'J'he dismissal is unconditional. No more talk of leaving the little ones, or the
flocks and herds ; or even of returning after the three days' journey. Pharaoh wants
no more to do with this fatal people. No one could any longer dream of the Lsraelites
ratuming, or expect them to do so. They were " thrust out altogether " (ch. xi. 1).

3. He seeks a blessing (ver. 32). He wished Moses to leave a blessing behind him. Ble
would be blessed, and still continue in his sins. Beyond letting Israel go, he had no
intention of renouncing his idols, and becoming a worshipper of the God he had so long
defied. Many would Uke to be blessed, while cleaving to their sins.

U. The EaYFTiANS abe as eaqeb as theib uonabch to see the Isbaeliteb
8AFELT OUT OF EaYPT. 1. TJiey were affrighted. " They said, we be aU dead men "
(ver. 33). They were perfectly right. Had Israel been detained longer, their nation
would have been destroyed. It would be well if every sinner had as clear a perception
of the effects of persistence in his eviL 2. 2'hey were wrgent to send the people away.
Not simply because this was what Jehovah had commanded, but because tliey were
terrified to have them in their midst any longer. The Israelites were a people of ilV
omen to them. They wished to get rid of the nation at once and for ever, 'i his is
not without significance. We remember how the Gadarenes besought Jesus that he
would depart out of their coasts (Matt. viii. 34). Worldly people have no liking for the
company of the converted. Society bustles them out of its midst. Their old com-
panions betray a singular uncomfortableness in their presence. They would rather
nave done with them. " Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us ; for we desire
not the knowledge of thy ways" (Job. xxi. 14). Alas! the world that desires to be
rid of the society of God's people will one day get its wish. The separation they would
fain hasten will take place, and for ever (Matt. xxv. 46). 3. They were willing to buy
the departure of Israel (ver. 3.^, 3ti). The Israelites asked, and the Egyptians freely
gave, of jewels of gold, of jewels of silver, and of raiment. Thus, singularly did
Providence provide for the enriching of the people in the hour of their exodus. They
went forth, not in squalor and disorder, but as a triumphant host, laden with the
spoils of the enemy. The spoils of the world will yet turn to the enrichment of the
Church.

III. The Isbablites make no delay in availing themselves of the oppob-
TUMTY of freedom (ver. 34). Pharaoh did not need to tell them twice to leave the
land. Their dough was imleavened, but, binding up their kneading-troughs in their
clothes uion their shoulders, they prepared at once for departure. There are supreme
moments in every man's history, the improvement or non-improvement of which will
decide his salvation. Many other things at such a moment may need to be left undone ;
but the man is insane who does not postpone everything to the making sure of his
deliverance. Such times are not indolently to be waited for. The Lord is to be
sought at once. But GtDd's ways of saving are varied. The seeking, as in Augustine's
case, may go on a long time before God is found. — J. 0.



288



THE BOOK OP EX0DU8.



[CH. jra. 37—39



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 87 — 39. — ^Thb Dbpabtcbe. There
are, no douhi, great difficulties in conceiving
tie departure on one day, from one place, of
" six hundred thousand that were men, heside
children." The dilEculty is increased when
we find (from Num. i. 3—43) that by " men "
is meant males above twenty years of age.
The entire body of Israelites is thns raised
from over half a million to over two millions.
Tie whole narrative, however, supposes some
such number ; and it is accepted by the best
critics, as Ewald, Kalisch, Kurtz, Canon Cook,
and others. As these two millions must have
lived dispersed over a considerable space, and
there could have been no advantage in their
all assembling at Bameses (Tauis), we are
probably to suppose the main body with
Moses and Aaron to have started from that
place, while the others, obeying orders pre-
viously given, started from all parts of
Goshen, and converged upon Succoth, which
was the first rendezvous. Each body of
travellers was accompanied by its flocks and
herds, and followed by a number of slaves,
dependants, and sympathisers not of Hebrew
birth (ver. 38), which still further enlarged
their numbers. The extremely open charac-
ter of the country, and the firmness of the
soil at the time of year, would facilitate the
journey. There was no marching along roads,
which indeed did not exist. Each company
could spread itself out at its pleasure, and go
its own pace. All knew the point of meeting,
and marched towards it, in converging lines,
there being no obstacle to hinder them.
Arrived in the vicinity of Succoth, they could
bivouac without hurt, in that fine climate, in
the open air.

Ver. 37. — ^From Bameses. It ha* been
doubted whether this " Kameses " is the same
place as the " Kaamses " of ch. i. 11. But the
doubt scarcely seems to be reasonable. The
two words differ only in the pointing. Brugsch
has clearly shown that Ramesos (Pa-Rainesu)
was a tovra newly buUt in the reign of
Bameses II., partly erected by himself, in the
immediate vicinity of the old city of Tanis c r
Zoau. It was the favourite capital of both



Bameses 11. and Menephthah. (See Brugsch,
Hist, of Egypt, voL ii. pp. 96 and 128.)
Suecotn. The meamng of the word " Suc-
coth " is " booths." Mr. Greville Chester
tells us that " huts made of reeds " are com-
mon at the present day in the tract south-east
of Tauis, and suggests that the Succoth here
mentioned may have been at Salahiyeh, fifteen
miles due south of Tanis. Tel-Defneh, at
the same distance to the south-east, is perhaps
a more probable site. Six hundred thousand.
See the Introductory paragraph. At the
time of the numbering recorded in Num. i.,
the males above twenty years of age were
625,550. Beside ohildien. Bather, " beside
families." The word used includes all the
women, and the children under twenty.

Ver. 38. — ^A mixed multitude went up also
with them, Kalisch supposes that these
strangers were native Egyptians, anxious to
escape the tyranny of the kings. Canon
Cook suggests that they were "remains of
the old Semitic population " of the Eastern
provinces. Perhaps it is more probable that
they consisted of fugitives from other subject
races (as the Shartana) oppressed by the
Pharaohs. We have again mention of this
" mixed multitude " in Num. xi. 4, where we
find that they were the first to regret the
"flesh and the fish, the cucumbers, the
melons, the leeks, the onions, and the gar-
lick " which they had eaten in Egypt freely
(«6. 5). They thus set a bad example, which
the Israelites followed. And flocks, and
herds, even very much cattle. Compare
ch. X. 26. It has been noticed that this is
important, as lessening the difficulties con-
nected with the sustentation of the Israelites
in the wilderness. But it increases, on the
other hand, the difficulties connected with the
march, and »with the possibility of finding
pasture for such large flocks and herds in the
oinaitic peninsula.

Ver. 39. Unleavened cakes. Some of the
modem Arabs make such cakes by simply
mixing flour with water, and attaching flat
circular pieces of the dough thus formed to
the sides of their ovens after they have heated
them. (Niebuhr, Detcription de I'Arabie,
p. 45, and pi. 1, F.) Others put a lump of
dough into the ashes of a wood fire, and cover
it over with the embers for a short time
(Layard, Aineveh and Babylon, p. 288). All
Arab bread is unleavened. They wera thmil
out of Egypt Compare ver. 83



CB. ML 3T, 38.] THE BOOK OP EXODDZJ. 289



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 37 — 38. In the departure of the Israelites from Egypt, after they had receivea
permission to set out, two things are principally remarkable : 1. All were of one mind —
none hung back ; 2. A mixed multitude cast in their lot with them, elected to accom-
pany them, and resolved to share their fortunes. The first of these two facts shows —

I. That in times of excitement, under divine guidance, a whole nation will
ACT AS ONE MAN. Critical times are favourable to the formation of a national spirit.
Let a powerful invader threaten a people, and differences are at once forgotten, quarrels
made up, party spirit held in abeyance. All unite with equal zeal against the common
enemy. Or again, let any wave of strong feeling come upon a people, desire of unity,
or of freedom, or of taking part in a great enterprise, like the crusades, and much the
same unanimity prevails. Such a spirit is found among the Jews who returned from
tje captivity with Zerubbabel, when in the seventh month they " gathered themselves
together to Jerusalem as one man " (Ezr. iii. 1), to set up the altar of burnt offerings.
Such a spirit appears again in the time of Kehemiah, when all the people with one
accord kept a solemn fast on the 24:th of Tisri (Nehem. vs.. 1), and then " sealed to the
covenant " (ibid x. 1 — 29). But it was not very frequently e^bited. When proclama-
tion was made by Cyrus the Great that all Israelites who chose might quit his
dominions and " go up to Jerusalem and build the house of the Lord" (Ezr. i. 3), it
was only a portion of the nation, " whose spirit God had raised," that went forth. But
now the whole people was of one mind. Braced by the severe discipline of suffering,
their spirits raised — their whole moral tone exalted — ^by the long series of signs and
wonders which they had witnessed, encouraged by the Divine promise of a " land
flowing with milk and honey," and confident in the leadership of Moses, they all arose
" as one man," left their abodes, their lands, their farming implements, their utensils,
their furniture, and started for the rendezvous of Succoth. Such waves of popular
feeling have been known from time to time, but scarcely to this extent. When Oubacha
started on Jan. 6, 1771, with 70,000 families of Cahnucks (420,000 persons) from the
banks of the Volga for China, 15,000 families remained behind (be Hell, Travels in the
Steppes, p. 227). But God now inspired the whole Israelite nation with one unanimoui
feeling ; and all left Egypt together. The other fact shows —

II. That the enthusiasm of a united nation is coNTAaious, and excites othebs
BEYOND ITS LIMITS TO FOLLOW ITS EXAMPLE. The coutagious character of a revolu-
tionary spirit has often been noticed. Even the war spirit, when strongly felt, is apt to b6
contagious, and to overleap national boundaries. Here we see that a righteous enthu-
siasm will also, on some occasions, catch hold of those seemingly beyond its range, who
are in contact yrith it, and sweep such alien elements into its vortex. The " mixed
multitude " who joined the IsraeUtes haA none of the reasonable grounds for hoping to
better their pondition that the Israelites had; but they entertained nevertheless
expectations of, somehow or other, sharing in their advantages. They may have
contained, 1. Some native Egyptians, connected with the Hebrews by marriage, for the
example of Joseph is likely to have been followed ; 2. Some slaves anxious for
freedom; 3. Some members of oppressed races, held to labour in Egypt, as the
Israelites had been. The later facts of the history show —

III. That neither of these two forms of enthusiasm is to be relied upon as
PERMANENT. The euthusiasm of Israel cooled wonderfully when they found themselves
shut in between the host of Pharaoh and the Bed Sea (ch. xiv. 10—12). It was revived
by the safe passage through the sea, but faded again rapidly vmder the toils and the
monotony of the wilderness. Nor was that of the " mixed multitude " more lasting. They
appear to have been the first to grow sick of the continual manna, and to have " lusted "
after the rich and varied diet of Egypt (Num. xi. 4). The Israelites were seduced by
them into similar misconduct ; and the quails, and the plague which followed the quails
(lb. 31 — 33), were the consequence. Enthusiasm is a thing with which we cannot
dispense ; as a motive force for initiating a great movement, it is invaluable ; but we
must not trust to it for the accomplishment of anything which requires long and
sustained effort. It is an abnormal and excessive stir of feeling, which must be followed
by re-action. As it dies away, we must seek to supply its place by the ever increasing
force of habit, which may be depended on for continuance.

ExoniTB. "



SW) THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. xil 37— «*



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS

Vers. 37 — 40.— The exodus as a fact in history. The exodus from Egypt lay at
the foundation of the national life of Israel. It appears in the history as a super-
natural work of God. The subsequent legislation assumes it to have possessed this
character. The bond of covenant declared to exist between the people and Jehovah had
its ground in the same transaction. They were God's people, and were bound to adhere
to him, and to obey his laws, because he had so marvellously redeemed them. Every
motive and appeal in the later books is drawn from the assumed truth of the events
related here, and of those which happened afterwards in the wilderness. Obviously,
therefore, the history of Israel presupposes the truth of this history ; while if the
narrative of the exodus, as here recorded, is admitted to be true, we are in immediate
contact with supernatural facts of the most stupendous order. We do not mean to
discuss the question in detail, but the following points may be indicated aa suitable for
popular treatment.

I. Objections. We touch only on that which relates to the number of the people
(ver. 37). The difficulty here is two-fold. 1. To account for the growth of the nation
of Israel from seventy persons to over 2,000,000 in the space of time allowed for that
increase. On this see the exposition. The difficulty is not serious (1) if we take the
plain wording of the history, and admit that the sojourn in Egypt lasted 430 years
(ver. 40) ; (2) if we do the narrative the justice of allowing it to remain consistent
with itself, the increase, on its own showing, being exceptional and marvellous
(ch. i. 7, 14, 20). (3) If we admit that the descendants of the households which
doubtless accompanied Jacob into Egypt, are included in the numbers. But this
supposition, however probable in itself, is really not necessary to vindicate the numbers.
The truth is, that granting a highly exceptional rate of increase, with 430 years to
increase in, the numbers, as will be seen on calculation, appear small, rather than too
great. They certainly could not have been much less than the history makes them.
The problem is quite soluble even on the hypothesis of the shorter reckoning, in favour
of which there is not a little to be said (see Birk's " Exodus of Israel "). 2. To account
for the possibility of so vast a, multitude, including women and children, with flocks
and herds, effecting an exodus in a single night (and day). The feat in question is
certainly unparalleled in history. Even granting what the narrative (as against
Oolenso) makes perfectly clear, that the Israelites were in a state of tolerably complete
organisation, had ample warning to prepare for starting on that particular night, and had
for months been on the tip-toe of expectation, as plague after plague descended on
Egypt, it is still an event so stupendous as to be difficult of realisation. The narrative
itself, however, does not fail to represent it as very extraordinary. And in pronouncing
on its possibility, there are several circumstances not always, perhaps, sufficiently taken
into account. Justice is not always done (1) to the perfectly superhuman efforts a nation
can sometimes make in a great crisis of its history. Even an individual, at a time when
feeling is highly strained, is capable of efforts and achievements, which, to read of them in
cold blood, we might judge to be impossible. (2) To the order and discipline of which
masses of people become capable when called to face an emergency on which they feel
that existence itself depends. The picture sometimes drawn of a disorderly rabble
pouring out of Egypt has no foundation in the history, and is false to psychology and
experience. The narratives of shipwrecks (the Kent, the London, etc.), show us what
crowds are capable of in the way of order and discipline, even with certain death
staring them in the face. When a people, under the influence of one great over-
mastering idea, are called upon to execute difficult movements, or to unite their efforts
towards one great end, it is incredible what they can accomplish. The feeling of
solidarity takes possession of them. They are of one heart and soul. The mass moves
and works as if one mind possessed it, as if it were a machine. Orders are obeyed with
promptitude ; movements are executed with rapidity and regularity ; men are lifted for
the time out of their littlenesses, and display a spirit of willingness, of helpfulness, and
of self-sacrifice truly wonderful. All these conditions were present on the night of the
exodus : the result was what might have been anticipated — the people were brought out
with wonderful rapidity, and in regular order ; " they went up harnessed "— " five in a



•M. xn. 37— 40.1 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 291

rank " (ch. xiii. IS). (3) We must add to these considerations, the singularly exalted
state of the religious consciousness in the companies of the Israelites. Everything in
their position comhined to awe and solemnize them; to fill them with an over-
mastering consciousness of the Divine presence ; to inspire them with boundless and
grateful joy, yet a joy tempered with the awful sense of death, as forced upon them by
the destruction of the first-born, and the lamentations of the bereaved Egyptians. Thi»
also would exercise a powerful and steadying influence upon their thoughts and beha-
Tiour, and would aid them in taking their measures with decision and speed.

II. Proofs. Those who pile up the difficulties of the Bible seldom do justice to the diffi-
culties on the other side. We have to ask — 1. Is it not absurd to say that so extra-
ordinary an event as, in any case, this exodus of Israel from Egypt must be admitted to
have been, happened in the full light of the most powerful civilisation of ancient times,
while yet the people who came out did not know, or could not remember, or could ever
possibly forget how it happened ? (Of. ver. 42.) The Israelites themselves did not believe
that they did not know. They had but one story to give of it — the story that rings
down in their psalms to latest generations — the same story which, with minute circum-
stantial detail, is embodied in these chapters. 2. If this is not how the children of Israel
got out of Egypt, will the critic show us how they did get out? It is admitted on all
hands that they were once in ; that they were in bondage ; that Egypt was at that time
ruled by one or other of its most powerful monarohs ; that they came out ; yet did not
come out by war, but peaceably. How then did they make their way out ? If the
whole history was different from that of which we have a record, how came it that no
echo of it was preserved in Israel, and that this sober and matter-of-fact relation has
come to take its place ? 3. There is the institution of the Passover — a contemporary
memorial. We have already expressed our belief that this ordinance was of a kind
which could not have been set up at a time later than the events professedly comme-
morated by it. Glance at the alternative hypothesis. The basis of the institution, we
are asked to believe, was an ancient spring festival, on which were grafted by degrees,
as the tradition formed, the rites and ideas of a later age. This hypothesis, however,
is not only unproved, but violates every law of historical probability. It must in
any case be admitted (1) that the exodus took place at the time of the alleged agricul-
tural festival. (2) That the festival thereafter assumed a new character, and was
observed, in addition to its agricultural reference, as a memorial of the escape from
Egypt. (3) That the use of unleavened bread in connection with it had reference to
the haste of the flight. (4) Farther, that an essential part of this festival was the offer-
ing of a sacrifice. (5) That, being at bottom a spring festival, it must have been
observed, with but few interruptions, all down the later history of Israel. But if so
much is admitted, we seem driven to admit more. For it is undeniable that the festival,
as observed among the Jews, was connected most especially of all with the fact of a
great judgment, which was believed to have fallen on Egypt on the night of the
exodus, and from which the Israelites had been mercifully delivered by the sprinkling
of the lamb's blood upon the door-posts ; a memorial of which was preserved in the
name (Pass-over). " The relation to the natural year expressed in the Passover, was
less marked than that in Pentecost or Tabernacles, while its historical import is
deeper and more pointed. That part of its ceremonies which has a direct agricultural
reference — the offering of the omer — holds a very subordinate place." (Diet, of the Bible.)
It is for the sceptic, therefore, to explain how that which enters into the inmost meaning
and heart of the observance, could possibly have been engrafted on it as an accident at
a later period — yet a period not later than accords with the ritual prescribed in these
very ancient written law? : how, moreover, the people could not only be persuaded, to
accept this new reading of an old familiar ordinance, hut to helieve that they had never
known any other : that this had been the meaning and ritual of the ordinance from the
beginning. 4. We have not as yet alluded to the Pentateuch, but of course the fact is
not to be overlooked that the work before us claims to be historical; that it wa«
probably written wholly or in large part by Moses himself; and that in style, circum-
stantiallj-, vividness of narration, and minute accuracy of reference, it bears all tha
marks of a true and contemporary history. — J. 0.

Vw. 38. — rA« mixed multitude. The mass of this mixed multitude which loA

u 2



292 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. xii. 29— 42*

Egypt with Moses, would consist of foreign settlers in the Delta, victims, like the
Hebrews, of the tyranny of the Pharaohs, and, like them, glad to take this opportunity of
making their escape (cf. oh. i. 10). The enthusiasm of a great body of people is con-
tagious. When the Israelites left Egypt, numbers would be moved to leave with them.
Becont events, too, had doubtless produced a powerful impression on these mixed popu-
lations ; and knowing that God was with Israel, they naturally expected great benefits
from joining the departing nation. They had not calculated on the trials of the desert,
and afterwards " fell a-lusting " (Num. xi. 4), provoking Israel to sin, and bringing
wrath upon the camp.

I. Multitudes join the banks of the Ceubch who have little in common with
HER 8PIBIT AND AIMS. They are like the mixed crowd of hangers-on, which left Egypt
with Israel. Their ideas, traditions, customs, maxims of life, habits of thought and
feeling generally, are foreign to those of the true Israel of God. Yet they are moved
to join the Church — 1. From motives of self-interest. 2. Under transient convictions.
3. Caught by a wave of religious enthusiasm. 4. Under partial apprehensions of the
importance of religion. 5. Because others are doing it. They hang of necessity on the
outskirts of the Church, taking little interest in her work, and acting as a drag upon
her progress.

II. There are many by whom the Church will not be bbnefitbd, whose
ADHERENCE SHE IS YET NOT ENTITLED TO REFUSE. The "mixed multitude" Were not
forbidden to go with Israel. Because, perhaps, they could not altogether be prevented.
It is kindlier, however, to believe that Israel allowed the mixed crowd to accompany it,
in the hope of ultimately incorporating them with the people of Jehovah. The Church
is certainly not at liberty to encourage nominal adl.erence. She must do her very utmost
to dissuade men from mere empty profession. Keither to swell her numbers, nor to add to
her wealth, nor to increase her respectability in the eyes of the world, nor vmder a mis-
taken idea of " comprehension," must she open her doors to those who are known to be
ungodly, or who give no evidence of serious religious intentions. Yet neither must she
draw her lines too stringently. She must not presume to judge the heart, or to deal with
men otherwise than on the ground of their professed motives and beliefs. She must
teach, exhort, warn, and rigorously exclude all whose lives are openly inconsistent
with the Gospel ; but she must at the same time exercise great charity, and rather
include ten who may possibly prove unworthy, than mistakenly exclude one whom
Christ would be willing to receive. The responsibility in the matter of religious pro-
fession must, in great measure, be allowed to rest with the individual who professes.
The Church is to consider, not only what is best for her, but the duty she owes to the
world, in laying hold of those who are yet very imperfect, and training them for Christ.

III. Nominal adherents, however, are no source of strength, but a great
WEAKNESS TO THE Chuboh. It may be the Church's duty to bear with them, but
she can never derive benefit from them. She may benefit them, and in that hope
should treat them tenderly, but they will never benefit her. They will be a drag upon
her activity. In proportion to their numbers they will exert a chilling and detrimental
influence. They will stand in the way of good schemes. They will " fall a-lusting,"
and provoke discontent. The morale of a Church can scarcely avoid being lowered by
them. What then? Put them out? Not so. We shall work in vain to separate
tares and wheat, and we are forbidden to act on this principle (Matt. xiii. 24 — 31). But,
1. Let us do what we can to keep down their number. Many churches and church
office-bearers are greatly to blame for the indiscriminate way in which they receive
persons to communion. We are bound to abide by the principles above laid down ; but
consistently with these principles it should be our care to keep down nominal adherence
as far as that is possible. Many of the character of the " mixed multitude " will find
their way into the Church without our seeking for them, or giving them any encourage-
ment. 2. Let us do what we can to change their nominal adherence into real
adherence. Seek their good. Be not overcome by their evil, but try to overcome it by
superior goodness. 3. Beware of their influence, and seek to keep it in check. — J. 0.

Vers. 29 — 42. — Egypt a sorrow: ^traeFs Joy. I. The judgment of Egypt th«
■MBLEM AND PB0MI8E OF THE WORLD'S JUDGMENT. 1. The time of Visitation ; midnight,
when all were wrapt in deepest slumber and, notwithstanding the warning which had



■txn. 29— 420 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 29t

been given, busy only with dieams. The world will be surprised in the midst of ita
false security. " As it was in the days of Noe," etc. 2. Its universality. There were
none so high that Q-od's hand did not reach them, and none so low that they were over-
looked. 3. The after anguish. The whole nation, steeped the one moment in deceitful
■lumber, the next torn with the most heartrending and hopeless grief. Their sin had
slain their dearest and best. 4. It is a hopeless sorrow. Their grief cannot bring back
their dead. The anguish of the wicked, like Esau's, will find no place for repentance.

II. The deliverance of Israel the emblem and promise of the full enfranohisk-
MBNT OF THE PEOPLE OF GfoD. 1. All that God had ever asked for them is granted.
The demand for freedom to the people of God, and the breaking of the yoke laid upon
the poor, will yet be obeyed in fear by the persecutor and the oppressor. 2. It is pressed
upon them with all the eagerness of deadly fear. Israel never so desired the boon as the
Egyptians that they should now accept it. The persecutors will come and worship at th»
Church's feet. 3. They go forth laden with the treasures of Egypt (Isaiah Ix. 5 — 17),
4. They go forth awed by the proof of God's faithfulness. To a day had he kept the
promise given to the fathers (ver. 41). The prophecies, now dim and misunderstood,
will then be read in the light of God's deeds, and like Israel of old, we shall know thai
God has kept the appointed time. — ^U.

Vers. 29 — 42. — March at midnight, " This is that night of Jehovah " (Ex. xiL
42). Observe the striking words of the text ! " The night of Jehovah," a night in
which he specially appeared and acted on behalf of Israel. For a description of the
scenery of this eventful night see Dr. W. M. Taylor's " Moses," 99 — 101. In the treat-
ment of this subject considerable exposition will be necessary. For material, sea
expository section of this commentary. It may, in order to include all important
points, be marshalled thus (under each head we give suggestive bints) : —

I. The hand that smote. Most, if not all the nine earlier plagues, had a natural basis,
the tenth had none. It was purely supernatural. They blended mercy (first warning
and then withdrawal) vrith judgment. This was pure judgment. In them there was
indeed a call to faith, but also room for unbelief. The demonstrations of God are
seldom absolute. But the tenth judgment was awfully impressive. There is very little
evidence of any secondary instrumentality, angelic, or any other ; but see in the Heb.
xii. 13, 23. Jehovah this time smote with his own hand.

n. The victims. First-borns. Of all beasts. Of men. But here distinguish
between the first-boms of fathers and of mothers. In the tenth plague it was so,
that the first-borns of mothers were the destroyed (xiii. 2). Now, these were the
"sanctified" unto the Lord, first, as "living sacrifices," and as representing the
consecration of each family, and then of the entire nation. But failing this consecration,
their lives were forfeited. This was the case at that moment with the Israelites and
Egyptians alike. In the case of the Egyptians the life of the first-bom was taken, in
that of the Israelites atoned for. Hence emerges a law of the Kingdom of God, that
every soul that will not voluntarily consecrate himself to the Lord, must involuntarily
come under the cloud of condemnation.

in. The objective. The gods of Egypt (Ex. xii. 12). This was so with the nine
plagues, it was especially so with the tenth. The heir to the throne was regarded as an
incamation of the Deity ; by this plague God pronounced him common clay with the
rest. But the first-bom of animals also fell. This was a blow against the animal worship
of the land.

IV. Completeness of the victobt. Here discuss whether Pharaoh's permission was
conditioned or unconditioned ; and show that with Pharaoh's resistance God's demands
increased, and that the king's surrender must have been absolute, in spite of xiv. 8, 9.
Note the pathos of the prayer of the now broken-hearted, " Bless me also," xii. 32.

V. The battle array. See xiii. 18. Perhaps a good translation, instead ol
"hamessed," would be " militant," as including the outer armedness, and the inner
»»lorous and jubilant spirit ; both which ideas are in the original. Observe ; the nine
or ten months of preparation, the organisation in which the "elders" and Hebrew
" clerks" of the works may have taken part, the arms they surely possessed, as witnesi
the battle at Rephidim— how probably they had become marshalled into detachmant*-
•nd places of rendezvous been appointed.



894



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CH. xa. 40— 4a



VI. The festal baimbnt. Israel " asked," Egypt " gave," under Divine influence
(lii. 36), gold, silver, and raiment ; these might be regarded as the " spoils " of Israel'a
victory, under Grod. These spoils were such as women might ask of women (see iii.
22 — "neighbour" is Feminine in the Hebrew), and such as women value. They were
to be put not only on themselves, but on sons and daughters. The contributions of
the Egyptian women must have been immense in quantity and value. Now then,
why this .spoiling ? That Israel might march, not like a horde of dirty, ragged slaves,
but in festal array. Compared with the slavery of Egypt the future might have been
one long holiday, one holy day unto the Lord.

VII. Partakbes of the jot (xii. 38). Low caste people probably ; even as it is at
this day in the mission field of India. But the lesson is obvious — the Lord's salvations
•re for the sinful, the outcast, and the miserable.

VIII. TsDTHS SUGGESTED. 1. The moment of salvation is the beginning of a »«io
time. Israel's history as a nation dates from that night (xii. 2). So the history of a
•oul dates from its conversion to God. 2. The new time is a festal time. 3. Tbf
redeemed - should assume festal attire (Luke xv. 22), a bright eye, a cheerful
countenance, etc. 4. Still he must don a/rmowr, and the Church must he militant. 5.
The Chvirch should welcome all comers ; for the miserable need salvation, and the most
rude are capable of some service. Comp. Deut. xxix. 11, with Ex. xii. 38. 6. The
salvations of God are full-orbed in their completeness. From the months of prepara-
tion till Israel went out in festal array, all was complete. 7. The moment of salvation
is to be held in everlasting remembrance (see Ex. xii. 42). So of the still greater
salvation. — ^B.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 40 — 42. — The narrative of the depar-
ture from Bgypt is followed, not unnaturally,
V7 a notification of the length of the sojourn,
which is declared to have been a space of
four hundred and thirty years. In the
"Introduction" to the Book, we have exa-
mined the question, which here arises, 1. As
to the soundness ; and 2. As to the true mean-
ing, of the Hebrew text, and hare arrived at
the conclusion that it is sound, and that it
means what it says, viz., that 430 years elapsed
between the arrival of Jacob in Egypt, with
his sons, and sons' sons, and their families, as
related in Gen. xlvi. 1 — 27, and the com-
mencement of the exodus. The time is
required by the genealogy of Joshua (1 Chr.
vii. 22 — 27). It is in remarkable accordance
with the traditions that Joseph was the
minister of Apepi, and that the Jews went
out under Menephthah. If not absolutely
required for the multiplication of the race
from " seventy souls " to above two millions,
it is at any rate more in accord with that
fact than the alternative number, 215. It is



twice repeated, so that "the mistake of >

copyist " is almost impossible.

Ver. 40. — The sojourning of the ohildrea
of Israel, which dwelt in Egypt. Rather,
" Which they sojourned in Egypt." (Compare
the Septuagint-—^ Karolicniris %v KBTij(Kj)(rov.)
Tour hundred and thirty years. Literally
" thirty years and four hundred years."

Ver. 41. — The self-same day ... aU the
hosts went out. The setting forth upon the
journey is regarded as the " going out" — not
the actual exit, which was only effected by
the passage of the Red Sea.

Ver. 42. — It is a night to be much ob-
served. We must suppose that some of the
Israelites actually commenced their march
before the night was over, being " hastened "
by the Egyptians (ver. 33), and having all
things in readiness ; but the bulk of the
people can scarcely have started before day-
break. Ibis is that night of the Lord — i.e.,
the night concerning which directions had
been already given (vers. 6 — 11) — ^the only
" night " for which any observances were
appointed. In their generations. To all
time — so long as they continue to be a people.
On the bindingness of this commandment,
see the comment on ver. 14 of this chapter.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 40 — 42. — Ood's discipline of his chosen ones. I. The tbialb of God's fedpli
ABE SEVERE, BUT HAVE A JOYFUL EKD AT LAST. The sojoum in Egypt was from first
to last an affliction (Gen. xv. 13). It was only on account of the fimuie in CaoMu:



OH. xn. 40—42.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 2M

that Jacob consented to change his abode and Ms condition. In Canaan he and his had
been free ; had " served " no one ; had lived like the sons of the desert. But in Egypt,
even during the lifetime of Joseph, they entered on a species of servitude. Not only
were they Pharaoh's subjects, but to some extent his servants (Gen. xlvii. 6). They
were no longer free to come and go as they chose. They had a certain province
assigned to them. They had, it is probable, to pay rent for their lands (Gen. xlvii. 26).
After a certain time, during which they suffered only this " light affliction," the severe
oppression began. Their lives were " made bitter with hard bondage, in mortar and
in brick, and in all manner of service in the field" (Ex. i. 14); then their children
were massacred (ib. ver. 22) ; lastly, they were required to " make bricks without straw "
(ch. v. 7 — 19). So with God's people generally. They are given a time of suffering.
They have to learn to " endure hardness." But God afflicts them as a discipline, and
makes even their worst afflictions tend to their growth in grace. At last their trial
time is over. Sometimes in this world, oftener in another, they find their Canaan, and
" enter into rest."

II. The tbial-timb seems long ; but God determines its length, and appobtions
rr TO THE needs op the PARTionLAE CASE. FouT hundred and thirty years is a Ion*
space, even in the life of a nation. It is about the period of time which separates us
from the rebellion of Jack Cade and the commencement of the " Wars of the Roses."
The severe oppression of Israel was not, however, nearly so long as this. Perhaps it
lasted only about a century. In any case, times and seasons are in God's hands, and
as he fixed four centuries for the entire servitude many years before it began (Gen. iv.
13), so, we may be sure, he fixed the term in his own counsels for the severe oppres-
sion. And it is doubtless the same with individuals. God knows what kind and length
of chastisement they need, and assigns to each of his chosen ones the term of suffermg
that is needful for Mm.

III. If THE TRIAL-TIME ENDS HEBE, AND A SEASON OP HAPPINESS SUPBBVENES, IT IS
WELL TO OBSEBVE TEABLT THE DAT OP THE CHANGE AS A DAY OP THANKSGIVING TO

GOD. As national mercies are rightfully commemorated by national " days of thanks-
giving," so the special blessings vouchsafed to individuals should receive private com-
memoration. The day, or night, that brought us out of the Egypt of sin, is especially
worthy of such honour. Wherever known, it should be " observed unto the Lord."

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOHa

Vers. 40 — 43. — The Exodus. View it in three lights.

1. Ab an EMANCIPATION OP SLAVES. God is the swom foe of the slave-holder. Only
in a very modified sense was slavery tolerated in Israel ; and the laws were such as
gradually to undermine the system. Historically, God's religion has proved itself the
great slave-liberator. 1. In kgypt. Here were two millions of a slave population set
free in a single night. 2. In Israel. Consider the effect on the abolition of the slave
system of the single precept in ver. 44 of tMs cliapter. The slave sat down with his
master on equal terms at the board of the passover. The same thing happened in the
Christian Church. When the Lord's Supper was dispensed, the Christian slave
remained ; the master, if he was only a catechumen or a penitent, retired. 3. In
Ghristicm, countries. Christianity, it is true, did not preach a crusade against slavery—
a course which would only have led to a slave-revolt — but it inculcated truths and
principles which undermined the system. Slavery was the corner-stone of the ancient
civilisations. Philosophers defended it. The pagan rel gions did nothing to overthrow
it. But the Christian Church took up from the very first the cause of the slave. The
master who ill-treated Ms slave was excommunicated. He was compelled to marry the
female slave whom he had seduced. He sat with his slave at the Lord's table. The
slave might hold office in the church, and thus become, in a spiritual point of view, the
iuperior of his master. The influence of the Church was used to secure the liberation
nf the slave. Under Doinitian, a prefect of Rome, named Chromatins, freed one thousand
four hundred slaves who had become Christians, saying, " Those who have become the
children of God ought to be no longer slaves of men." Says J. S. Mill, " In an age
when the weak were prostrate at the feet of the strong, who was then but the Church



896



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[CH. XII. 43-^61i



to plead to the strong for the weak ?" (Dissert, ii. 155). The emancipation of four
millions of American slaves — so long a blot on a so-called Christian civilisation — ^has been
ftcoomplisbed in our sight, a second exodus. " We can say to-day that, with soma
trifling exceptions, the soil of Christian nations is free from the disgrace of slavery.
Under what influences have the efforts been produced which have brought about such a
result ? We have only to look at recent facts, and we see the whole clearly. What
men, in the middle of last century, were the first to advocate and emancipate slaves ?
The Quakers of America, who held that bondage was contrary to the Gospel. What
men have pleaded the cause of the negroes in the English Parliament with the most
power and perseverance ? Decided Christians — ^Wilberforce and Buxton. What spirit
animated the book called Vncle Tom, which acted so powerfully upon opinion in favour
of the negroes ? A spirit steadfastly Christian. To what sentiment did the Czar of
Russia appeal, when he gave liberty to twenty millions of men ? Bead his proclamation
of Feb. 19th, 1864." (Ernest Naville.) Revealed religion— the religion of the Bible, is
thus the great liberator of the slave.

n. As A TEMPORAL DELivBHANCB OF THE Chuech. Many such deliverances has the
Church, both in Old and in New Testament times, experienced since. Deliverances
under the Judges; destruction of Sennacherib; edict of Cyrus, and return from
captivity ; Maccabsan Era. Bead Christian Church history. See the Church emerging
triumphant, laden with the spoils of the foe, from the days of persecution under the
Roman Emperors. Later instances in the Albigenses, in the Lollards of England, in the
Huguenots of France, in the Covenanters of Scotland, etc.

UI. Aa A TTFE OF A GBEATEB DELIVERANCE THAN ITSELT. Redemption ftOVk sio aod

wiath through Christ. See previous Homilies. — J. O.



EXPOSITION.



Ven. 48—51. — Siipplementabt oimi-

HANOE WITH RESPECT TO THE PaSSOVEB. The

position of these verses is curions. We should
have expected them to have followed imme-
diately on ver. 20, or else to have been reserved
for the further consideration of the subject in
«h. xxiii. It is suggested, in order to accoont
for their place, that they formed the matter of
a special revelation made to Moses at Succoth.
They comprise three main points : — 1. The
absolnte exclusion of all nncircumciscd per-
sons from participation in the passover rite ;
3. The extension of the rite (implied in
ver. 19) to all full proselytes; and, 3. The
injimction that not a bone of the lamb should
be broken. (This last is repeated in Nmn.
iz. 12.)

Vers. 43.— This is the ordinance of the
passover — i.e., "This is Oie law, in respect
of the persons who are to partake of it " —
there shall no stranger eat thereof, or lite-
rally, "No son of a stranger shall eat thereof."
By a "stranger" here is meant one of a
foreign race who wishes to retain his foreign
character and to remain uicircamcised. Com-
pare ver. 48.

Ver. 44. — Every man's servant that is
bonght for money. Or " every man's slave."
The Mosaic Law fonnd servitude existing,
and left it existing, only guarding against iia



extreme abuses (eh. xxi. 90 — 27). It pnt no

check on the traffic in slaves. When thou hast
circumcised tiim. The Jewish commentatois
say, that the desire of the slave to receive the
rite and become a Jew is here implied. But it
would seem rather, that opposition and refusal
is not thought of as possible (see Gen. xvii
13, 17). The case is like that of baptism
among the barbarous nations, where no sooner
was the king converted than a general order
went forth for the baptism of his subjects,
which no one thought of resisting. Then
shall he eat thereof. It was a principle of
the Jewish law that the slaves should be
admitted to complete religions equality with
the native Israelites. (Compare Lev. xxii.

110

Ver. 45.— A foreigner. Literally " a so-
journer " — i.e„ a foreigner who is merely pass-
ing through the land, or staying for a time,
without intending to become a permanent resi-
dent. The Septuagint rdpoiKos well ex-
presses the meaning. An hired servant. It
is assumed that the " hired servant " will be
a foreigner ; and intended to guard against
any compulsion being put upon him.

Ver. 46. — In one house shall it be eaten.
Compare the {Erections in vers. 3—10, which
imply this, and see the comment on ver. 10.
Neither shall ye break a bone of it. Ealisch
thinks that the lamb was a symbol of the
unity of the nation, and was therefore not to
have any of its bones broken. This view maj
be a tnw one, withoot being exhanstivo.



%



OH. ill. 43—51.]



THE BOOK. OP EXODUS.



2»T



vaaj lukTe been to mark the nnitj of the
Church in Christ that his hones were not
broken, and in view especially of that unity,
that the type waA made to correspond in this
particular with me antitype. (See John xix.
.S3— 36.)

Yer. 47. — All the congregation . . . shall
keep it. Bather " shall menjice it." (Com-
pare ver. 6.)

Vers. 48, 49.— And when a stranger, etc.
Here we have the positive ordinance corre-
sponding to the implied permission in ver. 19,
and modifying in the most important and
striking way the prohibitive enactment of
ver. 43. The "stranger," even if he only
" sojourned " in the land, was to be put on
exactly the same spiritual footing as the
Israelite (" One law shall be," etc.) S only he
and his would be circumeiMd, and so enter
into covenant



Ver. 50.— Thus did all the children oi
Israel — i.e., the Israelites, at their first
passover, acted in accordance with these pre-
cepts, especially in admitting to the feast all
circumcised persons, wheiher natives or
foreigners, and rejecting all the uncircma-
cised.

Ver. 51. — This verse should be transferred
to the commencement of the next chapter,
which should run as follows : — " And it came
to pass — on the self -same day that the Lord
brought the children of Israel out of the land
of Egypt by their armies — that the Lord spake
unto Moses, saying," etc. The word " armies,"
which at first sight may seem inappropriate,
occurs also in ch. vi. 26. It is probably in-
tended to mark that the people were tho-
roughly organised, and marshalled in diviooH
resembling those of an army.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 41 — 60. — Pattover preoepts realised in Christian fraeMe$. The |a«oepli

were : —

I. That no uirciBoniiciBED btbanoeb, hot even THOuaH a hibed sebtant in a
HEBREW FAMiLT, SHOULD EAT OF IT. Formally, baptism corresponds to circumcision,
both of them admitting into covenant with God ; and thus the rule of Christian com-
munities generally, that the reception of baptism must precede that of the Lord's
Supper, is a carrying out of this precept. But it is also carried out in another way.
Spiritually, the correspondent to the circumcision of the flesh is the circumcision of the
spirit ; and thus all Churches which warn the wicked from approaching the Lord's table,
do their best to enforce the precept, " No uncircumcised person shall eat thereof."
EQred servants of the Church, unless circumcised in heart, are as unfit to communicate
as those who have no external connection with Divine things. Nay, may we not say
more unfit ?

II. That all the coNOBEaATioN of Isbael, fbeemen and slaves alike, should
EAT OF IT. The frequent exhortation of all Christian Churches to all their members to
receive the Communion, especially at Easter-time, and the general allowance of the duty
by those who have any real sense of religion constitute a realisation, to a considerable
extent, of this precept in Christian practice. It is to be wished that the realisation were
complete. The joint participation of freemen with slaves has always characterised the
Christian Church ; and though there have been Christian communities which have acted
differently, the cases are too exceptional to deserve much notice, and are disappearing
as slavery disappears.

ILL That it should be eaten in one place, and none of it oabbied fobth.
Churches which allow not only reservation, but the carrying forth of the holy elements
to the bedsides of the sick, break at any rate the letter of this precept. But th*
Reformed Churches, which disallow even reservation, keep close to it.

IV. That not a bone of it should be bboeen. This precept can only be spiritually
observed, for in the Christian passover, the " flesh " to be eaten has no " bones." But
it is spiritually kept wherever communicants are warned against dividing Christ in their
thoughts, against separating his humanity from his Divinity, or against practising
special devotion to any separate portion of his person, as to his " Sacred Heart " or his
" Five wounds." It was the essence of one of the early forms of heresy to " divide
Christ ;" and on this aocoimt the Church of England protests in her second article of
religion, that in him " two whole and perfect natures are joined together in one penoi^
neutr te b$ divided, whereof ii One Chnat"



898 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. xm. 1— 1ft



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 43 — 51. — The spirit of the Passover ordinance. The features to be specifiea
reappear in the Lord's Supper. The ordinance was —

I. Exclusive. (Vers. 43, 45, 48.) A stranger, an uncircumcised person, and a hired
servant, were not to be permitted to eat of it. Their relation to Israel was wholly
external. In like manner, the Lord's Supper is exclusive. It excludes the stranger
to the death of Christ, the uncircumcised in heart, and those who sustain a merely
legal and hireling relation to the Church. These have " neither part nor lot " in the
matter.

II. Yet Catholic. (Vers. 48, 49.) The sojoiirning stranger who wished to keep
the passover had only to be circumcised — ^he and his males — to be admitted to the
ordinance. He was then to be as one bom in the land. This catholicity of spirit, and
kindliness to foreigners, blending with a stem exclusiveness iu religion, is characteristic
of the whole Mosaic code. Cf. Vinet on the tolerance and intolerance of the Christian
Teligion (" Vital Christianity "). The Lord's Supper is the most catholic of ordinances.
It overleaps all barriers of race, nationality, clime, and religion. At the Lord's table
there is neither Greek, nor Jew, barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free.

III. Equalisino. (Ver. 44.) The master and slave sat down at the same board.
See last homily. Christianity is the great spcial equaliser.

IV. Unifying. (Vers. 46, 47.) It taught the congregation to feel its unity.
1. The lamb was to be eaten in one house. 2. Not a bone of it was to be broken.
"Through the unity and integrity of the lamb given them to eat, the participants
were to be joined into an undivided unity and fellowship with the Lord, who had

Erovided them with the m.eal " (Keil). 3. All the congregation were to eat it. TTie
ord's Supper, in like manner, is a social meal, in which the Church, eating "one
bread," and drinking " one cup," declares itself to be " one body " (cf. 1 Cor. x. 16, 17).
" The preservation of Christ, so that not a bone was broken, had the same signifi-
cation ; and God ordained this that he might appear as the true Paschal Lamb, that
was slain for the sins of the world." — J. O.

Vers. 43 — 51. — The Law of the Passover. I. What God requibes in its obser-
vance. 1. God demands purity of communion. Is'o stranger is to eat of it. (1) Our
holy things are not to be profaned. The life of Christ is lowered and endangered by
indiscriminate admission to the Lord's table. (2) They are not to be degraded into
superstitious rites. When they are given as if salvation resided in them, we are
substituting idols for the unseen Saviour. The only safeguard for purity of worship
is purity of communion. 2. It is not to be carried out from the midst of the house-
hold of faith. Ihe peace and fellowship of the Gospel are only for the circumcised in
heart. 3. Communion with Christ to be characterised by reverence and holy awe : not
a bone of him is to be broken. 4. Every wall of partition is removed. All who believe
have a right to join in the feast (vers. 41 — 49) ; but they must come with the mark of
God's people, — a circumcised heart.

II. The obedience of faith is blessed not only with safety but also with
DELIVERANCE. " Thus did all the children of Israel . . . and on the self-same day "
they passed out of Egypt (50, 51). Fellowship with Christ is deliverance from th«
bondage of evil. — U.

EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER Xm.

Vers. 1-16. — Sanctification or the fibst-
noKN. In connection with the deliverance from
death of the Israelite first-born by the blood of
the lamb, and still further to fix the remem-
brance of the historical facts in the mind of
the nation, Moses was commissioned to de-



clare all the firstborn of Israel for all futnre
time, and all the firstborn of their domesti-
cated animals " holy to the Lord." There
was, perhaps, already in the minds of men
a feeling that peculiar dignity attached to
the first-bom in each family ; and this feel-
ing was now strengthened by the assignment
to them of a sacred character. God claimed



on. XIII. 1 — 16.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



2»9



them, and alio fhe first-bom of beasts, as His
own. The dean beasts became his by sacri-
fice; but the unclean ones could not be
similarly treated, and therefore had to be
'•redeemed" (verse 13) by the sacrifice of
clean animals in their place. The first-born
of men became at the first institution of the
new ordinance God's ministers ; but as this
system was not intended to continue, it was
announced that they too would have to be
•redeemed" (verses 13, 15). The exact
mode of redeeming them was left to be
settled afterwards, and will be found in
Num. iii. 40-51 ; xviii. 16.

Ver. 1. — On the true granmiatical nexus of
this verse, see note on ch. xii. 51. The in-
junctions of verse 2, and probably those of
8-15— were given to Moses on the very day
of the setting-forth, most likely, at Succoth
in the evening.

Ver. 2. — Sanctify unto me. Not by any
positive ceremony, but by regardir-^ it as
"set apart unto the Lord (verse 12)— made
over to him, that is, as his own. All the
flrst-bom. The Hebrew word used is mas-
culine, and by its proper force limits the
command to the first-born maUi, who alone
had been in danger from the tenth plague.
Whatever openeth the womb. This clause
added definiteness, showing that " first-born "
did not contain any reference to any later
bhth, and that it applied to every case
where a woman's first child was a male.
It is mine. Or, "it shall be mine." I
claim it.

Ver. 8.— And Moses said. Without relat-
ing the directions given to Moses any fur-
ther, the author passes to the directions given
by him. He thus, here and elsewhere, avoids
unnecessary repetition. Bemember this day.
The injunction came with great force at the
close of the first day's journey, when the
good-wiU of the Egyptians had been shown,
and the people had been helped and speeded
on their way, and felt that they were actually
quitting the house of their bondage, and
setting out for Canaan. By strength of hand
the Lord brought you out — i.e., "by His
powerful protection has God brought you on
your way thus far." Therefore, " Bemember
this day, and remember that nothing leavened
is to be eaten on it " (see ch. xii. 15-20).

Ver 4 —In the month Abib. The name
of the month had not been previously men-
tioned. Some have derived it from the
Egyptian Bpiphi. As, however, ab means
"greenness" in Hebrew, and abib "green
ears of com," while ibba meant "fruit" in
Ghaldee (Dan. iv. 12, 14), and <Mon means
" groen herbs " in Arabic, there is no need of
a foreign derivation for the word. The month



of "greenness," or of "green ears of com,"
would be both appropriate and intelligible.

Ver. 5. — The land of the Canaanites, etc.
Compare ch. iii. 8, 17. The six nations ol
these passages are reduced here to five by the
omission of the Perizzites, one of the less
important tribes. Which he sware nnto thy
fathers to give thee. See Gen. xv. 18;
xxiv. 7 ; and compare the comment on ch.
vi. 8. That thou shalt keep this service.
This injunction had been already given
(ch. xii. 25) almost in the same words ; but
on the former occasion it was delivered to the
elders only ; now it is laid upon the whole
people.

Ver. 6. — Seven days. Compare ch. xii. 15.
In the seventh day shall be a feast to the
Lord, The feast lasted during the whole of
the seven days, but the first day and the last
were to be kept especially hoiy. (See ch.
xii. 16 ; Lev. xxiii. 6-8.)

Ver. 7. — Here again the injunctions are
mere repetitions of commands already given
in ch. xii. (See verses 15 and 19.) fiepeti-
tion was no doubt had recourse to in order to
deepen the impression.

Ver. 8. — And thou shalt shew thy son.
Repeated from ch. xii. 26, 27.

Ver. 9. — And it shall be for a sign unto
thee upon thy hand, and for a memorial
between thine eyes. There can be no doubt
that the Jewish system of tephillin, or " phy-
lacteries," grew mainly out of this passage,
and was intended as a fulfilment of the com-
mands contained in it. The tephillin were
strips of parchment with passages of Scrip-
ture written upon them and deposited in
small boxes, which were fastened by a strap
either to the left arm, or across the forehead.
The modem Jews argue that they were what
Moses here intended, and that their employ-
ment began from this time. Some Christian
commentators agree with them. But the
great majority argue, from supposed proba-
bility and from the entire absence of any
reference to the actual wearing of tfphiUin
in the Old Testament, that the custom must
be, comparatively speaking, a modem one.
It is generally supposed to have originated,
with other superstitious practices, in the time
of the Babylonish captivity Those who take
this view regard the words of Moses in the
present passage as merely metaphorical, and
compare them with Prov. iii. 3 ; vi. 21 ; vii.8.
Kalisch, however, observes with reason, that
if the injunction to write pa,ssages of the Law
on the door-posts of their houses (Deut. vi. 9 ;
xi. 20) was intended to be understood lite-
rally, and was literally carried out (Is. Ivii.
8), the commands with respect to tephillin,
which are coupled with them (Deut. vi. 8;
xi. 18) nmst have been similarly intended.
And probability, which is said to be against
the Mosaic origin of t^fhSiin, may perhapi



300



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xm. 1 — 16.



rather be urged in its favour. The Egyptian
practice of wearing as amulets "forms of
words writien on folds of papyrus tightly
rolled up and sewn in linen (Wilkinson s
Ancient Egyptians, vol iii. p. 861) is well
attested. Would it not be in harmony with
the general character of his legislation, %at
Moses should adopt and regulate the custom,
employing it to do honour to the Law and
keep it in remembrance, without perhaps
purging it wholly from superstitious ideas?
Moses allowed the Israelites in many things
" for the hardness of their hearts," content If
he could introduce some improvement with-
out insisting at once on an impracticable
perfection. That the law of the Lord may
be in thy mouth. The Israelites are in-
structed from the first, that the tephillin are
to be a means to an end ; and that the end
is to be the retention of God's law in their
recollection — " in their mouth," and therefore
in their heart, since "out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaketh."

Yer. 10. — This ordinance. The ordinance
of unleavened bread. See ch. xii. 11, 21.

Ver. 12. — Set apart. The expression is
especially appropriate to the case of first-born
animals, which would have to be separated
off from the rest of the flock, or of the herd,
and " put aside " for Jehovah, so as not to be
mixed up and confounded with the other
lambs, kids, and calves. The males shall be
the Lord's. This limitation, implied in verse
2, is here brought prominently into notice.

Ver. 13. — Every firstling of an ass. The
ass was the sole beast of burthen taken by
the Israelites out of Egypt. (See Ex. xx. 17.)
Neither the horse nor the camel was among
theii possetiioiu in the wilderness. This is



agreeable to the Egyptian monuments, by
which the camel appears to have been rar<
in Egypt at this time, and the horse as yet
mainly used for war and by the nobles in their
chariots. With a lamb. A lamb or a kid. The
word used is the generic one. (See the com-
ment on ch. xii. 8.) If thou wilt not redeem
it, then thou shalt break its neck. This
enactment was evidently made to prevent a
refusal to redeem. It would not require to
be put in force, since by refusing under such
a penalty a man would suffer pecuniary loss.
All the first-born of men among thy child-
ren. Eather " among thy sons." Shalt thou
redeem. Later on, the amount of the redemp-
tion money was fixed at five shekels of the
sanctuary for each. (Num. iii. 17.)

Ver. 11. — When thy son asketh thee. Com-
pare ch. xii. 26, and the comment ad loe.

Ver. 15. — When Pharaoh would hardly
let us go. Bather, " when Pharaoh hardened
himself against letting us go." At his last
interview with Moses, Pharaoh had abso-
lutely refused to let them go toith their eatUe
(ch. x. 21 — 27), and Moses had absolutely
refused to go without them. I sacrifice all
that openeth the womb, being males. And
bemg clean animals. The common sense of
the reader or hearer, is expected to supply the
restriction. Of my children. Eather, as in
verse 13, " of my sons."

Ver. 16.— A sign . . . frontlets. See the
comment on verse 9. It is the custom among
the Jews to write this entire passage — Ex.
xiii. 1-16 — on two of the four strips of
parchment contained in the tephiUin. The
others have inscribed on them Dent. vi. 4-9,
and Dent, zi 13-31



HOMILETIOS.

Ver«. 1 — ^16. — The Dedication and Sedemption of the First-bom. In commemoration
of the great mercy whereby their first-born sons were spared, when all those of the
Egyptians were slain, Grod required the Israelites to do two things : — (1) To dedicate
aU their first-born sons, not only of the existing but of all future generations, to
himself; and, (2) to redeem them, or buy them back for the purposes of secular life,
by a money payment. It is analogous to this —

I. That Cheistian pabbnts abe bequibbd to dedicate, not theie FntsT-BOBN
SONS ONLY, BUT ALL THEiB CHiLDBEN, TO GoD DJ Baftism. All have deserved death.
All have been in danger of it. AU have been spared by the mercy of God, on account
of the atoning blood of Christ. All therefore are to be dedicated by their parents to
Gktd's service — brought to the font, and presented to him to be his faithful soldiers
and servants until their life's end. All are to receive a species of consecration,
whereby they become " priests to God" (Rev. i. 6), and may have boldness to approach
him without the intervention of a human mediator. But all are not to be ministers.
The ministry is for such as have a special call, which cannot be known in infancy,
or indeed until persons are well advanced towards manhood.

II. That Christian Pabents have, afteb dedicating them, to take theib
OHILDBEN BACK, AS IT WEBE, TO BEC17LAB LIFE. Haunah gave her eon up to God
from the time that she weaned him, took him to the Temple, and left mm with



'H. xiu. 1—16.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 301

the priests. OhiistioiM cannot do this. Though some of their sons may ultimately
have a call to the ministry, this will not be the case with all, and they must act aa
if it would not bo the case with any. They must take their children back to their
houses, give them a secular education, and prepare them in most instances for secular
life. But they have not to buy them back. This arises from the difference between
the two dedications, the one having been a dedication to the ministry and the other
not. Christians do not need to retract the dedication of their children by any sub-
sequent act. 'i'hey may and should maintain it. Laymen may lead lives as truly
sanctified as clergymen. They may serve God as well, though in a different way.
They may be, and should be " holy to the Lord." Who would not desire his children
to be such ?

Vers. 3 — 16. — The rightful use of Church ordinances. Church ordinances are^l)
Commemorative ; (2) Disciplinary ; (3) Channels of supernatural grace. The benefits
derivable from them depend mainly upon their rightful use. We learn from the
instructions here given to the Israelites by Moses, that their rightful use consists



I. In the bequlab keeping op them. "Thou shalt keep this ordinance in his
season from year to year." Spasmodic observance, enthusiastic and frequent at one
time, perfunctory and infrequent at another, ten times this year, once the next, will
bring no blessing, conduct to no good result. Bach ordinance has its own time or
times — ^baptism and confirmation once in a lifetime — the Holy Communion weekly, if
opportunity offers ; if not, monthly ; or, at the least, thrice a year — attendance at
public worship, each Sunday, twice — fasting, on Fridays and in Lent — commemoration
of chief festivals, once a year — and so on. Fitness has in every case been considered,
and set times appointed at proper intervals. Let the rule of the Church be regularly
followed, let there be no needless variation, no will-worship, no caprice, and the
greatest benefit may be confidently anticipated. But following one's own fancy in the
matter, now observing rules, now breaking them, making ourselves in fact a law to
ourselves, is a course that will assuredly obtain no blessing upon it. " Thou shalt keep
each ordinance in his season."

n. In the stbict keeping op them. " There shall no leavened bread be seen with
thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee, in all thy quarters." Lukewarm-
nesB, double-mindedness, half-and-half measures, are everywhere condemned in
Scripture. " If the Lord be God, follow Him ; if Baal, then follow him." " Because
thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth."
If the ordinances of the Church are worth following at all, they are worth following
strictly. If the Church says — " Put away gaiety and amusement during this or that
season," then all gaiety and amusement should be put away — none should be seen
" in all our quarters." If she appoints two services, or (as some understand it) three
for Sundays, then men should not limit their attendance to one. If she urges frequent
communions, they should attend frequently, and not be content with the minimum of
three times in the year.

III. In the keeping of such op them as abe commemoeative with rbmem-
UBANOB. "Eemember this day, in the which ye came out from Egypt" — " the Lord
slew all the first-born — therefore I sacrifice to the Lord all that openeth the matrix."
A large part of the ritual of every church is commemoiative. Sunday is a commemo-
ration. The Friday fast, enjoined by the Church of England and others, is a com-
memoration. Christmas, Easter, Whitsuntide, Ascension Day, are commemorations.
And the Holy Communion is in part commemorative. To observe, in a certain sense,
these days and seasons and ordinances, without giving serious thought to the historical
events with which they are connected, and out of which they have arisen, is to lose
half the benefit which their observance was intended to secure to us. It is scarcely,
perhaps, to be supposed that any one could receive the Holy Communion without
some thought of the death of Christ upon the Cross ; but it must greatly conduce to
the rite having its due and full operation on our minds and hearts, that we should
vividly present to ourselves on the occasion a mental picture of the agonies suffered foi
as, that we should dweU in thought upon the whole scene of the trial and the cruci-
fixion, and ieek to realise its particulars. We cannot have too deeply impressed upon



302 THE BOOK 01'' KXODUS. [uk. xm. 1—17,

us the recollection of the day on which, and the means by which, Ood brought th«
Church of the first-bom out of the spiritu'^1 bondage of Egypt, saved them from the
destroyer, sanctified them, and made them his " peculiar people."

IV. In the continued keeping op them through times of pbospbbity. " When
the Lord shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, thou shalt keep this
service." The discipline of adversity is apt to draw men nearer to God than that of
prosperity. Many are very careful and regular attendants on Church ordinances when
they are afflicted, or in poor circumstances, or suffering from a bereavement ; but, if
the world smiles upon them, if they grow rich and respected, if men court and flatter
them, they grow careless and irregular in such matters. They think that they cease
to have the time for them ; but in reality they cease to relish them. " The cares of
the world and the deceitfulness of riches," choke the good seed that was in them, and
" they become unfruitful." They forget God, and the marvellous things that he hath
done for them. Hence a warning is required. We must not let the " milk and
honey " of Canaan wean our hearts from God, or make us less zealous in his service, or
less constant attendants upon his ordinances. The higher we are lifted up the more
we need his grace ; the greater attraction that the world offers to us, the more helpful
to us are those holy rites and usages, which draw our thoughts away from earthly
things, and fix them upon things Divine and heavenly.



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHORS.

Yen. 1— -8, 11 — 17. — The sanctijication of the first-horn. This command has its

basis in the fact that on the night when God executed his tremendous judgment
against Egypt, the first-born of Israel was spared. Because this great mercy had been
shown to Israel, the first-born of man and beast were ever afterwards to be reckoned as
specially belonging to Jehovah. The first-born of the generation then living was his
by direct pm'ohase ; all later first-borns were to be his by grateful dedication. It was
required, in addition, that the first-born of man, as well as of unclean beasts, should
be " redeemed." This may have been designed to teach that the lives of these later
first-boms were as truly forfeited by sin as were those of the original first-born, on the
night of the exodus ; and that the nearer the relation in which the individual stands
to God, the more pressing becomes the need for atonement

L Eedbmption is by substitution. This is well illustrated by the law for the
redemption of unclean animals (ver 13 ; cf. Num. xviii. 15). The firstling of an ass,
being unclean, could not be ofi:ered on the altar. It was, therefore, to be redeemed by
the substitution of a lamb. If not thus redeemed, its neck was to be broken. This
teaches the further lesson — unredeemed life mtmi die. It was on the same principle that
the lamb was substituted for the first-born on the night of the exodus. This law does
not specify the manner of the redemption of the first-born of male children, but it was
probably originally by a lamb also. The redemption was subsequently effected by a
money-payment of five shekels (Num. xviii. 16). This gave prominence to the idsi
of a ransom, already implied in the use of the word " redeem." The principle of the
redemption was still the substitution of Ufe for life, the money-payment pointing
back to the lamb or other victim of which it was the price. Jesus has fulfilled the type
under both its aspects. He has redeemed us by the substitution of his holy life for
our sinful ones (Heb. ix. 26 — 28). His life has been given as a ransom for many
(Matt. XX. 28; 1 Tim. ii. 6).

II. Redeemed life belongs to God (vers. 1, 12, 15). As all later generations of
Israel were represented in that first one, so all later first-borns were represented in those
of the night of the exodus. By redeeming them from death, God purchased the first-
born of Israel in a peculiar manner to himself. What held true of the first-bom, held
true, in a wider sense, of the nation as a whole, and holds true now of all believers.
They are God's, because God has redeemed them. We must not seem to lessen the
natural claim which God has upon our service. All souls are God's ; and no moral
being "has a right to use his powers otherwise than for the glory of him who gsTe them,
liut in a special manner Jehovah claims redeemed life for himself. " I have redeijir.P'!



iH. xm. ;i— H.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 301

Ihee, thou art mine " (Is. xliii. 1). " Te are bought with a price ; therefore glorify Goi
In your body, and in your spirit, which are God's " (1 Cor. vi. 20).

111. The animal cbeation bhabes in uan's buik and bedemftion. First-bom
of man and heast. — J. 0.

Vers. 3 — 11. — "Remember this day." The exhortation in these verses may very well
be applied to Christians. They are to remember the fad and the might of their
redemption. They aie to commemorate it by observance of appointed ordinances. They
are to beware of forgetting it in days of prosperity. They are to show their remem-
brance of it by a holy walk, and by due instruction of their children.

I. Kemembbb the fact and the might oif youE EEDEMPTioN. 1. The fact of it
(vers. 3 — 8). How Jesus has brought you up " out of an horrible pit, out of the miry
clay " (Ps. xl. 1) ; has redeemed you from the law's curse, from Satan's tyranny, from a
condition of wrath, and from spiritual death ; has introduced you into the liberty of God's
children, and started you on your journey to an everlasting and glorious inheritai.ee.
Bedemption from the thraldom of Pharaoh sinks into insignificance as compared with
this " so great salvation." If Israel was summoned to remember the day on which
they came out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, much more is it the duty of
Christians to remember what great things God has done for them. 2. The might of it.
" By strength of hand the Lord brought you out of this place " (vers. 3, 9, 14). They
were to remember this as enhancing their sense of the greatness of their redemption,
and as affording a pledge that God was able to accomplish all else that he had promised
(ver. 5). The might expended in the Christian redemption is not less, but greater, than
in the exodus from Egypt. It does not detract from its greatness that it is chiefly
moial strength — power exerted in overcoming evil, in producing moral effects in the
minds and consciences of men, and in making them new creatures in Christ Jesus.
Redemption has both its objective and its subjective sides, and in both is displayed
the power of God. God's might is seen in the upholding of (.'hrist; in the victories
which, while on earth, he was enabled to gain over the powers of evil ; in the gigantic
triumph of the Cross ; and in the spiritual efi'ects produced since, through eighteen cen-
turies, by the preaching of his Gospel ; in the regeneration of souls, in the strength given
to his servants to do spiritual work, in the victory whereby they overcome the world.

II. BeWABB of FOEGETTINO TOUB EEl'EMPTION IN THE I'AVS OF TOUE PEOSPERITY,

ver. 15. Prosperity has a subtle influence in leading away the heart from God. When
men have eaten, and are full (Deut. viii. 12—18), they are very apt to grow haughty
and self-sufficient. This danger is one to be jealously watched against.

III. Show that vou bemembbb toue bedemption by doing the things that God
COMMANDS. 1. By observing his ordinances. The special ordinance here alluded to is
the feast of unleavened bread— a sequel to the passover (vers. .S — 10). Christians are
to observe the Lord's Supper. 2. By a holy life. The observance of the outward
ordinance would be valueless if that which it spiritually represented was lost sight of,
viz., the need of a walk in " newness of life." We are to " keep the feast, not with old
leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened
bread of sincerity and truth " (1 Cor. v. 7). To this end has ( hrist redeemed us, that
we may walk in holiness (Rom. vi. 4—7 ; Eph. v. 25—28 ; Titus ii. 14 ; 1 Pet. i. 18).
3. By instruction of children. God lays stress on this (vers. 8—14 ; cf. Deut. vi. 6 — 9 ;
xi. 18—22). It is his chief way of perpetuating a holy seed. The responsibility of
instruction vests primarily on the parent. No task should be more delightful to him,
or should be discharged more faithfully. If the parent is willing, many opj)ortunities
will present themselves. A child's curiosity is ever active. The ordinances of tha
Church will furnish starting-points for conversation. We have in these verses, and
elawhere in the book, specimens of the instruction that is to be given.— J. 0.

Vers. 1, 2. — ITie consecration of the first-born. I. The meaning of the type.
1. Man's first-born the type of the first-born of God, in his authority and priestly
function among his brethren, and as the object of the father's love and trust. 2. In
I'iypt's and Israel's first-born we find the two-fold type of Christ and his people.
I''.;yiit'3 die, Israel's are saved. The death of Egypt's first-born bursts the boncU d<
Israel, the death of God's first-bOrn, the bonds of his people.



804 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. xm 3— 1&

n. God's demakd. 1. His claim upon the saved life : " It is mine." (1) His right to
our service. He has bought us with a great price. (2) His delight in us. We are a
treasure and a joy to him. Because he loved us he gave Christ to die for us. 2. The
life which Christ has redeemed is to be set apart for God (Eom. xii. 1). (1) With lull
purpose of heart. (2) Under the power of Christ's love: "the Icvo of Christ con-
Btraineth us." (3) With unceasing prayer for the Spirit's indwelling.

Yer. 3—16. — How to declare OocPs salvation. I. Br the bemembbakcb of hu
jnsKoiES. 1. *' Remember this day in which ye came out from Egypt." (1) Ti.e
Lord's Supper is an ordinance of remembrance: "Do this in remembrance of me."
(2) The remembrance of deliverance extends over the Christian's whole life : " un-
leavened bread is eaten." 2. The celebration of the Passover awoke inquiry among
those who had not witnessed God's deeds (ver. 8). — True gratitude, heartfelt thanks-
giving, will make the reality of God's love to be felt by those who have not known
him. (1) The place and use of the Lord's Supper in the Christian Church. (2) The
power of love in the Christian life. (3) Of true praise and worship in the congregation.
To make God something to others, he must first be something to ourselves.

n. By the doiko op his will. The Israelites, in sacrificing or redeeming the
first-bom, woke again the question, " What is this ? " (vers. 14, 15). Our obedience to the
good and holy will of Cod, our consecration to his service will show the reality of his
Bslvation and awaken in many hearts the question whence this consecration flows and
the desire to share it. " Let your light so shine " (Matt. v. 16). — U.

Ver. 10. Cf. oh. xii. 42. — Hememher. Utmost pains taken that the day shoiild
be honoured and remembered. (1) The month in which it occurred became the
beginning of months. (2) A special ordinance as to the first-bom pointed back con-
tinually to the event celebrated (vers. 11 — 13). (3) The annual feast was specially
devised to keep it in memory (vers. 14, etc.). Why all this ?

I. Season of observance. It commemorated : 1. A great Judgment. Nina
plagues had passed; the members of each successive trial following one another at
shorter intervals and with increasing severity. [Illustration, siege of town. Besiegers
draw parallels closer and closer, each time sounding summons to surrender. Every
summons disregarded ; at length word given for the assault.] God laying siege to Kgypt,
now preparing for the assault (cf. generally Amos iv.). " Therefore, prepare to meet
thy God " (ch. xi. 4). " / will go out ;" the representatives stand aside that the arm
of Jehovah may be recognised. Fourteenth of month ; midnight. God accompanied
by the angel of vengeance. Picture result — palace, dungeon, stables, fields, temples,
streets. The judgment was upon Egypt and her gods. 2. A great deliverance. (1)
From death. God the judge is impartial. If Egypt has sinned, so also IsraeL Three
plagues shared by both, both now threatened by self-same danger. Israel, however,
ti'usting God, may escape by obedience. Lamb chosen four days earlier. Slain that
afternoon at sundown. Light of full moon shows blood streaks on lintels and door-
posts of houses in Goshen ; inside, people prepared for departure, feeding on lamb.
Midnight : Is it imagination that rush and quiver of unseen wings ? The shadow of
the wings of God shelter each blood-stained door, whilst the angel of vengeance passes
over, sparing those whom God protects. (2) From slavery. Wailing throughout
Egypt. Midnight message, " Go, get ye gone." At once families gather to standards
of their tribes. Soon one great army, harnessed and equipped, laden with spoils of
Egypt, the Israelites march forth from the land of their captivity, 'i'he time fulfilled
to the day (xii. 41), when their hour is come their God is ready. 3. A great exhibi-
tion of Divine poiver. Not a mere judgment or a mere deliverance, but judgment by a
personal judge, deliverance by a personal deliverer. (1) The Egyptians needed to
learn who Jehovah was. The Israelites had not done much to make him respected ;
rather had brought his name into disrepute as the patron of a slavish multitude.
Must cause his own name to be hallowed (cf. Ezek. xxxvi. 20 — 23). (2) Israel needed
to learn that Jehovah was the deliverer — a God faithful to his promises, yet who could
not endure sin. Moses and Aaron his instruments, but the victory due only to M
light hand and his holy arm.

n. Ub or THB OBBERVANOB. By oonuuunicating the judgment and the dellTeranot^



CH. xm. 17—20.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



S06



it was calculated to keep men mindful of the judge and tlie deliverer, and to prompt
respect for his law (xiii. 9). Commemorations are an aid to memory, reminding of past
events, and recalling associations connected with them. Mere observance as an end in
itself, bondage (cf. Gal. iv. 9, 10) ; as a means to an end, helpful and necessary. 'J'he
Pharisee makts a virtue of observance ; the right thing is to draw virtue from it. See
what this observance taught: — I. God is long-suffering, but the day of ven'^eanco
comes at length. The help to memory, as to what he had done, was a help to convic-
tion as to what he might do. 2. God will not clear the guilty, yet his mercy doth
endure for ever. Even with the help, how often were these truths forgotten (of. Ps.
cvi. 7 — 13, etc.) ; would any have remembered them without it ?

Apply. Life, which forms the memory of the future, grows out of memory of the
past. A good memory is a help to good living. What helps do you use to prompt
memory ? The marked bill, the birthday text-book, the diary — all these helpful ;
above all, the day, the anniversary, if we use it rightly. Commemorations are but
sign-posts pointing to that which is commemorated; use them as such, follow out
their indications. So, remembering past mercies, faith will be strengthened and hope
■ustained. — G.



EXPOSITION.



Ver. 17-20. — Thb dieeotion of the joub-
ET. — The direct road from Tanis to Palestine
— a road much frequented under the nineteenth
ynasty — ^lay along the coast of the Mediter-
auean, and conducted to Fhilistia. If we
I iiok at the map, and observe the position of
l''aDis (now San) on the old Tanitic branch
the Nile, now nearly dried up, we shall
6 e that the route which would naturally
8 ggest itself to any one wishing to proceed
t the Holy Land from Tanis would be one
running almost due east, from Tanis to Pe-
lusium, and from Pelusium, south of Lake
S rbouis, to Ehiuocolura; and thence, follow-
ing the course of the coast to Gaza, Ascalon,
aud Ashdod, the chief towns of the Philistine
C( untry. It is true that a, marsh region in-
tervenes etween Tanis and Pelusium which
might seem to bar the route; but the
K^ryptian emains show that, in the times of
til e eighteenth and nineteenth dynasties, this
obstacle was surmounted by means of an
embankment which was carried across it, and
that a direct road thus connected the two
cities.

Moses, at this point of his narrative, he-
Uj, about to trace the onward march of the
isiaelites from Succoth to Etham, in the
Jiiectiou of the Bed Sea, anticipated, it
would seem, an objection on the part of his
reader, who would naturally ask, Why was
let the direct route eastward taken aud
l)«naan entered on the south-west after some
T If-dozen marches? In verses 17, 18, he
gives the reply— 1. God led them, they did



not determine their own route ; and 2, God
would not lead them by the direct route,
because it would have conducted them to the
Philistine country, and the PhUistiues were
strong, aud would have resisted the invasion
by force of arms. Hence it was that the
southern or south-eastern route was taken in
preference to the northern one — and that the
second stage in the journey was from Succoth
to Etham (verse 20).

Ver. 17. — Although that was near. Ra-
ther "because it was near" (on tyyvs J\v,
LXX.) — i.e., " God did not, because it was
near, lead them this way, but a longer one."
Lest peradveuture the people repent when
they see war. The Philistines were a power-
ful and warlike race half a century after this,
in the time of Joshua, and were masters of
the five important cities of Gaza, Ascalon,
Ashdod, Gath, and Ekron, which seem to
have formed a confederacy (Josh. xiii. 3).
It would appear that their strength was
already considerable, aud that the IsraeUtes,
though perhaps more numerous, were in
capable of copmg with them, being wholly
unaccustomed to war. The Israelites were
therefore not allowed tu take this route,
which would have brought upon them at
once a severe trial, aud might have led to
their voluntary return into Egypt.

Ver. 18. — God led the people about. Or
"led the people a circait," i.e., made them
take a circuitous route to Canaan, the way
of the wilderness of the Eed Sea — i.e., by the
southern wilderness, or what is now called
"the wUderness of Siaai." Kalisch shows
the wisdom of this course — how it gave time
for the nation to be "gradually accustomed
to fati^es and hardships by a long and



S06



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[cH. xiii. 18—21



tiresome march in the desert" — to learn
obedience to their chief — and finally to be
■* trained to military discipline and martial
Tirtne by occasional expeditions against the
weaker tribes of the desert." He errs, how-
ever, in ascribing the wisdom of the course
taken to Moses, since Moses expressly de-
clares that the conception was not his, but
God's. And the children of Israel went up
harnessed. The word here translated "har-
nessed," is generally thought to mean either
" with their loins girded " (Onkelos, Kimchi,
Kalisch) or " in military order " (Gesenius, Lee,
Knobel). Ewald, who inclines to the latter
of these two senses, suggests that, strictly, it
means " in five divisions " — viz., van, centre,
two wings, and rearguard. The word is, ap-
parently, a derivative from khamesh, " five."

Ver. 19. — Moses took the bones of Joseph
— i.e., his body, which had been embalmed,
and deposited in a mummy case (Gen. 1. 26),
most probably at Tanis, which was the
capital of the Shepherd kings, no less than
of Menephthah. He had straitly sworn the
children of Israel. See Gen. 1. 25. Joseph,
firmly believing in the promise of God to



give Canaan to the descendants of Abraham
had made them swear to take his body with
them when they left Egypt. The desire to
be laid in their native earth was common to
most of the nations of antiquity, and. In the
case of the Israelites, was intensified by
Canaan being the " land of promise." Jacob
had had the same feeling as Joseph, and had
been buried by Joseph in the cave of Mach-
pelah (Gen. 1. 13).

Ver. 20. — And they took their journey
f om Sncooth and encamped in Etham. On
the probable position of Etham, see the
" Introduction to this book. The word
probably means f House of Turn," and im-
plies the existence at the place of a temple
of the Sun-God, who was commonly wor-
shipped as Turn or Atum. The name, there-
fore, is nearly equivalent to Pitbom (cli, i. XI),
which means " City of Turn ; " but it is not
likely that Moses designated the same place
by two distinct appellations. The site of
Etham, moreover, does not agree with that
of the Patumos of Herodotus (ii. 158), which
is generally allowed to be Pithoro



HOMILETICS.

Vera. 18 — 21. — It is the method of the Divine action to accomph'sh ends hy cireuitoui
means. (Jod "led the Israelites about." Instead of conducting them straight from
Tanis to Canaan in the course of six or seven days, he carried them down nearly to the
furthest point of the Sinaitic peninsula, at least two hundred miles out of the direct line
of route. He afterwards made them occupy in desert wanderings the space of forty
years, and brought them into Canaan on the side furthest from Egypt — that which
fronted the east. So it is —

I. In God's natural workings. To make a planet suitable for the habitation n'
man, he does not create one fit for him stra,ight off. He prepares an extended mass of
matter which gradually condenses, throws off an atmosphere, settles into laud and sea,
imdergoes for many thousands of years a series of aqueous and igneous changes, deposits
strata, elevates them into mountains, works out river courses, raises and submerges
continents; and only after a number of millennia does he, by this long and te-dious
process, offect the eud aimed at from the first, the construction of a habitation suitable
for such a being as man. Again, he will have man live on bread ; but he does not
make bread. He makes a germ capable of developing into a plant, of throwing out
roots and leaves, deriving sustenance from air and earth and showers, increasing gradu-
ally for several months, and finally throwing up the tall spike, which after growing, and
iwelling, and ripening, bears ultimately the golden grain that is suited to be man's
food.

II. In GtOd'b bpikitual workings. If God has a work for a man to do, if for this a
certain character is required, God again pursues no compendious method. The man is
born in a certain sphere, given certain powers, and then it is left for the circumstanoe*
of life to work out in him, under Divine superintendence, the character required. JVi/jses
is trained for eighty years in order to qualify him for his position as deliverer of the
Israelites from the bondage of Egypt ; and is only rendered fit to accomplish the task
by what befals him in that long period. All the saints of God, raised up to do any
great work, have had some such long training. Even Christ did not enter on his
ministry at once, but remained in obscurity for thirty years, before asserting his
Uiission.

UI. Even in God's uiRAcnLOUS wurkinqs. Christ would assuage the lains of



CH. xni. 18—21.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 30%

Lunger of the five thousand. He does not simply, as he might have done, remove them
by a word. He obtains such food as there is at hand : he blesses and breaks ; he causes
the multitude to sit down ; he distributes the food among the apostles, and bids them
distribute to the m'.iltitude. If the Eed Sea is to be parted, an east wind is made to
blow for some hours ; if a blind man is to be cured, clay is taken, and mixed with
spittle, and put upon the blind man's eyes, and by a circuitous method his cure is
efl'ected. All this seems strange to us because we are so impatient. Our life here
endures so short a space, and we so little realise the fact of the life to ccme, that
we are always in a hurry to obtain results, and are annoyed at having to wait for them.
But an Eternal Being can afford to be patient. " One day is with the Lord as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day." The question with God is never as to the
quickest, but always as to the best method. Haste is proverbially unsafe. " Most
haste, worst speed," says the adage. It would bring much improvement into human
life, if there were less of bustle and hurry in it — if men were not in so much haste to
be rich — if they did not expect to reap the harvest so soon as fchey have sown the
seed — if they would allow time for plans, to take effect, for improvements to be brought
to perfection, for institutions to take root and grow.

Ver. 19. — It is a Christian duty to carry with us on the path of life the hones of owr
dead. Joseph had sworn the Israelites to carry his bones with them out of Egypt at
their departure ; and they were thus in a special way bound to do it. But, apart from
any such oath, or any positive wish expressed, it would have been well for them to have
taken him with them. We are intimately bound up with the men of the generation
before our own, and cannot too carefully carry along with us their memory. Men may
be considered to carry their dead with them on their course through life —

I. When they bear in mind and have respect to their fathers in the faith,
ESPECIALLY THOSE NEAR TO THEM IN TIME. It is almost impossible to measure
adequately the amount of our debt to those who have immediately preceded us in life —
who have set us an e.^ample of a consistent Christian course — and shown us its possi-
bility. What living Christian man does not feel that to some other Christian man,
older than himself, still alive or else passed away, he is indebted for the impetus which
changed his path in life, turned him from the dumb idols which he was following, and
led him to the worship of the living God? What gratitude is not due in each such
case ! Such memories are to be cherished, clung to — ^not relinquished, because he to
whom we owe so much is dead. Being dead, such an one " still speaketh ; " and it is
well that our hearts should still hear his voice, a,nd be thankful for it.

II. When they cherish the memory of the friends and relations whom thbt
HAVE lost. It is too common a practice, with men especially, to shut out the memory
of the deceased. Bereavement is so terrible a thing, so poignant a grief, that to sysre
themselves men mostly make a sort of resolve that they will not think upon their dead.
And it is quite possible, after a while, so to turn from the thought as to make it both
transient and rare. But the better course — the true Christian course — is to retain our
dead in our thoughts. The recollection can do us nothing but good. It is soberiug,
chastening, yet elevating. It is apt to wean us from the world ; to soften us ; to draw
us into communion with the unseen ; to help our higher natufe in its struggle with the

lower.

in. When they bear in remembrance the worst sins that they have com-
mitted. The most terrible death to which we poor human creattires are subject Is ihat
"body of death," which we bear about with us in our flesh, and under which wo
" o-roan, being burthened " — viz. sin. There are persons who succeed in putting away
th'e memory of their past sins, and who are as gay and light-hearted as if there were
nothing against them in God's book. But it is a wiser course to bear about with
us always this "death" also, and not seek to hush it up or put it out of sight. The
thought of our past sins is well calculated to make us humble, penitent, forgiving ; w
gave us from presumption, and make us throw ourselvesi absolutely for justification <M
the merits ukd atoning blood cf Chriat.



X -



808 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. xiu. 17—21.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vera. 17 — 21. — " The way of the wilderness by the Bed Sea." The direct road to
Canaan lay through the land of the Philistines. God, however, did not lead the people
by this way, but round by the Red Sea. " For God said, Lest peradventure the people
repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt " (vers. 17). Another reason was
that he designed to make his covenant with them, and give them laws, in the solitude
of the " mountain of God " (ch. iii. 12).

I. Redeemed prom Egypt, the people abb not permitted to ljnqbr on its borders.
What snatches of repose are granted, are only meant as a preparation for resumption of
the journey on the morrow. Their destination was Canaan. To this they must jiress
forward. A rest of eleven months (at Sinai) will be granted afterwards, meanwhile, on
the borders of Egypt, they must pause no longer than is absolutely nepessary. At the
beginning of the Christian life, delays, pauses, lockings back, are peculiarly dangerous.
Egypt is too near. Return to it is too convenient. The pursuer will gain too easy an
advantage. There must bo no pausing till we are fairly out of the enemy's territory.
Succoth to Etham, Etham to Pi-hahiroth (ch. xiv. 2).

II. It rests with God to determine the way by which his people shall be led.
"When Pharaoh had let the people go, Ood led them not," etc. (vers. 17). 1. It was
the privilege of the Israelites that they had Ood as their gwide. His pillar of cloud and
fire went before them (vers. 21, 22). What wiser or safer guide could any one desire ?
2. Ood's guidance was authoritative. Not only were the Israelites not left to pick out
the way for themselves, but whither God directed, thither they were bound to go.
They were not permitted to take any route they pleased. They were God's people, and
must walk by his law. 3. Ood^s guidance was frequently mysterious. They would
often be perplexed to understand the reasons of it. A reason seems to have been given
here, but otherwise the route chosen must have seemed a very strange one. The
believer is often thus led by a way he knows not (Is. xlii. 16).

III. God consults fob his people's qood in the ways by which he leads them.
" For God said, peradventure," etc. (ver. 17). Consider here, 1. God's procedure. (1)
He turned the Israelites aside from the road which naturally they would have followed.
The way of the land of the Philistines was no doubt the road by which they expected
to be led. It was the customary road. It lay straight before them. It was the shortest
and most direct. How often does God thus turn us aside in Providence from what might
seem to be the natural, as, without a thought to the contrary, it may have been the
anticipated course of our lives ? TJJie road that lies straight before us is not the one in
which we are permitted to walk. Even in Christian work, by what zigzag ways are we
sometimes conducted to our ends ! (2) He led the Israelites by a long detour into the
wilderness. If the end was to escape the Philistines, God did not allow the Israelites
to suppose that he intended to pamper and indulge them. The wilderness was a worse
place to travel' in than " the way of the land of the Philistines." They would have to
encounter many trials. A heavy strain would be put upon their faith. Though
excRipted from war at the beginning, they had to fight enemies on the way, and
ultimately were marched .up to the borders of Canaan, to undertake, at another point,
t^e work of invasion. In like manner, the Christian curriculum is not an easy one.
Whoever enters upon the Christian journey, expecting to find it all sunshine and roses,
is doomed to sorrowful disappointment. The road, under God's guidance, soon takes a
turn, which leads into the wilderness of trial. 2. The reasons of God's procedure. (1)
The direct way was at that time an impassable one. The Israelites, just escaped from
Egypt, were not in a condition to force their way through the strongly defended
territory of the Philistines. The difficulty, it is true, lay in them — ^in their want t.
faith, courage, and power of obedience, not in God, whose help was all-sufficient. Uiit
practically, the direct road was closed against them. So, in God's merciful guidance of
his people, the path is sometimes bent aside, because no other is for the time practicable.
Obstacles to their progress, insurmountable by them at that stage of their knowledge
and experience, block up the road which seems more direct, and to be allowed to advanc«
in it would be no kindness. (2) The direct road was fraught with danger for themselves.
Their strength and faith were not equal to the opposition they would encounter. It



on. xm. 17-2L] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 3ol

T' ' ~ — " ■

would have proved too much for them. They must be allowed time to gather
experience, to throw off the habits of their servitude, to be brought under discipline for
war, to acquire steadiness and courage in facing an enemy. Led up against the Philis-
tines in their present undisciplined condition, they would have fled at the first onset,
and would have clamoured, even more vehemently than they did in the desert (ch. xiv.
12), to be conducted back to Egypt. And does not this in large measure oxflain the
mysterious turnings and windings in our own lives ? G-od, who knows our frame,
understands perfectly what degree of severity in temptation we are able to endure, and
he mercifully orders our course, so that we may not be tempted above that we are able
(1 Cor. X. 13). We pray, " Lead us not into temptation " (Matt. vi. 13), and this is one
way in which the prayer is answered. Another way is by preventing or restraining the
temptation. But where, as in the present case, it is a temptation which, so to speak,
belongs essentially to the situation — which we must encounter, if that path is to be
travelled at all, then is there no way of avoiding it but by being led in a dififerent road.
Especially in the heginning of a Christian course may we expect these sudden turning?
of our path. We are not then in a condition to encounter very powerful enemies, tc
endure very fierce temptations, and by taking us a little way about God shields us from
them. (3) There was a discipline to be gained in the circuitous route by which they were
led. God's design, in sparing his people the battle with the Philistines, was not, as we
have seen, to indulge and spoil them. The place whither he conducted them was the
wilderness, and there he purposed to subject them to a severe moral training. 'I'ho end
of this training was simply to bring them up to the standard which as yet they had no(
reached, to develop in them the qualities in which they were as yet deficient, to impart
to them, in short, that hardihood and strength of character and will which would enable
them to cope with Philistines, or any other foes. The end God has in view in our own
trials is precisely the same.

IV. Oua WISDOM, UNDER ALL THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF OUR LIVES, 18 TO RESIGN OUB-

KKLVES TO God's leadino, relieving it to be always the best for us. We cannot
err in resigning ourselves to the guidance of one omniscient, wise, loving, and supremely
good. — J. 0.

Ver. 19. — Joseph's hones. A promise, and most of all a promise to the dead, is to be
regarded as sacred. Amidst the haste of their departure the Israelites did not forget to
take with them the bones of Joseph. They probably carried away also the bones of th«
other patriarchs (Acts vii. 16). In this touching incident, see —

I. Faith's anticipations verified. Joseph had said, " God will surely visit you "
(Gen. 1. 25). He had died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen
them afar off (Heb. xi. 13 — 22). At the time of Joseph's death the tokens were scant
that Israel would grow to be so great a people, and would be led forth, many
thousands strong, to go to Canaan. Joseph's faith rested on God's naked word. God
had said that this time would come, and it did. We are never wrong in depending on
the Divine promise. Those who trust it, however the world may ridicule them as
devout enthusiasts, will prove to be right in the long run. Events will verify their
confidence. Apply, e.g., to the ultimate triumph of Christianity.

II. Faith's choice given effect to. He had strictly sworn the children of Israel,
saying, " Ye shall surely carry up my bones away hence with you." Notwithstanding
the splendour of his position in Egypt, Joseph's heart was still with his own people.
To his clear moral vision, the godless character of the Egyptian civilisation was suffi-
ciently apparent. The Hebrews were as yet but a handful of shepherds; but he
discerned in them a spiritual greatness which was wanting to Egypt, and he had faith
in the magnificent future which God's Word pledged to them. So he was not ashamed
to call the humble settlers in Goshen his brethren, and to declare that he preferred a
grave witli them to the proudest mausoleum that Egypt could erect for him. He left a
charge that wlien they' departed, they were to take his bones with them, and lay them
in Canaan, as subsequently they did (Josh. xxiv. 22). He thus anticipated Moses in
choosing the better part, and in preferring union with God's people to all the treasures
and renown of the land of liis adoption. We act in the same spirit when we set the
things which are " unseen and eternal " before those which are " seen and temporal," and
count it our highest honour to be enrolled among " God's children."



no



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



ton. Xni. 21, 22.



HI. A HINT OF THE EBsuRRBCTiON. Wience this care of Joseph for the bestowal
of his bones ? What matters it — it may be asked — where the dust is laid, if only the
spirit is secure ? In one way it matters very little, though affection naturally inspires
the wish to sleep beside one's kindred. There may have been more than this. The
care of the body in Egypt was, as we now know, connected with a hope of its revival.
And there are good grounds for believing that the same hope had to do with this
command of Joseph, and with the loving care shown by the patriarchs generally in the
bestowal of their dead. (See the point discussed in Fairbairn's 'typology, vol. i. p. 355,
et seq.). The believer's body is a sacred deposit. Destined to share with the soul in
the glorj yet to be revealed, there is a fitness in treating it with reverence, and in laying
it in a place consecrated to the Chrisiian dead. — J. 0.

Vers. 17 — 22. — Israel's journey the emblem of the Christian's pilgrimage. I. God's
TENDEB CARE FOB HIS PEOPLE. 1. Trials and temptations are proportioned to their
ability to bear them. ' He led them not through the way of the land of the Philis-
tines." The conflict with these was not too much for his strength, but it was too much
for Israel's faith. They would have made shipwreck at the very outset. He will not
suffer us to be tempted beyond that we are able to bear. 2. It " was near ; " but the
shortest way to our possession may not be the surest. God's love is more fully dis-
played in leading us seemingly away from what we desire than it would be in at once
leading us to it. 3. His purpose in delay. God leads us by the way of the wilderness
where, by the knowledge of ourselves and of him we may be prepared for the earthly and
the heavenly portion he designs to give us.

II. They bobe with them a peoof of God's faithfulness (ver. 19). 1. The
time might have been when the hope expressed by those unburied bones seemed vanity
and folly, but not uow. These relics touched a nxillion hearts, and reminded them how
gloriously God had redeemed his word. 2. We carry with us mementoes which fill us
with strong assurance for the future. The very light we now possess tells how God
fulfils his promises. Human hearts believed God of old when he said that the Sun of
Righteousness would arise, and human lips declared the hope. The past fulfilments of
prophecy lay broad foundations for our trust that every word will in like manner be
redeemed.

in. They had God himself fob guide. 1. We have t^je indwelling of the Spirit
and of Christ. We cannot mistake the way if we follow him who goes before us.
2. The light of his presence is brighter in the night of trial. When all else is veiled
firom sight, the light of that gracious presence beams out in fullest splendour. 3. There
must be the following by day to have the consolation of the glory by night. Are we
following in the footsteps of Jesus? Is he Saviour as well as sacrifice to us? — U.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 21, 22. — The fillab of thb cloud
AND or FIRE. Having stated, in verse 17, that
" God led the Israelites," and determined
their route for them, the writer here proceeds
to explain how this leading was accomplished.
With extreme simplicity and directness he
states, that the conduct was effected by
means of an appearance, which in the day-
time was like a column or pillar of smoke
ascending from earth to heaven, and in the
night was like a pillar of fire. He considers
the presence of God to have been in the pillar,
I7hich moved in front of the host, and showed
them the way that they were to go. When
H halted, they halted- when it advanced.



they advanced. Their jommeys being mode
as much in the night-time as in the day,
on account of the intense heat, the piUar took
in the night the appearance of a column of
fire, so as to be equally visible as by day.
All attempts to give a rational explanation
of the phenomenon are misplaced, since the
writer, from whom alone we derive om: infor-
mation on the subject, clearly regarded it
as miraculous; and both here and elsewhere
(ch. xiv. 19, 20, 24 ', xxxiii. 9 ; Num. xii. 5 ;
xiv. 11) speaks of it as a form under which
God was pleased to show himself. There it
little doubt that fire and smoke signals wert
already used by commanders of armies fsf



0&. xjii. 21, 2^0



THE BOOK OP texoDtrs.



311



much the same piirpose as that which Q-od
now accomplished in this way. The Egyptian
docimients of the period contain indications
of the usage; and it is found among the
Arabians, the Greeks, and the Persians. (See
especially Q. Curt. Vtt. Alex. v. 2 ; " Perticam,
quffi undique conspici posset, supra prsetorium
statuit, ex qua siguum eminebat pariter omni-
bus conspicuum : observabatur ignis noctu,
fumus interdiu.") The miracle was thus, in
a certain sense, founded upon an existing
custom, with the difference that God here
gave the signals miraculously, which were
wont to be given in a natural way by the
human leaders of armies. He thus consti-
tuted himself the general of the host.

Ver. 21. — The lord went before them.
From Succoth at any rate ; perhaps even on
the journey from Rameses to Succoth. In a
pillar of olond. The pillar was seen — the



presence of Jehovah, though unseen, wai
believed to be in it, and to move it. To go by
day and night. Or, "so that they might
march both by day and by night." Night
marches are generally preferred by Orientals
on account of the great heat of the days.
The night-marches of the Israelites ara
again mentioned in Num. ix. 21.

Ver. 22.— He took not away. The last
distinct mention of the cloud is in Num. xvL
42, after the destruction of Korah, Dathan,
and Abham. There is perhaps a later
allusion to it in Num. xx. 6. In Nehemiah
it is said that " the pillar of the cloud departed
not from them^" so long as they were in
the wilderness (Neh. ix. 19) ; and the same
is implied, though not foriually stated, in
Num. ix. 15-23. There is no mention of the
pillar of the cloud as still with the Israelites
in the Book of Joshua. Probably it was last
seen on the journey from Beth-jesimoth to
Abel-Shittim in the rich Jordan valley (Num.
xxxiii. 49).



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 21, 22. — God's guidance of his people. The Israelites had quitted Egypt, had
broken off from their old life, were about to plunge into that wild waste of sand and
rock which separates Africa from Asia by an almost impassable barrier. If they took
the northern line of march, they would come upon the sandy de.sert. Before them
would stretch " endless sands yielding nothing but small stunted shrubs — broad plains
— newly reared hills — valleys dug out by the last week's storm ; the hills, and the
valleys, and the plains, all sand, sand, sand, still sand, and only sand, and sand, and
sand again." (Kinglake, Eothen, p. 187.) If they turned southward, they would find
themselves in a labyrinth of twisted wadys, amid huge moimtains, and in a region con-
sisting chiefly of bare granite and sandstone rooks — "the Alps unclothed." (Henneker,
Notes during a Visit to Egypt, p. 214.) In either case they would sorely need God'i
guidance ; and God's guidance was vouchsafed to them. So it is with Christians.

I. Christians have the guidance op God's Spirit through all the intbicaotm
AND desert plains OF LIFE. The Lord leads them. God himself, God the Holy
Ghost, co-equal Person with the Father and the Son in the Triune Godhead, is their
guide and director, " a light to their feet and a lantern to their paths." Most necessary
to them such direction. Just escaped from Egypt, just freed from the bondage of sin,
how would they wander and go astray, unless his right hand were stretched out to heij)
and guide 1 On the weary waste, the dry, bare, monotonous plain of an eventless life,
where no sign showed the way, where hope would fail and the heart grow faint, what
could they do but for him? In the labyrinth of conflicting duties and uncertain
devious paths, how could they determine on their course but for him ? Alike in both
he leads, directs, guides. He " will not leave them nor forsake them."

II. The guidance is perpetual both by night and day. " Lo, 1 am with you
always, even unto the end of the world" was the promise given us by our Lord. There
is no part of life from which he withdraws himself — ^not the darkest night of earthly
misery and disappointment — not the brightest day of worldly success and glory. A nd
in both alike he is needed — perhaps most needed in the day. Then men think they
can walk by themselves, choose their own course, direct their own paths. I'lieu con-
sequently they are most apt to go wrong, and " wander out of the way in the wilder-
ness." But he is ever at hand to restrain, correct, recover them. By internal or
external checks, by feeling and conscience on the one hand, by his word, his ordinances,
his ministers on the other, he interposes to save men from themselves, to keep tnem in
the right way, or lead them back into the right way if they havs departed tom it,



ii2 t-HJl feOOk of SXObtJS. ten. XIII. 21, 2^

Darkness does not hide us from him — darkness does not separate us from him — yea,
" the darkness is no darkness with him — ^the night and the day with him are both
alike."

III. The guidance is vakibd to suit the different needs op the soul. Now
by cloud and darkness, an overshadowing of the soul by his felt but unseen presence ;
now by the flashing in of intolerable light into the secret recesses of the heart and con-
science, does the Holy Spirit of God direct and rule our lives. None can limit him as
to the means which he shall employ. Now he discomfits our foes, directing his keen
gaze upon them "through the pillar of fire and of the cloud" (Ex. xiv. 24); now he
simply separates between our foes and us by interposing an insurmountable barrier
(ib. ver. 19) ; at one time he shines into our hearts with a mild, gentle, and steady
radiance ; at another, he gives us rest, as under the shadow of a cloudy canopy. At all
times he chooses the mean's most fit to accomplish his ends, shrinking from none that
are potent to effect his gracious purposes. Clouds and darkness would seem to be the
things most opposite to the ineffable brightness of his most glorious nature ; but even
clouds and darkness are pressed into his service, and made his ministers, when they can
be ministers of good.

IV. The guidance continues until thet reach the Promised Land. " The
pillar of the cloud departed not" from the Israelites " by day, neither the pillar of fire
by night," during the whole time of their long and weary journeying, until they
reached Canaan. God's gifts are " without repentance." They are given for the whole
period during which we need them. As the Israelites required guidance until they
trod the soil of the Jordan vale, and Canaan's hills lay plainly in sight, so do Christians
need the Spirit's gentle leading, until the whole wilderness of this life is past, and
the true Canaan reached. And what they need, they have. The Spirit's aid is with
them to the end.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 21, 22. — HVie fiery-cloudy pillar. The visible pillar is no longer beheld, but
God's fiery-cloudy presence still attends the Church in her wanderings, and confers
upon her benefits analogous to those enjoyed by the ancient people. God's presence,
as manifested in the pillar of cloud and fire, was —

I. Holt. — 1. Ood is holy. Holiness is the principle which guards the distinction
between the Creator and the creature. It eternally excludes everything evil and im-
pure from the Divine nature (Martensen). It is the " zeal of the Lord of Hosts " for
his own honour, and for the maintenance of the interests of truth, purity, and
righteousness. The fire in the cloud was a symbol of it. 2. It is as the Holy One
that Ood dwells in his Church. " The Holy One of Israel in the r"dst of thee "
(Is. xii. 6). Holiness, ancordingly, becomes those who would serve him (Ps. xciii. 5).
3. The privilege is great, but perilous. (1) Sin leads to the withdrawal of God's
presence. When Israel sinned in the matter of the golden calf, God withdrew beyond
the precincts of the camp. The cloudy pillar removed to a distance (ch. xxxiii. 7 — 10).
(2) Kebellion provokes God to anger. On more than one occasion fire came out from
the midst of the pillar and destroyed the rebels (Lev. x. 2 ; Num. xvi. 22 ; xvii. 10).
" Our God is a consuming fire " (Heh. xii. 29). Holiness turned against sin is wrath.
God tempers the vision of his holiness, which otherwise would be unendurable to man,
by shrouding it in the cloud.

II. Enlightening. " A pillar of fire to give them light." God's presence in his
Church is illuminating. 1.' Whence the light shines. The light shines in the Word, in
Divine providence, and in the teaching of the Spirit which illuminates both. 2. What
the light does. It shows us s])iritual truth. It reveals duty. It guides (see below).
It cheers in the night of affliction. 3. Light with attendant myslery. The light is iu
the cloud. At best, we know but " in part " (1 Cor. xiii. 12). Even revealed truth has
its side of mystery.

III. Sheltebino. The allusion in Isa. iv. 6 would suggest that the cloud spread
itself over the camp in the daytime, and so formed a canopy or shadow from the heat,
God's presence is a grateful shelter to his people. They feel the need of it when temp-
tations fiercely assail, or when tribulation and persecution ariseth because of the Wonl



&. ihi. it— ^2 j tHte hoot of' texobtJS. 418

•* lu the time of trouble shall he hide me in his pavilio.n ; in the secret of his tabemaoU
shall he hide me " (Ps. xxvii. 5).

IV. Guiding. The pillar went before the camp of Israel " to lead them the way "
(of. l)eut. i. 33). The cloud pointed the way in the daytime, the fire by night. The
Church and the individual believer are similarly guided. He who seeks to know the
will of God will not fail of direction. Providence opens the road. The light that
streams from the Word shows the path of duty. " 'J'hine ears shall hear a word behind
thee, saying, This is the way : walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand and to the
left" (Is. XXX. 21).

V. Adaptive. The pillar adapted itself to the circumstances of the people. In the
daytime, when the sky was light, it took the form of cloud ; in the night season, it
shone as bright fire. Now it moved in front as a guiding beacon ; again, it was spread
as a grateful awning over the camp; at another time, it went behind, interccptiog the
enemy (ch. xiv. 19). Thus does God vary the aspects of his presence and the modes of
his help with unfailing adaptation to the special needs of his people. He is the All-
EufScient.

VI. Hostile to the enemy. — He intercepts their pursuit ; he hides his people firom
their fury ; he majjes their way dark to them ; he frowns upon them, and discomfits
them (ch. xiv. 19-26).— J. 0.

Vers. 17—22. Fire and cloud. "And the Lord went before them," etc. (Ex. xiii. 21).
Israel inight have been in Canaan within ten days. Reason why not is given xiii. 17.
This however, not a reason for the forty years wandering : but only for the circuitous
route by the desert of Sinai. The line of Israel's march for the first two days is soon
given. They start from liameses, capital of Goshen, a store city, recently built by the
Hebrews, the king there possibly. '1 he first stage was Succoth (" tents ") perhaps a
caravan station or military calnp — a journey of about fifteen miles. Another fifteen
miles to Etham on the edge of the desert. There roads, canals, now all to be left behind ;
just there and then appeared the fieb and cloud.

I. Its nature. Point out the three leading theories, especially as the two earlier
mentioned lead up to the third and the true. The phenomenon was : 1. Common
natural fire. Seen as fire by night, as smoke by day. Perhaps the sacrificial fire of
Israel preserved from primitive times. An ordinary caravan fire. Or such as was borne
at the head of the Persian armies. 2. The same, but glorified by association wiih a
religious idea ; viz., that God was in reality the Guide of his people, and that that was
well represented by the fire at the head of the hosts. 3. Altogether supernatural. God
saw the need of Israel at that moment, and met it in his own superb manner, [t'or full
discussion of Kitualistio explanations, see Kurtz, vol. ii. 344—348, Eng. ed.] The
phenomenon was a trinity in unity. It was one, not two, not one kind of pillar by
night and another by day. It consisted of cloud, oifire (electric ?) in the cloud, and of
Jehovah in both (xiii. 21 ; xiv. 24). The last doubtless a manifestation of the " Angel-
God" of the Old Testament.

II. FoBMs and movements. 1. Forma. (1) Usually a pillar (xiii. 21). (2) A wall,
see xiv. 19, 20. Must have been a wall in this case, of perhaps more than a mile in
length. A wall of cloud to Egypt, hiding the moon, the sea, and the advanced move-
ments of the armies of Israel. When the cloud lifted, Israel was gone. On the other
side, a mile or more of, as it were, electric fire, adding to the moon-illumination by which
Israel passed through the sea. (3) A roof or an awning. See Kum. x. 34 ; Ps. cv. 89 ;
1 Cor. X. 1,2 ;■ and the very beautiful passage, is. iv. 5, 6. 2. Movements. (1) Usually
stationary — on the tabernacle— on the mercy-seat — sometimes fillmg the tabernacle, so
that none could enter to minister. (2) Lifting, when Israel advancei ("3) Descending,
when Israel was to rest.

III. SiGKiJfiCANCE. Israel could not have seen the fire-cloud for forty years without
catching mucn of the meaning ; but we more. The fire-cloud teaches that the Lord
Jesus is : 1. Fver in and with the Chv/rch. The glory of Jehovah appeared in the cloud.
2. In two-fold glory ; in the fire of holiness ; in the cloud of mercy that tempers the
blaze. He so appears to the individual soul — to the family — to the Church — to the
nation — to the wider world. Note the special outbreakings firom the cloud at certaiu
Itnfiu crises in Israel's history. 3. Tlie leader of our pilgrimage. See C. Wesley'i



su



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[CH. X.1V. 1 i.



hymn, in Wesley's Collection, 326. Yet some scope, then as now, seems to have
been left for the play of intelligence (Num. x. 31). 4. Captain in our holy war. On
Egyptian monuments generals are represented as flames, streaming in darkness, at tha
heaid of armies. See the hymn beginning : " Forward be our watchword."

t Bums the fiery pillar
At our army's head ;
Who shall dream of shrinking,
By our Captain led ? "

6. Ow wall of defence. 6. Our canopy for comfort. 7. Whose interpositions are ever
marked by wondrous timeliness. It was on the " edge of the wilderness " that the fire-cloud
first appeared ; and after the desert journey, seems to have disappeared, save as it may have
been represented by the Shechinah above the mercy seat, which assumed unwonted
gplendoui at the dedication of the first temple. — B.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XIV.



Vers. 1 — 4. — The dikeotion of thb
JoDBNEY CHANGED. Hitherto the march of
the Israelites had been to the south-east.
Another day's journey in this direction would
have taken them beyond the limits of
Egypt, into the desert region east of the
Bitter Lakes, which was dry, treeless, and
waterless. In this tract there would have
been but scant nourishn^ent for their
flocks and herds, and absolutely no water for
themselves, unless it had been obtained by
miracle. God therefore changed the direction
of their route from south-east to due south,
and made them take a course by which they
placed the Bitter Lakes on their left hand,
and so remamed within the limits of Egypt,
in a district fairly well watered, but shut oft
from the wilderness by the Bitter Lakes and
the northern prolongation of the Gulf of
Suez, with which they were connected. This
route suited the immediate convenience of the
host ; and, having no suspicion of any hostile
movement on the part of the Egyptians, they

not unnaturally — made no objection to it.

It had, however, the disadvantage, in case of
a hostile movement, of shutting them in be-
tween their assailants on the one hand, and
the sea upon the other; and this circum-
stance seems to have led Pharaoh to make his
pursuit.

Ver. 2. — Speak unto the children of Israel
that they turn. Kalisch translates "re-
turn"— i.e., "retrace their steps," and sup-
poses that Etham lay far south of Pihahiroth,
on the west coast of the Gulf of Suez. But
the Hebrew word means either "turn back"



or " turn aside," and is translated here iIt»-
ffrpeyl/avTes and not avaffrpeyl/avTe^ by the
LXX. Dr. Brugsch supposes that the turn
made was to the north, and the " sea " reached
the Mediterranean ; but all other writers, re-
garding the sea spoken of as the Bed Sea
(compare ch. xiii. 18), believe the divergence
from the previous route to have been towards
the south, and place Pihahiroth, Migdol, and
Baal-Zephon in this quarter. Fihahhroth.
The exact position is unknown. Neither the
Egyptian remains nor the writings of the
Greeks or Romans present us with any similar
geographic name. If Semitic, the word
should mean " the entrance to the caves," but
it is quite possible that it may be Egyptian.
Uigdol. There was undoubtedly a famous
Migdol, or Maktal, on the eastern frontier of
Egypt, which was a strong fortified post, and
which is often mentioned. Hecatseus called it
Magdolos (Fr. 282). In the Itinerary of AntO'
nine it is said to be twelve Roman miles from
Pelusium (p. 76). Bat this is too northern a
position for the Migdol of the present pas-
sage ; which must represent a " tower ' or
" fortified post " not very remote from the
modern Suez. Over against Baal-Zephon,
The accumulation of names, otherwise un-
known to the sacred writers, is a strong mdi-
cation of the familiarity possessed by the
author of Exodus with the geography of
the country. No late writer could have
ventured on such local details. A name re-
sembling "Baal-Zephon" is said to occur in
the Egyptian monuments. Dr. Brugsch reads
it as " Baal-Zapuna." He regards it as the
designation of a Phoonician god, and com-
pares " Baal-Zebub." Others have compared
the " Zephon " with the Grseco-Egyptiau form
" Typhon," and have supposed " Baal-Zephon "
to be equivalent to " Baal-Set " or " Baal-
Sutech " — a personification of the principle ol
evil.
Ver. 8. — ^Ihey are antangled in the lail4



cfi. xtv. 1—L]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



sia



Or "they are confused," "peijlexed" — {. e.
"they have lost their way. '^ Pharaoh could
not conceive that they would have taken the
route to the west of the Bitter Lakes, which
conducted to no tolerable territory, unless
they were hopelessly at sea with respect to
the geography of the country. In this " per-
plexity "' of theirs he thought he saw his
own opportunity. The wilderness hath shut
them in. Pharaoh is thinking of his own
" wilderness," the desert country between the



Nile valley and the Red Sea. This desert,
he says, " blocks their way, and shuts them
in " — they cannot escape if he follows in theu
steps, for they will have the sea on one hand,
the desert on the other, and in their front,
while he hiins'4f presses upon their rear.

Ver. i. — I will be honoured See the
coinmeni on eh. ix. 16. That the Egyptian!
may know that I am the Lord. Compare
above, ch. vii. 6



HOMILBTICS.

Vers. 1—4. OocFs triah of Bis faithful ones. All hitherto had gone well with the
departing Israelites. The Egyptians indeed had "thrust them out" — ^had hurried
their depMture — had felt insecure till they were beyond the borders. But they haa
freely given of their treasures to speed the parting guests, and had in every way facili-
tated their setting forth. The multitude, vast as it was, had in no respect suffered as
yet ; it had proceeded in good military order (ch. xiii. 18), had found abundant pasture
for its flocks and herds, and was now on the very verge of the desert which alone
separated it from Canaan. Egypt was behind them ; freedom and safety were in front ;
no foe forbade their entrance into the vast expanse which met their gaze as they looked
eastward, stretching away to the distant horizon of hot haze, behind which lay the
Promised Land. 'Ihe question, how they were to support themselves in the desert had
not perhaps occurred to them as yet. They had come out provisioned with bread for a
certain number of da\s, and probably with many sacks of grain laden upon their asses.
If the spring rains had been heavy, as is likely to have been the case, since in Fgypt there
had been both rain and hail (oh. ix. 23 — 33), the desert itself would have been covered
at this season wuh a thin coat of verdure and " thickly jewelled with bright and
fragrant flowers ' {Eotlien, p. 18i)). The hearts of many were, no doubt, bounding at
the thought of quite quitting Egypt at last, and entering on the absolute freedom of
i.he illimitable desert. But at this point God interposed. " Speak unto the children
of Israel that tliey turn, and encamp before Pihahiroth." Egypt is not yet to be
quitted ; they are still to skirt it— to remain among P'gyptian cities — to turn away
from Palestine — to interpose a sea between themselves and Asia — to pursue a route
which leads into one of the most unproductive portions of the whole African continent.
Sore must the trial have been to those who had knowledge of the localities — dark and
inscrutable must have seemed the ways of Providence. What was tlie Almighty
intending? How could Canaan ever be reached if they turned their backs on it?
Whither was God taking them ? Kven apart from any pursuit by Pharaoh, the situa-
tion must have been perplexing in the extreme, and must have severely exercised the
more thoughtful. What then must not the universal feeling have been, when it
appeared that the monarch, informed of their movements, had started in pursuit?
What but that they were God-forsaken— or, worse, led by God himself into a trap from
which there was no escape ? Readily intelligible is the bitterness which showed itself
in their address to Moses—" Because there were no graves in I'gypt hast thou taken us
away to die in the wilderness? Wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us?" And so
God's people— his faithful and elect children — at all times and under all circumstances,
are subject to severe trials. These come upon them either—

I. Fob theik MOKAii impuovembnt. "The trial of our faith worketh patience," and
God wills that "patience should have her perfect work," that his saints may be
"perfect and entire,' wanting nothing" (James i. 3, 4). "Whom the Lord loveth he
chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth." Difficulties, dangers, tempta-
tions, perplexities, disappointments, constitute a moral discipline which is to most men
absolutely needful for the due training and elevation of their mora, characters. By
such trials the uross is purged away from them— the pure metal remains. Their love
of God ai'd trust in God are tested, and by being tested strengthened. " Tribulation
worketh patience; and patience experience; and experience hope; and hope maketh



Sie THE BOOK Of KXOJJtJS. [on. iiv. 1— fi.

not ashamed." Tlie man who is perfect in each good word and work has in almost
eye^ case passed through a furnace of afSiction to attain his perfection.

II. Fob the qi.ort of God. God's glory is often shown forth in the sight of men
most conspicudusly by the trials of his faithful ones. In Israel's case this was brought
about by miracle. But the rule holds good in the ordinary course of human affaire
equally. What has so shown forth he glory of God in the past as the endurance ol
trials, insults, torments, death, by Lis martyrs? What even now so impresses
men with the reality of religion, as suffering on account of the truth ? Afflictions,
crosses, disappointments, patiently borne, not only strengthen our o\m spirits, but are
a witness for God in a world that for the most part disregards him, and to a con-
siderable extent " get him honour."

III. Fbom the necessity of the case, because God's ways abe not as ona
WAYS. If the children of Israel could have foreseen that God would divide the Bed
Sea for th*sm and lead them through it, the route southwards to the point of crossing
wo ild have been seen to be the fittest and best, securing as it did the continuance
of water and' of forage, and avoiding one of the worst parts of the wilderness. But
it was impossible for them to surmise this ; and hence their perplexity, alarm, and
anger a^inst Moses. In our ordinary trials it often happens that our inability to
understand how we are being dealt with lies at the root of our sufferings. The disap-
pointment which most vexes us may he a necessary preliminary to the success of which
we have no thought. The " thorn in the flesh " may bring us to a higher moral condi-
tion than we should have reached without it. " God's ways are in the deep, and his
paths in the great waters, and his footsteps are not known." He deals with us as he
sees to be best, and we cannot see that so it is best. He has surprises in reserve for us,
sometimes as little looked for as the division of the Bed Sea by the Israelites. Hence,
if in cases of this kind we would suffer less, we must trust Uod more ; we must give
ourselves wholly up to him, place ourselves in his hands, accept whatever he sends as
Bssuredly, whether we can see it or not, what is fittest for us.



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 1 — 5. — The command to encamp hy the sea. These verses introduce the narra-
tive of what the Lord " did in the Bed Sea " (iN'um. xxi. 14), when liis people " passed
through ... as by dry land ; which the Egyptians, assaying to do, were drowned "
(Heb. xi. 29). This crossing of the Red Sea was no after-thought. God had it in
view when he turned aside the path of the children of Israel from the direct route,
and ordered them to encamp before Pi-hahiroth, near the northern end of the gulf.
His design in this event was to give a new and signal display of his Jehovah attributes,
in the destruction of Pharaoh's host (ver. 4), and in working a great salvation
for his Church. By the events of the Red Sea, he would be shown to be ul ?nce a God
of meroy and judgment (Is. xxx. 18); Supreme Ruler in heaven and in "nrth (Ps.
cxxxv. 6) ; disposing events, great and small, according to his good pleasure, ird for
the glory of his name ; making even the wrath of man instrumental to the ikCoom-
plishment of his purposes (Ps. Ixxvi. 10). Consider —

I. The mysterious turn in the route. The command was to turn to the south,
and encamp between Migdol and the sea, over against Baal-Zephon (ver. 2). This
route was — 1. Not necessarily an arbitrary one. We need not suppose that God
brought the Israelites into this perplexity — shutting them up between the sea and the
mountains, simply for the purpose of showing how easily he CDuld again extiicate
them. The choice of routes was not great. ( 1) The way of the Philistines was blocked
(ch. xlii. 17). (2) The way by the north of the lied Sea — between it and the Bitter
Lakes — probably did not then exist. The Bed Sea seems at that time to have ex-
tended much further north than it does at present. (3) To go round by the upper end
of the Lakes would have been to take the host far out of its way, besides exposing it to
the risk of collision with outlying tribes. (4) The remaining alternative was to march
southwards, and ford the Red Sea. The route was, nevertheless — 2. A mysterious ana
perplexing one. Pharaoh at once pronounced it a strategic blunder (ver. 3). Sup-
posing the intention to be to cross the Bed Sea, no one coi^d hazard a conjecnue as tut



0H.ZIV.1— «.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. ill

how this was to be accompUshed. Ordinary fords were out of the question for so vast
a miiltitude. Hemmed in by the mountains, with an impassable stretch of water in
front, and no way of escape from an enemy bearing down upon them from behind, the
Egyptian king might well judge their situation to be a hopeless one. Yet how
strangely Uke the straits of life into which God's people are sometimes led by following
faithfully the guiding pillar of their duty ; or into which, irrespective of their choice,
God's providence sometimes brings them ! Observe, further, 3. JSlo hint was given of
how the difficulty was to be solved. This is God's way. Thus does he test his people's
faith, and form them to habits of obedience. He does not show them everything at
once. Light is given for present duty, but for nothing beyond. Fain would we know,
when difficulties crowd upon us, how our path is to be opened ; but this God does not
reveal. He would have us leave the future to him, and think only of the duty of the
moment. Time enough, when the first command has been obeyed, to say what is to
be done next. " We walk by faith, not by sight " (2 Cor. v. 7).

n. God'b ends in leading them bt this eoute. God had ends. He was not
guiding the children of Israel blindly. His knowledge, his purpose, no less than his
presence, go before his saints, as guiding pillars, to prepare places for them. God had a
definite purpose, not only in leading the people by this route, but in planting them
down at this particular spot— between Migdoland the sea. His ends embraced — 1. The
humiliation of Pharaoh. That unhappy monarch was still hard in heart. He was torn
with vain regrets at having let the people go. He had a disposition to pursue them.
God would permit him to gratify that disposition. He would so arrange his providence
as even to seem to invite him to do it. He would lure him into the snare he had prepared
for him, and so would complete the judgment which the iniquity of Pharaoh and of his
servants had moved him to visit upon Egypt. This was God's hardening of Pharaoh's heart
(ver. 4). Note (1) If God is not honoured by men, he will be honoured upon them (Scott).
(2) Eetributive providence frequently acts by snaring men through the evil of their own
hearts. Situations are prepared for them in which they fall a prey to the evil principles
or dispositions which, in spite of warnings and of their own better knowledge, they
have persisted in cherishing. They wish for something, and the opportunity is pre-
sented to them of gratifying their wish. They harbour an evil disposition (say lust, or
dishonesty), when suddenly they find themselves in a situation in which, like a wild
beast leaping from its covert, their evil nature springs out upon them and devours them.
It was in this way that God spread his net for Pharaoh, and brought upon him " swift
destruction." 2. The education of Israel. The extremity of peril through which
Israel was permitted to pass — coupled with the sudden and marvellous deliverance
which so unexpectedly turned their " shadow of death into the morning " (Amos v. 8),
filling their mouth with laughter and their tongue with singing (Ps. cxxvi. 1) — while
their pursuers were overwhelmed in the Red Sea, was fitted to leave a profound and
lasting impression on their minds. It taught them (1) That all creatures and agencies
are at God's disposal, and that his resources for the help of his Church, and for the
discomfiture of his enemies, are absolutely unlimited. As said of Christ, " even the
winds and the sea obey him " (Matt. viii. 27). (2) That the Lord kuuweth, not only
" how to deliver the godly out of temptations," but also how >' to reserve the unjust
unto the day of judgment to be punished " (2 Pet. ii. 9). It was thus (3) A rebuke to
distrust, and a powerful encouragement to faith. 3. The complete separation of Israel
as a people to himself. Paul says—" all our fathers were under the cloud, and all
passed through the sea, and were baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea "
(1 Cor. X. 2). Connect this with the spiritual significance of baptism. Baptism,
especially as administered by immersion, figures dying to sin, and rising again to
righteousnoos (Rom. vi. 4). It is thus the analogue of the passage through the Red
Sea, which was a symbolic death and resurrection of the hosts of Israel. By saving the
people from the waves which engulfed their enemies, Jehovah had, as it were, purchased
the nation a second time for himself, giving them " life from the dead." 'ihe baptism
of the sea was thus a sort of " outward and visible sign " of the final termination of
the connection with Egypt. Its waters were thereafter "a silver streak " between the
Israelites and the land of their former bondage, telling of a pursuer from whom they
bad been delivered, and of » new life on which they had entered. — J. 0.



818 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. xiv. 1—12.

Vers. 1—12. — Israel stricken with terror ly reason of a deliverance not yet completed.
It is plain that the Israelites, going out of Egypt in such circumstances as they did,
must have gone out in a state of great exhilaration, almost beside themselves with joy
at such a complete reversal of all their past experiences at the hands of Pharaoh.
Moreover we are assured in ch. xiv. 8 that they went out with a high hand. Tha
power of God for the deliverance of Israel was manifested in great fulness. What he
had done in the past, and especially in the recent past, if only well considered and
kept in the mind, was sufficient to inspire trust, banish fear, and show the wisdom of
most diligent obedience to every direction that he gave. Nevertheless in verse 10 we
find this humiliating statement, "they were sore afraid" — sore afraid, so soon after
deliverance, and such a deliverance ! Whence could their danger have come, and what
could have made them so quickly to forget their God? These are the matters we have
now to consider.

I. Consider what theke was to explaw the local position which produced
THEIR FEAB. They were in an awkward and dangerous position from an ordinary point
of view. That position cannot he more forciby indicated than in the words of Pharaoh
himself. " They are entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them in." They
were going into a cul-de-sac. Before them lay the sea ; on either hand, as we imagine,
rose high ground ; it only needed that Pharaoh should come in at the rear and close them
up altogether, when they would be compelled to surrender. How then had they come
into this position ? It was not through any ignorance or carelessness on the part of
their leader. Any general leading an army into such a trap would have been deservedly
put to death for gross incompetency. It was God who had brought them exactly here,
and if the word " trap" is to be mentioned, it was a trap with regard to Pharaoh and
not with regard to Israel. The God who had led the Israelites out with a high hand,
led them on with the pillar of cloud, and led them into the very position which,
if they themselves had been consulted, was the last they would have chosen. It
was not the only way God could have taken tbem, but it was the way in which,
most effectually, speedily, and impressively, he could deliver them from Pharaoh.
For God, of course, well knew that the deliverance of his people was not accomplished,
simply because they had got out of Egypt. The exodus had been a miracle in
many ways, and not least in this, that it had compelled Pharaoh and his servants
to act in contradiction to all the most dominating elements of their character.
Just as afterwards in dealing with the waters of the Eed Sea, God made the force
of the wind to overcome the force of gravity ; so he had already by another east
wind, in the shape of the death of the first-born, completely set aside for a night
all the most settled habits of Egypt. These habits had stocd up on the right hand
and on the left, and made a broad and open way for Israel to go out of the land. But
presently, immediately and according to the natural order, these habits resumed their
former sWay. What else was to be expected ? It mattered not in what direction Israel
took their flight. Pharaoh and his hosts, smarting with injured pride, panting for
vengeance and recovery of lost treasure, would be after them. There was a void in
Egypt because of the death of the first-bom, but after all the mothers would fee) 'tat
void the most. There was another void by reason of the loss of all these slaves, these
useful labourers, these accumulators of Egyptian wealth, and this void, we may be sure,
was more operative in the vexation it produced than the loss of the first-born. It is a
humiliating truth, but men, as a rule, can more easily bear the loss of kindred, even
one so dear as the first -bom, than the loss of fortune. A failure in business is more
discomposing and fretting than a dozen bereavements, considered simply as bereave-
ments ; and thus it is certain that Pharaoh and his generals were very speedily in council
as to the best way of securing the fugitives. While so engaged, the news comes to them
of the direction in which the Israelites had gone. This news was the very thing to
decide Pharaoh and make his preparations large and overwhelming, especially when Uod
came to harden his heart to a greater pitch of stubbornness than it yet had reached.
Either recapture or destruction seemed now certain. Therefore, seeing Pharaoh was now
bound by the very force of the passions raging in his heart and the hearts of his people
to follow Israel, it was well as soon as possible, to remove all danger to Israel consequent
on this line of action. No good purpose was to be served either towards Israel or
towards Pharaoh him.self, by allowing him for any length of time, to harass thoir rear.



CM. xrr. I— 9.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 319

A catastrophe of the Bed Sea magnitude had to come, and the sooner it now came, the
better. Israel had dangers enough in front and within ; from Amalekites, Amorites,
Canaanites, and all the rest of their opponents ; from their owa character, their
own depravity, blindness of heart, sensuality, and idolatrous disposition. God does
not allow all jiossible dangers to come upon us at once. Do not let us be so occupied,
with the dangers that are present and pressing as to forget those which he has utterly
swept out of the way, overwhelmed in a Bed Sea, whence they will emerge against us
no more for ever.

II. Consider what thebe was to excuse and explain the fbae which Israel
EXPRESSED. In itself this fear was indefensible. There was no ground for it in the
nature of things. Uod had done nothing to produce fear ; everything indeed, if only it
could be rightly seen, to produce the contrary ; everything to call forth the utmost
leverence and obedience from every right-minded Israelite. He was now, even while
the Israelites were entangled in the land, Jehovah as much as ever, the great I Am,
leading Israel by a way which, though they knew it not, was the best way. But we
must also look at things from Israel's point of view ; we must really remember what
crod really remembers, that men are dust, and that even when they have the greatest
easons for confidence, those reasons get hidden up, or even presented in such forbidding
aspects as to make them powerful in producing unbelief. Our great arlvorsary, who can
make evil appear good also makes good appear evil. Look then at what there was in the
state of things, to excuse the Israelites in being sore afraid. 1. Themagnitude of Pharaoh's
preparations. In spiteof all the crippling effects of the plague, he was able to muster a great
array. Doubtless he had a big standing army, for chariots are not got ready at a moment's
notice. We may infer that he was a man who always had on hand some scheme of
ambition and aggrandisement, and because the Israelites had long dw-elt in his land,
they knew all about the skill, valour and crushing force of the charioteers. Whatever
strength there might be in the natural resources of Egj'pt they knew it well. When
the unknown Caanan had to be faced, they gave Moses no rest, tiU spies were despatched
to report on the land ; but they needed no report of Egypt. The military strength of
Pharaoh was only too deeply impressed on every mind. 2. There was the exasperation
of a great loss. The people not only knew the strength with which Pharaoh came, but
&lS spirit in which he came. He had lost 600,000 men, with their flocks and herds, and
all the choice spoils of Egypt, in the way of gold, silver and raiment. Then there was
a further loss of population in the mixed multitude. There was everything to exas-
perate the despot, and not one thing to soothe his pride or lessen his calamities. If only
he had failed in trying to get hold of a new possession, it would not have been so hard.
But he had failed in keeping the old ; he had gone through ten plagues, and yet lost
his treasures after all. We may fear that only too many among the Israelites, had just
that spirit of greed and grasping in their own hearts which would enable them to
appreciate the spirit of Pharaoh's pursuit. 3. There was the degrading effect of the long
oppression in which the Israelites had been kept. The spirit of the slave comes out in
the way they talk. These are not imaginary words put in their lips ; the very " tow:h
of nature " is in them. These are the language and conduct that reveal a real experience.
The present generation, and one knows not how many generations before, had been born
in servitude. They had not only been in servitude, but they had felt and acknowledged
the bitter misery of it. Aud now the servitude was ended in due course. Freedom
was a necessity, a blessing, and a glory to Israel ; but they could not be made fit for it
all at once. Jehovah could show signs and wonders in many ways ; he could by one
blow slay the flrst-bom of Egypt and let the oppressed go free ; but it required an
altogether different power and method to infuse into the liberated the spirit and courage
of fireemen. — Y.

Vers. 1 — ^9. — Trial and Judgment. I. God leads into trial, but assures of
victobt. 1. The command to turn and shut themselves in between the wilderness and
the sea. God leads us where troubles will assail us. Jesus was driven of the spirit
into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil. (1) It proves us, and reveals needs
which otherwise we might not have suspected. Our weaknesses are manifested. (2) It
reveals God. Through experiences of help his glory brightens for us. 2. The chcum-
•tances of God's people are taken advantage of bs their foes. Pharaoh imagined hil



820



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CH. XIV. 5 ft



time had now coiv 3. Earthly foes may strike at such a time ; batan surely will
3. The result will be God's triumph over the foe, not the foe's over us.

II. The wicked cannot be saved by judgments. 1. TeiTors are soon forgotten.
Repression of evil is not conversion. So soon as the repressive force ceases, evil reasserts
its sway. 2. Justice done through fear only is regretted, not rejoiced in, by the doer.
" Why liave we done this," etc. ? " As the dog returneth to his vomit." 3. Past lessons
are forgotten. Pharaoh might have asked what armies could do against the God of
[srael ; yet he assembles his forces, never dreaming that they are only marshalled for
destruction. Those who have known only the discipline of terror have not found
salvation. They have only heard a cry to flee and seek salvation. To linger upon the
way is to allow evU to overtake them and lead them ag^n into captivity. — U.



EXPOSITION.



Vets. 8—9. — The fcbsttit ov Isbael bt
THE Egyptians. A short respite from suffer-
ing was sufficient to enable Pharaoh to recover
from his extreme alarm. No further deaths
had followed on the destruction of the first-
born ; and he might think no further danger
was to he apprehended. The worst of Moses'
threats had been accomplished — perhaps
Jehovah had no more arrows in his quiver.
At any rate, as he realised to himself what
it would be to lose altogether the services of
so vast a body of slaves, many of them highly
skilled in different arts, he more and more re-
gretted the peraussiou which he had given.
Under these circumstances intelligence was
brought him of the change which the Israel-
ites had made in then route, and the
dangerous position into which they had
brought themselves. Upon this he resolved
to start in pursuit, with such troops as he
could hastUy muster. As his chariots were
six hundred, we may presume that his foot-
men were at least 100,000, all trained and
disciplined soldiers, accustomed to warfare.
The timid horde of escaped slaves, unused to
war, though it might be five or six times as
numerous as his host, was not likely to resist it.
Pharaoh no doubt expected an unconditional
surrender on the part of the Israelites, as soon
as they saw his forces.

Ver. 5. — It was told the King of Egypt
that the people fled, Pharaoh, when he let
the Israelites go, must have felt tolerably
certain that they would not voluntarily re-
turn. Formally, however, he had only con-
sented to their going a three days' journey
into the wilderness (ch. xii. 31). When,
being at Etbam, on the edge of the wilder-
ness, they did not enter it, but marched
southward to Pi-hahiroth, the Egyptians
might naturally report that instead of sacri-
Qciu^, they were filing — ^basting forward^ —



placing as much distance as they could b»
tween themselves and the Egyptian bead-
quarters. But this report alone would scarcely
have moved Pharaoh to action. It was in the
accompanying circumstances, in the particular
line of route, that he thought to find his
opportunity. The people " were entangled "
(ver. 3). They might be taken at a dis-
advantage, and might be reduced to choosing
between starvation and a return to Egypt.
The heart of Pharaoh, and of his servants,
was turned against the people. The re-
action of feeling was not confined to Pharaoh.
His subjects participated in it. The loss of
such a large body of labourers would be
generally felt as a severe blow to the pro-
sperity of the nation. It would affect aU
classes. The poor labourers might be bene-
fited; but the employers of labour are the
influential classes, and they would be injured.
So " Pharaoh's servants " were of one mind
with their master, and they " tiurned against '"
the Israelites. Why have we done this 1 In
the retrospect, the afflictions which they had
suffered did not seem so very great. They at
any rate had survived them, and were not per-
haps even seriously impoverished. Koyal favour
will find a way of making up any losses which
court minions have suffered, out of the general
taxation of the country. But in prospect, the
loss of 600,000 {more or less skilled) labourers
appeared a terrible thing. The official class
was quite ready to make a strenuous effort to
avert the loss.

Ver. 6. — He made ready his chariot. The
Egyptian monarchs, from the time of the
eighteenth dynasty, always went out to war in
a chariot. The chariots were, like the Greek
and the Assyrian, open behind, and consisted
of a semicircular standing-board of wood,,
from which rose in a graceful curve the
antj/x or rim to the height of about two feet
and a half above the standing-board. The
chariot had two wheels and a pole, and was
drawn by two horses. It ordinarily contained
two men only, the warrior and the charioteer.

Ver. 7. — Six hundred chosen chariots.
Diodor^g Siculns assigns to one Eeyptia*



CH. XIT. 5 — 9.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



821



king a force of 27,000 chariots (i. 54, § 4),
which however is probably beyond the triith.
But the 1200 assigned to Shishak (2 Ch.
xii. 3) may well be regarded as historical ;
and the great kings of the nineteenth dynasty
would possess at least an equal number. The
*' six himdred chosen chariots " set in motion
on this occasion probably constituted a division
of the royal body-guard (Herod, ii. 168).
The remaining force would be collected from
the neighbouring cities of Northern Egypt, as
Memphis, Heliopolis, Bubastis, Fithom, and
Pelusium. Captains over every one of them.
Kather, " Captains over the whole of them."
So the LXX. the Vulgate and Syriac version.
Some, however, understand " warriors in eafih
of them" (Gesenius, Bodiger, Kalisch).

Ver. 8. — The Children of Israel went out
with a high hand — i.e., boldly and confidently,
not as fugitives, but as men in the exercise of
their just rights — ^perhaps with a certain
amount of ostentation.

Ver. 9. — All the horses sad chariots of
Pharaoh. Bather, " all the chariot horses."



There is no " and " in the original. His
horsemen. Bather " his riders," or " mounted
men " — /.e., those who rode in the chariots.
That the Egyptians had a powerful cavahy at
a later date appears from 2 Chron. xii. 8;
but the Hebrew text of Exodus, in remark-
able accordance with the native monuments
of the time, represents the army of this
Pharaoh as composed of two descriptions of
troops only — a chariot and an infantry force.
(See Hengsteuberg, Aegypten und Mose,
pp. 127-9). Overtook them. It is uncertain
how long the Israelites remained encamped
at Pi-hahuroth. They would wait so long as
the pUlar of the cloud did not move (Num. ix.
18-20). It must have taken Phai-noh a day
to hear of their march from Etham, at least
another day to collect his troops, and three or
four days to effect the march from Tanis to
Pi-hahiroth. The Jewish tradition that the
Bed Sea was crossed on the night of the 21st
of Nisan (Abib) is therefore, conceivably, a
true one.



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 6. — The good resolutions of the worldly are short-lived. By a long series
of judgments, culminating in the destruction of all the first-bom both of man and
beast throughout his whole territory, Fharaoh had been brought down from his original
hardness and pride, had acknowledged God's hand, and allowed the Israelites to take
their departure. He had even besought them to ask that God would bestow upon him
his blessing (ch. xii. 32). But a short time sufficed to change all his good resolutions.
The more he reflected on it, the more grievous did it seem to him to lose the services of
above half a million of industrious labourers. The further they became removed, the
less terrible did God's judgments appear. He had lost one son ; but probably he had
many others ; and time, as it passed, brought consolation. He had quailed before Moses ;
but now, in Moses' absence, he felt himself a king again, and could not bear to think
that he had been made to yield. His state of mind was one ripe for revolt and reaction,
when intelligence reached him which brought matters to a crisis. The report that he
received seemed to show complete geographical ignorance on the part of the Hebrews,
together with " a cessation of the special providence and guidance which their God had
hitherto manifested in their favour " (Kalisch). Upon this his " heart was turned," he
cast his former good resolutions to the winds, and made up his mind either to detam
the Israelites or to destroy them (oh. xv. 9). In all this Pharaoh's conduct is but an
example of the general law, that " the good resolutions of the worldly are short-lived.
They are so, because : —

I They are not grounded on ant wish to do right, bdt on views of present
EXPEDIENCY. The immediate effect of the tenth plague was an impression, common no
doubt to Pharaoh with the other Egyptians, such as found vent in the words, "We be
all dead men " (oh. xii. 33). They were intensely alarmed for their own safety. This
and this alone produced the resolution to let Israel go. It was better to lose tne services
of even six hundred thousand labourers than to lose their own lives. _ Expediency was
their rule and guide. But expediency changes-or at any rate men s views of it change.
Were their lives really in danger ? Had they not been over-hasty in assmnmg this ?
Or, if there had been danger, was it not now over ? Might it not be reaUy expedient
to arrest the march of the Israelites, to detain them, and once more have them for

* irTmr ABB THE EFFECT OF IMPULSE BATHER THAN OF PMNCIPLE. EeSOlutiOM

made upon principle can scarcely change, for they are grounded upon that which is



122 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xiv. 5— 10

the most fixed and settled thing in human nature. But resolutions based upon im-
pulse are necessarily uncertain and unstable, for there is nothing so variable ai
impulse. All men have from time to time both good and bad impulses. Impulse
exhausts itself from its very vehemence, and can never be counted on as a permanent
force. It is here to-day, and gone to-morrow. No reliance can be placed upon it.

III. They are made merely by a man to himself, not made to God. When the
worldly man says, " I am resolved what to do," he means no more than this : " Under
present circumstances, I have come to the conclusion that I will act in this or that way."
He does not mean to bind himself, or, if he does, he soon finds that he cannot bind
himself. There must be two parties to an obligation or engagement. If we wish our
resolutions to be binding, and so lasting, we must make them solemnly, with prayer, in
the sight of God, and to God. It is neglecting this which causes so many good reso-
lutions to be broken, so many vows violated, so many pledges taken fruitlessly. Let
men be sure, before they make a solemn resolution or a vow, that it is a right one to
make, and then let them make the engagement, not to themselves only, or to their
erring feUow-mortals, but to the Almighty.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 5 — 10.— The pwrstcit " It was told the King of Egypt that the people fled,"
etc. Consider : —

I. The motives op the pursuit. The motives were various. 1. Pharaoh had
already repented of having let the people go (ver. 5). Their departure was a sore
humiliation to him. Wounded pride was aggravated by the sense of material loss. " As
serfs and bondagers, the Israelites were invaluable, and to let them go was to annihilate
the half of Egypt's industry " (Hamilton). Pharaoh and his servants, accordingly,
were ready to adopt any plan which promised them revenge. 2. Pharaoh found an
excuse for pursuit, in the allegation that the Israelites had "fled." Fugitives, in the
ordinary sense of the expression, the Israelites were not. Pharaoh having to the last
refused to let them go to hold the required feast in the wilderness, God had taken the
matter into his own hands, and had given them their freedom. The only sense in
which they were " fleeing " was, that, fearing treachery, they were making all the haste
they could to get beyond Pharaoh's reach. They had left Egypt, unfettered by any
stipulation to return. Eeturn, indeed, after what had happened, was out of the ques-
tion. When Pharaoh and his people thrust the Hebrews out from their midst (chs. xi.
8 ; xii. 31 — 34), they neither desired nor expected to see their faces more. But now
that the king had changed his mind, and wished them back again, it suited him to
represent their withdrawal into the solitary regions by the Red Sea as a " flight " — a
breach of good faith. God had forced him to relax his grasp, and while his hand was
open, the nation had escaped, like a bird escaped from the snare of the fowler. As
reasonably might the fowler complain that, the bird, thus escaped, does not voluntarily
return to its old quarters. 3. The determining motive of the pursuit taas the nei/K that
Israel was " entangled in the land." This decided Pharaoh. Almost would it seem to
him as if, by permitting the escaped people to make this huge blunder in their move-
ments, their Deity designed to give them back to his hand. As Saul said of David —
" God hath delivered him into mine hand, for he is shut up, by entering into a town
that hath gates and bars " (1 Sam. xxiii. 7).

II. Its formidable character. Probably a pursuit of escaped slaves was never
organised with greater chances of success. 1. The expedition was popular. "The
heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people " (ver. 5). Court
sentiment is not always a reliable index to the feeUngs of the commonalty ; but it is
probable that the movement to pursue Israel commanded a wide measure of popular
support. The griefs and humiliations they had sustained would fill the Egyptian!
with hatred of the Israelitish name, and would make them willing co-partners in any
scheme to inflict injury on the fugitives. They also, by this time, would be beginning
to realise how great a loss, financially and industrially, they had sustained, by the with-
drawal of so T»st a body of labourers. 2. The whole available military force of Egypt



CB. ziv. 6— 10.J THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 82S

tWM eailed into requisition. " All the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen,
snd his army " (ver. 9). Pharaoh, at the head of this glorious cavalcade, amidst this
sheen of weapons, must have felt himself a greater man, and would wonder anew how
he could have been so befooled as to let his slaves depart. And little, truly, to all
human appearance, would Israel, unpractised in the use of arms, be able to accomplish
against this disciplined and splendidly-equipped host. Pharaoh doubtless thought he
had the people this time securely in his grasp. It was no longer the unarmed Pharaoh
of the palace that Moses had to deal with ; but Pharaoh, at the head of the thousands
of Egypt, with chariots, and horses, and men of war ; and who was that Grod that
would be able to deliver him out of his hand? Alas for Pharaoh, and his " pomp and
circumstance of war I " It was soon to he seen what short work God can make on the
earth of the proudest of his assailants, showing strength with his arm, and scattering
the proud in the imagination of their hearts (Lube i. 51 ; cf. Is. xxxi. 3). 3. The situa-
tion of the Israelites seemed to make them an easy prey. They were " entangled in the
land" (ver. 3). This was the mainstay of Pharaoh's hopes. Israel cotild do nothing to
resist him. Penned up like sheep for the slaughter, they could neither, fight nor See.
Success was certain.

III. Its spmiTUAii lesson. It will readily be felt that in this pursuit of Israel by
Pharaoh, we have an image — ^from the typical character of the history, an intended
image— of a not uncommon experience of the Christian life. 1. We are liable to he
pnrsiied hy the evil from which we thought we had escaped. Whoever thinks to find it
otherwise will live to be disappointed. Conversion — even though one has been led into
Christian liberty with "an Mgh hand" (ver. 8) — is not the end of spiritual conflicts.
We do not escape from the power of evil without many an attempt being made on the
part of the enemies of the soul to reassert their dominion over us. We have a Pharaoh
in the evil of our own hearts, who, after we have left his service, will not fail to pursue
us. Another such Pharaoh we have in the world — old companions, etc. A third ii
the evil One himself, who lets no soul slip from his grasp, without many an attempt to
recover it. This goes on to some extent throughout the whole life. Pharaoh's pursuit
may be viewed as gathering up all these separate pursuits into a single picture. 2. This
experience is usvaUy most acute and perilous shortly after conversion. Naturally, after
the first breaking of the soul with sin, there comes, at a little distance, a time of recoil
and reaction. Passions formerly indulged, surge back upon the heart with something
of the old fury. We thought we had got rid of them ; but they return, pursuing us
with a vehemence which reminds us of Pharaoh's chariots and horses, and fills us
with dismay. Old habits, we thought we had broken with them for ever ; but they are
back again, struggling for the mastery. The world tries all its arts to regain its former
hold. Temptations come in floods. This is the time which tests the reality of
conversion, and practically decides whether God is to have us, or Satan. It is the old
experience of Israel, entangled in the land, and pursued by Pharaoh : if we gain the
victory, we shall probably see our enemies no more, or only in greatly weakened, in semi-
ghostlike forms. 3. The destruction of Pharaoh's host is the pledge of similar victories
to the Church cmd to the individual in like crises of their history. It involves the

Eromise that what God did for Israel here, he will do for us also, if we rely upon his
elp, every time we are spiritually tempted. Beyond this, it pledges and foreshadows
the ultimate and complete defeat of all the enemies of the Church, and of the individual
soul— even to that " last enemy that shall be destroyed," which is death (1 Cor. xv. tS).
The victory, like the pursuit, is gathered up typically into a single picture, though in
actual spiritual history it is spread over lifetimes and ages. It must, however, b«
sorrowfully admitted that in individual cases, type and reality too often fall asunder.
Who has not to mourn partial victories gained over him by the pursuing Pharaohs of
the soul— victories ofttimes almost amounting to the dragging of us back to bondage ?
And what extensive victories have fi-equently been gained by evil over sections of the
Church — victories which seem the very antithesis of this glorious Bed Sea deliverance ?
These, however, are but ebbings in a tide, which on the whole is on the flow, and they
do not touch the lesson of this incident. The pledge given in Pharaoh's destruction,
God will not fail to fhlfll to those who seek his aid; and as to the final victory, that il
seouie, beyond all power of man to prevent it— J. 0.

T ?



824 TEE B00£ OF EXODUS. [oh.xit.&

Ver. 8. — Jehovah hardening Pharaoh's heart. L Notice the emphasis with which
THIS FACT is STATED. The hardening of Pharaoh's heart is mentioned, not in one
place only, but in many. If it were mentioned in one place only, it might be in some
doubtful way, such as would excuse us for passing it over without much examination.
But being mentioned so many times, we dare not leave it on one side as something to
lie in necessary obscurity, meanwhile consoling ourselves that the obscurity is unim-
portant. The statement meets us in the very midst of the way of Jehovah's judgments
on Pharaoh, and we must meet it in return with a resolution to understand it as far
as believers in Jehovah may be able to do. Notice, then, exactly, how often the statement
is repealed. Jehovah says to Moses, or ever he leaves Midian, " I will harden Pharaoh's
heart that he shall not let the people go" (oh. iv. 21). Again, just as Jehovah's
dealings with Pharaoh were beginning, he says : " I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and
multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt " (ch. vii. 3). After the rod
was changed to a serpent his heart was still hardened (ch. vii. 13). Nor was there yet
any change after the waters were turned to blood (oh. vii. 22). He yielded a little when
the frogs came, but as soon as they vanished and there was respite, he hardened his
heart once more (ch. viii. 15). When the magicians confessed the finger of God in the
gnats, his heart remained the same (ch. viii. 19). The flies were taken away, and " he
hardened his heart at this time also, neither would he let the people go " (ch. viii. 82).
In ch. ix. 12 we have an express statement that the Lord hardened the heart of
Pharaoh. After the visitation of the hail there seems to have been a complete sur-
render ; but as soon as it ceases the hardening returns (ch. ix. 35) ; and so the references
continue down to the end (ch. x. 1, 20, 27 ; xi. 10 ; xiv. 4, 8, 17). Making these
references, we are led to notice also the variety of expressions used. Sometimes it is
•imply said that Pharaoh's heart was hardened, sometimes that Pharaoh hardened it,
sometimes that God hardened it ; and once or twice the expression rises to the emphasis
of the first person, and Jehovah himself says " I will harden Pharaoh's heart."

II. Notice the consequent obligation to make devout and eeveeent inquiry
INTO this matter. — There is no way to escape from the feeling that Jehovah did actually
harden Pharaoh's heart. We must treat the hardening of his heart as a great fact just as
Moses did the burning bush ; not doubting at all that it did happen, but rather asking
how and why it happened. We must turn aside and see this great sign, why Jehovah exer-
cised such a fearful power over Pharaoh that the end of it was the destruction of his host
in the waters of the Red Sea. It is a commonplace of speech to say that the expression
here is one of the most difficult in all the Scriptures. It is also a commonplace of
action to shake the head with what is meant for pious submission to an impenetrable
mystery. But what if this be only an indolent and most censurable avoidance of
earnest thought on the ways of God towards men? No one will pretend that the
mystery of this expression is penetrable to all its depths ; but so far as it is penetrable
we are bound to explore. How are we really to know that a thing is unfathomable^
until we make an attempt to fathom it? A devout Israelite, although excluded fi-om
the Holy of Holies, did not make that a reason for neglecting the temple altogether.
Our duty then is to inquire what this hardening of the heart may be, in what sense it
is reconcilable with the goodness and righteousness of God. One reason why this
statement is put so prominently forward in one of the most prominent narratives of
Scripture, and therefore one of the most prominent in aU history, may be this, that we
should be kept from wrong conclusions on man's agency as a responsible being ; con-
clusions dishonouring to God and perilous to ourselves. Is it not a great deal guned
if only this narrative sets people thinking, so as to deliver them firom the snares of
fatalism ?

III. Whatever view we take of this statement must evidently be in the LiOHrr of aiX
WE ABE permitted TO KNOW coNOBRNiNo THE oHARAOTEE OP Jehovah. In Considering
all difQcult statements as to the Divine dealings, we must start with certain postulates
as to the Divine character. Before we can say that God does a thing we must know
that the thing done is not out of harmony with the rest of his ascertained doings.
There may be plenty of evidence as to the thing done, when there is very little evidence
as to the doer. That the streams of Egypt were actually turned to blood was a thMg
that could be certified by the senses of every one who inspected those streams. But
tbst God wrought this strange work could onl^ be made sure by asking, fint, wlmt



(fh.xiV. 8j THE BOOK OF EXoDUS. 328

evidence there was of God's presence, and naet, what consistency there was with hif
acknowledged dealings. It is only too plain that Pharaoh's heart was hardened, that h«
became ever more settled in his resolution to keep hold of Israel as long as he could.
But when we are told that God hardened Pharaoh's heart, then we must at once bring
to mind all that we have heard of God in the Scriptures. We must take back into our
inspection of those distant times all we know of his character whom Jesus revealed ;
for the loving Father of our Saviour is the same with the great Jehovah. The same
holy personality is at work in the God who so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish but have eternal life,
as in the God who hardened Pharaoh's heart. We must not tolerate any conception of
the hardening which contradicts the Divine character. Any view oi this expression
which does not harmonise with the revelation of God in the New Testament is therefore
condemned. There is certainly no word in the Old Testament that more needs to be
looked at in the light of the New than this. We must then dismiss from our minds
any sort of notion that in hardening Pharaoh's heart, God dulled his moral sensibilities
and made him proud, indififereut to pity and justice and the fulfilment of promises.
God cannot put even the germs of these feelings into any human heart ; much less can
he increase them to such portentous magnitude as they attained in Pharaoh. We must
start with the conviction and keep to it, that what God does is right, and that it is right
not because he does it, hut that he does it because it is right. It is not open for us
first to fix our own interpretation of what may be meant by hardening the heart, and
then call it an outrage on moral sense to say that God should do this. What if we
have blundered in our interpretation ?

IV. A right view of this statement must evidently also be taken in the light of

ALL THAT WE KNOW BY AN APPEAL TO HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS. As nO WOrd God has

ever spoken can contradict the facts of external nature, so neither can it contradict the
facts of man's consciousness within. That which is true, independently of the teaching
of Scripture, does not become less true, nor does it become false when Scripture begins to
speak. Man is a free agent ; he acts as one ; he resents being treated otherwise by his
fellow men. He is degraded and impoverished just in proportion as he sinks to a mere
machine. His own decision is required every day, and he finds that wise decisions lead
to profit, and foolish ones to loss. The law treats him as a free agent. Nay, more ;
what can be clearer than that God treated Pharaoh as a free agent ? The plain state-
ment that God hardened his heart is not more frequent than the equally plain statement
that God demanded from him the liberation of Israel. If the one word is to be taken as
simple verity, so is the other. If when God hardened Pharaoh's heart, he really did
something in his nature ; then also when he asked Pharaoh to liberate Israel, he asked
something which he was at liberty to grant or refuse. Moses does not mock us with a
mere trick of rhetoric in saying that God hardened Pharaoh's heart ; neither did God
mock Pharaoh with a useless appeal when he said, " Let my people go." Pharaoh
knew well in his heart that it only needed his resolution and the whole of Israel could
march forth at very short notice. He himself would have been amazed to hear that
God had hardened his heart. True as it was, he would have denied it most strenuously
and indignantly ; and he would have denied it with justice, if it had been taken to
mean the destruction of his own free agency.

V. We may now perhaps consider the ground sufficiently cleared for a positiv*
conjecture as to what is meant by God hardening Pharaoh's heart. It means, we tak«

it, THAT HE WORKED A MIBACULOUS CHANOB IN ONE OF PhARAOH's NATURAL FACULTJBa.

There are certain things in every human being we do not hold that being responsible for,
e.^.. sex, features, temperament, acuteness and activity in seases and intellect. Soaw
persons have good vision, others poor, others are altogether blind. In a similar way,
some are naturally of a tenacious, determined will. Whatever they have set their mind
upon, they hold to, with bull-dog grip. Others again are easily swayed about. Now
clearly just as there are natural difterenoes in sight, or hearing, or intellect, so there must
be natural differences in this will-faculty. A man may have it very strong ; he may be
one who if he sets high and worthy aims before him, will be called resolute, inflexible,
tenacious, indomitable, loyal to conscience ; whereas if his aims be low, selfish and
entirely without ground in reason, he wiU he called obstinate, stubborn, self-willed in
the fullest sense of that word ; and is it not plain that God may take this power of toU-



826 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. roH.wr.a

tion, this will-energy, and do with it, as we know that Jesus in many of his miracles did
with defective or absent faculties? To the blind, Jesus gave vision, and he who could
thus call a non-existent faculty into existence, evidently could increase a faculty
actually existing to any degree such as man might be able to possess. And was it not
Bometlung of this kind that God did in hardening Pharaoh's heart? The term has
come to have a dreadful meaning to us in connexion with Pharaoh, simply because oi
Pharaoh's career. But the very miracle which God wrought in Pharaoh's heart would
have had good results, if only Pharaoh had been a different sort of man. Suppose the
instance of a blind man who gets sight fi-om Jesus. He goes into life again with a
recovered faculty : and that life, with respect to its opportunities, is vastly larger than
it was before. How wiU he use these opportunities? He may use them selfishly, and
Christ's own blessing will thus become a curse ; or he may use them as Christ would
have him use them, to become his efScient and grateful servant. There is a moral
certainty that some who had faith enough in Jesus to have impaired natural faculties
put right were yet destitute of that faith which went on to spiritual salvation and
spiritual service. It was one thing to believe in Christ for a temporal gain, quite
another to believe in him for a spiritual one ; and the one faith while meant to lead on
to the other, would not always have that effect. It is but a fond imagination to
suppose that it would. So Pharaoh, if he had been a humane, compassionate and
righteous man, a king with a true king's feelings for his own people, would, through
the very process of hardening his heart, have become a more efBcient ruler. This is the
way God helpa men who are struggling with temptation, struggling towards truth and
light, towards conquest over appetite, violent temper, evil habits. God does for them
and in them exactly what he (Ud in Pharaoh. What he did in Pharaoh happened to
hasten him in the way where he was already disposed to go. If Pharaoh ha!d been a
blind man as well as a bad one, no one would have had any perplexity as to God's
dealings in restoring his sight and giving it the greatest perfection sight can attain. If
Pharaoh had used that restored vision for bad, cruel purposes, he would have been
blamed, and not Jehovah, and exactly the same remark applies if we change the name
of the faculty. God strengthens the faculty of will, but Pharaoh is responsible for a
right use of the strengthened faculty as much as he was for the use of the weaker
faculty before. God dealt with a part of his nature where he had no power to resist
any more than a blind man would have power to resist, if God were to restore vision to
him. It was not against the hardening that Pharaoh struggled, but against the deliver-
ing. The hardening worked in a way he was not conscious of, but the delivering was
by an appeal to him, and that appeal he was by no means disposed to entertain. It
was not an awakened conscience that compelled him to his successive yieldings ; these
were but as the partial taming of a wild beast. Paul said, " When I would do good,
evil is present with me ; " but Pharaoh was steadily disposed to do evil. His cry would
rather have been, " When I think to get my own way, one of those terrible plagues
comes in to relax my resolutions and confuse my plans."

VI. A certain amount of weight must also be allowed for Phaeaoh's typical posi-
tion AND CHAEAOTER. We must distinguish between what he was typically and what
he was personally. Far be it from us to diminish his guilt or attempt to whitewash his
memory. Doubtless he was a bad man, and a very bad man ; but for typical purposes it
was needful to represent him as not having one redeeming feature. His name is not
Hnked even with one virtue amid a thousand crimes. He had to be set before the
whole world and all ages as the enemy of God's people. He is the type of a permanent
adversary far greater than himself. And just as the people of God, typically considered,
appeared very much better than they actually were, so Pharaoh, typically considered, is
described so as to appear worse, (if.jr. in Num. xxiii. 21, it is said, " He hath not beheld
iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverseness in Israel.") We do not know all
God s dealings with Phataoh. They are hidden beneath the waters of the Red Sea, and
it is no duty of ours to pass judgment on the defeated and baflSed opponent. God calb
us to the more practical business of going on with the living, struggling people. — T>



oa. XIV. 10—14.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



827



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 10—14. — Thb terrob of Isbael and
THE C0TIBA6E OF MosES. It bas been argued
that the Israelites, if they were so numerous as
stated (ch. xii. 37), must have been wretched
cowards, if they were afraid to risk an engage-
ment with such an army as that hastily
levied one which Pharaoh had brought with
him. But the difference between an army
of trained soldiers, thoroughly equipped for
wax, with helmets, shields, breastplates, sworda
and spears, and an undisciplined multitude,
unarmed for the most part, and whoUy unac-
customed to warfare, is such, that the latter,
whatever its numbers, may be excused if it
does not feel able to cope with the former,
and declines an engagement. Numbers,
without military training and discipline, are
of no avail — ^nay, are even a disadvantage,
since the men impede one another. It is not
necessary to suppose that the Israelites were
debased in character by their long servitude
to account for their panic on seeing the army
of Pharaoh. They had good grounds for their
fear. Humanly speaking, resistance would
(imply have led to their indiscriminate mas-
sacre. The alarm of the Hebrews, and even
the reproaches with which they assail Moses,
ore thus quite natural under the circiuustances.
What is surprising is, the noble courage and
confidence of Moses. Moses, though only
vaguely informed, that God would "be
honoured upon Pharaoh and all his host "
(ver. 4), is perfectly certain that all will
go well — how the result wUl be achieved, he
knows not ; but he is sure that Israel will
be delivered and Egypt discomfited ; his
people have no reason to fear — they have but
to " stand stiU and see the salvation of God "
(ver. 13) ; " the Lord will fight tor them; "
they will have simply to " hold their peace "
(ver. 14).

Ver. 10. — They were sore afraid. Before
the Israelites are taxed with cowardice, let
it be considered — 1. That they were un-
armed. Egypt was so settled a govern-
ment that civilians generally went unarmed ;
»nd slaves, like the Hebrews, would scarcely
have been allowed to possess any arms, if
the case had been otherwise. 2. They
had no military training. Whatever had
been done to teach them order and arrange-
ment in connection with their proposed
journey, we may be sure there had been no
drill or training in the use of arms, since this



would have been regarded by the Egyptiani
as open rebellion. 3. They were quite un-
accustomed to warfare. The Pharaohs main-
tained large garrisons of Egyptian and mer-
cenary troops in the frontier provinces, to resist
the invasions to which they were liable. The
Hebrews may have had occasionally to defend
themselves against a hasty raid : but in real
war they had stood aloof, and left the fighting
to the regular Egyptian army. The children
of Israel cried out unto the Lord. The appeal
to Jehovah showed that, with all their weak-
nesses and imperfections, the Israelites were
yet true at heart. They knew where alone
help was to be obtained, and made their
appeal accordingly. No cry is more sure of
an answer than the despairing one — " Lord,
save us ; we perish,"

Ver. 11. — And they said to Moses. It was
not unnatural that, while flying to God as
their only refuge, they should be angry with
Moses. Moses, they would argue, ought to
have known better than to have brought them
into a situation of such peril. He, the leader,
should have known the geography of th»
country — he, the courtier, shoidd have known
the temper of the court. It is always a satis-
faction to men to vent their anger upon some
one when they are in a difficulty. No graves
in Egypt. Egypt, with a necropolis outside
every city, was " a land of tombs ; " surely they
might have found graves there, instead of
being led out to such a distance simply
to. die.

Ver. 12. — Is not this the word that we
did tell thee I The reference was probably
to that time of depression, after their burdens
had been increased, and before the series of
miracles began, when the Israelites had ad-
dressed reproaches to Moses and Aaron (ch.
V. 21), and refused to listen to words of en-
couragement (ch. vi. 9). It was not true
that they had uniformly held the same lan-
guage, and desired Moses and Aaron to cease
their efforts. It had been better for ns to
serve the Egyptians than that we should die.
The spirit to prefer death to slavery, where
they are the only alternatives, is not a common
one ; and we must not be surprised that a
people which had grown up in servitude and
had no traditions of national independence
did not rise to the heroic height attained
under other curcumstances by Greeks, by
Switzers, and by Poles. It would have been
most extraordinary had they done so.
. Ver. 13. — And Moses said , . . fear ye n«t
Moses knew that the pursuit of Israel by the
host of the Egyptians was a part of the
counsel of God, and was to tend in some way
or other to the promotion of God's hon ur and
glory (ver. 4). He had sufficient faith t«
believe in a deliverance the nature of which



rtM eooS; ot fixoDtrS.



tcH. XIV. 16— SS.



it is not likely that he could anyway eonjeo-
tnre. Whether hail would fall from heaven
md destroy them (Josh. x. 11) ; or the earth
gape and swallow them up (Num. xvi. 32) ; or
the angel of death smite them all in the night
(2 Kings xix. 35) ; or any other strange form
ef destmction come upon them, he did not
know ; hut he concluded from what had been
revealed to him, that God was about to vindi-
cate his own honour without the aid of man.
Hence his words — Stand still, and see the
Balvatian of the Lord — which assigned to the
Israelites a mere passive attitude of expecta-
tion. Tor the Egyptians, etc. The order <rf



the words in the original favours the marginal
rendering, which is to be adopted with on«
slight change. Translate — " For, as ye have
seen the Egyptians to-day, ye shall see them
again no more for ever," i.e., ye shall see
them no more alive, vigorous and menacing,
but stUl and lifeless upon the Bed Sea shore
(ver. 30). There is no reference to any other
Egyptians than those vrith Pharaoh in the
camp, nor to any later relations between
Egypt and the chosen people.

Ver. 14. — ^Ta shall hold your peace — t.a
" do nothing, remain at teat."



H0MILBTIC8.

Vers. 10 — 14. — Divine trial a tcmehstone to distinguish faith from wnfaithf'ulntss.
The Israelites had almost as much groimd as Moses to l)elieve in Crod, and trust his
providential care of them. They had seen the whole series of miracles which Moses had
wrought. They had found themselves exempt from visitations which fell with the
utmost severity on their near neighbours. They had heard from Moses God's positive
promise to bring them into Canaan (ch. xiii. 5, 11). Yet at the first appearance of
danger they lost all heart, all hope. They turned upon Moses with reproaches, taxed
him with having brought them out of Egypt against their will, and expressed a readi-
ness to return, and resume their old service. Moses, on the other hand, remained firm
— did not blench — though, like the people, he felt the need of crying to God for aid
(ver. 15), yet he did so in a difi'erent spirit from them — he with faith, they, in panic
terror, without it; he, sure that God would somehow grant salvation, they expecting
nothing less than almost immediate death. Thus the same trial which shows forth one
man's £iith and trust and confidence in God, reveals other men's want of faith. While
things went smoothly, there was no apparent difference — an imprejudiced observer
might have thought the people just as trustful as their leader — but it was not so ; and God
willed that the difference should be made apparent. God will have feiith distinguished
from unfaithfulness, and each recognised as what it really is.

I. Fob the honoub of his tbxjb and faithful servants, which he wills to have set
forth in the eyes of men, out of the tender love he bears towards his people. Though
they be at the best "unprofitable servants," he deigns to recognise merit in their
service, and wishes them to be honoured and held in respect by others, assigning them
this as a part of their reward.

II. Fob tee wabnins of the unfaithfitl ones, who, unless a severe trial came,
might remain self-deceived, imagining themselves to have true &ith, though wholly
lacking it.

in. Fob the mere bioht'b bake. Because he is a God of justice and of truth,
abhorrent of pretence, semblance, make-believe ; and always on the side of sincerity and
openness. " There is nothing secret," he tells us, " that shall not be made manifest,
nor hid that shall not be known" (Luke viii. 17). And this revelation of the true
character of men and actions, which his truthfulness makes an ultimate necessity, his
providence works for here. His trials are touchstones, potent to detect sbamB, and tc
prove the faithfulness of the &ithfiil.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOEa

Vers. 10 — 23. — Thi deliverance. Consider on this section : —

L The obitioal situation of the Israelites. 1. Their position. "Encamp
hig by the sea, beside Pi-hahiroth, before Baal Zephon " (ver. 9). The first view of thn
■ea would probably be attractive to them. Its breeze, after the tedious travel of
the desert, would be deliciously refreshing. They would look with a child's wonder and
delight on the novel spectacle it presented. They would crowd to the beach to watch



ei. XiT. i&-23.] IttE BOOK OP fiXODtJS. S2d



its dancing, white-tipped waves, and curiously to listen to its soft, lapping ripple on tho
shore. Yet this sea, which is to-day their joy and plaything, will have become by
the morrow their terror and despair — their impregnable prison barrier. The experi-
ence is not uncommon. How often does it happen that the very things which at first
we are disposed to hail with delight, to welcome and rejoice in, prove afterwards our
greatest causes of sorrow 1 The engagements we enter into, the friendships we form, the
barguns we make, the society we are introduced to, etc. 2. The approach of the enemy,
" The children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and behold the Egyptians marched after
them" (ver. 10). The mountains are around, the sea is in front, and now — terrible
situation ! — the Egyptians are pursuing, and close at hand. On they come, in
whirling chariots, in ranks upon ranks of footmen ; the long lines are seen defiling
in the distance, and Israel knows that in an hour or two more the avalanche will
be upon them, sweeping aU before it, burying them in destruction. 3. They were
entirely unprepared. They had been resting and unbending, not preparing for battle.
The attack took them by surprise. There was no possibility under the circumstances
of presenting an effectual resistance to the enemy. But, indeed, had the circxmistances
been ever so favourable, these hordes of slaves, accustomed so long to crouch before
the rod of the taskmaster, would scarcely have attempted it. How critical, how
perilous, therefore, the entire situation ! A picture this of those straits of life formerly
refen-ed to, in which having done our utmost, we can do no more, and no altumative
remains but prayer, and quiet waiting upon God.

n. Theib panio and dbspaib (vers. 10 — 13). The appearance of the Egyptians
natmally threw the Israelites into a state of the most acute terror. Kemark:
1. Qreat allowance must he made for them. We do not read that, on this occasion, God
dealt severely with them for the wild, ungrateful words they uttered. He made allow-
ance. (1) Their situation was really very serious. Placed in like circumstances, we
would perhaps not have shown much more faith than they did. (2) They were unused
to the life of freedom. It takes time to teach those who have always been slaves to
appreciate the blessings of the opposite condition. They carry their slave habits with
thtm into the state of freedom. The Israelites had not as yet had much comfort in
their emancipation. Their painful marches had probably been harder work than even
the brick-making of Egypt. They could not as yet feel that it was better to be free,
though enduring hardships in their freedom, than to be more comfortably situated and
be slaves. Do we blame them ? Then reflect how even Christians sometimes murmur
and rebel at the self-denials, the sacrifices, the inconveniences, the persecutions, which
their Christian freedom entails upon them. You complain, perhaps, that you have a
harder time of it now, than even when you served the flesh. It may be true. But do
not forget that the difference between your condition noiv and then, is all the difference
between slavery and bondage, between salvation and a state of wrath. 2. Israel's be-
haviour was nevertheless very unworthy. (1) It was faithless. They did not wait to
ask or see what God, who had already done so much for them, was about to do now,
but at once concluded that he would leave them to perish. It is, indeed, said that they
" cried unto the Lord " (ver. 10), but then, in the next breath, we read of them reproach-
ing his servant and delegate (ver. 11). They are faithless prayers that come from faith-
^ss hearts. (2) It was ungrateful. How willing they had been to be led out of Egypt 1
yet now, at the first approach of danger, they turn on their leader, and taunt him for
having given them their liberty. "Was Moses to blame for the pursuit of Pharaoh ?
Or did he deserve to be thus requited for the noble stand he had taken on their behalf?
Public servants have often much to endure from the fickle humour of the crowd. (3)
It was cowardly. It showed a servile and ignoble spirit even to breathe so base a
regret as that they had not been suffered to continue in Egypt. 3. The contrast of
their conduct with that of Moses. The bearing of Moses at this crisis was sublime in its
calmness and trust. He does not return " railing for railing." No angry word escapes
his lips in reply to the reproaches of the people. They murmur ; he betakes himself to
prayer (ver. 15). They look to the visible chariots ; he to the invisible power which in
mightier than all. They seem bereft of reason, fearing immediate death ; he is cam»,
undaunted, self-collected, and gives them the best of counsel. Ponder his words—
" Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he wiU shew to you
lo-day " (ver. 13). (1) The situation wps one in which God alone eotild bring salvatioa



SAO THE BOOK OF EXODtlS. -jaa. xiv. 10—23,

They could do nothing for themselves. The salvation must be God's from first to last
(2) God would bring them this salvation. The fact that he had brought them intn
this strait was of itself a pledge that he would find them a way out of it. The believer,
who finds himself in situations of difficulty, may cherish the same confidence. (3) Their
duty was to stand still, and see this salvation. So long as means of help are put within
our reach, it is our duty to use them. When no such means exist, or when all avail-
able means have been exhausted, and still the shadow overhangs us, what remains but
to wait patiently on the help of the Most High ? " Stand still " — in trust, in prayer, in
expectancy, in readiness to advance the instant the word is given. " Stand still " — as
opposed to weak murmurings, to passionate regrets, to foolish rebellion against circum-
Btances you cannot alter, — so shall you " see the salvation of the Lord." If nothing else
will do, God will cleave a way for you through the waves, or better stUl,will enable you,
like Peter, to walk on them (Matt. xiv. 29).

in. God's command to Moses (vers. 15-19). 1. The command came in answer to
prayer. " Wherefore criest thou unto me" (ver. 15). The words contain no reproach,
but imply that prayer needed on the instant to be exchanged for action. 2. Moses was
to speak to the people that they go forward. See below. 3. He was to stretch his rod
over the sea, and divide the waters (ver. 16). The confidence of Moses, that God would
show a way of salvation, was thus justified by the result. The light was not given as
early as the people might have wished, but it was given in time. God also aimoimcea
to Moses his purpose of destroying the Egyptians (vers. 17, 18).

IV. The advance through the sea. On this notice — 1. The change in the
position of the 'pillar of cloud and fire (vers. 19, 20). Moving to the rear, it stood
between the Israelites and their pursuers, turning a bright side to the former, and a
dark side to the latter. (See below.) By this seasonable change in its position, it

(1) Illuminated the passage for the Israelites. The light would stream on in front.

(2) Made the way dark and perilous for the pursuers. (3) Hid the pursuers from the
pursued, and vice versa. This, besides being an additional defence to the Israelites,
saved them from the terror which the sight of their pursuers would naturally awaken.
It is related of a party of the Waldenses, that escaping by night from their cruel

{)ersecutors, their path lay through the rugged and perilous defiles of the Alps. At
ength the day broke, and under the light of the rising sun, they turned to survey the
track along which they had trod. By a unanimous and irresistible impulse, they fell
on their knees to thank God for their marvellous preservation. "Here, they had
walked on the very verge of a tremendous precipice where a false step would have
dashed them to atoms ; there, they had skirted the banks of a mountain lake, whose
black waters seem to indicate unfathomable depths," etc. But the dangers amidst
which they had moved had been veiled by the impenetrable darkness. There are some
things which it is better for us not to see. Learn (1) That God adapts his manifes-
tations of himself to his people's needs. (2) That God's presence with his Church is
an effectual bulwark against attack. He can hide his people from their pursuers.
He can darken the path of the latter; can confound their wisdom, divide theii
counsels, perplex them in their courses, and obstruct their progress by providential
obstacles. (3) Spiritually, in times of temptation and trial, we may rely on being
illuminated by God's truth, defended by God's power, and ultimately conducted to a
place of safety. 2. The division of the waters (ver. 21). (1) It was accomplished by
natural agencies, supernaturally directed. " The Lord caused the sea to go back by a
strong east wind all that night." The recognition of natural agency in no wise
detracts from the supernatural character of the transaction ; nay, seeing that direct
miracles are no longer to be looked for by the Church, it is even more helpful to faith
to find that natural means were employed in this instance, than if the result had been
wholly miraculous. It heightens our conceptions of what God can accomplish by
means of the agencies of nature. Instance the defeat of the Spanish Armada (2) It
was unexpected and surprising. In considering the ways by which God might
conceivably save them, the Israelites probably never dreamt of his opening a path
through the sea. So, in those straits of life to which reference has been made, help
usually arrives from unexpected quarters, in a way we had not thought of " God's
way is in the sea, and his path in the deep waters, and his footsteps are not known "
f Fa. IxxviL 19). (3) It affoided the passage that was required. The march through



ca.xtv.il.] THE BOOK: OB* ^XODUS. 331

the sea, certainly, would not be without its difficulties. 'The violent gale, the
thunderings and lightnings (Ps. Ixxvii. 18), the darkness, the boom of the distant
waters, the lurid light of the fiery cloud, the uneven passage, the panic and confusion,
the strangeness and fearfalness of the entire situation, would malte it an experience
never to be forgotten. But if the road was difficult, it was practicable. They could
pass by it. God promises to make a way for us. He does not promise that the way
will always be an easy one. 3. The safe transit (ver. 22). The children of Israel
got safe!'' across. They were preserved in the very midst of the hostile element. Nay,
the sea, which tcay had so much dreaded, became on either side a protecting wall to
them. The same superintending Providence which seoiured, in the shipwreck of Paul,
that "so it came to pass, that they escaped all safe to land" (Acts xxvii. 44),
doubtless brought about a like happy result in the case of the Israelites. Their
deliverance became, in after days, the type of any great deliverance wrought by God
for his siunts. See the figure wrought out in Ps. xviii. 4 — 20. — J. 0.

Ver. 11. — Grud words out of cowardly hearts. There was much, as we haye seen,
to excuse the terror of Israel ; but there is one thing not so easy to excuse, and that
is the sarcastic, unjust spirit in which these terrified Israelites treat their visible
leader. Formerly (ch. v. 21) they had turned on him with bitter reproaches; but
their conduct then was the effect of ignorance and hasty expectations, and their
language, however strong, was simply the language of reproach. But now to reproach
they add sarcasm ; they speak so as to set Moses in a ridiculous as well as a painful
position. We may suppose that when the question was asked, " Whatever can we
have been brought here for ? " some of the wits of Israel would reply, " There is no
room in Egypt to bury us, and so we are brought to be buried here." Then this sharp
speech, quickly flying from lip to lip, as clever things usually do, would in no long time
become the well-nigh universal thought. We have then here to consider the evils of
sarcastic speech. That such speech may do good sometimes, and sometimes be
necessary, need not be denied. But inasmuch as the temptation is almost entirely
the other way, we may dismiss as needless the work of considering what benefits there
may be in sarcastic speech. The ills of sarcasm have so far outweighed the good,
that we had better set ourselves earnestly to consider them. Is it not to be presumed
that fewer such sayings would fall from our lips, if only we habitually considered all
the ill effects that may flow from such a way of spealang?

I. CoNSiDEB THE FAIN iNFLioTED BY SARCASTIC SPEECH. There may be a great deal
of pain inflicted where no sense of pain is expressed. Moses does not here take any
notice of this bitter, clever, far-echoing word about the graves ; but thereby, he only
gives another illustration of his characteristic natural meekness. He may have felt,
and felt deeply, even though he did not speak. If, indeed, he reckoned nothing of
these words, we should hardly think so well of him. To be what is called thick-
skinned is not good, if it is meant thereby that one has no perception of the insolent,
inconsiderate language of others. Lack of sensibility to pain means a corresponding
lack of sensibility to pleasure. We can no more avoid feeling pain when a harsh
word is spoken, than when we receive a cut or a blow. No doubt it is pleasant to say
sharp, clever things; but the pleasure is a momentary one, an entirely selfish one;
it wUl not bear thinking about ; and it may inflict a durable pain. Sharp words may
be like barbed arrows that not all the lapse of years can work out of the memory.
Assuredly we must not shrink from inflicting pain, if duty, affection, and prudence
point that way ; but we had need to be very sure of the indications. To inflict bodily
pain for our own pleasure is admittedly an unchristian thing; and yet w lat a
monstrous inconsistency is revealed in the fact that persons who would not tread on a
worm, are constantly found inflicting the intensest pain by the words they speak.
Knock a man down, and you might do him less harm than by the few words that pass
so lightly, easily, and pleasantly between your lips. Less harm is done by the flst
than by the tongue.

n. Consider the injustice done by it. Sarcastic speeches never can be true
speeches. If they were true, it would be no justification of them, but in the very
nature of things they cannot be true. They must have about them, more or less,
elements of the fiJae and exaggerated. If a thing is to be sharp kt all, there is ao



a^ THE Book of taoDts. [tm. «v. ii

irresistible temptation to make it as sharp and striking as possible ; and truth cannot
but suffer in the process. Epigrams are always to be distrusted. How dearly tJu
injustice of sharp sayinys comes out in the illustration he/ore us ! The speech about
these graves was a witty, clever one, but how unjust I As it happened, Moses was
under no responsibility whatever for bringing the Israelites to this particular place.
He had not been left to use his own iudgment and discretion, but was as much under
the guidance of the cloudy pillar as all the rest. Hence from this illustration we receive
a slight warning that we may not only be inflicting ^ai/i, which is much, but injustice,
which is a great deal more. You who would not steal the least fragment of a man's
property, be equally careful to speak no word which may do hurt to his reputation.
Speak that you may inflict no pain ; speak also that you may do no injustice.

ni. CoNsiDEB THE PEBiL TO THE 8PEAKBE HIMSELF. Clevemcss is a perilous, and
not unfrequently a fatal gift. To be sharper than our neighbours may prove in the
end a dangerous thing for our own interests. Some who are admired, courted, widely ,
spoken about, for their powers of mimicry, find in the end that it might have been fer
more for their comfort and permanent well-being, if they had been of only common-
place abilities. To be admired is a poor satisfaction, mere dust and ashes, Lf it has to
stand instead of being loved. Make fim of other people, seize without mercy on their
weaknesses, their follies and their natural defects, and the chances are that you will
find yourself exposed, in turn, to like treatment. Those who attack with sharp
speeches are just the men who deserve — if they always got their deserts, and it were
expedient to retaliate — equally sharp speeches in return. What about these Israelites
here ? Did they not by talking in this fashion show clearly what a mean, miserable
company they were ? They hurt themselves far more than they hurt Moses. There is
hardly one who takes pride in what he calls his plain speaking, but might be pilloried
himself, and greeted with sarcastic speeches as severe as any he had uttered, and pro-
bably more charged with truth. And the worst of all is, that in the end those
habituated to evil-speaking may find themselves forsaken in their own great need. We
need friends, and, if we would have them, we must show ourselves friendly, ff we
go through the world constantly replenishing our sarcastic quiver with arrows, and
stretching the bow on every slight provocation, then we must expect people to give us
a wide berth ; and when at last we come to be stricken ourselves, it will be no matter
of just complaint if we are left well-nigh alone.

IV. CONSIDEB HOW MUCH GOOD IS THWARTED AND NEUTRALISED ET THIS WAT OF

SPEAKING. We may flatter ourselves that there is good to be gained in making folly
ridiculous, and so there may be ; but it can only be when the speaker is one of great
wisdom, goodness, and habitual elevation of life. Certainly we find in the Scriptures
the language of solemn irony from Grod himself; but his words are above our criticism,
and we are not at liberty to speak as he speaks. We are all upon the same level of
sin, ignorance, and partial views, and must speak as remembering this level. To affect
authority and superior station will be ruinous to all good effects from any remonstrance
of ours. Whatever truth is revealed to us, and put upon our consciences to speak,
must be spoken m love, in humility, and in the very best season we can find. If it is
really our desire to win others to better, wiser and manlier courses, we had better not
begin with sharp speeches. True it may be that the world is mostly made up of fools,
and perhaps there is no occasion when we do more to prove our own place in the large
company than when, in our contempt and impatience, we call other people fools. We
are not then behaving as fishers of men. We are not then becoming all things to all
men in order to save some. Many a Christian has had to sorrow for his imperfect
control over the gift of intellectual quickness. Before his conversion, he used his
gift of wit, repartee, and ludicrous conception with careless freedom and delight, not
staying to consider whom he hurt, whom he hindered. Then when such a one submits
at Last to the true lord of the intellect, he finds it hard, in this matter in particular, to
bring his thoughts into captivity to the obedience of Christ.

V. God's people must themselves pkepabe to bk sakcastioallt and bittsblt
BFOKBN OF. Only let each one of us consider his own temptation to say hard things,
and then we shall cease to wonder that hard things are said of us. We cannot expect
to receive from others, but as we give to them. Anyway we must be ready for hard
things, ready in particular for hard speeches. Where Christ went, his people must go;



OB.XIT. 13.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 333

and lie went in a path where he was called a gluttonous man and a winehihber, a Mend
of publicans and sinners. If he was sneered at on the very Cross, it is babyish on our
part to complain because the world sneers at us in the comparatively easy paths we
tave to tread. Our strength, our joy, and our serenity must not depend on the world's
opinion. Moses was getting a hint even thus early that he must not expect considera-
tion from his brethren, with respect to his feelings and difficulties. The joys of Moses
were to be got from quite another direction, even from the assiduous tenderness of
Jehovah himself.

VI. Cultivate a habit op pitiful consideration towabds the men op bae-
CA8TI0 SPEECH. Remember that they are not happy men. How can a man be happy
whose eye is for ever lighting on the blots and loathsome ulcers of human nature ; who
seems to have a morbid acuteness of vision with respect to them, but to become
purblind when noble and Divinely-produced elements of character appear? Such a
man is to be pitied with Christ's own gentle pity. Do not meet his sarcasm with
sarcasm, but here emphatically return good for evil. Force him to see that there is a
great deal more in the world, if only he will look far it, than dupUoity, selfishness,
and stupidity. Show him how to discern, even in the jostling and wrangling crowd,
men who have in them the mind which was in Christ. — Y.

The passage of the Red Sea. — " Fear ye not, stand still (firm), and see the salvation
of God " (Ex. xiv. 13). Mark, by way of introduction, the critical character of this
event, the greatest in Old Testament history. (For valuable suggestions on this point,
see Stanley's " Sinai and Palestine," p. 33, and Ewald's " History of Israel," vol. ii. p. 70,
Bng. ed. Ewald even is constrained to speak of " this event, whose historical cer-
tainty is well established."') Lay solid foundations for sermonic treatment by describing
first the scene, expounding the history, and then evolving the truths in the history.

I. The scene. In the Gospels, the spiritual significance is almost independent of
topography. Only two or three scenes (e.g., Jacob's well : the ridge whence Jesus saw
from OUvet the city and wept over it), can be absolutely and certainly identified. But
here sermon and story are inextricably blended with sea and shore. Note ! twice change
of direction : (1) not by way of Philistia : (2) not by caravan road, round by the mouth
of the western arm of the Eed Sea ; but brought into a position of extreme danger,
with the sea roaring between Israel and the freedom of the desert. The writer of this
section of the commentary believes, that Israel encamped on what is now known as the
plain of Suez, the sea reaching then much further north than now. (See maps and
interesting article, " Une Splendeur de la Foi," by L'Abbe' Moigno,' in " Les Mondes "
for Aug. 28, 1879.) Any detailed map will show — that there Israel would have the sea
on the east, hills to north and south, an open valley to the west, along which the
Egyptian forces would charge. Deepen the impression, that these two millions of
people, some indeed armed, but not yet organised, with women, children, and the aged,
were in a position utterly hopeless. It was a situation of despair — but that which is
impossible with man is possible with God.

II. The histobt. One of the objects should be to vivify and make very real to the
hearers, the histories of the Old Testament, which sometimes seem so very far away from
modem thought and life. With this intent, bring out clearly, by aid of exposition else-
where, points like these : — probably seven days elapsed between the Passover and the song
on the eastern shore of the sea, occupied thus : — 1. By Israel. On the 15th, to Succoth,
fifteen miles ; on the 16th, to Etham, fifteen miles ; on the 17th, to the dangerous position
by the sea; on the 18th, 19th, and 20th, encamped there, completing arrangements for
the pilgrimage to Sinai and Palestine. 2. By Eyypt. Every movement watched by the
government ; night of 15th, report from Succoth ; of the 16th, from Etham ; morning
of the 17th, courier could carry in a few hours, over the thirty miles, intelhgence
that Israel had taken the wrong (?) road. Sudden determination of the king. Had
three days to overtake. Called together six hundred picked chariots, other chariots,
infantry, and led in person. On the afternoon of the 20th, the pickets of Israel saw
far away the force coming over the sand ridges. Horror of the two millions. Th«

• In this artide the Abbe' proposes to raise £12,000 tp search ia the st^id for the 4«bri| qf
Fburaoh's army. See Is. xi. \^



9Si



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



fcH. XIV. 15 — 18.



splendid cities of tombs in Egypt rose to the memory. But here soon a sort of gigantic
anticipation of Isandiila. A cry against Moses, and unto Jehovah. The moral
attitude of Moses mixed — cheer for the people — a fainting heart before God. His silent
prayer. " The upward glancing of an eye." The word of assurance. " Forward.'
The movement of what must have been, in this instance, wall of cloud and fire, to give
soft electric light to Israel and over the sea, to be darkness to Egypt, and to cover the
greatest military movement in all history. The short time demanded perfect order.
Then came the ploughshare of the east wind. In the confusion and darkness, Egypt
eagerly followed. The look out of the cloud, shot with thunderbolt — a look which
meant ruin. Sea rolls back from the rear of Egypt. Chariot clashes against chariot.
Wheels lost. On the night of the lith Israel became a nation. On the morning of
the 21st the nation was free.

III. Truths. 1. Neither first nor even second openings in life are always into the
way God intends us to take. A common error to suppose that any opening is " pro-
vidential." Not via Philistia : nor the caravan road to Sinai. God's object to develop
moral thoughtfulness, and the scrutiny of apparent leading. M.g., Will this course
imperil my principle, lead into temptation, and ruin my soul ? 2. Seemingly hopeless
entanglement may have great issues. Moral firmness developed; dependence upon God.
Salvation complete, and anthem of victory. 3. The temper for crisis is that of calm
confidence. No panic I Had there been panic, Israel had been food for Egyptian
sabres! "Stani firm I" (see Heb.) Apply this to state of reUgion; things social,
political, at home and abroad ; to affairs personal. (See good sermon on this, by Pro-
fessor Jowett, in " Christian World Pulpit," March 26, 1879.) 4. Confidence should
express itself in prayer. Note the difference : the cry of Israel, and the evidently silent
appeal of Moses. 5. Action must follow prayer. " Wherefore criest," etc., an intima-
tion that prayer was already answered ; and now Moses to the front, and every man to
bis post. 6. When Ood leads into danger, He will certainly see us safely through it.
If wantonly and wilfully we go into danger, we may (through mercy) be delivered ; if
on Divine leading, we shall. JS.g., going into some scene of vice, out of curiosity, or
worse motive ; on the oth&r hand, at the request of a distant friend, to save a soul.
Difference between presumption and courage. 7. Salvations of Ood are ever timely
amd complete. 8. After God's great salvation comes, the dumbness of amazement, arid
after the dumbness, song. " Jehovah shall fight for you, and ye shall be dumb."
(Heb. xiv. 31; xv. 1; Eev. xv. 2— i.)— E.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 15 — 18. — God's answbb to Moses'
Pbatxb. To the faithful pi'ayer of Moses,
albeit pitched perhaps in too low a. key, God
made gracious answer. A " cry " had been
unnecessary, since his word was aheady
pledged to bring his people safe to Canaan,
and to get himself honour upon Pharaoh in
connection with the pursiut (ver. 4). But,
as the appeal has been made, he responds with
a plain statement of what has now to be
done : — 1. The Israelites are to make them-
selves ready for a forward movement (ver. 15) ;
2. Moses is to stretch out his rod over the
Bed Sea, and it will be divided ; 3. The
Israelites are then to make the passage on dry
ground ; 4. The Egyptians are to follow, and
then honour is to be gotten upon them ; and
they are to know by the result that God is
indeed JehQvtl)



Vers. 15, 16. — ^Wherefore criest tlion to
me ? It is evident that Moses, while boldly
encouraging the people, himself needed the
support and consolation of prayer. The Sy-
riac translator shows us that he divined the
fact aright, when he without authority in-
truded the words, " Moses then cried to
Jehovah." The form of the Divine reply to
his prayer seems to indicate a certain amount
of reproach, as if Moses himself had become
unduly anxious. Speak onto the children of
Israel that they go forward. The Israehtes
were not to rest in their encampment, but to
form in line of march, and descend to the very
shore of the sea, and there hold themselves in
readiness. Moses was to lift up his rod — the
rod with which his other miracles had been
wrought — and stretoh out his hand oyer the
sea, and then the drying up was to begin
Thus was most of the night passed.

Ver. 17. — I will harden the hearts of th*
lbfjfiia,at. Here, and here only, are titt



OB. XIV. 16 — 18.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



335



hearts of the Egyptians generally said to have
been "hardened. Whatever meaning we
attach to the expression, there will he no
more difficulty in applying it to them than to
Pharaoh. They had made themselves par-
takers in the monarch's gmlt by mustering
in hot haste when he summoned them, and
had allowed themselves to revel in the antici-
pation of plunder and carnage (ch. xv. 9).
Under such ciicumstanees, the general laws
which govern human nature would be quite
sulficient to make then: hearts grow hard.
They shall follow them. Upon this act —
rash, if the phenomenon had been a mere
natural one — presumptuous and infatuated if
the drjnng up were regarded as miraculous —
depended altogether the destruction of the
Egyptiana They had only to have "stood



still " and allowed the escape, which a week
previously they had done their best to en-
courage, in order to have remained safe and
unhurt. It was their stupidity and blood-
thirstiness which alone brought them into any
danger. Upon his horsemen. Bather "his
chariotmen." See the comment on verse 9.

Ver. 18. — The Egyptians shall know that
I am the lord. All Egypt would learn the
destruction of the host, and the circumstances
under which it occurred, whose miraculous
nature could not be concealed. And the con-
sequence would be a wide recognition of the
superior might of Jehovah, the God of Israel,
over that of any of the Egyptian deities.
More than this the Egyptians were not
likely to admit under any circumstances.



H0MILETIC8.

Vers. 15 — 18. — The reward of faith. God rewarded the faith and trust of Moses by
a revelation of the manner of that deliverance which he so confidently expected.
Hitherto the manner had been involved in mystery ; and it is scarcely likely that any
one had even conjectured it as a possible thing. There was no precedent for such an
interference with the laws of nature; and the thought could scarcely occur to the
imagination of any one. But, to reward his faithful servant, to quiet his anxiety, and
give definiteness to his expectations of deliverance, God now plainly revealed the mode
in which he would save his people. God is ever " a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him," and especially rewards faith. The faith of Abraham, which made him trust
God's promise to create of him a great nation, when as yet he had no child, obtained for
him the gift of Canaan and the covenant of oiroumcision. The faith of Noah, who
believed God's threat of a deluge, which all the rest of the world scorned, saved him and
his family from perishing by water. The faith of Enoch, by which he " walked with
God" — ^though he could not see him — caused God to " take him." Faith brings us, to
a certainty, — 1. The present blessing of an assured trust which nothing can imperil ;
2. Quietness and confidence — the feeling that we may " stand still and see the salvation
of God ; " 8. Freedom from panic fears and unworthy apprehensions ; 4, Cheerfulness
and hopefulness — a conviction that God will give us what is best for us. Faith may
also, by God's mercy, obtain for us further gifts in the future — blessings not naturally
arising out of it, but added to it as rewards by God, and signs of his approval. The
faith of Moses was ultimately rewarded, 1. By success in the great object of his life — the
liberation of his people and their safe-conduct through all the perils of the wilderness to
the verge of Canaan ; 2. By God's approval of him as " Moses, the servant of the Lord "
(Deut. xxxiv. 5) ; and 3. By the vision of Canaan from Pisgah.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 16. — " Speak unto the children of Israel that they go forward!" I. Forwaed!
— God's constant injunction to his Chukch. Tke law of Christian life is advance.
God never brings his Church or people into positions from which retreat is necessary,
or in which advance is impossible. We may bring ourselves into false positions of this
kind, but Ood never leads us into them. In proportion as we surrender ourselves to
his guidance, we may depend on being conducted always "forward." There is no
instance in the whole history of the Old or New Testament Church in which, while
God's guidance was followed, retreat had to be made. Forward! (1) In Christian
attainments. (2) In holy living. (3) In labours for the advancement of Christ's kingdam.
(4) In missionary enterprise. (5) In doing good to our fellow-men.



ne THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. xiv. 13— »1.

n. FOEWABD 1 — ^IN CONTEABT WITH VAIN LAMENTATIONS, AND UNBECOMINO EXPOSTU-
LATIONS WITH Fboyidenoe. These do no good, but much harm. They betray an
unbelieving spirit. If God brings us into situations of trial, the fact that it is he who
brings us into them is of itself a pledge that with the trial, he wUl make also m
way of escape (1 Cor. x. 13). When the foe bears hard upon us, we should, instead of
losing heart, rather feel that the time has come for getting everything in readiness fer
aavance — ^the " great door and effectual " must be on the very point of opening.

III. Forward ! — by the way which God makes fob us. At the same moment that
he is saying — " Speak unto the children of Israel that they go forward," he is doubtless
commissioning some Moses to stretch out his rod over the sea, to open up the way for
us. God never says " Forward," without at the same time opening the way.

IV. FoBWAED! — with good HEABT, STEONO hope, and firm ASSUEANCB of BEHfO

peotected on the jouenet. Going forward at God's word, the Israelites were assured
of God's protection. They were certain of reaching the further shore in safety. No
fear of the waves rushing back, and burying them. Pharaoh pursued, but he was not
permitted to capture them, and was himself overthrown. We may confront any perils,
if duty calls, and God goes with us. Cf. Luther at Worms. — J. 0.

Vers. 15 — 18. — Obedience necessary to salvation. I. The duty of those who aeb
leaders amono theib beeteeen in times of tbial. 1. There is a time for action as
well as prayer : " Wherefore criest thou unto me ?" (1) The time of the leader must
not be spent in prayer only — there are arrangements to make and needs to meet. In
times of difficiilty God asks for obedience. A path of love, of forgiveness of injuries, of
some service, lies right before us as our duty in that hour. True faith will walk in it.
This too is an app^ to our Father as well as prayer. (2) Unbelief may hide itself
behind a form of devotion. 2. To speak to them that they go forward. 3. To do
what God bids them in opening up their brethren's way. "Lift thou up thy rod."
The lifting up of the rod seemed a vain thing, but it clove a path for Israel through the
heart of the sea. Our service for our brethren in the day of their trouble may cleave a
way for them. A people's progress may be hindered by a leader's indolence and
selfishness.

n. God's unceasing woeking on his people's behalf (vers. 17, 18). 1. His mercy
was veiled, but he was working still. The very pursuit of the foe was from him.
2. Egypt had still to receive one crowning lesson regarding Jehovah's might and
unfailing guardianship of his people. When foes pursue, when sins rise up to recover
their former sway, it is that God may destroy the one and judge the other. — U.

Vers. 13 — 31. — Ood completes the deliverance of the Israelites from Pharaoh a/nd
removes their terror. 1. Note the way in which Mobes meets the complaints of the
Ibeaelites. They had addressed to him sarcastic, flippant, and in every way unworthy
speeches. They were not so filled with fear, not so occupied with the troubles of their
own hearts, but that they could find a malignant delight in striving to make him
ridiculous. This mingling of feelings on their part, fear mingled with hate, makes the
single-heartedness of his reply all the more manifest and beautiful. The time is not
one for liim to stand on his own dignity, or bandy sharp language with mean men, even
were his character such as to incline him that way. There is but a step from the sub-
lime to the ridiculous ; in one sense he makes that step, and by his noble, impressive
exhortation, he at once sweeps the ridiculous out of the path of the sublime. The
subject of the grave surely is never a seemly one for jesting; and the jesting was
unseemliest of all at this present hour. One almost sees these little, pert jokers retreat-
ing into the background before the great believer. They would not trouble him again
for a while. It was not Israel that had come out of Egypt seeking for graves, but
Pharaoh and his host. These murmurers did indeed find graves in the wilderness by
and by ; but it was for a subsequent transgression. It is part of the peculiar pathos
of human life that no one can tell where he must die and be buried. So much then
with respect to the meek and comely attitude — true attitude of a prophet of God — which
Moses here assumed. He rises clear above the little men of the crowd, for God has
taken him out, in particular, with a high hand, and now what shall the matter of hig
«lt»w9r b^? Se doep got turn tow«^d$ God doubtfully. (Contr^t his ponduQt nere



OH. xrv. 16—18.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 331

with hia conduct in ch. v. 22 — 23.) The peril is to the natural eye overwhelming, but
it is not perU to him, for God has flUed him with the spirit of faith. He himself
unfearing, can tell the people not to fear. He himself, calmly expectant that some
great deUverance is on the way, can recommend, his face not belying his tongue, the
same calm expectancy to the people. Let them stand still and wait, instead of rushing
hither and thither, weakening themselves still more by their disorder. Moses, exactly
comprehending that the position is one in which man can do nothing, and Ood must do
everything, presses this view on his brethren. What is his personal dignity, his amov/r-
propre, compared with the glorious view to be opened out to them ? Here is a lesson
then, when people speak to us out of Uttle envies and personal grudges. Reply by direct-
ing them to great soul-fiUing truths. Lead, if you can, mean, grovelling souls to the
mountain top. Give them the chance of seeing the wide inheritance of the saints ; and
if they cannot take it in, then the loss, and the responsibility of the loss, is theirs.

n. Note the insteitctions which God gives to Moses, vers. 15 — 18. 'I'hese instruc-
tions, astounding as they must have seemed at the time, were, nevertheless, eminently
practical. Those who bear the name of practical among men are those who keep well
within what is reckoned possible by the ordinary judgment. Men of the Columbus
type, such as great discoverers and great inventors, have to bear for long enough the
name of being mere visionaries, day-dreamers, wasters of life. But God's practicality is to
set his servants at once to things reckoned impossible. His directions are very simple :
" Go forward." He waits till the people are indeed shut up on every hand, and then he
says, " Go forward." They were to continue in the same direction, aud that led onward to
the sea. This was the appointed path to the mountain where they were to serve God.
Yes ; and if the path had been through the rocky steeps which enclosed them, God
could have dissolved those steeps away. Or if it had been through Pharaoh's host, he
could have smitten that host utterly, as he afterwards did Sennacherib's. Notice that
in this command there is another proving of faith. First, with regard to Moses. For
it will be observed that there is nothing to show that Moses knew anything of what
would happen in the Eed Sea, until God now made it known. Probably during the
whole course of the plagues, the precise nature of each plague was revealed to Moses
only just as it was approaching. And so here, in this new imprisonment, he was
quietly waiting for light to come from God, well knovring that sufficient would be done
to deliver Israel — that God had led his people into this entanglement, not without a per-
fectly definite purpose, and that the end of all would be the destruction of the Egyptians.
But he knew not any more than the least child in Israel, until just beforehand, how all
this was to be brought about. There was also a great proving of the faith of the people.
God has a command for them, and it is one requiring great faith. Notice how appro-
priately it comes on, as the climax of past treatment. We have seen the Israelites
sharing at first in the sufferings of the Egyptian plagues. After a while, the district in
which they reside is exempted from the plagues. Then when the first-born are smitten,
the Israelites, hy their obedience to Jehovah! s instructions, escape the blow. And now at
last their escape is to be completed by again obeying Jehovah's instructions, and equally
in the obedience of a pure faith. But mark the most important advance and develop-
ment of faith, which is here illustrated. Two quite different states of mind are brought
out by slaying the passover lamb in faith, and by going towards and through the Red
Sea in faith. To slay the passover lamb is to do a thing for which no reason is given
but the command of God. But it is a thing which plainly can he done. It involves no
peril ; there is no appearance of impossibility about it ; the only temptation is to think
It useless, a superfluous reasonless form. On the other hand, it is perfectly plain that
passage through the Eed Sea will provide escape. The question is, can such a passage
be gained, and therein the temptation lies. In slaying the passover lamb, the Israelites
had to humble their intellects before Divine wisdom ; in advancing to the Eed Sea, they
had to show the utmost confidence in Divine power. We must steadily believe that all
God commands is useful and necessary ; we must also steadily believe that all which is
fit for him to do, he most assuredly can do. It is a matter deserving consideration that
Jehovah should have given such a command, seeing the state of vmhdief and carnality
in which the Israelites evidently were. They had not spoken like men ready for siuch
tn awful miracle. But we can see certain things which made obedience easier. For
one thing, God had shut them up to it. If they had been taken down to the Bed Sea,

EXODUS. Z



3S8 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. xir. 16— 1&

with no FhaTaoh behind, with no enclosing mountains on either hand, they nught have
rebelled. But circumstances lent a strong compulsive aid. We know not what we can
doi what triumphs of faith we can acliieve till God shuts us up to them. Then there
was something also in the sight of the rod. God commanded Moses to exhibit some-
thing which had already been associated with wonderful deeds. Thus we see Omi
making plain to Israel the way out of their peril, and so far all is definite. But this
being told, the definite immediately shades away into the indefinite. The indefinite
mark, but not therefore the uncertain. All is manifest and straightforward with regard
to the Israelites ; they are to be safe. But what about Pharaoh and his army t We
remember Peter's question to Jesus concerning John (John xxi. 21). "Lord, what
shall this man do ? " So Moses might have questioned Jehovah — " Lord, what is to
happen to Pharaoh ? " Something on this matter Jehovah does say, just enough to
preserve confidence, attention and expectation; but for the details Moses and Israel
must wait a little longer. Meanwhile an inspiring hint is given of great judgment,
great himiiliation, and for Jehovah himself, great glory. Here the information stops;
and here we again notice the eminent practicality of God's instructions. For the day's
need and for our own need God gives us the amplest guidance ; but what is to happen
to our enemies, and exactly how they are to be removed he keeps within his own
knowledge, as within his own power. The proper answer to all impious and curious
pryings on our part is that which Jesus gave to Peter — " What is that to thee ? follow
thou me."

III. Note the consequent dealikqs of Jehovah in delivebiko Isbael and
DBSTEOYINO THE EaTPTiANS. 1. The altered position of the cloudy pillar. The angel
of God removed and went behind. By the angel of God is possibly meant the pillar
itself. Just as the burning bush is described as a messenger of God (ch. iii. 2), so here
there seems an indicating of the cloudy pillar as another messenger. Just at this
moment it was not wanted for purposes of guidance. Indeed it would not have
proved sufficient for these purposes. Jehovah had found it needful himself to in-
tervene and signify by unmistakable words, the way in which he would have the
people go. The cloudy pUlar was enough for guidance only as long as the Israelites
were in open and ordinary paths. But where it could not be used for guidance, it could
be used for defence. God's messengers can easily change their use. The doud, by
changing its place, hindered Egypt, and thereby helped Israel. Nor did it help Israel
in this way alone ; the boon was a positive as much as a negative one. Surely this was
a marvellous cloud, for it had in it darkness as well as light. Thus it served a double
purpose. Hiding Israel from the Egyptian eyes, it proved the best of fortifications.
But at the same time it shone upon the Israelites and gave them the benefits of day
with the immunities of night. They could put everything in perfect order for the
march, so as to take it the moment the way through the sea was ready. Imagine that
miraculous light shining down on that miraculous path, even from end to end ; just
like a light shining down a street ; and as it were pointing Israel onward, even though
it stood behind them. Thus we are made to think of all the double aspect of the work
of Jesus, how at the same time he confounds his enemies and guides and cheers his
Mends. Consider this especially in connection with his resurrection. On the one hand
he abolished death ; on the other he brought life and immortahty to light. 2. The
obedience of Moses and the Israelites to the Divine command. As we have noticed, all
this had been well prepared fur beforehand. Moses had been led up to it, and so had
Israel ; and therefore when the moment came, there was no hesitation. After what has
been already said there is no need to dwell on this actual obedience. It is enough to
note in passing, that God having duly arranged all conspiring causes, the effect followed
as a matter of course. But now we come to the point of main interest in the closing
section of this chapter, namely, 3. The conduct, treatment, and ultimate fate of the
Egyptiam*. There is first, their infatuated advance. They go down in the path which
Jehovah had made for Israel as if it was to remain a path for them. The Egyptians
were too full of their purpose, too fuU of the spirit of vengeance and greed to notice
their danger, even though it was a danger of the most obvious kind. They might have
gone into certain positions where a miracle would have been required to put them in
danger; but here the miracle is already wrought, and these enemies of Jehovah
■nd Jehovah's people advance, as if the piled-up waters were thus to remain, their



OH. »T. 19— 22.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 881

ihape settled for ages to come, just like the shape of the solid hills around. The
only thing to explain their conduct is the momentum that had been produced in their
own breasts. It was with them just as it is with the runner when he has gained •
certain speed. Suppose in his headlong career he comes to a chasm, stop he cannot.
Either he must clear the chasm or fall into it. The nezt point to be noticed is OocPi
treatment of them in their advance. The whole progress of affairs is exactly arranged so as
to produce the deliverance of Israel and the destruction of Pharaoh. The very nearness
of Pharaoh and his army to the Israelites, instead of proving ruin to them, only more
efTectually proves ruin to him. Some of the more timid among the Israelites might be
tempted to say, " Oh 1 that the waters would return, immediately the last Israelite is
ashore ; let the great barrier be set between us and Fharaoli as soon as possible." But
such a course would only have secured a present safety at the expense of a future one.
Jehovah has a far better way of working than any which human panic can suggest. He
lets the Egyptians go on until the whole army is in the midst of the sea, and then he
who has truly proved himself a man of war opens the last decisive battle by making
the chariots useless. Nay, not only were they useless ; they seem to have become a
hindrance and a terror. Jehovah neither hastens nor lingers ; he smites at the right
time, and therefore he smites effectually ; and now we are called to listen to a resolution
made too late. " Let us flee from the face of Israel." If only they had been wise in
time, they would not have had to flee at all. What were they doing in the midst of
the Red Sea ? Nay more, what were they doing out of their own covmtry ? They
had trifled and trifled with danger after danger, and now they had trifled beyond escape.
It is no time to talk of flight when the door of the trap has fallen. The waters are
on the point of returning ; the ordinary covu'se of nature is about to assert itself. Why
should that course be interrupted one moment longer, simply to preserve a host of
proud and dangerous men. The great lesson from Pharaoh's fall is to be time in time.
Flee from the wrath to come ! there is a possibility of that ; but when the wrath has
come, who then shall flee ? (Eev. vi. 16-17).

IV. Note tSb impression said to have been peoduobd on the minds or this
IsBABLiTBS. Ver. 31. More desirable words surely could not be spoken of any people
than that they fear Jehovah and believe in him and his servants. The fear and the
faith, however, must be of the right sort, arising out of a right state of the heart, and
cleaving to God through all the vicissitudes of circumstance. Such unfortunately was
not the fear and faith of these Israelites. We must have heart knowledge of God's
character, and come to imderstand how necessary it is to pass through a shaking of the
things that can be shaken in order that the things which cannot be shaken may remain.
Iheu we shall fear as we ought to fear, and believe as we ought to believe. — ^Y.



EXPOSITION.



Ver. 19 — 22. — The Fasbaob of the Bed
Sea. The Egyptians had arrived in the near
neighbourhood of the Israelite camp, at the
close of a long day's march, towards evening.
Having ascertained that the fugitives were
still, as they had expected them to be, shut in
between the sea and the wUdemess, they were
content, and made no immediate attack, but
encamped over against them. Hereupon,
" the pillar of the cloud," which was at the
time in front of the Israelite camp — ^pro-
bably near the point where God intended the
passage of the sea to be effected — " removed "
from this position, and placed itself directly



alone was calculated to alarm the latter, and
prevent them from stirring till near day-
break ; but, the better to secure their inaction,
the pillar was made to overshadow them with
a deep and preternatural darkness, so that it
became almost impossible for them to ad-
vance. Meanwhile, on the side which was
turned towards the Israelites, the pillar pre-
sented the appearance of a bright flame,
lighting up the whole encampment; and
rendering it as easy to make ready for the
march as it would have been by day. Thus,
the beasts were collected and laden — ^the
columns marshalled and prepared to proceed



behind the Israelite encampment, between in a certain fixed order — and everything mad«
thtm and the Egyptians. This movement | ready for starting so soon as the bed of the

12



840



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



LcH. xnr. 1»— 22



ses slionid lie sufficiently dxj. Moses, a1}ont
nightfiill, descending to tie water's edge,
stretched forth his rod over the waves, and,
an east wind at once springing up — accom-
panied perhaps by a strong ebb of the tide —
the waters of the gulf were parted in the
vicinity of the modern Suez, and a dry space
left between the Bitter Lakes, which were
then a prolongation of the Gulf, and the
present sea-bed. The space may have been
one of considerable width. The Israelites
entering upon it, perhaps about midnight,
accomplished the distance, which may not
have exceeded a mile, with all their belong-
ings, in the course of five or six hours, the
pillar of the cloud withdrawing itself, as the
last Israelites entered the sea-bed, and retiring
after them like a rearguard. Thus protected,
they made the transit in safety, and morning
saw them encamped upon the shores of Asia.

Ver. 19.— The angel of God. The Divine
Presence, which manifested itself in the

£iUar of the cloud, is called indifferently " the
lOrd " (ch. xiii. 21 ; xiv. 24), and " the
Angel of God" — just as the appearance to
Moses in the burning bush is termed both
" God " and " the angel of the Lord " (ch. iii.
2). Whioh went before — i.e., " which or-
dinarily, and (so to speak) habitually pre-
ceded the camp " (ch. xiii. 21 ; Ps. Ixxviii.
14). And stood behind them, Took up a
fixed station for the night, or the greater
portion of it.

Ver. 20. — It was a cloud and darkness to
them, bat it gave light by night to these.
Though there is nothing in the Hebrew
correspondent to the expressions " to them,"
" to these," yet the meaning seems to have
been rightly apprehended by our translators.
(See the Targums of Oukelos and Jonathan,
the Syriac version, and among moderns,
Knobel, Maurer, BosenmiiUer, and Kalisch.)
Ver. 21. — Hoses stretched out his hand.
As conunanded by God (ver. 16). Compare
the somewhat similar action of Elijah and
Elisha, when they divided the Jordan (2
Kings ii 8, 14). The Lord caused the sea to



go back by a strong east wind. The LXX
translate " a strong south wind " (iv ayefi^
rdrai fiiaitf) ; but the Hebrew kadim is cer
tainly " east " rather than " south." It it
not, however, "east" in the sense of duo
east, but would include all the range of the
compass between N.B. and S.B. If we sup-
pose the Bitter Lakes to have been joined to
the Bed Sea by a narrow and shallow chan-
nel, the action of a south-east wind, by driv-
ing the water of the Lakes northward, may
have easily produced the effect described in
the text. A simultaneous ebb of the lower
gulf would have further facilitated the pas-
sage. The waters were divided. Water re-
mained in the upper extremity of the Gulf,
now the site of the Bitter Lakes, and also, of
course, below Suez. The portion of the sea dried
up lay probably between the present southern
extremity of the Bitter Lakes and Suez.
By the gradual elevation and desiccation of the
region, it has passed into permanent dry land.
Ver. 22. — The waters were a wall — i. e., a
protection, a defence. Pharaoh could not at-
tack them on either flank, on account of the
two bodies of water between which their
march lay. He could only come at them by
following after them. The metaphor has been
by some understood literally, especially on
account of the expression in ch. xv. 8 — " The
floods stood upright as an heap ; " and again
that in Ps. Ixxviii. 1 3 — " He made the waters
to stand as an heap." But those phrases,
occurring in poems, must be taken as poetical ;
and can scarcely have any weight in deter-
mining the meaning of "wall" here. We
must ask ourselves — is there not an economy
and a restraint in the exertion by God even of
miraculous power? — is more used than is
needed for the occasion ? — and would not all
that was needed at this time have been
effected by such a division of the sea as we
have supposed, without the fluid being con-
verted into a solid, or having otherwise the
laws of its being entirely altered. Kalisch's
statement, that the word " wall " here is " not
intended to convey the idea of protection, but
only of hardness and solidity," seems to us
the very reverse of the truth. Protection is
at any rate the main idea, and any other is
secondary and subordinate



HOMILETICS

Vers. 19 — ^22. — Ood protects his own, but in strange ways. — The passage of the Red
Sea was the crowning miracle by which God effected the deliverance of his people from
the bondage of Egypt ; and all its circumstances were strange and worthy of notice.

I. The presence op the Lobd, which had been wont to lead them, removed
AND WENT BEHIND THEM. They had to enter the dark and slimy bed from which the
sea had retired without the cheering sight of the Divine presence before their eyes
beckoning them on. So there are occasions of trial in the life of every man, when God
seems to withdraw his presence, to remove himself, to "go behind us," so that we
cannot see him. Sometimes he withdraws himself in grief or in anger ; but more often



OH. XIV. 19—22.] THE BOOK OP EXODtJS. 341

he does it in mercy. The temporary obscuration will advantage the soul under
the circumstances. There is perhaps some secular work to be done which requires
all its attention, like this passage, where every step had tc be taken with care. Short
separations are said to intensify affection ; and the sense of the Divine presence is more
valued after a withdrawal, like the sun's light after an eclipse.

II. The pillab of the cloud, which had been wont to be all bmokb, ob all
FIRE, was now both AT ONCE. " It Came between the camp of the Egyptians and the
camp of Israel ; and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it gave fight by night to
these." The eye sees that which it has within itself the power of seeing. To th(«
godly the presence of God is a joy and a delight, a brightness and a radiance. To the
ungodly it is an awful and alarming thing, a cloud which mars their enjoyment. When
Jesus was on earth, there were those among the inhabitants of Palestine who " besought
him to depart out of their coasts " (Matt. viii. 34). The ungodly fear to look upon
God. He is to them dark, mysterious, terrible. The sense of his presence paralyses
them — they cannot stir till it is removed. But to the godly, it is " light in the dark-
ness " — ^it illuminates mind and soul and spirit — ^it cheers and brightens the path of life
— ^it irradiates even the obscurest gulf that we have to traverse. Let us bear in mind
that when the Divine presence is removed from before our eyes, it is still in no case far
from us. If at any time we do not see God, he at all times sees us. We have only to
make an effort, and we can in a short time recover our perception of his presence.

III. By MEANS OF A STRONG EAST WIND THE WATERS WEBB DIVIDED, UPON MoSEB

BTBBTCHiNG OUT HIS HAND OVER THE SEA. We may notc here, 1. The weakness of
the instrument. The rod of Moses, stretched over the sea, or towards the sea, from
some vantage-point on the shore — how small a thing was this ! How incapable in itself
of producing any important effect ! Yet in the providence of God, it was made a link
in the chain of causation by which was brought about one of the greatest events in the
whole course of mundane history. Must we not conclude from this, that, when God
appoints means, however weak and trivial they may be in themselves, they become at
once by his appointment matters of the highest consequence ? Again we may note,
2. The employment of a natural agency, insufficient in itself to accomplish the end, yet
having a natural tendency towards its accomplishment. God, the author of nature,
uses nature as a help towards accomplishing his ends, even when the help is but smalL
Our Lord fed the 5000 and the 4000, by means of loaves and fishes already existing,
though the material which they furnished could but have gone a short way. He
anointed the blind man's eyes with spittle and clay, and bade him " go, wash in the
pool of SUoam," using means which were to some extent reputed salutary, but which
of themselves could never have restored sight. So with the east wind. We must not
suppose that it divided the sea by its own natural force. God used it, as he used the
spittle and the clay, and made it accomplish his purpose, not by its own force but by
his own power. And so generally with the forces which seem to remove obstacles from
the path of God's people in this life — they are potent through his agency, because he
sets them to work, and works through them.

IV. The sea, on which Fhabaoh counted fob theib desteuction, became

FIRST THEIR DEFENCE AND THEN THEIB AVENGER. " The WatcrS Were a wall UntO

them." But for the two bodies of water, on their right and on their left, Pharaoh's
force might have outflanked the host of Israel, and fallen upon it on three sides, or
even possibly have surrounded it. God can at any time turn dangers into safeguards.
When persecutors threaten the Church, he can turn their swords against each other,
and allow the Church to pass on its way in peace. When temptations assault the soul,
he can give the soul such strength, that it conquers them and they become aids to its
progress. And with equal ease can he make the peril which menaces his faithful ones
fell, not upon them, but upon their adversaries. The furnace heated to consuioe the
« three children " destroyed none but those bitter persecutors who had arrested them and
cast them into the fire (Dan. iii. 22). The lions of Darius the Mede devoured, not
Daniel, but " those men that had accused Daniel " (ib. vi. 24). The Jews, who had
sought to destroy the infant Church by prejudicing the Eomans against Christ (John
xix. 12) and his apostles (Acts xxiv. 1 — 9), were themselves within forty years of
Christ's death, conquered and almost exterminated by these same Bomans. The ungodly
are ever " falling into their own nets together," while the godly man for whom the nets
are set " escapes them."



342 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. xiv. 19— aL



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vera. 19, 20, — Idght to the friend, darkness to the foe. We are told that as the
Israelites were about to cross the Red Sea, the fiery-cloudy pillar changed its position,
and came between them and the Egyptians. It was the self-same pUlar, but it wore
a very different aspect to friends and foes respectively. " It was," we read, " a cloud of
darkness to them (the Egyptians), but it gave light to these (the camp of Israel)."
We should notice that the same double aspect belongs to all God's manifestations of
himself, in Law and Grospel, in matter and spirit, in the world, and in the Church.

L God's ATTRisnTES have this double aspect. Not one of his attributes but has a
bright side turned to the believer, and a dark side to the wicked. This is true even of
such attributes as holiness and justice, &om which the believer, as a sinner, might seem
to have most to fear. " Faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness " (1 John i. 9). So God's omnipotence, which is hostile to the
transgressor, is pledged to defend, bless, and save the saint (1 Fet. i. 6 ; Jude 24),
God's eternity, in like manner, is given to the believer for a dwelling-place (Deut.xxxiiL
27 ; Ps. xc. 1), but how terrible an aspect it has to the evil-doer ! The dark side
of love is wrath. "If God be for us, who can be against us?" (Rom. viii. 31). But
on the other hand, "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living CKmI"
(Heb. X. 31).

n. God's laws have this double aspect. 1. Pht/sicdl laws. The constitution of
nature is favourable to virtue, hostile to vice (See Butler's Analogy). 2. Moral law,
for this, while awarding life to the obedient, is a ministry of condemnation to the sinner.
8. Mental and spiritual laws. Take e.g. the law of habit. " The law of habit, which
applies alike to all our physical, mental, and moral actions, must be regarded in its
design as a truly benevolent one. But the law of habit, when the soul yields to sin,
works death to the sinner : — like the pillar of cloud which made day to Israel, and was
darkness to the Egyptians, so the law, which is bright to the well-doer, sheds night
upon the path of the sinner, until he is plunged into the sea of death " (Theodora
D, Woolsey),

in. God's word has this double aspect. To the prayerful, believing, docile mind, it
is a source of unfailing light. It is a lamp to the feet and a light to the path (Ps. cxix,
105). But to the prou^ the imbelieving, and the presumptuous, it is only darkness.
These can see nothing in it but difficulties, incredibilities, contradictions, moral
monstrosities. It is full of stumbling-blocks. The more they read it, the more are
they blinded by it. They read only to discover some new fault or error.

IV. God's vbrt Gospel has this double aspect. " The preaching of the Cross is to
them that perish foolishness, but to us who are saved it is the power of Grod " (1 Cor.
L 18 — 24). It repels the one class, and attracts the other. To the one, it is a savour of
life ; to the other, a savour of death (2 Cor. iL 16). — J. 0.

Vers. 19 — 31. — TAe goodness and severity of Ood. I. What GrOD is to his own ts
THE OAT OF TBOUBLE. 1. He comcs between them and their foes. God's presence is
between us and our enemies, and they can do no more against us than his love permits.
2. He is light to them in the time of periL 3. The waters are divided before them
However much our way may seem hedged in, God's arm will open up a path for us.
4. The way was not only a path of escape, but one of perfect safety ; the waters were
a wall to them upon the right band and the left.

II. What God is to his people's foes. 1. Their path is wrapped in darkness.
They cannot lay hold of the weakest of those who but a moment before seemed wholly in
their power. They are perplexed and baffled. 2. Daring to follow they are fiUed with
horror by tha revelation that their contest is with the mighty God : they are face to face
not with the servant, but the master. 3. Their progress is arrested (25). 4, They in
T^ attempt to flee. Men may flee to God; they cannot &eefrom God. S. They are
overwhelmed with destruction,

III. The result of the conflict (31). I. The people are filled with holy awe.
"They feared Jehovah. God's judgments deepen in ms people's hearts the sense of hia
terriblenesB and majesty," 2, It strengthenbd their faith ; they believed the Lord. 3.



OB. XIV. 19—31.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 841

It produced a spirit of obedience : they " believed his servant Moses." They were
baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea. The outcome of fear and trust must
be full obedience to him who leads us into the promised rest — the Shepherd and Bishop
of our souls. — U.

Ver. 22. — We walk by faith, not by sight. The great mistake of most people is, that
they trust too much to their own eyes. They will not take into consideration anything
that lies beyond the field of sensible experiences. Now Q-od and his eternity, though
laanifested in this field, are practically outside it ; the spiritual eyesight is more reliable
than the physical, because that which it sees is safer to rely upon. Natural sight
■hows us obstacles, spiritual sight shows us how they may be surmounted. Try to
walk by the one and you must stand still ; try to walk by the other and nothing can
long keep you standing. Notice here : —

I. Faith's secret. The story illustrates this ; it shows us : — 1. What the Israditet
law. Their position looked bad enough. Behind were the hosts of Pharaoh ; before,
the sea. They were shut in. Trusting only to their eyes they could hardly do other
than despair (xiv. 10 — 13). Better to have been " let alone " in Egypt, than thug
delivered, to be destroyed in the wilderness. A clear head, if the heart be faint, is not
much help to any man. 2. What Moses saw. He was in the same position as the
people whom he led, yet he could see more than they did. He looked not merely
before and behind, he looked also up to Grod. Faith enabled him to ignore sight, and
inspired him to encourage his sight-fascinated followers. Soon the word came which
justified his faith, obstacles were nothing, let them wait the word of command and
then "go forward." Often difficulties seem to surround us — no way of escape anywhere
visible. Even so faith can sight the way, for faith can sight God who sees it. Stand
Btill, wiut his word ; refuse to allow that for tho.se who trust him any difficulties can be
insurmountable. Faith would not be of much good were there no obstacles to test it.
Faith is not of much good if it cannot learn to ignore obstacles.

n. Faith's success. The path of faith not merely leads out of danger, it turns
dangers into safeguards and transforms them into a protection for those who tread it.
When the word came " Go forward," the waters no longer " shut in " the Israelites ;
instead: — 1. They protected them during their passage. The Egyptians could but
follow, they could not circumvent. " The waters were a wall unto them " on either side ;
no wall could have been more impregnable. 2. They secured them against the fiiry of
their piu:suers. Israel once across, the waters returned, overwhelming the armies of
the enemy. So too faith, facing the flood, found that waters which drowned the world
upheld the ark and floated it in safety. So too faith, facing the waters of death, finds
that though they overwhelm the unready they float the faithful into a safe harbovu-.
So too with all difficulties, faced in faith, they are our best helpers. " The hand of the
diligent " not only " maketh rich," it cleaves a way for him through the sea of difficulty,
and leaves his pursuers, sloth, ignorance, aU the deadly sins, overwhelmed and
■wallowed up behind him.

in. Faith's stbenoth. How comes faith to do all this ? It is not faith that does
it, but the God in whom faith trusts. Nothing is impossible to faith, because nothing
is impossible to God. The Egyptians are sure of their prey ; the Israelites are sure of
destruction ; because, whilst reckoning with what sight sees, they fail to reckon with
the unseen God. Moses is sure of safety because he is sure of God, and knows that Ae
is more than a match for all the seeming tyranny of circumstances.

Application. How many people are shut in, faithless and discouraged before some
■ea of difficulty I " I cannot do this," " I cannot do that," and yet no progress is
possible untU I not merely can but do. " ye of little faith, wherefore will ye doubt !"
" I cannot ;" no, but Ood can ; and what he bids you do that he will strengthen you to do
Don't stand facing the difficulties, but face the God who is above them and beyond
them. " Stand stUl and wait " until the word comes, but when the word doea comtk
"€k) forward " (of. 2 C!or. xii. 9, 10).— Q.



S44



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[ca. xiT. 2»— 81



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 23 — 31. Thb dbstbcction of the
EoTFTiANS. As the rearguard of the Israelite
host having entered the tract from which the
waters had retired, proceeded along it, and
left the western end of the isthmus vacant,
the pillar of the cloud seems to have followed
it up and withdrawn with it. The Egyptians
immediately advanced. Notwithstanding the
preternatural darkness, they had become aware,
perhaps by means of their ears, of the move-
ment that was taking place, and with early
dawn they were under arms and pressing on
the line of the Israelite retreat. They found
the channel still dry, and hastily entering it
with their chariot force, they hurried forward
in pursuit. The first check which they re-
ceived was wholly supernatural. " The Lord
looked unto the host of the Egyptians through
the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled
the host of the Egyptians " (ver. 24). Details
here are wanting ; but less cannot be meant,
than that some strange phenomena connected
with the retiring " pillar " caused a panic and
threw the ranks of the army into confusion.
Then followed natural impediments. The
Lord " took off," or " clogged " their chariot
whoels, and made them go heavily — i.e., the
chariot wheels, not by miracle, but by the
operation of God's natural laws, sank into the
soft sand over which the Israelites had passed
easily, having no wheeled vehicles, and the
ehariots were consequently dragged forward
slowly and with difficulty. The double hin-
drance, from the confusion and the stoppage of
(he chariots, so discouraged the Egyptians,
that after a time they resolved on beating a
retreat (ver. 25). They had set out on their
return, when Moses, at God's instance,
stretched forth his hand once more over the
sea, and the waters on both sides began at
once to return. The Egyptians saw their
danger, and "fled against" the advancing
tide, racing against it, as it were, and seeking
to reach the shore. But in vain. The waves
came on rapidly, and (in the language of
ver. 28) there was not a man of all those who
had entered the dry bed of the sea that was
not overwhelmed and drowned in the waters.
We should be wrong to press this language
to the extreme letter In graphic narrative
the sacred writers uniformly employ universal



expressions, where they mean to gire fh«
general fact or general result The true
meaning is, that the pursuit altogether failed
Not an Egyptian made his way alive acrosi
the strait. All that the Israelites ever saw
afterwards of the army that they had so much
dreaded (ver. 10) was a ghastly mass of
corpses thrown up by the tide on the Asiatic
shore (ver. 80).

Ver. 23. — All Pharaoh's horses, Ui
chariots, and his horsemen. Here, as else-
where, the word translated " horsemen " pro-
bably means the men who rode in the chariots.
Observe that the Pharaoh himself is not said
to have gone in. Menephthah was apt to
avoid placing himself in a position of danger
(^Becords of the Past, vol. iv. pp. 44, 45). Nor
is any of the infantry said to have entered the
bed of the sea.

Ver. 24. — ^In the morning watch. The
"morning watch" of the Hebrews at this
period of their history lasted from 2 a.m. to
sunrise. Sunrise in Egypt, early in April,
would take place about a quarter to six. The
Lord looked onto the host of the Egyptians.
The description in Ps. Ixxvii. 17, 18, is gene-
rally regarded as belonging to this point in
the narrative of the Exodus, and may be con'
sidered as the traditional exposition of it
" The clouds poured out water : the skies sent
out a sound ; thine arrows also went abroad
the voice of thy thunder was in the heavens
the lightning lightened the world ; the earth
trembled and shook." As Josephus says —
" Showers of rain came down from the sky,
and dreadful thunders and lightning, with
flashes of fire ; thunderbolts also were darted
upon them ; nor was there anything, wont to
be sent by God upon men as indications of his
wrath, which did not happen upon this occa-
sion " (^Mt. Jud. ii. 16, § 3). And troubled
the host Or " disturbed the host," i.e.," threw
it into confusion" ((rwerripafe, LXX.).

Ver. 25. — And took off their chariot
wheels. The Sept. has " clogged the axles
of their chariots ; " but this is from a reading
not at present found in the Hebrew MSS.
Most modem commentators, however, prefer
the reading, which gives a good sense ; whereas
the existing text is unintelligible. As Kalisch
observes, " if the wheels of the chariots had
been broken off, the chariots would not have
moved at all." That they drove them
heavily. The marginal rendering, " and made
them go heavily," is preferable. The wheels
no donbt sank into the sand up to the axles,
and were with difficulty extricated, again to
sink a few yards farther on Progress wm



OH. XIV. 23—31.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



344



thns greatly retarded. Bo that the Sgyptians
said, " Let us floe." Literally, " And Egypt
said, 'I will flee.'" The Lord fighteth for
them. Compare the promise of Moses (ver.
14). The Egyptians were convinced, by the
various obstades which they encountered,
that Jehovah was lending his people active
aid, and miracnlously obstructing their ad-
vance. If this were so, it was of no use to
persevere, and accordingly they began their
retreat.

Vers. 26, 27.— And the Lord said, God
here interposed a new difficulty. Moses was
instructed to stretch out his rod once more,
and undo his former work. At the appointed
sign, the east wind ceased to blow, and the
waters of the Bitter Lakes, no longer driven to
the north-west by its force, flowed back with
something of a reflux, while at the same time,
the tide having turned, the Bed Sea waves
came rushing on at unwonted speed. In vain
the Egyptians fled. They were met b^ the
advancing floods, which poured in on either
side, overwhelming and covering up all those
who had entered on the dangerous path.

Ver. 28. — The chariots and the horsemen,
and all the host of Fharaoh, Bather " The
chariots, and the chariot men of all the host
of Pharaoh." So Knobel correctly. Kalisch
thinks — "We are not permitted to suppose
that oiJy the Egyptian chariots pursued the
-sraelites into the sea, while the infantry re-
mained behind, so that the former alone were
devoured by the waves." But even he admits
that " both in this and in the following chapter,
and in most other parts generally, the destruc-
tion of the chariots (chariot force?) and
its warriors is chiefly alluded to, eo that this
partievlar stress would perhaps justify that
conclusion." What is clear is, that no force
but the chariot force is said to have entered
the bed of the sea in pursuit of Israel. There
remained not so much as one of them. On
the proper understanding of this statement,
see the introductory paragraph to the chapter.

Ver. 29.— Walked. Bather, " had walked."
The waters were a wall. Bather, " had been
a wall." For the meaning of the expression,
see note on ver. 22.

Ver. 30. — Israel saw the Egyptians dead
upon the sea-shore. Josephus says (_ArA.
Jitd. ii. 16, § 6), that, after the passage of the
sea by the Israelites, a west wind set in, which
(assisted by the current) drove the bodies of the
drowned Egyptians to the eastern side of the
gulf, where many of them were cast up upon
the shore. In this way Moses, according to
him, obtained weapons and armour for a con-
siderable number of Israelites.

Ver. 31. — ^And Israel saw that great work.
The " work " was, at the least, (1) the (almost)
entire destruction of that arm of the service^
the chariot force — on which the Egyptian
Ungg mainly relied for success in aU their



wars ; and (2) the defeat and disgrace of the
Egyptian king himself, in an expedition for
which he was alone responsible, involving
permanent discredit to his military capacity,
and naturally tending to shake his authority
over his subjects. It secured the Israelites
from further persecution, mainly by lie
reminiscences which it left behind, but partly
also by removing them to a distance from
the natural course of Egyptian warlike or
commercial movement. Though Egypt had
mining establishments in the Sinaitic penin-
sula, at Wady-Magharah and Sarabit-el-
Khadim, yet as these were avoided by the
Israelites on their way to Sinai, and never
afterwards approached, there naturally was no
collision between them and the Fharaonic
garrisons at those sites. Still more remote
were they during their wanderings from the
Egyptian military route, which proceeded
along the coast from Pelusium to Gtaa,, and
then ran northwards through the Shephelah.
Thus the Passage of the Bed Sea brought one
phase in the life of the people to an end, and
was the commencement of another. It sepa-
rated them from Egypt until the time came
when their king would holdcommunication with
its monarch on equal terms (1 Kings iii. 1). It
secured their independence, and raised them at
once into a nation. It further caused them to
exchange the artificial life of a bureaucratical
and convention-loving community for the open
space and untrammelled freedom of the desert
It thus rejuvenated and reinvigorated the race,
and enabled them to enter on that career of
conquest which culminated in the Kingdom —
may we not say the Empire? — of David.
Some writers have supposed that the blow to tht
Egyptian power was greater than here repre-
sented. They believe the entire warrior caste
or class to have taken part in the expedition,
and to have been destroyed in the Bed Sea
Thus they describe the calamity as "the
total annihilation of the whole military force
of the Egyptians " (Kalisch). They aiso be-
lieve the Pharaoh to have perished with his
host. To the present writer it seems that the
former opinion is contrary both to the text of
Scripture, and to the after course of Egyptian
history, for it is agreed on all hands that
Egypt continued nearly as powerful as before,
while the latter he regards as at least exceed-
ingly doubtftJ. Ps. Ixxxvi. 15, is quoted as
asserting it ; but it appears to him (1) that
'• overthrow " is not necessarily " death ; "
and (2) that " Pharaoh and his host " may be
put for " Pharaoh's host " by hendiadys. The
absence of any prophecy that Grod would take
the Pharaoh's life, and the entire silence of
Moses on the subject in chs. xiv. and xv. seems
to be scarcely explicable on any other theory
than that he escaped, not having accompanied
his chariot for<w in its rash pursuit of th*
Israelites.



848 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. xiy. 2»~3L



HOMILETICS.

Vera. 28—30. — Ood^» dealingt with the wicked and impenitent. If the passage ol
Israel through the Red Sea shows conspicuously God's protection of his people in the
time of trouble, the overthrow of the Egyptians indicates, at least as conspicuously, hia
execution of wrath upon the wicked.

I. First of all, it is noticeable how his etb trpoN theib hearts, lookinq into

THEM THBOUGH THE CLOtJD AND DARKNESS WHEREIN THET AEB ENVELOPED, TROUBLES

tuem. Bad men cannot bear God's eye upon their hearts. It sees throtigh all veils,
penetrates all disguises, detects all subterfuges. The bad man is a riddle, even to him-
self, and would feign continue an enigma, impenetrable, mysterious. But the searching
eye of God turned full upon him, so illununates every dark comer and unexplored
cranny of his nature, that all becomes only too patent and clear. "All things are
naked and open imto the eyes of him with whom we have to do." Under that stead-
fast gaze the mystery melts away, like a summer fog, and the bad man sees himself
revealed, without disguise as a very ordinary and commonplace offender.

II. It is WORTHY OF OBSERVATION THAT HE OFTEN CLOGS THEIR CHARIOT

WHEELS, AND MAKES THEM TO 00 HEAVILY. The enterprises which the wicked under-
take are continually interfered with. God will not let them have the success which
their fi-amers anticipate, and which for their cleverness and ingenuity they may be said
to deserve. He " clogs the wheels " of their various designs, and makes them drag heavily.
One miscarriage follows another. This enterprise will not advance at all ; that, by dint
of great exertion, moves but slowly. It is as though the chariot wheelf sank into
quicksands. It is not often that they wake up to the conviction that " the Lord fighteth
against the Egyptians ; " though this may happen sometimes. Then perhaps they repent
them of their vain attempt, and would feign retreat from it. But it is too late.

III. It is most noticeable how at last God's judgments come in with an
OVBBWHELMINO FLOOD, WHICH THERE IS NO ESCAPING. "It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God." Upon the ungodly God at the last rains down
" snares, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest — this is their portion to diink." " Sudden
destruction comes upon them unawares." Now it is in financial ruin, now in utter failure
of health, now in complete prostration of the spirit, and an intolerable sense of remorse
and despair that the judgment descends — ^blow tbllows blow, failure succeeds to failure,
all the old refuges and supports prove vmavailing — angry floods pour in on every side —
there is no reaching the shore— all is tossing surf, slippery rock, and entangling sea-
weed — not a hand is stretched out to save. So they go down to the pit — ^the devouring
waves swallow them up — the water-floods go up over their heads — ^they disappear, and
their place knows them no more. The wages of sin is Jeath ; and the end of sin is
death. The ultimate end of impenitent sin is eternal death. Let men, while there i*
time, turn away from sin, give up their wicked enterprises, retrace their steps — ^taking
warning firom &e awful Red Sea calamity, and the terrible destruction there wrought.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 23 — 31. — The overthrow of the Egyptians. " The Egyptians pursued, and went
in after them to the midst of the sea," etc. On this observe : —

I. The infatuation of the pursdebb (ver. 23). We do not speak of the lessons
they had already received as to the foUy of contending with Jehovah. The plagues
weie past. The memory of them had been cast behind their backs. What we do
wonder at is, that when the Egyptians reached the shore, and saw there what they did
see, they were not deterred from proceeding further. What did they see ? 1. They saw
the sea divided. They could hardly mistake this for a merely natural phenomenon.
The place where the IsraeUtes crossed may have been, under special conditions, and to
a limited extent, fordable. But it is safe to say that the division now effected was one
the like of which had never been heard of before, and such as, occurring at this particular
juncture, ought to have convinced the Egyptians that it was a result of God's special
Providence, and intended for the protection of the Israelites. Special interpositions,
on behalf uf the Church, ought to arrest the attention of her enemies. 2. They saw the



OH. XIV. 2»— 25.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 347

doud that tDent with Israel move to the rear, obviously with the design of intercepting
their pursuit (vers. 19, 20). This, with the ominous darkness which enveloped them,
was a second circumstence wliich ought to have warned them that Jehovah was fight-
ing for his people. 3. There was the danger, which could not but present itself to thtm,
of being overwhelmed by the returning sea. In whatever way the division of the waters
was conceived of, whether as a natural phenomenon, or as a fact of supernatural origin,
it was plainly a perilous experiment to attempt the pursuit. Viewing it as the result
of an ebb-tide, aided by a strong east wind, there was the risk of being caught by thi
returning tide ; or if the wind abated, or changed its direction, uf being immediately
submerged. In the other case there was the danger, almost the certainty, of the super-
natural power which restrained the waters permitting them to flow back on the pur-
suers. What infatuation, then, possessed the Egyptians, prompting them to enter the
sea? (1) A false sense of honour. Having engaged in the pursuit, it would be
deemed a point of honour not to desist from it, so long as the faintest chance of success
remained. They had gone too far to retreat now at the water's edge. (2) Mage. Fury
and disappointment would possess them, as, in the very hour of their fancied triumph, they
saw their prey thus elude them. Was Pharaoh and his mighty host to be thus mocked
•nd set at nought — ^thus suddenly reined up and baffled ? What would Kgypt think of her
warriors, if, setting out on such an expedition, they returned humiliated and empty-
handed? At all hazards Israel must be pursued. (3) There was the chance of getting
through. The distance was short ; the way lay open ; if Israel had got across, so might
the Egyptians. On this chance, in the spirit of the gambler, they would stake every-
thing. What havoc have these same motives — a false sense of honour (cf. Matt. xiv. 9),
a spirit of imcalculating rage, the headstrong gambling disposition, — played in the his-
tory of the world 1 Together, or apart, they account for much of its infatuation. See
specially in this conduct of Pharaoh, a picture of the infatuation to which the enemies
of Christ's Church have so frequently been given over, and which will linger among
them till the end. Compare e.g. the Apocalyptic gathering uf the antichristian powers,
to do battle vfith the Lamb (Bev. xvi. 14 — 17 ; xix. 11 — 21).

II. The bbception which they received from God. 1. In " the morning watch,"
and when the Egyptians were in " the midst of the sea," God looked forth upon them
from the pillar of doud (ver. 23). The expression is a pregnant one. The look was
a " fire-look " — some fire-appearance of a startling kind wliich issued from the cloud,
and shed terror over the pursuers. It was accompanied with thunderings and light-
uings (Ps. Ixxvii. 18, 19). God's looks are potent. When God " looked " on Israel
(ch. ii. 25), it meant that he was about to bring salvation to them. When he
" looked " on the Egyptians, it was the prelude to their destruction. Through that
pillar glares forth an eye which sends a separate dismay into each Egyptian heast
and all is felt to be lost. We find two imitations of this in modem poetry — 0110 by
Coleridge, in his ' Ode on the Departing Year,' where he prays God to —

"Open his eye of fire from some uncertain dood,"

and another (by Southey) in the ' Cm'se of Eehama,' where, after the ' Man Almightj,*
holding his Amreeta Cup, had exclaimed —

"Now, Seeva, look to thine abode!"

it u added, when the cup is drunk —

" Then Seeva open'd on the accursed one
His eye of anger — npon him alone
The wrath beam fell He shudders, but too late." (QilfilUm.)

2. Ood troubled their hosts (vers. 24, 25). There is meant by this some supematoral
exertion of power. It was not due to natural causes alone that the chariot wheels were
" taken oflf," and that they drave heavily. It was God who, by his heavy hand upon
them, was thus obstructing their progress. The Invisible powers were fighting against
the Eigyptians, as "the stars in their courses fought against Sisera" (Jud. y. 20),



548 THE book: OF EXODOS. [oh. xt. 1—21

Those are sure to drive heavily, who drive in the face of God's inhihition, and under hli
ban. 3. Ood brought the sea back upon them (yet. 26). Swiftly, &tally,- at the
stretching forth of Moses' rod, the sea returned in its strength, and utterly over-
whelmed them. And such, in its main outline, is the reception which Jehovah must
give to all his enemies. Els wrath already rests upon them. His fiery look will one
day scare them. Even now they are troubled and impeded by it, and by the
resistance which he opposes to their plans. Finally, he will overwhelm them in the
sea of his wrath. He will visit them with " everlasting destruction from the presence
of the Lord, and from the glory of his power " (1 Thess. i. 9). Hence —

III. Theib complete destbuction (vers. 27, 28). They perished suddenly, miser-
ably, and all together. Type of the overthrow of God's enemies in the end (2 Thess.
ii. 8 ; Eev. xvi. 16, 17 ; xix. 17 — 21 ; xx. 9). The blow was a crushing one to Egypt.
It filled up the measure of her punishment for the evil she had done to IsraeL After
the death of the first-bom, there coidd remain nothing to Pharaoh and his servants,
in the event of their still hardening themselves, but " a certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation " (Heb. x. 27). Does some one say, what a waste of
human life — how unlike a God of mercy ! Bather, surely, how striking a testimony tc
the reality of retribution — how sure a token of the righteous doom which in the end
will infallibly overtake every obdurate transgressor! God will not permit sinners
always to defy him. His wrath and power are resistless. The "ungodly and sinner"
must expect to feel the weight of them (1 Pet. 17, 18).

IV. Resolt (vers. 30, 31). 1. Israel was saved. 2. The Egyptian dead were
found strewn upon the shore. This — (1) A memorial of God's vengeance. (2) An
awful satire on so-called human greatness. (3) A pledge of security to Israel. 3. The
people were filled with gratitude and fear. They " believed the Lord." The wonder
U that after so marvellous a deliverance they could ever again doubt him. — J. O
