:  ■      -■,v^^,v>' ■


\-%'vv^  s'%^vy\  vvt't'^  vVvvM^vvi'yy%\^'t.^''  \


m^


;;:t:v::H:::t^;::::XvX::><xv..^


«*k\VsS"-%\*,Vv\^»\   ^


THE    LIBHATIY
BRIGHA.     YOUNG  U    IVERSITY

PROVO,  UTAH


\


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2011  with  funding  from
Brigham  Young  University


http://www.archive.org/details/preacherscomplet07newy


THE    PREACHER'S    COMMENTARY


ON  THE


BOOK   OF   RUTH.


/


THE


§re<iiiter'0   Complete  ^)omtletkal

COMMENTARY

ON  THE

OLD    TESTAMENT

(O'N  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN).


BY


VARIOUS  AUTHORS,


FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY

London  and  Toronto

1892


y  !n  THE


PREACHER'S  COMMENTARY


ON    THE    BOOK    OF


RUTH.


WITH   CBITIOAL    AND    EXEOETICAL    NOTES


BY  THE


REV.     ^^  ALTER     BAXENDAEE.


Keto  ¥orfe

FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY

London  &  Toronto

1892


T  p  ri    \  fj


RY

'^^::      ivzimtf

PRU  YO,  UTAH


TO

MY    DEAR    WIFE,

WITHOUT   WHOSE   SYMPATHY  jLND    ASSISTANCE  THROUGHOUT    A   LONG

AND    SERIOUS    INDISPOSITION,

THIS    WORK

COULD    HARDLY    HAVE    SEEN    COMPLETION.


PREFACE.


The  Book  of  Euth  stands  apart  from  other  books  of  Scripture,  and
therefore  may  well  deserve  and  demand  a  separate  and  somewhat  distinct
method  of  treatment.  Neither  doctrinal  nor  polemical,  and  scarcely  to  be
called  historical,  it  yet  has  the  infinite  suggestiveness  which  must  always
belong  to  human  life,  tried,  tempted,  and  finally  triumphant.  With  such
a  book  it  has  seemed  that  the  poets  have  sometimes  caught  its  meaning,
teaching,  and  spirit  better  than  the  theologians.  So  much  also  has  been
written  upon  it,  and  so  well,  that  while,  as  in  its  own  harvest  field,  there  is
room  for  the  solitary  gleaner,  as  well  as  the  many  reapers,  it  can  scarcely  be
an  unprofitable  labour  to  endeavour  in  some  measure  **  to  bind  into  bun-
dles **  the  precious  grain  so  abundantly  provided.  The  present  attempt  ha?
eims  in  all  three  of  these  important  directions.

In  no  sense  however  must  this  book  be  looked  upon  as  a  mere  book  of
outlines.  "  The  true  value  of  a  sermon  "  lies,  as  Mr.  Spurgeon  well  says,
**not  in  its  fashion  and  manner,  but  in  the  truth  which  it  contains."  The
author  has  aimed,  first  of  all  and  above  everything  else,  at  gathering  sugges-
tive materials,  and,  for  this  purpose,  the  opinions  of  the  many  are  often  to  be
valued  above  the  finished  productions  of  the  most  highly  gifted  minds.  He
holds,  too,  with  the  great  preacher  already  quoted,  that  "  to  divide  a  sermon
well  may  be  a  very  useful  art,  but  what  if  there  is  nothing  to  divide  ?  A  mere
division  maker  is  like  an  excellent  carver  with  an  empty  dish  before  him."

The  character  of  the  book  lends  itself  naturally  to  expository  preaching,
and  to  a  textual  rather  than  a  topical  method  of  treatment.  No  two
passages  are  exactly  alike.  The  aim  has  been  to  bring  out  the  precise
meaning,  teaching,  and  drift  of  each,  rather  than  to  use  it  as  a  standpoint
for  discoursing  on  topics  which  might  better  and  more  fairly  be  approached


from  some  other  portion  of  God's  Word.     At  the  same  time,  themes  and

topics  are  continually  suggested,  the  author  taking  it  that  his   work  draws

to  a  close  when  the  topic  itself  has  heen  fairly  launched.

In  an  age  when  so  much  has  been  written  about  so  little,  he  has  no

apology  to  offer  for  this  deference  to  what  some  would  call  **  the   mere

verbiage  of  the  Scriptures."     The  only  apology  that  could  be  offered  is  that

the  work  has  not  been  done  more  completely  and  with  somewhat  more  of

the  thoroughness,  scholarship,  ability,  and  enthusiasm,  distinguishing  the

Commentaries  on  our  great  master-pieces  of  human  genius.     His  work  has

been  hindered  and  postponed  by  a  long  and  tedious  brain  affection,  but  it

has  been  all  throughout  a  labour  of  love,  oppressed  only  by  this  feeling

that  **  one  can  do  but  little  to  gild  refined  gold,'*  and  he  leaves  it  with  a

deepened  and  ever-deepening  sense  of  the  beauty^  tenderness,  truthfulness,

simplicity,  and  dignity  of  the  Divine  Word,  as  well  as  of  its  fitness  and  its

Buggestiveness  amid  the  perplexing  walks  of  common  and  daily  life.

To  acknowledge  obligations  in  any  special  instance,  where  has  been  so

much  indebtedness,  would  be  invidious.     The  author's  plan  has  rendered

it  necessary  that  he  should  avail  himself,  as  far  as  possible,  of  the  labours

of  all  who  have  preceded  him.     Wherever  practical  the  name  has  been

given ;    and  he  hopes  this  plan  may  not  be  without  its  uses  in  directing

attention  to  works  which  need  only  to  be  known  to  be  appreciated.

That  his  labours  may  be  useful  to  his  brethren,  who  amid  the  pressure

of  modern  ministerial  duties  find  it  difficult  to  appropriate  time  to  either

special  or  extensive  acquaintance  with  the  literature  of  the  book  of  Ruth,

is  the  earnest  and  sincere  prayer  of  their  well-wisher  and  brother  in  the

ministry  of  Jesus  Christ,

WALTER  BAXENDALE.


HOMILETIG   COMMENTARY


ON


RUTH.


INTRODUCTIOK

(1.)  Formed  a  part  of  the  book  of  Judges  il  the  ancient  Hebrew  canon,  supple-
mentary to  that  book,  hke  the  last  live  chapters  at  present,  according  to  Josephus,
Origen,  Jerome.  The  Septuagint,  in  harmony  with  Jewish  tradition,  places  it
there  without  a  separate  title,  and  Melito  of  Sardis  says  the  Jews  of  his  day
counted  them  together.  Keil  questions  this  (see  note,  p.  467  Keil's  Intro.),  Like
the  book  of  Judges,  a  narrative.  The  contents  contrast.  At  the  close  of  the
latter  a  dark  eclipse  has  fallen  upon  Israel ;  the  last  five  chapters  a  history  of
sinners  and  their  sins.  In  the  one,  Israel  seen  as  a  declining  nation  ;  the  other
shews  the  Gentile  hope  as  enlarging.  A  connecting  link  between  the  book  of
Judges  and  that  of  Samuel;  yet  a  joyous  transition  from  the  former  (Words-
worth). Carries  the  history  of  Israel  into  the  house  of  David.  Links  the  monarchy
with  a  more  simple  and  primitive  form  of  government.  What  is  of  more  impor-
tance, traces  the  descent  of  Israel's  greatest  king  directly  from  Judah.  Like
Esther,  takes  its  title  from  the  heroine.  Both  books  link  Jew  and  Gentile  histories.
Its  canonicity  has  never  been  questioned  among  the  Jews.  Has  the  superscrip-
tion of  Caesar,  the  stamp  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Fuller).  Not  in  the  Codex  Sinaiti-
cus.  The  Targum  on  Ruth  only  dates  back  as  far  as  the  seventh  century.  The
Arabic  version  is  generally  considered  to  have  been  made  from  the  Peshito
Syriac.

(2.)  According  to  modern  Jews,  Ruth  holds  a  variable  place  among  the
Kethubim,  or  Hagiographa,  that  is,  in  the  third  class  of  0.  T.  writings,  comprising
the  Song  of  Solomon,  Ruth,  Lamentations,  Ecclesiastes,  and  Esther.  This
owing  to  liturgical  causes,  as  it  was  read  from  primitive  times  during  the  Feast  of
"Weeks,  or  Pentecost  Raschi  and  others  connect  this  with  the  proclamation  of  the
kingdom  of  God  among  the  nations  ;  and  as  the  custom  dates  back  earlier  than
the  birth  of  our  Lord,  the  fact  is  significant.  Represents  the  O.T.  aspect  towards
the  Gentiles.  The  Midrash  explains  that  the  law  was  given  on  Sinai  io  allnationSf
only  it  was  not  accepted  by  them.  In  the  letter  the  book  of  Ruth  forms  a
suitable  introduction  to  the  prophecies,  in  spirit  it  stands  like  the  Psalms  at  the
gates  of  the  Gospel.

(3.)  Not  quoted  or  referred  to  in  the  N.T.,  unless  the  genealogy  in  Matthew
is  taken  from  it  (comp.  ch.  iv.  18 — 22  with  Matt.  i.  4 — 6).  The  language  gene-
rally pure  Hebrew,  and  that  of  a  very  simple  type.  So-culled  Chaldaisms  ought
rather  to  be  called  archaisms,  and  are  signs  of  antiquity  and  authenticity —
vestiges  of  the  ancient  colloquial  langunge  of  Palestine  (Woidsworth).  One  of
thc'ti  found  in  the  book  of  Job,  another  in  Judges  (comp.  Ruth  i.  4,  Judges  xxi.
23,  Rath  i.  13,  Job  xxx.  24).     They  occur  always  in  the  dialogue,  not  in  the

I


MOMILETIC  COMMENTAUy.'    llVTH.


narrative  portions  of  the  book.     The   narrative  Hebrew  is  good    (Dr.  Pusey)
Sertain   passages   have   a   striking    likeness   to   expression  used  in  the  book  of
Camuel.      The   quotations   in  Kuth  are   only  taken    from  the  earlier  books  of
Scripture.


CONTENTS.

Matter,  etc. — (4.)  Consists  of  four  chapters,  eighty-five  verses.  Too  simple  to
admit  of  artificial  divisions,  the  existing  chapters  supply  a  convenient  method  of
arrangement  (Groser).  May  be  divided  into  two  parts :  the  first  chapter  shews
that  many  are  the  troubles  of  the  righteous ;  the  three  last,  that  God  delivereth
out  of  them  all  (Fuller).  The  four  chapters  may  be  called  respectively,  "  The
Famine,"  "The  Harvest  Field,"  "The  Project,"  "The  Result"  (Binney).
Like  the  book  of  Job,  deals  mainly  with  the  history  of  an  individual,  and  those
associated  with  her  life.  In  Job  the  afflictions  prevail  throughout  the  book.
Not  so  here.  With  good  reason  the  book  is  not  called  Naomi,  or  Boaz,  or  the
Descent  of  David,  but  Ruth  (Lange).  She  is  the  heroine.  No  prophetess  like
Deborah  ;  not  a  queen  like  Esther ;  but  a  simple  Moabitish  maiden,  a  gleaner  in
the  harvest  fields,  strong  in  her  own  simple  purity.  She  is  no  saint,  no  devotee,
no  prophetess,  but  a  very  woman,  and  a  woman

"  Not  too  bright  and  good
For  human  nature's  daily  food." —  Wordsworth  {qitoted  in  Cox).

The  book  celebrates  the  piety  and  loving  faithfulness  of  a  proselyte.  Its  heroisra
is  that  of  the  home  and  family.  Does  not  preach  by  means  of  mighty  deeds  like
those  of  Gideon  and  Samson,  but  by  acts  of  love  (Lange).  Contrasts  as  much
with  the  book  of  Esther  (the  only  other  book  to  which  a  woman's  name  is  attached)
as  does  the  heroine  with  Deborah.  Bertholdt  and  other  neological  writers  treat  both
books  as  fictions  or  parables.

Character. — (5.)  A  prose  pastoral.  Has  some  of  the  finest  features  of  a
pastoral  poem.  A  romantic,  yet  historic,  Hebrew  idyl  (Steel  and  Terry).  No
doubt  a  love  story  (Cox).  A  beautiful,  because  natural,  representation  of  human
life  (Hunter).  Catholic  in  its  spirit.  Sympathetic,  not  critical.  A  book  of
reconcilation  for  those  aliens  who  accept  the  true  and  living  God.

"  The  narrative  displays  no  hatred  towards  foreigners,  gives  no  prominence  to  the  keen  dis-
criminations of  the  Mosaic  law  against  them,  notwithstanding  that  they  form  the  background  of
the  story  :  does  not  blame  the  really  well-disposed  Orpah,  although  she  turns  back  ;  has  not  a
word  of  reprehension  for  the  anonymous  relative  who  refuses  to  marry  Ruth  ;  but  in  contrast  to
these  facts  it  causes  the  blessing  which  lights  upon  Ruth  to  become  known." — Lange.

Deeply  religious,  yet  domestic.  A  brief  but  exquisite  story  of  hearth  and  home.
Abounds  with  felicitous  pictures  of  Oriental  village  life.  Simplicit}'-  of  rural
manners  beautifully  depicted,  not  by  a  shadowy  fiction,  but  in  the  homely  records
of  afl'ection  and  virtue  (Eadie).  Not  the  warrior  or  the  king,  but  the  farmer  and
householder,  find  their  prototypes  here  (Lange).  The  reader  finds  himself  now  in
the  open  field,  now  on  the  road,  and  anon  among  the  assembly  at  the  gate  (Lange).
In  style  dramatic.  He  makes  his  rustics  talk  in  rustic  fashion  (Lange).  Yet
all  this  subdued,  and  with  the  finest  moderation.  A  unique  specimen  of  the  art
which  conceals  art.  This  prose  idyl  fj^r  exceeds  those  laboured  songs  and
artificial  delineations  which  grace  the  poetry  of  Greece  and  Rome  (Eadie).

"  The  book  of  Ruth  is  like  some  beautiful  landscape  of  Claude,  with  its  soft  mellow  hues  of
quiet  eventide,  and  the  peaceful  expanse  of  its  calm  lake,  placed  side  by  side  with  some  stern
picture  of  Salvator  Rosa,  exhibiting  the  shock  of  armies  and  the  storm  of  war  ;  and  receiving

2


BOMILETIG   C03IMENTAIIY:    HVTIL


more  beauty  from  the  chiaro-osciira  of  the  contrast.  Or  if  we  may  adopt  another  comparison,
derived  from  classical  literature,  the  book  of  Ruth,  coming  next  after  the  book  of  Judges,  is  like  a
transition  from  the  dark,  terrific  scenes  of  a  tragedy  of  -^schylus,  to  the  fresh  and  beautiful
landscapes  of  some  pastoral  idyl  of  Theocritus,  transporting  us  to  the  rural  Thalysia,  or  harvest-
home  under  the  shade  of  elms  and  poplars,  on  the  banks  of  the  Halis,  or  to  the  flowery  meadows
and  sheep-walks  on  those  of  the  Arethusa  or  Anapus," —  Wordsworth.

Simple,  sometimes  sorrowful,  always  touching.  We  have  known  strong  and
rough  voices  break  down  with  emotion  in  reading  aloud  some  of  the  passages
(Kitto).*  Occasionally  becomes  poetic  in  form  as  well  as  in  substance.  (See
ch.  i.  16,  17  ;  iv.  11,  12,  and  14,  15,  in  Wordsworth.)  A  most  artless  and
inexpressibly  charming  picture  of  nature  (Humboldt).  The  loveliest  thing  in  the
shape  of  an  epic  or  idyl  which  has  come  to  us  (Goethe).

Scope  and  Object. — (1.)  To  teach  the  dignity  and  even  sacredness  of  much  we
call  secular  and  commonplace  in  life.

(2.)  To  afford  a  salutary  example  of  virtue  in  times  of  trial  (Theodoret).  The
moral  encouraging  to  unselfish  virtue  (Speaker's  Com.).  It  gives  us  a  beautiful
picture  of  female  virtue,  first  shining  in  the  midst  of  poverty,  and  then  crowned
with  felicity  (Lawson).

(3.)  To  shew  how  conversant  God  is  as  to  the  private  affairs  of  His  people.
Lawson  says,  **  We  find  here  that  private  families  are  as  much  the  objects  of  the
Divine  regard  as  the  houses  of  princes."

(4.)  To  prove  the  watchful  care  of  God  over  such  as  fear  and  trust  Him,  as
well  as  His  merciful  providence  towards  the  afiiicted,  the  widow,  and  the  fatherless
(Eadie).

(5.)  To  portray  the  under-current  of  piety  existing  in  households,  even  in  times
of  great  national  wickedness  (Wordsworth).

(6.)  To  set  forth  the  power  of  love  to  overcome  all  the  alienations,  hostilities,
and  prejudices  of  nature,  and  of  that  second  nature  which  we  call  habit  (Cox).
The  story  of  a  woman's  love  for  a  woman  (Cox).  Teaches  that  such  love  is
valued  before  God  (Lange).

(7.)  To  shew  how  a  stranger,  one  of  the  hated  house  of  Moab,  may  be  exalted
because  of  her  trust  in  God  (Umbreit).

(8.)  To  teach  that  when  men  and  nations  are  falling  away  from  God,  mission-
ary work  is  not  at  a  standstill :  a  Ruth  comes  from  Moab,  and  is  joined  to  the
church  of  God  (Wordsworth).

(9.)  To  typify  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles  in  Rcith  the  Moabitess  (Fuller).  To
foretell  that  the  Gentiles  should  be  called  in  Christ  (Topsell).

(10.)  To  exhibit  the  piety  and  faithfulness  of  David's  ancestors  (Keil).  Written
to  do  honour  to  David  (Dr.  Davidson).

(11.)  To  shew  the  pedigree  of  our  Saviour,  otherwise  genealogists  had  been  at
a  loss  for  four  or  five  descents  in  the  deducing  thereof  (Fuller).  Supplies  con-
necting links  in  the  chain  of  evidence  that  Shiloh  came  of  Judah.

(12.)  To  contain  as  it  were  the  inner  side,  the  moral  background,  of  the
genealogies  which  play  so  significant  a  part  even  in  the  Israelitish  antiquity
(Auberlen).

(13.)  To  typify  in  the  marriage  of  Boaz  and  Euth  the  espousal  of  the  Church
to  Christ  (Bede.)  So  Cbrysos.,  "  Ruth  alienigena  et  Moabitis  veniens,  sub  lege
Dei,  ea  egit  quae  figuram  gestarent  Ecclesise  venientis  ex  gentibus."  So  Jerome,
"  Christus  est  Spousus,  cui  ilia  venit  ex  gentibus  sponsa."  (Quoted  in  Words-
worth.) Spiritual  and  typical  (Professor  Bush).  No  mystical  or  allegorical  sense
can  be  assigned  to  the  history  (Speaker's  Com.).

(14.)  To  inculcate   a  man's  duty  of  marrying  his  kinswoman  (Berthold  and

*  **  It  is  said  that  Dr.  Johnson  once  read  the  book  of  Ruth  from  MSS.  to  a  company  of  fashionable
people  in  London.  Whereupon  their  adiniiation  was  so  excited,  that  they  requested  to  know
where  he  had  obtained  so  exquisite  a  .story." — Bradcn,

8


BOMIIBTIC  COMMEXTAUY:    llUTII.


other  neological  writers).  The  fact  that  Ruth's  descendants  are  represented  aa
the  children  of  Boaz  rather  than  of  Mahlon,  her  former  husband,  against  this
view.


AUTHORSHIP  AND  CHRONOLOGY.

Authorship. — (7.)  Like  many  other  of  the  inspired  books,  the  author's  name
is  not  inscribed.  So  far  the  custom  is  against  giving  the  name.  The  Talmud
affirms  that  the  book  of  Judges  was  written  by  Samuel,  and  treats  this  as  an
appendix.  Samuel  is  described  as  an  historian  (1  Chron.  xxix.  29).  This  opinion
held  among  the  rabbis,  and  adopted  by  Isidorus  and  other  ancient  commentators.
Not  so  Eichhorn,  De  Wette,  Ewald,  and  many  of  the  German  critics.  Dr.  David-
son agrees  with  the  latter,  and  thinks  it  is  impossible  to  discover  who  was  the
writer  of  the  book.  He  that  has  a  piece  of  gold  of  right  weight,  and  stamped
with  the  king's  image,  cares  not  to  know  who  minted  or  coined  it  (Fuller).

Date  of  Composition. — (8.)  Written  aftpr  the  crownim]  of  Said  (chap.  i.  1),  at
a  period  considerably  later  tlum  the  ei  ret  nit, stances  it  relates  (chap.  iv.  7).  After
the  birth  of  David,  since  he  is  mentioned  twice.  From  internal  evidence  in  a
time  of  peace,  and  in  days  singularly  free  from  the  bigoted  and  narrow  spirit
which  generally  clings  to  Jewish  history.  Could  not  have  been  composed  a,fter
the  birth  of  Solomon,  or  his  name  would  have  been  added  to  the  genealogies.  The
prejudice  against  Moabitish  women  becomes  so  intense  afterwards  as  to  render  it
extremely  improbable  such  a  book  would  either  have  been  written,  or  if  written
accepted  in  the  canon  of  Hebrew  Scriptures  (see  1  Kings  xi.  1  ;  Ezra  x.  10;
Neh.  xiii.  1).  Yet  Bertheau,  Davidson,  and  others  ascribe  its  composition  to  the
days  of  Hezekiah,  and  even  Ezra,  because  of  what  are  thought  to  be  Chaldaisms
in  the  more  coloquial  parts.  This  is  extremely  improbable,  and  held  upon  insuffi-
cient data.  The  book  breathes  the  tone  of  David's  life  and  times  (Cox).  Is  in
keeping  with  his  sending  his  father  and  mother  for  safety  into  the  land  of  Moab
(1  Sam.  xxii.  3),  and  with  his  whole  history.  Evidently  David  was  an  important
personage  to  the  writer  ;  probably  the  most  important  in  the  realm.  Keil  thinks
the  book  was  not  written  before  the  culminating  point  of  the  reign  of  this  great
king.  It  would  be  sufficient  to  say  before  the  anointing  by  Samuel.  Such  a  book
almost  necessary  to  justify  the  act  of  the  prophet  in  choosing  the  son  of  Jesse,  to
the  exclusion  of  Saul's  children.  And  what  better  justification  than  that  of  tracing
David's  descent  from  Judah  ?  Tradition  and  internal  evidence  alike  support  this
view,  as  well  as  the  testimony  of  the  rabbis  and  the  early  fathers.  Worthy  of
notice,  that  no  mention  is  made  of  David  as  being  king  in  Ruth.

(9.)  Keil  puts  an  interval  of  150  to  180  years  between  the  events  themselves
and  the  writing  of  the  book  ;  Pusey,  100  years  ;  and  the  former  fancies  the  con-
tents were  not  drawn  from  oral  tradition,  but  that  the  author  may  have  had  the
use  of  written  documents.  The  reference  to  the  custom  of  drawing  off  the  shoe
as  belonging  to  the  "  former  times  "  (iv.  7,  8)  in  favour  of  the  longer  period.

Date  of  Events.— (10.)  Josephus  relates  the  history  of  Ruth  immediately  after
that  of  Samson,  and  even  connects  the  narrative  with  the  times  of  Eli.  Cox
accepts  this,  and  says  we  may  be  reasonably  sure  that  the  story  was  enacted  while
Eli  was  judge.  Bertheau  places  it  in  the  latter  part  of  the  judges,  and  Keil  advo-
cated this  view  at  first,  but  afterwards  argued  in  favour  of  an  earlier  date,  pro-
bably in  the  days  of  Gideon.  Bishop  Patrick,  with  Hengstenberg  and  others,
inclines  to  this  view,  and  points  out  that  the  only  scarcity  noticed  in  the  book  of
Judges  was  in  the  time  of  Gideon  (comp.  Ruth  i.  1  with  Judges  vi.  4—6).  The  gene-
rality of  the  Jews  assign  it  to  the  period  of  Ibzan's  government,  the  successor  of
Jephthah,  conceiving  Ibzan  is  another  name  for  Boaz,  as  both  belong  to  Bethlehem.
(Wordsworth).  Gantz  adopts  this,  and  notices  the  fact  that  Ibzan  was  the  only  judge
born  at  Bethlehem    Vorstius  says  in  the  days  of  Deborah  and  Barak.  Usher  assigns

w


JIOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    RUTE


the  BarriiLives  to  the  still  earlier  days  of  Ebnd,  or  more  probably  Siiamgar;  and
Ligbtfoot,  following  some  eminent  Jewish  writers  in  general  agreement  with  this,
places  it  between  the  third  and  fourth  chapters  of  Judges.  Matthew  Henry  says
it  must  have  been  towards  the  beginning  of  the  judges'  time  ;  for  Boaz,  who  married
Kuth,  was  born  of  llahab,  who  received  the  spies  in  the  time  of  Joshua.  Balmon,
the  father  of  Boaz,  fongbt  under  Joshua.

The  only  landmarks  to  guide  to  a  decision  are  the  general  statement  of  Ruth
i.  1,  that  it  w;is  in  the  days  when  the  judges  ruled ;  and  the  genealogies  found  in
Ruth  iv.  and  Matt,  i.,  with  such  help  as  may  be  obtained  from  internal  evidence.
The  time  of  the  judges  generally  estimated  at  about  400  to  450  years.  (See
Judges  xi.  2G  ;  Kings  vi.  1  ;  Acts  xiii.  20.)  Another  school  of  critics  calculate
from  300  to  350  years.  Modern  criticism  is  in  favour  of  this  latter  view.  140
to  IGO  years  left  for  the  events  related  in  the  book  of  Judges  (Speaker's  Com.).
Many  of  the  events  narrated  possibly  synchronous.  Keil  insists  that  the
Ammonitish  and  Philistine  oppressions  occurred  not  successively,  but  simultane-
ously. The  condition  of  Israel  under  the  judges  similar  to  that  of  the  Anglo-
Saxon  kingdoms  under  the  Heptarchy  (Speaker's  Com.).  Possibly  Ehud,  Jephthah,
and  even  Gideon  contemporaries,  local  magistrates  raised  to  pre-eminence  in  their
own  particular  districts.  In  every  tribe  the  judge  was  the  local  magistrate.  In
Deut.  xvi.  18  it  is  said  thou  shalt  make  thee  judges  (shoplietim)  in  all  thy  gates.
(See  Lange's  Introduction  to  Judges,  p.  4,  and  Speaker's  Com.,  pp.  118 — 120.)

(11.)  Whatever  the  time  between  Joshua  and  David,  it  is  spanned  by  four
generations  in  the  genealogy — Salmon,  Boaz,  Obed,  Jesse,  the  latter  being  possibly
an  old  man  when  David  was  born  (1  Sam.  xvii.  12).  Usher  thinks  the  ancestors
of  Israel's  future  king  were  blessed  with  extraordinary  longevity.  As  the  genea-
logy stands,  Boaz  is  the  grandfather  of  Jesse,  and  the  son  of  Rahab,  that  is,  if  the
Rachab  of  Matt.  i.  is  the  Rahab  of  Ruth  iv.,  and  of  this  there  is  but  little  doubt.
Possibly  some  names  of  less  famous  ancestors  are  omitted,  a  common  practice
among  the  Hebrews  (variously  estimated  by  those  who  adopt  the  longer  chrono-
logy at  from  four  to  six,  and  even  eight  to  ten).  Lange,  and  those  who  place
the  events  in  the  days  of  Samson  or  Eli,  say  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  names
have  fallen  out  between  Boaz  and  Oled,  or  Obed  and  Jesse.  The  Scripture
language,  however,  as  to  the  earlier  links  in  the  chain,  precise  and  unusually
definite.  Salmon  begat  Boaz  of  Rachab,  and  Boaz  begat  Obed  of  Ruth,  the  two
Gentile  mothers  being  mentioned  as  well  as  the  fathers.  Dr.  Davidson  goes  so
far  as  to  say  that  '*  the  scrupulous  fidelity  of  the  Jewish  scribe  is  entirely  of
modern  growth,"  and  De  Quincey  says  there  is  no  correct  system  of  chronology  in
the  Old  Testament.  Either  the  genealogy  is  incomplete,  or  the  chronology  of
Usher,  as  derived  from  the  book  of  Judges,  wrong.

(12.)  From  internal  evidence  the  events  must  have  taken  place  in  a  time  of
spiritual  declension  and  of  famine, — a  time  of  friendship  with  Moab,  and  possibly
of  hostility  to  the  Philistines.  The  way  southward  to  Egypt,  or  westward  to
Philistia  not  chosen,  yet  these  were  the  usual  granaries.  Judges  iii.  presents  us
with  an  eighteen  years'  servitude  under  Moab,  a  revolt  under  Ehud,  a  conquest  of
Moab,  and  a  fourscore  years'  rest,  evidently  from  that  direction,  accompanied  by
inroads  from  the  Philistines  on  the  west.     (See  Judges  iii.  14—80,  81.)


GEOGRAPHY.


Scene. — (13.)  At  first  Bethlehem,  then  Moab,  then  Bethlehem  and  the  regionji
around  once  again.  Bethlehem,  two  short  hours'  journey  south  of  Jerusalem.  The
most  attractive  and  significant  of  all  the  world's  birth [ilaces  (Schubert).  Under
ordinary  ciicumstances  a  fruitful  land.  Remarkably  well  watered  in  comparison
with  other  parts  of  Palestine  (Benjamin  of  Tudehi).     Even  in  the  present  state  of


nOMlLETIC  C0M3IEKTARY:  RUTH,  chap.  I.


Palestine,  deserves  its  old  name.  (See  note  on  ch.  i.  ver  1.)  Ritter  says,
"  Notwithstanding  poor  cultivation,  the  soil  is  fruitful  in  olives,  pomegrantes,
almonds,  figs,  and  grapes.  Hep  worth  Dixon  thus  describes  its  present  appear-
ance : —

'*  A  string  of  gardens,  a  few  steep  fields,  much  crossing  of  white  roads — so  many  that  the
point  of  junction  may  be  called  the  Place  of  Paths— a  glen  which  drops  by  leaps  and  steps  to  the
great  Ccdron  valley,  makes  the  landscape.  Yet  the  slope  which  is  thus  bound  in  by  higher  tops
and  more  barren  crests,  has  a  winning  beauty  of  its  own,  a  joyous  promise  of  bread  and  fruit,
which  puts  it  first  among  the  chosen  places  of  Judea.  The  old  word  Ephrath  meant  Place  of
Fruit,  the  newer  word  Bethlehem  meant  House  of  Bread  ;  one  following  the  other,  as  barley  and
maize  come  after  grapes  and  figs,  and  the  sower  of  grain  succeeds  to  the  breeder  of  goats  and
kine.  The  little  bit  of  plain  through  which  Ruth  gleaned  after  the  young  men,  together  with
a  level  of  stony  ground  here  and  there  in  the  glen  toward  Mar  Saba,  are  the  only  corn  lands
occurring  in  the  hill  country  of  Judea  for  many  a  league.  .  .  .  The  lovely  green  ridge  of
Bethlehem  is  the  scene  of  some  of  our  most  tender  and  gracious  poems  :  the  idyls  of  Rachel,
of  Ruth,  of  Saul,  of  David,  of  Chimham,  of  Jeremiah,  of  the  Virgin-mother  ;  the  subjects  of
these  poems  being  the  foremost  passages  in  Israel's  religious  life." — Dixon's  Holy  Land.

Moab,  on  the  other  side,  and  S.E.  of  the  Dead  Sea,  from  Bethlehem.  A  dis-
trict about  forty  miles  long  by  twenty  in  width.  In  parts  a  luxuriant  land  when
cultivated.  The  uplands  are  very  fertile  and  productive  (Professor  Palmer).  Now
but  scantily  populated,  but  presenting  evidences  of  former  plenty  and  fertility.
Cox  says : —

*'  The  name  of  Moab  stands  in  the  Bible  for  three  districts  on  the  east  of  the  Dead  Sea,  but
we  can  teU  in  which  of  these  it  was  that  Elimelech  found  a  home  and  a  grave,  for  one  of  these
districts  is  expressly  called  '  The  Held  of  Moab,'  which  is  the  technical  phrase  used  throughout
this  book,  while  another  was  called  "  The  Land  of  Moab,"  and  a  third  '*  The  Dry"  i.e.,  the  Dry
Canton  of  Moab.  This  district  or  canton — the  Field  of  Moab  or  Moab  proper — has  the  preci-
pices which  border  the  Dead  Sea  on  its  western  hmits,  a  semicircular  sweep  of  hills  on  the  east,
behind  which  lies  the  Arabian  Desert ;  on  the  north  it  is  defended  by  the  tremendous  chasm
down  which  the  river  Arnon  foams  ;  while  on  the  south  the  two  ranges  between  which  it  lies
run  together,  meet,  and  shut  it  in.  It  was  a  high  tableland,  dotted  with  cities,  on  which  the
grass  grew  sweet  and  strong ;  and  it  has  been  in  aU  ages,  as  it  is  even  now,  a  favourite  haunt
of  pastoral  tribes.


CHAPTER  L

THE  EXILE  AND  THE  RETURN.

Contents. — A  famine  in  the  land  of  Israel. — Elimelech  a  wealthy  Helrerv,  descended  of
an  ancient  and  honovrahle  hovse,  goes  down  to  the  fields  of  Moah  with  his  family.  Tlie
removal  is  followed  by  his  death ;  the  marriage  of  his  sons^  Mahlon  and  Chilian  to  Ruth  and
Orpah,  and  their  death. — At  the  end  of  ten  years^  Naomi  his  wife  returning,  dissnades  her
two  day ghters  from  accompanying  her  further. — Orpah  goes  hack^  hut  Rnth  continues  with
Naomi. — The  two  come  to  Bethlehem  at  the  beginning  of  the  barley  harvest,  and  are  received
with  astonishment.

Cbitical  and  Exegetical  Notes. —  Ver.  1.  Now]  Heb.  i  vau^  and.  The  same  intro-
copula  between  all  the  books  of  the  0.  T.  so  far,  except  in  the  opening  of  Deuteronomy,  which
begins  abruptly.  Keil  (1  Kings  i.  1)  says  the  use  of  this  conjunction  at  the  beginning  of  a
writing  is  a  sure  sign  of  its  com  ection  with  another  book.  It  came  to  pass  in  the  days  when
the  judges  ruled  (judged).  ^n^T  The  imperfect  with  vau  consec.  simply  attaches  itself  to  a  com-
pleted action,  which  has  either  been  mentioned  before,  oris  supposed  to  be  well  known  (Ewald).
Assigns  a  particular  period.  Shows  also  a  different  state  of  things  [monarchy]  exioted  around
the  v^Titer.  Time  of  the  judges  generally  a  troubled  time.  Spent  to  a  large  extent  under  the
usur}  a:iun  of  neighbouring  nations.  Towards  its  end  Israel  had  fearfully  degenerated  (Judges
xxi.  25).  Does  not  necessarily  imply  a  judge  ruled  when  Elimelech  left  the  country
(Lan-son).  A  famine  in  the  land]  Threatened,  Lev.  xxvi.  19,  20;  Deut.  xxviii.  23,  24.  Re-
cognised as  a  Divine  instrument  of  punishment,  2  Sam.  xxiv.  13,  14  ;  Ezek.  v.  16  ;  Amos  iv.
6,  7.  That  it  did  not  extend  to  Moab  favours  this  idea.  Said  by  some  to  have  been  caused
by  an  incuision  of  the  Midianites (see  Judges  vi.  3,  4)  by  the  Philistines  (Co.r).  Josci)lius  savs
it  was  in  thcdaysof  Eli  (sec  Intro.,  par.  10 — 12).  ISoloiuiJiis  piaycr  i-onceining  famine  (1  Kings
viii.  35  —HI).     Christians'  duty  durini^  (Acts  x.i.  28).     A  pjore  terrible  famine  (Amos  viji.  ]  1^,

6


CHAP.  I.  1.  II03I1LETW    C0]\IM1:NTARY  :    RUTH.


when  men  shall  seek  the  word  of  God,  and  shall  not  find  it.  And  a  certain  man  (Ileb.
And  a  man)  of  Bethlehem  Judah]  To  distinguish  it  from  another  Bethlehem  in  Zebulon.
Means,  House  of  Broad.  Ancient  name  Ephrata  (fruitful),  thouij^h  this  may  have  applied  to
the  district  as  far  as  Jerusalem.  Now  called  Beit-Lahm,  or  Beit-el-ham  {Mamford).  Kachel
died  here.  David  and  Christ  born  here.  Hepworth  Dixon  advances  the  theory  that  both
may  have  been  born  in  the  house  which  is  mentioned  ch.  iii.  3.  (See  note  on  that  verse  ;  also
Dixon's  *'  Holy  Land.")  Kcfcicnces  to  Bethlehem  in  the  book  of  Judges  mournful  ones
(xvii.  7,  xix.  1,2).  The  tuin  of  the  narrative  hc»e  same  as  in  the  former  [Speaker's  Coni-
onenf(7nj).  Favours  the  idea  that  the  wiiter  was  the  same.  Went  to  sojourn]  Expresses
correctly  the  meaning  of  the  Heb.,  which  signifies  "  to  tarry  as  a  stranger  in  a  place."  Isaac
was  forbidden  this  method  of  lelief  from  famine  (Gen.  xxvi.  2),  when  he  would  have  followed
the  example  of  Abraham  in  going  down  to  Egypt  (Gen,  xii.  10).  Israelites  generally  much
attached  to  their  own  land.  In  the  country  (field  or  fields)  of  Moab]  Bertheau  maintains,
we  have  in  nt""  only  another  way  of  writing  mip  the  singular  (ver.  6),  Keil,  Gesenius,
Fiirst,  look  upon  it  as  a  form  of  the  plural.  The  same  style  of  expression  used  of  Moab
(Gen,  xxxvi,  85  ;  Num.  xxi.  20;  1  Chron.  i.  46).  Moab  connected  with  Israelites  in  the  days
of  Ehud  (Judges  iii.  12 — 20).  Continued  to  be  an  asylum  for  them  (comp.  1  Sam.  xxii,  3,  4 ;
Isa.  xvi.  34  ^Jer.  xl.  11,  12).  Israelites  held  places  of  trust  there  (1  Chron.  iv.  22,  23).
David  sent  his  father  and  mother  there.  Moabitcs  descendants  of  Lot  (Gen.  xix,  37),  and
w^orshippers  of  Chemosh.  Their  inheritance  spared  to  them  by  command  of  God,  when  Israel
entered  into  the  land.  This  may  account  for  the  friendship  with  Israel,  and  in  favour  of  the
earlier  date  ascribed  by  Lightfoot  and  others  to  book  of  Ruth  (see  Intro.,  par.  10, 12).  Moabites
not  admitted  into  the  congregation  of  the  Lord  until  the  tenth  generation,  on  account  of  their
disgraceful  origin.  For  description,  etc.,  see  Intro.,  par.  14.  He,  and  his  wife,  and  his  two
sons]  Sarah  w^ent  with  Abraham  (Gen.  xii.  18)  into  Egypt.  Rachel  and  Leah  left  their
countiy  with  Jacob.  The  family  of  importance  (ch.  ii.  and  iii.),  well  known  in  Bethlehem
(ch  i.  19,  and  iv.  1).     See  notes  on  ver.  2.


CHAPTER  I.— VERSE  1.
HOMILIES    AND    OUTLINES.

Theme. — The  Famine  and  Exile.

Now  [and]  it  came  to  pass.  Simple  phrases  bear  the  marks  of  a  nation's  way
of  thinking.  Language  has  been  called  fossil  thought,  poetry.  Here  the  Hebrew
faith  in  an  overruling  hand.  Not  by  chance,  but  by  the  orderly  unfolding  of
events.  A  common  scriptural  form  of  introduction;  simple,  dignified,  yet  how
much  it  may  express.

I.  View  it  simply  as  a  statement  of  facts,  (a)  lliese  things  hajypened.  The
phrase  introductory  to  a  remarkable  life  ;  singled  out  from  many  others.  Much  not
considered  worthy  of  record.  Lives  of  which  the  Scripture  takes  no  note,  written
in  the  record  kept  until  the  last  great  day.  Events  which  have  dropped  even
from  the  pages  of  inspired  history.  Note  :  When  God  is  silent,  it  is  not  wise  to
speak  [Welsh  Proverb).

But  these  things  come  within  the  scope  of  revelation — (a)  for  wise  purposes.

God  saw  fit  to  transmit  the  knowledge  ol  them  for  our  edification  (2  Tim.  iii.  16).

Paul  bids  us  look  to  Christ,  yet  learn  of  those  who  through  faith  and  patience,

\  etc.  (Heb.  vi.  12).   (y8)  For  yracious  purposes.    Here  are  links  in  the  chain,  and  the

end  is  Christ.     The  way  leads  through  Moab  back  again  to  Bctulehem.

{h)  Tliese  thinr/s  hapjjencd  by  the  hand  and.  providence  of  God.  The  theocratic
aspect  is  not  prominent  in  the  book  of  Ruth  [Davidson).  But  it  is  there.  A
special  hand  of  God  in  all  this  business,  beyond  man's  purpose  and  thought  (/i*.
Bernard).  The  story  of  Ruth  is  an  impertinence  in  Scripture,  unless  we  believe
in  a  special  providence.  This  everywhere  taken  for  granted  in  the  Divine  word.
God  in  profane  history,  much  more  then  in  sacred.  God  in  every  life.  The
very  absence  of  what  is  called  the  religious  element  has  its  significance.  The
book  beautifully  enforces  what  Wordsworth  calls  "natural  piety,"  But  more
particularly  amid  these  seemingly  commonplace  events  a  Divine  purpose  and
plan.     "  While  the  judges  were  ruling,  some  one  city,  and  some  another,  Pro-

7


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    RUTH,  ohap.  i.  1.


vidence  takes  particular  cognizance  of  Bethlehem,  and  has  an  eye  to  a  King,  to
Messiah  Himself"  (M.  Henry).

II.  See  in  it  a  subtle  connection  between  cause  and  effects.

In  those  days  of  ungodliness  this  happened.  The  judges  ruled,  but  every  man
did  right  in  his  own  eyes  (Judges  xxi.  25).  Religion  corrupted,  worship  decayed,
idolatry  common;  and  here  are  the  results.  When  sin  is  ripe,  vengeance  is
ready.

Notice  [a)  National  life  affects  individual  history.  We  cannot  separate  ourselves
from  our  surroundings  ;  are  members  one  of  another  in  many  senses.  We  prosper
or  we  suffer  together  in  times  of  Divine  visitation.

{h)  Life  as  it  stands  towards  God  influences  life  as  it  stands  towards  men.  All
life  an  unfolding,  a  coming  to  pass.  But  how  ?  Look  for  the  seeds  within,
around,  in  the  past ;  but  look  above  for  the  hand  overruling  and  bringing  to  pass.
God  of  His  most  dear  justice  hath  decreed  the  sum  of  all  discipline  {Cyprian).
Divine  law  in  the  natural  world  immutable,  so  in  the  spiritual.  The  world  of
morals  sways  the  sceptre  over  the  world  of  circumstances.  Every  other  view
of  life  practical  atheism.  Do  we  believe  it  ?  rather,  do  we  live  as  though  we
believed  it  ?  In  prosperity  we  are  commonly  Hke  hogs  feeding  on  the  mast,  not
minding  his  hand  that  shaketh  it  down;  in  adversity,  like  dogs  biting  the  stone,
not  marking  the  hand  that  threw  it  (Fuller),

Impeovement.  By-and-by  our  life  will  be  summed  up  in  this  short  sentence,
**It  came  to  pass;  "  the  pilgrimage  a  road  with  many  turnings,  but  all  mapped
out.  ^  The  ''  to  be  "  will  be  the  *'  has  been."  And  to  what  issues  ?  Doubtless  a
link  in  some  chain  or  other.  Ruth's  is  joined  to  Israel's,  to  David's,  to  Christ's.
A  Gentile  from  the  outer  darkness  brought  within  the  hope  of  Israel.  Gospel
mercy  foreshadowed  so  far  back  in  the  unfolding  of  events.  In  God's  time,  ''  it
came  to  pass."  Fuller  says,  "  To  typify  the  callin|  of  the  Gentiles,  as  He  'took
of  the  blood  of  a  Gentile  into  His  body,  so  He  should  shed  His  blood  out  of  His
body  for  the  Gentiles,  that  there  might  be  one  Shepherd  and  one  sheepfold  "—a
quaint  conceit,  but  enshrining  precious  truth.  The  ingathering  had  begun  to
work  itself  out  in  this  ''coming  to  pass.''  The  ingathering  is  going  on  now.  How
do  we  stand  as  towards  it  ?  Linked  with  Israel's  hope,  or  —  ?  What  is  the  life
unfolding  ?  A  history  of  one  wholn  God  has  chosen,  and  who  has  chosen  God  ?
or  the  sad  story  of  one  who  has  wandered  into  strange  lands,  leaving  behind  him
the  home  and  the  sanctuary  of  his  fathers — wandered  to  die  amid  his  wanderings  f
or  the  story  of  one  who  did  run  well  for  awhile  like  Orpah  ?     Which  is  it  ?

"  It  is  our  fault  that  we  look  upon  God's  manuscript  which  now  we  may  not  be  able

ways  and  works  by  halves  and  pieces ;  and  so  to  decipher,  but  which  by-and-by  will  prove

we  see  often  nothing  but  the  black  side itself  to  the  righteous  a  new  Scripture  full

We  see  Him  bleeding  His  people,  scattering  of  the  benedictions  of  God  "— ^
parliaments,  chasing  away  nobles  and  pre-  "  The  curtains  of  yesterday  drop  down,  the

lates,  as  not  wilhng  they  should  have  a  finger  curtains  of  to-morrow  roll  up,  but  yesterday

m  laying  one  stone  of  His  house;  yet  do  we  and  to-morrow  both  «m     Time  and  space

?  1*  ^T^*^,    '^  ^^^'^  dispensation  the  other  are  not  God,  but  creations  of   God.     With

half  of  God  8  work  makes  it  a  fair  piece  ?"—  God,  as  it  is  a  universal  here,  so  is  it  an

Rutherford  everlasting  ^ow:^—Carlyle.
UlQ  IS  all  one  unfolding,  as  of  some  quaint

Theme. — The  Beginning  op  Sorrows.

In  the  days  when  the  judges  ruled  [judged],  a  famine,  etc.

God  takes  the  events  into  His  own  hands.  While  the  judges  are  judging,  God
too  IS  boldmg  the  balances.  The  times  were  evil.  Six  long  servitudes,  at  least,
mark  the  Divme  displeasure  at  Israel's  sin.  Sin  deprived  angels  of  heaven,  Adam
of  Paradise,  Cam  of  his  honour,  Reuben  of  his  birthright,  thousands  of  the  land
of  Canaan  {E.  Bernard).  Now  it  deprives  Israel  of  food.  A  blessing  promised  on
their  land,  their  basket  and  their  store,  as  long  as  they  walked  in  His  law  (Lev.


(UAr.  I.  1.  IIOMILETIG  COMMENTAUY:    RUTH.


xxvi  1-3 — 5  ;  Dent,  xxviii.  5).  Evidently  they  had  departed  from  that  Jaw.  And
now  the  presence  of  the  godly  in  the  land  cannot  avert  the  evil,  as  at  Sodom.
The  fact  that  there  are  children  in  the  households  of  Israel  does  not  stay  the
Divine  hand  as  at  Nineveh.  No  place  is  exempt,  not  even  Bethlehem.  The  rich
Bntl'er  with  the  poor,  for  Elimeloch  belonged  to  a  wealthy  and  honourable  fnmily.

See  in  this,  I.  Designed  punishment.  Shall  there  be  evil  in  a  city,  and  the
Lord  hath  not  done  it?  God  has  many  arrows  in  His  quiver;  the  land  may  have
rest,  but  it  has  not  plenty  [M.  IJenry).  Famine,  the  peculiar  instrument  used — a
very  terrible  one.  David  preferred  the  pestilence  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  14).  But  no
choice  is  given  here.

Notice  (rt)  God's  judgments  come  in  a  very  natural  way.  The  wonted  streams
dry  up  possibly  from  very  apparent  causes — easy  to  understand,  easy  to  explain.
A  drought  or  an  inroad  of  the  enemy  may  have  caused  this.  But  beyond  natural
causes,  another  reason — behind  Nature,  God.  He  turns  a  fruitful  land  into  barren-
ness, because  of  the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwell  therein  (Ps.  cvii.  34).

(/;)  There  is  always  something  special  in  them  worthy  our  attention.  Esau,  de-
spising his  birthright,  lost  it.  Lot,  led  of  his  lust  into  Sodom,  had  to  leave  behind
all  for  which  he  lusted.  Judas  perished  ''in  the  midst"  of  the  field  he  had  pur-
chased with  the  price  of  blood.  (See  Alford  on  Acts  i.  8.)  A  sad  irony  often  in
the  history  of  sinners  and  their  sins.  So  here,  a  famine  in  the  land  flowing  with
milk  and  honey !  No  bread  in  Bethlehem,  the  house  of  bread  !  And  more,
Moab  has  plenty  while  Israel  is  pinched  with  penury.

(c)  There  is  always  a  reason  which  stands  out  in  connection  with  them.  God  had
said  expressly  He  would  deal  with  Israel  after  this  fashion.  Famine  was  to  be  to
them  one  especial  mark  of  His  displeasure  (Lev.  xxvi.  19,  20).  Moab  may  have
ease,  not  so  Israel  (Jer.  xv.  11,  xlviii.  11) ;  for  Moab  is  as  the  unregenerate,  his
taste  for  earthly  enjoyment  and  sensual  gratification  unchanged.  The  wicked
have  their  portion  in  this*ife,  but  Christ  says  woe  to  them  (Luke  vi.  25  ;  Amos
vi.  1).     And  Paul  reasons  of  such,  "  Then  are  ye  bastards,  and  not  sons."

See  in  this,  II.  Necessary  discipline.  Chastisement  meant  discipline  with
Israel.  Jehovah  explains  the  weary  wilderness  privations  as  intended  "  to  prove
thee,  to  know  what  was  in  thine  heart."  This  famine  has  a  like  explana-
tion (Judges  ii.  20 — 22),  if  it  resulted  either  from  a  Midianitish  or  Philistine
invasion,  as  is  probable.  (See  Notes  and  Introduction.)  The  prodigal  child  was
brought  from  the  keeping  of  harlots  to  the  keeping  of  hogs  {Fuller).  And  why  ?
The  "  I  will  arise"  explains  and  justifies  "  the  hungering  in  a  far  country."  So
always.  Christ  for  mere  trial  sometimes,  for  sin  at  other  times,  doth  cover
Hiinself  with  a  cload  {Rutherford).  Whatever  the  reason,  the  Divine  purpose  the
same — discipline.

yu)  jSuiice  ilie  different  forms  this  discipline  may  take,  as  illustrated  by  the  narra-
tive. Want,  scarcity  of  provisions,  possibly  hunger,  and  these  haling  to  loss  of
worldly  possessions  and  the  family  patrimony,  absence  from  the  sanctuary,  wan-
derings in  strange  lands,  years  of  exile,  death  to  most  of  them  in  a  foreign  land.
A  similar  epitome  might  be  made  of  many  a  family  history —

**  They  grew  in  beauty  side  by  side.
They  filled  one  home  with  glee;
Their  graves  are  scattered  far  and  wide,

By  mount  and  stream  and  sea." — Jl/r,s'.  Ilemans,

(5)  Notice  the  severity  of  this  particular  form.  Hunger  a  most  trying  test.  Any
kind  of  deprivation  is.  The  same  cause  sent  Abraham  and  Jacob  into  Egypt,
Isaac  to  Gcrah.  Even  Christ  must  feel  its  pangs  when  He  is  led  into  the  wilder-
ness to  be  tempted.

Improvement.  The  dispensations  of  Providence  strange — sovereign,  even  puni-
tive. Cnn  we  pee  this  other  thincr,  that  they  are  disciplinary  ("  Whom  the  Lord
luvc.il,"   etc.,   Lcb.  xii.  G),  and  may  be  beneficial?     This  last  aspect   depcnus

9


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    RVTH,  chap.  i.  1.


largely  upon  ourselves.  He  is  dealing  with  us  in  one  way  or  other.  If  not  by
famine,  then  by  our  very  abundance  ;  if  not  by  plenty,  then  perhaps  by  penury.
And  to  what  eti'ect  ?  Driving  us  towards  Moab  ;  away  from  the  sanctuary  ;  away
from  all  that  links  us  with  the  people  of  God  ?  There  is  this  sad  possibility,  and
the  narrative  which  follows  may  warn  us  of  this.  Or  ripening  us  for  that  land
where  there  is  no  hunger  ?  tribulation  working  patience,  etc.  (Rom.  v.  3).
Topsell  treats  the  passage —

1.  That  the  corruption  of  religion  and  the  neglect  of  the  worship  of  God  is

the  cause  of  all  His  judgments.
II.  That  the  Lord  is  true  in  His  judgments  as  in  His  mercies  (Deut.  xxviii.
23,  24 ;  Ps.  cxlv.  17 ;  2  Thess.  i.  6).
Bernard —

I.  That  people  deprive  themselves  by  their  sins,  of  that  which  God  had

given,  and  they  enjoyed,  according  to  His  promise.
II.  That  a  fruitful  land  is  made  barren  for  the  sins  of  the  inhabitanta

thereof.
III.  That  judgment  begins  at  the  house  of  the  Lord.
Fuller  derives  the  following  uses  [lessons]  : —

I.  Let  us   practise  that  precept,   "  Babes,  keep  yourselves  from  idols "

(1  John  V.  21).
II.  Let  us  be  heartily  thankful  to  God  for  our  plenty.

III.  Let  us  pray  with  David,  "Deliver  us  from  blood-guiltiness.**

IV.  Let  us  be  pitiful  and  liberal  to  relieve  the  distresses  of  the  poor,

"Burckhardt  states  that  in  Ncjd  in  Arabia  All  things  are  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  His

famines  like  these  recur  at  intervals  of  from  creatures  change  their  qualities  or  effects  at

ten  to  fifteen  years." — Wordsworth.  His  pleasure."— Z^?r50W.

"  The   Athenian  women  had  a  custom  to  "A  clear  and  striking  proof  that  here  is  no

make  a  picture  of  famine  every  year,  and  to  continuing  city  or  place  of  abode,  and  shews

drive  it  out  of  their  city  with  these  words :  the  necessity  of  our  seeking  a  city  which  hath

*  Out    famine,    in    food  ;     out    penury,    in  foundadons,  the  builder  and  maker  of  which

plenty  1 '      But   let    us    say  in    word,   and  is  God.     For  if  a  man  be  ever  so  agreeably

second  it  in  deed,  '  Out  sin." in  sanctity  ;  out  situated  in  the  midst  of  plenty,  Divine  Pro-

profaneness,  in  piety  : '    and  then  we  shall  vidence  can  soon  drive  him  from  his  rest,  and

see  that  as  long  as  our  king  reigneth,  there  reduce  him  to  the  disagreeable  necessity  of

shall  be  no  famine  in  our  land.  .  .  .  Is  this  dependinguponthebountyof  even  the  wicked

the  land  whereof  it  is  said,  'Asher  his  bread  themselves,  who  are,  like  Moab,  for  ever  shut

shall  be  fat,  and  afford  dainties  for  a  king '  out  from  the  sanctuary  of  Jeaovah." — Mac-

(Gen.    xlix.    20),  which   is   called    'a  good  go/van.

land  of  wheat  and  barley,   vineyards  and  "  When  afflictions  fail  to  have  their  due

fig  trees,  oil,  olive,  and  honey '  (Deut.  viii.  7) ;  effect,  the  cas-e  is  desperate." — Bolinghrohe.
which  is  commended  (Ezek.  XX.  6)  to  be 'a  "Suffering    seasons    have   generally   been

land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  the  glory  of  sifting  seasons,  in  which  the  Christian  has

all  lands'  ?  .  .  .  The  people's  hard  hearts  were  lost  his  chaff,  and  the  hypocrite  his  courage."

rebelhous  to  God,  and  the  hard  earth  proved  — Seeker.

unprofitable  to  them ;  their  flinty  eyes  would  "  There  is  a  deep  truth  contained  in  the

afford  no  tears  to  bemoan  their  sins,  and  the  fabled  story  of  old,  where  a  mother,  wishing

churlish  heavens  would  afford  no  moisture  to  render  her  son  invulnerable,  plunged  him

to  wake  their  earth  ;  man  proved  unfaithful  into  the  Styx,  but  forgot  to  dip  in  his  heel,  by

to  God  his  Maker ;  the  earth  proved  unfaith-  which  she  held  him.     We  are  baptized  in  the

ful  to  man  her  manurer." — Fuller.  blood  and  fire   of  sorrow,  that  temptation

"  Think  not  that  the  fertility  of  a  land  is  may  make  us  invulnerable ;  but  let  us  re-
able  to  secure  its  inhabitants  against  famine,  member  that  trials  will  assail  us  in  our  most
or  that  any  earthly  advantage  is  sufficient  to  vulnerable  part,  be  it  the  Lead,  or  heart,  or
secure  us  against  any  calamity  whatsoever,  heel." — Jlobertson.

Theme. — The  Depakture  from  Home.

•  Some  natural  tears  they  dropped,  but  wiped  them  soon ;
The  world  was  all  before  them,  where  to  choose
Their  place  of  rest,  and  Providence  their  guide." — Milton.

And  a  certain  man  of  BetliUliem  iceiit  t.  sojourn  in  the  country  [fields]  of  Moab.

An  exile  leaving  Bethlehem,  like  Dante  leaving  his  beloved  Florence.     To  this
10


CHAP.  I.  1.  HOMILETIG   C031MENTARY:    RUTH.


man  also  nuuquam  revocare.  He  dies  in  exile.  God's  providences  often  unex-
plained in  this  life — await  the  clearer  light  of  eternity.  Some  blame  Elimelech'a
going  to  Moab.  Possibly  self-exiled.  But  no  man  ought  to  be  condemned  without
proofs  of  guilt,  and  no  certain  proofs  appear  in  the  present  case  {Lawaon),
Israelites  were  not  prohibited  sojourning  in  a  strange  land.  David  dwelt  in  Gath.
Sent  his  father  and  mother  for  protection  into  Moab.  What  if  a  kindred  necessity
impelled  Elimelech  ?

I.  Suggests  the  mutability  of  human  aflfairs.  {a)  We  must  expect  changes  ?n
this  world,  changes  which  make  life  Mara  (ver.  20).  While  Moab  is  at  ease,  Israel
is  to  be  poured  from  vessel  to  vessel.  Elimelech  an  Israelite,  and  they  were
much  attached  to  their  land — dwelt  in  the  most  fertile  part  of  the  country,  pro-
bably a  rich  man  (see  notes),  and  yet  in  his  old  age  he  must  become  a  wanderer.
No  condition  of  life,  no  circumstaDces,  no  experience,  can  exempt  us.  (6)  We
cannot  always  dwell  where  we  wish.  David  must  sojourn  in  the  tents  of  Kedar,
leave  city  and  palace  behind,  and  flee  to  the  wilderness.  El  must  go  down  to
Moab,  Joseph  to  Egypt.  Nay,  touches  the  holiest :  Christ  Himself  a  wanderer,
"  not  having  where  to  lay  His  head."

II.  Presents  a  picture  of  restlessness  under  affliction.

Sight,  not  faith,  guides  Elimelech.  The  sublime  trust  which  waits  upon  God
in  these  hours  of  peril  seemingly  absent.  The  promise  to  Israel,  '*  Thou  shalt  eat
bread  without  scarceness"  (Deut.  viii.  9).  Tons,  "  Eest  in  the  Lord;  wait
patiently  for  Him ;  verily  thou  shalt  be  fed  "  (Ps.  xxxvii.  3,  7).  "In  the  days  of
famine  thou  shalt  be  satisfied"  (ver.  19).

Outward  appearances  against  the  promises.  Faith  weak — he  went  down  to  Moab.
Some  suggest  desire  after  gain  led  him.  Dr.  Gumming  thinks  that  he  fled  from
the  sight  of  poverty  and  want  around  him.  He  went  out  ''full."  Certainly
strong  reasons  demanded  for  a  change  like  this.  Otherwise  God  says  to  such,
♦'  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  to  change  thy  ways  ?  "  (Jer.  ii.  36.)

Besllessness  a  very  common  sin.  At  the  first  approach  of  trial  men  grow  im-
patient ;  seek  a  change  in  outward  circumstances,  or  in  doctrine ;  become
ofi'ended  even  A^ith  Christ  Himself  (John  vi.  QQ).

Note. — One  single  restraint  made  Adam  a  wanderer  from  God,  (See  outlines
on  ver.  2.)

And  III.  May  illustrate  spiritual  declension.

Elimelech  a  wealthier  man  than  many  of  his  neighbours,  who  bore  the  brunt  of
famine  rather  than  expose  their  children  to  the  seductions  of  heathen  license
{Cox).  If  all  should  do  as  he  did,  Canaan  would  be  dispeopled  [M.  Henry),
What  was  the  cause  in  his  case  ?  Did  he  value  the  sanctuary  privileges  less,  or
the  good  things  of  this  world  more  than  they  ?

Note  a  principle  in  this.     Men  go  down  to  Moab,

(a)  Because  the  promised  land  itself  seems  to  yield  them  scanty  supplies.  The
narrow  way  not  attractive  in  itself.  A  gospel  that  says  by  the  mouth  of  its
Master,  "  Sell  all  that  thou  hast,"  and  by  one  of  its  chief  apostles,  "  Silver  and
gold  have  I  none  " — a  service  which  demands  honesty,  though  honesty  should
prove  to  be  other  than  the  best  policy — truthfulness,  though  truth  be  an  ofi'ence —
must  seem  meagre  in  its  rewards,  alas  to  how  many  !  They  follow  for  awhile,
charmed  by  the  novelty  of  Christ's  kingdom.  Sooner  or  later  He  is  seen  as  "  one
not  having  where  to  lay  His  head,"  a  "root  out  of  a  dry  ground."  Human
nature  asks  large  things  (2  Kings  v.  13).  His  gospel  has  chosen  the  weak  things
and  things  which  are  not  (1  Cor.  ii.  27,  28).  Scanty  supplies  a  great  secret  of
spiritual  declension.

(h)  Because  of  the  rich  abundance  inviting  them  there.  Possibly  pinched  by
famine,  and  in  all  probability  fearing  to  lose  his  flocks  and  herds,  the  rich  grass
lands  on  the  other  side  of  the  Dead  Sea  proved  irresistible  to  this  man.  Lot
went  down  to  dwell  among  the  wicked  cities  of  the  plain  for  similar  reasons — led
of  his  own  spiiit  and  of  his  own  judgment.     To  both  men  the  journey  was  as

11


HOMILEriC   COMMENTARY:   RUTH.  cttap.  i.  1.


disastrous  as  it  was  tempting.  So  Judas,  Demas.  Abundance  is  not  everyfhimf.
The  world  may  seem  to  have  it,  does  seem  to  have  it  even  to  the  righteous  (see
Psalms  xxxvii.  85,  Ixxiii.  5,  7,  12).  A  blight  always  upon  it  when  the  righteous
seek  it.  Elimelech  goes  down  to  Moab  to  die  there.  Lot  has  to  escape  from
Sodom  "as  by  fire."  The  young  man  who  came  to  our  Lord  went  away
**  sorrowful."

Fuller  observes :  '*  It  is  lawful  for  men  to  leave  their  native  soil,  and  to  travel
into  a  foreign  country ;  as —

L  For  merchants,  provided  always  that,  while  they  seek  to  make  gainful
adventures  for  their  estates,   they  make  not  '  shipwreck  of  a  good
conscience.'
II.  For  ambassadors,  that  are  sent  to  see  the  practices  and  negotiations  in
foreign  courts.
III.  For   private  persons  that  travel  with  an  intent  to  accomplish  them-
selves with  a  better  sufficiency  to  serve  their  king  and  country."
Bernnrd  observes :

I.  No  place  is  exempt  from  punishment,  where  sin  is  suffered  to  reign.
II.  God  can  remove,  by  one  means  or  another,  men  out  of  their  homes  and

harbour.     No  man  may  think  himself  securely  settled.
III.  Fear  of  corporal  wants  will  make  men  leave  their  homes,  their  native
soil,  their  friends  and  kindred.     How  much  more,  then,  for  the  love
of  eternal  life,  should  we  be  willing  to  forsake  all ! "
Topsell — We  note,

I.  It  is  lawful  for  the  godly,  in  the  time  of  necessity,  to  crave  help  or
relief  of  the  very  enemies  of  God,  so  they  be  not  polluted  with  their
superstitions.
II,  That  the  Lord  doth  ever  provide  for  His  faithful  servants  in  all  their
miseries.  Joseph  sent  beforehand  to  provide  for  his  brethren  (Gen.
xlv.  45) ;  Obadiah,  who  hid  fifty  of  the  prophets,  and  fed  them  in  a
cave  (1  Kings  xviii.  13) ;  Elijah  provided  for  (1  Kings  xvii.  4 — 10 ;
see  also  2  Cor.  iv.  8,  9).

"  When  we  go  from  home,  it  depends  en-  mandment  of  the  Lord  ;  *  so  I  cannot  find

tirely  on  the  will  of  God  whether  we  shall  any  just  warrant  to  encourage  men  to  under-

arrive  at  the  place  of  our  destination.     When  take  this   removal ;    but   think    rather    the

we  are  in  it,  it  depends  no  less  on  the  Divine  counsel  best  that  King  Joash  prescribed  to

pleasure  whether  we  shall  ever  again  see  the  Aniaziah,  '  Tarry  at  home.'     Yet,  as  for  those

place  from  which  we  went  out.     '  A  man's  that  are  already  gone,  far  be  it  from  us  to

heart  deviseth  his  way,  but  the  Lord  directeth  conceive  them  to  be  such  to  whom  we  may

his  steps.'     Beware  of  bringing  upon  your-  not  say  '  God  speed.'     I  conclude,  therefore,

selves  the  punishment  that  came  upon  the  of  the  two  Englands,  what  our  Saviour  saith

proud  king  of  Babylon,  because  he  did  not  of  the  two  wines  (Luke  v.  39),  *  No  man

glorify  that  God  in  whose  hand  his  breath  having  tasted   of  the  old  presently  desireth

was.  and  whose  were  all  his  ways.     Do  not  the  new ;   for  he  saith,  The  old  is  better.*  "—

say  that  to-morrow  you  will  go  into  such  a  Euller.
city,  and  buy,  and  sell,  and  get  gain.     Say
rather  if  the  Lord  wiW'—Law.son.  "  The  merchant,  havinjr  obtained  his  bank,

"  It  is  an  evidence  of  a  discontented,  dis-  P>*omiseth  rest  and  security  to  himself;    the

f,.,.^+i!.,i    „v,of«v.i^  c-^i-^n-    t-r.  u^  ,„^ ^  ^f  Ai.^  husbandman,  havmg  gathered  his  fruits,  never

trustful,  unstable  spirit,  to  be  weary  of  the  ^oabteth  but  he  sliall  spend  them,  and  pro-
place  m  which  God  has  set  us,  and  to  be  for  ^^j^j^th  for  more;  the  gentleman,  coming  to
leaving  it  immediately  whenever  we  meet  1,,^  lands,  thinketh  his  revenues  and  pleasant
with  any  uneasiness  or  inconvenience  in  it.  life  will  endure  alway.  like  the  apostles  when
It  is  a  folly  to  think  of  escaping  that  cross  Christ  w;is  transfigured  in  the  Mount,  pre-
whicb,  being  laid  in  our  way,  we  ought  to  sently  they  would  build  tabernacles  of  resi-
take  up.  It  is  our  wisdom  to  make  the  best  dence  ;  but  as  the  cloud  came  betwixt  them
of  that  which  is,  for  it  is  seldom  that  changing  and  heaven,  and  bereaved  them  of  their  pur-
our  place  is  mending  it." — Matt.  Henry.  pose,  even  so  suddenly  will  death  come  and

**  Now  if  any  do  demand  of  me  my  opinion  deprive  you  of  your  profits,  call  the  merchant

concerning  our  brethren,  which   of  late  left  from    his   bank,   the    husbandman   from    his

this  kingdom  to  advance  a  plantation  in  New  farm. the  gentleman  fr(mi  his  land,  the  prince

England,  surely  1  think  as  St.  Paul  said  con-  from  his  kingdom." — Topsell.
cerning  virgins,  he  had   'received  no  com-  *' Sometimes  it  dimly  dawns  upon  us,  whet

12


CHAP.  I.  1.


noMiiKTic  co^nrEXTARr:  num.


we  see  other  men's  mischiefs  and  wronj^a,
tliat  we  are  in  the  same  oate'j^ory  witli  tlioni.
and  that  perhai)s  the  storms  which  have
overtaken  them  will  overtake  us  also.  But
it  is  only  for  a  moment ;  for  we  are  artful  to
cover  the  ear,  and  not  listen  to  the  voice  that
warns  us  of  our  danger." — Bcecher.

"  "What  is  this  passing  scene?
A  peevish  April  day  1
A  little  sun,  a  little  rain,
And  then  night  sweeps  along  the  plain,
And  all  things  fade  away.
Man  (soon  discussed)
Yields  up  his  trust,
And  all  his  hopes  and  fears  lie  with  him
in  the  dust.

Then  since  this  world  is  vain,
And  volatile  and  fleet.
Why  should  I  lay  up  earthly  joys.
Where  dust  corrupts,  and  moth  destroys,
And  cares  and  sorrows  eat  1
Why  fy  from  ill
With  anxious  skill,
When    soon    this    hand    will    freeze,   this
throbbing  heart  be  still  1 "

Xirke  White.

"  There  are  evils  worse  than  famine.  What
IS  the  real  misfortune  of  life  ?  sin  or  want
of  food?  sickness  or  selfishness?  And  when
I  see  Isaac  (Gen.  xxvi.)  gaining  from  his
want  of  food  the  heart  to  bear  up  and  bear
right  onward,  I  can  understand  that  the  land


of  famine  may  be  the  land  of  promise,  and
jn-^t  because  it  is  the  land  of  famine." —
L'obfrtson.

"  People  do  not  leave  their  country  for  a
mere  whim.  To  forsake  the  homestead  where
the  boys  were  l)orn,  to  bid  farewell  to  familiar
well-tried  friends,  to  leave  the  spot  Diade
sacred  by  leligious  worship,  for  a  heathen
country — it  is  hard!  very  hard  1     Elimelech

and  Naomi  must  have  felt  this These

in  voluntary  emigrants  hoped  to  return  speedily
— when  times  were  better.  Little  did  they
dream  that  three  out  of  the  four  would  be
lying  in  their  graves  before  ten  years  had
passed.  Their  farewell  was  a  final  one.  Oh  1
these  plans  of  ours,  what  folly  they  appear  to
us  when  we  look  back  to  see  how  one  touch
has  ruined  them  all  1  Our  designs  always  need
*  if  the  Lord  will '  written  right  across  the
face  of  them." — Braden.

"  One  month  in  the  school  of  affliction  will
teach  thee  more  than  the  great  precepts  of
Aristotle  in  seven  years ;  for  thou  canst
never  judge  rightly  of  human  affairs,  unless
thou  hast  first  felt  the  blows  and  found  out
the  deceits  of  fortune." — Fuller.

"  Probably  this  family  held  on,  trusting
that  prosperity  would  again  smile;  but  it
came  not,  and  hope  faded  away.  What  were
they  to  do  ?  Terrible  question  1  Crops  gone,
cattle  gone:  starvation  stai'ed  them  in  the
face." — Braden.


Theme. — Family  Changes.

"  Urged  by  remembrance  sad,  and  decent  pride,
Far  from  those  scenes  which  knew  their  better  days,*

He^  and  his  wifey  and  his  two  sons.

Touches  the  whole  household.  The  children  bear  the  burden  as  well  as  their
parents.  In  times  of  scarcity,  the  family  a  heavy  burden.  Christ  uses  this  as  an
extreme  case,  "  Woe  to  them  that  are  with  child  and  give  suck  in  those  days  !  "
(Matt.  xxiv.  19.)

We  have  here,  I.  An  important  step  in  the  family  history.  Not  lawful  unless
there  had  been  a  public  calamity  or  some  great  private  necessity  (Maimonides),
Nothing  but  necessity  can  dispense  with  a  local  relinquishing  of  God's  church,  not
pleasure,  nor  profit,  nor  curiosity  (Bishop  Hall).  In  moments  like  these,  go  not
before  God  and  Providence,  but  follow  Him  [Butherford).

II.  A  united  household  in  these  trying  times.  Domestic  union  in  the  midst
of  the  greatest  distresses.  Nothing  can  separate  those  whom  God  has  joined.
Grace  finds  its  most  appropriate  sphere  in  the  family  life.  Husbands  and  wives
who  aim  ot  separate  interests  reproved  here.  Naomi  willing  to  go  even  to  a  strange
land.  Saw  the  necessity.  She  was  one  of  those  wives  whose  law  is  their
husband's  will  in  all  things  wherein  the  laws  of  God  leave  them  at  liberty
(Lawson),  A  man  and  his  wife  should  be  like  the  two  wheels  of  a  chariot  (Hindoo
Proverb),

III.  A  parent's  responsibility  in  these  critical  changes.  The  results  of
Elimelech's  conduct  were  not  confined  to  himself.  His  children  either  gained
or  suffered  by  it.     No  man  lives  to  himself,  sins  to  himself.

His  care  for  his  wife  and  children  to  be  commended  (1  Tim.  v.  8).  Did  not
leave  them  as  the  ostrich,  to  care  for  themselves  (Job  xxxix.  IG).  He  acted
kindly,  did  he  act  wisely  ?     One  thing  certain,  his  rehpousibility  was  increased  by

13


UOMILETIC  COMMENTAHY :  hvth.


CHAP.  I.  2.


going  down  to  Moab,  where  temptation  was  sure  to  assail  his  children.  Possible
to  live  like  Joseph  in  Pharaoh's  court,  but  how  difficult  I

•*  All  worship  not  at  idol  feasts,
Whose  lot  it  is  to  live  in  idol  lands."

David  in  his  exile.  Daniel  and  the  three  Hebrew  children  in  Babylon.  But
how  few  come  out  untainted  !  Lot's  children  seem  to  have  carried  the  defilement
with  them  when  they  left  Sodom  (Gen.  xix.).

This  man  went  to  sojourn,  not  to  stay.  God  did  not  forsake  him.  The  wan-
derers were  fed.  Josephus  speaks  of  his  "  happy  prosperity "  in  the  land  of
Moab.  There  is  a  law  of  compejisation,  however,  in  connection  with  all  this.
He  died  there.  His  children  married  Moabitish  women,  and  then  died  in  exile.
His  wife  returned  empty  to  that  place  she  had  left  (ver.  21).


"  The  religious  man  may  be  considered  in
his  family  as  the  key-stone  to  the  arch." —
Salter.

"Is  such  a  man  a  Christian?"  was  asked
of  Whitefield.  "  How  should  I  know  ? "  was
the  answer  ;  "  I  never  lived  with  him."

"  The  very  tigress  fostereth  her  young,  and
the  helpless  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  under
her  wings,  and  exerts  the  full  extent  of  her
feeble  powers  in  their  defence." — Macgojvan.

"The  godly  in  old  time  knew  that  their
wives  and  children  were  as  themselves ;  and
as  they  were  careful  to  cherish  their  own
bodies,  so  they  were  mindful  to  nourish  their
own  families." — Topsell.

"  An  honest  man  careth  for  his  wife  and
children  as  well  as  for  himself." — Bernard.

*'We  see  the  flesh  of  fishes  remaineth  fresh,
though  they  always  swim  in  the  brackish
waters." — Fuller.

"  If  Elimelech  had  made  inquiry,  it  is  pro-
bable he  would  have  found  plenty  in  some  of
the  tribes  of  Israel ;  and  if  he  had  had  that
zeal  for  God  and  His  worship,  and  that  af-
fection for  his  brethren  which  became  an
i'^raelite,  he  would  not  have  persuaded
himself  so  easily  to  go  and  sojourn  in  Moab."
-^M.  Henry.

"  Life  is  the  first  thing.  God  wishes  no
man  to  starve ;  and  if  his  circumstances  are
such  that,  by  remaining  in  them,  he  must
suffer  want  and  death,  his  path  is  clear — he
must  depart.  Bishop  Hall  quaintly  says,
*  The  Creator  and  Possessor  of  the  earth  hath
not  confined  any  man  to  his  necessary  de-
struction.' It  may  be  our  duty,  in  order  to
save  ourselves  from  pecuniary  difficulties,  to
sever  the  dearest  ties." — Braden,


"  Now  the  devil  knoweth  that  this  is  a
blow  at  the  root,  and  a  ready  way  to  prevent
the  succession  of  churches ;  if  he  can  subvert
families,  other  societies  and  communities  will
not  long  flourish  and  subsist  with  any  power
and  vigour;  for  there  is  the  stock  from
whence  they  are  supplied  both  for  the  pre-
sent and  future." — Manton.

"  Families  are  societies  that  must  be  sancti-
fied to  God,  as  well  as  churches ;  and  the
governors  of  them  have  as  truly  a  charge  of
the  souls  that  are  therein,  as  pastors  have  of
churches.  But,  alas  I  how  little  is  this  con-
sidered or  regarded  I  But  while  negligent
ministers  are  (deservedly)  cast  out  of  their
places,  the  negligent  masters  of  families  take
themselves  to  be  almost  blameless.  They
offer  their  children  to  God  in  baptism,  and
there  they  promise  to  teach  them  the  doctrine
of  the  gospel,  and  bring  them  up  in  the  nur-
ture of  the  Lord ;  but  they  easily  promise
and  easily  break  it ;  and  educate  their  children
for  the  world  and  the  flesh,  although  they
have  renounced  these,  and  dedicated  them  to
God.  This  covenant-breaking  with  God,  and
betraying  the  souls  of  their  children  to  the
devil,  must  lie  heavy  on  them  here  and  here-
after. They  beget  children  and  keep  families
merely  for  the  world  and  the  flesh ;  but  little
consider  what  a  charge  is  committed  to  them,
and  what  it  is  to  bring  up  a  child  for  God,
and  govern  a  family  as  a  sanctified  society.'*
—  Westminster  Coirfession  of  Faith.

'-  Uome  is  the  chief  school  of  human  virtue.
Its  responsibilities,  joys,  sorrows,  smiles,
tears,  hopes,  and  solicitudes  form  the  chief
interest  of  human  liie.^^— Chamdng


VERSE  2.

Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes. —  Ver.  2.  And  the  name  of  the  man  (was)  Elimelech.
A  descendant  of  Nahshon  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  erection  of  the  tabernacle
(Numb.  i.  7).  According  to  Jewish  doctors,  a  noble  and  potent  person.  All  names  ending
with  **  melech  "  (Jcingi)  borne  by  distinguished  persons  {Lange^.  Means  to  whom  God  is
king  (Xeil).  My  God  is  King  (Laiige).  My  God  is  my  King  (Cox).  God  is  King  (  Words-
worth).  Josephus  calls  him  Abimelech.  Naomi,  more  correctly  Noomi  [LXX.  ^wefxiu;
Vulg.,  Noemi ;  Old  Eng.  trans.  Noemi].  According  to  Talmudists,  niece  of  Naason,  prince
of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and  daughter  of  his  brother  Salmon  (?).  Means  my  pleasure  or
delight  {Wright)  ;  pleasant,  gracious  (Gesen.)  ;  the  lovely  gracious  one  (Lange);  happiness
(Jtisrphi/s).  jVTahlon,  more  correctly  Machion,  the  husband  of  Kuth.  Means  sickness
(ilrighf).  sick  {Gesen.)\  the  weakly  (Keil);  consumption  (J/.  ZT^^wyy).  Not  so  (Latige);
14


mw.  I.  2.        noMTT.r.TTc  rn^nrFXT.^nr:  nrrnr.


rnther  derived  from  Vno  (ifincJifll)  **  circle  dance,*'  Greek  chorn.f,  and  so  may  mean  joy.
Chilion,  more  correctly  Kili.on.  (S('j?t.,  XeXaicjv  ;  Josfphus.  XeWicju);  means  pining  (Z^vV),
destruction  {Wright).  Not  so  ;  should  be  referred  to  "^^D,  to  crown,  and  so  means  ornament
(Lfjnffr\  Ephrathites  of  Bethlehem-Judah.  Some  of  the  older  Jewish  teachers  not  inappro-
priately render  "  Ephratim  "  by  evyevearaToi  [high-born]  {Lange).  Shews  these  were  natives
of  the  city  or  district  around  Bethlehem,  not  mere  residents  (comp.  1  Sam.  xvii.  12;  Judges
xvii.  7).  The  place  honourably  distinguished,  and  Jesus  Himself  called  an  Ephrathite  of
Judah  in  Micah  v.  2.  Euphrates,  Ephraim  (Gen.  xl.  52),  words  having  a  similar  derivation
and  meaning.  (See  also  notes  on  ver.  1.)  The  Ef)hraimites  called  Ephrathites  (Judges  xii.
5  :  1  Sam.  i.  1  ;  1  Kings  xi.  26)  (  Wi'lgld).  And  they  came  into  the  country  [field]  of  Foab,
and  continued  there  [literally,  were  there;  Old  Eng.,  abode  there].  The  Targum  adds,  and
were  there  as  princes.  The  route  supposed  to  be  down  the  Wady  Sudier  to  Engedi,  and  then
round  the  S.E.  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea,  as  with  modern  travellers.  Moab  not  so  large  as
Huntingdonshire,  and  not  so  far  from  Bethlehem  as  is  Huntingdon  from  London  (^Cox),

Theme, — Man  Peoposing,  God  Disposing.

**  And  the  name  of  the  man  (was)  ElimeJech,  ....  Ephrathites  of"  etc.

Names  give  an  air  of  truth  to  the  narrative  (Laivson).  Express  in  a  very
touching  manner  parental  hopes  and  faith.  Of  especial  significauce  among  the
early  Hebrews.  A  really  good  name  of  unspeakable  service  to  all  who  are
capable  of  feeling  its  aspiration  (Dr.  J.  Hamilton).  But  sometimes  given  in  vain.
When  contrasting^  with  the  character,  a  continual  humiliation.

Suggests,  I.  That  however  others  may  propose,  the  final  issues  of  life
are  with  God  and  with  the  man  himself.

These  names  remarkably  significant  and  suggestive.  But  in  what  way  ?
Elimelech  means  "  my  God  is  King,"  and  yet  some  take  his  life  as  illustrating
the  feelings  and  conduct  of  the  spiritually  dead  ;  others,  of  the  backslider  driven
by  momentary  trials  from  God's  ordinances  down  to  Moab.  Note  [a)  the  irony  of
a  good  name  when  men/all  short  of  its  promises.  At  the  present  day,  men  baptized
Martin  Luther  by  their  Protestant  parents  are  found  ministering  at  the  altar  of
Rome  [Braden.  See  extracts).  Naomi  means  pleasure,  delight,  happiness,  and
yet  she  comes  at  best  to  be  an  illustration  of  sanctified  affliction.  Possibly  the
names  of  the  whole  family  pitched  in  this  exultant  key  (see  notes),  and  yet  their
experience  is  in  sad  contrast.

(b)  Events  as  they  Pinfold  often  make  vain  all  human  for  ecastinrjs.  Even  parental
love  not  always  prophetic.  The  name  given  with  many  fond  anticipations,
perhaps  with  much  heart  searching  and  prayer.  That  is  all  the  human  can  do —
the  rest  is  in  the  hands  of  God.

The  local  designation  of  these  Hebrews  enforces  similar  lessons.  They  were
Ephrathites  of  Bethlehem- Judab,  a  title  as  honourable  as  any  an  Israelite  could
desire.  And  yet  under  stress  of  circumstances  Bethlehem-Judah  changes  to  Moab,
Ephrathites  (probably  meaning  ''  high-born  ")  to  exiles.

II.  That  it  is  not  how  men  are  called,  but  how  they  live,  and  what
they  are,  which  is  the  important  thing.

A  deadly  heresi/  to  rest  satisfied  wilh  the  outward  calling  of  things.  The  con-
ventional Christian  hearing  himself  termed  so  continually,  begins  possibly  to  lay
the  flattering  unction  to  his  soul  that  he  is  such.  The  sweet  delusion  grows,
eats  into  the  heart  of  the  man.  No  greater  offence  than  to  deny  him  that  title.
Translate  it  to  mean  '*  the  Christ-like,"  or  even  the  "  follower  of  Christ,"  and
what  then  ?  So  the  conventional  church  member  bears  as  lofty  a  name  as  this,
"  My  God  is  King."  A  member  of  Christ,  for  the  Church  is  "His  body."  You  may
explain  that  bond  to  imply  "  My  Saviour  my  Head"  (Eph.  iv.  15),  and  yet  how
many  are  satisfied  with  the  mere  name  I     This  —

A  strong  delusion. — The  "name  to  live,  and  are  dead."

A  transparent  folly. — Others  see  through  it;  if  not,  God  does.

A  cruel  self-deception. — Born  of  presumption,  fostered  of  hypocrisy.

A  crowning  impiety. — Disastrous,  Laodicean,  deadly  (ilev.  iii.  15 — 19).

15


H03IILETIC  COMMENTARY:    RUTH.  chap.  i.  2.


III.  That  men  consecrated  by  the  loftiest  associations  of  the  past  como
to  these  strange  experiences

Elimelech,  of  an  ancient  family,  born  in  the  most  honourable  of  birth-places,
dedicated  seemingly  from  his  youth  upwards.  His  name  should  have  taught
him  faith.  Had  he  been  true  to  that,  all  would  have  been  well,  and  possibly  he
would  never  have  gone  down  to  Moab.

So  those  born  as  it  were  inside  the  Church,  early  dedicated  to  God,  registered
among  His  covenant  people,  and  yet  to-day  they  are  prodigals  in  the  far
country,  Cains  with  the  brand  upon  them,  though  with  something  also  which
speaks  of  the  old  family  relationship — at  best  Elimelechs  in  Moab — Grod  mourn-
ing over  them,  as  over  Ephraim  (Hosea  vi.  4)  the  departed  glory  of  their  youth,
gone  like  "the  morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew" — asking,  as  of  Israel,  "  How
shall  I  put  thee  among  the  children,  give  thee  a  pleasant  land  ?  "  (Jer.  iii.  19.)

Improvement. — Sainted  memories  may  become  sad  remembrances ;  mementoes  of
a  better  past,  reminders  of  a  glory  which  has  been,  and  is  departed.  Men  carry
something  with  them  from  the  past,  must  carry  it.  Does  it  come  in  to  upbraid
or  to  bless  ?  How  was  it  with  this  name  Elimelech  in  Moab  ?  Might  have
taught  faith  even  there.     But  did  it  ?

lliese  patriaixlis  and  early  believers  types  of  those  still  found  in  our  midst.  The
history  of  the  most  insignificant  not  without  meaning.  They  hold  the  mirror  to
all  time,  though  the  natural  man,  beholding  his  face  as  in  a  glass,  straightway
forgets  what  manner  of  man  he  is.  Elimelech  going  down  to  Moab  !  Is  the  case
without  a  parallel  in  our  experience?  "Let  him  that  is  without  sin  cast  the
first  stone."


"  Great  birth,  good  means,  high  name  and
fame,  save  not  from  faUing  either  into  sin  or
outward  misery,  if  a  better  blessing  than  all
tbese  be  not  given  men  from  God." — JBcrnard.

'•  Mow  happy  must  tlnxt  man  be  whose  God
is  King  !  He  may  l)e  cbiven  by  famine,  by
perse' 11  lion  or  otherwise  far  from  the  house
of  his  God,  yet  he  can  never  be  banished  to
any  plaee  but  where  God  is  his  King." — Mac-
gowaii.

''  In  the  Hebrew  history  are  discernible
three  periods  distinctly  marked,  in  which
names  and  words  bore  very  different  charac-
ters, corresponding  to  the  periods  in  which
the  nation  bore  the  three  different  appellations
of  Hebrews,  IsraeUtes,  Jews.

*'  In  the  first,  names  meant  truths,  and
words  were  the  symbols  of  realities.  The
characteristics  of  the  names  given  were  sim-
plicity and  sincerity.

•'  The  second  period  begins  about  the  time
of  the  departure  from  Egypt,  and  it  is  cha-
I'acterised  by  unabated  simplicity,  with  the
addition  of  sublimer  thought,  and  feeling
more  intensely  religious.  The  heart  of  the
nation  was  big  with  mighty  and  new  religious
truth,  and  the  feelings  with  which  the
national  heart  was  swelling  found  vent  in  the
names  which  were  given  abundantly.  God,
under  His  name  Jah,  the  noblest  assemblage
of  spiritual  truths  yet  conceived,  became  the
adjunct  to  names  of  places  and  persons.
Osbea's  name  is  changed  into  Je-hoshua.

*•  In  the  third  period,  words  had  lost  their
meaning,  and  shared  the  hollow,  unreal  state
of  all  things." — Rohertaon  (^abridged).

"  The  meaning  in  names  not  always  true.
Absalom  meant  '  fathei-'s  peace,'  but  the
young  man  broke  his  father's  heart.  Solomon
16


called  his  son  Rehoboam,  *an  enlarger,'
but  he  reduced  the  kingdom  instead  of  en*
larging  it." — Bradcii.

"  'J"he  believing  Church  is  Christ's  Naomi,
His  sweet  and  pleasant  one,  and  He  is  her
Elin\elech,  her  God  the  King.  For  her  He  for-
sook the  mansions  of  plenty  and  delight —
with  her  He  sojourned  in  a  Moabitish  world,
amongst  enemies  to  God  ;  there  He  died  an
accursed  death  to  accompli-h  her  salvation  :
there  He  was  buried  to  purify  the  grave  for
her  use,  rose  again  to  trample  on  all  her
enemies,  and  is  now  gone  to  Bethlehem,  the
House  of  Bread,  to  prepare  a  place  for  His
Noami." — Macgownn.

Here  also  we  may  see  that  it  was  a  custom
of  great  antiquity  in  the  world,  that  men
and  women  should  have  several  names
whereby  they  were  called,  and  that  for  these
three  reasons  :

I.  That  they  might  be  differenced  and  dis-
tinguished from  others.

II.  That  they  might  be  stirred  up  to  verify
the  meanings  and  significations  of  their
names.  Wherefore  let  every  Obadiah  strive
to  be  a  "  servant  of  God,"  each  Nathanael  to
be  "  a  gift  of  God,"  Onesimus  to  be  •'  profit-
able," every  Koger  "  quiet  and  peaceable,"
Robert  "  famous  for  counsel,"  and  William
"  a  help  and  defence "  to  many ;  not  like
Absalom,  who  was  not  a  ''  father  of  peace,"
as  his  name  doth  import,  but  a  son  of  sedi-
tion;  and  Diotrephes,  not  "  nursed  by  God,"
as  his  name  sounds,  but  puifed  up  by  the
devil,  as  it  is  3  John  9.

III.  That  they  might  be  incited  to  imi-
tate the  virtues  of  those  worthy  persons
who  formerly  have  been  baarers  and  owners
of  thsir  names.    Let  all  Abrahams  be  faith-


CHAP.  I.  2.  HOl^riLETlC   C03[]\IF.NTARY:    UUTIt,


fill,  Isaacs  quiet,  Jacobs  prayerful,  Josephs  that  a  V)a(l  name  should  be  imposed  on  anj,

chaste  ;  every  Lewis  pious,  Edward  confessor  Oh  let  not  '■  folly  "  be  ''  with  "  them,  because

of  the  true  faith,  William  conqueror  over  his  Nabal  is  their  name  ;  but  in  such  a  case  let

own  corruptions.  Let  them  also  carefully  avoid  them  strive  to  falsify,  disprove,  and  confute

those  sins  for  which  the  bearers  of  the  names  their  names.      Otherwise,   if  tbey  be  good,

stand  branded  to  posterity.    Let  evei-y  Jonah  they  must  answer  them.      In  the  days    of

beware  of  frowardness,  Thomas  of  distrustful-  Queen   Elizabeth,   there   was    a  royal   ship

ness,  Martha  of  worldliness,  Mary  of  wanton-  called  "  The  Revv.-nire,"  whi(;h,  having  main-

ness.     If  there  be  two  of  oui'  names,  one  ex-  tained  a  long  fight  against  a  fleet  of  Spaniards

cecdingly  good,  the    other  notoriously  evil,  (wherein    eight    hundred   gieat    shot   were

let  us  decline  the  vices  of  the  one,  and  prac-  discharged  against  her),  was  at  last  fain  to

tise  the  virtues  of  the  other.    Let  every  Judas  yield  ;  but  no  sooner  were  her  men  gone  out

not  follow  Judas  Iscariot,  who  betrayed  our  of   her,  and   two  hundred  fresh  Spaniards

Saviour,  but  Judas  the  brother  of  James,  tlie  come  into  her.  but  she  suddenly  sunk  them

writer  of  the  General  Epistle;  each  Deme-  and  herself;    and    so   "The   Revenge"  was

trius  not  follow  him  in  the  Acts,  who  made  revenged.       Shall   lifeless    pieces    of    wood

silver  shrines  for   Diana,  but  Demetrius  (8  answer  .he  names  which  men  impose  upon

John  12)  who  had  a   "  good   report    of   all  them,    and    shall   not    reasonable    souls   do

men;"  every  Ignatius   not  imitate  Ignatius  the  same?      But  of  all  names  I   pray   God

Loyola  the  lame  father  of  blind  obedience,  that  never  just  occasion  be  given  that  we  ba

but  Ignatius  the  worthy  martyr  in  the  primi-  christened  "  Ichabod,"  but  that  the  glory  mny

tive  church.  And  if  it  should  chance,  through  remain  in  our  Israel  so  long  as  the  faithful

the   indiscretion  of  parents  and  godfathers,  Witness  endureth  in  heaven.

Theme. — The  Sojourn   in  Moab.

"Nos  patriae  fines,  et  dulcia  linguimus  area;
Nos  patriam  fugimus." —  Vh-f/il.

And  they  came  into  the  country  of  Moab,  and  continued  there*

In  weighing  human  actions,  difficult  to  say  what  is  merely  an  error  of  judgment
and  what  an  error  of  heart.  The  former  slides  imperceptibly  into  the  latter.
We  take  a  false  step — pride  prevents  our  retracing  it,  habit  comes  in  to  perpe-
tuate the  mistake.  Thus  folly  becomes  sin  and  the  cause  of  sin.  Elimelech  not
to  be  severely  condemned  in  that,  driven  by  stress  of  famine,  he  went  down  to
Moab.     Very  human  this.      WJiat  of  his  continidng  there?

After  all,  a  man  must  be  judged  by  the  standard  of  his  own  times.  This  would  in
some  measure  condemn  Elimelech.  [Jewish  expositors  do  so  almost  ULanimonsly.]
The  land  given  to  Israel  to  inhabit,  under  special  circumstances,  with  special
promises  (Deut.  xxviii.).  Would  not  the  true  Israelite  have  heard  the  call  "  to
return  "  sounding  in  his  ears  continually  ?  May  we  not  say  at  least  what  was
not  of  faith  was  of  sin  ?  Note.  An  error  generally,  though  on  the  side  <f  charity,  uJitn
we  inifnite  the  broad  catholicity  of  Christianity  t)  these  early  Jews.  The  traditions
of  his  people,  national  feeling,  education,  all  that  distinguished  the  true  Israelite,
against  this  journey  and  sojourn.  But  he  broke  through  all.  Does  not  seem  to
have  had  any  fear  of  dwelling  among  an  idolatrous  nation.

The  danger  subtle,  unseen,  often  unrealized,  but  as  often  deadly.  Malarias
are  dangerous  just  because  they  do  not  address  themselves  to  any  of  the  senses.

Notice —

I.  That  the  present  choice  may  influence  all  the  after  life.

A  mistake  to  put  Elimelech  outside  the  pale  of  ultimate;  salvation.  But  short
of  this,  much  which  is  instructive.

(a)  A  mail's  error  may  be  foolish  nitJinut  being  final.  Seems  to  be  so  here.  The
first  of  a  succession  of  disasters.  Peter's  denial  a  better  example.  So  with  the
disciple's  cowardice,  Jonah's  fleeing  to  Tarshish,  etc.

{b)  But  a  tendency  in  one  false  step  to  lead  to  a  second^  to  a  continuance  in  folly.
Peter's  first  denial  led  to  a  second,  to  a  third.  Here,  journeying  to  Moab  ends  in
dwelling  there.  Elimelech  went  to  sojourn  for  awhile,  the  same  reason  led  him  to
continue.  The  first  temptation  was  io  //o,  the  seccnd  would  naturally  be  to  remain.
Note.  Habit  mah  s  the  sin  of  the  past  the  '*  easily  besetting  sin.''  Lot  lingered  in
Sodom  ;  what  wonder  he  afterwards  lingered  in  Zoar  ?    (Gen.  xix.  IG,   1')  —23).

i3  17


noMllBTlC   ComUCMARY:    liV'fU.  CHAP.  I.  2.

TT   TTiat  after  a  false  step  in  life,  God's  mercies  are  not  wholly  denied  ns.

f^^r'^J^t:Jt:le  way  of^.o-al  rectitude  ;  ^^^^^^J^^
nfin  thfi  last  hour  with  the  offers  of  salvation  and  mercy.  Note.  2  to  should
^L  ««  lo»  aL,"»t  to  mm  in  qoing  towards  Moab,  but  may  save  us  from  despair  xf
r«"nrr  ThTfolly  ..hich  bLs  that  grace  may  abound  possibly  finds  a

"T")  1f^  coXta!;,Z  so  tUnk  tkemselves  justified  ir.  neglecting;  it  is  not  so  .Hk

%ter  the  Divine  lament,  "I  have  nourished  up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled
against  me-;-  au'ay  backu-ards,"  comes  the  aifectionate   q-f-":    .%     5
waiting  to  be  reconciled,  "  Why  should  ye  be  stricken  any  more  ?     (Isa   i.  l-5._)
Sav   more     He  follows  the  ten-ible  accusation,  "  Your  hands  are  lull  of  blood
Itk  the  tender  appeal,   "  Come  now,  let  us  reason  together:  though  your  sins  be
.».l!t  -Vtc    asa   i    15-18).    No  condemnation  like  His  upon  every  soul  that
:•„::  h,  and  t  %aslL  wl  His.     It  is   this  that  gives  point  to  the  Divine
declHm  ion,  "  My  ways  are  not  your  ways,"  etc.  (See  context,  Isa.  Iv.  8.)     So
with  E  imelech  in  Moab.      Doubtless  mercy  followed  while  justice  condemned
SS  may  have  been  the  "  smokmg  flax  "  and  the  "  bruised  reed."      Rest
QCQiirpd  it  was  neither   "  quenched  "  nor  "broken/

Impko4ment.-To  us  the  world  offers  its  Moab  continually  Forgetfulness  of
GodTs  Zt  far-off  land  (Anyustine).  Note.  The  filial  spmt  has  died  out  m  the
breast  of  Zry  prodiqal  before  he  lelves  his  fathers  hon.e.  Distance  from  God  is  not
n  spate,  but  in  affections  {Bede).  Apostacy  of  the  heart  always  goes  beiore
InoXcv  of  the  life.  Is  thy  heart  right  ?  the  in  portant  question.  If  not  the  land
^Fmomle  wU  sooner  or  Iter  be  the  land  of  penury,-Bethlehem  itself  a  p  ace
of  Lariness  and  want.  To  such,  life  cannot  be  otherwise  than  a  sad  departure
from  the  heritage  of  God.

Another  treatment  of  the  same  text.


Theme. — The  Wanderers.


'I  see  that  all  arc  wandeiers.  gone  astray,
Each  in  his  own  delusion  ;  they  are  lost
]n  chase  of  fancied  happiness,  still  woo'd,
And  never  won." — Coivper.

The  history  of  Ruth  begins  with  a  story  of  wanderers  from  God— a  sad  but
not  strange  commencement  {^rm)-  A  common  story  {a)  m  God's  Word  ;  {b)  m
human  experience.  We,  too,  know  of  a  spiritual  wandermg  from  God,  Irom
His  Word,  from  His  Spirit,  from  His  church  and  sanctuary,  from  His  gospel,
from  Bethlehem,  where  Jesus  is.  A  wandering  more  sad  and  fatal  than
this  in  the  text.  Those  who  go  out  ''full,"  to  return  like  the  prodigal  m
want  (Luke  xv.  17),  in  bitterness  of  spirit  (Ruth  i.  20),  havmg  lost  all.  Or,
stidder  still,  nho  iiever  return.  Jonah  a  wanderer,  Manasseh,  Demas.  ISay,  nA
men  by  nature  wanderers  (Isa.  liii.  6).  The  wicked  are  emphatically  called  "wan-
dering si.ars  "  (Jude  13).

I.  See  ^n  what  this  wandering  begins.
18


CHAP.  I.  2.  liOMllKTlC   COMMKKTaHI  :    kt/TlI.


(^)  Led  liij  distrust  rather  than  hy  immcdi'ite  want.  (See  previous  outlines.)
Ip)  By  siyht  rather  than  hy  faith.  No  Divine  voice  comes  to  Elimelech,  "  Get
thee  out  of  thy  country,"  as  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xii.  1),  or  as  to  Joseph,  '*  Arise,"
etc.  (Matt.  ii.  20).  No  pillar  of  fire  and  cloud  leads,  as  with  Israel  departing  from
E^ypt.  On  the  other  hand,  no  angel  stops  the  way,  as  with  Balaam  (Numb.  xxii.
22 — 35).  No  miraculous  providence  hinders,  as  with  Jonah.  Probably  bis
spiritual  experience  feeble  and  meagre,  his  life  commonplace  and  unheroic.  The
better  illustration  of  multitudes  who  wander  away  from  sanctuary  privileges.
The  very  absenc©  of  the  miraculous  int  hese  critical  moments,  these  times  of
choice,  when  life  turns  to  the  right  hand  or  the  lett,  itself  suggestive.  How  many
had  to  w\alk,  even  in  those  days,  with  nothing  supernatural,  nothing  out  of  the
ordinary,  to  guide  ;  only  the  light  of  conscience.  But  faith  can  always  speak,
and  did  speak.  Contrast  Abraham's  wandering  with  Elimelech's — this  seeking
a  country  with  that  mentioned  in  Heb.  xi.  Said  of  God's  heroes,  they  became
strangers  and  pilgrims,  but  *'by  faith,"  and  '^  seeking  a.  better  country"  (Heb.
xi.  16).  Hap}»y  wandering  and  even  sojourning  in  a  strange  country,  when
men  can  say  they  are  "  per'^uaded,"  etc.  [ib.  13).  But  sad  when  men  leave
Bethlehem  for  Moab,  go  out  but  to  sojourn  for  awhile,  and  coiUiniie  there.

(c)  By  discontent  rather  than  duty.  A  common  frame  of  mind  with  men,  and
the  secret  of  much  of  our  unrest.  The  unstable  are  always  dissatisfied.  Clouds
without  water  are  driven  to  and  fro  with  every  wind,  and  ships  without  ballast
liable  to  the  violence  of  every  tempi  st  [Westminster  Conf.  of  Faith).  Cain's  envy
made  him  a  wanderer.     (See  also  Outline  III.,  ver.  1,  div.  II.)

II.  See  where  this  wandering  leads.  As  in  the  parable,  the  son  goes  to  hire
himself  in  the  far  country.  Possibly  with  Elimelech,  also,  wandering  brought  want.
If  so,  another  sentence  may  apply,  "  He  would  fain  have  filled  his  belly — and  no
man  gave  unto  him."  The  peril  in  Moab  as  real,  thuugli  no  las  apparent,  as  that
in  Bethlehem  ;  perhaps  more  real.  The  one  a  famine,  the  other  a  scarcitj'-  of  all
those  things  by  which  men  truly  live.  Countless  avenues  besides  famine  to  the
human  heart  (Lawson).  Which  was  the  best,  bread  or  faith,  to  have  abundance
or  to  have  God  ?  {Fiobertso7i .)

Note.    We  rieed  never  go  far  to  sojourn  in  Moab  {Tyng),

III.  See  how  this  wandering  ends.

Notice  {a)  Joxirneyiny  to  Moab  often  means  continuing  in  Moab,  dying  in  Moab,
Not  said,  that  the  Lord  was  with  him,  as  with  Joseph  in  Egypt.  If  so,  all  would
have  been  well.  Not  said,  how  he  lived,  or  even  how  he  died.  His  life  after-
wards summed  up  in  one  short  sentence,  '' He  continued  there.'*  Whatever  his
state  of  mind  and  circumstances,  they  became  fixed,  permanent.

Notice  (b)  That  for  some  men  there  is  uo  returning  iii  life.  He  died  there.  How
much  then  may  depend  upon  the  moment's  choice  !  this  present  false  step  from
the  path  of  duty  :  all  time  ;  nay  more,  all  eternity.  In  every  sinful  life,  critical
moments  when  the  wandering  begins.  In  that  moment  the  path  is  turned  aside,
the  bias  given,  and /or  ever  it  may  be.

Improvement. — Are  we  free  agents  ?  and  do  we  choose  our  own  path  in  life  ?
God  chooses  the  circumstances  that  surround  it.  And  He  has  said  the  way  of
transgressors  is  hard.  To  the  sinful  He  says,  ''Behold,  1  uill  hedf/e  up  thy  way  with
thorns''  (Hos.  ii.  6).  Are  we  froward  ?  He  will  shew  Himself  froward  (Ps.  xviii.
20).  Do  we  walk  contrary  to  Him?  He  will  walk  contrary  to  us  (Lev.  xxvi.  23,
24,  27,  28).  Wandering  from  God  means  strife  with  God — a  folly,  a  gigantic
mistike  (Isa.  xlv.  9.)

Bernard  observes  on  these  passages —

I.  God,  intending  good  to  some  in  His  secret  counsels,  may  prosper  that
which  others  undertake  with  no  good  warrant.  Elimelech's  misfor-
tunes and  sojourn  in  IMoab  the  means  of  blessing  lluth.  So  also
Jacob's  sons,  in  selling  J()se])h  into  Egypt,  were  providing  a  refuge
for  the  family.     Christ's  cruel  death  the  world's  salvation.

19


IIOMTLETIC  COMMEXTAUY:    UUTlt


CHAP.  I.


3.


U.


III.


That  if  men  live  where  idohitcrs  be,  it  is  good  to  avoid  the  occnsion  of
•  infection  as  much  as  may  be.  Some  conjecture  that  E  iiuelech  went
not  into  the  cities  of  the  Moabites,  but  dwelt  in  tents.  (Translate
Fields  of  Moab.  See  notes  on  ver.  1.)
That  none  are  so  churlish  and  unkind  at  one  time  to  some,  but  God  can
incline  their  hearts  at  another  time  to  others.  These  Moabites
formerly  hard-hearted  to  Israel.
IV.  That  it  is  a  praiseworthy  matter  to  be  harboursome  to  strangers.  The
barbarians  commended  (Acts  xxviii.  2,  7,  10),  who  received  the  apostle.
Abraham,  Lot,  and  Job  praised  for  this.  We  are  exhorted  to  it
(Heb.  xiii.  2;   Rom.  xii.  20).


"What  made  it  wrong  for  Elinielcch  to
migrate  to  Moab,  wrung  according  to  the  Old
Testament  standard,  was  that  ho  was  aban-
doning his  place  among  the  elect  people  to
sojourn  among  heathen,  whose  so<ial  life,
whosevery  worship, was  unutterably  licentious
and  degrading,  .  .  .  True,  he  is  not  directly
blamed  for  his  error  in  the  book  of  Ruth,
which  is  written  in  the  most  considerate  and
generous  tone  throujjihout ;  but  that  the
writer  of  tho  book  thought  him  to  blame,
and  held  the  calamities  which  fell  on  him
and  his  house  to  be  a  judgment  on  his  sin,
there  is  scarcely  room  to  doubt." — Cox.

**  Oh  these  wanderings  from  sanctuary  pri-
vileges and  home  delights,  how  lightly  begun,
how  disastrous  in  the  ending  1  There  are
those  to-day  who  arc  flitting  about  like  the
poor  dove  from  Noah's  ark,  and  finding  no  rest
for  the  sole  of  the  foot ;  spirits  wandering
self-tormented  in  desert  places,  and  among
the  tombs,  like  that  poor  demoniac  of  old.
And  Christ's  message  to  such  is  as  then,
*  Return  unto  thine  own  house,  among  thy
kinsfolk  and  acquaintances,  show  forth  what
things  God  had  done  for  thee.'  " — JJ,

•'Like  wandering  birds  driven  from  their
nest ;  like  wandering  stars  rushing  into  dark-
ness ;  like  waves  of  the  sea  driven  of  the
wind  and  tossed.  Thus  we  wander  in  sin,
we  know  not  where,  we  know  not  to  what.
Forsaking  the  fountain  of  living  water,  we
hew  out  to  ourselves  cisterns,  broken  cisteins,
that  can  hold  no  water." — Tting.

"  To  grasp  at  happiness  is  all  our  view  ;
Through   different   tracks    her  footsteps  we

pursue  ;
While  each  his  own  fallacious  path  a})proves.
As  interest  leads,  or  inclination  moves  ;
Yet  most  through  error  lose  the  wishcd-for

way :
\VliQ  sets  out  tcrong  must  wander  far  astray."

*'  For  everywhere  lie  is  a  Judas,  with  whom
his  worldly  interest,  his  worldly  ambition,


prevail  over  his  attachment  to  Christ  and  to
Chi-ist's  cause." — Dr.  llaniia.

"  It  was  said  of  Athens,  that  it  was  *  a  good
place  to  pass  through,  but  a  dangerous  place
to  linger  in.'  To  the  faithful  Israelite,  Moab
could  have  been  no  more  than  this.  But  it  is
written  of  Elimelech,  '  He  continued  there.'

•*  As  you  value  your  souls,  beware  of  the
world :  it  has  slain  its  thousands  and  ten
thousands.  What  ruined  Lot's  wife?  the
world.  What  ruined  Achan  ?  the  world.
What  ruined  Haman  ?  the  world.  What
ruined  Judas  ?  the  world.  What  ruined
Simon  Magus?  the  world.  What  ruined
Demas  ?  the  world.  And  what  shall  it  profit
a  man,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and
lose  his  own  soul  ?  " — Die,  of  Illustrations.
"  Why  should  the  professor  of  Christianity
be  found  eagerly  pursuing  those  trifles  which
even  heathen  have  been  found  fleeing  from  ?
The  world  is  rather  a  sharp  briar  to  wound
us,  than  a  sweet  flower  to  delight  us." —
Seeker.

"  Ages  have  passed  away  ;  yet  Moab  exists
in  the  shape  of  the  world,  its  pleasures,  its
follies  and  vanities;  the  Inst  of  the  eye,  the
pride  of  life,  the  love  of  the  world,  that  is
Moab. ' ' — Dr.  On m ming.

'•  Let  us  not  therefore  abuse  strangers,  and
make  a  prey  of  them,  making  an  advantage
of  their  unskilfulness  in  the  language,  and
being  unacquainted  with  the  fashions  of  the
land  ;  like  Laban  that  deceived  his  nephew
Jacob  in  placing  Leah  for  Rachel,  and,  to
cloak  his  cheating,  pleaded  it  was  the  cus-
tom of  the  country." — Fiuler.

"Roraulusissaid  to  have  been  nursed  of  a  she-
wolf ;  iiieron.  king  of  iSyj-acuse,  by  bees  ;  Semi-
ramis,  of  birds;  Habides,  king  of  Tartesius,  of
a  hind  ;  Cyrus  the  Persian,  of  a  bitch  ;  Pelias,
of  a  mare ;  Paris,  of  a  bear.  .  .  .  We  know
how  the  Lord  commended  the  strange
Samaritan  beyond  the  priest  and  the  Levite,
because  he  succoured  the  poor  wounded  Jew
which  had  fallen  among  thieves." — Tojfsell,


VEIl'SES  3—5.

Critical  AND  ExEGETiCAL  Notes. — Ver.  3.  And  Elimelech  .  .  .  died.  The  conjunction
seems  to  intimate  shortly  after  his  arrival.  Lertauily  before  the  marriage  of  his  sons.
Josephus  tiiinks.  however,  towards  the  end  of  the  ten  years'  sojourn.

Ver.  4.  And  they  took  them  wives.  The  verb,  though  not  Chaldaic,  said  to  be  peculiar  to
20


CHAP.  T.  3.  noJIILETIC   COMMENTAliV:    HUTIL


the  later  Hebrew,  but  found  Judges  sxi.  23  {SjJCdh'r'a  Com.).  Always  used  in  a  bad  sense
(Aif/o).  Of  the  women  of  Moab.  And  they  Irimsirressed  the  decree  of  tlie  T.ord,  and  married
foTc\i:n  \\i\es,  etc.  {('/tdldce  Parrrjj/iraftt).  I'rf)bably  justified  by  necessity  (,S/;fY/7(^'r'j  Com.).
In  violation  of  the  Mosaic  Law  {Lnvge).  Marriages  with  Moalntish  women  not  forbidden
like  marriages  with  Canaanites  in  Deut.  vii.  3  (Aeil).  Bertheau,  Le  Clerc,  and  others  defend
the  act.  Aben  Ezia  thinks  that  Ori)ah  and  Euth  were  proselytes.  Why  make  excuses  for
them  ?  for  Scripture  does  in  no  wa}'  represent  them  as  holy  men  {S't-nrius,  a  lioninn  CatlioUc
expoxHor).  Traditum  ferunt  Jndnci  Ammonitam  et  Moabitam  (juidem  semper  fuisse  inter-
dictos.  at  feminas  eornm  statim  permissas  {Mid rash,  Tillrni).  The  name  of  the  one  {was)
Orpah.  Pievicnis  names  genuine  HeV^rew,  tliese  cannot  satisfactorily  be  explained  from  the
Jlcb.  (A'eU).  IMeans,  tuining  the  back?  (Aeil),  a  hind  (Ilaller,  Sivtonis),  a  mane  (Cefien.),
lil)erality  (  Wri(iht).  Ruth,  Ancestress  of  the  Singer  (Dante).  A  Jewish  tiadition  that  Ruth  "-^
was  the  daughter  of  Eglon.  king  of  Moab.  Chaldee  paiaphrast  adoi)ts  it.  A  higher  honour  '
in  that,  like  Eve.  she  is  to  be  mother  of  the  chosen  seed,  (iod  not  only  wrote  hername  in  the
book  of  life  in  heaven,  but  also  prefixed  her  name  before  a  book  of  life  on  earth  (Fuller).
Means  vision  or  beauty  (6'cw/i.)-  Either  to  be  C(  n>-i('ered  a  contraction  for  mx-i,  appear-
ance, beauty ;  or  still  better,  as  a  contraction  for  niyn,  a  female  fiiend,  or  as  an  abstract
friendship  (  Wrif/ht).  A  conjecture  that  Ruth  is  an  ancient  form  of  the  Gi'eek  podov,  the  Latin
rosa,  redness  (Langc.  Cox).

It  is  imagined,  and  Jiot  without  probability,  that  Mahlon  and  Chilion  are  the  same  as  Joash
and  Seraph,  who  mairied  in  Moab  (1  Chron.  iv.  22). — Adam  Clarke.     So  Ahcn  Ezra.

Ver.  5.  And  Mahlon  and  Chilion  died.  Cut  short  because  they  mamed  strange  women
(Chaldee  Parajjhrast).  Wright  trans''atcs.  and  also  the  two  of  them  died,  The  DJ  carries
ns  back  to  ver.  3.  Was  left  of  (from).  Was  bereaved  of.  "Almonah,"  which  we  render
widow,  signifies  ^^dvmb'  (Macgo7van).

VERSE  3.
Theme. — The  Fikst  Breach  in  the  Family  CiRCiiKJ

"  There  never  breathed  a  man  who  when  his  life
Was  closing,  might  not  of  that  life  relate
Toils  long  and  hard." — Wordsworth.

And  ElrmeJecJi,  Naomi's  husband,  died.

The  story  grows  inter sely  sad  (Braden).  Death  steps  in  here  as  elsewhere.
They  had  escaped  one  danger  only  to  fall  into  another  sorrow.  How  true  the
narrative  is  to  human  experiences !  The  text  eloquent  in  its  simplicity,  the
chapter  full  of  those  contrasting  lights  and  shadows  which  cling  to  human
history.

I.  See  how  much  there  is  uncertain  in  connection  with  life,  (a)  As  to  its
circumsUmccs.  I  have  seldom  seen  a  tree  thrive  that  hath  been  transplanted  when
it  was  old  [Fuller).  Changing  our  place  is  not  always  mending  it  (M.  Henry),
Could  Elimelech  have  foreseen  this  end  of  all  his  wanderings,  would  he  have
undertaken  the  journey  ?  But  no  !  he  went  forward  as  we  do.  {b)  As  to  its
character.  Different  estimates  as  to  this.  Cox  says,  "He  lost  his  life  while
seeking  a  livelihood — found  a  grave  where  he  sought  a  home — ^judgment  appa-
rently treading   on   the  very   heels  of  otfence."     But ?     Those  actions  not

ungodly  which  are  unsuccessful,  nor  those  pious  which  are  prosperous  (Fuller),
He  would  have  died,  whether  he  sinned  or  not,  in  coming  to  Moab.  The  lawful-
ness of  an  action  is  not  to  be  gathered  from  the  joyfulness  of  the  event,  but  from
the  justness  of  the  cause  for  which  it  is  undertaken  (Fuller).  Poor  man  to  sutler
want  in  his  life,  and  be  maligned  after  death  {Bradeu).  Note.  Something  of  this
uncerUnntij  invests  everij  life.  We  are  mysteries  one  to  another — our  actions  but
imperfectly  understood,  our  characters  imperfectly  estimated,  our  lives  misread.
Christ  says.  Judge  not,  etc.  (Matt.  vii.  1).  (c)  As  to  its  continuance.  We  know  not
what  a  day,  etc.  The  only  thing  certain  in  that  future  is  death,  (a)  We  cannot
escape  it.  Elimelech  could  avoid  the  arrows  of  famine  in  Israel,  yet  he  could  not
shun  the  darts  of  death  in  Moab.  (P)  We  cannot  prevent  it.  With  this  man  the
journey  accoiDplisbed,  the  project  seemingly  successful ;  but  what  of  that?  He
that  lived  in  a  place  of  penury  must  die  in  a  land  of  plenty  [Fuller).      NoLe.    With

21


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    RUTH.


CHAP.


1.3.


Flinirhrh  the  mi/strn/  of  sorrow  and  exile  ends  in  the  crownimj  mi/stcry  of  death.
The  first  journey  to  Moab,  at  his  own  desire,  his  own  time;  the  second  unexpectedly

at  God's.  .  „,

II.  See  how  much  there  may  be  uncertain  in  connection  with  death,     ihe

Bible  tells  us  very  little  of  the  closing  scene  {llohcrts.m).  One  short  sentence  here
concludes  the  history.  (a)  We  know  Utile  of  this  man's  life.  Was  he  one  of
those —

"  Whom  unmerciful  disaster
Followed  fast  and  followed  faster"  ?

Then  a  warning  to  the  afflicted,  that  sorrows  bring  no  exemption  from  death.
Was  he  one  who  wandering  sinfully,  always  purposed  to  return  ?  A  lesson  to
the  procrastinator  here.  Or  one  having  taken  the  false  step,  and  for  whom  there
is  no  repentance,  no  return  ?  Then  an  example  of  God's  dealings  with  the  repro-
bate, (b)  We  know  less  of  his  death.  Simply  the  place,  and  possibly  the  time.
He  died  in  the  place  to  wliich  he  had  wandered  from  Bethlehem,  and  in  all  pro-
bability just  as  he  conceived  his  purpose  in  coming  there  accomplished,  (c)  We
know  nothijig  of  his  eternal  destiny.  Multitudes  live  like  this,  die  like  this,  die  and
**give  no  sign."  The  life  such  that  you  can  form  but  an  imperfect  estimate  of
the  character  and  the  destiny — only  hope  the  larger  charitable  hope,  which  rests
upon  the  infinite  mercy  of  God.  The  death  sudden,  or  from  attendant  circum-
stances such  as  to  give  no  chance  of  forming  a  judgment.  Note.  To  he  uncertain
on  some  questions  is  itself  decisive.  Christ  says,  *'  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against
me"  (Matt.  xii.  30).  The  uncertainty  here  may  be  merely  historic.  Instructive
even  then.


"  Once  in  the  flight  of  ages  past
There  lived  a  man.  and  who  was  he?
Mortal,  howe'er  thy  lot  be  cast.
That  man  resembles  thee.

*  *  *  ♦

He  suffered — but  his  pan<2:s  are  o'er;
Enjoyed — but  his  delights  are  fled  ;
Had  friends — his  friends  arc  now  no  more,
And  foes — his  foes  are  dead.

♦  *  *  ♦
He  saw  whatever  thou  hast  seen  ;
Encountered  all  that  troubles  thee;


He  was — whatever  thou  hast  been ;
He  is — what  thou  shalt  be.

»  HI  *  ♦

The  rolling  seasons,  day  and  night,
Sun.  moon,  and  stars,  the  earth  and  main,
Erewhile  his  portion,  life  and  light,
To  him  exist  in  vain.

*  *  *  *

The  annals  of  the  human  race,
Their  ruins,  since  the  world  began,
Of  him  afford  no  other  trace
Than  this — there  lived  a  man."

Montgomery,


Improvement. — When  life  is  past,  it  is  all  one  whether  it  has  lasted  two  hundred
years  or  fifty  (i)r.  Newman).  Death  levels  all  distinctions,  thwarts  the  best  laid
plans,  will  come  in  with  us  as  with  Elimelech,  to  write  vanity  across  our  most
cunningly  laid  schemes.  What  is  our  life  ?  It  is  a  vapour  which  appeareth
for  a  little  while,  and  then  vanisheth  away.  Learn  (a)  amid  the  many  trials
of  life  to  remember  the  greatest  is  yet  to  come,  [b)  Before  the  want  we  dread,
death  itself  may  be  here,  (c)  Are  you  obliged  to  leave  your  native  fields  ?  you
muy  have  to  leave  the  world  itself  [Lawson).


"  Which,  I  wonder,  is  the  better  lot,  to  die
])rosperous  and  famous,  or  poor  and  dis-
appointed? To  have,  and  to  be  forced  to
yield  ;  or  to  sink  out  of  life,  having  played
and  lost  the  game  ?  That  must  be  a  strange
f(,'eling,  when  a  day  of  our  life  comes,  and
we  say,  '  To-viorrow,  success  or  failure  won't
matter  much  ;  and  the  sun  will  rise  and  all
the  myriads  of  mankind  go  to  their  work  or
their  pleasure  as  usual ;  but  I  shall  be  out
of  tho  tuini'iil."- — Thndirrdii .

"  When  Socrates  was  ui'gcd  by  his  friends
to  escape  from  the  prison  where  he  was  con-
22


demned  to  die,  he  answered,  *  Tell  me  of  a
land  where  men  do  not  die,  and  I  will  escape
to  that.'"— 7y?^^.

"  There  is  a  tradition  of  an  Indian  chief,
who,  with  his  tribe,  fled  before  the  prairie
fires,  till  he  had  crossed  a  broad  river,  when
he  struck  his  tent-pole  into  the  ground,  and
cried  '  Alabama  1'  (Here  we  may  rest !)  He
was  no  prophet.  Hostile  tribes  overpowered
them  ;  and  they  found  only  graves  where
they  sought  a  home.  This  is,  maybe,  a
parable  of  the  soul:  for  it  earth  has  uo
Alabama." — Die.  of  Illustrations.


CHAP.  I.  3.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:     RUTH.


"  Death  is  a  friend  of  ours  ;  and  he  that  is
not  ready  to  entertain  him  is  not  at  home."
— Lord  lincoii.

"Death  ar;j,ues  not  di^5!)leasure ;  because
he  whom  God  loved  best  died  first." — Bishop
Hall.

"  It  is  hard  to  die  when  the  time  is  not
ripe.  When  it  is,  it  will  be  easy.  We  need
not  die  while  we  are  living." — liceclier.

'*  It  is  said  that  Guerricus,  hearing  the
passage  read  in  church,  beginning,  *  And  all
the  days  that  Adam  lived  were  nine  hundred
and  thirty  years,'  and  ending  '  the  days  of
Methuselah  were  nine  hundred  and  sixty  and
nine  years,  and  he  died,'  went  home  and
began  immediately  to  prepare  for  death.

"  The  ashes  of  an  oak  in  a  chimney  are  no
epitaph  of  that  to  tell  me  how  high  or  how
large  that  was.  what  flocks  it  sheltered  while
it  stood,  what  men  it  hurt  when  it  fell.  The
dust  of  great  men's  graves  is  speechless  too  ;
it  says  nothing  ;  it  distinguishes  nothing." —
Donne.

"  There  is  a  moment  when  a  man's  life  is
re-lived  on  earth.  It  is  in  that  hour  when
the  colfin-lid  is  shut  down  just  before  the
funeral,  when  earth  has  seen  the  last  of  him
for  ever.  Then  the  whole  life  is,  as  it  were,
lived  over  again  in  the  conversation  which
turns  upon  the  memory  of  the  departed.  .  .  .
For  the  most  part,  when  all  is  over,  general
opinion  is  not  far  from  the  truth.  Misrepre-
sentation and  envy  have  no  provocation  left
them.  What  the  departed  was  is  tolerably
well  known  in  the  circle  in  which  he  moved."
—Robertson,  "  Israelites'  Grave  in  a  Foreign
Landy

"  '  May  it  please  your  Majesty,  Jenkyn  has
got  his  liberty.'  Upon  which  the  king  asked
with  eagerness,  'Aye.  who  gave  it  to  him?'
The  nobleman  replied,  '  A  greater  than  your
Majesty,  the  King  of  kings; '  with  which  the


king  seemed  great! v  struck,  and  remained
&i\c\\t:'— Death  of  the  Ucv.  W.Jenh/n,  108.5.

"Death  does  not  always  give  warning  be-
forehand ;  sometimes  he  gives  the  mortal
blow  suddenly — he  comes  behind  with  his
dart,  and  strikes.  .  .  .  Eutychus  fell  down
dead ;  death  suddenly  arrested  r>avid's  sons
and  Job's  sons  ;  Augustine  died  in  a  compli-
ment ;  (ialba  with  a  sentence ;  Vespasian
with  a  jest;  Zeuxis died  laughing  at  a  picture
of  an  old  woman  which  he  drew  with  his  own
hands;  So])hofles  was  choked  with  a  stone
in  a  grape." — Brooks^.

*'  A  man  may  escape  the  wars  by  pleading
privilege  of  years,  or  weakness  of  body,  oi
the  king's  protection,  or  by  sending  another
in  his  room  ;  but  in  this  war  the  press  is  so
strict,  that  it  admits  no  dispensation.  Young
or  old,  weak  or  strong,  willing  or  unwilling,
all  is  one,  into  the  field  we  must  go,  and  look
that  last  enemy  in  the  face.  It  is  in  vain  to
think  of  sending  another  in  our  room,  for  no
man  dieth  by  proxy ;  or  to  think  of  com-
pounding with  death,  as  those  self-deluded
fools  did  (Ps.  xxviii,  5)  who  thought  they
had  been  discharged  of  the  debt  by  seeing
the  sergeant.  No,  there  is  no  discharge  in
that  war." — Flavel.

"  Nihil  prodest  ora  concludere  et  vitam
fugientem  retinere," — Hierom.

"  Where  men  think  to  preserve  life,  there
they  may  lose  it  as  Elimelech ;  fleeing  from
the  famine  in  Israel,  he  died  where  plenty
was  in  Moab." — Bernard.

"  No  outward  plenty  can  privilege  us  from
death.  .  .  .  God  can  easily  frustrate  our  fair-
est hopes,  and  defeat  our  most  probable
projects,  in  making  those  places  most  dan-
gerous which  we  account  most  safe  and
secure;  causing  death  to  meet  us  there
where  we  think  furthest  to  fly  from  it."—
Fuller.


And  she  was  left,  and  her  two  sons.

Another  instance  of  the  wonderful  subservience  of  the  events  of  human  life  to
the  righteous  purposes  of  God.  God  deals  with  Naomi  in  this  way ;  not  in  anger,
but  in  love.  Recognize  the  Divine  agency,  and  see  something  of  the  Divine  plan.
First  famine,  then  exile,  then  bereavement.  Naomi  a  Christian,  but  what  is
called  a  backsliding  Christian ;  one  under  a  cloud,  one  who  had  proved  to  some
extent  untrue,  undutiful,  unthankful;  bitterly  chastened,  and  therefore  eventually
reinstated  in  her  forfeited  privileges  {Dr.  Gumming).  Not  necessary  to  take  this
view  of  her  character  in  looking  for  a  Divine  purpose  in  this  sad  event.  Whom
the  Lord  loveth  he  chastenetJi  (Hcb.  xii.  6).  Bereavements  natural,  inevitable,
common,  familiar.  None  the  less  they  have  a  meaning,  and  come  to  us  pregnant
with  important  lessons.

I.  See  how  much  there  was  that  must  have  seemed  severe  in  this  bereave-
ment. Naomi  left  a  widow — the  husband,  friend,  counsellor,  head  of  the  household,
gone.  The  widow's  lot  always  a  bitter  and  lonely  one.  Especially  so  here.
Naomi  a  widow  in  a  strange  land — far  from  home  and  sanctuary.  Notice,  (a)  T/iat
sorrow  is  natural  under  circumstances  like  these.  A  mistaken  notion  to  think  that
grief  in  itself  is  s  nful.  It  is  undue,  rebellious  sorrow  which  is  to  be  rebuked.
Borrow  without  faith,  grief  which  sees  no  future,  nothing  beyond  the  past  and  the
present.     One  pregnant  instance  at  leusl  of  a  holy  sorrow  at  the  gravt;,  "Jesus

-J


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    RUTH.  chap.  i.  3.


wept/'  (6)  That  affrction  for  those  taken  away  is  still  natural.  Unreasonable  to
think  that  the  family  bond  is  broken  at  death.  They  are  "loved  ones"  still,
though  "loved  ones  gone  before."  A  danger  in  this.  Affection  at  these  times
may  become  morbid,  a  matter  of  mere  sentiment.  Modern  spiritualism  in  many
family  circles  the  perversion  of  what  is  in  itself  true  and  right ;  love  for  the  dead,
and  then  a  craving  for  a  material  manifestation  of  the  loved  ones.  Note.  Jt  is
not  the  intensity  of  our  affection,  hut  its  interference  with  truth  and  duty,  which  malces
it  sinful.  No  man  ever  loved  child  or  brother  or  sister  too  much  [Robertson).
(c)  That  religion  comes  in  to  sanctify  alike  the  sorrow  and  the  affection.  It  says  of
those  taken  away,  "  Blessed  are  the  dead,"  etc.  (Rev.  xiv.  13),  and  of  the  faithful
remaining,  "  We  which  are  alive  shall  be  caught  up  together  with  them  :  so  shall
we  ever,"  etc.  (1  Thess.  iv.  17).  Perhaps  we  never  love  truly  until  we  learn  to
love  with  all  the  deep  fulness  of  a  sanctified  affection.  Especially  is  this  true  in
circumstances  like  those  in  the  text.  That  higher  affection  sustains  and  elevates
the  lower  human  one,  casting  round  it  a  glory  which  mere  personal  feeling  could
never  give  (Bohertson).

II.  See  how  much  there  was  especially  to  be  regretted  in  this  bereavement.
To  pass  beyond  the  great  loss  itself.  To  the  mother  a  multiplicity  of  new  cares
and  anxieties  involved  (a)  in  the  training  up  of  her  fatherless  offspring.  A  mother's
task  always  a  difficult  one.  Much  more  then  a  widowed  mother's.  The  strong
commanding  voice  hushed  in  death.  The  will  which  ought  to  be  the  supreme
..uthority  in  the  household  missing.  Possibly  this  one  reason  why  Paul  lays
stress  upon  widows  who  have  children  learning  ^\first  to  shew  piety  at  home**
(1  Tim.  v.  4).  This  the  more  necessary  since  the  father's  character  and  influence
is  absent,  (b)  In  doing  this  amid  the  surrounding  circumstances.  Journeying  to
Moab  involved  much,  and  perhaps  nothing  more  serious  than  this.  A  cheerless
prospect  to  Elimelech  in  dying,  this  of  leaving  his  widow  and  orphans  among
strangers  and  heathen,  and  well  for  him  only  if  he  had  strong  faith  in  the  God  of
the  fatherless  (Ps.  xxvii.  10).  Even  Elimelech  must  have  known  His  promise:
"If  they  cry  at  all  unto  me,  I  will  surely  heai-  their  cry"  (Exod.  xxii.  23).
Note.  (1)  ^  caution  to  those  who  have  kindred  responsibilities.  When  you  choose
your  place  of  abode,  if  you  have  families,  let  this  be  one  principal  consideration,
where  you  will  leave  them  if  God  should  call  you  out  of  the  world  [Lawson).
(2)  yl  warning  to  Christians  who  lead  their  children  into  the  midst  of  worldly  sur-
roundings. We  wonder  sometimes  why  the  children  of  sainted  parents  fail  to
grow  up  in  the  fear  of  God.  The  secret  here  and  in  this  :  led  into  the  world,
and  left  there,  as  Elimelech's  children  in  Moab.

III.  See  how  much  there  was  merciful,  after  all,  in  connection  with  this
bereavement.  Her  children  left  to  her.  The  family  circle  broken  into,  but  not
desiroyed.  Two  sons  to  support  her  declining  years.  And  by-and-by  Orpah
and  Ruth  are  introduced  into  the  bereaved  household.  Note.  The  wonderful
way  in  which  the  breaches  made  by  death  are  repaired  by  Divine  mercy,  now
and  always.  The  family  circle,  hke  the  ark  of  Noah,  survives  amid  the  wasting
waters  of  universal  change  (l)r.  Lee).

Doubtless  the  affliction  itself  had  its  spiritual  use.     Preparatory  to  the  "  I  will
arise"  (ver.  6).     Manasseh's  woes  drove  that  erring  monarch  to  God  (2  Chron.
xxxiii.  12).     With  the  righteous,  grief  makes  sacred.     Joy  may  elevate,  ambition
glorify,  but  sorrow  alone  can  consecrate  [H.  Grcshy).
Bernard  on  this  verse —
And  Elimelech  ....  died.

I.  That  death  is  the  end  of  all,  and  spareth  none  (Job  xxi.  33 ;  Eccles.
vii.  2,  vi.  6  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  61)  ;  for  all  have  sinned  (Rom.  v.) ;  and  death
is  the  reward  of  sin  (Rom.  vi.).
II.  That  a  full  supply  of  bodily  wants  cannot  prevent  death.  This  man  in
Moab,  where  there  was  food  enough.  The  rich  glutton  also  (Luke
xvi.  22).  The  rich  man  with  his  barns  full  (Luke  xii.  20).  Life
24


CHAP.  I.  3.


IIOMILETIC  COMMKyiAliY.     RUTH.


depends  not  upon  the  outward  means,  for  then  the  ricli  and  mighty
would  never  die.
III.  That  where  men  think  to  preserve  life,  there  they  may  lose  it.  Fleeing
from  famine  in  Israel,  this  man  died  where  plenty  was,  in  Moab.
Where  we  may  count  ourselves  secure,  there  death  may  take  us
away.
Naomi's  hushand.

L  That  it  is  a  grace  to  be  called  the  husband  of  some  women.     Such  an
one  is   a,   crown   to   her  husband  (Prov.  xii.  4).     The  foolish  woman
rottenness  to  his  bones  (Prov.  xii.  4).
n.  That  grace  in  one  prevents  not  death  in  another.     Married  persons  not
appointed  the  same  length  of  days.     We  come  not  together,  and  we
go  not  together.
in.  That  it  is  a  great  cross  for  a  woman  to   lose  a  good  husband.     In  this
the  wife  loses  her  head,  her  guide,  her  stay  and  comfort.
And  she  was  left^  and  her  two  sons.

I.  That  albeit  death  is  due  to  all,  yet  it  seizeth  not  upon  all  at  once.
II.  That  the  Lord  in  afflicting  His  children  sweeteneth  the  same  with  some
comforts.  In  dealing  with  Naomi,  He  took  away  her  husband,  yet
left  her  two  sons  ;  and  afterwards,  when  He  took  them  away,  gave
her  an  excellent  daughter-in-law.  A  bitter  affliction  for  Joseph  to  be
sold  of  his  brethren,  but  it  was  sweetened  with  Potiphar's  favour.


**  Bereavements  at  home  are  sorrowful
enough,  even  when  the  tenderest  sympathy-
beams  from  the  eyes  of  friends,  and  all  those
gentle  healing  agencies  which  love  has  ever
at  command  are  striving  to  bhid  up  the
broken  heart.  But  to  bury  one's  precious
dead  in  a  foreign  country,  away  from  all
the  blessed  associations  of  home,  is  a  test
under  which  the  strongest  spirit  may  well
bow  down." — Braden.

**  For  by  the  hearth  the  children  sit
Cold  in  the  atmosphere  of  death,
And  scarce  endure  to  draw  the  breath,
Or  like  to  noiseless  phantoms  flit.
But  open  converse  is  there  none,
So  much  the  vital  spirits  sink,
To  see  the  vacant  chair,  and  think
How  good  1  how  kind  1  and  he  is  gone."

Tennyson.

"  Here  we  see  how  mercifully  God  dealt
with  Naomi,  in  that  He  quenched  not  all  the
sparks  of  her  comfort  at  once  ;  but  though
He  took  away  the  stock,  He  left  her  the
stems;  though  He  deprived  her,  as  it  were,
of  the  use  of  her  own  legs,  by  taking  away
lier  husband,  yet  He  left  her  a  staff  in  each
of  her  hands,  her  two  sons,  to  vSupport  her.
Indeed,  afterwards  He  took  them  away  ;  but
first  He  provided  her  a  gracious  daughter-in-
law.  Whence  we  learn,  God  pouretli  not  all
His  afflictions  at  once,  but  ever   leaveth  a


little  comfort ;  otherwise  we  should  not  only
be  pressed  down,  but  crushed  to  powder  under
the  weiG:ht  of  His  heavy  hand." — Fidler.

'■'  Life  passes,  riches  fly  away,  popularity  is
fickle,  the  senses  decay,  the  world  changes,
friends  die.  One  alone  is  constant ;  One
alone  is  true  to  us ;  One  alone  can  be  true."
— Dr.  Newman.

"  God  out  of  these  things  is  bringing  forth
in  us  that  diviner  tenderness  which  can  only
characterize  the  matured  and  chastened
Christian.  The  time  is  indeed  short,  and
it  is  well  for  us  to  be  made  to  feel  it." — B.

"  Suffering  in  this  world  is  both  remedial
and  penal.  When  it  is  rightly  received,  it  is
remedial.  When  it  is  resisted,  it  becomes
per.al  to  him  who  resists,  and  admonitory  to
the  spectator.  .  .  .  There  are  two  ways  of
escaping  from  suffering — the  one  by  rising
above  the  causes  of  conflict;  the  other  by
sinking  below  them.  The  one  is  the  religious
method ;  the  other  is  the  vulgar,  worldly
method.  The  one  is  called  Christian  eleva-
tion, the  other  stoicism." — Beecher.

"  When  the  bridge  is  finished,  the  timbers
and  scaffolding  upon  which  it  has  rested  are
all  removed.  So  God  is  removing  these
earthly  props  of  ours,  one  after  another,  and
for  two  reasons  as  regards  ourselves.  First,
that  we  may  learn  the  great  lesson  of  self-
reliance  in  human  life,  but  chiefly  that  we
may  learn  to  rest  above  all  on  Him." — B,


25


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    RUm.  chap.  i.  4,


VERSE  4.

TJieme. — Makriages  in  Moab.

"  Honest  wedlock
Is  like  a  banqueting:-liouse,  built  in  a  garden,
On  which  the  spring  flowers  take  delight
To  cast  their  modest  odours."

And  they  took  them  wives  of  the  women  of  Moab,
The  father^s  death  did  not  arouse  these  Israelites  in  their  wanderings.  The
sons  thinking  of  marrying  when  possibly  they  ought  to  have  been  thinking  of
returning.  Note,  (a)  Every  cross  brlngeth  not  men  liome  ay (dn  [Bernard).  First  the
loss  of  the  father,  then  the  marriage  of  the  sons,  the  wedding  feast  seemingly
following  hard  upon  the  funeral.  How  true  to  human  life  !  Note  [h)  Sojourn-
ing in  Moab  meant  friendship  with  the  Moahltes^  marriaye  with  their  children.
Little  else  could  be  expected.  [The  Old  Testament  seems  to  intimate  that
the  daughters  of  Moab  were  fair  to  look  upon.]  The  two  sons  in  Moab  did
as  Moab  did, — married  Gentile  women,  not  caring  whether  they  were  idolaters
or  not  [Dr.  Cumminy).  Is  this  the  explanation  ?  or  is  it  that  EUmelecb  and  his
family  were,  after  all,  lights  in  the  midst  of  a  croked  and  perverse  generation  ? —
attracted  Ruth  and  even  Orpah  for  a  while.  New  joys  indeed  in  store  for  Naomi,
yet  these  mingled  with  many  anxious  questionings,  which  a  godly  parent's  ex-
perience alone  may  interpret.

I.  Take  the  brighter  and  more  charitable  view  of  these  marriages.  The
act  simply  considered  as  folloiviny  out  the  usual  course  of  human  life  not  at  all
reprehensible.  Rather  to  be  viewed  favourably — the  loss  of  one  comfort  supplied
by  the  enjoyment  of  another.  Judyed  by  its  circumstances  and  surroundinys,  much
to  be  said  in  its  defence.  The  main  question  of  right  and  wrong  lies  farther
back,  as  to  whether  they  were  justified  in  coming  to  Moab.  Lawful  lor  Israelites
to  marry  foreign  women  under  certain  exceptional  circumstances,  as,  e,y.,  those
taken  in  war  (Deut.  xxi.  10, 11).  No  direct  command  against  Moabitish  women,  as
against  the  Canaanites  (Deut.  vii.  8).  Better  marry  than  do  worse.  Judyed  by
its  results,  the  answer  favourable.  Salmon  did  well  in  taking  Rahab.  Mahlon
could  have  found  no  less  a  treasure  in  Ruth.  By  this  act  the  young  men  did
much  to  endear  themselves  to  a  people  who  had  evidently  received  them  kindly.
Orpah  and  Ruth,  wild  branches — it  was  something  to  graft  them  upon  the  stock
of  the  true  Israel.     (Cf.  1  Cor.  vii.  13,  14.)

II.  Look  at  the  darker  possibilities  connected  with  marriages  like  these.
Bishop  Hall  strongly  condemns  such  unions  (see  "  Contemplations,"  vol.  i.,  pp.  210,
211).  Note,  (a)  Does  not  appear  that  the  yodly  mother  had  any  hand  in  the  matter.
Seemingly  their  own  act:  "  They  took  them  wives."  The  influence  which  won  over
Ruth  may  have  belonged  to  after  years,  and  to  Naomi's  character  and  life  (ii.  12).
The  sons  themselves  possibly  having  lost  all  which  ought  to  distinguish  the  true
Israelite.  Such  marriages  fraught  with  great  danger,  even  if  overruled  for  good.
The  decisive  step  taken,  and  the  future  has  to  decide  whether  for  good  or  evil.
Note,  (b)  In  the  most  favourable  view,  these  youny  men  to  blame,  unless  they  had
credible  evidence  their  future  wives  were  cordially  disposed  towards  the  worship  of
God.  The  wife's  influence  often  more  subtle,  and  even  more  powerful  and  lasting
in  religious  matters,  than  the  husband's.  The  strength  of  Samson,  the  wisdom  of
Solomon,  not  sufficient  to  withstand  it  when  used  for  evil.  Note,  (c)  Impossible
to  say  what  was  the  effect  upon  the  youny  men  themselves.  Judging  from  the
influence  of  Eve  over  Adam,  etc.,  we  fear  it  was  evil  {Dr.  Cumminy).  Would
naturally  tend  to  lengthen  the  sojourn  in  Moab.  Mahlon  and  Chilion  excep-
tionally fortunate  in  their  wives  {Cox).  Strange  if  they  should  have  de:eriorated,
while  Orpah  and  Ruth  were  benefited ;  yet  not  impossible — not  unlikely.
Characters  assimilate,  mutually  act  and  react  upon  each  other — give  and  take,
especially  when  the  bond  is  as  close  as  that  of  marriage.

26


CHAP.  I.  4.  ILOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   RUTH.


III.  Improvement.  To  the  Cliristian  the  command  is,  *'  Be  not  unequally  yoked,"
etc.  (2  Cor.  vi.  14).  His  privilege  "  to  marry  in  the  Lord."  This  safe — without
olleiice — within  the  sphere  of  the  promises.     (See  next  outline.)

Brad  en  on  this  : —

Mahlon  married  Ruth,  Chilion  Orpah.  Little  is  known  of  cither,  perhaps
they  were  sisters — the  parents'  names  not  mentioned.  Both  natives  of  Moab,  and
heathen — appear  to  have  remained  so  while  in  their  own  land.     (See  i.  15.)

The  question  asked,  Were  these  two  young  men  Tvjht  in  warryiiKj  heatlien  uomen  f
Some  writers  justify,  others  condemn.  A  plausible  case  can  be  made  out  in  their
favour :  great  distance  from  Bethlehem,  absence  of  Jewish  maidens,  uncertainty
of  their  return,  naturally  diminished  interest  in  their  native  land,  arising  from
long  residence  in  Moab,  the  fact  that  there  was  no  distinct  commandment  against
marrying  a  Moabitess,  though  there  was  against  marrying  a  Canaanite — all  good
reasons  for  pleading  on  their  behalf.  More,  Boaz  married  Ruth  afterwards,  and
God  made  her  ancestress  of  Christ.  Yet  were  not  absolutely  free  from  blame.
God  overruled  for  good,  still  they  erred.  This  nation  under  a  curse,  excluded
from  the  Jews  (Deut.  xxiii.  3).  Ezra  rent  his  garment,  etc.,  under  similar
circumstances  (Ezra  ix.).  No  doubt,  to  marry  a  heathen  a  sin  in  the  eyes  of
the  Jew.

A  practical  question  started  :  Should  a  'professing  Christian  marry  one  who  makes
no  such  professiou  ?  "Whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is  of  sin."  If  you  are  not
firmly  convinced  the  step  is  right,  then  for  you  it  is  sin.  Does  the  N.  T.  lay
down  any  law  ?  No  direct  utterance  on  the  subject  to  be  discovered.  Paul's
warning  (2  Cor.  vi.  14),  "Be  ye  not  unequally  yoked  with  unbelievers,"  etc.,  often
quoted  against  such  mixed  marriages,  but  does  not  specifically  refer  to  them.
The  apostle  arguing  as  to  the  whole  relationship  of  life,  urging  that  the  Christian
Church  should  be  separated  from  heathen  associations.  The  greater,  however,
included  in  the  less.  The  law  applicable  to  the  entire  life  peculiarly  touches
marriage.

It  may  be  answered,  "  Times  have  changed,  the  broad  line  of  demarcation
between  believer  and  unbeliever  no  longer  exists.  Heathen  are  not  found  among
us ;  non-professors  moral  and  reputable  in  life,  and  can  hardly  be  designated
"  unbelievers."  True,  no  doubt.  The  lines  between  the  Church  and  the  world
faded,  a  mutual  movement  towards  each  other.  Many  see  no  wrong  in  marrying
one  who  appears  to  be  everything  but  a  professor  of  religion.  A  mistake  to
burden  consciences  by  asserting  that  any  course  of  conduct  is  sinful  if  the  vexed
matter  is  fairly  open  to  doubt.  Tends  to  produce  a  reaction,  in  which  sacred
principles  are  themselves  thrown  aside.

This,  however,  may  be  maintained,  that  mixed  marriages  are  eminently  inex-
pedient and  very  dangerous.  A  want  of  sympathetic  rehgious  convictions  between
husband  and  wife  injuriously  afi'ects  their  sacred  relationship.  True  marriage
rests  on  common  admiration  and  sympathy — a  union  of  hearts.  If  religion,  which
concerns  the  deepest  emotions  and  noblest  thoughts,  is  excluded,  the  union  dis-
astrously incomplete,  the  real  foundation  insecure.  Love  which  rises  from  other
things  meagre,  partial,  unsatisfactory — the  richest  cords  of  the  soul  untouched.
Tliat  which  one  esteems  as  the  best  thing  in  life,  the  other  may  not  possess — a
perpetual  craving  for  s}'mpathy  where  it  cannot  be  given.  The  hindrances  and
sorrows  springing  from  this  spiritual  isolation  incalculable.  Nan  and  icife  do  not
understand  each  other.  Look  at  numberless  experiences  from  opposite  stand-
points— motives  imputed,  sneers  at  saintliness  uttered  perhaps  on  one  side,  and
denunciations  atgodlessncss  on  the  other.  Multitudes  oi  family  quarrels  arise  from
vant  of  spiiitual  union,  and  the  highest  aspirations  of  the  godly  soul  perpetually
thwarted.  Then  the  education  of  the  children  perplexing ;  the  example  of  the  one
nullified  by  the  conduct  of  the  other.  To  marry  an  unbelieving  husband  or  wife
may  involve  the  future  destiny  of  the  offspring.  If  the  children  grow  up  in  the
fea.r  of  God,  it  will  je  in  spite  of  the  bad  example  of  one  parent.

27


IIOMILETIC   C03I3IENrARY  :    RUTH.


CHAP.  I.  4i


It  may  be  said  that  many  wed  hoping  to  produce  a  change.  They  may  be  in-
stmrcental  in  the  conversion  of  the  beloved  one — a  beautiful  but  most  delusive
hope.  Can  instances  be  quoted  ?  Their  scarcity  contrasts  most  painfully  with
the  multitude  of  failures.  Beligimis  influence  generally  less  after  marriage  than
before.  The  charm  strnngely  disappears,  the  same  words  irritate.  More  difficult
to  speak  upon  these  themes,  lest  there  should  be  some  taunt  about  inconsistency.
Easier  to  address  strangers  about  Christ,  than  our  own  households.  The  home
friends  know  our  failings — do  not  see  our  struggles  against  them.  Decision  for
God  the  great  pre-requisite  for  a  happy  and  useful  marriage,  far  better  than
beauty — intellect — wealth.

(Condensed  by  permission  from  ''The  Beautiful  Gleaner.")

"  Here  we  see  the  fashion  of  the  world.
Mankind  had  long  apro  decayed,  if  those
breaches  wliich  are  daily  made  by  death
were  not  daily  made  up  by  marriage." —
Fuller.

"  And  thus  the  world  moves  on — deaths
and  marriages,  marriages  and  deaths.  The
household  which  to-day  mourns  as  though
all  joy  had  taken  flight  for  ever,  to-morrow
resounds  with  the  laughter  of  many  voices
at  a  new-born  happiness.  The  faces  all
tear-stained  yesterday  are  bright  with  smiles
to-day.  The  bell  which  slowly  tolled  the
funeral  knell  an  hour  ago,  now  rings  out  the
joyous  wedding-chime.  So  it  must  be,  so  it
ought  to  be.  Probably  life  would  lose  half
its  beauty  but  for  this  alternation  of  shadow
and  sunshine ;  at  least,  this  we  know,  that
human  hearts  need  both  the  darkness  and
the  light,  or  they  will  not  grow  to  that
perfection  of  truth  and  purity  which  God
has  designed  they  shall  attain.  Elimelech
died,  the  sons  married.  It  is  a  simple  state-
ment, yet  a  whole  world  of  change  is  in-
volved in  it  for  that  small  household." —
B?'adc7i.


"  Hail,  wedded   love,  mysterious  law,  true

source
Of  human  offspring,  sole  propriety
In  paradise  of  all  things  common  else,
By  thee  adulterous  lust  was  drawn  from  men
Among  the  bestial  herds  to  range  ;  by  thee,
Founded  on  reason,  loyal,  just,  and  pure,
Eelations  dear  and  all  the  charities
Of    father,   son,  and    brother,    first   were

known."  3Iilton.

"Wherever  found,  women  are  the  same
kind,  civil,  obliging,  human  tender  beings,
inclined  to  be  gay  and  cheerful,  humorous
and  modest." — Ledyard.

"  True  marriage  rests  on  common  admira-
tion and  sympathy;  it  is  the  union  of  hearts
in  the  bonds  of  holiest  love.  If,  however,
religion,  which  concerns  the  deepest  emotions
and  noblest  thoughts,  is  excluded,  the  union
of  the  two  natures  is  disastrously  incomplete,
the  real  foundation  of  married  life  becomes
fearfully  insecure." — Braden.

"  Marriage  has  less  of  beauty,  but  more  of
safety,  than  the  single  life.  It  hath  not  more
ease,  but  less  danger;  it  is  more  merry  and  more
sad;  it  is  fuller  of  sorrows  and  fuller  of  joys;
it  lies  nrK"" or  more  burdens,  but  it  issnj)ported
by  all  tliC  sti  ength  of  love  and  charity,  and

28


those  burdens  are  delightful.  ...  It  is  that
state  of  good  to  which  God  hath  designed  the
present  constitution  of  the  world." — Jeremy
Taylor.

"The  woman's  cause  is  man's.     They  rise  or

sink
Together.     Dwarfed    or   godlike,  bond  or

free ;
If  she  be  small,  slight-natured,  miserable,
How  shall  men  grow  ?  .  .  .  Let  her  be
All  that  not  harms  distinctive  womanhood;
For  woman  is  not  undeveloped  man.
But  diverse.     Could  we  make  her  as  the

man.
Sweet  love  were  slain,  whose  dearest  bond

is  this,

Not  like  to  like,  but  like  in  difference;

Yet  in  the  long  years  must  they  liker  grow;

The  man  be  more  of  woman,  she  of  man,
*  *  *  ♦  ♦

Till  at  the  last  she  set  herself  to  man
Like  perfect  music  unto  noble  words."

Tennyson,

" An  unlessoned   girl,  unschooled,  un-
practised ;
Happy  in  this,  she  is  not  yet  so  old
But  she  may  learn :  and  happier  than  this,
She  is  not  bred  so  dull  but  she  can  learn ;
Happiest  of  all,  is,  that  her  gentle  spirit
Commits  itself  to  yours,  to  be  directed
As  from  her  lord,  her  governor,  her  king."

Shakespeare.

"  When  a  woman  marries  a  man  that  is
ungodly,  wrong  as  it  is,  we  may  indulge  a
reasonable  hope  that  he  through  her  influence
will  become  a  Christian.  But  it  rarely  hap-
pens when  a  man  marries  a  woman  that  is
not  a  Christian,  that  she  becomes  a  Christian ;
rather  he  sinks  down  to  her  moral  level." —
Dr.  Cvmming,

"  A  good  wife  is  heaven's  last,  best  gift  to
a  man  ;  his  angel  of  mercy,  minister  of  graces
innumerable  ;  his  gem  of  many  virtues,  his
cat-ket  of  jewels." — Jeremy  Taylor.

"  No  doubt  it  is  a  truism  to  say  that  in  any
case  marriage  is  a  solemn  thing.  We  smile
and  jest  over  it ;  the  prospect  of  a  wedding
always  awakens  good-humoured  remark;
festivities  appropriately  accompany  the  cele-
bration ;  yet  we  cannot  lose  sight  of  the
grave  importance  of  the  event  itself.  Two
human  beings  of  differing  temperament  and
education  stand  before  God  and  clasp  hands,
covenanting  *  to  be  faithful  even  unto  death.'


riJAM.  5.  tlOMlLMTiC  COMMENTAHY:    RUTH.


Henceforth  the  makin<r  or   the    Tnarrincr   of  in  hand  una'lviscdly,  lightly,  or  wantonly,

eachother'shnppincssrests  with  that  hus])«n('  biit  reverently,  discreetly,  advisedly,  soberly,

and  wife,      llciiccfortb  they  are  b  miid  by.'  aul  in  the  fear  of  God.' " — Jir/iden.

tie  strong  as  the  law  itself,  and  no  discovery  '*  Marriage    is  the  best   state   for   man  in

of  incompatibility  of   character,  no  chan;_'e  general  ;  and  every  man  is  a  worse  man  in

of   temporal  circumstances,  no  mere    incon-  })roportion  a-*    he   is   unfit   for  the   married

veniences  of  position,  on^y  distinct  criminal  state." — Dr.  Johnson.

acts,  can    *  put    asunder '    *  what   God  hath  "  He   that   goes  far  to  marry,  goes  to  be

joined  together.'      Well,  therefore,  does  the  deceived  or  to  deceive.     The  day  you  marry

(Service  decJ«.re  that  it  should  '  not  be  taken  you  kill  or  cure  yourself." — S}/anish  Proverbs.


VERSE  5.
Theme. — The  Second  Great  Bejieavement,

"  Is  God  less  God,  that  thou  art  left  undone  ?
Rise,  worship,  bless  Him,  in  this  sackloth  spun,
As  in  that  purple  1  " — Mrs.  Browning

Then  died  these  two  also.

Thus  far  the  book  of  Ruth  resembles  that  symphony  of  Beethoven,  in  which  the
song  of  birds,  the  cheerful  hum  of  a  holiday  crowd,  .  .  .  are  hushed  by  the
crash  of  a  sudden  and  threatening  storm  (Cox).  Scarcely  so  :  all  along  there  has
been  the  undertone  of  sorrow,  afHiction  following  affliction.  But  we  can  imagine
years  of  bappy  prosperity  (possibly  ten)  in  Moab,  since  the  last  great  calamity
(ver.  3).  Now  a  further  trial — to  Naomi  the  climax  of  all  which  has  gone  before,
a  more  terrible  famine  than  that  in  the  land  of  Israel.

I.  We  have  Death  here  once  again  in  the  family  circle.  Three  sepulchres
now  attest  his  melancholy  ravages  [Eadie).  This  time  the  sons  taken  in  the
flush  of  manhood  ;  not  as  the  father,  who  might  well  have  anticipated  his  end.
Note,  [a)  Even  the  younr/  man's  life  a  vapour.  Death  no  respecter  of  youth,  or
strength,  or  beauty.  The  blossom  as  subject  to  be  nipped  as  the  flower,  the
spark  to  be  extinguished  as  the  flame.  Was  it  the  "joy  "  and  the  **  ornament  "
(see  note  on  ver.  2)  of  this  household  God  took,  or  the  "weakly"  and  the
*' pining"  ones?  Was  the  death  sudden,  or  ushered  in  by  signs  of  failing
strength,  as  the  latter  interpretation  of  the  names  would  seem  to  intimate  ?  The
Scripture  language  severe  in  its  brevity,  but  touching  in  its  simplicity,  *'  Then
died  these  two  aho  "  (see  notes) — died  in  banishment,  from  their  fatherland,
perhaps  from  their  father's  God.  (h)  The  young  man's  plans  vanity.  Escaped
famine,  but  death  overtook  them.  Founded  their  houses  in  Moab,  Moab  became
their  grave  [Lange).  Probably  determined  not  to  return  home  until  the  famine
was  over  ;  when  it  was,  they  themselves  were  no  more  (Lange).

II.  We  have  separation  once  more  in  the  household  life.  Husband  from
wife,  children  from  a  fond  parent.  With  Naomi,  first  it  had  been  separation  from
kinsfolk  and  acquaintances,  then  from  husband,  now  from  her  sons.  Thus  the
Divine  hand  is  removing  one  after  another  the  ties  which  bind  her  afiections
earthward.  Note.  A  naming  against  seeking  vnwitigated  satisfaction  in  family
joys.  We  should  live  together  as  those  who  may  be  called  upon  to  separate  at  any
moment.  Rather  as  those  who  look  for  a  union  beyond  the  separation  (1  Thess.
iv.  14).

**  The  love  that  rose  on  stronger  wings,
Uiipalsied  when  he  met  with  Death,
Is  comrade  of  the  lesser  faith,
That  sees  the  course  of  human  things,
♦  »  »  *  ♦

That  all.  as  in  some  piece  of  art,

Is  toil  co-ojx'rant  to  an  end." — Tcnnyi<on.

III.  We  have  still  further  separation  in  a  foreign  land.     New  afllictions

29


JIOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    RUTH.  chap.  i.  5.


added  to  Naomi's  former  griefs — loss  upon  loss,  trial  following  trial.  The  grief
of  the  two  younger  widows  not  mentioned — speechless  before  a  more  majestic
sorrow  than  its  own.  "  And  tlie  woman  was  left  of  her  two  sons  and  her  hus-
band.'' The  desolation  of  bereavement  never  more  vividly  pictured  than  by  these
touching  phrases  {Braden).  To  heighten  the  picture,  what  little  wealth  had
remained  would  seem  to  have  vanished.  Poverty  comes  in  upon  them  "  like  an
armed  man."  Note,  (a)  The  case  by  no  means  siufjuhir,  even  thoiKjh  the  afflictions
are  complicated.     Bereavement  !   in  what  household  is  the  shadow  unknown  ?

**Too  common  !  never  morninfr  wore
To  evening,  but  some  heart  did  break.

The  widow's  story  too  familiar!  Note,  (b)  These  providences  mysterious — in-
scrutable. Only  on  all  theories  of  human  life,  the  atheist's  among  the  rest,  they
face  us,  and  we  must  bow  to  them.  Explain  it  or  not,  here  is  the  fact.  And
happy  those  alone  who  can  say,  as  Naomi  appears  to  have  done,  "Although  I
have  lost  the  gift,  I  have  not  lost  the  Giver  {Dr.  Ciimming).  Faith  only,  though  it
be  "  but  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,"  can  give  consolation  in  such  hours.  Note.
(c)  Some  comfort  remaining  even  to  the  most  forlorn  and  desolate.  The  sons'  wives
left  in  the  household — human  love  side  by  side  with  Divine  care.

"  Oh  weep  no  more  1  there  yet  is  balm
In  Gilead  :  love  doth  ever  shed
Eich  healing  where  it  nestles,  spread
O'er  desert  pillows  some  green  palm.
God's  ichor  fills  the  hearts  that  bleed,
The  best  fruit  loads  the  broken  b(nigh,
And  in  the  wounds  our  sorrows  plough.
Immortal  love  sows  sovereign  seed." — Gerald  Masaey.

Improvement,  (a)  When  heavy  calamities  befall,  beware  of  speaking  or  even
thinking  unadvisedly  of  them.  ''  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth,"  etc.
(Gen.  xviii.  25).  Our  best  thoughts  sometimes  presumptuous  on  these  matters.
(i)  The  love  or  hatred  of  God  not  to  be  estimated  by  what  we  see  of  His  doings.
(c)  Let  none  because  of  youth  put  far  off  the  day  of  death  {Bernard).  The
question  of  early  death  is  one  about  which  no  like  mystery  hangi  (Brade^i).
Some  He  takes  away  from  the  evil  of  the  world  ;  others  for  reasons  beyond  our
present  knowledge  and  judgment.  [d)  Those  least  expected  may  be  most  likely  to
go  soonest.  Remember  now,  etc.  (Eccl.  xii.  1).
M.  Henry  on  this:  —

I.  That  wherever  we  go  we  cannot  outrun  death,  whose  fatal  arrows  fly  in

all  places.
II.  That  we  cannot  expect  to  prosper  when  we  go  out  of  the  way  of  our
duty.     He  that  will  save  his  life  by  any  indirect  course  shall  lose  it.
HI.  That    death,    when  it  comes   into   a  family  often,   makes  breach  upon
breach.     One  is  taken  away  to  prepare  another  to  follow;  that  afflic-
tion not  duly  improved,  God  sends  another  of  the  same  kind.
Bernard : —

That  the  Lord  gave  them  time  to  marry  and  to  enjoy  their  marriage  for
some  space,  though  they  made  no  better  use  ot"  their  father's  death.
Thus  good  and  patient  is  God  unto  men  for  their  bettering.
II.  That  when  God  hath  proved  men  in  patience,  and  they  will  not  make
right  use  thereof,  then  will  He  take  them  away.
m.  That  God  can,  and  sometimes  will,  cut  off  young  men  in  the  flower  of
their  youth.  So  Nadab,  Abihu,  Hophni  and  Pliiuehas,  Amnon,  etc.
Some  for  their  own  sins,  as  Absalom  ;  others  for  their  father's,  as
David's  child  (2  Sam.  xii.  14)  and  the  sons  of  Saul.

'  The  end  of  onesorrow  is  thebeginninjr  of       from  the  top  of  a  house,  when  one  is  gone
another,    like  the  drops   of    rain    distilling       another  followeth  :  like  a  ship  upon  the  sea.
80


CHAP.  I.  5.


IIOMILETIC  COMMEKtAUr:    MUTll


being  on  the  top  of  one  wave  presently  is
cast  down  to  the  foot  of  another  ;  like  seed,
which  being  spread  by  the  sower  is  haunted
by  the  fowls,  being  green  and  past  their
reach  is  endangered  by  frost  and  snow,  being
past  the  winter's  hurt,  by  beasts  in  summer,
being  ripe  is  cut  with  the  sickle,  threshed
with  the  flail,  purged  in  the  floor,  ground  in
the  mill,  baked  in  the  oven." — Tapacll.

"The  good  husbandman  may  pluck  his
roses  and  gather  in  his  lilies  at  midsummer,
and  for  aught  1  dare  say  in  the  beginning  of
the  first  summer  months ;  and  he  may  trans-
plant young  trees  out  of  the  lower  ground  to
the  higher.  What  is  that  to  you  or  me  1
The  goods  are  his  own." — Rutherford.

**  With  many  it  is  ebb  water  before  the
tide  be  at  the  full.  The  lamps  of  their  lives
are  wasted  almost  as  soon  as  they  are  lighted.
The  sand  of  their  hour-glass  is  run  out  when
they  think  it  is  but  newly  tuined." — Seeker.

'*  Oh  1  these  earthly  separations  from  those
we  love,  how  terribly  do  they  scald  and  wear
the  heart  1  day  by  day  to  see  those  things
laid  out,  as  it  were,  in  such  stony,  death-like
forms,  which  used  to  lie  about  here  and  there,
in  that  sweet  abandonment  of  daily  life." —
Power.

*' '  Death  strikes  with  equal  foot  the  rustic
cottage  and  the  palaces  of  kings.'  After  ten
years,  in  which  the  members  of  this  notable
family  seem  to  have  opposed  a  constant  face
to  the  austere  and  threatening  brow  of  mis-
fortune, and  to  have  grown  the  dearer  to  each
other  for  the  sorrows  and  calamities  they
shared  together,  Mahlon  and  Chilion,  still
young  men,  followed  their  father  to  the  grave,
and  Naomi  was  left  a  childless  widow.
Songs  of  mirth  were  exchanged  for  songs  of
mourning.  The  three  men  of  the  household
had  g(jne  to  their  long  home,  and  the  three
beieaved  women  were  left  to  weep  together,
and  to  comfort  each  other  as  best  they  might."
—  Cox.

"  Even  young  men  in  the  prime  of  their
ag£  are  subject  to  death.  The  sons  of  Jacob,
when  they  came  to  the  table  of  Joseph,  sat
down,  the  eldest  according  to  his  age,  and
the  youngest  according  to  his  youth  :  but
Death  observes  not  this  method  ;  he  takes
not  men  in  seniority,  but  sometimes  sends
them  first  to  the  burial  that  came  last  from
the  birth,  and  those  that  came  last  from  the
Womb,  first  to  the  winding-sheet." — Fuller.

**  He  the  young,  the  strong,  who  cherished
Noble  longings  for  the  strife.
By  the  wayside  fell  and  perished,
Weary  with  the  march  of  life."

Longfellow.

"  Hush  I    listen  1    let  the   heart  in    silence

learn
How  that  of  all  things  fair  Time  hath  no

certain  hold  :
The  fairest  flower,  the  greenest  leaf,  may

fade.
Death  is  a  ravening  wolf,  sparing  no  earthly

J  old."  B.


**  Death  is  the  solemn  thought  of  the  world.
Let  it  be  ever  so  vulgarized  or  commoa ;
still  beneath  the  tent  of  the  eastern  emir,  or
in  the  crowded  cemeteries  of  the  capital,
death  is  an  awful  arresting  thing.  VVhile
civilization  has  robbed  other  horrors  of  their
wonder,  death  is  still  the  insoluble  event.
But  here  we  have  sometliing  more  than
death  ;  we  have  separation.  .  .  .  Death  be-
comes awfully  credible  when  those  we  are
accustomed  to  live  with  die.  We  feel  then
as  those  tell  us  they  have  felt  who  have
experienced  an  earthquake.  The  earth,  the
most  stable  of  things,  becomes  to  them
unstable,  and  to  us  the  solid  life  becomes
hollow,  and  '  I  may  be  the  next'  is  the  first
thought." — Robertson.

"  God  keeps  a  niche
In  heaven  to  hold  our  idols  ;  and,  albeit
He  brake  them  to  our  faces  and  denied
That  our  close  kisses  should  impair  their

white,
I  know  we  shall  behold  them  raised  com-
plete,
The  dust  swept  from  their  beauty — glori-
fied,
New  Mcmnons  singing  in  the  great  God-
light."  Mrs.  Browning.

**When  you  and  I  die,  Providence  will  not
be  ]>uried  in  our  grave ;  the  '  Redeemer  liveth.'
We  entrust  to  Hira  our  eternal  life,  shall  we
not  entrust  to  Him  our  dearest  earthly  rela-
tiy^l  He  will  be  a  husband  to  ray  beloved
wife,  and  a  father  to  my  children,  when  I  can
no  longer  look  after  them ;  His  gracious
presence  will  cheer  them  in  solitude,  shield
them  in  danger,  guide  their  inexperience
through  untrodden  paths  in  the  darkest
night." — Dr.  Waugh.

"  Before  we  had  the  particular  losses  of
Naomi,  now  we  have  them  all  reckoned  up
in  the  total  sum.  "  A  threefold  cable,"  saith
Solomon,  *'is  not  easily  broken,"  and  yet
we  see  Naomi's  threefold  cable  of  comfort,
twisted  of  her  husband  and  her  two  sons,
broken  by  death.  Of  the  two  sexes,  the
woman  is  the  weaker ;  of  women,  old  women
are  most  feeble ;  of  old  women,  widows  most
woful  ;  of  widows,  those  that  are  poor,  their
plight  most  pitiful ;  of  poor  widows,  those
that  want  children  their  case  most  doleful ;
of  widows  that  want  children,  those  that  once
had  them  and  after  lost  them,  their  estate
most  desolate;  of  widows  that  have  hjid
children,  those  that  are  strangers  in  a  foreign
country,  their  condition  most  comfortless.
Yet  all  these  meet  together  in  Naomi,  as  in
the  centre  of  sorrow,  to  make  the  measuie  of
her  misery  '  pressed  down,  shaken  together,
running  over.'  I  conclude,  therefore,  many
men  have  had  affliction — none  like  Job ;
many  women  have  had  tribulation — none
like  Naomi." — Fuller.

"  High  up  the  mountain  slopes  of  Cha-
mouni  there  is  a  plain  coNcreo  with  verdure
and  flowers.  Thither  the  sliei)herds  of  the
Alp-;  drive  their  flocks.  Atone  ])oint  of  the
asi  v.nt  the  rocks  rise  almost  perj)endicular,

'61


HOMILETIC   C03I3IJJNTARY:    RUTB.  chap.  I.  &


When  the  flock  arrives  at  this  point,  none  is  trees  of  the   Alps.'      Bereaved   parents,  the

bold  enough  to  venture;  but  the  shepherds  iamb  of  your  love  has  been  carried  up,  and

gather  the  lambs  in  their  arms,  and  toss  them  beckons    you    to   follow  where    are   flowers

upon  the  plain  ;    the  whole  fl.ock  clambers  sweeter  than  those  of  the  Alps,  and  air  and

after  them,  and  soon  is  feeding  upon  the  rich  sunshine   purer  and  brighter  than_  is   found

herbage,  or  ruminating  beneath  the  *  rose-  up  in  Chamouni." — Die.  of  Illustrations.


VERSES  6,  7.


Critical  and  ExeCtETICAl  Notes.—  Ver.  6,  7.  Then  [and]  she  arose.  She  arose  in
order  to  return.  Et  surrexit  ut  in  patriam  pergeret  (  Vulycite).  With  her  daughters-in-law.
Both  the  young  women  set  out  with  the  intention  of  going  to  Bethlehem  {Berthcau  and  others).
That  she  might  return.  :iwb  (to  return)  applies  strictly  and  grammatically  to  Naomi  only.
For  she  had  heard.  By  the  mouth  of  an  angel  {Targnm).  The  cause  of  her  rising  to  return
was  not  the  death  of  her  sons,  but  the  message  {Spealter's  Com.').  That  the  Lord  had  visited,
etc.  Because  of  the  righteousness  of  Ibzan  the  judge,  and  because  of  the  simplicity  of  the
pious  Boaz  {Targvm).  ipD  occurs  repeatedly  for  such  a  return  of  Divine  remembrance
{Lange).  The  language  (comp.  Luke  i.  72,  vii.  16).  especially  in  the  LXX.,  can  hardly  fail  to
draw  the  mind  onward  to  that  used  in  connection  with  the  coming  of  Christ  [Word.^worth).
In  giving  them  bread.  Ps.  cvii.  35—37  ;  Luke  i.  68.  From  the  turn  of  the  language  it
may  properly  be  inferred  that  the  famine  was  not  the  result  of  war,  but  of  drought  {Lange).
And  they  went  on  the  way.  And  they  already  went,  etc.  {Lange).  From  this  verse  it  appears
plain  that  all  started  out  for  the  land  of  Judah  {Berthran)  1  Until  now  Naomi  had  looked
on  her  daughters-in-law  as  only  bearing  her  company  for  a  while  {Dr.  Cassel,  in  Lange).  The
journey  to  the  borders  of  their  own  land  would  probably  be  an  act  of  oriental  courtesy,
whether  they  intended  to  proceed  further  or  not  {Speaker's  Com.).  The  sense  here  demands
that  this  should  be  read  with  the  following  verse :  i.e.,  "  On  their  way  Naomi  said,"  et<j.

VERSE   6.
Theme, — The  Awakening  in  Moab.

*  Ah,  graceless  heart !  would  that  it  could  regain
From  the  dim  storehouse  of  sensations  past
The  impress  full  of  tender  awe,  that  night
Which  fell  on  us  1     It  was  as  if  the  Christ
Had  been  drawn  down  from  heaven  to  track  us  home.**

Jean  Ingelow,

Then  she  arose  with  her  daughters-in-law.

No  rest,  no  comfort,  no  profit  in  Moab.  Perhaps  Naomi  had  said,  "  I  shall  die  in
my  nest"  (Job  xxix.  18).  Not  so,  the  nest  is  broken  up.  Now  she  was  ready  to  say,  "I
would  rather  have  been  a  beggar  in  Canaan,  with  my  husband  and  my  sons  about
mo,  than  be  the  possessor  of  everything  in  Moab  without  them  "  [Tyng).  Note.
How  vain  and  empty  the  world  will  seem  to  us  when  the  day  of  a  similar  awakening
comes  I  (Luke  xv.  16,  17.)  Enjoyment  gone,  wealth  vanished,  hope  departed,
loved  ones  taken  away,  Moab  begins  to  shew  itself  in  its  real  character.  Like
the  prodigal,  Naomi  "  came  to  herself,"  and  remembers  now  that  there  is  bread
enonerh  and  to  spare  in  the  Father's  house.

We  have  here —

1.  The  result  of  a  mind's  transition.  "  She  arose,"  a  decided,  and,  in  this
case,  a  decisive  step.  The  expression  similar  to  that  used  in  Luke  xv.  In  all
probability  there  would  be  several  preliminary  stages  :  first,  the  longing  for  home,
then  the  resolve,  then  the  act.  Note,  (a)  rdglit  purposes  are  good  so  far  as  they  go  ;
to  he  profitahle  tliey  7nust  he  followed  hy  p?vmj)t  and  decisive  action.  This  is  espe-
cially true  in  the  critical  moments  of  huinanlife.  Note,  (h)  It  is  time  to  leave
the  place  of  our  ahode  when  the  godly  are  taken  away,  and  none  left  but  the  wicked  to
converse  ivith  [Bernard).

The  awakening,  no  doubt,  was  painful ;  but  mark,  it  is  the  beginning  of  a  new
32


CHAP.  I.  6.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JlVTH.


life.  Niiomi's  experience  a  very  common  one, — through  sorrow  to  repentance,
through  bitterness  to  decision.  Note,  (c)  Adceraitt/  sarcs  inultitmles  whom prosperittj
u-ould  possibly  have  destroi/cd.  The  world  becomes  distasteful,  the  pleasures  of
Moab  delight  us  no  longer,  rather  they  weary  us.  Then  comes  the  old  longing
for  home.  Many  a  prodigal,  many  a  backslider,  has  been  brought  to  himself  again
in  this  way.  Note,  [d)  Such  awakenings  are  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  thouyh
hroiKjht  about  by  natural  causes.  Possibly  she  had  heard  the  Divine  voice  saying,
*' Arise  ye,  depart,"  etc.  (Micah  ii.  10,  Isa.  Hi.  11)  in  a  still  more  unmistakable
manner.  A  simple  word  aroused  Jacob,  and  sent  him  back  to  Bethel  (Gen.  xxxv.
1).  The  best  men  need  such  at  times.  (See  next  outline.)
We  have  here —

II.  The  influence  of  a  right  and  wise  decision,  not  only  upon  her  own
course  of  action,  but  upon  "  her  daughters-in-law."  If  Elimelech's  going  to  Moab
had  been  the  fatal  thing  in  connection  with  his  sons,  Naomi's  return  is  to  be  a
blessing  to  one  of  the  wives  at  least.  This  influence  argues  much  in  favour  of
Naomi's  piety  (cf.  ver.  16)  and  her  sweetness  and  beauty  of  character.  Note.  The
truly  virtuous  are  of  an  attractive  power  [Bernard).  Goodness,  even  among  in-
fidels, will  make  itself  friends.  Orpah  and  Kuth  ready  to  forsake  their  kindred,
their  country,  and  even  their  own  mother,  for  a  stranger  whose  affinity  died  with
her  sons  [Bishop  Hall).

We  have  here —

III.  The  reason  of  this  immediate  and  decisive  step.  She  had  heard  that
the  Lord  had  visited,  etc.  Note  (a)  that  God's  mercy  is  here  as  elsewhere  the  key-
note of  man's  return.  The  pious  Hebrew  saw  God  in  all  things  {Co.v).  Second
causes  had  not  as  yet  hidden  the  Almighty.    A  lesson  for  to-day ;  (1)  in  temporal

afi'airs.

"  Happy  the  man  who  sees  a  God  employed
In  all  the  good  and  ill  that  chequers  fife." — Cowpcr.

(2)  in  spiritual  matters.  In  the  larger  sphere  of  human  history,  the  fact  that  God
has  visited  His  people  (Luke  i.  68)  is  the  great  reason  for  man's  return  unto  Him.
More  than  this,  {b)  We  never  shall  return  unto  Him  until  we  have  seen  the  hand  of
God  in  human  affairs.  Naomi's  faith  quickened  her  footsteps  homeward,  a  faith
which  came  by  hearing  :  "  She  had  heard.''  She  believed,  and  a  simple  trust  in  God
solved  all  her  difiiculties.  Hence  "  she  arose.''  The  reasons  for  her  remaining  in
Moab  had  ceased,  if  they  ever  existed.  Now  it  was  dangerous  to  remain.  See
the  hand  of  God  in  all  this  leading  her  (Isa.  Ivii.  18).  Recognize  it  even  in  the
rumour,  etc.  Trifles  in  the  moment  of  indecision  may  be  angel-hands,  guiding
us  homeward  and  Godward,  Note  (c)  Not  all  that  is  in  Moab  can  keep  the  godly
there,  when  God  calls  tJiem  away  (2  Cor.  vi.  17,  18).

Bernard  on  "  How  that  the  Lord  had  visited  His  people  "  : —

I.  That  God  seeth  His  people  in  adversity  and  want,  and  cometh  in  His
due  time  to  help  them.     We  are  not  to  think  ourselves  forgotten  in
great  extremities  (Exod.  iii.  7,  8),  but  rest  in  the  stability  of  His  love
and  promises.
II.  That  God  hath  ever  had  more  specially  a  people  for  His  own,  called  His
people,  called  the  sons  of  God  (Gen.  vi.).     Not  chosen  out  of  any
merit  in  them,  but  of  His  mere  love  (Deut.  vii.  8;  Eph.  i.  4).
III.   That  corporal  food  and  the  necessaries  of  this  life  are  God's  gift.    (Deut.
xi.  14,  15  ;  Hosea  ii.  8,  9  ;  Joel  ii.  19).    He  makes  the  earth  fruitful.
Man  without  Him  can  do  nothing  (Ps.  cxxvii.  2 ;   Hag.  i.  6  ;  Deut.
viii.  18).
Fuller  on  this —

By  bread  is  meant  all  sustenance  necessary  for  the  maintaining  of  our  lives,
"whereof  bread  is  the  chiefest.  As  the  temple  of  Dagou  principally  leaned  on  two
pillars,  and  fell  to  >b/)  ground  when  Samson  took  them  away,  so  the  buildings  of
our  bodies  chiefly  rely  on  bread  and  water  for  outward  sustenance,  which  being


n03IILEfIC  COMMEKTART:  ttXlTli,


CHAP.  I.


taken  away,  they  cannot  hnt  presently  decay.  Let  others,  therefore,  wish  those
dishes  which  curiosity  hath  invented  rather  to  increase  than  s  itisfy  hun>^rer,  which
are  more  delightsome  to  the  eye  than  pleasing  to  the  palate,  yet  more  pleasing  to
the  palate  than  wholesome  to  the  stomach  •  let  us  pray,  "  Give  us  this  day  our
daily  hread."

Bread  is  a  dish  in  every  course  :  without  this  can  be  no  feast,  with  this  can  be
no  famine.


"  In  all  the  ways  of  earthly  feci  in  a;  which
man  can  take  in  order  to  seek  his  hapf)incss,
he  must  sooner  or  later  fall  into  a  death- like
absence  of  joy;  it  becoming  clear  to  him
that  he  has  fallen  into  a  grievous  delusion,"
— Lange.

"  There  had  been  a  famine  in  .Tudah,  but
ah  1  she  found  a  far  worse  famine  in  Moab.
....  Her  poverty  when  she  arrived  ba<"k
again  seems  to  argue  other  troubles  besides
bereavement Far  better  was  this  begin-
ning of  a  return  with  conscious  emptiness  to
God  than  her  former  going  out  'full.' " — Tijng.

"  We  know  not  precisely  how  the  change

was    effected Perhaps    the    Divine

Spirit  wrought  by  the  power  of  memory,
thawed  the  ice  away  from  the  frosted  spirit
by  sunny  pictures  of  the  past — by  the  vision
of  the  ancestral  home." — The  Prodigal  Son,
Morlcy  Punshon.

"Whilst  her  husband  and  her  sons  lived,  I
hear  no  motion  of  retiring  home;  now  these
earthly  stays  are  removed,  she  thinks  pre-
sently of  removing  to  her  country.  Neither
can  we  so  heartily  think  of  our  home  above,
while  we  are  furnished  with  these  worldly
contentments;  when  God  strips  us  of  them,
straightway  our  mind,  is  homeward." —
Bishop  Hall.

"  How  often  is  it  that  in  this  way  the
darkest  day  is  the  beginning  of  the  brightest
life.  Reverses,  difficulties,  trials,  are  often
amongst  God's  best  blessings.  From  the  loss
of  property  is  brought  out  very  often  the
latent  energies  of  character,  a  power  to  suffer
and  to  act  which,  in  the  querulous  being,
without  a  wish  ungratified.  you  would  have
scarcely  said  existed  at  all." — Robertson.

"  To  Naomi  there  comes  the  voire,  '  Arise,
this  is  not  your  rest,  it  is  polluted.'  Like
the  prodigal,  for  the  first  time  she  felt  in  her
heart,  if  she  did  not  give  utteran'^e  with  her
Ups,  *  I  will  arise  and  go  to  l>ethlehem,  the
house  of  bread,  my  Father's  house.'  " — 3r.
Cumming.

'*  It  has  been  well  and  beautifully  said  that
woman  has  no  life  but  in  her  family.  While
her  husband  and  sons  lived,  their  home  was
hers — there  was  the  scene  of  her  duties,  there
of  her  affections  ;  but  now  those  ties  were
broken,  she  was  called  on  to  act  for  herself  ;


and  with  energy  and  with  dignity  she  did
act.  Israel  was  her  proper  hop^e ;  and  now
it  was  seen,  perhaps  for  the  first  time,  that
her  heart  was  there." — Maaai'tney.

**  All  are  not  taken  ;  there  are  left  behind
Living  beloveds,  tender  looks  to  bring
And  make  the  daylight  still  a  happy  thing,
And  tender  voices  to  make  soft  the  wind :
But  if  it  were  not  so — if  I  could  find
No  love  in  all  the  world  for  comforting,
Nor  any  path  but  hollowly  did  ring
Where  '  dust  to  dust '  the  love  from  life

disjoined,
And  if,  l)cfore  those  sepulchres  unmoving,
I  stood  alone  (as  some  forsaken  lamb
Goes    bleating    up    the    moors   in   weary

dearth).
Crying,  '  NViiere  are  ye,  O  my  loved  and

loving  / ' —
I  know  a  voice  would  sound,  '  Daughter,  I

AM  ;
Can   I   suffice  for   heaven,  and  not  for

earth  ? '  "  Mrs.  Brorvning.

"  When  Naomi,  the  aged  widow,  proposed
to  return  to  Helhlehem,  the  two  young  widows
were  so  charmed  with  her  faith,  so  struck
with  her  meek  submission  beneath  a  load
that  would  have  crushed  the  strongest  giant
in  the  land  of  Moab,  so  convinced  that  this
aged  widow  had  some  spring  of  consolation
that  the  world  had  not,  some  sweet  source  of
peace  that  they  knew  not  of,  that  both  the
young  widows,  under  impulsive  attachment
to  a  beautiful  character,  resolved  at  all
hazards  to  go  with  her." — Dr.  Cumming.

"  I  suppose  when  any  messenger  .arrived  in
Moab  out  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  Naomi  did
presently  repair  unto  him  and  load  him  with
questions  concerning  the  estate  of  her  country.
For  nine  years  Naomi  had  no  news,  but  of
want  and  scarcity  ;  yet  the  tenth  year  there
came  a  man  who  brought  her  word  that  the
valleys  began  to  laugh  and  sing  with  plenty."
—Fuller.  '

"  Let  none  therefore  pretend  in  needless
excuses  to  linger  in  the  land  of  Egypt  when
they  may  return  unto  the  honey-flowing  land
of  Canaan.  Joseph  must  not  tarry,  with  his
wife  and  son,  when  he  is  dead  that  sought
the  life  of  the  child." — Fuller.


84


VERSE  7.
TJiane. — The  Homewabd  Pilgrimaob,

•*  What  though  the  radiance  which  was  once  so  bright
Be  now  for  ever  taken  from  my  sij^ht.


THAP.  I.  7.  nOMTLETTC  COMMENT.iHY:  HUTU.


Thoup^h  nothing  can  bring  back  the  hour

Of  splendour  in  the  grass,  of  glory  in  the  flower ;

We  will  grieve  not,  rather  find

Strength  in  what  remains  behind

In  the  primal  sympathy

Which  having  been  ever  must  be,

In  the  soothing  thoughts  that  spring

Out  of  human  suffering,

In  the  faith  that  looks  through  death,
In  years  that  bring  the  philosophic  mxwA.'"  —  Wordsworth,

Wherefore  she  went  forth  out  of  the  place.

The  Te»i  commencement  of  the  narrative  as  it  concerns  the  true  history  of  Buth,
AU  else  preparatory,  explanatory,  introductory.  A  fresh  starting-point  in  the  his-
tory of  Naomi.  Poor,  solitary,  and  almost  broken-hearted, — yet  this  is  the  most
promising  hour  of  her  life.  Her  prosperity  dates  from  it,  begins  to  dawn  when
the  night  of  affliction  seems  darkest.  Divine  wisdom  has  put  a  boundary  to  this
deep  sea  of  affliction,  and  said,  "  Here  thy  proud  waves  shall  be  stayed."  Christ
suffered  Peter  to  sink,  not  to  perish — Jonah  to  be  overwhelmed,  not  destroyed —
sent  Titus  lest  Paul  should  be  swallowed  up  of  sorrow  (2  Cor.  vii.  6).  Note.
h^o  state  so  bad,  i\o  circumstance  so  desperate,  as  to  be  considered  altogether  hopeless.
With  God's  children  the  smoking  furnace  of  temptation  usually  precedes  the
smiling  lamp  of  gospel  consolation. — Macfjoican.

Ip  connection  with  this  return,  notice —

I.  The  thought  and  purpose.  The  home  ties  which  bound  Naomi  to  Moab
exist  no  longer.  Her  husband  dead  ;  like  Israel,  happy  only  as  she  realizes  that
her  Maker  is  her  husband  (Isa.  liv.  5),  all  things  are  ready,  and  now  her  face
is  set  towards  Bethlehem.  Returns  like  these  the  human  response  to  the  Divine
api)eal,  "  I  am  married  unto  you"  (Jer.  iii.  14).  When  they  spring  up  in  the  heart
of  the  true  Israelite,  where  else  can  they  lead  but  to  the  land  of  the  sanctuary
and  the  promises  ?  Necessary  then  and  always  that  men  should  renew  their
spiritual  youth — trace  back  the  path  until  they  have  assurance  that  they  are
standing  on  holy  ground.  Jacob  responded  to  a  similar  appeal,  and  went  back
to  Bethel,  the  place  of  the  covenant  (Gen.  xxx.).  Note,  (a)  Homeward  with  such
often,  perhaps  alicays,  means  Godward.  Life  seems  to  move  in  a  circle  sometimes,
departing  only  to  come  back  again ;  wandering  afar  to  return  at  length,  finding
itself  at  last  at  tbe  point  from  whence  it  started.  Christian  experience  knows
something  of  this.  With  many,  as  years  advance,  there  is  a  return  to  the  old  land-
marks, to  the  simplicity  of  old  experiences,  to  the  faith  and  theology  learnt  around
a  mother's  knee.  You  may  picture  many  an  experience  in  this  way — an  oasis  of
childhood  and  an  oasis  of  old  age,  and  between  them  the  barren  waste,  scorched
of  passion,  and  laid  desolate  of  sin,  which  men  call  life.  With  Naomi,  and  with
all,  the  past  irreparable,  but  the  future  availing.  Note  [b)  in  connection  with  this
return,  the  Divine  intention  must  have  embraced  two  tilings — (1)  The  renewal  of
a  past  consecratio7i  ;  (2)   The  revival  of  a  past  spiritual  life.

Notice,  II.  The  significant  fact.  Men  may  rise  from  this  lowness  and  dead-
ness,  to  this  earnestness  and  newness  of  life,  in  a  moment  and  with  a  word.
Samson  is  caught  in  tbe  Delilah  spell,  and  bound  with  the  Philistine  bonds,  but
something  of  the  old  strength  lingers  (Judges  xvi.  8 — 15).  Note,  (a)  A  plain  dis-
tinclion  between  the  true  Israelite  and  those  ivhn  /mow  -not  God — enough  for  hope,
not  enough  for  presumption.  The  child  carries  the  home  instincts  wherever  the
path  may  lead;  the  alien  has  never  known  them,  though  he  lives  in  the  Father's
house.  Naomi  an  illustration  of  this.  Life  without  God,  a  desert  to  which
the  sweet  rains  of  heaven  bring  no  feiti  ity.  But  life  with  this  thought  of  God
in  the  heart,  hidden,  slumbering,  like  the  parched  and  thirsty  earth,  which  may
revive  again  in  the  time  of  the  latter  rain.  Naomi's  past  history  in  Moab  may
have  been  a  dead  and  barren  one.  In  no  single  point  had  her  condition  been
improved  by  the  change.     Her  experience  the  type  of  a  very  common  Christian

85


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  RVTH,


CHAP.  I.  T.


experience.  The  freshness  of  first  love— gone.  The  glow  of  zoal  and  the  ardour
of  devotion — a  thing  of  the  past.  The  joy  of  believing — well-nigh  forgotten.
Now  loTe  has  torments,  and  faith  is  full  of  fears,  and  devotion  is  a  burden.
Note,  {b)  For  such  there  is  a  return:  (1)  it  may  be  now;  (2)  it  maij  he  accepted;
(3)  it  771  ay  be  final  and  for  ever.  We  are  to  think  of  it  as  necessary — as  not
impossible — as  not  too  late.

"  In  December,  the  days  grow  shorter  till
the  twenty-first,  the  shortest  day,  when,  at  a
precise  moment,  the  sun  pauses  and  begins  to

return  towards  the  north So  there  is

a  precise  moment  when  the  soul  pauses  in  its
departure  from  God,  and  begins  to  return
towards  Him.  The  fruits  of  that  return  may
not  be  at  once  visible ;  there  may  be  long
interior  conflicts  before  the  coldness  and
deadness  of  the  heart  is  overcome  ;  but  at
length  the  good  will  triumph,  and  instead
of  winter  and  desolation,  all  the  Chiistian
graces  will  spring  up  in  the  summer  of  divine
love." — Bcecher.


**  With  fettered  steps  we  left  our  pleasant

land.
Envying  our  fathers  in  their  peaceful  grave.
The  strangers'  bread  with  bitter  tears  we

steep  ;
And  when  our  weary  eyes  should  sink  to

sleep,
*Neath  the  murk  midnight  we  steal  forth

to  weep

The  born  in  sorrow  shall  bring  forth  in

joy;

Thy  mercy.  Lord,  shall  lead  Thy  children

home,
And  Canaan's  vines  for  us  their  fruits  shall

bear,
And  Hermon's  bees  their  honeyed  stores

prepare."  Milman,

«  Like  Bunyan's  pilgrim  when  he  had  slept


in  the  bowers  of  ease,  there  is  to  be  thai
humiliating  journey,  which  is  not  forward,
but  ba  -kward.  until  the  lost  treasure  hag  been
recovered."  —B.

"  The  Bethlehem  of  the  past  may  become
the  Bethlehem  of  the  future,  once  again  '  a
house  of  bread  '  to  God's  chosen  people,  if
they  will  only  turn  their  faces  thitherward.
It  may  seem  a  pilgrimage  of  penitence  and
sorrow — the  path  slopes  backward  and  down-
wartl — but  new  consecration  is  new  life,  and
this  is  the  repentance  which  needs  not  to  be
repented  of." — B.

"  As  in  music  there  are  particular  key-
notes, so  also  in  the  whole  wide  life  of  the
world  and  of  man.  Life  has  a  deep  key-
note which  answers  to  the  note  of  life  in  its
bloom.  It  is  called  return — return  to  God —
return  home — and  it  is  accompanied  with  a
longing  after  home." — Lange.

"  iShe  arose  to  return,  not  to  another  idola-
trous land,  but  '  home.'  " — Tyng.

"  Memory  is  busy,  and  upon  her  painted
frncy  she   pictures  the  home-scenes  of  the

happy  past Anxiety  is  busy,  and  she

projects  her  wonder  into  the  nearing  future,
and  speculates  upon  the  probabilities  of  her
reception." — Pun-shon.

"  There  is  not  a  trouble  so  deep  and  swift-
running  that  we  may  not  cross  safely  over,
if  we  have  courage  to  steer,  and  strength  to
pull." — Beecher,


YERSES    8—10.

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NoTES. —  Ver.  8,  10.  And  Naomi  said  [Then  said  Naomi]  unto.
The  first  recorded  utterance  of  Naomi.  Cox  imagines  them  having  reached  the  ford  of  the
Arnon  [N.  boundary  of  Moab],  or  perhaps  the  fords  of  the  Jordan  [E.  boundary  of  JudahJ.
Go,  return  each.  Shews  that  they  were  not  natural  sisters  {Bernard).  To  her  mother's  house.
The  mention  of  the  mother's  house,  which  the  separation  of  the  women's  house  or  tent  from
that  of  the  men  facilitates,  is  natural  ....  has  more  tenderness  ....  does  not  imply  the  death
of  their  fathers  (Speakers  Com.).  Ruth's  father  was  still  alive  (ii.  11)  (cf.  Lev.  xxii.  13).
The  Lord  deal  kindly  with  you.  Lit.  Jehovah  do  kindness  with  you.  In  ddw  the  suffix
is  masc.,  although  referring  to  women,  a  colloquial  inaccuracy  found  in  conversations  {Lange).
With  the  dead.  The  Papists  expound  it,  that  these  women  did  fast  and  pray  for  the  souls  of
their  deceased  husbands  {Fuller).  The  sense  is  in  all  probability,  "You  have  been  kind  to
your  husbands,  who  now  are  dead,  whilst  they  were  living."  Fuller  thinks,  however,  that
more  may  be  implied.  The  Lord  [Jehovah]  grant  you.  The  pronouns  in  these  verses  are
surprisingly  corrupt  in  the  Hebrew  {Kennieott).  Oiigi'nally  colloquial  inaccuracies  {Gesen.).
[See  Intro,  par.  2.]  So  with  the  verbs.  When  courage,  virility,  fortitude,  efficiency,  or  the
like,  is  intended  to  be  predicated  of  females,  these  verbs  are  put  in  the  masculine  gender
{Prof,  Lee).  All  but  two  of  these  inaccuracies  are  actually  found  in  conversations  {Lange).
Ye  may  find  rest  [a  resting-place]  each  in  the  house  of  her  husband.  She  wished  them
happier  mariiages  than  they  had  with  ber  sons,  who  were  so  soon  taken  from  them  {Josephns).
In  the  East  of  antiquity,  the  position  of  an  unmarried  woman  a  very  unhappy  and  perilous
one  {Cox).  The  Hebrews  spoke  of  the  husband's  house  as  a  woman's  "menuchah,"  or  "rest,"
— her  secure  and  happy  asylum  from  servitude,  neglect,  license  {Cox,  Lange).  On  the  con-
gti'uction  see  Gesen.  UJO.  Then  she  Ijissed  them.  To  take  leave  of  them  (A'<?iZ).  So  Gen,
86


CHAP.  I   8.  ITOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.


xxxi.  28,  55  ;  2  Rnm.  xix.  31)  ;  Acts  xx.  37.  Gave  them  her  parting  kiss,  as  the  Jews  call  it
{Gill).  A  rejection  of  every  form  of  hoiiiaf;(i  procei'ds  from  superstition  rather  than  from
Scripture  usage  {Mncgowan).  And  they  said,  "  Surely."  '3  before  a  direct  statement  serves
to  strenirthen  it.  and  it  la  almost  e(]uiva]cnt  to  a  positive  assurance  (Keil,  Widrjht),  Not  true
in  all  cases  {Latiga).  Dr.  Cassel  trans,  "for,"  but  first  supplies,  "  We  will  not  turn  back."
Best  taken  like  on  in  the  New  Testament  before  words  directly  quoted  {Lanfje).  Not  so,
but  to  be  trnnslated  as  '•  c(M'fainly  "  (  WrUjJif)  ;  "  nay  "  ( Grddrs,  Cox) ;  in  an  adversative  sense
as  "  but ''  {Rosen.).     We  will  return.     To  be  proselyted  (  Targum).

VERSE  8.

TJieme. — The  First  Trial  of  Affection.

"  O  friendship  1  of  all  things  the
Most  rare,  and  thei'cfore  most  rare  because  most
Excellent ;  whose  comforts  in  misery
Are  always  sweet,  and  whose  counsels  in
Prosperity  are  ever  fortunate." — Lilly,

And  Naomi  said,  ....  Go,  return  each  to  her  mother^s  house.

The  farewell  greetings  of  friends,  the  words  spoken  in  parting — everything
connected  with  such  moments — will  tend  to  draw  out  our  truer  and  deeper  cha-
racteristics, as  well  as  our  tenderest  and  holiest  feelings.  Having  travelled  some
distance,  Naomi  s  unselfish  nature  manifests  itself  (Braden).  Silence  has  com-
mended her  virtues  so  far.  It  would  seem  she  had  not  urged  Orpah  and  Ruth
to  go  with  her  even  to  this  distance.  We  are  not  to  see  her,  however,  in  what
follows,  as  careless  of  their  best  interest.  They  are  to  go  ivllUngly  and  knowing
what  lies  before  them,  if  they  are  to  go  wisely.  The  Targum  puts  this  in  a  very
striking  manner  [cf.  Crit.  Note  on  ver.  16].  Of  course  their  presence  would  have
been  a  comfort  to  Naomi.  But  note.  A  true  lover  is  loath  to  disadvantage  friends
for  the  sake  of  private  interests  [Bernard).

We  have  here —

I.  The  care  and  thoughtfulness  of  a  generous  spirit  for  the  outward  estate
of  others.  She  knew  they  had  friends  in  Moab,  none  in  Judah.  Even  a  friend-
ship like  hers  could  scarcely  supply  the  place  of  a  mother's  love.  Go,  return  each
to  her  mother's  house.  To  go  forward  with  her  might  be  for  the  saving  of  their
souls.  Might  there  not  also  be  something  of  selfishness  in  this  ?  Note.  Our  efforts
for  the  good  of  others  need  to  he  watched  very  narrowly  when  they  coincide  with  our
own  interests.  Selfishness  the  most  subtle  and  insidious  of  all  sins.  Judas  aa
instance  of  one  who  under  a  y)lausible  pretext  cloaked  the  most  mercenary
motives  (John  xii.  6).  If  Naomi  errs  at  all,  she  errs  on  that  side  which  demands
a  sacrifice  of  her  convenience  and  feelings.  Her  sense  of  justice  and  love  towards
these  young  warm-hearted  women  will  not  allow  her  to  reap  any  advantage  at
their  cost  (Braden).  She  would  not  have  them  come  to  Bethlehem  merely  on  her
account.  Notice,  (a)  Self-love  contrary  to  Christ's  commands;  against  the  true
fellowship  of  Chri^tians  one  with  another  ;  contrary  to  the  end  of  our  calling
(1  Cor.  X.  24  ;  2  Cor.  xii.  14  ;  Eph.  iv.  28).  (b)  A  sin  as  between  man  and  man.
Contrary  to  that  care  which  God  commands  for  the  preservation  of  other  men's
estates  (Deut.  xxii.  2 — 4  ;  Exod.  xxiii.  4,  5).  (c)  A  sin  as  between  man  and  God.
Self-love  is  idolatry.  Note.  True  religion  will  shew  its  influence  in  every  part  of
ou!-  conduct ;  like  the  sap  of  a  living  tree,  which  penetrates  the  most  distant
boughs.

II.  A  fair  test  and  trial  of  the  fervour  and  sincerity  of  those  who  have
already  been  influenced  towards  good  things.  TJie  deepest  religious  interests
were  involved.  A  choice  like  this  not  to  be  made  lightly  and  from  mere  personal
motives  as  towards  ourselves.  Our  social  infiaeuce  may  be  consecrated,  but
questions  like  these  are  to  be  decided  on  a  higher  ground.

Naomi  would  try  (a)  the  strength  of  their  athctiou  to  herself.  Bather  she
would  see  (b)  whether  nature  wrought  more  powerfully  than  grace  [Bniiard).

87


BOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.


CHAP.  I.  8.


So  Christ  tried  those  who  followed  Him  (Luke  ix.  57,  58).  The  young  ruler
(Mark  x.  17 — 22).  Note.  With  those  ivlio  have  been  Jed  toicards  holy  tlilmjs
by  the  force  of  a  noble  and  consecrated  life,  a  similar  time  of  testing  is  sure  to  come.
The  Saviour  puts  it  in  one  strong  and  expressive  phrase  (Luke  xiv.  26).  The
hour  arrives  when  every  secondary  consideration,  every  subordinate  motive,  is
counted  as  nothing  in  the  balances.  The  momentous  question  stands  on  its  own
merits,  and  asks  of  us  a  dehberate  choice.  Notice  that  the  same  issues  were
involved  here  as  upon  Carmel  (1  Kings  xviii,  21).


"  It  is  no  sign  of  friendship  to  draw  others
into  any  calamity  for  our  comfort's  sake,  how-
ever much  they  may  press  it.  Bear  the  bur-
den bravely  alone,  if  it  be  possible,  and  do
not  crush  another  heart,  though  it  plead  with
generous  sympathy  to  share  the  load." —
Rraden.

*'  Naomi  could  not  be  so  insensible  of  her
own  good  as  not  to  know  how  much  comfort
she  might  reap  to  the  solitariness  both  of  her
voyage  and  her  widowhood  by  the  society  of
these  two  younger  widows,  whose  affection
she  had  so  well  tried  ;  even  every  partiiershij)
is  a  mitigation  of  evils  ;  yet  so  earnestly  doth
she  dissuade  them  from  accompanying  her,
as  that  she  could  not  have  said  more,  if  she
had  thought  their  presence  irksome  and  bur-
densome. Good  dispositions  love  not  to
pleasure  themselves  with  the  disadvantage  of
others ;  and  had  rather  be  miserable  alone,
than  to  draw  in  partnei'S  to  their  sorrow ;
for  the  sight  of  another's  calamity  doth  rather
double  their  own  ;  and  if  themselves  were
free,  would  affect  them  with  compassion.
As  contrarily,  ill  minds  care  not  how  many
companions  they  have  in  misery,  nor  how
few  consorts  in  good ;  if  themselves  miscarry,
they  would  be  content  all  the  world  were  en-
wrapped with  them  in  the  same  distress." —
JJishop  Hall.

"  A  sound-hearted  friend  will  follow  the
apostle's  advice,  not  seeking  his  own,  but  his
friend'i  welfare.     True  love  will  not  make


worse,    where    it    cannot    make    better."—

Rernnrd.

•'  Many  give  counsel  like  lawyers  for  their
fees,  but  few  like  Naomi  for  their  conscience.
8hc  loves  their  (,'ompany  well,  but  counsels
their  safety  better." — T<ij)iicll.

"  It  is  harder  for  me  than  for  you  that  we
must  part.  But  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  gone
out  against  me.  I  have  no  hope  for  the
future.  I  must  walk  my  darkened  path
alone.  But  you,  you  may  still  find  an  asylum
with  the  people  of  your  own  race.  Go  then
and  return  each  to  her  mother's  house." —
Ci)x.

"  I\Iaternal  love  knows  best  how  to  comfort
a  daughter  in  a(hiction." — Kelt.

"  >lerc  we  see  widows,  if  poor,  are  to  be
maintained  by  their  pai'ents.  These  widows
(1  Tim.  V.  16)  were  not  to  be  burdensome  to
the  Church,  but  to  be  relieved  by  their  own
Umheiir—Fidkr.

"  If  religion  does  not  make  us  lovely  and
amiable  in  our  family  relations,  it  does  no-
thing for  us,  but  deceives  us  to  our  ruin."—  /
Slnicon.

"  Ittai  the  Gittite,  when  following  David
in  his  flight  from  Absalom,  was  urged  to
leave  him.  as  Elisha  also  was  repeatedly  by
Elijah,  pi'cvious  to  his  assumption  to  heaven.
There  was  no  positive  duty  lying  upon  them,
or,  at  all  events,  none  which  David  and
Elijah  were  not  at  liberty  to  dispense  with."
— Siineon.


VERSES  8,  9.
Tlieme. — A  Benediction  and  a  Valediction.

"  Wouldst  thou  from  sorrow  find  a  sweet  relief  ?
Or  is  thy  heart  oppressed  with  woes  untold  ?
Balm  wouldst  thou  gather  for  corroding  grief  ?
Pour  ble^jsings  round  thee  like  a  shower  of  gold." — Charlos  Wilcox.

The  Lord  deal  kindly  with  you,  as  ye  have  dealt,  etc.
The  Lord  grant  you  that  ye  may  find  rest,  etc.

A  scene  now  begins  of  unequnlled  tenderness  and  amiableness  [Lange),  The
inspired  words,  "  She  opcneth  her  mouth  with  wisdom,  and  in  her  tongue  is  the
law  of  kindness"  (Prov.  xxxi.  26)  truly  verified  in  Naomi.  The  speech  seasoned
with  salt  (Col.  iv.  6),  her  words  breathe  all  the  fervour  of  piety  and  the  warmth  of
a  self-denying  love.  We  fmd  in  them  (a)  a  generous  recognition  of  the  worth  of
these  two  young  women,  and  {b)  an  affectionate  rogird  for  their  future  welfare. |
This  generous,  unselfish  spirit,  one  of  tho  secrets  of  Naomi's  influence.  Note.
If  we  had  more  like  Naomi  ir^  cne  Church,  we  yniyht  expect  to  win  more  like  iiuth
88


CHAP.  I.  9.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH,


from  the  world.  See  how  takingly  love  behaves  itself  in  every  condition,  on  every
occasion,  to  every  person,  and  about  everything  (Pennington).  It  sees  God  in
all  things,  and  all  things  in  God.

The  text  contains,  I.  A  prayer.  Like  David,  her  eyes  are  unto  the  Lord
(Ps.  XXV.  15).  Slie  could  not  part  without  praying  with  and  for  them  (Macgowan),
Poor  and  destitute,  she  had  no  other  means  of  requiting  their  kindness  (Fuller),
No  other  was  necessary.  A  prayer  like  this  better  than  all  gifts.  Goes  up  in  a
shower  of  tears,  but  descends  in  a  shower  of  blessings — returns  laden  with
comfort,  like  the  southern  winds  in  Egypt,  whose  wings  are  charged  with  the
sweet  odours  of  spices  (Penn).

Notice.  Naomi  prayed  with  equal  earnestness  for  both.  Did  not  know  which
the  Lord  had  chosen  (Marffon-an).

She  asks  for  them  (a)  The  favour  of  God  ;  His  kindness,  smile,  benediction —
all  the  Hebrews  w^ould  include  under  their  beautiful  phrase,  "  The  light  of  His
countenance  (Numb.  vi.  26  ;  Ps.  iv.  6,  xl.  3,  Ixxxix.  15)  ;  (/')  The  comforts  and
blessings  which  with  God's  approval  would  flow  from  a  second  marriage.  Only
in  the  house  of  a  husband  could  a  woman  be  sure  of  respect  and  protection  (Cox),
(See  Grit,  and  Ex.  Notes.)  The  prayer  agrees  with  the  apostle's  direction
(1  Tim.  V.  14),  which  applies  to  young  widows  like  Orpah  and  Ruth,  (c)  And
these  in  the  measure  they  had  meted  to  the  dead  (cf.  Matt.  vii.  2 ;  Col.  iii.  23,
24)  and  to  her.

Notice.  (1)  Duties  honourably  fulfilled  in  the  past  come  in  to  bring  a  blessing
upon  us  in  the  present.  Who  would  not  wish  for  a  similar  commendation  to  this
of  the  text  ?  especially  with  regard  to  our  treatment  of  the  dead.  They  had
given  good  measure,  pressed  down,  running  over ;  now  it  is  returned  to  them.
When  mothers-in-law  will  thus  freely  testify  of  their  sons'  wives,  it  is  evident  that
duty  has  been  nobly  fulfilled  ;  for  they  usually  set  up  a  high  standard  (Braden),
An  instinctive  conviction  in  every  heart  that  God  will  reward  us  according  to  our
treatment  of  ethers  (Judges  i.  6;  Rom.  ii.  15;  cf.  also  Exod.  xxi.  23 — 25;
1  Sam.  XV.  33 ;  James  ii.  13).

(2)  That  dutiful  conduct  has  few  sweeter  rewards  in  this  world  than  its  acknow-
ledgment. Even  aliens  to  the  hope  of  Israel  have  experienced  this.  Ruth  does
not  appear  to  have  exceeded  Orpah  in  affection  for  those  who  were  gone.  The
commendation  shared  equally  by  both.  Shews,  on  the  other  hand,  that  moral
and  social  virtues,  and  the  faultless  discharge  of  the  duties  of  this  life,  offer  no
suitable  ground  for  the  hope  of  salvation.  How  many  wives,  as  tender  and
sympathetic  as  Orpah,  have  gone  back  a^^ain,  and  been  unfaithful  to  the  little  light
which  has  shone  upon  them  from  God  !  Yet,  even  with  these,  no  act  of  kindness,
no  self-sacrifice,  no  silent  deed  of  love,  is  unknown  to  Him.

(3)  Tliat  jjvayer  for  us  gains  warmth  and  power  by  what  men  see  in  us.  Every
wish  is  a  prayer  wdth  God  (Mrs.  Browning).  The  warmest  wishes  will  in  the
main  follow  the  most  worthy.  Live  well !  and  the  prayers  of  the  good  will  gain
in  faith  and  confidence.     So  Paul  evidently  regarded  Timothy  (2  Tim.  i.  3 — 6).

The  text  contains,  II.  A  valediction.  Her  m<ttherly  benediction  was  the  best
valediction  (Trapp).  She  blesses  them  not  in  the  name  of  Chemosh,  but  in  the
name  of  Jehovah  (Lawion).  Gold  and  silver  she  had  not  for  them,  but  that
which  was  better,  heartiest  orisons  and  w^ell-wishes  (Trapp).  A  heart  impelled  by
love  and  self-devotion  does  much  to  invest  the  scene  with  its  sacred  charm.  No
priest  like  Melchisedec,  yet  Naomi  blesses  them  as  the  patriarch  blessed  Abraham
— as  Simeon  blessed  the  iniunt  Christ  and  His  mother  (Luke  ii.  34),  with  like
faith,  and  a  like  trust  in  God  (ib.  28) — as  Elizah^.th  blessed  Mary  (ib.  i.  42 — 45).

Note.  Love  amid  its  own  sorrows  will  still  tJiink  of  the  welfare  of  others.  Has  a
word  of  comfort  and  kind  wishes  in  what  is  intended  to  be  the  hour  of  separation.
We  get  a  glimpse  here  (1)  Tnto  a  family  life  tliat  may  serve  as  a  model  fn  all
(Lange).  What  a  picture  of  peace  and  happiness  does  it  suggest  1  The  women
have  not  only  heard  the  re'igion  of  Jehovah  confessed  in   Moab,  but  they  have

89


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  RUTH.  chap.  i.  9.


peen  the  expression  of  it  in  the  life  (Laiu/e).  Never  more  so  than  now.  (2)  Into
the  ivay  in  which  the  fjodly  nsrd  and  made  memorable  the  separations  which  come
in  life  (of.  Gen.  xxviii.  1 — 3,  xxxi.  55,  xliii.  14).  So  Paul  commended  the
elders  of  Epliesus  to  God  (Acts  xx.  32).  So  Jonathan  separated  from  David
(1  Sam.  XX.  42).  Men  do  it  now,  hut  not  with  that  reverence  and  earnest  desire
meet  and  befitting  in  such  a  case  (Bernard).
Bernard  on  this —

I.  That  it  is  a  duty  to  pray  for  those  who  do  either  us  or  ours  good
(ii.  12  ;  1  Sam.  xxv.  33,  and  xxiv.  19).
n.  That,  at  parting,  friends  are  to  pray  one  for  another  (Gen.  xxviii.  1 — 8,
xxxi.  55,  xliii.  14 ;  Acts  xx.  36).

III.  That  the  godly  are  persuaded  that  the  Lord  is  a  merciful  re  warder  of

the  duties  of  love  which  one  doth  toward  another  (Col.  iii.  24).

IV.  That   children    should    so    well   deserve    of   parents,   yea,    though   hut

parents-in-law,   as   that   they   may  be   moved   heartily  to   pray  for
them.
V.  That  God  will  not  only  barely  reward,  but  so  deal  with  us  as  we  de    .
with  others.  *

As  ye  have  dealt  ivith  the  dead  and  with  me.

I.  That  daughters  of  a  bad  race  may  prove  good  wives  and  good  children-
in-law  sometimes.
II.  That  good  and  truely  loving  wives  love  their  husbands*  parents  for  their
husbands'  sake.
The  Lord  yrant  you  that  ye  may  find  rest.

1.  That  godly  and  wise  friends  pray  not  only  In  general,  but  in  particular,

as  they  know  them  to  stand  in  need,  for  whom  they  pray.
II.  That  godly  mothers-in-law  are  hearty  well-wishers  to  their  children-in-
law.

III.  That  second  marriages  are  lawful.

IV.  That  husbands  are  to  be  then-  wives'  rest.

V.  That  it  is  God's  blessing  to  be  peaceably  married

Fuller  remarks  on  hindly  .   ...  as  ye  ha^-e  dealt  with  the, dead: —

A  godly  man  dying,  loaves  behind  him,

First,  his  body ;  to  which  we  mnst  be  kind  by  burial  and  lamentation.

Secondly,  his  estate;  to  which  we  mist  be  kind  by  careful  and  faithful
administration.

Thirdly,  his  children,  friends,  or  kindred ;  to  whom  we  must  be  kind  by  love
and  affection.

Fourthly,  his  faults  and  failings;  to  v/hirh  we  must  be  kind  by  silence  and
"=tuppression.

Fifthly,  his  memory  and  virtues;  to  which  we  must  be  kind  by  congratulation,
ommemoration,  and  imitation.

"  Prayer  eases  the  soul  in  times  of  clistress,  pression  not  to  be  erased.     T aey  are  like  the

when  it  is  oppressed  with  griefs  and  fears,  by  words  of  the  dying  ;  for  our  friends  are  dead

giving  thom  vent,  and  that  in  so  advantage-  to  u-^  when  we  see  them  no  more." — Lnnsofi.
ous  a  w;iy,  emptying  them  into  the  bOvSom  of  '•  Our  duties  which  we  discharge  to  parents

God.     The  very  vent,  were  it  but  into  tue  or  husbands  are  as  pledges  before  the  Lord  to

air,  gives  ease ;  or  speak  your  grief  rather  to  do  good  unto  us Goodness  procureth

a  statue  than  smother  it;    much  more  ease  goodness,  a    1  (>vil  begetteth  evil,  like  as  birds

does  it  give  to  pour  it  forth  into  the  lap  of  breed  birds,  and  fishes  f.shes.*' — TopselL
a  confidential  and  sypathising  friend,  even  *'  When   the   tribe  of    Eeuben,    Gad,    and

though  unable  to  help  us;  yet  still  more  of  half   Manasses  erected  the  altar  Ed   at  the

one  who  can  help;  and  of   all  fricn(' ■;.  our  passage  over  Jordiin,  it  startled  all  the  rest

God  is,   beyond  all  comparison,  the   surest,  of  the  tribes,  as  if  under  it  they  had  hatched

and  most  affectionate,  and  most  powerful." —  some   superstitious  design;    whereas  indeed

Leighton.  the    altar   was    not  intended  for  sacrifice,

"  The  words  of  parting  friends,  who  are  but  was   meiely   an   altar  of  memorial,  to

likely  never  to  meet  again,  make  an  im-  evidence  to  posterity  that  these  two  tribei
40


CHAP.  I.  9.


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    RUTH.


and  a  half,  thonuh  divided  from  the  rest,
were  conjoined  with  them  in  the  worsliip  of
the  same  Go(i.  ]n  like  manner,  when  s^me
ministers  thank  God  for  tiie  de})artnre  of  His
servants,  some  people  are  so  weak,  and  some
so  wilful,  to  eondcmn  such  for  passages  of
Popery,  as  if  supeistitious  prayers  were  made
for  their  departure  ;  whereas,  indeed,  such
contiratulation,  on  the  contrary,  speaks  our
contidence  on  their  present  bliss  and  happi-
ness, and  continueth  the  Church  militant
with  the  Church  triumphant,  as  the  com-
pleting one  entire  Catholic  Church  of  Jesus
Christ."— i''?/ZZ6'/-.

"  It  is  the  best  remembrance  of  our  dead
progenitors  to  follow  their  virtues.  St.  Paul
cannot  look  upon  Timothy,  but  presently
calls  to  mind  his  mother  Eunice  and  his
grandmother  Lois,  though  the  latter,  no
ioubt,  was  long  since  departed." — Fuller.

"  Men  and  women  were  joined  in  ma,rriage
vGen.  ii.)  to  the  end  to  be  a  mutual  help  one
to  the  other;  but  many  prove  such  helpers
as  the  king  of  Assyria  did  to  Ahaz  (2  Chron.
xxvii.  20),  of  whom  it  is  said,  '  He  distressed
him,  but  helped  him  not.'  " — Fuller.

"  A  man's  best  fortune  or  his  worst  is  his
wife." — English  Proverl.

"  It  is  an  honour  to  the  deceased  sons,
Mahlon  and  Chilion,  tliat  they  made  srvh  a
selection  of  wives ;  but  they  must  also  have
been  worthy  of  the  enduring  love  they
awakened,  notwithstanding  that  there  were
no  children  to  strengthen  the  bonds  of
affection.  The  attachment  of  the  Moabitish
women,  Ruth  and  Or  pah,  to  their  new  family
must  be  grounded  on  psychological  facts,
with  a  knowledge  of  which  exegesis  cannot
dispense.  The  Moabitish  women  had  entered
into  an  Israelitish  house,  and  had  breathed
the  beneficent  atmosphere  of  a  family  of
Judah.  Marriage  and  family  life  form  the
real  mirror  of  religious  belief  and  worship.
Hence  the  apostle,  in  his  sublime  manner,
ai-ranges  the  relations  of  husband  and  wife


by  refeiiing  to  the  love  <)f  Christ  for  Hig
Church  (Eph,  v.  22).  Ancient  Isiael  there-
fcjie  distinguished  itself  frmn  the  inhabitants
of  Canaan,  not  merely  by  the  name  of  its
God,  but  by  its  life  at  home  in  the  family,
by  faithfulness  and  love  to  wife  and  child.
Purity  and  morality  in  marriage  were  the
necessary  results  of  faith  in  the  only  living
God." — La7\ge.

"  The  unhappy  relations  between  daughter
and  mother-in-law,  elsewhere  usual,  must  in
general  have  been  unknown  in  Israel.  Other-
wise the  prophet  could  not  represent  it  as  a
sign  of  the  extremest  social  ruin  that  as  the
son  against  the  father  and  the  daughter
against  the  mother,  so  (Micah  vii.  6)  the
daughter-in-law  rises  up  against  the  mother-
in-law." — Lange.

"  The  mother-in-law  has  forgotten  that  she
was  ever  a  daughter-in-law.  The  best  mother-
in-law  is  one  who  is  dead." — German  Pro-
verbs.

"  Here  we  learn,  God,  in  the  rewarding  of
the  good  deeds  of  His  servants,  dealeth  with
them  accordingly  as  they  have  done  with
others.  Yet  far  be  it  from  us  to  suppose
that  in  our  stained  and  imperfect  works  there
is  any  meritorious  virtue,  which  deserveth
that  God  should  proportion  a  reward  unto
thom  :  but  this  freely  proceedeth  from  God's
favour,  who,  to  encourage  us  in  well-doing,
will  not  suffer  a  cup  of  cold  water  to  pass
without  its  reward.  Do  we  desire,  then,  to
leave  dutiful  children  and  faithful  servants
hereafter  1  Let  us  be  dutiful  to  our  parents,
faithful  to  our  masters.  On  the  other  side,
hath  God  afflicted  us  with  Zibahs  to  our
servants,  and  with  Absaloms  to  our  sons  ?
Let  us  reflect  our  eyes  on  that  which  is  past,
and  call  ourselves  to  account,  whether  we
formerly  have  not  been  unfaithful  to  our
masters,  undutiful  to  our  parents  :  no  doubt
we  may  then  take  up  the  confession  of  Adoni-
bezek  :  *  As  1  have  dealt  with  others,  so  the
Lord  hath  done  to  me.'  " — Fuller,


"  Benign  restorer  of  the  soul,
Who  ever  fliest  to  bring  relief,
When  first  we  feel  the  rude  control
Of  Love  or  Pity,  Joy  or  Grief." — Rogers,  On  a  Tear,

Then  she  kissed  them,  and  they  lifted  up  their  voice  and  wept.

In  every  life  these  sudden  outbursts  of  feeling.  The  clouds  do  not  gather  and
the  showers  fall  more  naturally  than  sorrow  expresses  itself  in  tears.  Christ
Himself  has  shewn  us  that  even  a  perfect  humanity  is  not  outside  the  realm  of
this  law  (John  xi.).  Note,  (a)  Apathy  is  not  fortitude.  The  Christian  is  no
Stoic.  Firmness  with-him  is  to  exist  side  by  side  with  the  tenderest  susceptibili-
ties (Eccles.  iii.  4,  vii.  2;  Rom.  xii.  15).

Times  even  when  a  loud  and  demonstrative  sorrow  like  this  is  appropriate  ;
They  lifted  up  their  voice  and  wept.  So  the  Ephesian  elders  said  farewell  to
Paul  (Acts  XX.  87,  88),  *'  sorrowing  most  of  all  that  they  should  see  his  face  no
more."  So  with  these  three  widows.  Their  love  was  a  passion  of  the  heart,
breaking  forth  into  wailing  and  weeping  [Bernard).  Note,  (b)  Community  of
trials  unites  human  hearts^  as  fire  unites  metals  [Dr,  Waiujh),

They  wept —

I.  At  the  recollection  of  the  many  endearing^  and  joyful  circumstances  of  the

41


BOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY:  RUTH,  chap.  i.  9.


past.  Their  tears  a  tribute  to  the  love  which  bound  them  so  closely  together  to
the  memories  they  shared  in  common,  and  to  "the  dead,"  with  whom  they  had
dealt  so  faithfully.  'J'he  very  joy  which  had  been  theirs  comes  in  now  to
enhance  their  sorrow.  Naomi's  reference  to  the  past  (ver.  8)  probably  the  key
to  this  affecting  scene.

II.  At  the  realization  of  their  poverty  and  defenceless  condition.  So  far,
however,  love  was  strengthened  rather  than  abated  by  their  trials.  Affliction  had
evidently  drawn  them  closer  together.  Note.  TJiere  is  a  charitable  and  holy  weeping
for  the  miseiif's  of  others  [Bernard)^  and  of  our  own.

III.  At  the  very  thought  of  a  separation  as  possible.  Adieu  I — more  tears
have  been  shed  at  that  word  than  at  the  utterance  of  any  other.  Separation  I — a
mysterious,  if  a  familiar  subject.  Its  shadow  seems  to  have  fallen  upon  the
spirit  of  Christ  Himself  as  He  wept  at  the  tomb  of  Lazarus,  With  these  young
women,  Naomi's  kiss  meant  their  dismissal,  and  they  wept  at  the  thought  of
parting  with  one  who  had  so  endeared  herself  to  them.  Note.  One  of  the  sorest
afflictions  incident  to  this  life  is  the  everlasting  separation  of  those  who  are  mutually
dear  to  each  other  (Laivson).

IV.  In  protestation  of  their  fidelity.  Possibly  the  bitterest  trial  of  all  with
both  was  that  Naomi  should  doubt  their  wilhngness  to  go  with  her,  and  thus  put
it  to  the  test.  The  event  (ver.  14)  proved  that  Naomi  was  right.  So  Peter
viewed  the  words  of  Christ  (Mark  xiv.  27 — 31),  and  protested  "the  more
vehemently."  Note.  Tears  are  not  always  a  proof  of  an  enduring  fidelity .  Orpah
and  Peter  both  sincere,  but  mistaken.  So  present  sorrow  for  sin  is  not  to  be
taken  always  as  a  sign  of  ultimate  repentance.  Many  who  have  wept  with
Christ,  it  may  be,  as  well  as  many  who  have  done  wonderful  works  in  His
name,  will  be  found  at  last  saying,  "  Lord,  Lord,  open  unto  us  "  (Matt.  vii.  22  ;
Luke  xiii.  25).

Bernard  on  this —

Then  she  kissed  them.  This  action  we  may  find  fourfold :  carnal^  as  in  fleshly
lust ;  hypocritical,  as  it  was  with  Job  and  Judas  ;  hoJy,  of  which  the  apostle
speaks  (1  Cor.  xvi.  20) ;  or  civil,  as  here  used  at  the  meeting  of  friends  (Gen.
xxix.  11,  xxxiii.  4),  at  their  departing  (Gen.  xxxi.  55).  It  was  honestly  used  to
testify  love  and  unity ;  therefore  in  the  primitive  Church,  before  they  received  the
sacrament,  they  thus  saluted  one  another.

And  they  lifted  up  their  voice  and  wept.

Weeping  is  used  in  Scripture — I.  To  express  sorrow  at  the  parting  of  friends
(2  Kings  xiii.  14;  1  Sam.  xx.  41);  II.  For  very  joy  (Gen.  xlv.  14,  xlvi.  29,
xxix.  11) ;  III.  In  pity  and  compassion  at  the  misery  of  others  (Job  xxx.  25  ;
Jer.  iv.  19 ;  Luke  xix.  41) ;  IV.  At  the  apprehension  of  kindness  (1  Sam.
xxiv.  16).

"  Observe  the  beautiful  simplicity  of  Scrip-  And  touch  but  tombs, — look   up  I    those

ture,  which  counts  it  not  a  thiog  unmanly  to  tears  will  run

own  that  Abraham,  the  stern,  iron-hearted  Soon  in  long  rivers  down  the  lifted  face,

saint,  has  wept.     Joseph  '  lifted  up  his  voice  And  leave  the  vision  clear  for  stars  and

and  wept,'  Jacob,  Peter,  Christ,  are  all  said  sun."                           ^Irs.  Browning.

to  have  wept     Contrast  this  with  the  con-  ..  ^^^^  ^^^^^  ^     ^.  ^^_sf^^^>,  ^-igbt  have  you

ventional  feeling  which  represents  grief  as  ^^         ^^^^  ^^  ^^    \^y    ^^^^  I  j  ^^.^  ^^  ^^^^

unworthy  manhood.  -Robertson.  ^^  revelation,  none  in  reason,  none  in  any-

"  Tears  1   what  are  tears  ?     The  babe  weeps  thing,  except  a  spontaneous   and   universal

in  its  cot ;  idea." — EUhu  Burritt.

The  mother  singing ;  at  her  marriage-bell  '•  Through  the   dim  windows  of  affliction

The  bride  weeps,  and  before  the  oracle  how  changed  is  the  aspect  of  the  world  !  how

Of  high-faned  hills  the  poet  has  forgot  cold,  and  grey,  and  desolate,  all  its  radiant

Such  moisture  on  his  cheeks.     Thank  God  glory  departed,  all  its  beauteous  hues  reduced

for  grace,  to  one   dull   leaden   sadness  1    The  tears   of

Ye  who  weep  only  1    If  as  some  have  done,  sorrow  are  like  spiritual  lenses,  shewing  ua

Ye  grope  tear-blinded  in  a  desert  place,  the  world  in  its  true  character,  as  a  poor,

empty,  unsatisfying  thing." — Afion,


CHAP.   I.   10.


nOMILETIG  COMMMENTARY :  RUTH,


"  It  is  better  for  a  Christian  to  be  sorrow-
ful, than  secure  as  the  people  of  the  world
are." — Liiiher.

"Adversity  is  the  only'furnace  of  friend-
shi]).  If  love  will  not  abide  both  fire  and
anvil,  it  is  but  counterfeit:  so  in  our  love  to
God  we  do  but  crark  and  vaunt  in  vain,  if  we
cannot  be  willing  to  suffer  for  llira." — Bishop
II a  II.

"  The  observation  here  may  be  the  same
which  the  Jews  collected  (John  xi.),  which,
when  they  saw  our  Saviour  weep  for  Lazarus,
they  said,  '  Behold  how  He  loved  him  1 '  So
these  tears  in  this  place  were  the  expression
of  their  affection.  Sorrow,  like  the  river  of
Jordan  in  the  first  month,  did  overflow  the
banks,  and  streamed  waterdown  theircheeks."
—Fuller.

•*  She  dismissed  them  with  great  affection  :


shn  kissed  tliem^  wished  she  had  somewhat
better  to  give  them,  but  silver  and  gold  she
had  none.  However,  this  parting  kiss  shall
be  the  seal  of  such  a  true  friendship  aa
(though  she  never  see  them  more)  she  will
while  she  lives  retain  the  pleasing  remem-
brance of.  If  relations  must  part,  let  them
thus  part  in  love,  that  they  may  (if  they  never
meet  again  in  this  world)  meet  in  the  world
of  everlasting  love." — Matthew  Henry.

"  What  precious  drops  are  those

Which  silently  each  other's  track  pursue,
Bright  as  young  diamonds  in  their  infant
dew  1 "  Dry  dm.

"  The  rose  is  sweetest  washed  with  morning

dew,
And  love  is  loveliest  when  embalmed  in

tears."  Scott*


VERSE  10.

Theme. — The  Promising  Commenoemknt.

**  Call  to  thy  God  for  grace  to  keep
Thy  vows,  and  if  thou  break  them  weep—
Weep  for  thy  broken  vows,  and  vow  again,
Vows  made  with  tears  cannot  be  still  in  vain." — Herbert,

And  they  said  unto  her,  Surely  we  will  return  with  thee.

Youth  is  the  Beason  of  warm  and  generous  emotions.  Renewed  proofs  of  Naomi'g
affection  only  bind  these  young  women  to  her  with  stronger  ties  (Braden).  Such
a  love  a  chain  not  easily  broken  (Braden).  Note,  (r)  hi  all  this  we  are  to  see  the
reward  of  a  godly  affection  and  a  consistent  walk.  Piety,  wherever  found,  has  the
power  to  win  the  hearts  of  people  (Starkf).  She  won  love  because  she  was  Naomi,
**  pleasant  "  (Lange).  She  cherished  no  vanity,  sought  no  strife,  and  did  not  wish
to  rule  ;  hence  she  had  peace  and  love  (Lange).  {h)  We  should  so  live  that  others
by  our  good  example  may  be  drawn  to  love  the  truth  (Gen.  xxxiv.  31 ;  Luke
viii.  16).  Naomi's  character  sheds  n,  lustre  upon  a  whole  nation.  For  thy  sake
we  are  drawn  in  love  with  the  whole  people  (Topsell).  Besides,  to  follow  and  go
with  Naomi,  meant  to  serve  the  Lord.  So  Ruth  understood  it  afterwards  (ver.  16),
and  we  can  scarcely  imagine  Orpah  intending  to  serve  Chemosh  now  she  resolves
to  go  forward  with  Naomi,  (c)  Many  infidels  and  carnal  persons  are  sooner  drawn  to
the  Lord  by  the  works  which  they  see  than  by  the  words  which  they  hear  {Topsell).

We  have —

I.  An  apparent  agreement.  They  walk  together — journey  on  the  same  road,
are  engaged  in  the  same  object,  apparently  with  the  same  results.  Now  they
protest  in  the  same  lancjuage.  Worthy  of  attention,  that  their  first  utterance
recorded  by  the  inspired  writer  is  a  vow  of  fidelity  to  Naomi.  Their  choice
voluntary,  made  with  seeming  deliberation,  and  after  being  urged  very  earnestly
and  affectionately  in  a  contrary  direction.

See  in  this —

(1)  An  encouraging  and  happy  commencement,  Naomi  can  rejoice  for  the  present,
in  not  knowing  the  difference  between  them,  and  the  Divine  record  gives  no  sign
as  yet.  God  only  kno.vs  the  Orpah  from  the  Ruth  at  this  stage,  outwardly  there
is  nothing  to  distinguish  them.  Note.  It  is  ours  to  rejoice  in  the  beginnings  of
good  things^  irrespective  of  after  results.  Not  for  us  to  turn  any  back  (Tyng).  We
should  encourage  and  not  suspect,  rejoice  rather  than  criticize.  The  Christian  is
the  sower  of  the  good  seed,  not  the  scparater  between  the  tares  and  the  wheat.
God's  command  to-day.  Let  both  grow  together  uutil  the  harvest  (Matt.  xiii.  30).

^2)  A  purpose  good  and  commendable  so  far  as  it  was  carried  out.      We  will

4d


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.  chap.  i.  10.


return^  etc.  So  they  both  said,  and  said  as  they  thought  (Tra/ip),  No  reason  to
doubt  the  sincerity  of  either  (Lawson).  For  awhile  they  travelled  happily  and
ail'ectionately  together,  and  there  seemed  no  prospect  of  their  separation.  So  in
the  heavenward  journey  with  the  believer  and  the  mere  professor.  Whatever  can
be  done  in  religious  appearance  in  the  world,  and  without  an  absolute  separation  of
the  heart  from  the  world,  they  may  have  in  common  (Tyiuj).  Journey  together
to  the  very  extremities  of  Moab.  Note.  We  mistake  life,  and  read  it  amiss,  when,  we
look  for  those  file  distinctions  between  the  riyhteous  and  the  wicked  which  shall  one
day  he  made  apparent.

We  have  here —

II.  A  startling  contrast.  Undeveloped,  unseen  as  yet,  but  real  and  already
apparent  in  the  eyes  of  God.  Orpah  upon  second  thoughts  did  otherwise  (Trapp).
The  impulse  with  her  good,  but  frail.  She  lacked  the  deep  earnestness  of  Rnt!i.
The  seed  sprang  up,  but  it  withered  "  immediately  "  (Matt.  xiii.  5,  6).  Her  choice
the  result  of  passion,  and  an  earthly  aJBfection,  not  rooted  in  longings  after  God
and  the  true  Israel,  as  with  her  sister-in-law  (ver.  16).  She  loved  Naomi,  but  even
with  all  this  her  affections  were  back  in  Moab.  And  so  even  now  the  thorns  were
springing  up  which  were  to  choke  the  good  seeds  of  a  noble  resolution,  made  and
partially  carried  out.

So  in  spiritual  things  it  is  not  every  blossom  which  comes  to  fruit.  They  fall
away  (Luke  viii.  13)  speedily,  miserably,  inexplicably,  irrevocably.  Note.  A  con-
version in  the  understanding,  sentiment,  or  iniayination  may  he  a  flower,  hut  will  be
fruitless  {Oosterzee).  The  promise  is  not  the  performance  ;  beginning  well  is  not
always  a  sign  of  ending  well.  There  is  a  great  difference  between  the  same  mind
at  different  times.  Saul  in  a  passion  promised  fair  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  16,  17,  xxvi.  21),
but  David  knew  there  was  no  trusting  to  either  his  tears  or  his  talk  (Trapp).
Note.  Strong  passions,  without  a  settled  judyment,  commonly  produce  weak  resolutions
{Matthew  Henry).

Lessons  (1)  How  short-lived  are  the  noblest  purposes  when  made  in  our  own
strength  I  Like  the  morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew  (Hos.  vi.  3).  Orpah  and
Ephraim,  types  of  those  only  too  common  in  our  churches.  (2)  We  ought  not  to
mistake  every  determination  to  walk  with  God's  people  as  a  sign  of  true  grace.
Regeneration  is  a  change  of  heart,  not  a  mere  momentary  change  of  habit.
(See  also  on  ver.  14.)

Macgowan  on  this —

I.  Promises  of  speech  and  purposes  of  heart,  whether  to  God,  to  His  Church,
or  to  individuals,  ought  to  go  hand  in  hand.  If  a  man's  word  does  not  express
his  meaning  and  bind  him,  nothing  can.

II.  Promises  and  purposes  often  proceed  from  passion  instead  of  principle.
Exemplified  in  young  converts  who  have  a  passionate  regard  to  the  person  or
manner  of  a  preacher.  Saul,  overcome  with  David's  kindness,  promised  that  he
would  not  seek  his  hurt.

III.  Promises  and  purposes  proceeding  merely  from  passion  soon  fall  to  the
ground.  "  I  go,  sir,"  one  said  in  the  Gospels,  and  "  went  not."  Some  persons
melting  under  the  ministry  of  the  word  as  a  summer  brook  (Job  vi.  15 — 20).  A
changed  heart  necessary  to  perseverance.  Saul  may  have  religious  fits,  and  Jehu
much  zeal ;   for  want  of  a  regenerated  nature  both  come  to  nothing.

Bernard  on  this —

I.  Surely  im  will  return.  An  earnest  affection  snfF3reth  not  easily  a  separation
from  the  party  affected.  True  love  Hveth  in  the  party  beloved,  and  can  no  more
foisjike  him  than  it  can  forsake  itself.

II.  With  thee.  It  is  better  to  have  the  company  of  one  sound  Christian,
than  to  enjoy  the  fellowship  of  a  world  of  wjridiiaR's.  Jonathan  took  more
delight  in  one  David  than  in  the  society  of  all  bis  father's  house.  The  godly  are
such  as  go  the  way  to  eternal  life.  Wuosouvur  looks  for  them  must  keep  thenj
company  thither.

H


CBAf.  I.  11.


BOMILETIC  COMMENT AllY:  JUJTIL


III.  Unto  Thi/  people.  There  is  a  right  in  every  particular  member  to  the
Church,  as  in  the  Church  to  every  member,  and  all  to  Christ,  and  Christ  to  them
(1  Cor.  xii.  12).

IV.  On  the  whole  verse.  In  passionate  affection  more  will  be  spoken  than
acted.  Both  women  say  the  same  thing ;  but  yet  upon  more  deliberation  one  of
them  calleth  back  her  word.  Passion  causes  men  to  speak  unadvisedly.  They  are
not  themselves.


"What  a  pleasing  sight  to  see  relations
walking:  hand  in  hand  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord
from  Moab  to  Canaan — from  this  world,
doomed  to  destruction,  to  the  upper  regions,
the  seat  of  rest  and  felicity  1 — Margoivan.

"  The  wise  and  foolish  virgins  both  take
their  lamps  and  go  forth  to  meet  the  bride-
groom. Thus  all  go  together  on  the  way  to
return  unto  the  land  of  Judah.  As  far  as
this  journey  lies  still  within  the  limits  of
Moab,  so  far  they  may  unite  to  go." — Tyng.

"At  Preston,  at  Malines,  at  many  such
places,  the  lines  go  gently  asunder :  so  fine
is  the  angle,  that  at  first  the  paths  are  almost
parallel." — Dr.  J.  Hamilton,

"  Many  listen  together  to  the  preaching  of
the  word  of  God.  Many  feel  together  the
burden  of  personal  affliction  and  distress.
Many  are  made  to  see  their  danger,  and  to
remember  their  responsibility  to  God.  Many
appear  to  feel  the  guilt  of  their  past  sin-
ful life,  and  to  be  really  aroused  in  their
mind  and  conscience  to  the  necessity  of
obtaining  salvation.  Anxious,  excited,  appa-
rently earnest  and  sincere,  they  set  out  upon
their  journey  back  to  the  gracious  Being
whom  they  have  so  long  neglected.  Yes,
they  really  set  out,  and  appear  to  set  out
sincerely. " — Tyng.

"  How  many  of  these  young  travellers  have
I  seen  1  The  Church  delights  over  them,  the
pastor  rejoiced  in  them ;  Christian  friends
were  encouraged  by  them  ;  the  brightest  and
most  blessed  hopes  clustered  around  them.
....  For  a  season  they  must  be  allowed  to
go  on  together.  Awakened,  convinced,  inter-
ested in  religion,  apparently  equally  deter-
mined, they  set  out  well." — Tyng.

**  So  from  the  heights  of  will

Life's  parting  stream  descends.
And,  as  a  moment  turns  its  slender  rill,
Each  widening  torrent  bends.
From  the  same  cradle  side.
From  the  same  mother's  knee.
One  to  long  darkness  and  the  frozen  tide,
One  to  the  peaceful  sea." — Holmes.


"  What  a  strange  and  perplexing  medley
this  world  is  1  and  how  the  confusion  would
be  increased,  could  we  read  the  hearts  of  men
aright,  and  distinguish  the  destinies  shaping
themselves  to-day  for  that  other  and  never-
ending  life  I  Here  is  one  who  by  the  grace
of  God  is  seeking  a  crown  of  unfading  glory,
yonder  one  who  shall  assuredly  wear  the
crown  of  everlasting  reproach  ;  here  a  spirit
climbing  heavenwards,  there  one  going  down
deliberately  to  the  home  of  eternal  darkness.
And  they  dwell  to-day  side  by  side,  linked  by
the  various  ties  of  social  and  family  life,  in
the  same  street,  in  the  same  house,  it  may
be,  bound  together  in  the  closest  bonds  of
love  and  friendship.  To  men  the  difference
is  but  a  slight  one  ;  with  God  bhe  distinction
is  seen  as  the  beginning  of  a  never-ending
separation." — B.

''•  Man  oft  resolves  and  re-resolves,  yet  dies
the  same.  Hell  is  paved  with  good  inten-
tions. ' ' — Luther.

"  Man    is    but    man,  unconstant    still,    and

various ;
There's  no  to-morrow  in  him  like  to-day.
F'erhaps  the  atoms  rolling  in  his  brain
Make  him  think  honestly  this  present  hour;
The    next    a    swarm    of    base,   ungrateful

thoughts
May  mount  aloft."  Dry  den.

"  A  variety  of  minerals  exhibit  translucency
only  on  their  edges.  The  central  mass  ia
dark  ;  but,  holding  the  specimen  up  to  the
light,  light  is  transmitted  dimly  through  the
thin  edges.  Marble,  flint,  or  hornstone  are
examples.  These  symbolize  the  man  who
has  been  brought  so  much  under  the  influence
of  Christianity  that  it  has  modified  his  exter-
nal conduct,  ]:)roduced  some  regard  for  true
piety,  led  to  some  outward  reformations,  and
caused  him  to  adopt  some  of  the  forms  of
religion.  Yet  the  darkness  of  unregeneracy
reigns  within.  Friends,  and  possibly  the
man  himself,  mistake  the  rays  that  struggle
through  the  edges  of  his  character  for  genuine
Christian  experience." — HitcJicoch,


VERSES  11—13.

Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes. — Are  there  yet  sons?  etc.  Ta  allusion  to  the
custom  of  a  man  laising  posterity  to  his  deceased  l)rother  by  taking  his  widow  (Adorn
Clarke,  Jarci.  Wright,  Kcil).  Probably  this  custom  obtained  among  other  nati(ms  {Patrick,
Scott).  Known  among  the  Gentiles  before  it  was  given  to  Israel  (Gill,  Speaker'.^  Com.)
(cf.  Gen.  xxxviii.  8.  26 ;  Deut.  xxv.  o).  That  law  respects  a  brother  by  the  father's  side.  an(l
not  by  the  mother's  orAy  {Ahen  Ezra,  Carpzov).  Not  binding  on  a  brother  as  yet  unborn
{Gill,  Carpzov,  etc.).  Evidentl}'.  however,  extended  beyond  the  brother  in  the  strict  sense,
and  applied  to  the  nearest  relative,  IJoaz  { Speaker' h  Com.)  Deut.  xxv.  5,  probably  to  be
understood  in  this  wider  sense.     Turn  agaia  rieturn]  go  [to  your  own  people]  {Targum),

45


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  BUTE.  chap.  i.  VL


If  I  should  say.  Eather,  suppose  that  I  should  say  I  have  hope  that  T  were  even  to  be
married  this  very  night,  and  were  even  to  bear  children  {JfUhnp  Ilorslcy).  In  English  we
might  imitate  the  sentence  thus :  For  (lot  us  suppose)  I  say  1  liave  hope  ;  I  have  a  husband  ;  I
have  children ;  will  you,  etc.  {Lange).  Another  reference  to  a  Levirate  marriage,  possibly.
So  Keil,  Wright,  etc.  Not  so  Rosenmuller,  Carpzov.  (See  on  ver.  11.)  If  I  should  have  an
husband,  etc.  If  I  were  with  an  husband,  etc.  And  should  also  hear  sons.  Shall  I  yet
have  any  more  sons  that  I  may  give  them  to  you  ?  (Syriac.)  Perhaps  you  think  that  I  will
marry,  and  that  sons  will  be  born  to  me  {Arabic).

Ver.  13.  Would  ye  tarry.  For  ]nb  read  the  masculine  Dhb  {Tlovhigant,  Bishop  Ilorsley),
Eather  to  be  taken  adverbiallv.  as  "  therefore."  "  Would  you  therefore  wait,"  etc.  {Manrer,
JRosen.,  Gesen.,  JBertheaii,  Wright).  The  rendering  of  the  English  version  (after  Sept.,  Vulg.),
"for  them"  is  very  improbable  {Lange).  Omit  "for  them,"  and  translate  "under  these
circumstances,"  or  briefly  "  then"  (Z^-'wyr).  Would  ye  tarry  on  these  accounts,  for  these
reasons?  {Wordsivorth.)  Would  you  stay  [for  them  (omit)]  from  having?  etc.  Would  you
therefore  shut  yourself  up,  so  as  not  to  have  an  husband  ?  (  Wright.)  p^  From  the  Chaldean,
"to  keep  back,"  "to  shut  up"  (  Wrighf).  Does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  Hebrew._  As  virgins
before  their  marriage  lived  in  seclusion,  so  widows  who  were  betrothed  to  children,  while
waiting  for  their  coming  of  age,  should  keep  themselves  at  home,  lest  any  suspicion  should
attach  to  them  {Le  Clerc).  And  will  you  be  hindered  from  being  married?  {Syriac.)  Will  you
be  kept  back  by  them  from  marrying?  (LXX.)  It  grieveth  me  much.  It  is  much  more
{Lange),  far  more  bitter  to  me  than  to  you  (  Wright,  etc.).  For  it  has  gone  much  more  bittei'ly
with  me  than  with  you  {IMl).  As  in  the  Authorized  Version  {Gef<en.,  Berthean).  It  may  be
a  trial  to  you  to  leave  me,  but  it  is  a  still  greater  trial  to  me  to  be  deprived  of  you ;  but  it
must  be  done,  since,  etc.  ( Tremcllivs,  Jvnivs).  The  LXX.  has  virep  vfiag,  not  vnip  vfxajv  ;
and  so  Syriac,  Arabic  (comp.  Gen.  xix.  [)).  You  may  have  husbands  and  children,  but  1  can
never  expect  to  have  either  ( Wordsworth).  The  hand  of  the  Lord.  Generally  signifies  the
means  whereby  He  accomplishes  His  counsels  {Tojjsell).

VERSES  11—13.
Theme. — The  Second  Tkial  of  Affectioii.

**  I  have  lived  long  enough  :  my  way  of  life
Is  fallen  into  the  sear,  the  yellow  leaf :
And  that  which  should  accompany  old  age,
As  honour,  love,  obedience,  troops  of  friends,
I  must  not  look  to  have." — Shahe.^^eare,

**  Our  voluntary  service  He  requires,
Not  our  necessitated ;  such  with  Him
Finds  no  acceptance,  nor  can  find ;  for  how
Can  hearts  not  free  be  tried  whether  they  serve
Willing  or  no  ? " — Milton.

Ver.  11. — And  Naomi  saidf  Turn  again,  my  daughters,  etc
Ver.  12. — Turn  again  .   .   .  go ;  for  I  am  too  old,  etc,
Ver.  13. —  Would  ye  tarry  for  them  [Heb.  therefore,]  etcf

Here  we  see  in  Naomi  the  same  non-proselytising  spirit  which  characterizes
her  descendants  down  to  the  present  day  {A^wn.).  Scarcely  so.  Rather  the
epirit  which  would  convince  before  it  converts,  which  loves  too  well  to  persuade
unwisely,  which  knows  that  a  conversion  made  outwardly  and  in  seeming  only,
is  but  the  beginning  of  a  future  apostacy.

Note,  (a)  To  decide  any  important  question  on  wrong  issues  or  false  expecta-
tions is  inevitably  to  find  the    ground  hollow  under  our  feet  by-and-by.

(b)  Love  which  deals  faithfully  with  us  in  such  moments  is  likely  to  prove
faithful  to  us  hereafter.  It  may  wound,  but  it  does  so  with  good  reasons  (Prov.
xxvii.  6).

(c)  Love  can  say  **  no"  sometimes,  even  when  no  moans  "  separation."

"With  Naomi,  in  fairness  to  tJiem,  she  says  "return," — but  in  her  affection  she
calls  them  "  daughters."  She  can  do  the  latter,  but  she  can  do  nothing  more.
They  could  enter  into  her  house,  but  not  into  Israel's  nationsil  life  (Lange).
This  the  key  to  what  follows.  In  her  own  mind,  if  they  go  forward  with  her,  the
prospect,  humanly  speaking,  is  hopeless,
4.(j


OJUP  I.  11-13.      noMILETIC  COMMEKTAHY:  nUTiL


Notice.  Grief  often  says  many  really  ininece.ssary  thinys  in  order  to  conceal
others  nliich  it  dares  not  say  [Lanye).  AVhen  s!ie  says  that  there  is  no  hope  for
them  in  herself  \i.e.^  in  husbands  being  born  them  through  her],  she  implies  there
will  be  none  elsewhere  in  Israel.  At  best  they  could  only  be  as  widows  shut  up
(see  Crit.  Notes),  waiting  for  a  husband  never  to  be  born.  A  dreary  prospect
even  to  Naomi.  The  climax  of  grief  shows  itself  in  the  climax  of  impossibilities
adduced  (Lanye),

We  have —

I.  A  test  of  true  love.  If  they  go  forward,  (1)  They  must  die  to  their  own
interests.  Do  not  indulge  romantic  hopes — visionary  expectation  which  can  only
end  in  disappointment  (Lawson).  What  her  sons  had  done  in  Moab  was  not  cus-
tomary in  Israel  [Lanye).  She  loves  them  too  much  to  deceive  them, — would
rather  part  with  them  than  do  this,  or  even  allow  them  to  deceive  themselves ;
if  they  go  with  her,  they  must  go  forward  with  a  similar  and  kindred  spirit  of
self-denial.  Note.  Thoughts  ripened  into  resolves  by  serious  consideration  are
likely  to  be  kept  {M,  Henry).

So  Christ  dealt  with  His  disciples.  He  said,  **  Foxes  have  holes,"  etc.  (cf.  Luke
ix.  23,  24,  58).     So  a  faithful  pastor  will  deal  with  young  converts.

The  test  here  plain,  sincerely  meant,  and  founded,  as  the  issue  shews,  upon  good
reasons.  Naomi's  words  follow,  and  are  in  agreement  with  the  outward  circum-
stances. We  see,  too,  that  they  follow  the  leadings  of  Divine  Providence.  To
do  the  one  is  often,  and  if  we  could  rightly  read  the  outward  circumstances  would
always  be,  to  do  the  other.

Note,  (a)  God  sometimes  hedges  up  the  path  so  that  there  is  nothing  before  us  but
the  strait  gate  of  self-denial.  Especially  is  this  true  of  the  spiritual  life.  Stript  of
all,  we  enter  the  kingdom  of  God.     The  gate  strait,  the  way  narrow.

"  Heaven's  gates  are  not  so  highly  arched
As  princes'  palaces.     They  that  enter  there
Must  enter  on  their  knees."

(5)  To  he  joined  to  the  hope  of  the  true  Israel  of  God,  we  must  he  ready  to  deny
ourselves  of  everything  else.     Esau  sold  his  h(  pe  for  a  mess  of  pottage.     So  Orpah.

Again,  (2)  If  these  young  women  are  to  go  forward  with  Naomi,  love  itself
must  bring  its  own  and  only  reward.  Not  a  single  inducement  is  held  out,  not  a
single  promise  made.  Naomi  would  be  theirs,  nothing  more.  It  is  this  that
sends  Orpah  back,  but  sufiers  Huth  to  go  onward.  And  why?  Orpah  saw
herself,  while  Ruth  saw  only  the  beloved  one  [Lange).  She  went  with  Naomi,
though  alone,  because  she  loved  Naomi  alone.

How  true  all  this  is  of  a  real  affection  for  Christ!  In  love  as  in  life  He  will  be
the  fiist  and  the  last.     (Comp.  Matt.  vi.  24,  with  xxiii.  10 ;  John  xxi.  15,  22.)

We  love  not  Christ  at  all,  unless  we  love  Him  above  all  [Augustine).  Compare
the  Saviour's  description  of  the  stony-ground  hearer  (Matt.  xiii.  20,  21),  as  seen
in  the  conduct  of  the  Jews  (John  vii.  GO — GO),  with  the  words  of  Simon  Peter  on
that  occasion  (ib.  67 — GO).

We  have —

II.  A  test  of  character  and  motives.  Free  will  is  essential  to  virtue ;  and
that  free  will  may  be  faiily  exercised,  there  must  be  no  concealment.  It  must  be
able  to  sit  down  and  count  the  cost.  One  test  is  not  sufficient.  Naomi's  words
search  Orpah  through  and  through,  from  many  sides  and  in  many  ways.  Did  she
desire  "  rest  in  the  house  of  a  husband  "  ?  (ver.  9.)  Hitherto  this  may  have
seemed  possible  to  her  in  going  forward.  Not  so  now,  aiid  she  must  see  it!
A  dreary  blank  hopelessness  in  tliis  direction,  tlie  secret  of  Orpafis  return  to  Moab.

Of  this  return  notice —

(1)  Persuasions  which  fall  in  with  our  own  desires  are  readily  accepted.

(2)  And  that  until  these  come  we  have  not  heeu  truly  and  really  tested.

(3)  The  strongest  and  purest  motives  are  the  only  endurmg  ones.

47


nOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.    chap.  i.  11—13.


So  in  Christian  life.     Time,  and   circun^ stances,  and  the  unfolding  of  events
around  us,  must  and  will  come  in  to  test  the  momentary  decision  for  Christ.
Note.   This  is  God's  ordinary  and  deliberate  plan  in  dealing  with  men  in  life.
If  heaven  could  be  won  by  a  single  struggle,  by  a  single  determination,  the
work  would  be  easy.     But  experience  does  for  us  what  Naomi  did  for   these.
The  test  possibly  not  very  severe  at  first, — the  victory  on  our  side  (cf.  ver.  8 — 10).
Sooner  or  later  we  are  met  by  a  prospect  as  blank  on  the  human  side  as  this
(Luke  ix.  23  ;  Mark  x.  21).     What  then  of  our  better  resolutions  and  vows  ?
We  have  here —

III.  A  test  involving  the  deepest  and  most  solemn  issues.  (1)  Decisive
between  God  and  Chemosh.  So  Orpah  understood  it,  for  she  went  back  **  to  her
gods."     So  Ruth  understood  it  (ver.  16).

Note,  {a)  The  hnmari  love  is  made  the  pivot  on  which  a  higher  affection  turns  and
hangs — the  human  selfishness  or  unselfishness  decisive  of  more  lasting  questions.
A  principle  connected  with  this,  love  for  the  creature  leading  to  and  shewing  a
capacity  for,  love  to  the  Creator  (cf.  1  John  iv.  20).  More  particularly  must  this
be  seen  in  a  lasting  and  unselfish  afiection  for  the  godly.

Note,  {h)  We  may  love  the  image  of  Christ  in  His  servants,  though  we  have  not  yet
understood  the  full  meaning  of  our  affection.  This  Euth's  position.  Her  afi'ections
leaned  in  that  direction,  and  she  was  ready  to  embrace  all  it  involved  (ver.  16,  17).
Another  extreme  of  character  shrinks  from  all  contact  with  Christ's  disciples.  A
third  type  exists,  in  those  who  love  God's  people  but  merely  on  the  human  side.
This  Orpah's  danger.  Note.  Eartldy  affections  are  frail  at  best,  and  often  rningled
unconsciously  with  much  that  is  selfish.  Such  characters  fail  ignominiously  in
moments  like  these.

(2)  Decisive  seemingly  for  time  and  eternity.  A  choice  of  mere  outward  circum-
stances may  involve  issues  which  are  to  last  throughout  eternity.  Opah  took
Moab  and  all  that  Moab  implied  and  included;  Ruth,  Israel.  This  last  test
seems  at  first  a  trifling  one  ;  judge  it  by  its  results  1  So  always  in  spiritual
things.  When  we  choose  the  lower  path,  what  is  it  but  that  we  turn  our  back
upon  a  higher  ?  The  momentary  action  decisive,  the  tendency  fatal.  Christ  would
give  to  the  world  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  they  will  have  the  kingdom  of  earth,
and  here  they  part  [Luther),
Bernard  on  this —

I.  That  in  giving  counsel  to  or  fro,  it  is  good  so  to  speak  as  may  declare

love  and  respect  to  the  parties.
n.  That  it  was  a  custom  among  the  Jews,  for  parents  and  children  to  speak
most  commonly  one  to  another  in  the  nearest  and  dearest  terms  of  love.
III.  That  it  is  a  point  of  wisdom  to  ask  ourselves,  Why  we  will  do  this  or

that  thing,  before  we  undertake  it,  or  resolve  upon  it.
rV,  That  the  true,  honest-hearted,  and  such  as  fear  God,  in  the  kind  offers
of  their  friends,  deal  truly  with  them,  and  will  not  lead  them  into
vain  hopes.
V.  That  worldly  respects  are  not  the  motives  which  should  induce  any  to
join  themselves  with  God's  people.
VI.  That  the  wise  will  not  make  promises  rashly  for  others,  nor  persuade
to  more  than  they  well  know.
On  the  point  of  marriage,  as  taught  here —

I.  That  while  a  woman  hath  hope  of  children  she  may  marry.
II.  The  marriage  is  for  them  that  are  grown  up  for  it  and  are  marriageable.

III.  That  it  is  not  good  for  such  as  intend  to  marry  to  defer  off  too  long.

IV.  That  a  godly  and  wise   mother-in-law  cannot  only  be  willing,  but  also

will  persuade  her  children-in-law  should  marry  again.

"  Till  this  advice  was  given,  the  soundness  *'  Naomi    would   not   willingly   leave   her

and  sincerity  of  Ruth's  religion  did  not  ap-  widowed  daughters-in-law  in  Moab.   Though

pear ;  nor  did  the  rottenness  of  Orpah's  pro-  she  apparently  discourages  them,  it  is  with

fession  aiscover  itself," — Maegowan.  the  manifest  design  that  they  should  go  with

i8


C11..1-.  1.  11—13.    noMlLETIC  COM^IEKTARY :  nVTB.


licr  upon  motives  that  should  be  permanent
and  not  (iisnjipointino-." — ^?/w/7.

"  iShe  discharges  her  difficult  task  with  in-
finite delicacy.  They,  of  course,  had  no
thought  of  marrying  any  sons  that  might
be  born  to  the  widt)\ved  Naomi.  Such  a
thought  could  not  possibly  have  entered  into
their  minds.  Why  then  does  Naomi  lay  such
emphasis  on  the  utter  unlikelihood  of  her
having  sons,  and  of  their  waiting  for  them
even  if  she  should  have  them  ?  Simply  to
convey  to  them  that,  if  they  went  with  her,
they  would  have  no  hope  hit  in  herself. " —
Cox.

*'  The  surprising  delicacy  with  which  this  is
done  is  such  as  to  shew  clearly  how  truly  a
religious  love  educates  and  refines.  The
ultimate  cause  of  the  grief  occasioned  by  the
separation  lies  after  all  solely  in  the  fart  that
Ruth  and  Orpah  are  Moabitesses.  Naomi
could  not  bear  to  tell  them  that  if  they,  as
daughters  of  Moab,  went  with  her  to  Israel,
they  would  find  themselves  in  a  less  hospita-
ble situation  than  they  had  hitherto  enjoyed.
She  is  too  tender  to  remind  these  good  chil-
dren of  the  fact  that  Israel  does  not  sanction
connections  with  Moab." — Lange.

"  Orpah  and  Ruth  are  themselves  aware  of
all  that  Naomi  says  to  them  in  these  verses.
In  wishing  to  go  with  her.  they  cannot  possi-
bly have  a  thought  of  building  hopes  on  sons
as  yet  to  be  born  to  Naomi  by  another  mar-
riage. But — and  this  is  what  Naomi  would
make  them  feel — any  other  hope  than  this
vain  one,  they  as  Moabitish  women  could  not
have  in  Israel.  If  I  myself — she  gives  them
to  understand — could  yet  have  sons,  I  would
take  yon  with  me.  My  home  would  then  be
your  home  too.  To  me  you  are  dear  daughters-
in-law,  whether  in  Israel  or  in  Moab,  hut  other
prospects  have  you  none.  She  heaps  up  im-
probabilities in  order  to  indicate  in  this
veiled  manner  that  this  was  nevertheless  the
only  possible  ground  of  hope  for  them  in
Israel." — Lange  (condensed).

*'  We  see  these  young  travellers  meet  with
many  discouragements  to  their  return.  How
earnestly  Naomi  argues  with  them  to  search
what  manner  of  spirit  they  were  of  1  How
kindly  she  presses  them  to  go  back  and  find
their  shelter  and  their  rest  among  the  friends
they  were  leaving  1  How  she  presses  upon
their  remembrance  that  she  has  nothing  to
offer  them,  no  hopes,  no  promises  to  hold  out
of  present  or  prospective  worldly  gain  1  How
she  mingles  the  expressions  of  her  gratitude
and  her  grief  in  order  the  more  effectually  to
impress  them  with  a  conviction  of  the  earthly
poverty  of  her  journey  !  Again  and  again
she  kissed  them  in  token  of  farewell.  Again
and  again  they  wept  in  protestation  of  their
fidelity  and  determination.  How  affecting
and  how  promising  seems  such  an  interview!
Read  again  these  pathetic  verses.  Did  Naomi
really  wish  to  discourage  them  ?  Did  she
really  desire  them  to  go  back  ?  Was  she
willing  to  leave  them  in  Moab?  Did  Orpah
gratify  her  more  than  Ruth  ?  P^ar  from  this.
bhe  would  try  their  faith  and  affection.    She


would  know  what  was  in  their  heart.  She
would  see  how  long  and  how  truly  she  might
trust  them  hereafter.  And  therefore  she  lays
before  them  the  sorrows  of  the  journey  and  the
barrenness  of  the  earthly  prospect." — Tyng.

"  We  cannot  [but]  notice  here  what  seems
an  interesting  fact — the  thorough  tolerance
of  Naomi.  She  indicates  not  the  slightest
shadow  of  intolerant  dictation  or  overbearing
advice,  the  most  obnoxious  form  that  advice
can  take.  She  recognizes  in  the  two,  when
then  say  they  will  return  with  her,  their  in-
defeasible right,  though  her  own  children  by
marriage,  at  least  to  think  and  to  decide  for
themselves.  She  felt  her  business  was  to  give
them  clear  and  trustworthy  information,  but
not  to  exercise  even  maternal  influence  in
precipitating  what  they  might  blame  her  for
when  they  came  to  taste  the  possible  bitter-
ness of  her  position,  and  to  experience  poverty,
it  might  be,  with  the  knowledge  of  the  true
and  living  God.  She  sets  to  us  a  most
righteous  example.  Never  try  to  coerce  the
judgment,  or  to  force  the  conscience,  even  of
the  nearest  and  dearest ;  a  victory  gained  at
such  expense  is  worse  than  a  defeat.  Respect
the  intellect,  revere  the  conscience ;  say  what
you  would  like,  urge  what  you  would  prefer,
but  leave  to  each  individual  connected  with
you  perfect  liberty  to  decide  and  act  for  them-
selves. To  tempt,  to  coerce,  or  compel  by  fear,
or  by  reward,  or  by  force,  is  to  intrude  your
hand  into  th^^^  holy  place  which  the  human
conscience  is,  even  in  its  aberration, — to  lay
a  rude  hand,  as  it  were,  upon  the  ark  of  God,
and  to  assume  prerogatives  for  yourself  which
God  alone  is  exclusively  competent  to  exer-
cise.

'*  As  there  was  to  be  no  coercion  or  violence
on  the  part  of  Naomi,  there  was  on  the  other
hand  to  be  no  concealment.  There  are  two
ways  of  bringing  another  over  to  what  we
like  ;  we  may  either  coerce  the  person,  which
is  most  criminal,  or  we  may  conceal — which
is  most  dishonest — the  actual  state  of  things,
and  draw  over  to  us  unawares  one  who  will
afterwards,  on  discovering  facts  as  they
are,  repent  and  regret  the  step.  Naomi  was
candid.  She  shews  them  that  there  was  no
earthly  prospect  whatever  of  bettering  their
condition." — Dr.  Cuviming.

'  *  I  cannot  think  very  highly  of  Naomi's
character  when  I  see  the  advice  she  gave  to
her  daughters.  She  loved  them,  it  is  true  ;
but  her  love  was  of  too  carnal  a  nature ;  for
she  had  more  respect  to  their  temporal  wel-
fare than  to  the  welfare  of  their  souls.  Should
not  the  advice  of  Moses  to  Hobab  have  been
hers  to  both  of  them,  "Come  with  me,  and
G<.d  will  do  you  good"'?  (Numb.  x.  29—32.)
Naomi,  thou  hast  given  us  a  j)icturetoo  often
realized  in  the  present  day :  in  her  we  see  a
mother  more  anxious  about  the  providing  of
husbands  for  her  daughters  than  the  saving
of  their  souls." — Simeon.

"  A  Jesuit  might  raise  the  question,  i*  it  wine
to  tell  the  whole  truth  under  circumstances
like  these  ?  The  Christian  cor\science  is  satis-
fied in  knowing  that  it  cannot  he  sinful.'^ — 3^

4U


BOMILETIG  COMME^TAliY:  nvTH.  chap.  i.  13.


Theme, — Resignation  in  Sufferino,

"  Oh,  'tis  good
To  wait  submissive  at  Thy  holy  throne,
To  leave  petitions  at  Thy  feet,  and  bear
Thy  frowns  and  silence  with  a  patient  soul." — WATTS.

iVay,  my  daughters;  for  it  grieveth  me  ,  .  .  .  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  gave  out

against  me.

Three  widows  remaining,  the  solemn  and  aflfecting  monuments  that  God  will
not  be  forgotten.  Here  is  the  end  of  all  the  wanderings  of  the  past  !  Naomi's
sorrow,  bitter  as  it  is,  intensified  by  the  helplessness  of  those  who  have  shared  her
calamities  with  her,  her  afflictions  finding  an  increasing  heaviness  because  of  her
unselfish  desires  for  their  welfare.  [Some  translate,  "  It  is  far  more  bitter  to  me
than  to  you,"  or,  *'It  has  gone  much  more  bitterly  with  me  than  with  you."]
God  has  reduced  me  to  such  mean  services  that  I  can  do  nothing  for  you  (Gill).
Note,  (a)  To  a  graciovs  spirit  it  is  an  increase  of  sorrow  to  see  others  involved  in  the
fruit  of  our  sins.  The  heaviest  burden  of  many  a  parent's  heart  explained  in  this
(cf.  2  Sam.  xii.  15 — 23).  Even  a  monarch's  crown  brings  no  exemption  from  the
law  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  17).  {h)  True  love  takes  to  heart  a  friend's  afflictions  in  its  own
troubles  [Bernard).  Human  life,  alas  !  shews  too  often  the  other  extreme,  a  hard-
ness and  callousness  of  heart  to  all  the  expressions  of  Divine  displeasure  as  they
concern  ourselves,  and  a  total  insensibility  to  the  result  of  our  sin,  as  it  may
afi*ect  others,  (c)  Calamities  like  these  7iot  only  bring  sorrow  for  the  dead,  but  grief
for  the  living.

Notice,  I.  The  source  of  this  affliction.  Men  generally  see  in  details  Hke
these  (v.  1 — 5  j  the  natural  and  ordinary  sequence  of  events.  Naomi  saw  something
else  beyond  and  behind,  infinitely  more  worthy  of  note.  Her  loss  proceeded  from
no  other  by-causes,  but  from  the  hand  of  God  [Fuller).  As  the  showers  come
from  the  clouds,  so  her  afflictions  from  the  Lord  (Topsell).  Why  doubt  this,
though  they  had  stolen  upon  her  a  thousand  times  more  naturally,  gently,  and
insensibly,  were  that  possible  ?  Stoics  ascribe  calamities  to  inevitable  fate ;
Epicureans  and  atheists,  to  blind  fate ;  Philistines,  to  chance  ;  Christians,  to
that  One  by  whom  the  very  hairs  of  our  head  are  all  numbered  [Maegowan),
Note.  This  is  one  (f  tJie  distinguishing  marks  of  God's  children  in  all  ages.  Afflictions
come  of  the  Divine  hand.  Their  measure,  their  continuance,  their  purpose,  all
appointed  of  Him  "  with  whom  we  have  to  do."

A  caution  necessary  here.  God's  people  may  sometimes  without  good  reason
think  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  gone  forth  against  them  [Lawson).  Job  thought
so  when  the  hand  of  Satan  had  despoiled  him  of  his  substance  and  his  children
(Job  i.  12,  21 ;  ii.  6,  10),  So  also  there  is  a  slothful  way  of  giving  assent  to
Divine  judgments.  We  say  it  is  His  hand  when  it  is  the  hand  of  our  own  sloth
and  folly,  Eli,  with  a  resignation  which  would  have  been  beautiful  under  other
circumstances,  said,  "  It  is  the  hand  of  the  Lord''  (1  Sam.  iii.  18).  Note.  This  a
common  phrase  in  the  mouth  of  the  ivirked.  Under  this  covert  we  often  hide  our
impatience  as  well  as  our  sinful  carelessness.

II.  The  spirit  in  which  afflictions  should  be  borne,  (a)  With  resignation.
Naomi  does  not  complain.  Seems  to  bow  to  the  inevitable  future.  Doubtless
found  comfort  in  the  fact  that  it  was  the  hand  of  the  Lord — that  God,  with  whom
is  mercy,  and  not  another,  had  wounded  her  heart.  Note.  Every  other  way  of
receiving  chastisement  folly  and  madness  (Acts  ix,  5  ;  Isa.  i,  5  ;  Rom.  ii.  4,  5).
(6)  With  candour.  She  acknowledged  evidently  the  sinful  cause  of  all  the  dis-
cipline through  which  she  has  passed  as  in  herself — "  the  hand  of  the  Lord  lias  gone
out  against  me.''  Otherwise  the  passage  reads  like  an  accusation  against  God.
Note.  Some  have  even  represented  life  in  this  way  as  a  conjlict  with  God  (cf.  Job  ix.
34,  xiii.  21,  xvi.  12 — 21,  etc.).  A  terrible  thought,  if  true,  and  there  is  a  sense  in
which  it  is  true  of  the  wicked.  Naomi,  however,  looked  upon  her  afflictions  as  a
60


CHAP.  1. 13.  SOMILETIC  COMM:ENTAny:    UtlTS,


judgment  for  lingering  in  the  country  of  Moab  {M.  Henry),  (c)  With  wise  thought-
fulness.  She  obeys  and  returns  (M.  Hennj).  (d)  With  unselfish  care  and  regret
for  the  evil  estate  of  others.  Grief  too  often  hard<  ns  the  heart  to  all  other  sorrow
outside  our  own.  It  is  not  so  here.  Naomi's  gentle  unselfish  spirit  shines  out
conspicuous  among  the  Old  Testament  saints.  It  yrieveth  me  much  for  yoursakes,
Topsell  on  this  : —

First,  that  all  our  afflictions  come  from  the  Lord,  that  He  might  chastise  His  own,
and  confound  the  ungodly  (Job  xxxiv.  and  xxxyi.).  Neither  the  godly  escape,
nor  the  wicked  go  scot-lree  (Deut.  xxxi.  18).  This  the  confession  of  Moses  and  of
David,  a  man  more  exercise  d  in  trouble  than  all  the  world  beside  (Ps.  cxix.  71).

Secondly,  that  the  godly  are  so  patient  in  all  their  tribulations,  even  from  this
consideration,  that  the  Lord's  hand  afflicteth  them  (2  Sam.  xvi.  10 — 12  ;  Job  ii.  10).
Bernard  on  this  : —

I.  The  most  godly  sometimes  take  their  afflictions  very  heavily  (Job  ill ;
Jer.xx.  9— 12).
n.  Afflictions  are  the  more  grievous  for  friends  wrapped  therein,  so  as  one
cannot  help  another.

III.  That  all  afflictions  come  by  the  power  and  providence  of  God — as  by  a

hand  upon  us  (Lam.  i.  12 — 17;  Amos  iii.  6,  iv.  6 — 11;  2  Chron.  xv.  6).

IV.  That  the  godly  in  common  calamities  take  themselves  to  be  especially

chastised.     This  good   woman  applied  the    whole  cross  to    herself.
They  think  upon  their  own  sins,  and  not  upon  other  men's  misdeeds.


"And  if  there  be  some  things  which  we
believe  to  be  inflicted  by  the  Lord,  to  whom
can  we  render  our  patience  better  than  to  the
Lord  ?  Nay,  He  teacheth  us  to  rejoice  more-
over, and  to  be  glad  in  that  we  are  thought
worthy  of  Divine  chastisement.  As  many  as
I  love,  saith  He,  /  chastise.  Oh,  blessed  is
that  servant  on  whose  amendment  the  Lord
is  bent ;  with  whom  He  deigneth  to  be  angry  ;
whom  He  deceiveth  not  by  hiding  His  ad-
monitions from  himl" — Tertullian.

"  Patience  .  .  .  adorneth  the  woman,  ap-
proveth  the  man  ;  is  loved  in  the  boy,  praised
in  the  young  man,  respected  in  the  old  ;  is
beautiful  in  every  sex,  in  every  age.  Come
now,  let  us  describe  her  form  and  her  de-
meanour. She  hath  a  countenance  serene
and  placid  ;  a  forehead  smooth,  contracted
with  no  wrinkle  of  grief  or  of  anger,  her
brows  evenly  and  cheerfully  relaxed,  her  eyes
cast  down  in  humility,  not  in  melancholy.
Her  mouth  bearcth  the  seal  of  honourable
silence.  Her  colour  is  such  as  those  have
who  are  free  from  care  and  crime." — 2er'
tvlUan.

"  God  Almighty  in  mercy  makes  this  world
unplcasing  to  good  men  by  atiliction,  that
they  may  set  the  less  value  upon  it.  This
is  the  voice  of  the  rod,  and  of  Him  that
hath  appointed  it,  which  every  wise  man
ought  to  hear  and  answer  with  all  obedience,
8ui)uiission,  and  thankfulness;  and  when
affliction  hath  wrought  this  effect,  its  busi-
ness is  in  a  good  measure  eiulcd,  and  for  the
most  part  it  is  thereupon  cased  or  removed."
—Hale.

"'Oh,'  snith  the  pco])lc,  *  God  hath  justly
Bent  this  plague  for  the  corruption  of  the
mngistrates.'  *  It  is  justly  inflicted,'  saith
the  magistrate, 'for  the  disobedience  of  the
people  '  '  Herein,'  saith  the  poor  man.  *  God
hath  met  with  the  oppression  and  extortion


of  the  rich.  *  Herein,'  saith  the  rich  man,
'  God  hath  paid  home  the  muttering  and  the
repining  of  the  poor.'  *  Now,'  saith  the  pro-
digal, *  God  punisheth  the  covetousness  of
old  men.'  •  Now,'  saith  the  old  man,  *  He
scourgeth  the  prodigality  of  such  as  be
young.'  Far  otherwise  Naomi,  who,  though
the  arrows  of  God  did  glance  and  rebound,  to
the  wounding  of  Orpah  and  Euth,  yet  she
thought  herself  was  the  mark  at  which  God
did  level  His  shafts.  *  The  hand  of  the  Lord
is  gone  out  against  me.'  " — Fuller,

"We  are  never  nearer  to  God  than  when
we  are  lowest  in  our  own  estimation ;  and
never  more  pleasing  to  Him  than  when  we
abhor  ourselves,  and  repent  in  dust  and
ashes." —  Charles.

"  To  be  dejected  is  natural ;  but  to  be  over-
come by  dejection  is  madness,  and  folly,  and
unmanly  weakness.  You  may  grieve  and
weep,  but  give  not  way  to  despondency,  nor
indulge  in  complaints.  Weep  as  wept  your
master  over  Lazarus,  observing  the  just  limits
of  sorrow  which  it  is  not  proper  to  pass.  —
Chryso.sioni.

"  He  who  possesses  religion  finds  ft  pro-
vidence not  more  truly  in  the  history  of  the
world  than  in  his  own  family  history  ;  the
rainbow  which  hangs  a  glistening  circle  in
the  heights  of  heaven  is  also  formed  by  the
same  sun  in  the  dewdrop  of  a  lowly  flower."
— Jean  Paul  liichter.

"  Disappointments  meet  us  at  every  turn  ;
where  we  expected  we  should  be  particularly
favoui'cd  with  helps  and  advantagfis  ....
we  beliold  ourselves  left  destitute  ;  so  ttiat
we  have  no  more  a  place  of  refuge  upon
earth,  no  more  a  dear  counsellor  or  fritnd
who  is  as  our  own  soul.  By  this  means  we
are  compelled,  as  Noah's  dove  wns,  by  the
wide  watery  waste  which  did  not  afford  a

5i


llOMILETtC  COMmJENTaIIY:   RUTH.


CHAP.  I.  14.


single  restinpr-place,  to  fly  to  the  Ark,  and  to
take  shelter  there." —  Venn.

"  Be  still  in  sorrow  1     As  God  wills  1
Let  that  thy  motto  be  ;
Submissive  'neath  His  strokes  receive

His  image  stamped  on  thee.
Be  still  in  God  1     Who  rests  on  Him,

Enduring  peace  shall  know,
And  with  a  spirit  glad  and  free.
Through  night  and  grief  shall  go."

Sturm,

•*  And  if  in  our  unworthiness
Thy  sacrificial  wine  we  press ;


If  from  Thy  ordeal's  heated  bars.

Our  feet  are  seamed  with  crimson  scars,

Thy  will  be  done  1
Strike.  Thou  the  Master,  we  Thy  keys.
The  anthem  of  the  destinies,
The  minor  of  Thy  loftier  strain.
Our  hearts  shall  breathe  the  old  refrain,

Thy  will  be  done  I  "
Whittier.

The  good  we  have  enjoyed  from  Heaven's

free  will ;
And  shall  we  murmur  to  endure  the  ill  1 "

Dryden.


YERSE  14.

Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes. — And  they  lifted  up  their  voice  and  wept  again

"exceedingly"  {Dr.  Cassel),  "■  still  more"  {Lnither).  A-s  in  E.V.  {LaiKjr.).  (.^ee  on  ver.  9.)
Much  affected  with  the  tender  things  Naomi  had  said  {M.  Henri/)  (cf.  Gen.  xxix.  11).  And
Orpah  kissed  hermother-in-law  {kcu  fxtorpn/zfj/  hq  tov  \aov  avnjQ).  [and  returned  to  her  own
people]  (LXX.).  So  Vulgate,  Arabic,  Synac.  LIn(|ae.stionabiy  found  in  their  M88  (Bp,
Horsley).  So  Dathe,  Houbig,  Booth.  Not  so  Wright.  Lange  supplies,  "and  turned  back."
As  it  stands,  the  sentence  s(jems  incomplete.  Buxtorf  contends,  however,  that  the  return
is  implied  in  the  act  of  kissing.  Naomi's  kiss  (ver.  9)  evidently  meant  "return,"  and  so
Orpah's  may  be  understood  to  say  "  farewell."  The  last  sad  kiss  of  a  tearful  separation  {Steele
and  TcTvy).

But  Ruth  clave  unto  her,  followed  her  (LXX.),  stayed  by  her  {Luther).  Her  person
was,  as  it  were,  glued  unto  Naomi,  as  the.  force  of  the  Hebrew  words  is  {Bernard).  In
Psahn  Ixiii.,  the  same  word  is  rendered  "foUoweth  hard."  No  fresh  demonstration  of  affec-
tion, but  she  clave,  etc.,  not  merely  because  of  a  tender  affection  for  her  mother-in-law,  but
also  a  yearning  desire  to  know  more  of  the  God  and  land  of  Israel  {Steele  and  Terry).  The
conversion  of  Ruth  probably  commenced  at  this  time  {A.  Clarke),  bhe  had  been  a  proselyte
hetore  {Barnbachivs,  Ahen  Ezra).  Ruth  (see  Intro.,  par.  4,  5:  and  Ciit.  and  Exeg.  Notes
on  ver.  4).  In  his  genealogy  of  our  Lord,  St.  Matthew  inscribes  the  name  of  only  four
women — Thamar,  Rahab,  Ruth,  and  Bathsheba  [literally  only  throe  are  mentioned  by  name,
and  these  three  are  foreigners  {Kitto),  Bathsheba  being  designated  as  "her  of  Urias"]  ;  and
among  these  four,  Ruth  easily  holds  the  pre-eminence  (  Cox).  Thamar,  Rahab,  and  Bathsheba,
were  all  women  of  dubious  virtue  (  Cox).  Ruth  is,  in  some  respects,  one  of  the  most  interesting
female  characters  of  the  Bible  {Kitto).

Theme, — The  Crisis  and  the  Contrast  once  again,

"  'Twixt  two  worlds,  like  a  star,  life  shines ;

A  little  star  with  fading  light ;

Above,  o'erbending  day  ;  beneath,

The  deep  abyss  of  endless  night.
♦  ♦  *  *  ♦

And  who  shall  hymn  its  praise  aright,

If  it  enfold  eternal  bliss  1
What  notes  express  the  funeral  dirge.

If  it  the  future  crowning  miss  1 " — 7?,

And  they  lifted  up  their  voice  and  wept  again;  and  Orpah  kissed  her  mother-ill'

laWf  but  liutJi  clave  unto  her.

Insensibility  in  certain  circumstances  is  not  fortitude  ;  it  is  savageness  and
Btupidity,  or  something  worse  (Toller).  Their  tears  here  their  ornament  and
their  honour.  Both  wept  again  (cf.  ver.  9) ;  alike  in  the  signs  of  their  affection,
not  so  in  the  actions  which  follow.  Probably  Orpah's  grief  was  the  more  demon-
Btrative  (ver.  10),  especially  so  now.  Note,  (a)  That  all  outward  sorrow  giveth
not  certain  witness  of  the  soundness  of  the  heart  [Bernard).  Saul's  weeping  to
David  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  IG).  Ishmael,  the  son  of  Nethamah,  in  his  tears  a  deep
dissembler  (Jer.  xli.  6 — 8).  [b)  The  difference  between  mere  kindness  of  manner
and  self-sacrificing  love  most  vividly  depicted  here  {Speaker's  Com.),


CHAP.  I.  14.  TfOMTTEriC  COMJfENTARV:    TiUTH.


"  And  Oii)ali  kissed  lier  niotlicr-iii-law," — tho  customary  salutation  in  saying
(■{irewc'll.  Previously  Naomi  had  kissed  Orpali  (ver.  9).  They  parted  possibly
\\iLh(.ut  a  wold.  Too  much  oveicome  to  speak,  the  natural  and  usual  sign  of
allectiou  comes  in  to  say  that  which  words  cannot.

"  Oh  1  when  the  heart  is  full  ;  when  bitter  thoughts
Come  crowding  thickly  up  for  utterance,
.  .  .  The  poor,  common  words  of  courtesy
Are  such  a  very  mockery." —  Willis.

Note,  (a)  An  evidence  here  that  affection  suiuires  a  difference  of  opinion  (Dr,
Cvmniinff).  Separation,  even  on  the  most  vital  points  of  religion,  does  not
necessarily  mean  alienation  of  heart ;  just  as  distance,  either  in  time  or  space,
does  not  necessarily  afiect  true  love.  The  adoption  of  a  false  religion  must  not
deaden  aflection,  or  break  up  the  courtesies  of  social  intercourse  (Dr.  Cnvwrnuj).
[li]  Farewell  may  he  spoken  and  received^  even  when  we  tliink  it  spoken  unwiseltj,
without  anger.  No  dispute  here,  no  bitter  feeling  in  the  mind  of  either,  (c)
Second  remonstrances  may  succeed  where  previously  our  entreaties  and  persuasion
have  met  with  apparent  failure.     This  is  true  whether  for  good  or  for  evil.

We  have  here  again  (cf.  on  ver.  10) —

I.  A  marked  and  strong  contrast.  Orpah  going  back  in  tears,  perhaps  in
despair  (cf.  Matt.  xix.  22)  ;  Kuth  going  forward  in  resolute  self-sacrifice,  though
from  the  human  side  without  hope  ;  the  one  to  the  pleasures  and  delights  of
the  past ;  the  other,  true  to  the  little  light  already  given,  onward  to  a  better
future.

(1)  Points  to  an  underlyiny  though  unseen  difference  in  character  and  faith,
Orpah  preferred  the  sensuous  to  the  spiritual ;  liuth,  the  unseen  to  all  she  knew
as  lying  behind  her  in  Moab  (cf.  ver.  16,  17).  Orpah  sought  rest  in  the  ''house
of  a  husband  ;"  Ruth,  rest  with  the  Israel  of  God.  Orpah  could  not  easily  under-
stand the  force  of  a  great  moral  or  intellectual  obligation  [Cumnnng]  ;  Ruth
determined  to  follow  love  wherever  it  might  lead  her.  In  Orpah  we  have
nature  in  its  most  hopeful  aspect ;  in  Ruth  we  begin  to  see  the  dawnings  of  grace.
Note.  Where  and  how  a  cJiild  of  sense  differs  from  a  child  of  the  Spirit,  (a)  In
the  want  of  steadfastness.  (/S)  In  clinging  to  self  after  all  in  the  decisive  moments
of  life,  (y)  In  love  of  the  world  behind  when  the  final  hour  of  choice  has  come.
(Cf.  on  ver.  10,  div.  II.)

(2)  Suggests  a  very  common  contrast  between  natural  gifts  and  grace.  The  one
makes  a  man,  the  other  a  Christian.  Orpah's  religion  was  passion  ;  Ruth's,
principle.  Orpah's  illustrates  mere  profession  ;  Ruth's,  decision  for  God.  Orpah
the  type  of  the  beautiful,  affectionate,  fair,  but  frail  ones  of  this  world.  Much  that
is  good,  only  the  touch  of  the  defiler  is  there.  Ruth  the  representative  of  the  noble,
enduring,  and  self-sacrificing  spirit  God  only  can  bestow.

We  have  here —

II.  A  final  separation.  Brought  about  by  natural  causes,  but  involving
spiritual  and  even  eternal  issues.  (See  on  ver.  11 — 13,  div.  III.  ;  also  p.  57.)
Onward  with  Naomi  means  Godward,  and  so  heavenward.  Like  Abraham,  Ruth
becomes  through  her  fidelity  "  heir  of  the  promises,"  and  ancestress  of  a  long  line
of  kings,  ending  in  the  Shiloh  that  was  to  come.  WJiat  does  backward  mean  ?
And  yet  all  depends  upon  the  choice  of  the  moment.  A  piinful  but  inevitalU
crisis  (Tyng).  They  have  dwelt  together,  suflfcrcd  together,  journeyed  side  by
side.  Yet  now  they  must  separate,  and  here  they  have  come  to  the  decisive  point.
Their  paths  lie  apart.  For  the  future,  their  aims,  direction,  the  issues  of  their
lives,  wide  as  the  poles  asunder.

Note,  (a)  A  time  like  this  in  the  souVs  history.  The  sinner  comes  to  a  point
where  he  must  either  go  forward  and  confess,  or  backward  and  deny,  the  hope
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  He  sta  nds,  like  Orpah,  irresolute,  deciding  now  for  and
now  against.  But  sooner  or  later  the  irrevocable  decision  comes,  and  all  the  future
bangs  upon  that,

63


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   IILTH.  chap.  i.  14.


(h)  A  time  like  this  in  the  history  of  all  human  friendshijJS.  A  separation  wh
certain,  and  as  final  ;  if  not  before,  then  in  that  groat  day  when  the  sheep  are
divided  from  the  poats  (Matt.  xxv.  32).  (1)  Often  browiht  about  by  religious  injlueuces
in  this  world.  Tlie  Uuths  go  forward  to  new  and  holier  companionships  ;  the
Orpahs  back  again  to  the  sinful  associations  of  Moab.  (2)  Sometimes  by  out-
H-ard  circumstances y  the  exigencies  of  human  life,  and  the  providential  leadings  of

God.

"  There  is  no  union  here  of  hearts
That  finds  not  here  an  end."

Improvement. — Learn  (1)  the  necessHy  for  an  instant  and  wise  decision  in
these  critical  moments  ;  (2)  That  the  plausible  choice,  like  Orpah's,  is  not  always
the  wise  one;  (3)  That  all  connexions,  all  enjoyments,  all  worldly  pursuits,
should  give  place,  as  with  Kuth,  to  the  sweet  and  endearing  influences  which
draw  us  towards  God.

Fuller  on  this  (condensed)  : —

l^hese  words  contain  two  general  parts  ;  (1)  A  blazing  meteor  falling  down  out
of  the  air;   (2)  A  fixed  star  fairly  shining  in  the  h<  aven.

That  thou  mayest  finally  persevere  observe  these  four  rules —

I.  Utterly  renounce  all  sufficiency  in  thyself.     Who  but  a  madman  will
nowadays  warrant  the  paper  shields  of  his  own  strength,  that  knows
that  Adam's  complete  armour  of  original  integrity  was  shot  through
in  Paradise  ?
n.  Place  all  thy  confidence  on  the  undeserved  mercy  of  God.    Perseverance
cometh  neither  from  the  east,  nor  from  the  west,  nor  as  yet  from  the
Bouth ;   but  God  suffereth  one  to  fall,  and  holdeth  up  another.     The
temple  of  Solomon  had  two  pillars;   one  called   Jacin  ("The   Lord
will  stablish  "),  the  other  Boaz  ("In  Him  is  strength").     So  every
Christian — the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost — is  principally  hold  en   up
by  these  two  pillars,  God's  power  and  will  to  support  him.     Where-
fore  in  every  distress  let  us   cry  out  to  God,  as  the  disciples  did  to
our   Saviour  in  the  midst  of  a  tempest,  "  Help,  Master,  or  else  we
perish  ! "
m.  Use  all  those  means  which  God  hath  chalked  out  for  the  increase  of
grace  in  thee ;   as  prayer,  meditation,  reverent  receiving  the  sacra-
ments, accompanying  with  God's  children,  reading,  hearing  the  word,
etc.
IV.  Always  preserve  in  thyself  an  awful  fear  lest  thou  shouldest  fall  away
from  God.     Fear  to   fall,  and   assurance   to  stand,  are   two   sisters ;
and  though  Cain  said  he  was  not  his  "  brother's  keeper,"  sure  I  am
that  this  fear  doth  watch  and  guard  her  sister  assurance.     Faulus  est
gradus  certitudinis,  qiiantus  sollivitudinis :   they  that  have  much  of  this
fear  have  much  certainty ;  they  that  have  little,  little  certainty ;  they
that  have  none,  have  none  at  all.     It  is   said  in  building,  that  those
chimneys  which  shake  most  and  give  way  to  the  wind  will  stand  the
longest :  the  moral  in  divinity  is  true  ;  those  Christians  that  shiver
for  fear  by  sins  to  fall  away  may  be   observed  most  courageous   to
persist  in  piety.
Improvement. — Let   us   therefore    "  work    out    our   salvation   with   fear   and
trembling  :"   ever  trembling,  lest  we  should  be  cast  to  hell ;    ever  triumphing  that
we  shall  come  to  heaven  :   ever  fearful,  lest  we  should  fall ;    ever  certain  that  we
shall  stand :   ever  careful,  lest  we  should  be  damned ;   ever  cheerful  that  we  shall
be  saved.

"Look  at  that  sad  group  of  three  tearful  No,  not  fu^  any  painter,  but  for  one  wh(jse

widowed  women    standing  in    the  highway  soul  can  sympathise  with  womanly  gricl  and

debating  this  question,  Shall  we  say  farewell  whose  hand  has  skill  enough  to  poitray  that

or  not?     Is  it  not  a  scene  for  any  painter?  pathetic  mingling  of  sorrow  and  love,     B-Ow


CHAP.  I.  14.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   RUTH.


he  would  sketch  the  varied  expiessions  in
those  faces  1  Naomi  with  eyes  full  of  ea;j;er
entreaty,  and  lips  quiverini^  with  jiain  ;  Or])ah
moved  to  weeping'-,  yet  perplexed,  wondering
what  decision  to  make,  and  casting  a  glance
ever  and  anon  back  on  tfie  road  they  have
come  ;  Ruth  standing,  grasping  her  mother's
hand  with  unwavering  resolve  in  every  line
of  her  face  and  attitude.  It  is  a  sacred
moment,  an  hour  of  suspense,  on  which  de-
ponds  a  future  that  no  prophet's  eye  hath
discerned." — Bvadcn.

"  We  have  [here]  a  very  striking  and  in-
structive instance  of  the  distinction  between
mere  amiableness  of  natural  temper  and
religious  principle.  Forming  your  opinion
of  them  from  the  whole  of  the  former
part  of  the  history,  you  see  nothing  to
choose  between  them.  Both  of  tlicm  a[»pear
to  great  advantage,  most  amiable  and  well-
disposed  young  wcmien ;  excellent  wives,
and  kind  and  affectionate  daughters-in-law.
But  when  put  to  the  test,  you  see  the  differ-
ence. Or  pah  appears  to  have  had  every
natural  excellence  that  Ruth  possessed,  but
it  was  not  grafted  on  religious  principles.
Ruth  was  not  only  as  amiable  as  her  sister-
in-law,  but  knowledge  of  the  true  God  appears
to  have  reached  her  heart.  .  .  .  The  one  was  a
lovely  heathen,  the  other  what  we  should  call
in  this  day  an  amiable  Christian.  .  .  .  Orpah
was  like  the  young  man  whom  Jesus  loved
for  his  amiable  qualities,  but  who  went  away
sorrowful ;  Ruth  was  like  Mary,  who  chose
the  better  part,  that  could  not  be  taken  away
from  her."— r.  N.  Toller,

"  It  might  be  said  with  a  certain  degree
of  truth,  that  the  same  cause  induced  Orpah
to  go,  and  Ruth  to  remain — the  fact,  namely,
that  Naomi  had  no  longer  either  son  or
husband.  The  one  wished  to  become  a  wife
again,  the  other  to  remain  a  daughter.  Few
among  the  natural  children  of  men  are  as
kind  and  good  as  Orpah  ;  but  a  love  like  that
of  Ruth  has  scarcely  entered  the  thoughts  of
poets.  Antigone  dies  for  the  love  of  her
brother  ;  but  the  life  which  awaits  Ruth  was
more  painful  than  death.  Alcestis  sacrifices
herself  for  her  husband,  and  Sigune  persist-
ently continues  in  a  solitary  cell,  with  the
corpse  of  her  lover  whom  she  had  driven
into  battle,  until  she  dies  ;  but  Ruth  goes  to
a  foreign  land,  and  chooses  poverty,  not  for
a  husband  or  a  lover,  but  for  the  mother  of
him  who  long  since  was  torn  away  from  her.
She  refuses  to  leave  her  for  the  very  reason
that  she  is  poor,  old,  and  childless.  Naomi,
having  lost  her  sons,  shall  not  on  that  account
lose  her  daughters  also.  Rather  than  leave
her  to  suffer  alone,  Ruth  will  starve  with  her
or  beg  for  her.  Here  is  love  for  the  dead
and  the  living,  surpassing  that  of  Alcestis
and  Sigune.  That  Ruth  does  for  her  mother-
in-law,  what  as  the  highest  filial  love  the
poet  invents  for  Antigone,  when  he  represents
her  as  not  leaving  her  blind  father,  is  in
actual  life  almost  unexanii)led.  Nor  would
it  be  easy  to  find  an  instance  of  a  deeper
conflict  than  that  which  love  had  to  sustain
on  t  his  occasion.     The  foundation  of  it  was


laid  when  Elimcloch  left  his  people  in  order
not  to  share  their  woes.  It  was  rendered
inevitable  when,  against  the  law  of  Israel,
his  sons  took  wives  of  the  daughters  of  Moab.
It  broke  out  when  the  men  died.  Their  love
for  their  Israelitish  husbands  had  made  the
women  strangers  in  their  native  land ;  and
the  love  of  Naomi  for  her  Moabitish  daughters
made  her  doubly  childless  in  Israel.  Nation-
ality, laws,  and  customs  were  about  to  sepa-
rate mother  and  daughter-in-law.  But  a^
lore  had  mi] ted  them,  .s-o  also  love  alojie  has
yower  to  solve  the  contilrt,  but  only  such  a
love  as  Ruth's.  Orpah  escaped  the  struggle
by  returning  to  ]\I  iab  ;  Ruth  ends  it  by  going
with  :\aomi." — Lange.

"  Longing  for  knowledge^

Thirsting  for  truth,
Loving  fair  virtue,

Saying  like  Ruth,
*  I  will  go  with  thee,

Thine  shall  be  mine  ;  *
Friendships  it  may  chanoe

Leaving  behind ;

New  worlds  shall  open.

Bright  with  a  sheen,
Decked  with  a  glory,

Eyes  have  not  seen ;
Clearer  the  sunshine,

Lighter  the  shade.
Daily  and  hourly

O'er  life's  way  made.

True  to  thine  own  sel^

True  to  thy  God,
Treading  the  pathway

Good  men  have  trod  ;
All  the  past  for  thee

Worketh  amain,
All  the  past  in  thee

Livetli  again ;

All  that  is  worthy,

All  that  is  true,
In  thy  right  deed

Liveth  anew ;
And  unborn  blessings

Springing  from  thine,
Gladden  the  morrow.

Make  it  divine." — B.

"  Nature  in  its  highest  endowments  and
improvements  is  infinitely  below  grace.  There
are  some  believers  in  Christ  whose  natural
tempers  are  never  refined  to  such  a  degree
as  we  might  e.xpect  from  their  religious  prin-
ciples; yet  they  shall  dwell  for  ever  in  the
regions  of  love.  There  are  other  men  whose
natural  tempers  are  affectionate  and  humane.
Perhaps  they  are  improved  by  all  the  advan-
tages of  a  polite  and  learned  education.
Thus  they  acquire  an  uncommon  degree  of
respectability  in  the  world,  and  yet  continue
destitute  of  faith  in  Christ  and  love  to  God.
With  all  their  attainments  they  are  still  in  a
miserable  conilition.  The  love  and  esteem
of  men  will  not  secure  them  from  the  wrath
of  that  God  whose  service  they  neglect,  and
whose  Son,  the  only  Saviour,  they  d's 'isvi."—
Lawson.

6d


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    TIUTH.  chap.  i.  14


'•Like  Martba  and  l\Tary  of  New  Testa-  'reproach  for  Christ,'  and  to   suffer  wrong

ment  history,  Orpah  an(]  Kuth  represent  two  patiently,  is  to  my  mind  very  much  like  'the

different  types  of  character.     Oi-pah's  home  root' in  practical  srodliness.  .  .   .  See  there  a

attachments,  and  desire  to  find  rest  in  an-  youn.sr  man  who  has  risked  losing  his  situa-

other  husband's  house,  control  and  limit  her  tion  because  he  will  not  conceal  his  attach-

life  influence  and  action.    Ruth's  loftier  spirit  ment  to  Christ.    Such  as  these  are  sometimes

discerns  in  the  God  of  Israel  the  fountain  of  brought  into  great  straits.     They  do  not  see

a  purer  religion  than  the  Moabitish  idolatry  any  precept  that  plainly  says,  '  Thou  shalt  do

affords,  and   she  gladly  forsakes  father  and  this,'  or  '  Thou  shalt  do  that.'     But  they  find

mother,  and  sister,  and  native  land,  to  identify  they  must  do  one  thing  or  the  other.     They

herself  in  anyway  with  the  people  of  Jeho-  make  their  choice,  and  it  is   against  their

Yah." Steele  and  Terry.  worldly  interest,  but  it  is  done  for  the  love

"  Some  habits  and  practices  of  godly  men  they  bear  to  a  Saviour's  name.     Little  faith

may  be   easily  counterfeited.     Yet    I   ihink  takes  a   strong  grip.     Oh  1    I  cannot  doubt

that  there  are  certain  virtues  of  God's  chil-  the  root  of  the  matter  is  found  in  them."—

dren  which  are  perfectly  inimitable.    To  bear  Sjmrgeon.

Theme. — The  Failure  of  a  merely  Earthly  Affection.

**  Oh  heart  of  ours  1  so  weak  and  poor,
That  nothing  there  can  long  endure ;
And  so  their  hurts  find  shameful  cure, —
While  every  sadder,  wiser  thought.
Each  holier  aim  which  sorrow  brought,
Fades  quite  away,  and  comes  to  nought." — Trench,

**  Thy  soul  shall  have  her  earthy  freight,
And  custom  lie  upon  thee  with  a  weight,
Heavy  as  frost,  and  deep  almost  as  life." — Wordsworth,

And  Orpah  kissed  her  mother-in-law  [and  went  back  to  her  own  people,  LXX.].

A  little  entreaty  will  serve  to  move  nature  to  be  good  unto  itself  [Bishop  Hall).
So  with  Orpah.  No  other  persuasions  have  been  used  but  worldly  reasons  taken
from  marriage.  She  that  even  now,  for  the  love  of  people  and  mother-in-law,
would  go  as  far  as  the  farthest,  for  the  cogitation  of  a  heathen  husband  forsaketh
both  God  and  people  and  mother  and  sister  [Toji.sell).  Alas  for  human  nature,
for  here  is  the  type  !  Men  follow  the  higher  and  nobler  instincts  of  the  heart  for
awhile;  but  how  often  is  it  that  afterwards  inducements  of  worldly  prosperity
or  comfort  come  in  to  turn  them  abide,  and  to  lead  them  back  to  the  world !
And  alas,  too,  for  the  fickleness  of  our  best  resolutions  (cf.  ver.  10),  if  unaided  by
Divine  grace  I
See  here,  then —

I.  An  instance  of  instability  and  inconstancy.  Orpah  a  reed  shaken  with
the  wind  [Braden).  (1)  She  must  have  bee7i  untrue  to  her  convictions.  Men  do
not  go  so  far  as  this  towards  the  true  Israel,  without  seeing  enough  to  encourage
them  in  still  going  forward.  We  may  pity,  but  pity  must  not  warp  the  judgment.
We  may  even  excuse  in  some  measure.  But  the  true  reason  of  such  "  returns  "
found  in  the  apostle's  words,  "  They  went  out  from  u?^,"  etc.  (1  John  ii.  19).
(2)  She  certainly  was  untrue  to  her  affections.  And  untrue  to  the  lower  love,  how
could  she  be  true  to  the  higher  hope  of  Israel  ?  (cf.  1  John  iv.  21.)  Seeking  the
things  that  were  her  own,  she  left  behind  her  the  things  that  were  Christ's
(Phil.  ii.  21).

Note  with  such — (a)  A  change  of  mind  evidently  underlies  this  outward  change  of
purpose.  Man  in  himself  fickle  as  the  wind,  especially  in  those  things  which
concern  his  best  welfare.  "Ye  did  run  well,"  etc.  (Gal.  v.  7) — a  common  and
necessary  exhortation  always.

Note.  [Ii]  The  necessity  for  a  decision  is  the  signal  for  a  retrograde  movement  (M,
Timson).  They  begin  to  go  backward  precisely  as  they  begin  to  understand  what
is  really  involved  in  going  forward.  So  with  those  who  followed  Christ  (John
vi.  60 — (SO)).  When  they  heard  that  discipleship  meant  faith  in  Him  [ib.  G3),
and  a  Divine  power  working  in  themselves  [ih.  05),  they  stumbled  at  the  saying,
aiid"w!ilkid  no  more  with  Him,"  They  "  went  back/"  ms  0)pa.]i  did.  Suc-b
56


CHAP.  I.  14.  HOMJLF.TIC  COMMENTARY:   RUTH.


miiicls  will  go  a  certain  length  in  positive  duty,  and  yet  always  draw  back  from  a
really  decisive  act  [M.  Timson).

Note,  (c)  In  sovie  feeble  ivay  there  will  he  an  ea-Jiihition  of  actual  love  for  the  course
uhich  is  nevertheless  renounced  (M,  Timson).  Orpab  wept,  and  Judas  bitterly
repented.  The  vision  of  things  divine  haunts  them  even  as  they  return  into  the
darkness  they  have  chosen  (M.  Timson).  And  inspiration  sends  after  them  the
solemn  words  of  warning,  *'  If  any  man  draw  back,  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure
in  him  "  (Heb.  x.  38).  Notice  then  the  porilous  position  of  those  who  stand  in
the  critical  moments  of  life — on  the  boundary-line  of  God's  Israel,  and  yet  with
love  to  the  Moab  behind  hidden  in  the  heart.  Orpah  the  type  of  a  mind  half
awakened  to  the  things  of  God  [M.  Timson).

See  here —

II.  An  illustration  of  apostacy.  Orpah  neither  cold  nor  hot,  like  the
Laodicean  church  [Macyowan).  Pats  her  hand  to  the  plough,  but  looks  back
again  ;  and  such  are  unworthy  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Like  Judas  with  Christ,
she  is  loving  enough  to  kiss,  but  not  to  cleave  to  Naomi.

Notice  as  significant — This  going  hack  (1)  her  own  choice,  (2)  deliberately  made,
(3)  respectfully  expressed,  (4)  freely  and  finally  carried  out  (1  John  iv.  21).

So  with  many  to-day.  They  forsake  the  world  apparently ;  join  themselves  t6
God's  people ;  travel  towards  the  heavenly  Jerusalem ;  seemingly  profit  in  reli-
gion, but  they  have  no  stability,  "no  root  in  themselves,"  as  the  gospel  expresses
it  (Matt.  xiii.  21).  Easy  Christianity,  half-hearted  Christianity,  external  Christianity
apostatizes,  and  well  it  may  !  Without  vital  change,  men  return  to  the  world,  to
their  old  state  and  ways  (Heb.  iii.  12).  They  return  speedily,  and  as  certainly
as  Orpah  went  back  to  Moab  (John  vi.  QQ).  And  this  in  the  face  of  all  their
protestations  (ver.  10).

Note,  (a)  Professions  are  like  hills;  you  judge  their  worth  hy  the  names  they  hear,
thefimis  hy  which  they  are  issued  (Braden).  {h)  What  is  soon  ripe  is  soon  rotten
{]\[.  Henry).

See  here —

III.  An  illustration  of  the  causes  and  consequences  of  apostacy.  (1)  The
causes.  With  Orpah  the  reasons  for  this  return  to  be  found  (a)  in  her  inclinations.
Hence  she  is  easily  persuaded  to  yield  to  these.  She  prefers  her  pagan  connections,
after  all,  to  the  privileges  of  the  house  of  Israel.  Puts  her  country,  her  kindred,
and  her  god  [Chemosh]  before  all  else.  Eve  lost  Paradise  for  an  apple,  and  the
Gadarenes  will  lose  Christ  rather  than  their  swine  {Bernard).  Such  is  man's
choice  naturally.  A  warp  in  the  nature,  a  proneness  to  meaner  things,  (b)  In
her  supposed  interests.  She  went  as  far  as  consisted  with  her  hope  of  carnal
enjoyment  (Macguwan).  But  when  the  prospect  of  a  husband  in  Israel  was  for
ever  put  aside  (ver.  12,  13),  then  she  returned  to  Moab,  where  there  still  might
be  hope  (ver.  8,  9).  Note.  An  inability  to  deny  herself  the  key  to  this  ^^  going
hack.'"  Orpah  like  many  now,  who  are  almost  but  not  altogether  Christians.
They  follow  Christ  to  a  great  length,  but  cannot  forsake  all  for  Him ;  are  willing
to  part  with  much,  but  not  with  everything ;  go  as  far  with  Him  as  costs  no  pam
and  calls  for  no  complete  self-denial,  but  btumble  at  a  daily  "  cross-bearing,"  and
that  following  Him  through  good  and  evil  report  which  He  demands  (cf.  Luke
xiv.  26  ;  James  iv.  4  ;  1  John  ii.  15,  etc.).  (c)  In  the  threatened  inco7iveniences.
Orpah  a  type  of  those  who  have  a  sensitive  hatred  to  suffering  (Braden).

(2)  Its  consequences.  She  ^^  goes  back,''  and  the  separation  becomes  wider  every
hour.  So  an  awakened  and  convinced  mind  can  never  abide  at  the  line  where  a
Saviour  is  refused  (Tyng).  No  permanency  in  that  state.  She  goes  back  to  Jier
own  people.  So  apostates  return  to  the  old  companionships  and  associations  of
the  past ;  to  the  haunts  of  dissipation  and  delight  (2  Pet.  ii.  22) ;  to  the  folly  and
frivolity  of  the  past  (2  Tim.  iv.  10) ;  to  covetousness  and  ever-increasing  greed
(2  Pet.  ii.  15,  IG) ;  to  unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart  (2  Tim.  ii.  17)  ;  to  oju  n
hubtility  and  hatred  of  the  truth  {ibid.).     She  goes  back  to  her  god.     Chemuih

67


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.  chap.  i.  14.


preferred  to  Jehovah — a  being  without  existence,  having  eyes  and  yet  seeing  not
(Isa.  xliv.),  to  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth.  Note.  Apostates  begin  in  the  spirit,
bat  end  in  the  flesh  (Lawson).  How  true  the  apostle's  words  of  such,  '*  The  latter
end  is  worse  with  tbem  than  the  beginning"  (2  Pet.  ii.  20).  ^

Lessons. — (1)  We  are  not  easily  to  entertain  men  as  sincere,  because  they
have  made  a  fair  show  in  religion  for  a  time  {Bernard).  (2)  An  amiable  temper
or  an  affectionate  behaviour  will  not  compensate  for  perseverance  in  the  heaven-
ward calling.  Being  almost  a  Christian  never  conducted  any  man  to  heaven
(Macgouan).  (3)  Those  who  at  first  were  forward  in  religion,  may  afterwards
altogether  fall  away  (Fuller),  Asa  possibly  an  illustration  of  this  (2  Chron.
xiv.  10 — 12).  Note.  Many  leave  Christ  with  a  kiss,  who  would  shrink  from
betraying  Him  as  Judas  did.

Price  on  this  (condensed) : —

Theme, — Okpah,  or  the  mere  Professor.

An  onlooker  not  able  to  discover  the  difference  between  Orpah  and  Kuth  so  far.
Begins  to  appear  now.  The  crisis  has  come.  Both  had  made  professions  (ver.  10).
Here  the  difference  is  made  apparent.

I.  We  le-arn  that  it  is  possible  to  go  a  long  way  towards  Christianity,  and
yet  not  to  be  a  Christian.  To  be  born,  educated,  and  dwell  in  Christian  house-
hoMs,  these  are  great  blessings,  but  do  not  constitute  or  make  a  Christian.  It
will  not  do  to  be  almost,  we  must  be  altogether,  decided  for  Christ.  The  cup
that  is  almost  sound  will  not  hold  water.  The  ship  that  is  almost  whole  will  not
weather  the  storm.  To  be  almost  a  son  is  to  be  a  bastard.  To  be  almost  a
Christian  is  to  be  almost  saved,  and  to  be  almost  saved  is  to  be  altogether  damned.
Nothing  will  save  us  short  of  being  in  Christ.  Feelings,  sentiment,  profession,
are  all  good  if  they  spring  from  a  living  faith  in  Jesus  Christ ;  without  this  they
are  worse  than  worthless.

II.  We  learn  that  it  is  possible  to  deceive  ourselves,  and  to  think  that  all  is
right,  when  in  truth  all  is  wrong  with  our  souls.  Hardly  possible  that  Orpah
played  the  conscious  hypocrite.  She  meant  what  she  did  when  she  became  a
proselyte — did  not  deliberately  act  a  part.  Feeling  and  sentiment  [love  for  her
husband]  blinded  her  eyes.  Now  that  which  looked  like  principle  proves  itself
passion.  Discovers  that  she  had  deceived  herself.  Love  to  God,  which  she  had
thought  supreme  in  her  heart,  subordinate  to  the  love  of  Moab.

This  often  so  with  men ;  they  are  not  hypocrites,  they  are  self-deceivers.
Education,  circumstances,  the  force  of  influences  around  them,  produced  an
emotional  religion  which  they  mistake  for  vital  godliness.  They  hear  with  joy
like  tko  *'  stony-ground  hearers."  We  do  such  an  injustice,  if  when  we  see  them
going  back  we  point  the  finger  of  scorn,  and  cry  "  hypocrite."

III.  We  learn  that  our  religion  will  not  profit  us  at  all  unless  it  be
characterized  by  perseverance  to  the  end.  Orpah  stands  with  Jehu,  Judas,
Demas,  Hymenaeus,  Alexander,  and  Philetus — Beacon  lights !  Their  word  to
us  is  this,  "  Beware  I  "  No  grace,  however  bright  and  precious,  will  take  us  to
heaven  without  perseverance.  Language  cannot  adequately  set  forth  the  misery
of  the  man  who  apostatizes.  The  latter  end  of  that  man  is  worse  than  the
beginning  (2  Pet.  ii.  20 — 22).     Conscience  becomes  hardened,  etc.

Improvejient. — Is  our  profession  a  mere  profession  or  the  fruit  of  a  living  faith  ?
Brought  by  circumstances  to  the  boundary-line  between  life  and  death,  have  we
stopped  there  ?  The  Bible  full  of  such  instances.  Felix  trembled ;  Balaam
prophesied ;  Herod  heard  gladly ;  Judas  sat  at  the  sacramental  table  with  our
Lord  I  Whatever  we  do,  we  must  not  stop  short  of  conversion;  if  we  do,  we
perish.  We  must  not  be  content  with  a  mere  outward  reformation  ;  we  must
seek  that  radical  and  entire  change  in  the  soul,  of  which  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the
author.

58


CUAP.  I.  14.


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   RUTH.


Berrard  on  this —

I.  It  is  easy  to  make  signs  of  love,  but  not  to  shew  the  true  fruits  of
love.
II.  Worldly  respects  are  great  hindrances  in  the  course  of  godliness.
III.  An  unsound  heart  may  for   a  time  make  a  fair  show  in   the   way  to

Canaan,  but  yet  turn  bnck  nt  the  last.
IT.  Such  as  want  soundness  towards  God  for  religion,  may  yet  have  other-
wise commendable  parts  in  them.


*'  Tn  the  first  half-awakened  state  ftf  the
mind,  and  before  Christ  has  been  f-ecn  in  the
visii>n  of  a  true  faith,  to  go  a\vay,  or  to  cut
oneself  off  from  the  human  teach(  v  and  friend,
is  to  cease  from  the  sj>iritual  pxKl  alrea<!y
attained.  It  may  be  that  Orpah  did  not
realize  this  at  tlie  time,  or  that  she  was  but
paitially  conscious  of  it;  yet  it  was  j)rescnt.
and  the  mightiest  element  in  the  (luestion
uj)on  which  she  was  called  to  decide.  8he
was  not  the  first,  nor  the  last,  who,  in  for-
saking a  friend,  forsook  also  a  true  teacher
and  guide — one  whose  love  would  have  been
the  guarantee  of  the  quality  of  the  higher
influence  exerted," — M.  T'ntt.son.

*'  Is  this  she  which  even  now  was  so  pro-
mising in  her  words,  and  so  passionate  in
her  weeping  ?  See  how  soon  a  forward  pro-
fessor may  turn  to  a  fearful  apostate.  Though
she  standeth  or  falleth  to  her  own  Master,
yet,  as  the  Psalmist  saith,  *  I  am  horribly
afraid  for  those  that  f(»rsake  Thy  law '  so
have  we  just  cause  to  suspect  the  fearful  final
estate  of  Orpah." — Fvllcr.

"  Orpah  had  left  her  heart  in  Moab,  with
its  follies,  its  frivolities,  its  amusements,  its
dissipations,  its  sights,  festivals,  and /^f^*;
its  idol  temples,  shrines,  and  altars.  Her
heart  was  so  full  of  these,  that  she  could  not
detach  it  from  them  ;  and  therefore  she  re-
turned to  her  gods,  her  people,  and  her
country." — Dr.  Ciivnn  'nig.

*•  The  bright  moining  does  not  always
shine  unto  the  perfect  day ;  the  sweetest
Gpring-bud  of  promise  does  not  always  ripen
into  precious  fruit.  The  seed  that  was  cast
on  stony  ground  grew  rapidly  up,  but  withered
in  a  moment.  Orpah's  decision  was  the  de-
cision of  impulsive  feeling,  of  filial  affection  ;
it  was  strong  suddenly,  it  grew  up  in  an
instant,  and  in  an  instant  it  perished." — Dr.
Onmming.

"  On  second  thoughts  her  enthusiasm  cooled
down.  I  daresay  she  said  within  herself.
'It  was  not  enthusiasm — it  was  simply
fanaticism,  and  I  have  now  come  to  a  better
mind.'  One  would  gather  from  the  conduct
of  Oipah  that  she  had  feelings,  not  very  deep
affections,  strongly  rooted  in  her  nature ;
pure  passions,  but  not  yet  consolidated  into
fixed  principles;  resolutions  that  had  no
anchorage  in  her  heart,  no  hold  of  her  inmost
and  her  deepest  nature.  She  was  vacillating,
impulsive,  very  likely  sentimental ;  her  teais
and  smiles  followed  each  other  in  rapid  tran-
sition. She  was  ea.-5ily  swayed;  the  victim
of  feeling  and  momentary  impulse ;  repent-
ing at  her  leisure  what  she  had  accej)ted  in  a
hurry." — Dr.  Cumm inrj.


"■  If  the  soul  be  not  changed,  though  there
may  for  awhile  some  religious  colour  ap-
j)ear  in  the  man's  face,  he  will  at  last  return
to  his  former  habit." — (Spiritual  Bee)  Pcnn?

'*  I  have  sometimes  seen  a  blazing  comet
much  outshining  other  stars,  and  attracting
the  eyes  of  men  to  behold  with  wonder,  which
yet  by  its  decay  and  vanishing  awhile  after
hath  appeared  to  have  no  true  place  among
the  stars,  but  in  the  lower  region." — (^Sj/lritval
Dee)  Demi  ?

"  Gifts,  affections  without  Christ  ....
They  are  the  fair  flowers  and  perfumes  which
only  make  more  terrible  the  death-pyre." —
Wadsfvorth.

**  Men  said  to-day  of  one  who  sinned,  *  What
may
This  mean  ?     What  sudden  madness  over-
took
His  brain,  that  in  a  moment  he  forsook
The  rectitude  which  until  yesterday
Had  made  his  life  a  beacon  by  the  way
To  common  men?'     I  answered,  'We  but

look
On  surfaces.     Temptation  never  shook
One  soul  whose  secret  hidden  forces  lay
Firm  centred  in  the  right.      The  glacier

bides
For  ages  white  and  still,  and  seems  a  part
Of  the  eternal  Alps.     But  at  its  heart.
Each  hour,  some  atom  noiseless  jars,  and

slides,
Until  the  avalanche  falls  with  thundering

weight.
God  only  knoweth  the  beginning's  date.'"

Helen  Hunt.

"  They  fall  deepest  into  hell  who  fall  back-
wards into  hell." — Dunyan.

"  Kara^Cktiv  ovx  tan  <pi\eiv,  saith  Philo.
Apostates  betray  Christ  with  a  kiss,  tempo-
raries forsake  Him,  and  embrace  this  present
world." — Trapp.

"  Faith  is  the  champion  of  grace ;  but  what
is  it  worth  if  it  faint  and  fail  1  Love  is  the
nurse  of  grace  ;  but  what  will  it  avail  if  it
decline  and  wax  cold  ?  Humility  is  the
adorner  and  beautifier  of  grace ;  but  what
will  it  profit  if  it  continue  not  unto  the  end?"
— A  Di(ritan  Divine.

"  As  the  worst  travelling  is  when  the  road
is  frozen  after  a  thaw,  so  those  are  frequently
the  most  hardened  who  have  had  some  con-
victions, who  have  had  some  knowledge  of
the  Gospel,  and  some  religious  affection,  and
have  then  relapsed  into  their  natural  hard-
heart  edness." — Arrrn-Kinith.

•'  Every  one  is  rather  a  Naomi  to  his  own
soul,  to  persuade  it  to  stay  still,  and  enjoy


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    RUTH,  chap.  i.  14.


the  delights  of  Moab,  rather  than  to  hazard  "  You  have  seen  a  ship  out  on  the  bay,

our  entertainment  in  Bethlehem.     Will  reli-  swinging  with  the  tide,  and  seeming  as  if  it

gion  allow  me  this  wild  liberty  of  my  actions,  would  follow  it ;  and  yet  it  cannot,  for  down

this  loose  mirth,  these  carnal  pleasures  1 " —  beneath  the  water  it  is  anchored.     So  many

Bishop  Hall.  a  soul  sways  towards  heaven,   but  cannot

"His  heart  he  cannot,  will   not,  give  to  ascend  thither,  because  it  is  anchored  to  some

Christ.     Anything  else  he  will  do.     IBut  no-  secret  sin." — Bcccher.

thing  else  will  avail  him  anything.     He  will  "  The  soul's  birthright  is  not  cast  away  by

be  baptized.     But  baptism  cannot  save  him.  a  momentary    weakness   or  folly, — one   act

He  will  be  confirmed.     But  that  is  not  sal-  such  as  this  before  us  may  decide  the  woful

vation.     He  will  come  to  the  table  of  the  transaction,  but  a  hundred  minor  actions  and

Lord.  But  there  is  no  salvation  for  him  there.  thousands  of  thoughts  of  wrong  have  gone

He  will   fast  and  pray.     He  will   toil   and  before  it  to  make  it  possible.  .  .  .  Tempta-

labour  in  his  own  self-righteous  plans.     He  tion,  when  it  comes  upon  a  man  well-grounded,

will  try  to  cleanse  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  leaves  him  as  the  wave  leaves  the  rock  over

platter,  and  resolve  to  work  religious  works.  which  it  has  rolled  ;  but  when  principles  are

But  all  this  is  not  salvation.     And  here  he  already  undermined,  a  trivial  temptation,  a

must  separate  from  the  people  of  God,  though  single  wave,  is  often  enough  to  complete  the

they  have  travelled  long  together.  They  must  ruin." — II.  Wonnacott.
go  on,  and  he  will  not.'" — Tyng.

Theme. — The  Constancy  of  a  Divinely-kindled  Love.

«  True  friends,  like  ivy  and  the  wall  it  props,
Both  stand  together,  or  together  fall." — Bic.  of  Poetic  Illustrations,

"  Without  a  murmur  I  dismiss
My  former  dreams  of  earthly  bliss;
My  joy,  my  consolation  this,

Each  hour  to  cling  to  Thee." — Mrs.  Mliot.

But  Ruth  clave  to  her.

The  Scriptures  are  seminally  brief  [Lynch).  A  phrase  here  expresses  a  love
and  heroism  which  has  seldom  been  equalled  and  never  excelled  in  human  history.
**  Kuth  clave  to  her."  The  force  of  the  Hebrew  word  is  to  be  knit  as  man  and
wife  inseparably  (Bernard)  [cf.  Gen.  ii.  24  ;  Matt.  xix.  5,  where  the  word  is  used
in  this  connection].  So  Onesiphorus  clung  the  more  closely  and  tenderly  to  Paul,
when  Phygellus  and  Hermogenes,  with  all  who  were  in  Asia,  turned  from  him  in
the  hour  of  his  distress  (2  Tim.  i.  15,  16).

Note,  (a)  The  heart  has  reasons  which  the  reason  does  not  comprehend  [Pascal),
Who  can  explain,  much  less  justify  at  the  time,  a  sublime  and  self-sacrificing  choice
like  Kuth's  ?  All  outward  appearances  are  against  it, — the  choice  would  not  be
heroic  were  it  otherwise.

(b)  But  a  deathless  love  such  as  this  has  always  in  the  end  proved  its  own  vindi-
cation. So  when  the  soul  cleaves  to  Christ,  it  is  influenced  by  motives  which  the
understanding  but  imperfectly  estimates,  and  which  the  carnal  mind  fails  altogether
to  comprehend.  The  Saviour  Himself  offers  the  true  explanation,  that  "  wisdom
is  justified  of  her  children"  (Matt.  xi.  19).  Yet  in  this  is  the  real  test  as  to
whether  we  walk  by  faith  or  by  sight.  If  you  would  believe,  you  must  crucify
that  question,  "Why?"    [Luther).

(c)  Every  theory  which  fails  to  appreciate  that  man  is  a  spiritual  being,  influenced
in  other  ways  than  mere  external  ones,  must  inevitably  misread  and  misinterpret  human
life.  If  this  life  is  all,  what  profit  in  self-denial,  what  promptings  towards  virtue,
that  can  seriously  command  our  attention  for  a  moment?  On  the  sceptical  theory,
Ruth's  choice  a  mere  impulse,  and  not  even  her  after-success  and  prosperity  can
rech  ^m  it  from  the  charge  of  folly.  And  yet  what  heart  fails  to  estimate  the
incomparable  superiority  of  Ruth  to  Orpah  ?  The  heroic  in  history,  that  which
men  have  admired  and  loved  in  all  ages,  that  which  has  made  human  progress
possible,  and  left  a  halo  of  glory  around  the  past,  is  mirrored  here.  That  which
is  best  m  human  fiction  finds  its  counterpart ;  that  which  is  noblest  in  life,  its

60


THAP.  I.  14.  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   RUTB.


image  and  semblance.  And  all  is  explained  and  accounted  for  if  we  see  in  Ruth
one  chosen  out  of  a  far  country,  and  from  among  a  strange  people,  that  she  might
become  an  Israelite  indeed — one  yielding  to  the  Divine  impulses,  and  listening  to
the  Divine  voice,  though  unable  as  yet  to  interpret  its  full  meaning.  "Forget
also  thine  own  people  and  thy  father's  house;  so  shall  the  king  greatly  desire  thy
beauty ;  for  He  is  thy  Lord  :   and  worship  thou  Him"  (Ps.  xlv.  10 — 13).

We  have  here —

I.  The  choice  of  true  love.  Orpah's  stone  of  stumbling  and  self-denial  seen
as  a  jewel  flashing  with  heaven's  own  light  to  Ruth.  Naomi  so  precious  in  her
person  and  inflaences  as  to  be  clung  to,  be  the  consequences  what  they  may.
The  choice  a  kindred  one  to  that  of  Moses  in  its  faith  and  self-sacrifice.  (Choosing
rather  to  suffer  afiliction,  etc.,  Heb.  xi.  25.)  Can  we  be  far  wrong  in  seeing  in
both  the  same  underlying  religious  convictions,  as  coming  in  to  decide  the  choice  ?
If  so,  it  is  a  mistake  to  say  that  love  for  Naomi  merely  led  her  to  become  a
Jewish  proselyte.  Note,  [d)  Love  may  he  spiritual  and  God-given,  and  yet  perfectly
natural  in  its  way  of  development.

Notice  of  this  choice,  (1)  That  it  was  not  that  of  impulse,  hat  of  conviction.  Nothing
can  shake  her  resolution.  The  love  that  has  brought  her  so  far  with  Naomi  kept
her  steadfast  now,  and  to  an  afi'ection  like  hers  decision  becomes  more  and  more
easy.  Note,  (a)  Ajf'eclions  are  the  great  deciding  influences  in  life.  Hence  Paul
says,  "  Set  your  aii'ections,"  etc.  (Col.  iii.  2).  And  {h)  The  supreme  affection  is
the  great  central  power  in  human  life.  Everything  else  responds  as  by  a  law  of
gravitation  to  that.  Hence,  if  it  be  toward  Moab  and  the  world,  as  with  Orpah,
everything  around  us  will  lead  us  backward ;  if  it  be  towards  the  hope  of  Israel
and  God,  onward  and  forward  as  with  Ruth.

(2)  That  it  was  not  the  influence  of  mere  sentiment  or  excitement.  The  choice
made  with  a  full  determining  to  abide  by  it,  come  weal  or  come  woe,  for  ever
(Pnce).  She  had  counted  the  cost.  Probably,  as  a  Moabitess,  she  might  have  to
bear  cold  looks  and  harsh  treatment  [Price).  Significant  that  she  was  called
afterwards  llutJi  the  Moabitess  (cf.  ii.  2,  12,  etc.),  the  designation  of  an  alien  and
one  outside  the  covenant.  Note.  Steadfastness  essential  to  the  formation  and  manifes-
tation  of  a  religious  character  [Toller).  Piety  must  be  such  as  to  stand  the  test  of
time.

(3)  That  it  icas  not  biased  by  any  selfish  hope.  The  same  gloomy  prospect
before  her  which  had  deterred  Orpah  from  going  forward.  But  like  that  one  who
cried  out  ''  so  much  the  more"  because  of  discouragements,  Ruth  clave  to  Naomi
the  more  steadfastly,  in  spite  of  threatened  afi3iction  and  seeming  opposition.
Seems  to  say,  "Be  the  sacrifice  ever  so  great,  I  am  ready  to  make  it;  I  shall
delight  in  making  it"  [Simeon).  Note,  [a)  A  true  and  steadfast  convert  to  Israel
follows  very  naturally  in  one  who  has  stood  such  a  testing  of  the  natural  affections.
(b)  The  portion  of  Israel  and  of  Christ  not  a  barren  choice,  though  it  may  look  so
for  the  present.  Such  are  to  receive  "a  hundredfold"  (Matt.  xix.  29).  The
promise  literally  fulfilled  in  the  case  of  Ruth.

We  have  here —

II.  An  instance  of  more  than  filial  piety.  Almost  as  marvellous  in  what  it
leaves  as  in  what  it  clings  to.  She  realizes,  doubtless,  a  keen  sense  of  her
mother-in-law's  forlorn  condition  ;  but  only  the  more  vividly  to  become  conscious
of  Naomi's  worth  and  her  own  duty.  Her  natural  afi'ections  are  to  be  seen  as  an
open  door  leading  towards  faith  and  God.  Note,  (a)  The  next  degree  unto  godli-
ness is  the  love  of  goodness  [Bishop  Hall).  He  is  in  a  fair  way  to  grace,  that  can
value  it  [ibid.),  [h)  There  are  circumstances  in  uhich  we  are  called  to  stand  to
certain  people  in  the  place  of  God  [Braden).  Parents  have  to  do  so  to  their
children.     They  have  to  learn  of  us  before  they  can  learn  of  Him  [ibid.).

See  here  (1)  Tlie  expulsive  jiowcr  of  a  new  affection.  Transforms  her  whole
nature,  changes  the  tenor  of  her  whole  li.'e.  Love  is  a  marvellous  magician
^Braden).     Note,  [a)  It  is  not  what  we  take  up,  hut  what  we  give  up,  which  makes  u»

61


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH,  chap.  i.  14.


rich  (Beecher).  Only  with  renunciation  life,  properly  speaking,  can  be  said  to
begin  (Carlyle).  Mark,  too,  (b)  The  higher  good  can  only  be  gained  by  the  sacrijice
of  the  lower  (M.  Tiinson).

See  here  then  (2)  A  sacrijice  almost  unequalled  in  its  severity.  The  old  nature
against  her,  the  force  of  habit,  and  all  the  early  associations  of  the  past.  Yet  love
triumphs  over  all.  Put  to  the  trying  alternative,  either  to  forsake  her  mother-in-
law  and  the  hope  of  Israel,  or  all  that  was  behind  her  in  Moab,  she  does  not
hesitate  for  a  moment.  The  religious  aspect  of  the  question  comes  in  here.  This
alone  could  justify  her  leaving  her  own  mother  for  a  comparative  stranger.
Remember  what  Moab  was,  and  in  this  higher  aspect  Rath's  choice  is  completely
vindicated.

III.  An  illustration  of  the  entire  surrender  of  ours3lves  to  God.  We  have
a  final  separation  from  Moab,  and  a  complete  devotion  to  Naomi.  So  David  clave
to  the  sanctuary  (Ps.  xxvii.  4).  So  Paul  to  Christ  (Phil.  iii.  7 — 9),  and  to  the  way
of  salvation.      "Tliis  one  thing  I  do,"  he  said  {ibid.  13).

See  what  a  real  determination  for  God  and  religion  is  (cf.  16).  It  does  not  consist
in  rash  promises,  in  hasty  resolutions,  in  transient  feelings,  however  strong,  but
in  what  the  Scriptures  call  "  a  full  purpose  of  heart  to  cleave  unto  the  Lord,"  a
fixedness  of  so\d  upon  matured  conviction  {Toller).  To  this  Barnabas  exhorted  the
Christians  at  Antioch  (Acts  xi.  23).  Note,  (a)  To  know  Christ  truly  is  to  need  Him
eternally.  Whoever  has  tasted  Him  can  never  again  live  without  Him  (Lange).
No  going  back  to  the  *'  beggarly  elements  of  the  world"  then!  {b)  Only  those  who
are  cleansed  by  the  washhig  of  regeneration  and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ohost  will
cleave  to  Christ  and  His  believing  Church  in  the  dark  and  clouded  day  of  adversity
(Macgoivan).

Improvement. — (1)  Away  with  all  mere  affection  which  kisses,  but  does  not
cleave  to  Christ !  Clinging  to  Him  is  the  only  test  of  true  love  (John  xv.).  All
else  counterfeit, — this  the  only  conclusive  sign  that  we  are  His.  (2)  See  too  the
necessity  for  decision.  To  make  a  beginning  in  the  right  direction  is  a  great
thing  {Beecher).  (3)  Learn  also  the  power  of  resolution  ;  it  silences  temptation.
Those  that  go  in  religious  ways  without  a  steadfast  mind  stand  like  a  door  half
open,  which  mocks  a  thief;  but  resolution  shuts  and  bolts  the  door  {Miniature
Com.).

"  Blessed  is  Ruth,  who  so  clave  to  her  aged  steps  of  our  Lord,  and  tarried  where  He  was.

mother-in-law  that  she  would  not  leave  her  Confession,   martyrdom,   prayer,   and    every

until  death.   For  this  reason,  Scripture  indeed  brotherly  thought  or  deed,  spring  from  the

has  justly  extolled  her  ;  but  God  has  beati-  love  of  the  converted  heart." — Lanfjn.

tied  her  for  ever.     But  He  will  judge,  and  in  *'  Love  is  above  all,  and  when  it  prevails

the  resurrection  condemn,  all  those  wicked  in  us  all,  we  shall  all  be  lovely,  and  in  love

and  ungodly  daughters-in-law  who  deal  out  with  God,  and  one  with  another." — Penn.

abuse   and  wrong    to  their    parents-in-law,  *'  Lead  men  through   love  to  love.      For

unmindful  of  the  fact  that  they  gave  life  love  cultivates  and   preserves  the   true  and

and  sustenance  to  their  husbands.   ...    If  the  good  by  doctrine,  life,  prayer,  watchful-

therefore  thou  lovest  thy  husband,  0  wife,  ness,  and  by  a  thousand  other  inventions  of

then   love  them  also  who   gave  him  being,  its  inexhaustible  genius." — Sailer  {quoted  in

and  thus  brought  up   a  son  for  themselves  Lanrje).

and  a  husband  for  thee.     Seek  not  to  divide  "  If  moral  virtue  could  be  seen  with  mortal

the  son  from  his  father  or  mother,  lest  thou  eyes,  it  would   attract  all   hearts  to  ii.  ' —

fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the  Lord,  in  Plato.

the  day  of  awful  inquest  and  judgment." —  "A  spiritual  relationship  is  never  so  close

Origen.  and  so  strong  as  when  the  persons  are  related

"  Neither  self-interest,  nor  hope,  nor  vanity  s^.?.ohJ  strong  natural  sympathies.  .  .  .  Now

mix  themselves  up  with  this  love.     It  is  a  and  then  it  lias  happened  that  this  harmony

purely  moral  and  spiritual  love,  of  which  no  has   been    so  strangely  complete,   that  each

other  instance  is  on  record.     It  is  in  fact  the  has   loved   the    other   literally   as   his    own

love  of  those  whom  God  by  His  mercy  has  soul,  and  felt  indeed  as  though  there  were

won  for  Himself,  and  who  love  God  in  their  but  one  soul  between  them.     The  fact  is,  that

brethren.     It  is  the  evangelical  love  of  the  the  one  spirit  enters  into  and  affects  similar

apostles,    who    loved    Greeks    and    Franks,  natures  so  similarly,  that  when  either  speaks

Persians   and    Sythians,  as   their   own   flesh  out  of  his  deei)est  life,  he  e(|nally  speaks  the

and  blood.     Such  love  as  this  followed  the  experience  of  the  other.    When  these  similars
62


CHAP.  L  15.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   RUTH.


by  nature  are  apprehended  by  the  Second
Adam,  and  the  sweet  life  of  eternity  sprinp^s
up  in  their  hearts,  the  rehition  beromes  one
of  unutterable  endearment.  .  .  .  Every  step
of  their  spiiitual  prog^ress  relates  them  more
and  more  essentially." — John  Puhford.

"  'Twixt  that,  long  fled,  which  gave  us  light,
And  that  which  soon  shall  end  in  night,
There  is  a  point  no  eye  shall  see,
Rut  on  it  hangs  eternity.
This  is  that  moment — who  can  tell
Whether  it  leads  to  heaven  or  hell  ?
This  is  that  moment    -as  we  choose,
The  immortal  soul  we  save  or  lose.
Time  past  and  time  to  come  are  not ;
Time  present  is  our  only  lot  ;
O  God  1  henceforth  our  hearts  incline
To  seek  no  other  love  than  Thine."

J.  Montgomery.

"  Think  not  too  meanly  of  thy  low  estate;
Thou  hast  a  choice;  to  choose  is  to  create  I
Remember  whose  the  sacred  lips  that  tell,
Angels  approve   thee   when  thv   choice  is
well."  0.  W.  Holmes.

*•  A  few  forsake  the  throng,  with  lifted  eyes,
Ask  wealth  of  heaven,  and  gain  the  real

prize —
Truth,  wisdom,  grace,  and  peace,  like  that

above.
Sealed  with  His  signet,  whom  they  serve  and

love."  Anon.

"  Blest  with  this  fellowship  divine,
Take  what  Thou  wilt,  I'll  ne'er  repine ;
E'en  as  the  branches  to  the  vine,
My  soul  would  cling  to  Thee.

Far  from  her  home,  fatigued,  oppressed.
Here  she  has  found  her  place  of  rest;
An  exile  still,  yet  not  unblessed.
While  she  can  cling  to  Thee."

Mrs.  Elliot.

"  A  few  years  ago,  and  you  were  not ;  a
few  more,  and  on  this  stage  of  life  you  will
be  no  more.  Much  has  been  done,  much  is
yet  to  be  done  in  the  interval.  You  are  now
at  the  outset  of  womanhood.  Woman's  duties,
woman's  strange  and  mixed  destiny  of  suffer-
ing, feeling,  and  deep  life,  is  beginning." —
Robertson.

"  They  say  that  when  the  temperature  has
gone  down  below  the  fieczing-point,  water
will  remain  apparently  the  same,  and  yet
that  it  will  congeal  at  a  touch  and  in  a
moment.  So  with  the  changes  and  transi-
tions in  human  character  and  life.  They  go
on  silently  and  invisibly,  until  some  crisis  in
outw^ard  circumstances  brings  them  suddenly
to  maturity." — B.

"  Thus  it  is  that  in  some  decisive  moment
every   soul   that  attains  salvation  makes  its


choice,  by  which  it  adopts  the  true  Jehovah
as  its  portion.  It  abandons  all  the  former
idolatries  of  its  life,  and  becomes  a  true  wor-
shipper of  the  true  God." — Steel  and  Terry,

•'  tio  a  soul  that  is  truly  brought  to  Christ
affectionately  loves  Him  and  heartily  cleaves
to  Him,  resolves  in  the  strength  of  Divine
grace  to  follow  Him  whithersoever  He  goes
or  directs,  and  is  desirous  of  having  commu-
nion with  none  but  Him." — Gill.

"  Ruth's  attachment  was  worth  ten  thousand
of  Oipah's  kisses.  The  young  nobleman  in
the  Gospel  treated  our  Lord  with  high  respect ;
but  all  this  availed  him  nothing,  for  he  would
not  sell  his  possessions  at  Christ's  command,
and  become  a  follower  of  Jesus.  Happy  were
the  apostles  who  continued  with  Him  in  all
His  temptations.  They  left  all,  and  followed
Him.  What  they  left  was  little;  but  that
love  which  disposed  them  to  leave  all  was
highly  valued  by  11  im,  and  they  received  a
hundredfold  of  recom pence  even  in  this
world." — Lawson.

"  The  story  of  Ruth  has  shed  a  peaceful
light  over  what  else  would  be  the  accursed
race  of  Moab.  We  strain  our  gaze  to  know
something  of  the  long  line  of  the  purple  hilla
of  IMoab.  which  form  the  background  at  once
of  the  history  and  of  the  geography  of  Pales-
tine. It  is  a  satisfaction  to  feel  that  there
is  one  tender  ajssociation  which  unites  them
with  the  familiar  history  and  scenery  of
Judea — that  from  their  recesses,  across  the
deep  gulf  which  separates  the  two  regions,
came  the  Gentile  ancestress  of  David  and  the
Messiah."  — Stanley.

"  Ruth  is  a  prophecy,  than  which  none
could  be  more  beautiful  and  engaging,  of
the  entrance  of  the  heathen  world  into  the
kingdom  of  God.  She  comes  forth  out  of
Moab,  an  idolatrous  people,  full  of  wanton-
ness and  sin.  and  is  herself  so  tender  and
pure.  In  a  land  where  dissolute  sensuality
formed  one  of  the  elements  of  idol  worship,  a
woman  appears  as  wife  and  daughter,  chaste
as  the  rose  of  spring,  and  unsurpassed  in  these
relations  by  any  other  character  in  Holy
Writ.  Without  living  in  Israel,  she  is  first
elevated,  then  won,  by  the  life  of  Israel,  as
displayed  in  a  foreign  land.  Amid  sur-
rounding enmity  and  jealousy  toward  Israel,
she  is  capable  of  being  formed  and  attracted
through  love," — Lange.

"  What  can  you  do,  but  faithfully  and
simply  follow  Him  who  has  said,  '  VVhoso-
ever  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  me,
is  not  worthy  of  me  *  1  You  must  go  forth
with  Ruth,  and  leave  those  who,  rejecting
Jesus,  will  not  go  with  you.  You  must
follow  the  Lord  fully,  though  you  follow
Him  alone  among  your  earthly  connexions."
—Tyng.


VERSE  15.

Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes.— And  she  [Naomi]  said,  Behold  thy  sister-in-law,
i.e.,  wife  of  a  husl).TJui'>  bi-other  ;  no  English  word  exactly  answering  to  the  original  Hebrew.
The  same  word  is  rendered  brother's  wife  (Deut.  xxv.  7,  9),  being  the  feminine  of  that  ren-

63


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.  chap.  t.  15.


dered  {ih.  7)  husband's  brother  {Sjyenher's  Com.),  Unto  her  gods  [god].  "And  to  her
god"  (^Luther's  B'Me).  The  singular  is  to  be  preferred  {Lange).  Adam  Clarke  thinks  that
both  Orpah  and  Ruth  had  been  idolaters  so  far.  With  Ruth,  however,  a  leaning  towards  the
God  of  Israel  and  His  laws  (Keil).  Wright  argues  from  these  words  that  Naomi  viewed
idolatry  without  serious  disfavour,  at  least  as  practised  by  others.  This  held  upon  insufficient
data.  Naomi's  words  do  not  necessarily  contain  any  recognition  of  the  Moabitish  deity,  or
indicate  (as  Wright  suggests)  that  she  was  possibly  led  astray  by  the  false  idea  that  Jehovah
was  only  the  God  of  Israel  (^Lange).  Was  Jephthah  then  (Judges  xi.  24,  27)  similarly  led
astray?  {Lange.)

Return  thou.  Serious  in  her  intentions,  sincere  in  her  advice  (Keil).  Perhaps  said  merely
to  prove  Ruth's  constancy  {Sj)eahc7-'s  Com.).  (Cf.  Josh.  xxiv.  15 — 19;  2  Kings  ii.  2—6).
Sf)oken  that  it  might  be  made  clear  whether  she  would  adhere  steadfastly  to  the  God  of  Israel
{Seh.  Schmidt).  Not  that  she  desired  her  to  return,  but  to  try  her  sincerity  (  Gill),  She  had
simply  the  earthly  prosperity  of  her  mother-in-law  in  her  mind  (^Keil,  Carpzov),

Theme, — The  Thikd  and  Last  Trial  of  Affection,

**  What  though  the  world  unfaithful  prove,
And  earthly  friends  and  joys  remove  1
With  sure  and  certain  hope  of  love.

Still  would  I  cling  to  thee."— 3/y.?.  Elliot,

And  she  [Naomi]  said,  Behold  thy  sinter-in-law  is  gone  back,  ,  .  •  Return

thou,  etc.

How  sad  is  the  history  of  a  return  to  Moab  (Tyng),  both  in  its  effects  and  in  its
influences  1  With  Orpah,  to  go  back  to  her  people  was  to  return  to  her  gods.
And  yet  how  pregnant  with  meaning  !  Evident  now  that  Orpah  had  mistaken  a
mere  momentary  feeHng  (cf.  ver.  10)  for  something  deeper  and  more  lasting.
Evident,  too,  that  Naomi's  suspicions  and  surmises  were  correct.  Note,  {a)  The
"  return  "  justifies  the  tests  (ver.  8,  9  ;  11 — 13).  Very  naturally,  also,  it  leads  to
this  final  trial  of  Ruth's  affection  and  steadfastness.  Naomi  anxious  still ;  fears
lest  even  now  cleaving  to  her  should  be  the  result  of  a  rash,  unthinking  choice  ;
dreads  a  future  apostate  in  a  present  convert.  Could  not  really  intend  to  persuade
her  beloved  daughter  to  return  to  the  service  of  Chemosh  [Lauson).  Said  of  those
of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy,  "  they  were  tempted  "  (Heb.  xi.  37).  So  here.
Note,  (b)  The  trial  is  by  no  means  intended  to  justify  the  '^  return.^ ^  In  the  present
case,  disobedience  a  virtue  (Macgowan).  When  Christ  said  to  Judas,  "  What  thou
doest  do  quickly,"  He  by  no  means  authorised  Judas  to  execute  his  wicked  designs
(Lau'son).     Orpah  doubtless  went  back  to  Naomi's  grief  (Lawson).

I.  See  where  the  strength  of  this  last  trial  lay.  An  unfavourable  example
lends  its  weight  to  worldly  disadvantages  (AI.  Timson).  These  heavy  enough  before  ;
now  Ruth  is  to  see  one  she  loves  turning  away  from  Naomi,  and  lending  her
influence  to  lead  her  backwards.  Orpah  has  **gone  back,"  too,  although  she
cherished  as  warm  an  affection  for  Naomi  as  any  a  mother-in-law  could  expect.
Note,  (a)  Example  has  a  mighty  influence,  especially  the  example  of  those  who
are  dear  to  us.  Christ  felt  it  to  be  so  in  that  moment  when  the  last  link  between
Himself  and  His  half-hearted  followers  was  severed,  and  He  turned  to  the  rest
with  the  question.  Will  ye  also  go  away  ?  (John  vii.  G7.)  A  scriptural  doctrine,
that  because  iniquity  shall  abound,  the  love  of  many  shall  wax  cold  (Matt.  xxiv.
12).  Note,  {b)  The  castle  seems  almost  won  where  one-half  the  soldiers  aro
overcome  [Lauson).  Orpah  has  yielded,  and  yet  for  all  this  Ruth  stands
steadfast.

II.  See  in  what  lies  its  meaning  and  purpose.  It  evidently  settled  the
questions  at  issue  once  and  for  ever.  Decision  comes  as  the  result  of  conflict.
Distrust  of  one's  own  judgment  the  most  terrible  spectre  to  fight  [M.  Timson),
Especially  so  when  the  example  of  those  we  respect  is  adverse  to  our  decisions.
This  mastered,  however,  the  rest  is  easy.

Lessons.     (1)  The  falls  of  some  may  justlv  bring  others  into  trial  (Bernard),
(2)  Not  the  length  or  fury  of  the  conflict  which  is  important,  but  its  results,
(8)  The  folly  of  apostacy  must  not  damp  but  rather  invigorate  our  zeal.
64


CHAP.  I.  15.


UOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  RVTIL


FuUor  on  this  (condeiisod)  : —

Examples  of  others  set  before  our  eyes  are  very  potent  and  prevalent  arguments
to  make  us  follow  and  imitate  them,  whether  they  be  good  examples — so  the  for-
wardness of  the  Corinthians  to  relieve  the  Jews  provoked  many — or  whether  they
be  bad — so  the  dissembling  of  Peter  at  Antioch  drew  Barnabas  and  others  into  the
same  fault.  But  those  exa  iiples,  of  all  others,  are  most  forcible  with  us  which
are  set  by  such  who  are  near  to  us  by  kindred,  or  gracious  with  us  in  friendship,
or  great  over  us  in  power.

Use  [Lesson]  I.  Let  men  in  eminent  places,  as  magistrates,  ministers,  fathers,
masters,  and  the  like  (seeing  that  others  love  to  dance  after  their  pipe,  to  sing
after  their  tune,  to  tread  after  their  track),  endeavour  to  propound  themselves
patterns  of  piety  and  religion  to  those  that  be  under  them.

II.  When  we  see  any  good  example  propounded  unto  us,  let  us  strive  with  all
possible  speed  to  imitate  it.  .  .  .  Follow  not  the  adultery  of  David,  but  follow
the  chastity  of  Joseph ;  follow  not  the  dissembling  of  Peter,  but  follow  the  sin-
cerity of  Nathanael ;  follow  not  the  testiness  of  Jonah,  but  follow  the  meekness
of  Moses  ;  follow  not  the  apostacy  of  Orpah,  but  follow  the  perseverance  of  Ruth.

III.  When  any  bad  example  is  presented  unto  us,  let  us  decline  and  detest  it,
though  the  men  be  never  so  many  or  so  dear  to  us.  Imitate  Micaiah  (1  Kings
xxii.).  .  .  .  Yea,  but  one  may  say,  "  What  if  I  find  in  the  Scripture  an  action
recorded  whose  doer  is  known  to  have  been  a  godly  and  gracious  man,  may  I  not,
without  any  further  doubt  or  scruple,  follow  the  same  ?  "  .  .  .  The  Holy  Spirit
hath  not  set  these  sins  down  with  an  intent  they  should  be  followed  ;  but  first  to
show  the  frailty  of  His  dearest  saints  when  He  leaves  them  to  themselves  ;  as
also  to  comfort  us  when  we  fall  into  grievous  sins,  when  we  see  that  as  heinous
offences  of  God's  servants  stand  upon  the  record  in  the  Scriptures.


"  Oh,  Orpah,  Orpah  !  that  thou  hadst  been
wise,  at  least  in  this  thy  day,  to  think  of  the
things  which  belong  unto  thy  peace  1  but  now
they  are  hidden  from  thy  eyes.  .  .  .  And
could  we  know  her  history,  we  should  doubt-
less find  in  it  many  a  sorrowful  and  weeping
hour  as  she  thought  of  these  friends  of  her
youth  whom  she  was  to  see  no  more.  ...  It
is  the  history  we  have  seen  in  the  child  of
the  world  over  and  over  again.  You  may
renounce  the  Saviour,  and  walk  with  Him  no
more.  You  may  go  back  to  Moab,  and  bary
yourself  in  its  sins  and  follies.  But  you  will
find  no  peace  or  happiness  there.  Your  con-
Bcience  will  never  again  allow  you  to  rest." —
Tyng.

"  Worldliness  is  not  living  in  the  world,
possessing  the  world,  using  the  world  ;  world-
liness is  pursuing  the  world  which  is,  to  the
forgetfulness  and  exclusion  of  that  which  is
to  come  ;  it  is  a  sacrificing  of  the  future  to
the  present,  the  enjoying  of  earth's  mess  of
pottage  at  the  loss  of  the  heavenly  birth-
right."—i/".  Woiinacott.

"  Where  the  heart  is  indeed  influenced  by
sovereign  grace,  and  drawn  by  the  eternal
Father,  opposition  will  only  serve  to  inflame
our  love  and  zeal,  as  oil  cast  into  the  fire
serves  only  to  increase  its  ardour  instead  of
extinguishing  the  flame." — Macgmvan.

"  Still  Naomi  proves  the  spirit  of  Ruth.
'  Your  sister  has  gone  back  to  her  people  and
her  gods.  If  you  mean  ever  to  go  back,  now
is  your  best  time  to  go.  Think  well  of  wliat
you  give  up,  and  of  what  you  may  encounter
in  accompanying  me.     Much  as  I  would  love


to  have  you  to  go  with  me,  I  do  not  wish  you
hereafter  to  feel  disappointed  or  grieved  on
my  account.  Remember,  1  have  nothing  to
ofEer  you.  If  you  go  with  me,  it  must  be  as
a  partner  of  my  griefs  and  wants,'  Thus  God
often  proves  the  young  disciple  with  new
trials.  He  sends  the  east  wind  upon  the
young  trees  of  His  planting,  not  to  weaken
or  destioy,  but  to  give  greater  strength  and
endurimce  for  the  time  to  come." — Tyng.

"Adam  was  soon  drawn  by  Eve ;  Rehoboam's
heart  was  easily  led  after  the  advice  of  his
familiars  ;  the  women  of  Judah  by  their  hus-
bands easily  fell  to  idolatry." — Bernard.

"  This  is  Naomi's  last  trial  of  Ruth  ;  and
these  words  show  plainly  all  was  to  try  her,
because  she  tellcth  Ruth  of  Orpah's  going
back,  not  only  to  her  people,  but  also  to  her
gods,  which  Naomi,  a  good  woman,  could  not
but  hate,  and  could  not  so  ill  respect  Ruth,
and  show  so  great  coldness  in  religion  and
honour  of  the  true  God,  as  to  dissuade  Ruth
from  the  same  God  of  truth  to  return  unto
idols." — Barnard.

"  The  Saviour  Himself  cared  not  so  much
to  be  followed  by  the  crowd,  as  to  be  served
and  loved  by  the  few.  Let  the  promiscuous
multitude  be  gone,  so  that  the  handful  left
prove  faithful  and  worthy  I  And  even  these
He  tries  again  and  again.  Strong  enough  to
deny  Himself  of  every  faint-hearted  and
faithless  disciple,  and  yet  tender  enough  to
wiep  after  every  such  denial  and  dese]ftion,it
is  so  He  speaks  those  pregnant  and  searching
W(»rds  of  llis  to  every  one  of  us.  Will  /e  also
go  away  ?  " — B,

65


TJOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:   RUTFT.        chap.  t.  16,  17.


VERSES  16—18.

Critical  aub  Exegetical  Notes. — Entreat  me  not — Urge  me  not  (Lange),  Force  mo
H'  't  (  Wordsn'orth),  Be  not  against  me  {Trcm.  Junius,  Montan.  Bernard,  Fuller,  Wright ;  Vvlg.,
Wycdlffe,  and  Dovay  Ver.).  Thy  people  shall  be  [is]  my  people.  I  will  be  a  Jewess  both  in
country  and  religion  (  Wright).  This  appears  to  be  a  form  of  compact  and  union,  as  we  may
infer  fj'om  Zoheir's  speech  in  Antar  (vol.  iii.  98) :  "  If  you  engage,  we  will  engage  ;  if  you  fight,
we  will  fight ;  if  you  die,  we  will  die  ;  yours  is  our  property,  and  yours  is  all  we  possess"
{Kitto).     Where  thou  lodg-est,  abidest  {Lange),  stayest  (Reil).

Ver.  17.  The  Lord  [Jehovah]  do  so.  The  Eternal  do  so  to  me,  and  more  also  {Benisch,  a
Jewish  translator,  who  invariably  renders  the  word  "  Eternal.")  And  rs  ore  also,  Lit.  And  so
may  He  add  to  do  (A'eil).  This  form  of  imprecation  is  frequent  in  the  books  of  Samuel  and
Kings  [cf.  1  Sam.  iii,  17;  2  Sam.  iii.  9;  1  Kings  ii.  23;  etc.]  When  the  imprecation  is
followed  by  the  thing  which  the  speaker  affirms  shall  happen,  the  affirmation  is  preceded,  as
here,  by  the  particle  ^3  that  {Sjyeaker's  Com.)  8o  Adam  Clarke,  Lange.  ^3  is  not  if  [Lange).
Answers  to  on  in  the  sense  of  quod,  introducing  a  declaration  (Keil).  The  E.  V.  might  be  cor-
rected by  leaving  the  particle  untranslated,  and  rendering  "  Only  death  shall  part  thee  and
me  (Larige).  Death  alone  shall  part  thee  and  me  (Benisch).  So  the  LXX.,  I  swear  that
death,  and  nothing  else  than  death,  shall  separate  us  (Keil).  I  swear,  or  some  such  expression,
is  understood  (Lange).  The  first  occurrence  of  that  common  formula  of  an  oath,  by  which
the  person  swearing  called  down  upon  himself  a  stroke  of  Divine  judgment  in  case  he  kept
not  his  word  nor  carried  out  his  resolutions  {Steele  and  Terry).  The  Hebrew,  instead  of
invoking  a  definite  judgment  or  calamity  on  himself,  in  case  he  should  break  his  oath,  simply
says  ns,  which  with  the  addition  "  and  more  also,"  is  perhaps  more  awful  to  the  imagination
because  it  is  not  definite  (Lange).

There  is  an  antiphonal  character  in  these  words,  which  gives  it  almost  the  character  of  a
musical  chant:  perhaps  it  was  often  on  the  lips  of  maidens  of  Israel  [Wordsworth):  com  p.
Ps.  xlv.  10,  "  Hearken,  0  daughter,"  etc.,  and  the  rhythmical  movement  in  Rom.  viii.  35,  "Who
shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ?"  etc.  (ibid).

"And  Ruth  said,  '  Entreat  me  not  to  leave  thee  and  return  from  following  after  thee,  for  I
desire  to  become  a  proselyte.'  Said  Naomi,  *  We  are  commanded  to  observe  the  Sabbath  and
good  days  in  not  travelling  more  than  two  thousand  cubits.'  Said  Ruth,  '  To  every  place
where  thou  goest  I  will  go.'  Said  Naomi, '  We  are  commanded  not  to  lodge  with  the  Gentiles.
Said  Ruth,  '  Whei-esoever  thou  lodgest,  I  will  lodge.'  Said  Naomi,  •  We  are  commanded  to
keep  six  hundred  and  thirteen  precepts.'  Said  Ruth,  '  What  thy  people  keep,  I  will  keep,  as
if  they  were  my  people  from  of  old  until  now.'  Said  Naomi,  '  We  are  commanded  not  to
worship  with  a  strange  worship.'  Said  Ruth,  '  Thy  God  shall  Himself  be  my  God.'  Said
Naomi, '  We  have  four  kinds  of  capital  punishment  for  criminals  :  stoning,  burning,  behead-
ing, and  hanging.'  Said  Ruth,  '  In  whatever  way  thou  diest,  I  will  die.'  Said  Naomi,  *  We
have  a  house  of  burial.'  Said  Ruth,  'And  there  will  I  be  buried*  "  (Chaldee  Paraphrast)
So  the  Jewish  expositors  after  the  Targum  (Lange).

Verse  18.  When  [and  when]  That  she  was  steadfastly  minded.  Firmly  resolved  (Lange,
Wright)  that  she  strengthened  herself  ( Wordsworth)  with  an  oath  (Bernard,  Fuller).  The
verb  means  "  to  stiffen  oneself  firmly  upon  a  thing"  (Keily  Braden).  She  left  speaking  v/nto
her.     Ceased  to  dissuade  her  (Lange,  Cox).

VERSES  16,  17.

Theme. — Sacred  Moments  and  Solemn  Vows.

Love's  holy  flame  for  ever  burneth  ;

From  heaven  it  came,  to  heaven  returneth :

Too  oft  on  earth  a  troubled  guest,

At  times  deceived,  at  times  opprest,

It  here  is  tried  and  purified  ;

But  hath  in  heaven  its  perfect  rest ;

It  soweth  here  in  toil  and  care,

But  the  harvest-time  of  love  is  there.*' — Southey,

And  Ruth  said.  Entreat  me  not  [be  cot  against  me]  to  leave  thee^  etc.

Where  thou  diest,  etc.

Ruth's  famous  reply  to  Naomi's  dissuasive  entreaties  takes  high  rank  among
the  sentences  which  the  world  will  nut  willingly  let  die  (Cox).  Hard  to  say
which  is  the  more  admirable, — Naomi  in  putting  from  her  her  sole  comfort  and

66


CHAP.  I.  IG,  17.      BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  RUTH.


stay,  or  Euth,  in  leaving  all  that  she  had  to  become  the  stay  and  comfort  of
Naomi's  declining  years  (ibid).  God  has  chosen  to  confer  singular  honovrs  upon
women  throughout  the  sacred  Scriptures  (Kitto).  As  examples,  Miriam,  Deborah,
Huldah,  Anna,  Mary,  Lydia,  and  Dorcas  may  be  mentioned.  Ruth  stands  pre-
eminent among  them  for  the  strength  of  her  affections,  and  these  have  been  the
glory  of  woman  always.  Did  ever  the  love  of  the  human  heart  find  a  richer,
sweeter  expression  than  this  ?  In  the  whole  realm  of  literature  where  can  they
be  equalled  ?  They  are  absolutely  matchless  (Braden).  The  words  become''
rhythmical  and  musical  with  the  burden  of  love, — a  love  which  solves  all
difficulties,  and  removes  all  obstacles.  There  are  moments  in  life  when  the
Godlike  wifliin  us  flashes  forth,  when  we  prove  ourselves  children  of  immortality ;
for  we  can  face  the  ills  of  time,  and  look  beyond  them.  Such  a  moment  is  this
in  the  history  of  Ruth.

We  have  here,  I.  The  utterance  of  a  pure,  passionate,  and  personal  affection
— pure,  because  unselfish;  passionate,  because  intensely  in  earnest;  and  personal,
for  love  naturally  centres  in  a  person  [see  on  ver.  14,  p.  60].  She  sacrificed  all
the  pleasures,  all  the  friendships  of  her  youth  ;  all  the  hopes  of  better  days  in  her
own  country,  and  she  chooses  banishment  here,  for  Naomi's  sake,  as  John  for
Christ's  (Rev.  i.  9).  Note  (a)  The  Saviour  demands  a  kindred  sacrifice  of  His
disciples  (Luke  xiv.  33).  (hi)  The  Christian's  Patmos  his  wag  to  Paradise  (Seeker).
"  Now  I  begin  to  be  a  disciple,"  said  Ignatius  on  his  way  to  martyrdom.  ''  I  weigh
neither  visible  nor  invisible  things,  so  that  I  may  gain  Christ,  (c)  Adversity  alike
the  test  oj  sincerity  and  discipleship  [cf.  Luke  xxi.  16,  17 ;  vi.  22].

Some  translate,  *'  Be  not  against  me,"  [that  is,  in  urging  me  to  leave  thee.]  Ruth  ^
evidently  was  greatly  distressed  and  moved  by  what  Naomi  had  just  said.  To  a  heart
like  hers  the  mere  thought  of  separation  was  unbearable.  See  here  then  a  mind  fully
persuaded.  She  weighs  neither  pains  nor  penalties,  and  obstacles  only  make  the
decision  more  plain,  as  the  refining  fire  serves  to  make  the  purity  of  the  gold
more  apparent.  Note  [a)  Tkey  are  against  us  who  use  reasons,  and  exhort  us  to
turn  back  from  well-doing  (Bernard).  Christ  called  Peter  "  Satan,"  that  is,  adver-
sary, when  he  gave  Him  counsel  to  do  otherwise  than  His  Father  had  appointed
(ibid),  (h)  The  godly  have  a  desire  not  to  he  hindered  i^i  a  good  course.  So  it  was
with  David  when  he  had  determined  to  meet  Goliath.  So  Elisha,  repeatedly
urged,  refused  to  leave  Elijah.  So  Paul  in  his  resolve  to  go  onward  to  Jerusalem
(Acts  xxi.  13,  14).  And  so  it  must  be  always  with  the  man  of  God.  A  holy
boldness  characterizes  him  ;  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  to  suffer  violence,  etc.
(Matt.  xi.  12).

We  have  here,  then,  II.  The  expression  of  a  choice  made  once  and  for  ever.
Not  a  wish  merely,  but  a  strong,  deliberate  purpose,  formed  amid  much  apparent
opposition,  and  expressed  with  an  impassioned  invocation  on  the  name  of  Jehovah.
Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaks.  Opposition  only  makes  her
the  more  steadfast ;  she  strengthened  herself  with  an  oath  [see  Crit.  and  Exeg.
Notes  on  ver.  18].  "  God  do  so  to  me,"  etc.  The  choice  full  [complete,  whole-
hearted], unlimited,  affectionate,  determined,  final  (Bel/rage).  No  reserve,  no
conditions.  Her  creed  not  an  election  of  the  heart  only,  or  a  preference  of  the
intellect,  but  a  practical  adoption  (Camming).

Notice  of  this  choice,  (1)  TJiat  it  ivas  a  choice  made  in  youth.  **I  bless  Thee,
0  God  !"  said  Beza  in  his  will,  "  for  many  things,  but  especially  that  I  gave  myself
up  to  Thee  at  the  early  age  of  sixteen."  Ruth  probably  older  than  this,  though
there  can  be  little  doubt  she  came  to  Bethlehem  early  in  life.  [Boaz,  when  he
first  meets  her,  asks,  "  Whose  damsel  is  this  ?"  and  calls  her  daughter,  ii.  5 — 8.]
Life  opening  before  her,  the  future  untried,  so  she  gives  herself  to  the  God  of
Israel,  and  comes  to  take  shelter  under  His  wing.  To  the  young,  life  is  yet  fresh
and  new — in  their  hands  it  is  plastic  and  pliable.  They  have  the  experiment  of
living  yet  to  begin,  and  they  are  interested  as  noue  beside  can  be,  in  learning  how
to  begin  it  yioW.  (Binncy).     Note.  Early  piety  is  likely  to  he  eminent  piety.     Why

67


TTOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  BUTH.       chap.  i.  16,  17.


should  not  the  powers  of  nature,  in  their  first  bloom  and  glory,  adorn  the  kingdom
of  grace  ?  {Dr.  Walls.)

Notice,  (2)  That  it  was  a  choice  made  for  life  and  death.  Made  in  a  moment,
but  made  for  all  the  future.  See  in  it  therefore,  not  only  the  expression  of  the
old  love  for  Naomi,  but  of  the  new  hope  and  the  new  life  dawning  within  the
heart  of  Ruth.  They  have  been  together  in  Moab,  in  darkness,  bondage,  and
misery,  why  should  they  not  be  together  in  the  land  of  promise  ?  How  beautiful
when  companionship  outside  the  covenant  of  Israel  ends  and  even  leads  to  com-
panionship within  the  fold  of  Christ !  Mark  of  this  choice,  {a)  It  is  to  control  all
her  actio7is,  her  goings  and  abidings.  "Where  thou  goest,"  etc.  She  takes  Naomi
for  better  or  worse,  for  richer  or  poorer — makes  no  exception  to  aify  condition
which  may  arise.  So  men  must  give  themselves  to  Christ,  as  the  disciples  followed
the  Saviour.  They  were  content  with  such  lodgings  as  their  Lord  had  for  Himself
{Mac(jowan).
^  Again,  (b)  It  is  to  influence  all  her  ho]jes.  "  Thy  people  shall  be  my  people,"  etc.
Religion  creates  a  firmer  kinship  than  nature.  Grace  in  the  heart  overleaps
such  petty  boundaries  as  nationality.  "Hereby,"  says  the  inspired  divine,  "do
we  kuow  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren."
HeDceforward  their  hope   is  our  hope,  their  lot  our  lot  in  time  and  in  eternity.

So  always.  To  us,  to-day,  there  are  two  lands  and  two  people.  When  we
give  ourselves  to  the  Lord,  we  give  ourselves  to  His  people  also.  The  love  of
Christ  constrains  us  in  this  as  in  every  other  way.  David's  delight  was  not  in
one  saint,  but  in  "  the  saints  ;"  and  they  that  love  one  godly  person  for  godliness'
sake  cannot  but  affect  all  the  Lord's  flock  [Bernard).  Mark,  the  Christian  is  no
recluse,  the  Church  is  not  a  nunnery.  "Thy  people;"  it  is  companionship,
society,  the  general  assembly  of  the  church  of  the  firstborn  (Oiimming),

Once  more,  (c)  It  is  to  last  as  lojig  as  life  itself.  Ruth  thinks  only  of  the  future  as  it
is  joined  to  Naomi's,  and  in  this  she  is  the  true  type  of  the  Christian  convert.  Death
alone  shall  divide  them;  for  death  must  divide  all  earthly  friendships,  at  least,  for
awhile.  "  Where  thou  diest,"etc.  How  strong  the  affinity  which  holds  out  for  life,
stronger  still  that  which  is  for  life  and  death  !  Nay,  more,  she  is  willing  to  take
the  risk  of  dying  first,  and  she  will  not  so  much  as  have  her  body  taken  back  to
Moab.  "There  will  I  be  buried,"  etc.  Love  alone  strong  as  life  itself,  unquench-
able and  unchangeable,  dare  speak  in  language  like  this.  And  yet  this  is  the
only  language  Christ  will  listen  to  if  we  are  to  be  His  disciples.  We  are  to  hate
father  and  mother  for  His  sake ;  and  if  we  love  our  own  life,  we  shall  lose  it  in
loving  Him.  We  take  Him  for  life  and  for  death,  and  the  grave  is  not  to  separate
us.  Blessed  compensation  !  To  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  to  be  buried  with
them,  is  to  sleep  in  Jesus,  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better.

(3)  That  it  was  a  choice  made  for  God  and  eternity.     Her  nominal  profession

changed  into  an  abiding  principle  [Braden).     The  climax  here,  "  Thy  God  shall  be

my  God."    This  confession  the  key-stone  of  her  vow  [Lanye).    Not  merely  chosen

because  He  was  Naomi's  God  (Laivson).     No  !     And  yet  love  to  Naomi  was  the

//human  spark  kindling  an  altar- flame  to  burn  before  God  throughout  the  eternities.

\l  Mysterious  truth,  that  we   may  be   instruments   of  grace    to    our    fellow-men  I

»  Friendship  may  lead  upward  to  the  love  of  God!    Note,  of  this  choice,  in  the  last

place,  that  {d)  It  is  to  decide  the  great  question  of  her  destiny.     It  places  her  within

the  Israel  of  God.     It  links  her  with  the  promises  coming  down  from  Abraham's

time  and  Adam's.     So  it  is  "  the  seed  of  the  woman,"  this  womaiif  is  to  bruise  the

serpent's  head.     Hfippy  choice  !  earnest  of  that  day  when  men  shall  lay  hold  of

the   skirt   of  Him   that   is  an  Israelite   indeed,  saying.  We  will   go   with  you;

for  we  have  heard  that  God  is  with  you  (Zech.  viii.  23).

Improvement. — (1)  The  most  paii,iul  [;art  of  religion  comes  first:  God  has  provided
"  some  better  thing"  further  on  [Morlais  Jones).  Poverty  and  misery  awaited  Ruth
at  first.  (2)  Self-denial  is  the  only  way  to  share  the  Israelite's  hope.  (3)  With  the
truly  earnest  spirit,  spiritual  affections  will  always  have  the  victory  over  carnal  per-

68


CHAP.  I.  16,  17.       nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.


suasions.  (4)  The  love  of  goodness  in  men  should  lead  to,  and  show  itself  finally  in,
the  love  of  God  Himself,  the  supreme  good.  "  Thy  God  shall  be  my  God,"  the
language  of  every  truly  believing  heart  to  the  Church  of  Christ.  A  natural  man
may  choose  deliverance  from  hell,  but  no  man  doth  ever  choose  God  and  Christ,
and  the  spiritual  benefits  Christ  hath  purchased,  and  the  happiness  of  God's  people,
till  he  is  converted  (President  Edwards),
Tyng  on  this  (condensed)  : —

Theme. — The  Choice  of  Youth.

Ruth's  faithful  choice  remains  a  permanent  and  everlasting  pattern  to  all  who
hear  the  gospel  in  their  youth.

I.  It  was  an  humble  choice  :  nothing  to  offer  but  herself ;  no  claim  to  present ;
fears  she  may  be  a  burden  and  uuwelcome.     So  when  the  Holy  Spirit  brings  the
soul  to  Jesus,  she  comes  as  a  beggar.     But  in  all  her  conscious  unworthiness  she
chooses  Christ  as  her  portion  and  her  Lord.
//    II.  It  was  an  affectionate  choice :  personal,  tender.     Can  leave  Moab  without
//regret ;  can  part  with  earthly  friends,  but  she  cannot  leave  Naomi.   (Entreat,  etc.)
II  To  such  a  choice  the  Saviour  would  lead  us  ;  not  one  of  duty  merely,  or  obliga-
•  tion,  of  fear  or  necessity.     Not  the  mere  remedy  and  recourse  of  disappointment
and  weariness  ;  not  the  constrained  denial  of  self,  of  appetite,  and  loved  indul-
gence ;  not  an  involuntary,  sorrowful  relinquishment  of  a  world  that  was  loved
as  long  as  it  bloomed,  and  has  been  forsaken  only  because  it  has  faded.    No.    The
world  was  never  brighter.     It  is  the  perception  of  something  infinitely  more
precious,  the  choice  of  the  Saviour,  etc.     As  freely  as  the  falling  drop  mingles
with  the  current,  does  the  affectionate  heart  embrace  and  resolve  to  go  with  Him.

III.  It  was  an  entire  choice — no  hesitation.  The  contrasting  claims  of  Moab
were  nothing.  She  made  the  exchange — the  transfer  of  herself — freely,  com-
pletely, and  without  reserve.  So  the  true  convert  makes  a  complete  surrender  of
herself  to  the  Lord.  Like  Saul,  "  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?"  None  but
Christ  the  language  of  her  youthful  heart.

IV.  It  was  a  determined  choice :  amazing  dignity  and  firmness  in  her  stand.
Useless  all  attempts  to  lead  her  back  to  Moab.  So  in  the  history  of  early  martyr-
doms for  Christ.  *'I  am  a  Christian,"  the  gentle  but  firm  reply  to  every  solici-
tation to  recant.  An  open,  sincere,  and  determined  choice  of  Christ  leads  us  into
a  harbour  of  rest.     So  Paul':  "  None  of  these  things  move  me  "  (Acts  xx.  24).

V.  It  was  an  instant  choice.  Asked  no  time  for  consideration.  She  staggered
not  in  unbelief,  nor  wavered  amidst  conflicting  motives.

When  Ruth's  faithful  choice  was  thus  made,  she  was  allowed  to  go  on  her  way
in  peace.     The  young  convert's  sincerity  was  proved.     There  she  stood,  acknow-
ledged, honoured,  and  accepted,  as  a  chosen  traveller  for  Immanuel's  land.
McCheyne  on  this  : —

We  should  cleave  to  our  converted  friends.     Follow  those  who  follow  Christ,
I.  Their  God  is  a  precious  God  ;  sin  pardoning,  faithful.
II.  Their  people  are  a  happy  people.

III.  They  want  you  to  go  with  them.

IV.  If  you  do  not  go,  there  will  be  an  eternal  separation  between  you.     How

strange  that  two  trees  should  grow  so  near — one  to  flower  in  Paradise,
the  other  to  be  a  firebrand  in  hell.     Can  yon  bear  the  thought  of  such
a  separation  ?
Ferris  on  this  : —

I.  A  beautiful  illustration  of  the  influence  of  true  affoction.
II.  An  illustration  of  the  character  and  feelings  of  the  true  convert,

III.  One  of  the  richest  sources  of  parental  joy.

IV.  An  encouragement  to  pious  example  and  effort.
Cox  on  this  : —

Three  points  should  be  noted.     (1)  That  in  these  words  Ruth  meets  every

6U


nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   RUTH.       chap.  i.  16,  17.


dissuasive  plea  of  Naomi.  Naomi  had  no  home,  no  asylum  to  offer ;  and  Kuth
replies,  "  Where  thou  lodgest,  I  will  lodge."  Naomi  reminds  her  that  she  is
going  among  an  alien  people,  who  worship  auother  Grod ;  and  Ruth  replies,  "  Thy
people  shall  be  my  people."  Naomi  urges  that  there  will  be  no  brightness,  no
life  in  her  life ;  and  Ruth  replies  that  she  is  content  to  die,  so  that  she  may  share
Naomi's  grave.  (2)  That  Ruth  adopts  Naomi's  God,  as  yet,  purely  from  love  of
Naomi.  And  (3)  that  she  shows  how  instantly  and  entirely  she  adopts  Naomi's
religion  by  sealing  her  vow  with  her  Hebrew  oath,  and  by  calling  on  the  God  of
the  Hebrews,  "  Jehovah  do  so  to  me,  and  more  also,"  etc.


"  Her  vow  bas  stamped  itself  on  the  very
heart  of  the  world  ;  and  that  not  because  of
tbe  beauty  of  its  form  simply,  though  even  in
our  English  version  it  sounds  like  a  sweet
and  noble  music,  but  because  it  expresses  in
a  worthy  form,  and  once  foi'  all,  the  utter
devotion  of  a  genuine  and  self-conquering
love.  It  is  the  spirit  which  informs  and
bieathes  through  these  melodious  words  that
mnkes  them  so  ]>recious  to  us,  and  that  also
renders  it  imj)Ossible  to  utter  any  fitting
comment  on  them.  They  shine  most  purely
in  their  own  light," — Cox.

"  Love  is  a  giant — it  heapeth  mountains
upon  mountains,  and  thinks  the  pile  but
little  ;  it  is  a  mighty  mystery,  for  it  changes
bitter  into  sweet ;  it  calls  death  life,  and  life
death  ;  and  it  makes  pain  less  painful  than
enjoyment." — Spiirgcon.

•*  Love  here  is  surrounded  by  the  other
graces,  and  divides  the  honours  with  them  ;
but  they  will  have  felt  the  warp  of  night  and
of  darkness  when  it  Avill  shine  luminous
against  the  sky  of  eternity." — Beecher.

''  Love  is  a  marvellous  magician.  Let  the
soul  but  feel  its  mighty  touch,  and  you  dare
not  prophesy  the  results.  Men  and  women,
commonplace  enough  in  the  ordinary  affairs
of  life,  become  poets  and  heroes  under  the
influence  of  its  mysterious  inspirations.  The
slowest  tongue  grows  eloquent,  timidity  loses
its  fear,  and  is  brave  for  all  duty  and  sacri-
fice, and  even  death  looks  not  terrible  to  the
clear  eyes  of  love." — Braden.

"Love  does  not  aim  simply  at  the  con-
scious good  of  the  beloved  object ;  it  is  not
satisfied  without  perfect  loyalty  of  heart  ;
it  aims  at  its  own  completeness." — George
Eliot.


{


"  The  love  of  Thee  flows  just  as  much
As  that  of  ebbing  self  subsides  ;
Our  hearts  (their  scantiness  is  such)
Bjar  not  the  conflict  of  two  rival  tides."

Madame  Guyon.

**  Of  all  that  human  was  or  is.
Alone  unchanging  is  Thy  love,
Thy  love  to  us,  and  ours  to  Thee,
Kesponsive  turns  to  heaven  above.

True  as  the  needle  to  the  pole,
True  as  the  bianches  to  the  vine  :
Oh  blessed  hope  1  if  kept  by  Thee,
Amid  these  changes  we  are  Thine."

B.

"  After   a   little,    when   a   man    has  fairly
committed  himself  to  a  Chrisiiau  life,  many

70


of  those  things  which  have  been  against  him
turn  round,  and  are  like  winds  in  his  sails  to
help  him.  The  great  thing  is  to  begin — to
begin  honestly,  to  begin  with  the  help  of
Christ  and  God — to  hcghi.  For  this  is  one  of
those  cases  in  which  to  begin  is  half  the
journey.  And  where  a  man  is  willing  to  say
to  his  companion,  or  to  some  friend  or  Chris-
tian brother,  '  The  time  past  suffices  in  which
I  have  lived  a  worldly  life,  and  I  am  going,
by  the  gnice  of  God.  to  y)egin  to  lay  the
foundations  of  a  Christian  life,'  in  many  and
many  cases  the  crisis  is  past.  You  may  not
have  joy  to-day,  nor  for  weeks  ;  but  you  are
on  the  way  toward  it.  It  may  not  be  con-
version ;  but  will  stand  ultimately  connected
with  it.  .  .  .  When  Peter  was  in  prison,  and
he  was  aroused  by  an  angel  in  the  night,  that
touched  his  chains,  and  caused  them  to  fall
off,  when  first  he  opened  his  eyes,  and  beheld
the  angel,  his  rescue  had  begun.  His  rescue
had  begun  before  his  chains  fell,  before  the
prison-door  was  thrown  back,  before  he  passed
the  keeper." — Beecher.

"  To  follow  Naomi  was  not  simply  to  go
with  one  whose  piety  was  deep  and  true,  and
whose  ability  to  teach  the  doctrines  of  a
diviner  faith  might  be  measured  by  her
chaiacter  and  her  personal  affection,  but  to
go  into  a  land  of  piety,  where  the  service  of
God  was  publicly  celebrated  ;  where  instruc-
tion might  be  received  in  the  Divine  law,  and
where  everything  around  would  tell  of  the
worship  of  Jehovah.  Who  that  has  thought
at  all  of  the  subtle  influence  of  daily  sur-
roundings, or  attempted  to  measure  the  effects
of  a  moral  atmosphere,  that  may  be  peculiar
to  the  age  in  which  he  lives,  does  not  know
what  this  would  mean  1 " — 31.  Tiviaon.

"  I  would  nol  even  ask  a  Hindoo  to  give  up
the  religion  that  he  has,  so  great  is  the  sacri-
fice, unless  I  could  supersede  it  by  a  more
comforting,  a  more  glorious  religion,  the  re-
ligion of  light  and  liberty,  and  life  and  truth."
— Br.  (htmmrtig,

"  The  humble,  meek,  merciful,  just,  pious,
and  devout  souls,  are  everywhere  of  one
religion  ;  and  when  death  has  taken  off  the
mask,  they  vdll  know  one  another,  though
the  diverse  liveries  they  wear  here  make
them  strangers." — Penn.

*'  Our  vows  are  cruel  to  ourselves,  if  they
demand  nothing  but  gentle  zephyrs,  and
flowery  fields,  and  calm  repose,  as  the  lot  of
our  life  ;  for  these  pleasant  things  often
prove  the  most  dangerous  enemies  to  our
nobler  and  dearer  life." — Leigkton*


CHAP.  1.  IG,  17.       UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   IIUTII


"  Milking  thus  the  Lord  my  choice,
I  have  nothing  move  to  choose,
But  to  listen  to  Thy  voice,
And  my  will  in  Tliinc  to  lose:
Thus  whatever  may  betide,
I  shall  safe  and  happy  be  ;
Still  content  and  satisfied.
Having  all  in  having  Thee.'*

"Some  men  will  follow  Christ  on  certain
conditions  ; — if  He  will  notleail  them  through
rough  roads — if  He  will  not  enjoin  them  any
painful  tasks — if  the  sun  and  wind  do  not
annoy  them — if  He  will  remit  a  part  of  His
plan  and  order.  But  the  true  Christian,  who
has  the  spirit  of  Jesus,  will  say,  as  Kuth  said
to  Naomi,  '  Whither  thou  gocst,  I  will  go,*
whatever  difficulties  and  dangers  may  be  in
the  way."
!  "  The  upright  in  heart  are  like  Ruth  :
whatsoever  becometh  of  the  gospel,  they  will
be  sharv  rs  with  it  in  the  same  condition  ;  be
it  affliction,  or  belt  prosperity  ;  be  it  comfort,
or  be  it  sorrow  ;  be  it  fair  weather,  or  be  it
foul ;  be  it  light,  or  be  it  darkness ;  they  will
take  their  lot  with  it." — Caryl.

"  See  here  the  large  extent  of  a  saint's
love ;  it  lasts  till  death :  and  no  wonder ;
for  it  is  not  founded  upon  honour,  beauty,  or
wealth,  or  any  other  sinister  respect  in  the
party  beloved,  which  is  subject  to  age  or
mutability,  but  only  on  the  grace  and  piety
in  him  ;  which  foundation,  because  it  always
lasteth,  that  love  which  is  built  upon  it  is  also
peipetual." — Fuller.

(►  '•  Carnal  afEections  cannot  prevail  over
spiritual  convictions.  The  sinner  who  is  in
earnest  for  salvation  will  be  deaf  to  invi-
tations to  go  back.  The  more  he  is  soliciied
by  them,  the  faster  he  will  flee  from  them." —
Mason's  Azotes  on  the  Pilgrim's  Froyi'css.

"  A  good  companion,  suith  the  Latin  pro-
Terb,  is  pro  viatico  ;  I  may  add  also,  pro
dicersorio.  Ruth,  so  be  it  she  may  enjoy
Naomi's  gracious  company,  will  be  content
with  any  lodging,  though  happily  it  may  be
no  better  than  Jacob  had.  And  yet  we  see
how  some  had  been  discouraged  even  from
the  company  of  our  Saviour,  for  fear  of  hard
lodging.  Witness  the  scribe,  to  whom  our
Saviour  said,  'The  foxes  have  their  holes,'
etc." — Fuller.

"  It  has  not  in  any  age  been  common  for
the  greatest  of  saints  to  have  the  softest  beds
and  most  comfortable  lodgings  ;  and  yet,  in
every  age,  God  has  had  His  followers  and
witnesses,  and  the  Church  her  unfeigned
1  overs." — Maggownn.

"  When  those  that  we  have  formerly  been
conversant  with  are  turning  to  God  and  to
His  people,  their  example  ought  to  influence
us.  Their  example  should  be  looked  upon
as  a  call  from  God.  to  do  as  they  have  done.
God,  when  He  changes  the  heart  of  one,  calls
upon  another,  especially  docs  He  loudly  call
on  those  that  have  been  their  friends  and
acquaintances.  We  have  been  influenced  by
their  example  in  evil,  and  shall  we  cease  to


follow  them  when  they  make  the  wisest
choice  that  ever  they  made,  and  do  the  best
thing  that  ever  they  did  ? " — President  Kd-
wards.

"  In  our  narrative,  the  confession  of  Ruth,
*  Thy  God  is  my  God,*  is  the  highest  stage  of
tiiat  devotion  which  she  yields  to  Naomi  for
life.  She  has  vowed  that  nothing  shall  sepa-
rate her  love  from  its  object;  for  whatever
could  separate  it  would  make  it  imperfect.
But  since  the  God  of  Israel  is  the  true  ground
of  all  the  love  which  she  felt  for  her  Israel-
itish  friends,  it  follows  that  her  confession  of
Him  is  the  keystone  of  her  vow.  It  is  at  the
same  titne  the  true  solution  of  the  conflict
into  whicti  persons  who  mutually  loved  each
other  had  fallen.  It  rectifies  the  error  com-
mitted by  her  husband  when  he  took  the
Moabitisli  woman,  notwithstanding  her  rela-
tion to  the  idol  of  Moab.  The  unity  of  the
Spirit  has  been  attained,  which  not  only
shows  true  love,  but  even  in  memory  recon-
ciles what  was  amiss  in  the  past.  For  Naomi's
grief  was  so  great,  not  only  because  she  had
lost  her  sons,  but  also  because  the  daughters-
in-law  which  she  had  must  be  given  up,  and
she  be  left  alone.  And  as  love  enforced  the
separation,  so  love  also  became  the  cord
drawing  to  a  yet  closer  union.  If  Naomi
believed  herself  fallen  out  of  the  favour  of
God  on  Moab's  account,  she  could  derive
comfort  from  Ruth,  who  for  her  sake  ent  ered
into  the  people  of  God." — Lange.

"  She  was  unchangeably  resolved.  So  was
that  martyr  who  said,  '  The  heavens  will
sooner  fall  than  I  will  forsake  my  profession.'
I  wdll  follow  the  Lamb  wheresoever  He
goeth.  The  hop  in  its  growing  windeth
itself  about  the  i)ole,  and  always  followeth
the  course  of  the  sun  from  east  to  west,  so
that  it  can  by  no  means  be  drawn  to  the
contrary,  but  chooseth  rather  to  break  than
to  yield." — I'rap'p.

"  I  have  oftentimes  noted,  when  women
receive  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  they  are
more  fervent  in  faith,  they  hold  it  more  stiff
and  fast  than  men  do,  as  we  see  in  the  loving
Magdalen,  who  was  more  hearty  and  bold
than  Peter." — Luther.

"  To  her  religion  is  no  weak  and  drivellir.g
fanaticism,  but  a  life,  a  power,  a  heavenly
glory." —  Wadsivorth.

"Naomi  had  said,  and  there  was  a  sifting
emphasis  in  her  words,  '  Thy  sister  has  gene
back  unto  her  people  and  to  her  gods.'  Ruth
says,  '  Thy  people  shall  be  my  people,  and
thy  God  my  God.'  " — Price.

"  O  beautiful  example.

For  youthful  minds  to  heed  1
The  good  we  do  to  others

Shall  never  miss  its  meed;
The  iove  of  those  whose  sorrows

We  lighted  shall  be  ours.
And  o'er  the  path  we  walk  in
That  love  shall  scatter  flowers  "

IJryan*


71


HOMILETIG  COMMENTABY :  BUTH.  chap.  i.  18


VERSE  18.
Theme, — Steadfast-mindedness.

**  When  all  things  have  their  trial,  you  shall  find
Nothing  is  constant  but  a  virtuous  mind  " — Shirley,

"  I  am  constant  as  the  northern  star,
Of  whose  true,  fixed,  and  resting  quality
There  is  no  fellow  in  the  firmament." — ShaJicspeare,

[And]  when  she  saw  that  she  was  steadfastly  minded  to  go  with  her^  then  she  left

speaking  unto  [ceased  to  dissuade]  her.

Older  expositors  have  imagined  that  Naomi's  efforts  to  persuade  her  daughters-
in-law  to  return  homeward  were  not  altogether  seriously  meant  ...  a  dogmatic
anachronism  (Lange).  The  efforts  to  be  looked  upon  as  sincere,  but  limited  in
the  direction  the  text  points  out ;  when  she  saw,  etc.  Only  the  omniscient  God
Himself  can  read  the  heart,  and  yet  even  He  sees  fit  to  try  and  to  test  His  children.
But  mark,  in  a  case  like  this,  friendship  can  dissuade  no  longer,  when  love  shows
itself  to  be  firmly  resolved,  "  steadfastly  minded."

Note.  After  prooj  and  trial  made  of  their  fidelity,  we  are  to  trust  our  brethren^
without  any  further  suspicion  [Fuller).  Not  to  try  before  we  trust  is  want  of
wisdom  ;  not  to  trust  after  we  have  tried  is  want  of  charity  (ibid).  Naomi  the
elder,  yet  she  yielded  [Braden).

Learn,  I.  That  steadfast-mindedness  does  much  to  bring  trial  itself  to
an  end.  The  discipline  of  life  has  accomplished  its  purpose  when  it  becomes
plain  and  apparent  that  we  are  *'  fully  persuaded."  Ephraim  is  fully  persuaded
to  evil,  and  God  says,  "  Let  him  alone."  Euth  is  steadfastly  minded  towards  good,
and  no  further  hindrances  are  to  be  placed  in  her  way.

Note,  (a)  Deciding  for  ourselves,  we  help  others  to  a  decision ;  even  those  who  love
us  and  seek  our  best  welfare.  So,  too,  decision  for  Christ,  and  confession  of
Christ — the  making  it  plain  that  we  have  chosen  God's  people  to  be  ours — will
bring  those  to  be  with  us  who  formerly  may  have  seemed  to  be  against  us.
(b)  Many  of  the  hindrances  to  our  best  and  highest  life  are  not  meant  permanently  to
hinder  us.  They  are  obstacles  only  for  the  moment  placed  in  our  way,  that  we
may  overcome  them,  and  use  them  as  stepping-stones  to  higher  things  :  at  their
worst  they  are  only  intended  to  hold  us  back  from  entering  the  kingdom  until  we
are  "fully  persuaded."  God  wrestled  with  Jacob,  with  a  desire  to  be  conquered;
so  Naomi  no  doubt  opposed  Ruth,  hoping  and  wishing  that  she  herself  might  be
foiled  {Fuller),  (c)  Opposition  will  cease  generally  the  moment  it  is  plain  that
opposition  is  in  vain.  It  is  the  wavering  mind  which  invites  persuasion,  courts
opposition  ;  men  spare  their  breath  when  they  see  that  we  are  steadfastly  minded,
as  the  disciples  at  Caesarea  did  with  Paul  (Acts  xxi.  14).

Learn,  II.  That  earnestness  of  character  is  the  secret  of  perseverance
and  final  success  on  the  human  side.  "Hard  pounding,  gentlemen;  but  we
will  see  who  can  pound  the  longest"  {Wellington  at  Waterloo).  The  steadfast-
minded  are  like  the  oak,  deep-rooted,  and  so  unmoved  ;  like  the  iceberg  in  a
swelling  sea :  the  cause  of  its  steadiness  is  its  depth  {Arnot).  Lange  and  others
translate  "  firmly  resolved."  The  one  phrase  points  to  the  cause,  the  other  to
its  effect.  Note.  With  such  to  be  fully  persuaded,  is  to  be  steadfast-mifided.  This
steady  earnestness  of  purpose  is  like  the  vital  energy  in  the  animal  and  vegetable
creation,  without  which  they  would  languish  and  die  {Pilkington).

We  have  here  the  silvern  side  of  the  shield  of  truth  illustrated,  viz.,  that  we
continue  in  the  heavenward  course,  just  as  Ruth  went  onward  towards  the  earthly
Canaan,  because  we  are  fully  persuaded  and  so  steadfast^minded.  (cf.  Heb.  xii.)  Said
of  the  Patriarchs,  "  they  were  persuaded,"  and  that  "  if  they  had  been  mindful  of
that  country  from  whence  they  came  out,"  like  Ruth  "  they  might  have  ha(i
opportunity  to  have  returned."

72


CHAP.  I.  18.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH,


The  other  and  golden  side  of  truth  also  illustrated  here.  Mark,  the  influences
came  from  Naomi,  wliich  bound  Ricth  to  Naomi,  the  attractions  drawing  her  onward
to  Canaan  came  from  that  other  and  better  land.  So,  too,  in  spiritual  things  we
"  are  persuaded,"  but  we  are  persuaded  "  of  Him."  In  all  affection  which  is  to  be
lasting  there  must  be  the  influences  which  attract,  as  well  as  the  mind  and  spirit
capable  of  being  attracted.  Love  and  life  are  always  influenced  from  without.
We  speak  of  an  aff'ection  laying  hold  of  us.  And  note,  it  is  only  the  life  anchored
within  the  veil  by  faith,  "  hid  with  Christ  in  God,"  which  will  bear  without
breaking  the  strain  and  stress  of  the  storm.

So,  too,  Ruth  was  not  without  her  own  misgivings  and  realization  of  the  weak-
ness which  is  ours  always.  The  Hebrew  reads  it  *'that  she  strengthened  herself,"
that  being  their  phrase  to  express  an  oath  [Fuller).

Improvement. — (1)  Divine  moment  when  a  man  can  say  that  he  is  **  fully
persuaded."  Henceforward  the  problem  of  life  may  be  looked  upon  as  solved  —
the  light  that  shone  upon  our  path  has  become  a  fixed  and  guiding  star.  (2.)  A
distinct  step  too,  in  all  true  progress,  when  others  perceive  our  steadfast-minded-
ness  to  go  onward.  It  is  certain,  my  belief  gains  quite  infinitely  the  moment
I  can  convince  another  mind  thereof  (Carlyle).  (3.)  As  the  gold  is  not  known
but  by  the  touchstone,  so  is  not  any  Christian  till  he  be  thoroughly  tried  [Topsell),

Bernard  on  this  : —

I.  The  godly  wise  are  wary  in  their  admittance  of  others  into  their  company,
till  they  well  know  them.

II.  Words  with  an  oath,  and  actions  agreeing  sufficiently,  may  persuade  us  of
the  steadfastness  of  the  heart,  and  the  inward  disposition  of  the  mind  of  such  as
show  themselves  virtuous.

III.  An  oath  is  the  strengthening  of  the  mind  of  him  that  sweareth.

IV.  There  is  no  reason  to  make  further  trial,  where  an  honest  resolution  is  or
may  be  well  discerned.

Lessons. — Learn  (1.)  To  try  before  we  trust,  and  then  to  trust  after  sound
trial.     (2.)  Not  to  put  to  further  trial  than  need  is,  lest  we  weaken  faith,  etc.

\f  "When  Constantine  was  chosen  emperor,  and  proving  them,  we  offend  a  weak  Chris-
he  found  several  Christians  in  office  ;  and  he  tian.  Christ  tried  the  woman  of  SjrophcE-
issued  an  edict  requiring  them  to  renounce  nicia  first  with  silence,  then  with  two  sharp
their  faith,  or  quit  their  places.  Most  of  them  answers;  at  last,  findings  her  to  be  sound,
gave  up  their  offices  to  preserve  their  con-  He  dismissed  her  with  granting  her  request,
science  ;  but  some  cringed,  and  renounced  and  commending  of  her  faith.  When  He  had
-Christianity.  When  the  emperor  had  thus  said  to  Peter  the  third  time  *  Lovest  thou
made  full  proof  of  their  dispositions  of  cha-  Me  ? '  He  rested  satisfied  with  Peter's  an-
racter,  he  removed  all  who  basely  complied  swer,  and  troubled  him  with  no  more  ques-
with  his  supposed  wishes,  and  retained  the  tions." — Fuller.

others  ;  saying  that  those  who  would  desert  "As  soldiers,  when  they  have  long  besieged

or  deny  their  Divine  Master  would  desert  a  city,  with  the  loss  of  time,  money,  and  men,

him,  and  were  not  worthy  of  his  confidence."  being  hopeless  to  take  it,  they  even  sound  a

— Die.  of  Illustrations.  retreat,  and  retire  home  without  accomplish-

"  After  supper,  the  dean  having  decanted  a  ing  their  desire  ;   so  Naomi,  perceiving  that

bottle  of  wine,  poured  what  remained  into  a  all  her  arguments  which  she  used  to  conquer

glass,  and  seeing  it  was  muddy,  presented  it  Ruth,  like  water  in  the  smith's  forge  cast  on

to  Mr.  Pilkington  to  drink  it.     *  For,'  said  he,  coals,  did  more  intend  [intensify]  the  heat  of

'I  always  keep  some  poor  person  to  drink  herconstaucy,givesoverinmy text." — Fuller.

the  foul  wine  for  me.'    Mr.  Pilkington.  enter-  **  The  mind  can  never  be  steady,  whilst  it

ing  into  his  humour,  thanked  him,  and  told  stands  upon  other's  feet,  and  till  it  be  settled

him    'he  did  not  know  the  difference,  but  upon  such  grounds  of  assurances,  that  it  will

was  glad  to  get  a  glass  at  any  rate.'     '  Why  rather  lead  than  follow  ;  and  can  say  with

then.'  said  the  dean,    'you   shan't,  for  I'll  Joshua,  whatsoever  become  of  the  world,  '  I

drink  it  myself. '  " — Slier idan^s  Life  of  Swift.  and  my  house  will  serve  the  Lord.'  " — Bislwp

"  The  goldsmith  must  purify  the  dross  and  Hall.

ore  from  the  gold,  but  he  must  be  wary  lest  "There  is  all  the  difference  in  the  world

he  make  waste  of  good  metal,  if  over-curious  between  firmness  and  obstinacy,  though  they

in  too  often  refining.     We  may  search  and  are   constantly  co!-foundcd.      Firmness  is  a

sound  the  sincerity  of  our  brethren;  but  after  conscientious  adherence  to  what  is  held  to

good  experience  made  of  their  uprightness,  be  right  after  a  careful  examination  of  the

we  must  take  heed  lest,  by  continual  siiung  rciisons  that  can  be  given  for  the  opposite

78


EOMILETIC  GOMMENTABY:  EVTII.       chap.  i.  19—21.


course.  Stubbornness  is  the  tenacious  main-
tenance of  a  position,  whetlier  it  be  right  or
wi'ong." — Bra  den.

"  Naomi  teaches  us  that  there  is  '  a  time  to
speak  and  a  time  to  keep  silence,'  a  time  to
entreat  and  a  time  to  refrain  from  entreating,
a  time  to  argue  and  a  time  to  yield  in  the
argument,  a  time  even  when  parents  should
Concede    to    the   wishes   of    their    children,


though  contrary  to  their  own  judgment."—
Bra  den.

*'  When  our  Saviour  Christ  had  dealt  with
the  Canaanitish  woman  about  the  like  cause,
seeing  that  silence  would  not  answer  her,  nor
denial  satisfy  her,  nor  the  opprobrious  word
of  dog  dismay  her,  then  He  yielded  to  her
desire,  cured  her  daughter,  and  proclaimed
her  faith  to  be  wonderful," — Topscll.


VERSES  19—21.

Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes. — So  they  two.     Types  of  the  Jewish  and  GentUe

Churches  {3Iacgowan).  Amicitia  sit  inter  binos  qui  sunt  veri,  et  bonos  qui  sunt  pauci(^V'<2j9/?).
Went.  They  were  obliged  to  travel  on  foot  {Patrick,  Gill).  If  the  more  southern  route  was
chosen,  they  would  descend  from  the  high  table-land  of  Moab,  cross  the  plain  at  the  south-
western extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea,  part  of  the  once  larger  vale  of  Siddim,  where  stood  the
cities  of  the  plain,  the  soil  of  which  is  entirely  covered  with  salt  (Eadie),  then  turn  north-
wards up  the  Wady  Sudier  to  Engedi,  and  so  to  Bethlehem.  K  the  more  northern  route,
they  would  cross  the  two  fords  of  Arnon  and  Jordan.  In  either  case  one  of  the  most  weird
and  desolate  landscapes  in  the  world,  the  scene  of  the  destruction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,
lay  before  them  (cf.  Deut.  xxix.  2.S).  Came  to  Bethlehem  [cf.  Intro.,  p.  13].  All  the  city  was
moved  [cf.  1  Sam.  iv.  5  ;  1  Kings  i.  45].  All  the  city  was  in  a  commotion  about  them
(Beni^ck).  rixv^^  V  ToXtf.  The  city  rang  with  the  news  (LXX,).  All  the  city  rejoiced  at
them  {Arah,  Syriac).  The  E.V.  rightly  uses  the  more  comprehensive  term  which  may  include
curiosity,  surprise,  gladness,  etc.  Amazement  not  so  much  at  the  fact  that  Naomi  was  still
alive  and  had  come  back  again,  as  at  her  returning  in  so  mournful  a  condition  (Xeil).  And
they  said.  They  in  the  Hebrew  is  feminine.  The  women  of  Bethlehem  said  {Spcakci'^s
Com.).  Not  exactly,  dicelantqne  mvlieres,  as  the  Vulg.  has  it ;  the  population  of  the  city  are
the  subject  of  the  verb,  but  in  a  matter  of  this  kind  women  would  naturally  be  so  prominent
as  to  lead  the  narrator  insensibly  to  use  the  feminine.  Perhaps  Naomi  arrived  in  an  hour  of
the  day  when  the  labours  of  the  field  left  none  but  women  in  the  city  {Lange).  The  Midrash
makes  the  scene  still  more  dramatic  by  the  explanation  that  the  concourse  of  the  inhabitants
was  occasioned  by  the  fact  that  the  first  wife  of  Boaz  had  that  very  day  been  carried  to  her
grave  {Lange).     May  possibly  have  been  some  such  public  occasion.

Ver.  20.  Call  me  not  Naomi  [pleasant.  See  on  ver.  2,  p.  14].  Call  me  Mara  [bitter  ;  LXX.
TTi/cav  ;  comp.  Exod.  xv.  23].  I  have  no  more  anything  that  is  pleasant  about  me:  my
life,  like  a  salty,  bitter  spring,  is  without  flavour  or  relish  {Lange).  A  similar  allusion  to  the
meaning  of  names,  Gen,  xxvii.  86  ;  Jer.  xx.  3  {Speaker's  Com.).  From  this  we  gather  that
Naomi  was  not  the  name  given  her  at  first  by  her  parents,  but  a  popular  name  commonly
given  her  by  her  neighbours,  because  of  her  comely  presence  and  courteous  behaviour
{Patrickl)  The  Almighty  [Shaddai].  The  name  Almighty  is  almost  peculiar  to  the  Penta-
teuch and  to  the  Book  of  Job,  in  which  last  it  is  found  thirty  times.  It  occurs  twice  in  the
Psalms  and  four  times  in  the  prophets  {Speaker's  Com.).  Why  is  Shaddai  used  here?  Must
be  connected  with  its  pregnant,  proper  signification  {Lange),  the  source  of  fruitfulness  and
life.  Used  continually  as  in  Gen.  xxxv.  11;  I  am  El  Shaddai :  be  fruitful  and  multiply.  The
word  must  therefore  unquestionably  be  referred  to  a  root  nT«iJ  still  used  in  Arabic  in  the
sense  "  to  water,  to  fertilize."  [See  Lange  in  loco.'\  Naomi  w^as  rightly  named,  when  with
a  flourishing  family  she  went  to  Moab ;  but  now  Shaddai,  who  gave  the  blessing,  has  taken  it
away  {Lange).  Rashi  and  Adam  Clarke  explain  Shaddai  to  mean  self-sufficient.  Hath  dealt
very  bitterly  with  me;  has  worked  against  me  {Bcrtheau)  ;  hath  testified  against  [lit.  hath
answered]  me  ( Wordsworth) ;  hath  inflicted  bitter  sorrow  upon  me  {Lange) ;  hath  made
me  very  sad  {Wright).  [Comp.  Exod.  xx.  16;  2  Sam.  i.  16;  Job  x.  17;  Mai.  iii.  5.]  A
metaphor  from  adversaries  at  law  {Trapp).  So  Job  says,  "Thou  writest  bitter  things  against
me  "  (xiii.  26).

Ver.  21.  I  went  out  full.  That  is,  in  the  rich  possession  of  a  husband  and  two  sons  {Steele
and  Terry).  Home  again  empty.  The  very  reverse  of  Jacob's  experience  (Gen.  xxxii.  10)  :
"  With  my  staff  1  passed  over  this  Jordan,  and  now  I  am  become  two  bands."  Cf.  Hannah's
song  (1  Sam.  ii.  5),  "  They  that  were  full  have  hired  out  themselves  for  bread."  Though  the
Hebrew  *'  full,"  there  meaning  fvll  of  food,  is  quite  different  from  that  here  used,  which  is  the
opposite  of  empty  [Speaker's  Com,.).  The  Lord  \ Jehovah']  hath  testified  against  me.  Koi
KvQioQtTWKuvijjae  f.it  (LXX.).  The  reading  of  the  LXX.,  '*  He  humbled  me,"  was  justly  departed
from,  for  it  is  only  a  paraphrase  of  the  sense  {Lange).  Quam  Dominus  humiliavit  {Vulg.).
The  Lord  has  brought  me  back  in  vain  {Syr.),  has  sent  down  upon  me  a  terrible  punishment
{Arab.).  On  the  whole,  we  incline  to  prefer  the  ordinary  translation  {Wright).  So  Lange,
Treme^,  Drusius.  Gesen.,  Eosenm.  That  which  Bertheau  considers  to  be  the  difficulty  of  the
passage,  that  it  makes  G  od  to  testify  against  a  person,  while  elsewhere  only  men  bear  testimony,

74


CHAP.  I.  10.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  RUTH.


is  precisely  tlie  special  thou.o^ht  of  Naomi.  "  I  went,"  she  says,  "  and  God  lias  testified  that
tliis  <,n)inf/was  a  sin  "  {Lnngr).  In  the  loss  of  my  children  and  family,  says  Naomi,  I  perceive
that  He"^"  declares  me  G:nilty."  as  the  Tar;;um  excellently  remlers  it  {ibid).  Comp.  for  a
similar  turn  of  thouLdit.  I  Kinc^s  xvii.  18,  followed  at  ver.  20  by  the  identical  word  here  rendered
hath  afflicted,  there  thou  hast  brought  evil  {Speakers  Com.),

VERSE  19.
Theme, — Companionship  in  Progress.

**  Along  the  solitary  plain  we  went.
As  one  who  unto  the  lost  road  returns,
And  till  he  finds  it  seems  to  go  in  vain." — Dante,

**  Not  enjoyment,  and  not  sorrow,
Is  our  destined  end  or  way,
Bat  to  act,  that  each  to-morrow
Finds  us  farther  than  to  day." — Longfellow,

So  they  two  went  until  they  came  to  Bethlehem,

In  life  action  is  everything,  and  joy  and  sorrow  come  of  themselves  (Goethe),
Onward  with  these  two  means  that  they  are  nearer  every  moment  to  Canaan,  the
land  of  promise,  and  Bethlehem,  the  house  of  bread.  A  rough  way,  but  the  right
way  (Philpot) — a  difficult  journey,  but  a  wise  one ;  onward  from  weakness  to
strength,  poverty  to  riches,  disquietude  to  rest.  Moab  behind  them,  the  promised
land  in  front.

"  Linked  hand  in  hand  they  went,  tears  in  their  eyes.
As  faint  and  beautiful  as  eyes  of  flowers." — Alexander  Smith.

Note.  Pilgrimage  is  the  appointed  lot  of  God's  saints ;  for  true  life  is  always
moving  onward,  progressing.

We  have  here,  I.  Companionship  *in  Progress.  They  two  went.  Their  prin-
ciples  were  one,  the  life  and  love  of  God  in  the  soul.  Their  object  was  one,
to  come  and  trust  in  the  shadow  of  the  Divine  wings  (ii.  12).  Their  interest  was
common,  the  salvation  of  their  souls  and  communion  by  the  way  (Macgouan).  So
Lot  and  his  daughters  went  hand  in  hand  out  of  Sodom,  led  of  the  angels  to  a
place  of  safety.  Note.  The  world  is  our  wilderness,  and  we  are  happy  only  as  the
path  leads  us  onward  to  a  place  of  rest.  T'hey  came  to  Bethlehem  [the  house  of
bread].  How  many  accompany  each  other  to  Bethaven  !  [house  of  iniquity.]  Our
travellers  are  an  emblem  of  the  righteous,  who  hold  on  their  way,  etc.  (Macgowan).
They  went  together  lovingly,  they  ceased  not  to  go  on,  they  did  not  linger,  they
took  no  by-paths,  neither  forgot  they  whither  they  were  going,  till  they  came  unto
Bethlehem  (Bernard).     See  also  on  ver.  6,  7 ;  pp.  32 — 36.

II.  Mutual  sympathy  in  affliction. — The  Holy  Spirit  mentioneth  not  what
discourse  tliey  exchanged  by  the  way  ;  yet  no  doubt  they  were  neither  silent,  nor
busied  in  unprofitable  talk  (Fuller).  Note.  Tivo  things  prevented  them  sinking  into
despair,  their  piety  and  their  mutual  lore.  An  instance  here  of  God's  faithfulness  in
lestoring  comfort  to  His  mourners.  Elimelech  and  his  sons  taken.  Ruth  given  as  a
fast  friend.  When  Abraham  lost  Sarah,  Rebekah  is  brought  into  her  tent  (Macgowan),
Note,  [a)  l^rue  companionship  embraces  three  things,  lovCy  unity,  and  constancy.
Friends  must  be  of  one  mind  and  one  heart,  if  they  would  journey  together.
These  united  in  an  indissoluble  bond  of  love  (Cox),  (b)  Only  in  looking  heaven-
ward, not  in  looking  earthward,  do  what  we  call  union,  mutual  love,  society,  begin
to  be  /fossible  (Carhjle).

III.  Fellowship  and  communion  in  desire  and  hope. — Both  are  journeying  to
join  the  Israel  of  God.  Probably  they  were  beguiling  the  way  by  anticipations  of
the  future;  for  now  that  Naomi  has  t«iken  Ruth  more  closely  to  herself,  their
interests  are  inseparable,  whatever  may  unfold.  Note.  They  are  to  be  admit: (d
unto  our  fellowship,  whom  wejind  to  be  constant  in  a  good  course,  and  true  lovers  of

75


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  BUTE.


CHAP.  I.  19.


ijoodnesSy  whatsoever  they  were  before  (^Bernard).     Thus  God's  angels  deal  with  us  ;
they  will  account  us  their  fellow-servants  when  we  turn  to  God  (ibid).

Improvement. — (1.)  God  leaves  His  saints  generally  neither  companionless  nor
comfortless.  Luke,  Mark,  Titus,  Timothy  given  and  sent  at  different  times  to
Paul  [of.  2  Cor.  vii.  6].  And  where  man's  company  fails.  He  will  send  His  angels.
Jacob  was  comforted  of  heaven  when  earth  failed  him  (Gen.  xxviii.  12).  And
when  the  disciples  slept  in  Getlisemane,  an  angel  appeared  strengthening  the
Saviour.  (2.)  Success  always  attends  our  efforts  when  they  are  in  accordance
with  Divine  purposes.  They  came  to  BcUdehem.  Naomi  is  at  home  once  more;
and  for  the  first  time  Ruth  stands  on  the  sacred  spot  where  the  Saviour  is  to  be
horn.  How  much  depended  upon  the  journey,  humanly  speaking  I  Fit  emblem  of
another  journey  to  another  land  of  promise.

"  Is  it  a  long  way  off  ?

Oh  1  no,  a  few  more  years,

A  few  more  bitter  tears, —

We  shall  be  there.

Sometimes  the  way  seems  long,

Our  comforters  all  go,

Woe  follows  after  woe,

Care  after  care,"
•  *  *  •

'Tis  no  uncertain  way
We  tread,  for  Jesus  still
Leads  with  unerring  skill

Where'er  we  roam ;
And  from  the  desert  wild
Soon  shall  our  path  emerge,
And  land  us  on  the  verge

Of  our  dear  home." — K  W.  Die.  of  Poetic  Illustrations,


"  Naomi's  heart  throbs  with  mingled  feelings
as  they  pass  along  the  way  traversed  by  her
and  her  venerated  dead  some  ten  years
before.  The  sight  of  the  beloved  city  and
the  familiar  spots  quickens  a  crowd  of
painful  memories.  Those  who  have  returned
to  their  native  country  and  their  childhood's
heme  after  a  prolonged  absence  know  too
well  how  everything  looks  familiar  yet
strange,  old  yet  sometimes  new,  and  a
thousand  thoughts  throng  to  the  mind,  and
tearful  emotions  surge  in  the  heart,  at  every
turn  of  the  way." — Braden,

"  A  man  may  turn  whither  he  pleases,  and
undertake  anything  whatsoever,  but  he  will
always  return  to  the  path  which  nature  has
prescribed  for  him." —  Goethe.

"  Often  again  in  his  course  of  life  man
feels  as  a  feathered  seed  driven  by  winds  ;
as  if,  without  weight  or  power,  he  slowly
floats  or  is  swiftly  hurried,  but  rests  nowhere.
He  feels  that  within  him  is  life,  but  knows
that  he  is  as  yet  an  embryo.  He  is  con-
fusedly conscious  of  what  his  tendencies  are,
but  cannot  tell  what  his  outgrowth  will  be.
.  .  .  Let  him  but  find  resting  place,  and
he  also  will  put  forth  buds  and  boughs,  and
array  himself  in  beauty." — Lynch.

"  Life  is  only  bright  when  it  proceedeth
Towards  a  truer,  deeper  life  above  ;

Human  love  is  sweetest  when  it  Icadeth
Towards  a  more  divine  and  perfect  love.

Learn  the  mystery  ot  trogression  duly  ;
Do  not  call  each  glorious  change  decay  :

7a


But  know,  we  only  hold  our  treasures  truly
When  it  appears  as  if  they  fade  away.

Nor   dare  to  blame  God's  gifts  for   incom-
pleteness—
In  that  want  their  beauty  lies  :  they  roll
Towards   some  infinite  depths  of  love  and
sweetness.
Bearing  onwards  man's  reluctant  soul  1 "

Adelaide  A.  Proctor,

"Men's  mid-day,  cold,  and  slow  pace  to
heaven  will  cause  many  a  man  to  want  his
lodgings  at  night,  and  to  lie  in  the  fields." —
Fuller.

"  To  walk  with  Love  in  Love's  own  country
will  be  as  easy  as  it  is  happy;  but  here,
where  love  is  put  upon  its  trial,  it  is  not  so.
It  is  to  walk  as  with  a  thorn  in  your  foot,
which  gives  great  pain  at  every  step — new
pain  in  an  old  wound." — Lynch.

"  Permanent  rest  is  not  to  be  expected  on
the  road,  but  at  the  end  of  the  journey." —
Bllhvyn.

"  Though  God  may  bring  us  into  the
wilderness,  yet  if  He  speak  comfortably  to
us,  the  wilderness  will  be  turned  into  a
paradise.  ...  If  the  road  is  rough,  let  us
not  complain,  for  it  leads  to  a  glorious  rest
which  nothing  shall  disturb." — Cliarles.

"  Make  all  plain  and  clear,  and  what
sphere  is  there  left  for  that  trust  by  which
the  soul  learns  to  lean  upon  God  Himself?
To  see  all  the  pathway,  and  know  whither  it
leads,  and  what  are  the  ditficulties  in  the  way,
and  how  they  are  to  be  avoided,  that  is  sight^


CHAP.  I.  10.


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.


and  not  faith.  But  when  '  light  is  given,  and
yt't  the  way  is  hid,'  when  the  little  we  know
points  to  a  deeper  mystery,  and  beyond  there
is  the  darkness  and  uncertainty  from  which
the  spirit  shrinks  and  life  holds  bark,  when
wc  stand  like  the  Israelites  at  the  ited  iSea,
the  swollen  waters  in  front,  tbe  mountains  on
either  hand,  the  enemy  behind,  and  none  to
help  us  but  God  ;  it  is  then  that  faith  either
falters  and  fails,  or  triumphs  and  shows  itself
inestimable,  mo-st  precious  when  most  needed,
just  as  the  miner's  candle  is  valued  beyond
all  else  when  the  gloom  is  densest  and  the
way  most  intricate." — H.

"  The  more  the  cross,  the  more  the  longing  :
Out  of  the  vale  man  upward  goes  ;

Whose  pathway  through  the  desert  lies  ;
He  craves  the  land  where  Jordan  flows :
When  here  the  dove  hnds  no  repose.

Straight  to  the  ark  with  joy  she  flies."

SchmolJi.

"  It  is  a  mere  and  miserable  solitude  to
want  true  friends,  without  which  the  world
is  but  a  wilderness.  .  .  .  There  is  no  man
that  imparteth  his  joys  to  his  friend,  but  he
joyeth  the  more ;  and  no  man  that  impart-


eth his  griefs,  but  he  grieveth  the  less." —
liacon.

"  Then  I  saw  in  my  dream,  they  went  very
lovingly  on  together,  and  had  sweet  dis-
course of  all  things  that  had  happened  to
them  in  their  pilgrimage." — Bunyan.

"  it  is  with  (Jiiristians  as  with  burning
coals.  If  these  are  scattered  far  apart,  one
after  the  other  is  easily  extinguished,  but
when  collected  together,  the  fire  of  one  pre-
serves that  of  the  other,  and  the  glowing
coals  often  ignite  others  that  lie  near." —
Franke.

"  *  Daughter,'  ye  softly  said — ^  Peace  to  thine

heart  ;
We  too — yes,  daughter  1 — have  been  as  thou

art,
Tossed  on  the  troubled  waves,  life's  stormy

sea ;
Chance  and  change  manifold   proving  like

thee,
Hope-lifted,  doubt-depressed,  seeing  in  part.
Tried,  troubled,  tempted,  sustained  as   thou

art:
Our  God  is  thy  God  ;  what  He  willeth  is  best :
Trust  Him  as  we  trusted,  then  rest  as  we

rest.' "  Carolind  Southey,


VERSE    19.
Theme* — A  City  in  Astonishment,

«  The  blast  of  death
Hath  stript  our  roof  trees ;  the  guardian  boughs
Hang  like  sad  willows  o'er  the  stream  of  life,—
Where  drifting  slowly  by  our  native  shores,
Familiar  faces  smile  on  us  no  more." — Macltay.

And  it  came  to  pass,  when  they  were  come  to  Bethlehem,  that  all  the  city  was  moved
about  them,  and  they  said.  Is  this  Naomi  ?

Naomi's  return  was  no  common  occurrence.  Probably  the  inhabitants  of
Bethlehem  never  expected  to  see  her  more  [Lawson).  The  city,  and  especially
the  women,  were  thrown  into  a  peaceable  uproar.  Everybody  ran,  told  the
news,  and  wondered  [Lamje).  The  great  change  in  Naomi's  circumstances
apparent  in  her  appearance,  in  her  very  way  of  entering  Bethlehem.  Ten  years
ago  she  had  left  under  far  different  circumstances.  She  went  out  with  a  husband,
children,  wealth ;  as  she  herself  says,  "full."  The  story  well  remembered,  for
the  family  was  a  prominent  one  in  Bethlehem  ;  natural  that  the  news  of  her  return,
poor  and  sorrowful,  should  spread  like  wildfire,  and  create  what  to  her  was  an
unpleasant  sensation  [Lanye).  Is  this  Naomi  ?  Note.  No  questions  cut  so  keenly
as  those  which  remind  us  of  beloved  ones  who  have  passed  into  the  shadow  of  death
(Braden).

See  in  these  words,  I.  The  language  of  surprise  and  astonishment.  Strange!
Wonderful !  Is  this  she  who  was  once  so  wealthy  ?  How  quickly  is  a  river  of
riches  drained  dry  !  [Fuller.)  Is  this,  can  it  be,  Naomi?  Time  and  sorrow,  too,
had  wrought  their  cruel  work  upon  her.  Ten  years,  and  such  troubles  as  hers,
leave  terrible  marks  at  her  time  of  life  [Braden).  The  rose  withered  unlike  what
it  was  when  blooming  [Matt.  Henry).  She  that  formerly  was  so  fair,  now  one
can  scarcely  read  the  traces  of  beauty  in  her  face  [Fuller),  Is  //u'.s  Naomi  ?  Note.
\a)   The  more  renowned  any  are  in  2^rosjjerlty,  the  more  remarkable  are  they  in

77


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH,  cttap.  i.  19.


adversity  (Bernard).  Men  are  more  carried  away  by  the  coDsideration  of  the
outward  means  how  things  come  to  pass,  than  of  the  power  and  pleasure  of  God
to  make  such  an  alteration  {ibid).  And  so  (li)  .God's  j^rovidential  doings  are  a
continual  cause  of  surprise — as  full  of  mystery  as  they  are  of  mercy ;  necessarily
so  if  faith  is  to  have  its  perfect  work.  He  brings  about  great  changes  in  persons,
families,  cities,  countries.  And  that  often  in  ways  least  expected.  The  poor
are  exalted,  the  rich  cast  down;  empires  seemingly  established  for  ever,  like
Babylon  and  Rome,  coming  to  nought ;  cities  destroyed,  etc.  (Cf.  Lam.  ii.  15,
*'  Is  this  the  city  that  men  call  the  perfection  of  beauty?"  etc. ;  Rev.  xviii.  15 — 17.)
II.  The  language  of  condemnation.  May  be  feared  there  was  more  blame
than  pity  in  the  exclamation  [Cox).  See  I  see!  this  is  she  that  could  not  be
content  to  tarry  at  home  to  take  part  of  the  famine  with  the  rest  of  her  fellows
{Fuller).  Perhaps  they  were  moved  about  her,  lest  she  should  be  a  charge  to
the  town,  she  looked  so  bare  (Matt.  Henry).  Men  judge  mainly  by  outward
appearances

"  Virtue  without  success
Is  a  fair  picture  shown  by  an  ill  light." — Dry  den.

Under  the  old  economy,  too,  adversity  was  looked  upon  largely  as  meaning
punishment.  Only  the  nobler  spirits  seem  to  realize  the  meaning  and  ministry
of  suffering.  A  trace  of  this  to  be  found  among  the  heathens,  as  in  the  seven
years'  probation  of  Eneas  : —

"  Long  labours,  both  by  sea  and  land,  he  bore,
And  in  the  doul)tful  war,  before  he  won
The  Sabian  realm,  and  built  the  destined  town." —  Virgil,

But  even  this  was  associated  with  fate  and  *'  the  wrath  of  the  gods."  Note.
The  multitude  in  all  ages  have  traced  afflictions  to  the  anger  of  the  Deity,  (See  Job
viii.  6,  xi.  20,  etc.)  Difficult  for  Christians  to  realize  always  that  "whom  the
Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth."

So  that  we  may  have  here.  III.  The  language  of  contempt.  The  crowd  come
and  look  upon  a  spectacle  like  this,  and  then  pass  away  to  their  usual  avocations,
some  at  least  pointing  the  finger  of  scorn.  David  was  cursed  of  Shimei  in  his
affliction,  and  God's  prophet  saluted  with  the  cry,  "  Go  up,  thou  bald  head."  The
man  of  God  must  expect  to  be  misunderstood  in  all  that  concerns  him,  even  in  the
Divine  dealings  with  him.  Christ  said  to  His  disciples,  *'  The  time  cometh  that
whosoever  killeth  you  will  think  he  doeth  God  service."  Note.  Hatred  to  the
good  seems  inherent  to  the  evil  heart;  and  poverty  brings  contempt  upon  the  best.
Proud  hearts  take  contempt  in  adversity  as  worse  than  death  [Bernard) ;  but  we
must  learn  to  bear  it  as  Naomi,  as  David,  as  Christ  did.

We  may  have  here,  IV.  The  language  of  pity  and  commiseration.  Alas  !  alas  I
is  not  this  that  gracious  woman,  that  godly  saint,  which  formerly  by  her  charity
relieved  many  in  distress  ?  How  soon  is  a  full  clod  turned  into  parched  earth  I
one  that  supplied  others  into  one  that  needeth  to  be  supplied  by  others!  [Fuller.)
*^  How  has  the  gold  becoine  dimF^  Those  that  had  seen  the  magnificence  of  the
first  temple  wept  when  they  saw  the  meanness  of  the  second  [Matt.  Henry).
There  are  always  hearts  that  are  touched  in  a  right  way  at  the  sight  of  sorrow
and  trouble.  The  priest  and  the  Levite  may  come  and  look  on  and  pass  by  on
the  other  side ;  but  some  good  Samaritan  draws  nearer  sooner  or  later  to  pour
in  oil  and  wine  into  the  open  wounds.  Naomi  evidently  moved  by  the  expression.
Is  this  Naomi  ?  She  utters  no  word  of  reproach  afterwards  against  the  inhabitants
of  Bethlehem.  Note.  Good  and  godly  people  do  not  less  esteem  the  virtuous  because
of  their  outward  low  estate  and  poverty  [Bernard).  The  poor  around  us  test  the
sii  cerity  of  our  professions  of  religion.  Christ  will  say  at'last,  "Inasmuch  as  ye
did  it  not,"  etc.

Improvement. — (1)  The  same  language  may  have  a  very  different  meaning  in
different  lips.     (2)  Our  very  surprise  at  adversity  should  be  mingled  with  com-

78


CHAP.  I.  20.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  RUTH,


pnssion,  and  meted  out  with  sympathy.  Idle  words,  how  they  wound  the  broken
heart  I  Is  this  Naomi  ?  brings  back  the  memory  of  all  the  past.  (3)  In  adversity
we  should  be  comforters,  not  as  Job's  friends,  who  sat  down  and  censured  him,
nor  as  Christ's  and  St.  Paul's,  who  forsook  them  {Bernard),  not  even  as  Naomi's,
whose  casual  words  open  the  fountains  of  grief  afresh  ;  but  as  those  who  them-
selves have  suffered,  and  have  the  meek  and  gentle  spirit  suffering  only  can  bring.
(4)  When  we  remark  the  sad  changes  which  numbers  suffer,  we  should  be  reminded
to  prepare  for  changes  ourselves,  especially  the  last  great  change  (Scott).


"  Their  exclamation,  *  This  Naomi  1 '  ex-
presses the  general  astonishment  at  the
change  which  had  passed  upon  her.  No
doubt  the  little  hamlet  had  been  all  aflame
with  gossip  when,  ten  years  before,  the  rich
sheep-master  Elimelech  had  left  it,  and
many  pious  brows  had  been  shaken  over  his
sin  in  going  to  sojourn  among  the  heathen.
And  no  doubt,  on  Naomi's  return,  many  who
would  have  stiared  that  sin  if  they  could,  and
many  who  had  committed  far  worse  sins  than
any  of  which  she  had  been  guilty,  once  more
shook  their  heads  in  grave  rebuke,  and  were
forward  to  recognize  the  judgments  of  an
offended  God  in  the  calamities  which  had
befallen  her." — Cox.

Naomi  was  formerly  a  woman  of  good
quality  and  fashion,  of  good  rank  and  repute;
otherwise  her  return  in  poverty  had  not  so
generally  been  taken  notice  of.  Shrubs  may  be
grubbed  to  the  ground,  and  none  miss  them;
but  every  one  marks  the  falling  of  a  cedar.
Grovelling  cottages  may  be  levelled  to  the
earth,  and  none  observe  ;  but  every  traveller
takes  notice  of  the  fall  of  a  steeple.  Let  this
comfort  those  to  whom  God  hath  given  small
possessions.  Should  He  visit  them  with  po-
verty, and  take  from  them  what  little  ihej
have,  yet  their  grief  and  shame  would  be  the
less;  they  should  not  have  so  many  fingers
pointed  at  them,  so  many  eyes  staring  on
thim,  so  many  words  spoken  of  them.  They
might  lurk  in  obscurity.  It  must  be  a  Naomi,
a  person  of  eminence  and  estate,  whose
poverty  must  move  a  whole  city." — Fuller.

"If  we  would  truly  sympathise  with  others,
we  must  beware   of  hastily  estimating  the

manner   and  degree  of  their  trouble

Comforters  must  come  as  inquirers,  not
judges;  come  to  bestow  consolation,  not
criticism." — Lynch.

"To  seek  the  applause  of  man  is  wrong;
but  to  merit  it  is  most  desirable.  A  man  of
worthless  character  creates  no  respect  in  the
minds  of  others,  so  that  if  ill  befall  him,  he


finds  but  little  sympathy  in  the  bosom  of
those  around  him ;  whereas  a  good  man  under
misfortune  excites  a  lively  interest  in  his
affairs." — Simeon.

"The  feelings  of  men  are  easily  excited  for
those  who  have  met  severe  and  peculiar
afflictions;  but  in  the  generality  of  mankind
those  feelings  soon  die  away,  and,  even  while
exciting,  rarely  produce  any  practical  effect.
'  The  whole  city  was  moved  '  about  Naomi,
but  we  are  not  told  that  one  door  was  opened
to  receive  her,  and  we  soon  find  her  rejoicing
in  being  allowed  to  partake  of  the  last  and
lowest  resource  of  the  destitute.  Few  re-
member how  large  a  proportion  of  pure  and
undefiled  religion  consists  in  visitmg  the
fatherless  and  widows  in  their  affliction." —
Macartney.

"  Outward  contact  never  accords  with  the
epoch  of  inner  culture,  and  therefore,  as  it
cannot  further  us,  must  necessarily  injure
us." — Goethe.

"  We  all  suffer  from  the  want  of  genuine
human  help  and  sympathy.  But  often,  to
meet  our  particular  case,  it  is  required  that
those  around  us  possess  a  higher  than  the
average  goodness.  We  must  not  curse  hu-
manity because  we  cannot  find  the  man  we
want." — Lynch.

"  There  is  '  salvation  in  fulness,'  and  there
is  'salvation  by  fire.'  There  is  the  'abun-
dant entrance*  into  the  kingdom  of  God,
and  there  is  the  getting  in  with  something
like  *  difficulty.'  One  man  may  be  conducted
to  his  '  joy  and  crown '  through  thronging
multitudes,  amid  outstretched  hands  and
reverberating  hosannas,  and  along  the  great
public  thoroughfare  of  the  city  ;  while
another  shall  advance  with  hesitating  step  ;
be  glad  to  get  an  entrance  without  observa-
tion ;  be  met  by  no  congratulating  crowds;
creep  stealthily  by  some  unfrequented  street
to  his  undistinguished  abode ;  tremulous  with
a  thankful,  though  shaded  joy,  that  he  is
saved  at  all." — Blnney,


VERSE  20.

Theme. — Spiritual  Despondency  and  Depression.

"  Grief  hath  changed  me,
And  careful  hours,  with  Time's  deform^<l  hand,
Hath  written  strange  defeatures  in  my  face." — Shiikes'peare.

"  We  overstate  the  ills  of  life,  and  take
Imagmation,  given  us  to  bring  down
Ihe  choir  of  singing  angels  ....


79


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARy  :  BUTH.  ctj4P.  j,  20.


to  rake
The  dismal  snows  instead ;  flake  flowing  flake,

To  cover  all  the  corn

O  brothers  1  let  us  leave  the  shame  and  sin

Of  talking  vainly,  in  a  plaintive  mood,

The  h(»ly  name  of  Grief, — holy  herein,

That  by  the  grief  of  one  came  all  our  good." — Mrs.  Browning*

Call  me  not  Naomi,  call  me  Mara:  for  the  Almighty  hath  dealt  very  bitterly

with  me.     1  went  out  full,  etc.

Ten  years  have  turned  Naomi  into  Mara  {Bp.  Hall).  Ten  years  and  departure
into  the  far-off  land  (cf.  Luke  xv.  14).  This  is  what  sojourning  in  Moab  meant
then  and  always ;  affliction,  barrenness,  want,  even  to  those  who  are  least  guilty.
So  Israel  had  to  come  out  from  Egypt,  though  they  found  a  Goshen  there  for
awhile,  "in  haste,"  and  as  from  a  land  of  bondage.  Note.  Man  goes,  hut  God
f  brings  home  [Lange).  The  departure  is  all  our  own,  the  return  is  His  with  whom
we  have  to  do.

Remark,  I.  On  the  changes  incident  to  human  life.  Its  sweet  and  pleasant
things  become  bitter,  its  fulness  emptiness,  its  prosperous  goings  out  disastrous.
Note,  {a)  This  is  not  by  chance,  but  by  the  providence  of  God.  A  peculiarity  of
piety,  that  it  ascribes  the  issues  of  all  the  affairs  of  life  to  God  [Lange).  He  turns
Naomi  into  Mara,  mirth  into  mourning,  sweet  into  sour,  honour  into  dishonour
(Bernard).  As  examples  we  have  Job,  Haman,  Nebuchadnezzar,  Belshazzar,
Herod,  beyond  the  memorable  instance  of  the  text.  Outward  glory  is  but  as  a
fading  flower,  and  as  the  warm  sunshine  of  a  cold  wintry  day,  soon  gone,  and  all
the  delight  thereof  (Bernard).  Note,  (b)  Every  inan^s  estate  is  in  the  hands  of  thb
Lord  to  alter  as  He  will.

Remark,  II.  On  the  meaning  and  manner  of  these  changes.  (1)  Life  means
discipline,  and  therefore  pain  is  a  secondary  question  to  that  of  our  perfection.  God
denies  and  takes  away,  just  as  the  sculptor  does  with  the  marble,  that  he  may
bring  out  the  ideal  form  beneath.  He  finds  it  sometimes  best  to  cross  the  likely
projects  of  His  dearest  children  [Bishop  Hall).  "If  God  have  loved  thee,"  says
Beugel,  '*  thou  canst  have  no  lack  of  trouble."

Again,  (2)  Experience  comes  in  this  way :  we  grow  strong,  not  only  in  conflict,
but  in  times  when  we  must  bear  as  well  as  do.  *'  Thou  therefore,  my  son,  endure
hardship,"  etc.  (2  Tim.  ii.  3).  The  soldier  must  pass  through  his  baptism  of
fire,  and  the  Christian  his  baptism  of  suffering.

Once  more,  (3)  We  never  understand  life  aright  until  we  see  in  it  two  wills  in
conflict,  the  human  and  the  Divine.  Our  thoughts  and  purposes  at  best  are  not
His  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  Mark,  the  choice  in  life  is  with  us,  the  issues
with  Him.  There  is  the  exercise  of  free  will  on  our  part,  and  there  are  His
foreorditined  purposes.  And  note.  His  purposes  will  be  accomplished,  even  though  Hd
deal  bitterly  with  us.  In  all  our  projects  we  must  expect  that  God  may  testify
against  us  as  against  Naomi.  He  does  so  as  seeing  the  end  from  the  beginning,
the  true  meaning  of  life  amid  its  outward  and  plausible  appearances.  Man  in
his  abundance,  too,  is  apt  to  forget  God.  Adversity,  denial,  is  the  Divine  way  of
calling  our  thoughts  back  again  to  Himself.  No  doubt  God  does  deal  bitterly
with  men  at  times.  The  profoundest  love  may  show  itself  in  this  way,  as  with
the  parent  when  he  corrects  his  child  ;  the  most  far-reaching  wisdom,  as  with  the
physician  when  he  cures  with  distasteful  remedies.  [See  also  on  vei.  13,  pp.
60—62.]

Remark,  III.  On  spiritual  depression  as  accompanying  these  changes.
Usually,  the  natural  man,  even  as  a  beggar,  still  desires  to  shine  (Lange).  Not  so
Naomi.  Her  humility  regards  not  a  glorious  name  in  a  dejected  state  (Matt.
Henry).  She  hates  this  hypocrisy,  and  since  God  hath  humbled  he*-,  desires  not
to  be  respected  of  men  (Bishop  Hall).  A  poor  widow  now,  though  once  a  noble
woman.     Call  me  not  Naomi,  she  says,  call  me  Mara.     Note.  We  have  in  this

80


CHAP.  I.  20.  ffOMILETIC  COMMENTAUY:    BUTK


the  hitternefis  of  grief,  not  of  impatience ;  something  of  that  shadow  which  haa
fallen  at  times  upon  the  noblest  spirits.  We  call  it  spiritual  depression,  relifjious
despondency y  melancholy,  etc.,  and  in  it  the  heart  does  not  so  much  murmur  against
the  burden  of  life  as  feel  it.     The  spirit  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak.

Enquire  (1)  As  to  some  of  the  causes  of  this  spiritual  depression.  Sin  in  ourselves,
wrong-doing  of  others,  peculiar  mental  and  physical  conditions,  unsolved  problems
of  this  our  existence.  Or,  as  here,  adverse  circumstances,  and  the  lowliness  of
human  life  (Ps.  Ixxxviii.  8).  Naomi's  losses  have  followed  one  another  like  Job's,
hence  her  bitter  cry.  So  Elijah  in  the  hour  of  depression  said,  "It  is  enough;
now,  0  Lord,  take  away  my  life."  Note.  With  all  men  there  is  a  cloudy  and  dark
day  ;  and  the  world  within  us  generally  reflects  the  world  without.

"  Many  of  God's  most  precious  gifts  are  sad  ;  '*

and  so  far  in  the  world's  history  the  best  songs,  like  the  nightingale's,  have  been
sung  in  the  dark.

Again  with  Naomi,  God  Himself  seems  to  he  against  her,  afflicting  her.  Her
loving  heart  takes  all  God's  judgments  on  itself  (Lange).  She  is  humble,  repentant,
but  also  keenly  sensitive  and  alive  to  the  hand  above  her.  A  great  alleviation  of
pain  to  see  God  in  our  afflictions  [cf.  on  ver.  13,  p.  50,  div.  L],  but  there  is  a
dark  side  even  to  this.  "  Tlie  Lord  hath  testified  against  me.'''  It  is  not  only  God
hiding  Himself,  but  God  against  her,  as  an  advocate  pleading,  as  a  witness  testifying
on  the  other  side.  This  the  bitterest  drop  in  her  cup  of  afiliction,  which  makes
her  ready  to  disclaim  her  very  name,  and  all  the  past  of  her  history.  So,  too,  in
a  more  mysterious  sorrow  the  cry  went  up,  "My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  Thou
forsaken  me  ?  "  Note.  God  testifies  against  His  own  children.  His  saints  are  by  no
means  perfect  in  love,  in  faith,  in  obedience;  and  He  will  continue  to  testify  until
His  own  purposes  are  accomplished  in  them.

Enquire  (2)  As  to  the  Divine  meaning  in  connexion  with  spiritual  depression.
Afflictions  {a)  sent  as  chastisement,  (/;)  allowed  as  discipline,  (c)  part  of  a  wider
problem  in  the  history  of  the  human  race.

So  with  that  chastened,  humbled,  and  even  sorrowful  frame  of  mind,  which
accompanies  them.  Undue  sorrow  is  better  than  undue  security.  Where  the
showers  fall  most,  there  the  grass  is  greenest  (Spurgeon).  Just  as  some  islands
owe  their  fertility  to  the  humidity  of  the  atmosphere,  the  very  clouds  that  darken
and  the  rains  that  deluge  the  land,  so  many  Christians  owe  their  richest  and
divinest  experiences  to  the  sorrow  which  has  darkened  all  their  life.  No  chastening,
says  the  Apostle,  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but  grievous  ;  but  after-
ivards  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  (Heb.  xii.  11).  And  Christ
Himself  likens  the  disciples,  in  the  hour  of  His  trial,  to  a  woman  in  travail  (John
xvi.  20—22).

"  The  night  is  darkest  before  the  morn  :
"When  the  pain  is  sorest,  the  child  is  born  ;

And  the  day  o£  the  Lord  is  at  hand." — Kingsley,

Again,  just  as  the  capacity  for  sorrow  proves  man  above  the  brute,  so  this  very
sensitiveness  to  God's  dealings  shows  the  saint  superior  to  the  worldling.  "  Sanc-
tified afflictions,"  says  Dodd,  with  deep  insight  into  God's  dealings  with  His
children,  "  are  spiritual  promotions."  He  treats  us  as  sons  (Heb.  xii.  7).  And
so  the  godly  sorrow,  our  burden  to-day,  will  be  our  glory  to-morrow.  Paul  felt
this  when  he  said,  **  Our  light  affliction,"  etc.  (cf.  1  Cor.  iv.  11 — lo  ;  2  Cor.  iv.
IG— 18,  vi.  8—10).

Les&ons.  (1)  The  condition  of  creatures  is  soon  changed  (Macgowan)
(2)  Afflictions  may  make  that  which  was  once  our  glory  seem  and  sound  like
irony  to  us.  With  Naomi,  the  very  remembrance  of  her  name  increases  her
grief.  (3)  Those  who  are  truly  humbled  are  not  ashamed  that  the  world  should
think  them  so.  In  all  forms  of  good  there  are  more  that  care  to  seem  than  to  be
{Bishop  Hall),     Many  that  are  debased  and  impoverished,  yet  afi^ect  to  be  called

81


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  BUTE.


CHAP.  I.  20.


by  the  empty  names  and  titles  of  honour  they  formerly  enjoyed  {Matt.  Henry),
Not  so  Naomi.  (4)  When  our  condition  is  brought  down,  we  may  and  must
expect  our  spirits  to  be  humbled  with  it.  (5)  Neither  dignity  of  place,  highness
of  birth,  nor  Iruitfulness  of  children,  may  minister  comfort  to  those  whom  the  Lord
has  humbled  (Topsdl),  The  hand  that  smites  is  the  only  hand  that  can  heal ;
and  worldly  misery  is  only  abated  entirely  by  everlasting  felicity.  (6)  It  is  not
an  affliction  itself,  but  an  affliction  rightly  home,  that  does  us  good  (Matt,  Henry),
"  So,  friend^  I  see  that  thou  hast  not  yet  forgiven  God  Almighty!  "  the  rebuke  of
Ebenezer  Adams  to  a  lady  of  rank,  a  widow,  he  was  visiting.  The  reproof  pro-
duced such  an  effect,  that  she  immediately  had  all  her  trappings  of  grief  destroyed,
and  went  about  her  necessary  business  and  avocations.  So  many  calamities  have
been  lost  upon  you  if  you  have  not  yet  learned  how  to  suffer  (Sen.  ad  Helv.),
Behold  us  willing  to  suffer  in  this  life  the  worst  it  may  please  Thee  to  bring  upon
us  ;  here  lay  Thy  rod  upon  us  ;  consume  us  here,  cut  us  to  pieces  here,  only
spare  us  in  eternity  (St.  Augustine).  (7)  It  is  no  part  of  religion  to  harden  our-
selves against  the  rod.  "  Thou  hast  stricken  them,  but  they  have  not  grieved  "
(Jer.  v.  3),  is  the  charge  the  prophet  brings  against  Jerusalem ;  but  we  nowhere
find  them  condemned  for  feeling  too  keenly  (Macartney),


"She  put  her  mouth  in  the  dust,  and  spake
in  a  low  language,  suitable  to  her  present
condition  ;  God  had  aiRicted  her,  and  she
would  carry  h(,'r  sails  accordingly.  Many  are
humbled,  but  not  humble ;  low,  but  not
lowly.  These  have  lost  the  fruit  of  their
affliction,  saith  Auf^ustine,  and  are  therefore
most  miserable.  God,  saith  another,  calls  no
man  Benjamin,  but  those  whom  their  own
hearts  call  Ben-oni  in  their  humility.  He
salutes  them  not  Kaomi,  beautiful,  who  do
not  humbly  feel  themselves  Mara,  bitter." —
Trapp.

'•  Jf  all  our  aHflictions  come  from  the
Almighty,  it  is  in  vain,  as  well  as  impious,  to
contend  with  Him  that  smites.  iShall  the
potsherds  of  the  earth  strive  with  their  Maker,
who  has  all  power  to  do  with  them  as  He
pleases?  He  cannot  effectually  be  opposed,
and  He  can  do  nothin«-  thnt  is  wrong.  Weak
mortals  may  injure  their  fellow-creatures  for
their  own  advantage,  but  what  profit  can  it
be  to  the  Almighty  that  He  should  oppress
the  work  of  His  own  hands?  " — Laivson.

We  ought  not  so  to  lament  the  comfort  we
have  lost,  as  to  think  that  all  our  future  days
must  be  spent  in  bitterness."— iZ/?^.

'•  Wonder  not  at  David,  if  he  crieth  in  the
anguish  of  his  heait ;  at  Job,  if  he  complaineth
in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul ;  at  Jeremiah,  if
he  lamenteth  in  the  extremity  of  his  grief;
for  even  then  they  are  swallowing  of  a  potion
which  is  bitter  unto  flesh  and  blood." —
Fnller.

"  It  will  always  remain  a  wonder  to  the
majority  of  men  what  the  agonies  of  some
spirits  mean.  Questions  which  scorch  the
spirit  like  burning  lava,  pitiful  wailings  after
light,  ga "Apings  of  the  oppressed  soul  for  fresh
air  and  liberty,  the\  know  nothing  of.  I
have  met  men  and  women  who  had  been
familiar  with  sorrow  in  many  forms.  For-
tune had  not  favoured  them — fortune  is
strangely  capricious :  in  whatever  dire  tion
the  golden  veins  run  in  this  world,  they  had
never  somehow  struck  into  one  ;  the  gifts  of


health  had  been  niggardly  doled  out  to  them,
and  the  common  enemy  death  had  passed
through  their  homes,  and  his  footsteps  had
dried  up  the  springs  which,  amid  all  the
world's  weariness,  had  been  so  refreshing.
These  trials  they  had  borne  patiently  and
humbly.  But  the  pain  which  was  almost
impossible  to  bear,  the  blow  which  made  the
soul  stagger  and  reel  was  this,  the  light
went.  They  were  left  in  mental  darkness  ;
there  was  nothing  to  guide  the  soul  by  ;  per-
plexity, uncertainty,  bewilderment  through-
out the  whole  realm  of  religion." — Morlais
Jones,

"  Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  just  as  they
had  ended  this  talk,  they  drew  nigh  to  a  very
miry  slough  that  was  in  the  midst  of  the
plain,  and  they  being  heedless  did  both  fall
suddenly  into  the  bog.  The  name  of  the
elough  was  DESPOND." — Bmiyan.

"  Men  spoil  their  own  lives,  and  then  com-
plain that  life  is  evil ;  they  mar  and  rend  the
picture,  and  nMirmur  because  its  beauty  has
disappeared ;  they  run  the  ship  upon  the
rocks,  and  weep  to  find  her  a  wreck  ;  they
crush  the  flower  with  a  rude  hand,  and  are
disappointed  because  it  withers." — Thoiu(.9
Jones.

"  As  torrents  that  are  dried  up  in  the  heat
of  summer,  when  there  is  most  need  of  them,
so  all  comforts  fail  in  the  extremity,  that  aie
not  derived  from  the  fountain  of  life." — iJr
Bates.

"Sorrow  is  the  substance  of  man's  natural
life,  and  it  miirht  ahnost  be  defined  to  be  his
nsitural  capability  of  the  supernatural,  no-
thini;;  has  a  lastino;  interest  for  man  wliich
is  not  in  some  way  connected  with  sorrow;
sorrow  is  the  poetry  of  a  creation  which  is
fallen,  of  a  race  which  is  in  exile  in  a  vale  of
tears."— i^.  W.  Faher.

"  The  cross  is  always  ready,  and  waits  for
thee  in  every  place.  ...  Why  hopest,  then
to  avoid  that  from  which  no  human  being
has  been  exempt  ?  Thou  art  deceived,  wretch-
edly deceived,  if  thou  expect  anything  but


CHAP.  I.  '21.


nam  LET ic  comment  ahY:  ruth.


tribulation;  for  this  whole  mortal  life  is  full
of  care,  and  signed  on  every  side  with  the
cro-s." — TJiomns  a  Kctnp'iH.

"  What  is  sixty  yrars'  pain  to  eternity  ?
We  never  th'nk  of  sorrow  in  our  dreams  ;
wherefore  should  we  in  the  dream  of  life?"
•—Jean  Paul  lilrhtcr.

"A  few  in  every  nge  have  known  the
divine  art  of  carrying:  <;  'rrow  and  trouble  as
wonderful  food,  as  an  invisible  garment  that
clothed  them  with  strength  ;  as  a  myst'^rioug
]oy,  so  that  they  suffered  gladly,  rejoicing  in
infirmity,  and  holding  up  their  head?  with
sacred  presages  ;  whenever  timesi  were  dark
and  troublous,  let  the  light  depart  from  their
eyes,  that  they  might  by  faith  see  nobler
things  than  sight  could  reach.' — Beecher.

''Darkness  shows  u?  worlds  of  light
We  never  saw  before." — Moore.

**The  cares  and  infelicities  of  life,  which
are  spoken  of  as  *hindr?nces  to  grace,'  may
be  hindran'^es,  but  they  are  the  only  helps  it
has  in  this  v/cild.  The  voice  of  provocation
is  the  Toioe  of  God  calling  us  to  the  practice
of  pat^nce.

' '  A  man  in  his  old  age  is  like  a  sword  in  a
i^hop  vvindow  :  men  that  look  upon  the  per-
It^t  blade  do  not  imagine  the  process  by
which  it  was  completed.  Man  is  a  sword.
Daily  life  is  the  workshop,  and  God  is  the
artificer  ;  and  those  cares  which  beat  him
u])on  the  anvil,  and  file  his  edge,  and  eat  in,
acid-like,  the  inscription  upon  his  hilt, — these
are  the  very  things  that  fashion  the  man." —
Ueecher.

"  No  men  have  need  to  be  so  vigilant,  so
attentive,  so  listening,  so  appreciative,  as
those  who  are  in  deep  trouble,  borrow  is
Mount  Sinai.  If  one  will  go  up  and  talk
with  God  face  to  face,  he  must  not  fear  the
vo'ce  of  thunder,  nor  the  trumpet  sounding
long  and  loud." — Bcechcr.

"  I  have  read  of  a  fountain  that  at  noon-
day is  cold,  and  at  midnight  it  grows  warm ;


so  many  a  precious  soul  is  cold  God-ward,
and  heaven- ward,  and  holiness- ward,  in  the
day  (^>f  prosperity,  that  grows  warm  God-
ward,  and  heaven-waixl.  and  holiness-ward
in  the  midnight  of  adversity." — Brooks.

"  i'rosperity  is  the  blessing  of  the  Old
Testament  ;  adversity  is  the  blessing  of  the
New,  which  carrieth  the  greater  benediction
and  the  clearer  revelation  of  God's  favour  " —
Lord  Bacon.

"  The  good  man  suffers  but  to  gain.
And  every  virtue  springs  from  pain ;
As  aromatic  plants  bestow
No  spicy  fragrance  while  they  grow  ;
But  crushed  or  trodden  to  the  ground.
Diffuse  their  balmy  sweets  around."

Goldsmith.

"  I  see  not  a  step  before  me  as  I  tread  the

days  of  the  year,
But  the  past  is  still  in  God's  keeping,  the

future  His  mercy  shall  clear  ;
And  what  looks  dark  in  the  distance  may

brighten  as  I  draw  near.

For  perhaps  the  dreaded  future  has  less

bitterness  than  I  think  ;
The  Lord  may  sweeten  the  water  before  I

stoop  to  drink.
Or  if  Marah  must  be  Marah,  He  will  stand

beside  its  brink.

*  ^^  *  •

So  I  go  on  not  knowing.     I  would  not  if  I

might ;
I  would  rather  walk  on  in  the  dark  with

God,  than  go  alone  in  the  light  ;
I  would  rather  walk  with    Him  by  faith

than  walk  alone  by  sight.

My  heart  shrinks  back  from  trials  which

the  future  may  disclose.
Yet  I  never  had  a  sorrow,  but  what  the

dear  Lord  chose  ;
So  I  send  the  coming  tears  back,  with  the

whispered  word,  *  He  knows. '  "


VEUSE  21.
Theme. — Painful  Hemembrances.

"  This  is  truth  the  poet  sings,
That  a  sorrow's  crown  of  sorrow  is  remembering  happier  things." — Tennyson,

"  Brothers,  hush  I  the  Lord  Christ's  hands
Ev'n  now  are  stretched  in  blessing  o'er  the  sea  and  o'er  the  lands.
Sit  not  like  a  mourner,  brother  1  by  tbe  grave  of  that  dear  past  ;
Throw  the  present  I  'tis  thy  servant  only  when  'tis  overcast.
Give  battle  to  the  leagued  world  ;  if  thou'rt  worthy,  truly  brave,
Thou  shalt  make  the  hardest  circumstance  a  helper  and  a  slave."

Alexander  Smith,


I  went  out  full,  and  the  Lord  hath  brought  me  home  empty  again:  why,  then,?  etc.

Sooner  or  later  the  time  comes  in  the  history  of  good  men  when  things  begin
to  show  themselves  as  they  are.  Appearances  deceive  us  no  longer.  The  scales
full  from  our  eyes.     Life  stands  out  in  its  true  relationships,  and  we  read,  plain  aa

83


nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.  chap.  i.  21.


the  handwriting  on  Babylon's  walls,  the  lessons  God  would  have  us  learn  from
the  past.  We  come  more  completely  to  ourselves,  and  that  moment,  even  to  the
best  of  men,  is  one  of  contrition  and  regret,  and  often  of  painful  self-accusation.

Naomi  is  evidently  passing  through  such  a  time  in  this  the  hour  of  her  return.
A.  penitent  feeling  pervades  her  lamentation  (Lant/e).  She  left  her  people  in  the
day  of  famine,  and  now  she  comes  back  to  them,  the  famine  in  her  own  heart.
Life  has  narrowed  itself  to  a  question  between  herself  and  God.  Her  emptiness
is  of  Him,  but  her  going  away  is  all  her  own.  She  went  out  of  her  own  free  will,
though  others  led  her  ;  and  in  contrast  with  this  comes  the  doings  of  the  God  of
the  Israel  she  left  behind.  I  went  because  it  was  my  will  to  go,  not  God's  ;  now
God's  judgment  has  sent  me  back  i^Laivje).

Note,  [a)  To  go  out  of  GocVs  way  is  to  go  out  of  His  protection  (Macgowan) ;
but  (b)  to  go  against  His  will  is  to  come  wider  the  sweep  of  His  chastisements.

We  have  here,  I.  The  true  conception  of  human  life.  (1)  God  dealing  in  it
personally,  individually,  with  men.  A  Scriptural  doctrine  found  from  Genesis  to
Revelation.  Pre-eminently  a  Christian  doctrine  :  "  Even  the  very  hairs  of  your
head,"  etc.  More  than  this,  it  is  a  reasonable  doctrine.  If  there  be  no  special
providence,  there  is  no  providence  at  all  ;  only  blind  fate,  or  resistless  law.  On
any  other  theory  which  recognises  a  Deity,  we  are  at  the  mercy  of  what  is  worse
than  chance — a  God  who  thinks  it  beneath  Him  to  regard  His  creatures  ;  or
worse  still,  a  God  who  is  chained  and  overmastered  by  His  own  laws.

(2)  Its  departures  and  ivanderirigs  our  own,  "  I  went  out."  If  any  might  have
blamed  others,  Naomi  might.  But  not  so,  she  blames  herself  alone.  Note.  Self-
condemnalion  a  constant  attendant  upon  Christian  life.  "I  went  out  full."  So
did  the  prodigal.  People  usually  get  full  before  they  go  out  from  God's  way  and
habitation  {Macgowan).  Sbe  went  out  not  for  want,  but  for  fear  of  want  {Bernard^
Trapp).  (See  on  ver.  1,  pp.  10 — 13.)  She  went  out  full  of  family  happiness,
of  joy  in  her  sons,  and  of  hope  of  a  cheerful  old  age,  surrounded  by  children  and
children's  children  ;  but  empty  now  of  all  these,  without  possessions  and  without
hope  (Lange).  What  a  vivid  picture  of  those  who  leave  the  way  of  God's
ordinances  and  sanctuary  privileges !  They  go  out  for  gain,  but  they  meet  with
gall  and  wormwood  instead  of  honey  [Macgowan).  Note.  Our  blindness  oftentimes
carries  us  into  the  perils  we  seek  to  eschew  (Bishop  Hall).

(3)  Its  better  leadings  and.  holier  impulses,  its  repentance  and  return  to  God.  **  The
Lord  hath,"  etc.  Just  as  the  planets  are  brought  into  their  appointed  orbits  by
the  central  and  attractive  force  of  gravitation,  so  it  is  between  man  and  God.
(See  on  ver.  7,  div.  I.,  p.  35).  Mark,  (a)  that  she  was  brought  home  again.
Afflictions  are  not  a  consuming  but  a  refining  tire  to  the  godly  (Seeker).  And
mark  (b)  how  she  was  brought  back.  By  weeping  cross,  Trapp  says  quaintly.
*'  Home  again  empty,"  says  the  text.  Jehoshaphat's  ships  were  broken  ;  Lot  lost
all ;  Josiah  came  home  short  (Trapp).  Note  as  true  always  of  such  returns,  that
the  backslider  retraces  his  steps  (1)  with  many  tears  and  self-reproaches,  (2)  with
conscious  emptiness,  (3)  with  total  self-renunciation.  Naomi  renounces  even  her
right  to  her  former  name.  Why  call  me  Naomi  ?  Why  speak  a  single  word  to
remind  me  of  my  former  glory  ?  In  my  losses  and  in  my  loneliness,  in  all  that
belongs  to  my  life,  "  the  Lord  hath  testified  against  me."  Men  call  her  Naomi
(pleasant,  gracious,  lovely);  but  she  reads  her  life  in  a  different  fashion,  and  says,
Gal  me  Mara  (bitterness).  Note.  We  fall  short  in  the  eyes  of  God,  however  we
may  seem  in  the  eyes  of  our  fellow -men.  Repentance  and  a  change  of  heart  always
brings  us  to  see  this.  The  old  nature  and  the  old  life  is  no  longer  Naomi,  rather
it  is  Mara  to  us.

We  have  here,  II.  The  true  explanation  of  afflictions.  (1)  Always  from  God,  if
not  always  for  pu7iishr?ient.  This  one  of  the  great  lessons  taught  in  the  book  of
Job.  So  here.  Naomi,  not  worse,  not  even  so  bad,  as  many  around  her  who  had
80  far  escaped  calamity.  But  God  has  a  right  to  deal  severely  with  the  best  of
His  children  for  their  ultimate  good.     Mark  the  distinction ;    He  corrects  His

84


CDAP.  I.  21.  nOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY:  RUTH


children,  He  punishes  the  wicked.  The  one  act  looks  forward  to  a  future  porfect-
ness,  the  other  looks  back  only  upon  the  past.  The  one  is  remedial  and  continual
uulil  the  end,  is  accomplished  ;  the  other  waits  and  lingers  in  hope  of  repentance,
but  comes  at  last,  swift  as  liglitning,  and  sudden  as  the  whirlwind.  (Cf.  Heb.
xii.  5—11,  with  Ps.  xxxvii.  9—13,  20,  38.)

(2)  Always  kavhyj  a  tnennvmj  (md  a  inessaf/e,  though  not  always  m  auger.  (See
last  outline,  div.  II.)  Afflictions  are  represented  here  as  God's  testimony  against
those  who  have  wandered  from  His  ways.  ''The  Lord  hath  testified,"  etc  He
puts  the  straight  way  of  His  judgments  side  by  side  with  our  crooked  ways.  As
that  One  who  brings  all  things  to  pass.  He  brings  our  folly  to  fruition  to  confound
us.  He  ripens  our  plans,  and  lo  they  are  our  undoing  !  It  is  not  that  He  thwarts
us  ;  oftentimes  He  gives  us  the  desire  of  our  heart,  and  it  is  the  strongest  testimony
to  our  sin.  Note.  God  not  only  testifies  by  word,  hut  hy  act ;  not  only  in  revela-
tion, but  in  providence.  Our  life  a  testimony  in  its  circumstance,  etc.  God's
will  is  being  accomplished  in  it,  as  well  as  our  own.

Lessons.  (1)  The  vanity  of  earthly  possessions.  So  uncertain  is  that  which
we  call  fulness  in  the  creature,  an  hour  may  strip  us  of  all.  Like  a  bladder,  so
is  worldly  prosperity ;  a  puff  doth  make  it  swell,  but  a  prick  doth  make  it  fall
again  [Topsell).  (2)  It  is  a  sign  of  true  grace  when  we  ascribe  the  ills  which
come  in  life  to  the  hand  of  God,  while  we  take  all  the  blame  to  ourselves.  What
is  it  but  the  child  recognizing  even  in  chastisement  the  hand  of  the  Father  ?
Bernard  on  this  : —

I.  That  it  is  a  fault,  voluntarily  for  safety  of  goods,  through  distrust,  to  leave

God's  people,  and  go  to  live  among  idolaters.
II.   That  there  is  no  certainty  in  worldly  wealth.
III.  That  oftentimes  the  ways  and  means  which  men  take  to  prevent  want,  by

the  same  they  bring  it  on  them.
lY.  That  such  of  God's  children  as  go  astray,  He  will  bring  home  again,  but

yet  with  correction.
V,  *'  t^ hy  then  call  ye  vie  Naomi?  "  etc.     That  the  humbled  and  afSicted  take
no  pleasure  to  be  remembered  of  their  former  prosperity  by  names  and
titles.
VL  That  man's  comfort  is  nothing  able  to  allay  the  bitterness  of  God's  dis-
comforts on  us.
VII.  That  afflictions  are  commonly  the  Lord's  witnesses  against  us  for  something
amiss  in  us.

"  The  Lord  giveth,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  ing.     "We  are  permitted  to  weep  and  moan

away."'     When   He   gives,    He   is   under   no  under  the  hand  of  God,  but  it  is  not  easy  to

necessity  ot  securing-  to  us  the  possession  of  weep,  to  sorrow  without  excess  ;  at  once  to

what  He  gives.     We  may  soon  provoke  Him,  feel  the  rod  and  to  kiss  it,  to  adore  and  to

by  our  sins,  to  bereave  us  of  all  that  He  hath  bless  a  correcting  and  bereaving  God.     How

piven  us  ;  but  however  careful  we  may  be  to  noble  the  spirit,  and  how  pious  the  language

])lease  Him,  we  cannot  merit  the  continuance  of  Job,  when  he  exclaimed, '  The  Lord  gave,'

of  His  favours,  and  without  any  special  provo-  etc." — Toller.

cation  on  our  part  He  may  have  good  reasons  "  There  are  times  when  we  reason  thus  :  the

for  impoverishing  us,  and  placing  us  in  con-  darkness  is  around  us,  therefore  it  will  always

ditions  quiie  the  reverse  of  those  to  which  be  dark ;  the  winter  has  been  long  and  cold,

we  have  been  accustomed.     And  one  great  hence  summer  will  never  arrive;  troubles  are

reason  why  God  so  fi-oquently  changes  men's  come  upon  us,  consequently  we  are  to  expect

propercus  condition  into  misei'V  is  to  teach  nothing  but   trouble.     Thus  does  the  mind

us  the  folly  of  trusting  to  our  present  enjoy-  take  a   melancholy  pleasure   in   tormenting

merit.     '  But  this  1  say,  brethren,  the  time  is  itself.     We  turn  our  back  to  the  light,  look

short.     It  remaineth,'  etc." — Lawson.  at  our  own  dark  shadow  cast  upon  the  ground,

"It  is  hard  to  come  down  in  the  world  and  then  cry  out  in  sorrow  that  all  things

through  upright  dealing,  but  harder  still  to  are  and  will  be  against  us."' — Thomas  Jones.
stoop  to  dishonest  dealing  in  order  to  keep  "  Aftlictions  are  a  testinu)ny  against  men

up  in  the  world.    If  the  h-ss  of  temporal  gain  that  they  are  sinners,  but  they  are  not  always

be  the  gain  of  eternal  good,  then  liie  revei'se  a  testimony  that  the  sufferer  is  guilty  of  some

of  fortune  is  the  i  everse  of  misfortune.  particular  sins  for  which  God  chastiseth  him  "

"It  is  difficult  to  mourn  without  murmur-  (Job  ii.  8). — Lawson.


EOMILETIG  COMMENTAliy  :   liUTH.


CHAP.  I.  T£.


*'  God  made  men  to  be  blessed.  If  the  cry
of  broken  hearts  goes  up  to  heaven,  it  is  not
His  institution." — Bdldwin  Brown.

"  Men  think  God  is  destroying  them  because
He  is  tuning  them.  The  violinist  screws  up
the  key  till  the  tense  cord  sounds  the  concert
pitch  ;  but  it  is  not  to  break  it,  but  to  use  it
tunefully,  that  he  stretches  the  string  upon
the  musical  rack." — Bcechcr.

"  She  utters  not  a  breath  of  accusation
against  Elimelech,  or  of  excuse  of  herself.
Properly  speaking,  the  fault  did  lie  with  her
husband  and  sons.  They  were  the  originators
of  the  undertaking  that  ended  so  disastrously  ;
but  of  this  she  has  no  memory." — Langc.

"  She  takes  the  whole  blame  on  herself.
She  confesses  that,  in  leaving  '  the  land  of
promise,'  she  was  walking  after  her  own  will,
not  the  will  of  God.  But  though  she  con-
fesses her  own  sin,  she  utters  no  reproach
against  the  beloved  dead.  '  1  went  because
it  was  my  will  to  go  ;  and  now  God  has  taught
me,  by  all  I  have  suffered  and  lost,  that  it
was  wrong  to  go.  He  has  justly  emptied  me
of  all  my  possessions,  all  my  hopes,'" — Cox.

"  It  is  nearly  the  same  utterances  as  fell
from  her  lips  in  parting  with  Orpah.  Grief
makes  her  almost  fierce.  The  name  she  bears
sounds  like  irony  and  a  reproach." — Braden.

'*  It  is  good  at  times  to  be  in  disti  ess,  for  it
reminds  us  that  we  are  in  exile." — Thomas  a
Kevijris.

"  Those  trials  which  come  from  God  are
never  without  benetit  to  us,  when  we  receive
them  worthily,  since  there  is  always  a  rich
harvest  of  spiritual  blessings  for  the  afflicted
religious  heart.  If  human  nature  at  first
shrinks  from  sorrow,  faith  and  Christian  hope
soon  come  to  its  support;  the  trial  then
appears  easy  to  be  borne.  Receive  it  as  from
God,  and  its  hittcrmtss  is  past.  .  .  .  Indeed,
the  peace  which  is  always  found  in  this  sub-
mission is  itself  a  great  blessing,  even  without
any  exterior  alleviation  of  sorrow.  It  is  a
peace  so  much  the  more  pure  as  it  is  uncon-
nected with  the  world." — I'enelon,


"  But  the  problem  of  our  life  is  solved  in
and  by  Jesus  Christ.  He  has  explained  its
nature,  purpose,  and  ending.  Without  Him
the  world  is  a  haunted  house,  disturbed  by
strange  noises — half-formed  apparitions  glide
through  the  gloom,  and  the  inhabitants  are
sore  afraid ;  but  possessing  His  revelatic^n,
we  know  it  to  be  the  outer  court  of  the  hea-
venly temple,  and  we  hear  already  the  har-
monious voices  of  the  worshippers  in  the  inner
sanctuary  praising  God  for  their  existence.
Christ  is  our  refuge  from  fear." — Thomas
Jones.

"The  martyrdom  of  an  hour  is  sudden
glory,  but  the  martyrdom  of  a  life — there
needs  something  more  than  human  to  endure
this." — Spurgeon.

**  Oh  ye  who  suffer,  whatsoe'er  it  is

Hath  brought  this  fellowship  with  Christ

to  try  the  heart.
Know  that  the  ajigel  ministering  is  God's;
And  suffering  e'en  as  doing  is  the  better
part.

And  ye  who,  cumbered  with  much  care  or

pain.
Sleep  not,  but  count  the  weary  hours,  and

wish  for  morn  ;
Lo  I  from  the  pentecost  of  sorrow   yours

to-day.
The  pentecostof  joy  to-morrow  shall  be  born.

And  ye   who    sorrow   for    a  light    that's

quenched
For  love  that  gladdened  all  the  morning  of

life's  day  ;
By  all  the  sacred  tears  that  Jesus  wept.
The  dead  ye  mourn  are  sleeping,  and  not

lost  for  aye.

Our  friend  he  sleepeth,  said  the  Master  once,
So  named  He  man's  last  hour,  when  fails

the  feeble  breath.
A  sickness  to  God's  glory  ;    through   the

ages  thence
New  meaning  lurks  to  us  in  sorrow,  suffer-


ing, death."-


-B.


VERSE  22.

Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes. — Which  returned  out  of  the  country  [territories  or
fields]  of  Moab,  The  description  by  which  Ruth  was  commonly  designated  [cf.  ii.  fJ].
{JSjHaker's  Com.).  As  the  same  expression  occurs  at  chap.  iv.  3,  in  connexion  with  Naomi,  it
maybe  supposed  that  it  becnmc  customary  to  speak  of  Naomi  and  Ruth  as  "  the  retuined
from  Moab."  or,  as  we  should  say  popularly,  "the  returned  Moabitcs"  (Lange).  Here  the
phrase  applies  to  Ruth,  as  at  ii.  6,  but  in  iv.  8  to  Naomi  (A'eil).  Dr.  Cassel  translates,  ''  And
so  Naomi  was  returned  home,  and  Ruth,  the  Moabitess,  her  daughter-in-law,  with  her  [who
accompanied  her]  r/ffcr  [or  on]  hei'  departure  from  the  fields  of  Moab."  And  she  desired  to
return  with  her  [tiiat  is,  with  Naomi]  with  the  whole  heart  ;  and  they  came  from  the  land  of
Moab,  etc.  {Syr.).  The  Douay,  following  the  Vulgate,  trans.,  "So  Naomi  came  with  Ruth  the
Moabitess,  her  daughter-in-law,  from  the  land  of  her  sojourning"  [from  the  land  of  her
pilgrimage  (  Wyclijjc)'].  Ahen  Ezra  thinks  this  to  be  understood  of  her  returning  at  another
time  {Oill\  In  the  beginning  of  barley  harvest.  The  harvest  as  a  whole  commenced  with
the  barley  harvest  (A'rflj.  The  beginning  of  spring,  for  the  barley  harvest  began  immediately
after  the  passover,  and  that  feast  was  held  on  the  15th  of  the  month  Nisan,  which  corre-
sponded with  our  March  {A.  Clarke).  They  came  to  Bethlehem  on  that  day  m  which  the
children  of  Israel  began  to  mow  the  sheaf  of  barley  which  was  to  be  waved  before  the  Lord
{Targum).     The  firstfruits  of  the  barley  harvest  were,  as  we  know,  presented  at  the  passover,

86


CiTAP.  I.  22.  ITOMrLETIC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.


before  which  it  was  not  lawful  to  bcG^in  the  harvest  (Kitto).  In  the  next  chapter  (ver.  23)  it
is  related  that  Ruth  chicaned  '•  until  the  end  of  barley  and  of  wheat  harvest.''''  This  book  was
therefore  appointed  by  the  ancient  Hebrew  Church  to  be  read  in  the  synagogues  at  the  feast
of  weeks  or  I'cnterost,  when  the  wheat  harvest  began  (  Wordatrorfh)  [cf.  Intro.,  p.  1,  par.  2].
They  came  to  Bethlehem  in  the  beginning  of  the  barley  harvest.  Opens  the  way  for  the
further  course  of  the  history  {Kcil).  Explains  the  narrative  in  the  next  chapter.  Keil
questions  whether  the  Bethlehem  mentioned  in  connexion  with  Ibzan  in  Judges  xii.  8 — 10  is
the  Bethlehem  of  the  text,  as  Josephus  affirms.

YERSE  22.
Theme. — The  Wanderer  Home  Again.

**  I  still  had  hopes,  my  long  vexations  past,
Here  to  return,  and  die  at  home  at  last." — Goldsmith^

"  We  leave
Our  home  in  youth — no  matter  to  what  ena— -
Study, or  strife,  or  pleasure,  or  what  not;
And  coming  back  in  few  short  years,  we  find
All  as  we  left  it  outside  :  .  .  ,
But  lift  that  latchet, — all  is  changed  as  doom." — Bailey,

So  Naomi  returned and  they  came  to  Bethlehem,  in  the  beginning  of  the

barley  harvest.

This  first  chapter  of  the  book  of  Ruth  is  in  itself  a  perfect  poem,  as  well  as  an
epitome  of  human  life  and  a  parable  of  the  soul's  pilgrimage.  The  theme  is  that
of  "  the  wanderers."  It  has  its  prologue  in  the  famine,  and  its  epilogue  in  the
return.  Blow  follows  blow  until  the  catastrophe  is  complete  in  the  death  of  all
who  left  the  land  of  promise,  save  one.  Then  out  of  the  dark  night  of  sorrow
hope  is  born  and  the  return  begins.  Love  lights  up  the  picture,  a  love  surpassing
the  ordinary  and  usual  love  of  woman,  and  the  chastened  spirit  bows  at  last,  not
to  fate,  but  God.  It  is  a  poem  complete  in  itself,  rich  with  contrasting  lights  and
shadows,  and  as  Goethe  has  well  said,  "  the  loveliest  thing  in  the  shape  of  an
epic  or  idyl  which  has  come  to  us."  Penned  by  inspiration,  it  has  no  equal  and
no  second.

See  here  then,  in  conclusion,  I.  The  wanderer  home  again.  The  most  friend-
less of  human  beings  has  a  country  which  he  admires  and  extols  (Sydney  Smith),
The  greatest  wanderer,  some  place  dear  above  all  else  which  he  thinks  of  as  home.
Even  the  prodigal,  sitting  in  the  far  country  among  the  swine,  remembers  he
has  a  "father's  house,"  and  turns  longingly  towards  it.  So  with  Naomi.  [For
the  return,  see  on  ver.  6,  7,  pp.  32 — 36,  and  on  ver.  19  and  21.]  Note,  (a)  The  home
tics  the  strongest^  the  home  claims  the  most  binding  in  human  life.  True  friend-
ship as  well  as  true  religion  centres  there.  Bethlehem  was  Naomi's  proper  place,
and  the  whole  scope  of  the  narrative  is  to  show  that  in  leaving  it  she  had  gone
out  of  the  way  of  God's  providences,  as  well  as  of  His  ordinances.  (6)  Christian
love  begins  its  work  at  home.  Christian  manhood  shows  its  best  there,  and  the
circle  of  genial  influence  spreads  and  widens  from  that  centre.

II.  Home  again  in  a  fortunate  way.  Led  of  God ;  for  she  recognizes  that
the  Lord  had  brought  her  home  again  (ver.  21).  Naomi's  extremity  was  God'a
opportunity.  So  with  David  (i  Sam.  xxiii.).  The  statement  of  the  text  made  in
order  to  intimate  that  the  help  of  God  did  not  tarry  long  (Lange).  Note,  (a)
When  God  leads,  it  is  not  ours  to  linger.  Beware  of  by-paths  and  idle  goings,  keep
straight  on  (Bernard).  These  came  from  Moab  to  Bethlehem  ;  they  had  no  idle
vagaries  that  we  read  of.  Old  Naomi  desired  to  see  her  country,  and  young  Ruth
was  not  wantonly  disposed,  but  constantly  kept  her  company  (Bernard),  (b)
They  arrive  safely,  whom  God  conducts.  He  neither  slumbereth  nor  sleepeth.  He
led  Israel  through  the  wilderness  for  forty  years,  and  landed  them  safely  in
Canaan  at  last.  So  always  in  lawful  journeys,  so  especially  in  the  heavenward
one.     Only  let  us  see  to  it  that  we  are  of  the  same  mind  as  Moses,  "  If  Thy

87


HOIulLETIG  COMMENTARY :  RVTH.


CHAP.  1.  22.


presence  go  not  with  us,  carry  us  not  up  hence"  (Exod.  xxxiii.  15),  and  all  our
journeyings  must  come  to  a  prosperous  issue.

III.  Home  again  at  a  fortunate  time.  At  the  time  of  the  barley  harvest
(see  Crit.  and  Exeget.  Notes).  When  there  was  at  least  gleaning  to  yield  them
sustenance,  and  the  summer  before  them.  In  the  beginning  of  the  passover,  saith
the  Chaldee  Paraphrast,  taking  the  fittest  opportunity  both  for  soul  and  body
(Trapp).  Here  we  see  tlie  providence  of  God,  in  ordering  and  disposing  the  journey
of  Naomi,  to  end  it  in  the  most  convenient  time.  Had  she  come  before  harvest,
ehe  would  have  been  straitened  for  means  to  maintain  herself;  if  after  harvest,
Ruth  had  lost  all  those  occasions  which  paved  the  way  to  her  future  advancement.
God  therefore,  who  ordered  her  going,  concludes  her  jouii  in  the  beginning  of
harvest  {Fuller).  Note.  There  is  a  fuhiess  and  fitness  of  time  for  every  event
(Macgoivan).  The  redemption  from  Egypt;  the  coming  of  Shiloh  when  the
sceptre  was  departing  from  Judah ;  the  soul's  conversion ;  deliverance  from
affliction,  etc.  {ibid).     God's  time  is  always  the  best  time.

Improvement. — [a)  When  the  heart  is  truly  repentant,  past  error  and  sin,  the
humiliating  experiences  which  have  left  their  scars  upon  our  inmost  souls,  may
become  to  us  blessed  monitors  urging  us  onward  in  the  path  that  God  has
appointed,  (b)  Like  the  wounded  hart,  the  bruised  and  troubled  spirit  turns
homeward  in  its  last  extremity,  if  perchance  it  be  only  to  die  there.


"  Tender  and  dear  memories  cluster  around
many  a  spot :  none  so  sacred,  so  hallowed  as
this  ;  for  once  again  she  is  standincj  in  the
place  consecrated  by  a  thousand  memories  of
the  sacied  dead.  Keturns  like  these  ought  to
be  significant  of  rest  and  privileges  restored,
as  well  as  of  new  conseciation  to  God  ;  and
this,  although  the  past  has  been  a  barren
past  of  worldly  compromise  and  spiritual
deadness." — B.

"  There  is  a  latter  as  well  as  a  former  rain
in  spiritual  things ;  covenant  mercies  to  be
manifested  in  our  declining  yeais,  as  well  as
in  the  days  when  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was
but  newly  entered.  Our  youth  may  have
been  given  in  part  to  folly,  the  more  rca'^on
that  old  age  should  be  consecrated  unmis-
takably to  God.  And  perhaps  we,  like  Naomi,
ehall  bebt  find  the  Protector  of  our  declining
years  in  the  Bethlchems  of  our  youth.  .  .  .
Understand  the  meaning  of  this  place  to
Naomi.  No  dreamy  haze  of  mysticism  rests
upon  it,  no  unreal  sanctity.  It  is  a  piace
where  the  heart  writes  bitter  things  against
itself,  where  the  icy  fountains  of  the  great
deep  within  break  up,  a  place  where  the  past
seems  a  failure,  and  the  future  hopeless  ;  and
yet  for  all  this  it  is  a  place  where  the  winter
time  of  the  soul  is  endino-.  and  the  new  sum-
mer life  of  prosperity  begins  to  dawn." — H.

"The  wandering  of  men  from  the  perfect
Home  has  brought  with  it  degradation  and
scourging.  Their  return  will  be  to  find  a
Divine  birthright  restored  in  Christ." —
J^ulsford.

"  Woe  for  my  vine -clad  home,
That  it  should  ever  be  so  dark  to  me.
With  its  bright  threshold  and  its  whisper-
ing tree,
That  I  should  ever  come.
Fearing  the  lonely  echo  of  a  tread
Beneath  the  roof -tree  of  my  glorious  dead  1"

j\f.  P.  miiis.
88


"  Perhaps  this  world  of  sorrows  presents
no  sadder  picture  than  that  here  brought
before  us — the  return  of  a  childless  widow  to
the  spot  she  had  left  a  happy  wife  and
mother." — Macartney.

"  Thou  needest  not,  then,  sit  down  in  weari-
ness an  I  hopelessness,  whatever  of  earlier
years  thou  hast  lost,  whatever  grace  thou
hast  forfeited  ;  though  thou  hast  been  in  a
far  country,  far  away  in  affections  from  him
who  loved  thee;  and  wasting  on  his  crea-
tures,— nay,  sacrificing  on  idol  altars,  with
strange  fire,  the  gifts  which  God  gave  thee
that  thou  mightcst  be  precious  in  His  own
sight." — Piiscy.

"  Landed  property  in  Palestine  is  of  very
little  value,  except  the  possessor  has  the
means  of  cultivating  it ;  and  as  it  was  under
the  Jewish  law  unalienable,  strangers  could
not  purchase  it.  A  landed  proprietor  might
thus  be  reduced  to  beggary,  and  in  times  of
general  distress  might  long  remain  so.  Such
seems  to  have  been  the  case  with  the  family
of  Elimelech,  and  they  were  therefore  forced
to  remain  in  Moab.  Even  upon  the  return
of  Naomi  and  Ruth,  though  the  family
property  was  still  theirs,  they  were  com-
pletely destitute.  I'heir  property  was  value-
less, because  they  did  not  possess  the  means
of  cultivating  it.  This  will  serve  to  explain
the  peculiar  position  of  Naomi  and  Ruth  on
their  arrival  in  Bethlehem." — KHto.

"  Many  a  Swiss  has  sunk  a  martyr  to  his
longing  after  home.  The  malady  is  com-
monly brought  on  by  hearing  the  celebi'ated
national  air  of  the  '  Ranz  des  Vaches.'  sung
at  an  unexpected  moment,  or  when  under  the
influence  of  dejected  feelings.  Overcome
with  the  recollections  which  it  awakens,  he
sheds  tears  ;  and  is  only  to  be  consoled  by
the  prospects  of  immediately  retiirning  to
that  home,  his  exile  from  which  he  deplores.
H  unable  to  accomplish  this  wish  of  his  heart,
he  sinks  into  a  profound  mclal.clloI3^  which


CHAP.  IT.  2.  TTOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.


not  unfrequently  termmates  in   disease  and  he  would  maintain  due  allc,^ance  to  it  in  his

death." — Percy.  own   realm    and   upon  his  own    estate.      So

"  It  wns  the  custom,  and   still  may  be,  at  true  hearts  t^ive  themselves  to  God — in  that

the  coronation  of  our  sovereigns,  that  every  which  is  truly  theirs,  at  least,  He  shall  reiga

peer  of  the  realm  should  come  forward,  and  supreme." — JB,
placing  his  hand  upon  the  crown,  swear  that


CHAPTER  II.
THE  GLEANER  IN' THE  HARVEST  FIELD.

Contents. — Rzith,  in  her  poverty,  is  led  hy  seeming  chance  to  glean  in  the  field-portion  oj
Boaz,  Naomi's  kinsman,  and  a.  great  man  in  Bethlehem.  Boaz,  coming  down  from  Bethlehem
is  attracted  by  her,  and  makes  inquiries  concerning  her.  He  afterwards  shows  her  great
Itindness,  and  gives  his  reapers  directions  to  favour  her.  She  returns  to  Naomi  to  hear  that
he  is  near  of  kin  to  tluun,  and  to  receive  the  approhation  of  her  mother-in-law.  She  gleans  in
the  field-portion  of  Boaz  until  tlie  end  of  the  harvest,  dwelling  with  Naomi.

VERSES  1—3.

Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes. — And  Naomi  had  a  kinsman.  According  to  Rabinical
tradition,  which  is  not  well  established  however,  Boaz  was  a  nephew  of  Elimelech  {Keil).
Lyra  saith  Elimelech  and  Salmon — other  Hebrews  say  Elimelech  and  Naason — were  brethren.
Some  more  probably  hold  that  Elimelech  was  the  son  of  Salmon's  brother,  and  so  his  son  the
kinsman  of  Boaz  once  removed,  for  there  was  one  nearer  {Trapp).  Not  the  kinsman  who  is
meant,  but  a  kinsman,  as  there  were  several  {Wright).  Boaz  was  only  a  ttq  {Lange);
yvcjpifiog,  a  friend,  a  person  known  (LXX.,  Wordswo?'th).  This  not  only  explains  a  certain
remoteness  of  Naomi  from  him,  but  it  makes  the  piety,  which,  notwithstanding  the  distance
(manifest  also  from  iii.  12)  of  the  relationship,  perform  what  the  narrative  goes  on  to  relate,
more  conspicuously  great  than  it  v/ould  appear  if,  according  to  an  unfounded  conjecture  of
Jewish  expositors,  he  were  held  to  be  a  son  of  Elimelech's  brother  {Lange).  The  Hebrew
word  is  not  the  same  as  that  rendered  kinsman  in  ver.  20  and  iii.  9 — 13.  Literally,  it  means
only  an  acquaintance,  but  it  expresses  more  than  we  mean  by  that  term.  The  man  was  not  a
very  near  relative,  but  one  "  known  "  to  the  family  as  belonging  to  it  {Lange).  A  mighty
man  of  wealth  [a  valiant  hero]  {Lange).  Here  it  signifies  a  man  of  property  {Kiel).  These
words  are  applied  to  Boaz  in  no  other  sense  than  to  Gideon  (Judges  vi.  12),  Jephthah  (xi.  1),
and  others,  and  have  no  reference  to  his  wealth  and  property  {Lange).  The  phrase  undoubt-
edly points  to  his  valour  and  capacity  in  the  field  of  battle  {Cox).  It  is  to  be  understood  in
the  sense  of  "a  leading  man  ;  a  great  man."  Hence  the  Jewish  tradition  that  Boaz  is  another
name  for  Ibzan,  the  only  judge  connected  with  Bethlehem.  He  was  a  strong  and  able  man  in
Israel  in  war  and  in  peace  {Lange).  And  his  name  was  Boaz.  Signifies  strength  {Fuerst^
Words7Vorth,Wright).  Son  of  ?,tYQi\gt\i  {Lange,  Cox).  A]a,cTitj  {Gesen.,  Xeil).  To  be  explained
by  reference  to  the  name  of  one  of  the  pillars  erected  by  Solomon  (  Lange,  Wordsworth).  Cf.
1  Kings  vii.  21,  2  Chron,  iii.  27,  in  connexion  with  Solomon's  temple.  The  signification  alacritas
would  hardly  ha  applicable  to  the  pillar  {Lange).  The  name  Boaz  found  a  contrast  to  that  of
Ruth's  former  husband,  Mahlon,  which  signifies  weakness  {  Wordsworth).  The  Chaldee  reads
"mighty  in  the  law."     Boaz,  son  of  Salmon  and  Rachab  the  harlot  (Matt.  i.  .5).

Ver.  2.  And  glean  ears.  Literally,  glean  among  the  ears.  Let  me  gather  (Sc,  some  ears)
among  those  that  are  left  lying  in  the  field  by  the  harvesters  {Lange).  The  right  to  glean  was
a  legal  privilege  of  the  poor  in  Israel  (cf.  Lev.  xiii.  22,  xix.  9,  and  Deut.  xxiv.  19).  But  hard-
hearted farmers  and  reapers  threw  obstacles  in  the  way,  and  even  forbade  the  gleaning  alto-
gether {Keil).  Hence  Ruth  proposed  to  glean  after  him  who  should  generously  allow  it  {ibid).
Gleaning  conceded,  not  as  a  matter  of  right,  but  as  a  favour  {Kitto).  Of  corn.  Corn  is
in  Syriac  the  generic  word  for  grain  of  any  kind  {Steele  and  Terry).  After  him  in  whose  sight
I  shall  find  grace.  Whoever  he  might  be.  Did  not  mean  Boaz  {A.  Clarke).  The  owner  had
a  right  to  nominate  the  persons  who  might  glean  after  his  reapers  {Steele  and  Terry).  In  other
words,  the  poor  applied  as  Ruth  did  (ver.  7)  for  permission  to  glean.  Some  think,  however,
that  she  did  this  only  as  a  foreigner.

Ver.  3.  And  she  went  and  came.  That  is,  she  went  out  of  the  house  where  she  was,  and
out  of  the  city, and  came  into  the  field  {Gill).  According  to  the  Midrash,  however  {vide  Jarci
and  Alshech,  in  loco.),  she  marked  the  ways  as  she  went,  before  she  entered  into  the  field,  and
then  came  back  to  the  city,  that  she  m'ght  not  mistake  the  way  {ibid).  And  gleaned  in  the
field  after  the  reapers.  Still  regarded  by  the  rural  poor  as  one  of  their  ri- his,  though  the
decision  has  been  against  them  in  courts  of  law.  The  popular  notion  probably  derived  from
Jewish  customs  (see  Kitto).  The  Jaw  of  Moses  directed  very  libeial  treat ment  of  the  poor  at
the  Seasons  of  harvest  and  ingathering.     The  corners  of  the  field  were  not  to  be  i  eaped  ;  the

by


EOMILETia  COMMENTARY :  BUTE.  chap.  ii.  1.


owner  was  not  to  glean  his  own  field ;  and  a  sheaf  accidentally  left  bebind  was  not  to  be  fetched
away,  but  left  for  the  poor  {Kitto).  As  landowners  were  not  subject  to  money  taxes  for  the
support  of  the  poor,  this  claim  was  liberally  construed  by  them  (Xitto),  at  least  by  the  herter-
disposed  among  them.  And  her  hap  was  to  light.  More  literally,  "And  her  lot  met  her  on
the  field  of  Boaz  "  (Lange).  Literally,  her  hap  happened  (Scliaff.  in  Lanqe)^  her  chance
chanced  to  hit  upon  the  field  {Kail,  Wordsnwrth).  A  part  of  the  field  belonging  unto  Boaz.
"  The  field-portion,"  i.e.,  that  part  of  the  grain-fields  about  Bethlehem  which  belonged  to  Boaz
(JLange).  The  grain-fields,  unlike  the  vineyards,  are  not  separated  by  xpy  enclosure.  The
boundary  between  them  is  indicated  by  heaps  of  small  stoues,  or  somctimiH.  h>-  single  upright
stones,  placed  at  intervals  {Lange),


CHAPTER  II.— YERSE  1.

HOMILIES    AND    OUTLINES.

,77ieme. — The  Claims  oe  the  Weak  upon  the  Steono,

"Who  gain  their  titles  not  by  birth.
But  win  them  by  the  lordlier  worth
Of  noble  deeds, — true  chivalry,
These  men  are  God's  nobility." — B.

**  Howe'er  it  be,  it  seems  to  me
'Tis  only  noble  to  be  good  :
Kind  hearts  are  more  than  coronets.
And  simple  faith  than  Norman  blood." — Tennyson,

And  Naomi  had  a  kinsman  [lit.  acquaintance]  of  her  hushand^s,  a  mighty  man  oj

wealth  [a  valiant  hero  (Lange)^^  etc.

The  second  chapter  opens  up  a  new  act,  as  it  were,  in  this  beautiful  and  touch-
ing drama  ;  poetry  of  the  highest  order,  and  not  the  less  poetry  because  it  is  fact ;
for  far  more  romantic  things  are  recorded  in  history,  than  ever  yet  were  created  in
novel  or  romance  {^Gumming).  Mark,  too,  that  thus  early  in  the  narrative,  what  is
the  key  to  the  whole  story  is  plainly  pointed  to,  viz.,  redemption,  salvation,  help,
from  one  near  of  kin,  one  of  the  same  family  and  blood.  No  wonder  the  old
Puritans  saw  a  spiritual  suggestiveness  in  the  character  of  Boaz.  "  My  Redeemer
liveth  "  is  *'my  Goel  liveth,"  and  the  very  word  is  applied  to  Boaz  (chap.  iv.).
My  strength  and  my  Redeemer  (Ps.  ix.  14),  in  the  Hebrew  is  my  Boaz  and  my
Goel  (Cumming).

The  text  suggests  as  worthy  consideration —

I.  The  relationship  between  the  rich  and  the  poor.  Every  branch  of  the
tree  is  not  a  top  branch  (Matt.  Henry).  Must  be  and  will  be  subordination,
mutual  dependence,  and  mutual  responsibility,  as  long  as  the  world  lasts,  or  as  long
as  the  world  is  what  it  is.  God  wills  that  it  should  be  so.  He  puts  the  rich  and
the  poor  side  by  side,  and  has  linked  them  together  a  thousand  times  in  this  way.
Beautiful  when  life  repeats  what  is  seen  here,  for  the  narrative  goes  on  to  show
how  Boaz  came  to  respect  Ruth  and  Naomi,  first  for  kindred  and  then  for  virtue's
sake.  Note,  (a)  A  ivealthy  man  may  be  a  good  and  godly  man,  ready  to  meet  the
responsibilities  which  come  to  him.  Riches  neither  further  nor  hinder  salvation,
but  as  loved  and  trusted  in.  Not  money,  which  is  "  the  root  of  all  evil,"  but  the
love  of  money.  It  is  rare  that  religion  and  riches  meet,  yet  Boaz  was  both  rich
and  religious  (Macgoivan).  Not  many  rich,  etc.  {h)  Poverty  a  thing  not  to  be
despised  in  and  for  itself.  The  poor  may  be  virtuous  and  attractive,  as  Ruth  and
Naomi  evidently  were.  Boaz  had  "  a  poor  relation,"  a  most  uncomfortable  fact,  as
many  respectable  people  know  {Braden).  And  yet  they  neither  begged  of  him  nor
thrust  themselves  unduly  on  his  notice.  They  were  an  example  to  all  the  world
of  that  quiet  self-respect  which  feels  the  claim,  and  yet  waits  the  opportunity  when
that  claim  is  to  be  presented  by  circumstances  and  providential  leadings  rather
than  by  themselves.

90


CHAP.  TI.  1.


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   RUTTT.


Note,  (c)  It  is  not  in  the  oiitiranl  estate  to  alter  blood  and  kindred,  or  the  claims
which  come  from  thence.  Poor  Naomi  and  rich  Boaz  were  of  the  same  stock  after
all.  Joseph,  though  governor  of  Egypt,  had  poor  Jacob  for  his  father,  and  plain
shepherds  for  his  brethren  {Fuller).  Mark  the  frailty  and  vanity  of  worldly
dignity.  However  parents  provide  for  their  posterity,  these  contrasts  are
common  enough  in  family  life.  The  posterity  of  the  righteous  are  brought  into
poverty,  that  they  sot  not  their  minds  on  temporal  glory  (Topsell).

II.  The  relationship  between  the  strong  and  the  weak.  A  link  here  between
the  two  extremes.  Boaz,  whose  very  name  signifies  strength,  a  hero  and  a  great
man,  perhaps  a  judge  in  Israel ;  and  this  poor  bankrupt  widow,  forced  to  live  upon
another's  gleanings.  Naomi  could  say  as  does  the  Psalmist,  "  Thou  hast  put  my
kinsman  far  from  me"  (Laiu/e).  But  Boaz  had  other  qualities  besides  his  strength.
He  shows  himself  morally  brave  in  every  relationship  (Lait/;e)  All  the  claims
which  came  to  him  in  life  are  recognized  and  responded  to,  (1)  as  master ;  (2)  as
\  servant  of  God  ;  (3)  as  a  man  of  action  ;  (4)  as  one  not  insensible  to  worth,  hiding
itself  under  the  garb  of  poverty,  he  is  an  example  of  what  is  meant  by  the  godly
jnul  righteous  man.  He  stooped  from  his  high  estate,  as  Christ  Himself  humbled
Himself  to  rescue  the  poor  from  their  lot  of  ignominy  and  poverty  ;  and  he  clothes
tnem  with  his  own  dignity.  His  strength  like  the  Saviour's  strength — to  compare
human  tilings  with  Divine — is  shown  in  his  works.  Note.  Jesus  is  our  near  kins-
man and  (Joel  {M(ic<iowan),  a  mighty  man  of  wealth  in  a  natural  and  in  a
spiritual  way  (Col.  i.  19,  ii.  3).

I.MrKOVEMENT. — Learn  from  the  whole  narrative,  as  shadowed  forth  here,
(1)  The  nobleness  of  strength  nourishing  weakness,  true  greatness  recognizing  the
claims  of  those  beneath  it,  where  many  would  pass  by  and  despise.  '*  We  that  are
strong,"  etc.  (Rom.  xv.  1).  (2)  Recognize  the  claims,  which  make  the  whole
family  of  God  as  one.  We  are  all  of  the  same  blood.  Go  back  far  enough,  and
you  will  find  relationship.  Remember  the  words  of  that  noble  Roman,  received
even  then  with  tumultuous  applause,  "I  am  a  man;  nothing  that  concerns  man  can
be  a  matter  of  indifference  to  me."


"  The  Improvement  of  the  ground  is  the
most  natural  obtaining  of  riches  ;  fur  it  is  our
great  mother's  blessing,  the  earth's  ;  but  it  is
slow.  And  yet,  when  men  of  great  wealth  do
sto.»p  to  husbandry,  it  multiplielh  riches  ex-
ceedingly."'— Lord  Bticon.

"It  is  not  the  having  of  wealth,  but  the
having  confidence  in  wealth  ;  not  the  possess-
ing it,  but  the  relying  on  it,  which  makes  rich
men  incapable  c)f  the  kingdom  of  heaven  :
otherwise,  wealth  well  usetl  is  a  great  bless-
ing, enabling  the  owner  to  do  God  more
glory,  the  Church  and  commonwealth  more
good." — Fuller.

"  Naomi,  though  a  poor,  contemptible
widow,  had  rich  relations  whom  yet  she
boasted  not  of,  nor  was  burdeu^^ome  to,  nor
expected  anything  from,  when  she  returned
to  Bethleiiem  in  distress.  Those  that  have
rich  relations,  while  they  themselves  are  poor,
ought  to  know  that  it  is  the  wise  providence
of  tiod  that  makes  the  difference  (in  which
we  ought  to  acquiesce),  and  that  to  be  proud
of  our  relation  to  such  is  a  great  sin,  and  to
trust  to  is  a  great  folly." — Matt.  Henry.

"  How  came  it  to  pass,  then,  that  a  man  so
bold  and  generous  and  pious  left  Naomi  un-
helped  and  uncomfoited  in  the  time  of  her
penury  and  grief  ?  We  cannot  altogether
tell.  He  may  have  been  absent  on  military
service  when  she  returned  from  the  field  of


Moab,  and  have  only  got  leave  of  absence,  as
soldiers  then  commonly  did,  during  harvest.
He  may  only  just  have  heard  the  tale  of
Naomi's  sorrow  when  he  met  Ruth  in  the
harvest-field." — Cox.

"  One  would  suppose  that  to  the  proud  heart
of  man  anything  would  be  preferable  to  beg-
gary ;  but  so  inconsistent  are  its  workings,
that  more  are  led  to  beggary  by  pride  than
poverty,  as  people  imagine  that  a  certain  dis-
tinction attaches  to  dependence  on  relatives,
or  even  on  friends,  while  they  regard  the  lower
kinds  of  industry  as  disgraceful.  .  .  .  It  would
be  well  for  all  classes  to  remember  that  mean-
ness is  not  humility  ;  it  is  the  miserable  re-
source by  which  disappointed  pride  seeks  to
steal  that  distinction  which  has  been  denied
it,  and  to  avoid  the  humiliating  and  correcting
lessons  which  Providence  sends  ;  it  is  the
crouching  to  man  of  those  who  will  not  bow
to  God.  In  proportion  as  pure  religion  enters
the  soul,  this  hateful  spirit  leaves  it,  and  a
love  of  independence  takes  possession  of  it, —
a  love  of  independence  arising  not  from  pride,
but  from  the  genuine  desire  not  to  encroach
on  human  kindness,  not  to  forget  the  Divine
declaiation,  "That  if  any  would  not  work,
neither  shoidd  he  eat." — Macartney.

"  Behold  therefore  as  in  a  glass  the  perfect
image  of  temporal  felicity,  the  father  a  king,
the  children  beggars,  the  father  honourable,

91


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HUTU.


CHAP.  11.  2.


the  son  not  worshipful,  the  predecessors  the
chiefest  in  authority,  but  the  successors  the
meanestin  calling:  this  made  the  fathers  think
that  the  world  was  like  a  sea,  here  a  mighty
wave,  there  a  great  downfall.  Some  thought
it  to  be  like  ice,  where  a  man  can  never  stand
sure,  but  the  one  will  be  breaking,  or  he  be
sliding  ;  some  like  to  trees  whereof  the  tallest
are  soonest  overturned  ;  but  all  agree  in  this,
that  worldly  felicity  is  miserable  vanity  ;  for
our  present  wealth  is  like  a  pleasant  summer
which  must  needs  come  to  an  end,  though  all
the  world  should  strive  to  the  contrary." —
Toj^sell.

"Therefore  make  you  friends  of  the  unright-
eous mammon,  that  when  you  shall  have  need
they  may  receive  you  into  their  everlasting
habitations.  Distribute  liberally,  give  plenti-
fully,  live  peaceably,  walk  humljly  ;  for  the
wealth  of  the  world  doth  not  always  last,
neither  the  crown  from  generation  to  genera-
tion."— Topiiell.

"  Let  this  confiite  such  as  having  gotten  a
little  more  thick  clay  than  the  rest  of  their
family,  the  getting  of  new  wealth  and  honour
makes  them  to  lose  their  old  eyes,  so  that  they
cannot  see  and  discern  their  poor  kindred
afterwards.  When  Joseph  was  governor  of
Egypt,  it  is  said  that  he  knew  his  brethren,
but  his  brethren  knew  not  him  ;  but  now-a-
days  it  happeneth  clean  contrary.  If  one  of
a  family  be  advanced  to  great  honour,  it  is
likely  that  his  kindred  will  know  him,  but  he
oftentimes  comes  to  forget  them.  Few  there
be  of  the  noble  nature  of  the  Lord  Cromwell,
who,  sitting  at  dinner  with  the  lords  of  the
council,  and  chancing  to  see  a  poor  man  afar
off  which  used  to  sweep  the  cells  and  the
cloisters,  called  for  the  man,  and  told  the
lords, '  This  man's  father  hath  given  me  many
a  good  meal,  and  he  shall  not  lack  as  long  as
I  \\y^r'— Fuller.

"  Who  knoweth  whether  God  hath  raised
thee  up,  who  art  the  best  of  thy  kindred,  to
this  very  intent  that  thou  mightest  be  the
treasure  and  the  storehouse  to  supply  the  want
of  others  which  are  allied  unto  thee  ? " —
Fuller.

"  There  are  multitudes  of  men  like  the  sum-
mer vines,  which  never  grow  even  liqueous,
but  stretch  out  a  thousand  little  hands  to


grasp  the  stronger  shrubs  ;  and  if  they  cannot
rc'a;3h  them  they  lie  dishcvclk'd  in  the  grass,
hoof- trodden,  and  beaten  of  every  storm.  .  .  .
As  yet  the  world  will  not  understand  that  he
governs  whom  love  makes  serviceable.  The
strong  are  few,  the  weak  are  many,  and  God
appoints  the  strong  to  serve  tie  weak,  saying,
'  V/e,  then,  th  ,t  are  strong  ought  to  bear  the
infirmities  of  the  weak,  and  not  to  please
ourselves.  Let  every  one  of  us  please  his
neighbour  for  bis  good  to  edification.  For
even  Christ  pleased  not  Himself ;  but,  as  it  is
written,  The  reproaches  of  them  that  reproach
thee  fell  on  me.'  " — Bcecker.

"  A  Christianity  which  will  not  help  those
who  are  struggling  from  the  bottom  to  the
top  of  society  needs  another  Christ  to  die  for
it:'— Ihid.

*'  How   seldom,   friend,   a   good    great   man

inherits

Honour  and  wealth,  with  all  his   worth

and  pains  !

It  seeius  a  story  fi'om  the  world  of  spirits

When  any  man  obtains  that  which  he  merits,

( 'r  any  merits  that  which  he  obtains.

For  shame,  my  friend  1  renounce  this  idle

strain  !

What  wouldst  thou  have  a  good  great  man

obtain  ?
*****

Goodness  and  greatness  are  not  means,  but

ends.
Hath  he notalways  treasures,  always  friends.
The  great  good  man  1     Three  treasures^

love  and  light.
And  calm    thoughts,   equable   as   infant'a

breath ;
And  three  fast  friends,  more  sure  than  day

and  night —
Himself,  his  Maker,  and  the  angel  Death  ?'*

Coleridge.

"  How  blessed  he
That  feels    not  what  affliction  greatness

yields  !
Other  than  what  he  is  he  would  not  be,
Kor  change  his  state  with  him  that  sceptre

wields.
Thine,  thine  is  that  true  life  ;  that  is  to  live,
To  rest  secure,  and  not  rise  up  to  grieve."

J)anieU


VERSE    2.
Theme, — Humble  Toil,  the  First  Step  towards  aji  after  Rec  mpenje,

**  O  woman  I  in  our  hours  of  ease
Uncertain,  coy,  and  hard  to  please,
And  variable  as  is  the  shade
By  the  light  quivering  aspen  made  ;
When  pain  and  anguish  wring  the  brow,
A  ministering  angel  thou  1 " — Scott.

**  Oh.  what  makes  woman  lovely  ?  virtue,  faith,
And  gentleness  in  suffering. —  an  endurance
Through  scorn  or  trial, — these  call  beauty  forth.
Give  it  the  stamp  celestial,  and  admit  it
To  sisterhood  with  angels  1  " — Brent.

92


CHAP.  II.  2.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.


And  Ruth  said  .  ,  ,  Let  me  noiu  go  into  the  fields^  and  ylean.     And  she  said  unto

her,  Go,  my  daughter.

This  is  the  first  movement  of  the  machine  which  brought  such  grand  things
about.  From  gleaning  she  arose  to  be  ancestress  to  Jesus  (^Macyowan).  This
request  led  to  the  recompence  ;  proved  a  step  towards  her  highest  preferment.

Note,  (a)  Great  things  often  arise  from  very  small  beginnings.  A  restless
night  by  Ahasuerus  produced  that  great  revolution  in  favour  of  the  Jews
(Esther  vi.)  (Macyowan).  [b)  High  buildings  are  raised  upon  the  lowest  foundations
(ibid.).  Christ's  Church  was  to  be  built  upon  the  truth  contained  in  Peter's  con-
fession (Matt.  xvi.  16 — 18).  So  upon  Ruth's  fidelity  the  human  nature  of  our
Lord  is,  as  it  were,  to  be  engrafted.

It  reveals,  I.  A  truly  filial  spirit.  Gentle  obedience,  willing  submission  to
Naomi.  Her  nativity  of  Moab  ;  her  behaviour  that  of  an  Israelite  indeed — a
true  daughter  of  Abraham,  though  she  springs  from  Lot  {Lawson).  Mark  how
her  meek  and  beautiful  spirit  begins  to  show  itself.  She  did  not  go  of  herself,
obstinately  and  selfishly.  She  consulted  her  mother-in-law,  and  this  was  even
more  commendable  than  if  it  had  been  done  to  her  natural  parents.  Possibly,
too,  she  wished  Naomi  to  enjoy  the  rest  suitable  to  her  time  of  life.  Note.
{a)  A  wise,  thouyhtful,  considerate  spirit  onf  of  the  true  siyns  of  grace.  This  not
always  exhibited,  especially  where  the  pangs  of  want  are  felt.  A  parent's  poverty
at  times  the  source  of  discontent  (Hraden).  Many  become  hard,  cold,  cynical  in
reverses.  Not  so  Ruth,  (b)  These  charities  of  the  heart  su-eelen  life  [Lawson).  We
have  here  a  beautiful  example  of  courtesy  between  children  and  parents,  as  in
verse  4,  between  masters  and  servants.

II.  A  truly  humble  spirit.  Mark  the  lowliness  of  her  employment.  She  will
work  in  the  hot  sun  as  a  poor  gleaner,  and  never  murmur  [Braden).  Some  way
of  earning  a  livelihood  was  a  necessity.  Ruth  desirous  of  an  honest  though  never
so  simple  a  calling  {Topsell).  Takes  that  which  is  nearest  to  hand.  Will  not
depend  upon  Naomi,  but  would  rather  that  Naomi  in  her  old  age  should  lean  upon
her.  Will  not  even  wait  until,  perhaps,  Naomi's  relatives,  out  of  very  shame,
step  in  with  succour  and  assistance.  No  I  Like  that  one  in  the  Gospel,  she
cannot  dig,  and  to  beg  she  is  ashamed.  But  unlike  that  one,  she  is  not  above
using  every  honest  means  to  maintain  herself  and  assist  her  mother.  Note,
Female  feelings  are  keener  than  those  of  men  (Macgowan).  Contact  with  the  rude,
unfeeling  world  means  more  to  them.  Ruth  must  have  shrunk  with  a  woman's
sensitiveness  from  the  step.  And  yet  she  adapts  herself  to  the  new  circumstances.
She  goes  out  to  glean  with  the  poor  around  her.  So  Paul :  *'  I  have  learned  in
whatsoever  state,"  etc.     "  I  know  both  how  to  be  abased,"  etc.  (Phil.  iv.  11,  12).

III.  A  truly  noble  spirit.  The  best  natures  show  best  when  most  tried,  and
they  are  lovelier  in  poverty  than  in  wealth.  Note,  (a)  Brave  toilers  have  always
made  the  worst  drudgery  sublime  (Braden).  Work  is  not  degradation,  and  only  mean
spirits  think  it  to  be  so.  Paul  laboured  with  his  own  hands  as  a  tent  maker.
Not  what  I  have,  but  what  I  do,  is  my  kingdom  (Carlyle).  There  is  a  perennial
nobleness,  and  even  sacredness,  in  work  {ibid).  However  humble,  it  exalts  the  man.
Labour  is  man's  necessity  ...  is  man's  glory  {Caleb  Morris),  and  brings  its  own
reward.     Especially  so  when  an  affection  like  Ruth's  prompts  us  to  it.

"  Offices  of  love  ,

Wrought  for  a  parent  lighten  duty's  labours." — Sophocles,

Lessons.     (1)  Before  honour  is  humility.     (2)  Great  things  come  to  pass  by
poor  and  unlikely  beginnings  {Bernard).     (3)  The  way  of  our  abasement  may
become,  in  God's  providence,  the  way  of  our  advancement.
Bernard  on  this  : —

I.  Honest  hearts  truly  entertaining  religion,  do  not  forsake  it  or  the  godly  for
worldly  wants.

93


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  RUTH.


CHAR  II.  2.


II.  Godly   children   hold    themselves  bound  to  be  at  the    disposing  of  their
parents.

III.  Honest  minds  will  stoop  to  base  means,  so  they  be  honest,  to  relieve  their

wants  in  their  poor  estate.     The  truly  religious  will  not  live  idle.

IV.  Gleaning  then,  as  now,  was  a  lawful  means  for  the  poor  to  get  food.
In  wJiose  sight  1  shall  Jind  favour.

V.  The  godly,  in  using  lawful  means  to  live,  hope  to  find  favour  with  one  or
other  for  their  relief.
And  she  said  unto  her,  Go,  my  daughter.
VI.  Requests  are  to  be  granted  of  parents,  unto  children,  when  they  be  lawful

and  fit.
VIII.  A  meek  and  loving  spirit  giveth  a  meek  and  loving  ansv/er.


"  What  cold  entertainment  do  they  find  at
Bethlehem,  even  in  the  Church  of  God,  for
whose  sake  one  forsook  her  country,  the  other
her  wealth,  and  both  of  them  their  welfare.
...  Is  this  the  profit  of  your  profession,  which
promises  mountains  of  security,  and  pays  a
multitude  of  miseries  ?  .  .  .  A  man  that  hath
a  thousand  pounds  laid  beside  him,  and  layeth
it  out  upon  a  bargain,  whereof  he  shall  receive
no  profit  in  many  years,  but  the  date  expireth
ind  the  day  of  receipt  come,  receiveth  his
own  and  many  thousand  pounds  for  his  gain.
.  .  .  Even  so  with  religion,  it  is  a  pearl  for
which  we  must  sell  both  living  and  lands,
and  yet  it  is  worth  both,  and  many  a  thousand
times  more  ;  if  thou  feel  not  the  profit  at
first,  tarry  awhile,  thou  hast  the  promise  and
bond  of  the  Lord  of  hosts." — Topsell.

"  For  this,  then,  she  had  left  paternal  house
and  land  .  .  .  But  the  love  she  cherishes  makes
everything  easy  to  her.  It  not  only  gives
utterance  to  good  words,  but  it  carries  them
into  practice.  tShe  forgets  everything  in  order
now  to  remember  her  filial  duty  to  Naomi,
and  Naomi  accepts  her  offer.  Until  now  she
has  only  silently  endured  every  expression  of
Ruth's  self-sacrifice.  She  had  indeed  ceased
to  dissuade  her  from  going  with  her,  but  she
had  also  refrained  from  encouraging  her.  .  .  .
The  meekness  with  which  she  asks  permission
to  encounter  toil  and  misery  overcomes  in
Naomi  every  other  ulterior  consideration.
Such  a  request  could  no  longer  be  silently
accepted,  nor  could  it  be  refused.  Naomi
has  no  other  reward  for  Ruth's  self-sacrificing
disposition,  than  that  she  is  ready  to  accept
its  effort  for  herself." — Lange  (condensed).

"  What  prosperity  had  concealed,  adversity
brings  to  light.  Nobleness  that  we  never  sus-
pected, with  powers  that  would  have  remained
uncultured  and  unfruitful,  have  been  mani-
fested. They  are  like  some  grand  mansion
surrounded  and  hidden  in  summer  time  by
large  fuU-foliagcd  trees  ;  the  passer-by  cannot
discern  the  fine  proportions  and  ornamental
sculpture  that  make  it  'a  thing  of  beauty  ;'
but  when  winter  tears  away  with  ruthless
hand  every  leaf,  until  the  trees  si  and  clear
and  bare,  then  behold  the  magnificent  handi-
work appears  in  all  its  glory  and  perfection."
— Bradeti.

"  I  do  not  hear  Ruth  stand  u|)on  the  terms
of  her  better  education  or  wealthy  parentage;

94


but  now  that  God  had  called  her  to  want,  she
scorns  not  to  hiy  her  hand  upon  all  homely
services,  and  thinks  it  no  disparagement  to
find  her  bread  in  other  men's  Melds.  There
is  no  harder  lesson  to  a  geneious  mind,  nor
that  more  beseems  it,  than  either  to  bear  want
or  to  prevent  it.  Base  spirits  give  themselves
over  to  idleness  and  misery,  and  because  they
are  crossed  will  sullenly  perish." — B'lsliop
Ball.

"  High  spirits  can  more  easily  starve  than
stoop ;  Ruth  was  none  of  those.  She  does
not  tell  her  mother.  She  was  never  brought
up  to  live  upon  crumbs.  Though  she  was
not  brought  up  to  it,  she  is  brought  down  to
it,  and  is  not  uneasy  at  it.  Nay,  it  is  her
own  motion,  not  her  mother's  injunction.
Humility  is  one  of  the  brightest  ornaments
of  youth,  and  one  of  the  best,  omens.  Before
Ruth's  honour  w^as  this  humility." — Matt.
Henry.

Let  this  teach  even  those  whose  veins  are
washed  with  generous  blood,  and  arteries
quickened  with  noble  spirits,  in  their  pros-
perity, to  furnish,  qualify,  and  accommodate
themselves  with  such  gentile  (gentle)  arts  and
liberal  mysteries  as  will  be  neither  blemish
nor  burthen  to  their  birth  ;  that  so,  if  here-
after God  shall  cast  them  into  poverty,  those
arts  may  stand  them  in  some  stead  towards
their  maintenance  and  relief." — Fuller.

"  There  are  compensations  even  in  this
world, of  which  we  little  dream,  and  God  sets
one  thing,  and  often  a  better  thing,  o\eragai7ist
another  in  human  life.  Riches  fly,  but  cha-
racter is  developed  ;  we  are  compelled  to
work,  and  out  of  work  spring  our  truest  joys.
Our  life  is  paradoxical,  but  without  contia-
dictions  ;  we  are  made  the  least,  that  we  may
become  the  greatest,  and  the  way  down  is.
with  God  as  guide,  always  the  road  to  exalt-
ation."—  Bra  den.

''  Young  persons  should  be  cheerfully  will-
ing to  bear  fatigues  and  troubles  for  the  sake
of  their  aged  parents,  that  they  may  enjoy
such  ease  as  the  infiimitics  of  ape  re()uire.
Let  tho^e  who  are  in  the  vigour  of  age.  if  their
parents  are  feeble,  remember  what  their
niothei'S  endured  for  them  in  infancy  or  sick-
ness, how  they  willingly  suffered  anxiety  of
mind,  the  want  of  sleep,  and  many  fatigues
of  body,  that  their  beloved  offspring  might
enjoy  pleasure,  or  be  relieved  from  distress.


CHAP.  11.  3.  HOMILETW  COMMENT  AMY:   RUTH.


How  selfish  are   the  spirits  of  those  young  of  our  natui-al,  our  bodily,  our  animal  happi-

persons  who  grudge  toil  or  expense  for  their  ness.     Labour  in  some  shape  or  other  is,  in

parents  in  that  time  of  life  when  they  can  fact,  the  very  foundation  of  everything  that

enjoy  little  pleasure   but  what  arises   fi'oin  is  good  for  man." — Calrh  Morrhs.

beholding  the  affectionate  attachment  of  their  "  Do  the  duty  which  lies  nearest  thee,  which

children." — Larvson.  thou  knowest  to  be  a  duty.    Thy  second  duty

"  I  am  told  that  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  will  already  have  become  clearer.  .  .  .  Hence

which  is  not  infallible,  has  decided  that  no-  also  our  whole  duty,   which  is  to  move,  to

body  has  a  right  to  glean.     It  was  hitherto  work,  in  the  right  direction." — Carlyle.

supposed  to  be  a  universal  right  ;  that  pre-  "  As  frosts  unlock  the  hard  shells  of  seeds,

script  had  made  it  law;  but  one  of  our  courts  and   help   the  germ   to  get  free,  so  trouble

has  decided  that  it  is  not  law,  and  that  no-  developcs  in  men  the  germs  of  force,  patience,

body  has  a  right  to  glean.     And  therefore  we  and  ingenuity,  and  in  noble  natures  '  works

have  got  what  1  suppose  is  thought  politically  the   peaceable   fruits   of   righteousness.'      A

a  better  substitute — the  Poor  Law,  instead  of  gentle  schoolmaster  it  is  to  those  who  are

the  ancient  usage  of  gleaning  in  the  fields  '  exercised  thereby.'     Tears,  like  rain-drops,

after  the  reapers. " — Dr.  Cummtnrj.  have  a  thousand  times  fallen  to  the  ground

"  Labour  is,  and  must  be,  the  foundation  and  come  up  in  flowers." — Beecher.
of  our  earthly  livelihood,  must  be  the  price


VERSE  3.
Theme. — Seeming  Chances,  real  Providences.

**  Our  indiscretion  sometimes  serves  us  well,
When  our  deep  plots  do  pall ;  and  that  should  teach  QS
There's  a  Divinity  that  shapes  our  ends,
Rough-hew  them  how  we  will." — Sliahespeare.

**  All  Nature  is  but  art,  unknown  to  thee  ;
All  chance,  direction  which  thou  canst  not  see|
All  discord,  harmony  not  understood  ;
All  partial  evil,  universal  good.
And  spite  of  pride,  in  erring  reason's  spite,
One  truth  is  clear,  whatever  is,  is  right." — Pope,

And  she  went  and  came,  and  gleaned  in  the  field  after  the  reapers,  and  her  hap  was

to  light,  etc.

Inspiration  speaks  here  after  our  human  ways  and  methods  of  speech.  Christ
Himself  did  so  in  His  wonderful  parable  of  the  Good  Samaritan.  "  By  chance,"
He  says,  *'  there  came  "  (Luke  x.  31).  Note.  A  revelation  from  God  to  man  neces-
sarily implies  this  condescension.  Just  as  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  so  the  Divine
thought,  when  it  was  revealed  to  holy  men  of  old,  must  clothe  itself  with  the
limitation  and  imperfection  which  belong  to  speech.  How  else  could  we  receive  it
— understand  it  ?  Elsewhere,  however,  the  Scriptures  teach  us  there  is  no  such
thing  as  chance.  "  Not  a  sparrow  falleth,"  etc.  And  where  men  think  they
appeal  to  fortune,  the  hand  of  God  is  to  be  seen.  "  The  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap,
but  the  disposing  of  it  is  of  the  Lord  "  (Prov.  xvi.  33).

Observe,  I.  That  by  what  appear  mere  accidents,  we  may  alight  upon  our
best  blessings  (Braden).  Wandering  at  her  will,  going  whithersoever  she  would,
she  was  still  treading  in  the  path  of  destiny.  Possibly  she  had  neither  choice  nor
desire,  which  could  bias  either  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.  At  best,  it  was
only  a  question  as  to  where  she  would  be  allowed  to  glean  that  absorbed  the
mind  (ver.  2,  7).  Yet  it  was  one  of  the  critical  moments  of  her  life.  So  with
ourselves.  How  many  things  have  happened,  about  which  we  were  strangely
indifi'ereut ;  yet  their  issues  have  proved  unspeakably  momentous  [Braden).
Note.  Human  life  itself  is  made  up  of  little  things^  of  small  and  seemingly  unini'
portant  events,  upon  which  greater  things  depend.

"  Giiaid  well  the  boon,  'tis  trivial
In  seeming  only,  and  shall  win
A  dower  of  heaven  for  faithfulness,
The  cuise  of  hell,  if  there  be  siu." — B%

95


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  RUTH.  chap.  ii.  3.


Observe,  II.,  as  following  this —

That  these  seeming"  chances  are  real  providences.  If  we  could  see  the  end
as  God  does,  we  should  see  that  every  event  is  for  the  believer  {McCheyiie).  With
regard  to  Euth,  this  ivas  hap  or  cha7ice;  she  knew  not  the  fields  of  Boaz  from  those
of  another.  With  God  it  was  providence.  Outwardly,  and  as  men  speak,  it  was
an  accident,  but  mark  to  what  the  accident  led  !  It  brought  her  to  that  part  of
the  field  belonging  to  the  man  to  whom,  of  all  others,  it  was  of  the  greatest
importance  she  should  be  introduced.  Note,  (a)  That  ivhich  we  call  cliance,
casualti/,  accident,  ^^ good  luck,"  is  included  in  the  all  things  that  work  together  for
good  (liom.  viii.  28).  What  though  it  be  a  catastrophe  or  a  crime  ! — there  may
be  second  causes  and  the  action  of  human  evil,  but  the  great  first  cause  is  in  all
(^Spurgeon).

Note.  (6)  Those  things  which  with  us  are  accidental,  are  all  the  determinations  of
a  holy  Providence  (Macgowan).  Ruth's  purpose  was  to  glean,  God's  purpose  was
to  direct  her  into  the  way  of  meeting  with  Boaz.  So  always.  In  the  eye  of  man,
mere  chance  brought  Jacob  and  Rachel  together  (Gen.  xxix).  So  with  Pharaoh's
daughter  going  to  bathe  (Exod.  ii.  6 — 10).  None  the  less  there  was  the  Divine
purpose  being  accomplished,  which  had  respect  to  the  future  of  Israel.  So  with
the  Syrian  arrow  drawn  at  a  venture  (1  Kings  xxii.  34).  God  directed  it.  Note.
(c)  The  way  of  man  is  not  in  himself ;  it  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps
(Jer.  X.  23).  We  go  blindly,  not  knowing  what  a  day  or  even  an  hour  may  bring
forth.  All  is  chance  in  one  sense.  We  stumble  upon  the  best  things  that  come
to  us  in  life.  It  is  all  a  surprise,  and  God  has  intended  that  it  should  be  so.  But
then  this  is  only  the  human  side.  Look  deeper,  and  there  is  a  plan,  a  purpose.
Life  unfolds  itself  to  the  wise  man  more  and  more  as  if  it  were  a  premeditated
thiug.  There  is  a  fitness,  an  appropriateness  about  all  that  happens,  which
speaks  the  Divine  direction  and  control.  Note,  [d)  Providences  to  the  righteous,
are  hut  the  fulfihnent  of  promises.

Learn,  III.  That  God  does  direct  and  give  success  to  the  efforts  of  the  right-
minded.  David  says,  "  The  steps  of  a  good  man  are  ordered  by  the  Lord  "  (Ps.
xxxvii.  23).  If  so,  the  way  and  its  issue  alike  must  be  well.  Who  can  guide
himself  aright  in  this  perplexing  world  ?  (Braden).  Ignorance,  confusion,  tiie
tangled  thread  of  human  afiairs,  everywhere  apparent !

"  Mystery  enshroudeth  ever,
Unknown  shores  on  either  side,
And  for  ever  through  the  darkness
Flows  the  deep  and  troubled  tide." — B.

So  men  have  said  as  they  travel  onward  down  the  stream  of  time.  But  faith  has
its  answer  amid  these  perplexities  of  human  life, — "  This  God  is  our  God  for  ever
and  ever,  and  He  will  be  our  guide  even  unto  death."

Note,  {a)  That  this  Divine  guidance,  however  apparent,  does  not  set  aside  indi-
vidual responsibility.  The  angel  hands  were  laid  upon  Lot  when  he  left  Sodom,
but  he  himself  must  yield  to  them — the  human  will  working  with  the  Divine  will
— if  his  salvation  is  to  be  secured.  He  might  have  cast  ofi*  the  angel  hands,  and
perished  with  his  sons-in-law,  who  mocked  alike  at  the  threatened  danger  and  the
offered  guidance  (Gen.  xix.  14 — 16).  Note,  {h)  "  I  being  in  the  way,  the  Lord  led
tne"  (Gen.  xxiv.  27),  the  principle  upon  which  God  deals  with  men.

So  it  was  with  Ruth.  Mark  (1)  God's  hlcssing  met  her  in  the  way  of  humble
toil.  Lange  gives  as  a  more  literal  translation,  "  And  her  lot  met  her  in  the  field
of  Boaz."  Her  destiny  was  decided  there — humble  gleaner  as  she  was,  she  found
favour  with  the  man  upon  whom  everything  depended.  So  always.  God's  bless-
ing can  come  to  us  in  the  cornfield,  or  in  the  workshop,  or  in  the  counting  house.
And  He  Himi^elf  can  be  with  us  there.  "  Not  man's  manifold  labours,"  says  Dr.
Pusey,  **  but  his  manifold  cares,  hinder  the  pie:-cnce  of  God.  Lai. our  ordained
by  God,  and  wrought  for  and  in  God,  invites  God's  fuller  presence."  Note.  A
principle  in  this  choice  of  the  humble  who  are  to  be  exalted  [cf.  Luke  i.  48 — 53].    He

96


CflAP.  11.  3.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  nVTJl.


who  chose  a  gleaner  to  be  the  ancestress  of  David,  of  Christ,  chose  the  fisher-
man, and  the  tax-gatherer,  and  the  tent  maker,  to  confound  the  wisdom  and  the
greatness  of  the  world  (1  Cor.  i.  18 — 28).

Mark  (2)  Go(.rs  hUssinfj  met  her  in  the  luay  of  a  self-denyiiKj  as  tvell  as  a  self-
appointed  duty.  Her  reward  found  her  where  her  love  led  her.  This  one  of
the  main  lessons  of  the  history,  a  lesson  pointed  out  by  the  pen  of  inspiration
itself  [cf.  ver.  12].

Tyng  on  this  (ver.  2 — 6)  condensed  : —

TJieme. — The  Gleaner.

God  brings  His  children  by  ways  they  know  not.  The  manifestation  of  His
plans  gradual.  No  accident  in  our  lives.  How  ample  was  the  portion  He  had
provided  for  Ruth,  a  kinsman  prepared  to  protect,  to  sustain,  and  to  exalt  her
— a  mighty  man  of  wealth.  But  as  yet  she  had  no  personal  knowledge  of  him
— no  means  of  knowing  the  gracious  purposes  of  God  regarding  her.  So  God
has  prepared  an  all-sulHcient  and  waiting  Saviour  for  the  poor  and  perishing
binner,  a  Saviour  able  to  meet  his  wants,  his  dangers,  his  future  need.  But  the
perishing  one  knows  nothing  of  Him.  The  way  in  which  God  is  pleased  to  lead
us  to  Jesus  illustrated  in  the  method  of  Ruth's  introduction  to  her  rich  kinsman.

I.  The  first  step  is  to  reduce  her  to  the  deepest  necessity.  In  great
poverty,  and  with  no  apparent  means  of  relief,  Ruth  proposes  to  glean.  The  very
necessity  brought  out  a  proof  of  her  excellency.  So  God  brings  the  soul  to  an
experience  of  utter  want.  Looks  round  in  vain  for  relief.  His  conscious  necessity
urges  him  to  come  as  a  beggar.  And  it  is  when  he  can  say,  "  1  am  willing  to  be
the  lowest  of  the  low,  if  the  Saviour  will  receive  me,"  that  the  day  of  his  salvation
draws  nigh.

II.  The  next  step  is  to  take  away  all  feeling  of  rebellious  pride  in  this
state  of  want.  Sintul  pride,  a  most  common  attendant  on  earthly  distress — a  very
different  feeling  from  self-respect.  Ruth  had  great  self-respect,  and  yet  she  was
not  ashamed  to  be  poor.  Willing  to  glean — to  do  anything.  So  the  sinner  must
be  made  to  feel  his  deep  unworthiness,  his  complete  nothin^-ness,  etc.

III.  The  next  step  is  one  of  gracious  providence  to  bring  her,  as  it  were
by  accident,  to  an  unexpected  introduction  to  her  rich  kinsman.  God  had
disposed  and  prepared  her  way  before  her  ;  and  leads  her  to  the  very  place  where
He  designs  to  bless  her.  Her  coming  seemingly  accidental,  but  far  enouc^h  from
accident  in  reality.  So  the  gracious  providence  of  God  is  often  manifested  in
bringing  poor,  perishing  souls  under  the  ministry  of  the  Word  !  This  the  point
to  which  everything  else  is  tending,  and  to  which  everything  else  is  subordinate.

IV.  The  next  step  in  Ruth's  history  is  the  peculiar  crisis  at  which  she
came  into  the  field.     The  time  of  a  gracious  visit  from  the  master,  etc.

Bernard  on  this  (condensed)  : —

And  she  went  and  came  and  gleaned.  She  craved  leave  to  go,  and  when  it  was
granted,  she  accordingly  went.  (1)  Honest  motions  and  intentions  to  well  doing  are
to  he  put  into  practice^  else  they  are  worth  nothing.  Paul  had  a  mind  to  visit  the
l)rethren,  and  he  did  so  ;  the  prodigal  son  had  a  purpose  to  return  home,  etc.  If
motions  be  good,  it  is  good  to  put  them  into  execution,  and  that  speedily  ....
;!nd  not  to  lose  the  fruit  of  good  thoughts.  (2)  Whom  necessity  moveth,  and  con-
fidence in  God  encourageth,  they  fear  no  danger.  Trusting  in  God,  and  being  urged
of  necessity  to  use  honest  means  to  live,  she  feared  no  peril,  though  in  those  days,
every  one  did  what  they  listed  (Judg.  xviii.,  xxi.  25).  When  men  have  faith  in
God,  when  the  duty  of  their  calling  warranteth  them,  they  grow  courageous  and
bold,  and  put  on  a  resolution  without  fear.

And  her  hap  was.  When  things  fall  out  beside  a  man's  purpose,  or  otherwise
than  was  intended,  and  whereof  a  man  is  ignorant  before  the  thing  come  to  pass,
then  it  is  counted  hap,  or  luck,  or  as  the  hcitthen  used  to  speak,  fortune.  (1)  It
is  not  unlawful  to  speak  accordinq  to  men  thus  :  It  happened,  it  chanced^  it  ivas  my

H  97


BOMILETIG  COMMENT  A  BY:  litlTH.


'^liAP.  II.  X


luck ;  so  that  we  understand  thereby  that  which  happened  beyond  our  purpose
and  expectation,  but  yet  guided  by  God's  hand  and  providence  ....  alway^<
excepting  in  clear  cases,  where  the  apparent  hand  of  God  is  seen  ;  for  thus  offended
the  Philistines  (1  Sam.  vi.  6 — 9).  (2)  God  doth  so  govern  mens  actions^  as  tinny  ^
fall  out  beyond  expectation,  and  as  they  were  to  be  wished.  See  it  in  the  success  of
Abraham's  servant  sent  to  fetch  a  wife  for  Isaac  (Gen.  xxiv.) ;  in  Elijah  coming  to
the  poor  widow  of  Sarepta  in  a  most  fit  hour,  etc.  This  should  make  us  to  rely
upon  God's  providence  as  Abraham  did  (Gen.  xxiv.  7).  (3)  God  will  prosperously
direct  the  well-minded  which  use  honest  means  to  relieve  themselves.


"  She  went  out,  not  knowing  whither  she
went;  taking  either  the  right  hand,  or  the
left,  scarcely  being  able  to  assign  a  reason
why  she  preferred  the  one  to  the  other." —
Toller.

*'  The  misery  or  happiness  of  our  life  is
often  derived  from  accidents  that  appear
quite  trivial.  Time  and  chance  happeneth
to  all  men,  and  no  man  can  tell  what  conse-
quences the  slightest  accident  may  leave.
Connections,  happy  or  pernicious,  riches  or
poverty,  life  or  death,  may  be  the  conse-
quences of  a  walk  or  a  visit  intended  for  the
amusement  of  a  single  hour."— Zaw^o/i.

*'  As  the  star  (Matt,  ii.)  guided  the  wise
men  to  Judca,  to  Bethlehem,  to  the  inn,  to
the  stable,  to  the  manger  ;  so  the  rays  and
beams  of  God's  providence  conducted  Ruth,
that,  of  all  grounds  within  the  compass  and
confines,  within  the  bounds  and  borders  of
Bethlehem,  she  lighted  on  the  field  of  Boaz."
— Fuller.

"  We  take  our  steps  without  thought  of
consequences,  and  imagine  that  we  are  fol-
lowing out  our  own  arranged  designs,  wlien
all  the  while  we  are  unconsciously  fulfilling
the  purposes  of  a  sovereign  Providence." —
JBraden.

"  How  comes  the  Holy  Spirit  to  use  this
word — a  profane  term  which  deserves  to  be
banished  out  of  the  mouths  of  all  Christians?
Are  not  all  things  ordered  by  G<  d's  immediate
providence,  without  which  'a  spaivow  light-
eth  not  on  the  ground'  ?  Is  not  that  sentence
most  true,  '  God  stretcheth  from  end  to  end
strongly,  and  disposeth  all  things  sweetly:
strongly,  Lord,  for  Thee  ;  sweetly,  Lord,  for
me'  1  So  St.  Beriiard.  Or  was  the  providence
of  God  solely  confined  to  His  people  of  Israel,
that  so  Ruth,  being  a  stranger  of  Moab,  must
be  left  to  the  adventure  of  hazard  1  How
comes  the  Holy  Spirit  to  use  this  word
*  hap  '  ?  ''—Fuller.

"  Things  are  said  to  *  happen,'  not  in  respect
of  God,  but  in  respect  of  us  ;  because  often-
times they  come  to  pass,  not  only  without
our  purpose  and  forecast,  but  even  against
our  intentions  and  determinations.  It  is
lawful  therefore  in  a  sober  sense  to  use  these
expressions,  '  It  chanced,'  or  '  It  foi'tuncd  '
(Luke  X.  .SI).  Nor  can  any  just  exception  be
taken  against  those  words  in  the  C(j]lect,
'Through  all  changes  and  chances  of  this
mortal  life,'  provided  always  that  in  our
forms  of  speech  we  dieam  not  of  any  heathen
chanre.  It  is  observed  that  rv^'i  '^  '^'*'  used
in  all  the  works  of  Homer ;  but  sure  St.
Austin,   in   the  fiist  of  his   *  Ketractations,'

88


complaineth  that  he  had  too  often  used  the
word  fortvna,  and  therefore,  in  the  pagans'
sense  thereof,  we  ought  to  abstain  from  it." —
Ihid.

"  Scripture  speaks  of  all  things  as  beinG;
what  they  appear  to  be  :  were  it  otherwise,
its  language  would  be  incomprehensible  to
us.  We  would  n(  )t  talk  to  a  savage  of  chcmiea
affinities,  in  endeavouring  to  exp'ain  to  hin
the  uses  of  salt  or  soap  ;  we  would  speak  o
their  apparent  properties,  and  thus  be  en-
abled to  carry  his  mind  with  us.  Were  Go<l
lo  s{)eak  to  us  of  things  as  they  are,  that  is.
as  He  sees  them,  how  utterly  unintelligible
would  such  address  to  us  be  1  Let  us  mark
attentively  the  course  of  events  connected
with,  and  depending  on,  this  chance  event  —
the  birth  of  Obed,  and  through  him  of  David
— the  promises  made  to  the  man  after  God  s
own  heart  fulfilled  by  the  appearance  in  that
family  of  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  ;  .  .  .  .
and  let  us  cast  from  us  as  un scriptural  and
absurd  the  theology  which  would  teach  us
that  great  events  are  indeed  ordered  by  God,
but  that  smaller  matters  are  beneath  His
notice,  and  unworthy  of  it.  While  the  g7*eat-
est  events  are  made  to  spring  from  minute
causes,  the  Lord  of  the  universe  must  be
rec(jgnised  alike  in  the  smallest  as  in  the
vastest  of  His  works,  whether  of  providence
or  of  creation.  '  The  very  hairs  of  your  head
are  all  numbered.'" — Mncartneij.

"The  story  describes  it  as  a  fortunate
incident,  a  curious  coincidence  ;  that  is,  it
speaks  in  a  natural  human  manner  about  it,
because,  when  unable  to  trace  the  immediate?
action  of  a  Divine  hand,  we  are  inclined  to
speak  of  chance  rather  than  law,  and  ot
fortune  rather  than  God.  Hut  we  believe
that  it  was  by  a  supernatural  guidance  she
was  led  there  that  day.  .  .  .  It  was  '  her  hap,
but  it  was  God's  will." — Braden.

*'  Things  do  not  liappen — casualty,  accident
chance,  are  mere  words  used  to  conceal  oi.
ignorance.     Look  deep  enough,  and  you  wi
find    law,    order,   and  purpose   in    the   mos
chaotic  circumstances  ;  listen  attentively,  an'i
you  will  hear  the  sound  of  a  Divine  harmony
beneath  the  discordant  and  confusing  noises
of  our  present  existence."  —  Thomas  Jones.

**  People  say,  *  How  fortunate  it  is  that
things  have  turned  out  just  as  they  have —
that  I  was  prepared  for  this  1 '  As  if  God  did
not  arrange  the  whole  !  One  might  as  well
say,  '  How  fortunate  it  is  that  I  have  a  neck
beneath  my  head,  and  shoulders  under  my
neck  !  "  " — Beech er.

*•  JJouht  Providence — and  what  the  better


CfiAK  II.  4—7.       TiOUTlETtC  COMMEKTArxY:  RUTH.


are  you  ?  You  have  the  liability  to  accident,
and  nothing  to  control  it,  nothing  to  throw
light  upon  it,  nor  to  which  you  yourself  may
fly.  You  are  the  creature  of  chance,  driven
to  and  fro  as  a  fallen  leaf,  and  when  you  cry,
there  is  none  gri^ater  than  you  to  help  you." —
Wardhnv  NcAll.

"  This  circunisianre  was  with  Ruth  merely
accidental,  and  not  the  result  of  choice  and
contrivance  ;  but  it  was  the  effect  of  the
Lord's  secret  direction,  in  whose  providence
great  events  depend  upon  apparently  trivial
incidents." — Scott.

"  Accidit  acL'idens  vel  eventus.  By  mere
chance  in  respect  of  Rath,  who,  being  a
stranger,  knew  not  whose  field  it  was ;  but
by  a  sweet  providence  of  God,  who  led  her
hither  by  the  hand,  as  it  were,  for  her  present
encouragement  and  future  advancement." —
Trap}).

*'  Little  do  we  know,  when  we  go  forth  in
the  morning,  what  God  means  to  do  with  us
ere  night.  There  is  a  providence  that  attends
on  us  in  all  our  ways,  and  guides  us  insen-
sibly to  His  own  ends  ;  that  Divine  hand
leads  Ruth  blindfold  to  the  field  of  Boaz." —
Bishop  Hall.

"  Blindfolded  and  alone  I  stand.
With  unknown  thresholds  on  each  hand ;


The  darkness  deepens  as  I  grope,

Afraid  to  fear,  afraid  to  hope  :

Yet  this  one  thing  I  learn  to  know

Each  day  more  surely  as  I  go,

That  doors  are  open'd.  ways  are  made,

Burdens  are  lifted,  or  are  laid,

By  some  great  law  unseen  and  still,

Unfathom'd  purpo-^e  to  fulfil

Not  as  1  will." — Helen  Hunt.

"  I  do  not  deny  that  these  tilings  happened
in  the  natural  order.  I  say  I  am  grateful  for
what  happened  ;  and  look  back  at  the  past
not  without  awe.  In  gi'eat  grief  and  danger,
may  be,  I  have  had  timely  rescue.  Under
great  suffering  I  have  met  with  supreme
consolation.  When  the  trial  has  seemed
almost  too  hard  for  me,  it  has  ended,  and  our
darkness  has  been  lightened.  Ut  vivo  et
valeo — si  valeo.  I  know  by  whose  permission
this  is,  and  would  you  forbid  me  to  be
thankful  ?  To  be  thankful  for  my  life  ;  to  be
thankful  for  my  children  ;  to  be  thankful  for
the  daily  bread  which  has  been  granted  to
me,  and  the  temptation  from  which  I  have
been  rescued  ?  As  I  think  of  the  past  and
its  bitter  trials,  I  bow  my  head  in  thanks  and
awe.  I  wanted  succour,  and  I  found  it.  I
fell  on  evil  times,  and  good  friends  pitied  and
helped  me." — Tlmcheray,


VERSES   4—7.

Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes. — Ver.  4.  And  behold  Boaz  came.     Not  only  to  see

the  progress  of  the  work,  but  also  to  take  part  in  the  entertaitmient  provided  for  his  labourers
(  Wright),  'ihe  Lord  [Jehovah'}  be  with  you.  The  first  time  this  emphatic  expression  occurs  in
Scripture  (Scott).  Cf.  Jutlges  vi.  12.  The  same  salutation  as  that  addressed  by  the  angel  to
Gidron  {Speaker's  Com.).  The  salutation  one  almost  universally  hears  between  the  peasants
in  the  fields  are  identical  with  those  used  by  Boaz  and  his  reapers  {Dr.  Porter).  The
Tau/uni  is,  "  May  the  word  of  the  Lord  be  your  help."

Ver.  5.  Then  said  Boaz  [And  Boaz  said}  unto  his  servant  that  was  set  over  the  reapers
aypoxo/iog:  the  land  steward  {Jo.<iephvs).  "ir:  is  not  only  used  in  its  primary  significance  as  a
bo3%  but  also  in  its  more  general  meaning  as  a  servant  [Wright).  Whose  damsel  is  this  ?  t'ivoq
r)  vtai'ig  civrr)  (LXX.).  Cujus  est  haec  puella  (  \'vlgate).  What  nation  is  this  girl  1  (Targum.)
What  is  the  news  of  this  girl  ?  {Sgr.)  What  is  the  state  of  this  maiden  'I  (Arab.)  It  seems
that  Boaz  found  her  resting  in  the  tent  where  the  reapers  took  their  meals  (cf.  ver.  7 — 14).

Ver.  6.  It  is  the  Moabitish  maiden.  Or  she  is  a  Moabitish  maiden,  who  came  back  with
Naomi,  etc.  {Lange).  Thus  taken,  the  answer  does  not  assume  that  Boaz  is  ac([uainted  with
the  return  of  Naomi.  The  E.V.  may,  however,  be  justified  by  taking  nDirn  as  a  participle
(cf.  6res.  iii.  2,  a)  (ihid.)  [cf.  on  i.  22].  Boaz  had  heard  of  her,  and  had  been  much  interested
in  her  history  (ver.  11),  but  he  had  not  seen  her  before,  so  that  this  was  their  first  meeting
{Steele  and  Tcrrg.)

Ver.  7.  And  she  said.  And  she  has  said  (asked).  Pray  I  will  glean  [i.e..,  pi'ay  allow  her
to  glean]  (Ac iZ).  And  gather  among  the  sheaves  [Greek,  handfuls].  The  IsiaeliteB  appear
generally  to  have  made  up  their  corn  into  sheaves  [Kitto),  cf.  Gen.  xxxviii.  7;  Lev.  xxiii.
10 — 15;  Job  xxiv.  10,  etc.  In  the  most  ancient  times,  however,  the  corn  was  plucked  up  by
the  roots,  and  in  Egypt  at  this  day,  barley  and  dourra  are  so  gathered.  Wheat  as  well  as
barley  does  not  grow  half  so  high  as  in  England  (Bussell).  So  she  came,  and  hath  continued.
And  has  come  and  stays  There)  from  morning  till  now  (Keil).  And  she  has  gleaned  from
morning  even  to  resting  (Sgr.).  The  LXX.  renders  it  fi-eely  :  '*  And  she  came  and  stood  from
morning  till  evening,  and  rested  not  even  a  little  in  the  field."  That  she  tarried  a  little  in
the  house.  Thus  her  sitting  in  the  house  is  but  for  a  little  (Lange);  «.e.,she  has  been  sitting
in  the  house  as  you  see  her  now,  only  for  a  short  time  {Wright).  Boaz,  it  would  seem,  had
remarked  Ruth  sitting  in  the  cottage  or  tent  in  which  the  reapers  were  accustomed  to  rest
themselves  and  to  take  their  meals  {ibid.).  Wordswortii  thinks  it  hardly  probable,  that  she
would  have  entered  a  tent  of  the  reapers,  and  tianslates  rather  as  to  her  stay  in  the  house,
that  is  little  ;  i.e.,  she  spares  herself  no  time  to  go  home  for  rest  and  refieshinent.     iier

99


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.  chap.  n.  4.


sitting  in  the  house  that  is  little  (Kcil).  Evident  from  this  answer,  (1)  that  Boaz  did  not
pi'ohibit  any  po;)r  peibon  from  glcauinu;  in  the  fields  ;  (2)  that  Ruth  asked  permission  of  the
overseer,  and  a\ailed  herself  of  that  permission,  with  untiring  zeal  from  the  first  thing  in  the
morning  ;  (H)  that  her  history  was  well  known  to  the  overseer,  and  also  to  Boaz,  although
Boaz  sees  her  now  for  the  first  time  (ibid. ).

VERSE  4.
Theme. — The  Right  Relationship  between  Masters  and  Servants.

"  It  is  a  kind  of  good  deed  to  say  well  ;
And  yet  words  are  not  deeds." — Shakesj^eare,

"  Large-hearted  souls  that  turn  with  love
To  ail  beneath  and  One  above  ;
To  heaven  they  constant  bow  the  knee,
And  prove  them  God's  nobility." — B.

^   And   behold  Boaz  came  from  Bethlehem.^  and  said  nnto    the  reapers^   The  Lord

[Jehovah]  be  with  you,  etc.

Now  that  Ruth  is  in  the  field,  the  plans  of  Divine  Providence  are  not  completed
until  Boaz  has  been  led  there.  Note,  (a)  Providence  is  the  execution  of  the
Divine  decree,  ahcays  infallible  and  well-timed  (^Macgowan).  How  opportunely  it
brought  Pharaoh's  daughter  to  the  infant  Moses  ;  Ahasuerus  to  have  that  part  of
his  chronicles  read  which  concerned  Mordecai  (Esther  vi.  1,  2);  Pharaoh  to  dream
when  Joseph  is  to  be  delivered  from  prison.  A  similar  guidance  to  be  recognized
in  connexion  with  the  text.  [See  on  ver.  3.]  Note,  (b)  God's  thoughts  are  above
ours,  and  He  so  orders  our  actions  as  we,  if  we  had  known,  should  have  wished
(^BisJwp  Hall).  Looking  back,  how  often  do  we  see  that  He  has  not  only  given
us  the  thing  that  is  best  for  for  us,  but  brought  about  events  even  as  we  our-
selves could  have  desired.

Remark,  I.  On  the  character  of  a  righteous  man  as  illustrated  here.  Boaz
seen  in  the  text  as  (1)  diligent  in  business,  {2)  fervent  in  spirit.  Rich  but  religious,
a  rare  bird  (Trapp).

Mark  his  industry.  Did  not  sit  at  home,  and  leave  his  affairs  to  his  servants.
There  is  an  overseer  [a  land  steward — Josephus']  but  everything  is  not  left  to  him.
Not  one  of  those  who  are  ashamed  to  be  seen  in  the  fields  with  his  labourers.
No  !  he  goes  to  inspect,  to  oversee,  to  direct,  to  look  well  after  his  business
affairs.  An  example  (a)  to  masters.  *'  No  eye  like  the  master's."  If  a  man  would
thrive,  let  him  do  his  business  himself  (Toller).  Careful  personal  superintendence
not  only  necessary,  but  beneficial — work  performed  more  rapidly — vast  waste
prevented,  etc.  [Braden).  (b)  To  ministers,  Oportet  Episcopum  conscionantem
mori  (Bishop  Jewell).

Again  mark  his  benevolence  and  kindness  to  a  stranger  (ver.  8 — 16),  as  well  aa
the  courtesy  and  piety  expressed  here.  The  salutations  are  earnest  prayers.  Like
every  good  man,  he  carries  a  devout  atmosphere  about  with  him  wherever
he  goes,  into  the  cornheld  as  well  as  into  the  closet.  Note,  (a)  Real  goodness
will  display  itself  in  every  relationship  of  life.  Naaman,  although  a  heathen,
ap})ears  to  have  showed  kindness  to  his  servant  (2  Kings  v.  1 — 3).  Our  faith
barren,  unless  it  make  itself  seen  in  the  character  and  the  life.  If  a  man  cannot
be  a  Christian  in  the  place  where  he  is,  he  cannot  be  a  Christian  anywhere
(Bcecher).  Note,  (b)  Good  men  ivill  pray  for  a  blessing  upon  those  around  them,
especially  those  of  iheir  own  hoiiscJiold.  Tlie  Lord  be  with  you  I  This  address,
with  the  response,  is  one  of  the  earliest  examples  of  family  prayer  (Wordsworth).

Remark,  II.  On  the  right  relationship  between  master  and  servants,  as
illustrated  here.  They  must  be  very  depraved  men  who  are  not  faithful  servants
and  sincere  friends  to  such  masters  as  Boaz.  "  Even  publicans,"  says  our  Lord,
*'  love  those  who  love  them  "  (Lawson).  Note.  Good  masters  generally  make  good
servants.  Treat  men  with  kindness  and  courtesy,  and  they  will  return  it,  as  here.
The  just  demeanour  of  their  master,  refined  by  humility,  controlled  i\iQ%Q  (Lange),

100


CHAP.  IT.  4.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  BUTB.


Observe,  (1)  The  mutual  ra^pect  and  good-unll  between  master  and  servant  ex-
pressed in  these  salutations.  Tiie  picture  a  very  beautiful  one,  the  master  pray-
ing a  blessing  upon  his  servants,  the  servants  in  return  praying  a  blessing  upon
their  master.  Can  a  pious  mind  read  these  godly  salutations  without  wishing  for
a  return  of  those  simple,  primitive  times  ?  (Adam  Clarice.)  Note,  (a)  Christians
are  to  bless,  and  curse  not.  Religion  requires  rather  than  prohibits  these  salutations
[cf.  Matt.  X.  12  ;  John  xx.  26 ;  Luke  i.  28  ;  Ps.  cxxix.  7,  8,  etc.],  so  that  our
greeting  be  sincere.  It  is  to  be  neither  that  of  an  Absalom  (2  Sam.  xx.  10)  nor  a
Judas,  but  free  from  guile,  and  without  hypocrisy.  (6)  A  sign  of  an  ungenerous
nature  to  be  outvied  with  courtesy  (Fuller).  Charity  hopeth  all  things,  and  if  they
[whom  we  salute]  be  not  sons  of  peace,  our  peace  returneth  to  us  (Trapp).  Those
passages,  as  2  Kings  iv.  29,  and  Luke  x.  4,  which  the  Anabaptists  formerly  quoted
against  Christians  saluting  each  other,  to  be  explained  by  the  haste  of  the  messen-
ger, etc.  (Bernard).

Observe,  (2)  The  harmony  between  employer  and  employed.  The  secret  of  it  to
be  found  in  the  joint  dependence  upon  the  Divine  providence  expressed.  *'  The
Lord,"  etc.  Living  faith  in  God  is  the  best  bond  between  master  and  workman  ;
preventing  a  wrongful  use  of  power  on  the  one  side,  and  presumptous  insubordi-
nation on  the  other  (Lange).  Note.  Only  a  true  Christian  can  make  either  the
highest  type  of  master  or  of  man.  Until  men  are  inspired  by  God's  love  .  .  .  until
they  have  confidence  in  each  other  as  religious  men,  there  will  be  neither  mutual
sincere  courtesies,  nor  any  profound  trust  in  each  other's  dealings  (Braden).

This  happy  relationship  expressed  in  the  text  useful,  if  only  by  luay  of  con-
trast. Class  alienation  our  country's  greatest  curse  (Brade)i)  ;  little  of  genial
unity  between  employers  and  employed ;  the  breach  between  capital  and  labour
seriously  widening  (ibid.).  Where  is  the  cure  ?  Laws,  however  wisely  framed,
can  never  altogether  amend  relationships  which  depend  upon  mutual  esteem  and
good-will.  The  cure  must  go  deeper  than  the  realm  of  law.  Is  to  be  found  alone
where  Christianity  promises  it,  in  the  regeneration  of  human  nature  itself.

Impeovement. — (1)  Let  us  learn  to  use  (a)  courteous  salutations  as  expressions
of  a  sincere  good-will  (M.  Henry),  (b)  Pious  ejaculations,  lifting  up  our  hearts  to
God  for  His  favour  (ibid.)  upon  ourselves,  our  friends,  households,  servants,  etc.

(2)  See  how  grace  humbles  the  heart,  teaches  men  to  be  sociable — is  the  very
cement  of  society.  It  makes  mighty  men  of  wealth  not  above  their  fellows
(Maccjowan).  Among  the  Moslems,  the  salutation  ....  a  sign  of  their  brother-
hood in  religion,  and  their  actual  equality  before  God  (Kitto).  We  may  go  to  the
East  to  learn  how  the  poor  may  be  treated  with  courtesy,  and  be  continually
reminded,  in  every  passing  form  of  speech,  of  their  natural  and  religious  brother-
hood {ibid.).

"  It  appears  safe  to  conclude  that  the  inn  of  fields  ;  in  fact,  the  very  ground  on  which  the

Joseph  and  Mary  was  the  inn  of  Jeremiah ;  inn  of  Jesus  stood,  and  on  which  the  church

and  if  it  was  the  inn  of  Jeremiah,  it  was  also  and  convent  of  the  Grotto  stand,

beyond  doubt  the  house  of   Chimhara,  and  "  Here,  then,  where   by  all   analogies   we

consequently  it  was   presumably  the  house  should  seek  it,  the  Bible  tells  us  that  the  house

which   had   once   been   that   of   David    and  of  Boaz  stood  on  the  green  slopes  some  paces

Ruth.  below  the  town,  between  the  gates  and  the

"  Every  hint  afforded  by  the  Bible  narrative  cornfields.     Ruth,  living  in   the   town  with

as  to  local  fact  and  local   colour  helps   to  Naomi,  had  to  go  down  into  these  fields  as

prove   that  the    birth[)lace    of    David,   and  the  gleaners  go  down  now  (iii.  3),  the  descent

that  the  khan,  or  residence  of  Jesse,  in  which  from  the  hill  on  which  the  city  is  built  to

the  two  men  were  born,  stood  here  in  Beth-  the  fields  being  sharp." — Uepn'orth  Bixon*8

lehera,  on  the  very  ridge  now  crowned  by  the  "  Boh/  Landy

Church  of  the  Holy  Nativity.  ...   As  the  "  So  a  king,   in  Homer,  is  represented  as

shape    of    the    ri<lge,    and    its    relation    to  among  his  reapers,  with  his   sceptre  in  his

Jerusalem  imply,  the  spot  on  which  the  house  hand,   and  cheerful.     Tliny   relates   it,  as  a

of  hospitality  would  stand  must  have  1  een  a  saying  of  the  ancients,  that  the   eye  of  the

little   below   the   town,   at   the   junction    of  ma-ter  is  the  most  fruitful  thing  in  "the  field  ;

roads  coming  up  the  gi'eat  valleys  .  .  .  on  a  and  Aristotle  reports,  that  a   Persian  lieing

spot  lying   below  the  gates  and   above  the  asked  what  fattened  a  horse  mo'jt  re[)lied,  The

101


HOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:   RUTH.


CTIAP.  IT.  4.


eye  of  the  master  ;  and  an  African  being
asked  what  was  the  best  dung  for  land,
answered,  The  steps  of  the  master." — GUI.

"  Say  to  a  Turk  according  to  custom, '  May
your  morning  be  propitious  1 '  he  replies,
'  May  jou  be  the  pledge  of  God  ! '  Ask  a
Turk,  '  Is  your  hea'th  good  ? '  he  answers,
*  Glory  be  to  God  ! '  Salute  him,  as  you
pass  him  rapidly  in  travelling,  he  exclaims,
'  To  God  I  commend  you  I '  and  is  answered,
'  May  God  be  with  you  ! ' " — Hartley.

"  The  pious,  affectionate  language  inter-
changed between  him  and  his  reapers,  and
which  appears  to  have  been  familiar  to  them,
shows  that  there  were  many  godly  persons  in
Israel,  notwithstanding  national  defections  ;
and  it  beautifully  illustrates  the  genuine
effect  of  true  religion  in  producing  affability
in  superiors,  and  respect  and  affection  in
inferiors,  and  mutual  unaffected  goodwill  in
all.  It  is  lamentably  true  that  such  language
as  this  is  seldom  heard  in  our  fields,  while
the  bounty  of  Paradise  is  gathered  in,  but
frequently  the  reverse ;  yea,  whatever  can
inflame  the  passions  and  corrupt  the  morals ;
so  that  a  stranger,  who  should  be  occasionally
present,  would  be  apt  to  form  a  very  different
opinion  of  the  religion  of  England,  than  Ruth
did  of  that  of  Israel, from  the  conversation  and
conduct  of  Boaz  and  his  reapers." — Scott.

"  '  If  a  civil  word  or  two  will  make  a  man
happy,'  said  a  French  king,  '  he  must  be
wretched  indeed  who  will  not  give  them  to
him.'  " — Dictiunary  of  lllu.strations.

"  Observe,  courteous  and  loving  salutations
beseem  Christians.  Indeed,  our  Saviour  (Matt.
X.)  forbade  His  disciples  to  salute  any  in  the
way  ;  but  His  meaiiing  was  that  they  should
not  lag  or  delay,  whereby  to  be  hindered  from
the  service  wherein  they  were  employed.
And  St.  John,  in  his  second  Epistle,  saith,
that  to  some  we  must  not  say  '  God  speed,'
lest  we  be  made  '  partakers  of  their  evil  deeds; '
but  that  is  meant  of  notorious  sinners,  which
have  discovered  their  impious  intents.  It  is
commonly  said  that  the  smallpox  is  not  in-
fectious until  it  be  broken  out,  so  that  before
the  time  one  may  safely  converse,  eat,  drink,
lie  with  them  ;  but  after  the  pox  is  broken
out  it  is  very  dangerous  ;  so  we  may  safely
salute  and  exchange  discourse  with  the  most
wicked  sinners,  whiles  yet  they  smother  and
conceal  their  bad  designs;  but  when  once  they
declare  and  express  them,  then  it  is  dangerous
to  have  any  further  familiarity  with  them."
—Ihiller.

"  Piety  not  only  srands  with  humanity  and
civil  courtesy,  but  also  exacteth  and  requireth
it  (Matt.  xii. ;  1  Pet.  iii.  8  ;  Luke  x.  5).  God
hath  His  ethics,  and  commandeth  good  man-
ners as  well  as  good  conscience.  Affability
and  courtesy  is  the  way  to  win  others  ;  men's
minds  are  taken  with  it,  as  passengers'
eyes  are  with  fair  flowers  in  the  springtide;
whereas  a  harsh,  sullen,  sour,  churlish  con-
versation is  very  distasteful  to  all,  galleth
the  best  (witness  David,  1  Sam,  xxv.),  and
openeth  bad  men's  mouths  to  speak  evil  of
religion. " — Tra;pp,

102


"  This  was  a  real  prayer  from  the  mouth  of
Boaz.  It  is  too  common  with  men  to  say
*  God  be  with  you,'  when  God  is  not  in  their
thoughts.  The  name  of  God  is  profaned  when
it  is  used  without  consideration.  It  is  re-
ported of  the  great  philosopher  Boyle,  that
he  never  mentioned  the  name  of  God  without
making  a  visible  pause  in  his  discourse.  .  .  .
All  good  things  are  requested  in  this  prayer,
The  Lord  he  with  thee.  God's  presence  and
favour  will  satisfy  our  souls,  will  supply  every
want,  will  turn  sorrow  into  joy,  and  the  sha-
dow of  death  into  the  morning.  But  without
God's  presence  and  blessing,  the  richest  con-
fluence of  sublunary  blessing  will  leave  us
wretched  and  miserable,  poor  and  blind  and
naked. " — Laivson.

"  These  salutations  are  well  paraphrased  by
Dr.  A.  Clarke  : — '  May  God  be  with  you  to
preserve  you  from  accidents,  and  strengthen
you  to  accomplish  your  work,'  '  May  God
bless  thee  with  the  increase  of  the  field,  and
grace  to  use  His  bounty  to  the  glory  of  the
Giver.'  They  impress  us  as  beautiful  indica-
tions of  the  pious  and  simple  courtesy  of  the
ancient  Hebrew  people.  Such  salutations,
both  between  equals  and  superiors  and  infe-
riors, are  still  common  in  the  East,  but  a
Moslem  will  not  thus  knowingly  hail  one  of
another  religion." — Steele  and  Terry.

"  Men  must  strive  to  understand  each  other's
position,  to  look  upon  it  with  broader  sympa-
thies, to  learn  that  the  interest  of  master  and
servants  cannot  be  separated.  For  this  class
alienation  is  our  country's  greatest  curse,  and
must  prove  utterly  disastrous  to  the  prosperity
of  its  commerce  and  the  growth  of  its  social
well-being." — Bruden.

"  Where  a  pious  and  brave  spirit  like  that
of  Boaz  pervades  the  community,  social  ques-
tions and  crises  do  not  arise  ;  for  external
laws  can  never  restrain  the  inward  cravings
of  the  natural  man.  But  where  the  landed
proprietor,  in  his  relations  to  his  people,  is
governed  by  other  principles  than  those  of
self-interest,  and  cares  also  for  their  moral
and  religious  development ;  where,  further,
the  labourer  understands  that  an  increase  in
wages  is  not  necessarily  an  increase  of  peace
and  haj)piness  ;  where,  in  a  word,  the  con-
sciousness of  an  omnipresent  God  regulates
the  uprightness  and  care  of  the  one,  and  the
honesty  and  devotion  of  the  other  ;  there,  no
artificial  solutions  of  conflicts  between  capital
and  labour  will  be  required.  Boaz  lives  in
God,  and  therefore  knows  what  duties  of  faith
and  love  are  obligatory  upon  him." — Lange.

"I  think  it  looks  as  if  Boaz  and  his  ser
\  ants  were  really  on  friendly  terms,  and  had
one  another's  interests  at  heart  ;  he  was
pleased  to  see  them  cheerful  and  happy,  and
they  to  see  him  prosperous ;  he  piously
wished  a  blessing  upon  their  labours,  and  they
devoutly  returned  a  benediction  upon  his
subsiance." — Fuller.

"  The  master  of  the  great  household  of  the
world  gives  us  an  example  of  the  case,  whose
eye  is  in  every  corner  of  his  large  j)osstssii)n.
IS'ot  civility  only,  but  religion,  binds  us  to


CJiAP.  II.  5— 7.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;  liUTH.


good    husbaiulry.       We    are    all   sfe wards,  with  you,'  as  one  that  knew  if  he  were  with

and  what  account  can  we  give  to  our  Master,  them,  and  not  the  Lord,  his  presence  could

if  we  never  look  after  our  estate?     I  doubt  avail  nothing.    All  the  business  of  the  family

whether  Boaz  had  been  so  rich  if  he  had  not  speeds  the  better  for  the  master's  benediction,

bcensofi'ugal,  yet  was  he  not  more  thrifty  than  Tliose  affairs  are  likely  to  succeed,  that  tako

religious.     He  comes  not  to  his  reapcis  but  their  beginning  at  God,*' — Buhop  Hall,
with  a  blessing  in  his  mouth,  '  The  Lord  be


VERSES  5—7.
TJieme, — Attention  to  the  Stranger  at  the  Gat£«

**  The  f  I'agrant  sheaves  of  the  wheat
Made  the  air  above  them  sweet ;
Sweeter  and  more  divine
i  Was  the  scent  of  the  scattered  grain.

That  the  reaper's  hand  let  fall
To  be  gathered  again
By  the  hand  of  the  gleaner:
Sweetest,  divinest  of  all.
Was  the  humble  deed  of  thine,
And  the  meekness  of  thy  demeanour.** — Longfellow,

Then  said  Boaz  .   .   .  Wliose  damsel  is  this?

And  the  servant  that  was  set  over  the  reapers  answered,  etc

And  she  said,  I  pray  you  [thee]  let  me  glean,  etc,

A  finer  picture  of  rural  harvest-scenes  Is  nowhere  extant.  We  hear,  as  it  were,
the  rustling  of  the  reapers'  sickles  \^Lamje),  The  interest,  however,  here,  as  always,
centres  in  the  human  elements  of  the  picture — most  of  all,  in  Ruth  pursuing  her
humble  and  lonely  task,  a  stranger  ia  a  strange  land.  Possibly  the  poet's  words
are  only  too  true,  where  he  speaks  of

*•  The  sad  heart  of  Ruth,  when  sick  for  home.
She  stood  in  tears  amid  the  alien  corn. — Keatt

Rural  life  not  that  paradisiacal  thing  Virgil  contrasts  so  enthusiastically  with  the
luxuriant  life  of  Rome  {Lange).  Even  in  Israel  a  gleaner,  conspicuous  by  her
foreign  garb,  may  have  been  in  danger  of  insult  (ver.  9).  Only  when  a  pious  and
Godfearing  spirit  rules  in  the  heart  of  proprietor  and  dependants,  is  it  good  to
live  amid  the  quiet  scenes  and  rewardful  toil  of  the  country  (Lange).  Only  then
*'  the  chaste  dwelling  preserves  virtue  [casta  pudicitiam  servat  domus]  (ibid.).
The  text  gives  a  fine  example  of  the  best  aspects  of  rural  life,  where  religion  comes
in  to  soften  and  refine  its  usual  asperities.

Observe,  I.  The  prompt  attention  as  well  as  careful  although  courteous
bearing  towards  a  stranger  on  the  part  of  the  master.  (1)  Prompt  attmtion.
The  Hebrew  law  held  a  master,  in  some  measure,  accountable  for  the  stranger  at
his  gate  [cf  Exod.  xx.lO].  Nehemiah  recognized  this  responsibility  (Neh.  xiii.  16 —
22).  So  does  Boaz  in  the  text.  He  does  not  wait  for  information,  but  asks  at  once,
W^hose  damsel  is  this  ?  An  example  («)  to  masters  and  heads  of  households,  which
lollowed,  will  as>uredly  bring  its  own  reward,  as  here.  '*  Be  not  forgetful,"  says
the  Apostle.  *'  to  entertain  strangers ;  for  thereby  some  have  entertained  angels
unawares"  (Heb.  xiii.  2).  (/;)  To  ministers.  One  of  the  complaints  of  modern
worshippers  is,  that  they  come  and  go  from  the  sanctuary  unheeded ;  no  one
making  inquiries  concerning  them  or  their  welfare  ;  no  one  doing  for  years  what
this  fine  old  Hebrew  gentleman  did  at  once,  and  in  a  spirit  which  lifted  it  above
all  possibility  of  being  misunderstood.  Even  Eli,  although  mistaken,  was  not
indifferent  to  the  stranger  in  the  sanctuary  (1  Sam.  i.  1 — 18).  Note.  "  Xo  man
carelh  for  my  soul,''  a  terrible  indilement,  if  true,  ayainst  any  Christian  church  or
community,

103


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY;  BUTIL  chap.  ii.  5.


(2)  Carefuhiess.  Boaz,  in  doing  good,  evidently  would  know  the  persons  and
recipients  ;  who  they  are,  whence  they  came,  whether  they  were  worthy  or  not.
A  modern  tendency  to  be  lax  on  all  these,  and  kindred  points,  rebuked  here.
True  that  G-od  sends  His  rain  upon  the  just  and  the  unjust,  that  the  wicked
are  not  to  be  left  to  perish  in  times  of  want  ;  bat  also  true,  that  the  Church
has  a  special  duty  towards  its  own  [cf.  Gal.  vi.  10 ;  Luke  xxiv.  47,  etc.].
Charity  is  to  begin  at  home,  as  well  as  to  begin  with  the  worthy,  though  it  is
not  to  remain  there.  Note.  Strict  inquiry  sJiould  ha  made  respecting  those  damsels
ivho  glean  in  the  Jleld  of  gospel  ordinances.  Whose  are  they,  OocVs  or  Satan's?
(Macgowan.)

Observe,  II.  The  ready  and  unhesitating  answer  on  the  part  of  the  steward.

Mark,  (1)  JIc  answers  luithout  hesitation;  can  give  a  ready  account  of  those
whom  he  has  suffered  to  glean  in  his  master's  fields.  Evidently  he  has  performed
his  duty  as  overseer  diligently  and  faithfully,  as  one  who  may  at  any  moment
be  called  to  an  account  by  the  master.  An  example  (a)  to  servants,  (b)  to  church
officers,  elders,  deacons,  ministers,  etc.  Note.  Church  stewards  ought  to  be  capable
of  giving  an  account  of  those  they  suffer  to  partake  of  her  bounty  {Macgoiuan).

(2)  He  makes  no  attempt  at  concealment.  Had  done  nothing  but  what  he
knew  the  master  would  approve.  His  kindness  to  the  damsel  had  not  made
him  unfaithful  to  his  master  ;  nor  did  his  faithfulness  to  his  master  make  him
surly  to  the  poor  (Macartney).

(3)  He  is  just  and  accurate  in  the  account  he  gives.  He  neither  misrepresents
nor  overstates, — a  model  steward.  "  Faithful  in  that  which  is  least,"  in  that
which  simply  concerns  a  poor  gleaner,  he  is  likely  to  be  '*  faithful  also  in  much."
A  contrast  to  the  unjust  steward  mentioned  by  our  Lord  (Luke  xvi.).

(4)  He  displays  a  kindly  and  considerate  spirit.  Little  did  he  think  that  this
damsel  was  his  intended  mistress  (Macgowan).  But,  like  master,  like  servant.
He  had  caught  some  touch  of  the  generous  and  considerate  spirit  which  belonged
to  Boaz  ;  he  knew  his  master's  benignity,  and  imitated  it.  Honourable  of  him,
that  he  at  once  recommends  Ruth  by  praieing  her  diligence  (Lange).  Note.  The
well-disposed  will  praise  virtue  wherever  they  see  it.

Observe,  III.  That  which  made  this  attention  and  kindness  on  the  part  of
master  and  servant  of  value  in  the  case  of  Ptuth.  (1)  She  was  a  stranger,  one
of  an  alien  race,  a  Moabitish  damsel.  Kindness,  sympathy,  slight  attentions  of
especial  value  to  such.  [Example,  Mungo  Park  and  the  African  women.]  This
gave  her,  too,  a  special  right  to  gather  the  gleanings  of  the  harvest  (Lev.  xix.  9,  10).
Even  the  law  pointed  out  the  stranger  as  one  not  to  be  forgotten  and  overlooked
by  the  benevolent — how  much  more  then  does  the  gospel  !  Ruth^s  position
illustrates  that  of  many  to-day,  just  coming  into  similar  relationships  with  the
Church  of  God.  Note.  All  are  Moahites  by  birth,  who  glean  in  the  gospel  fields
(Macgoivan).

(2)  She  was  a  proselyte — had  left  all  for  Naomi  and  Naomi's  God.  This
evidently  procured  her  favour  in  Israel,  and  ought  to  have  done  so.  Note.
Such  deserve  the  deepest  symjjaihy  and  the  warmest  welcome  from  the  Church  of
Christ.  Only  those  who  have  passed  through  the  same,  or  a  kindred  ordeal,  can
understand  what  it  means,  this  tearing  oneself  away  from  old  associations  and
affections,  for  the  sake  of  a  new  principle,  possibly  to  be  met  with  coldness
and  even  distrust  and  prejudice.

(8)  She  was  humble  and  modest  in  her  behaviour.  Not  merely  the  natural
charm  and  grace  of  her  presence,  not  merely  her  modest  and  reserved  bearing,
not  merely  the  fact  that  she  was  a  foreigner,  makes  her  conspicuous  ;  the
narrative  reveals  other  and  more  sterling  qualities  :  (a)  gratitude  (ver.  10),  (b)
humility.  Did  not  glean  until  she  had  asked  leave  :  "  I  pray  you  let  me,"  etc.
(ver.  7).  Little  did  she  think  that  this  rich  field  was  to  become  her  own.
Note.  In  all  this  she  is  a  type  of  the  true  convert.  What  mean  thoughts  have
Buch  of  themselves  when  they  come  first  to  glean  in  the  gospel  fields  !  [Macgowan.^

104


CHAP.  II.  6.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JWTH.


They  cannot  think  thoy  have  a  right  to  the  handfuls,  much  le.>s  to  the  sheaves,
less  still  that  the  field  is  tlieir  own  ;  and  least  of  all,  that  the  unsearchable
riches  of  the  owner  arc  theirs  (ibid.).

(4)  She  was  dilujent  and  unsparing  of  herself .  Gleaniiifr  not  a  dignified  em-
ployment, but  she  evidently  did  it  thoroughly  and  heartily.  Note,  (a)  There
should  he  fideliti/,  heartiness,  thorouf/hness,  si'iceritij,  honest  truthfulness^  in  the
minutest  things  (Beecher).     [Example,  Phidias;  see  extracts.]

Mark  her  constancy,  too,  in  industry.  Not  merely  diligent  at  first,  as  many,
but  all  day  long.  A  type  of  those  who  are  reallij  and  truly  Christ's.  We  are
His  if  we  continue  in  well-doing,  if  we  hold  the  beginning  of  our  confidence  stead-
fast unto  the  end  (Heb.  iii.  14).  Ruth  continued  in  her  labour  "  from  the  morning
till  now,"  till  night,  till  the  end  of  the  harvest  (Fuller).  Oh  that  we  could  imitate
her  constancy  iu  the  working  out  of  our  salvation  !  not  only  to  be  industrious
in  the  morning,  when  we  first  enter  into  Christianity,  but  to  hold  out  and  to
persevere  even  to  the  end  (ibid.).

Again,  observe  on  the  other  hand,  as  taught  here,  that  rest  is  a  necessity  with
the  most  urgent  and  diligent.  Allowed  and  blessed  of  heaven  (Ps.  cxxvii.  2).
True  Christians,  however,  feel  like  Ruth,  that  they  must  be  up  and  doing  ;  "  her
resting  in  the  house  is  but  for  a  little "  [see  Crit.  and  Exeg.  Notes].  They  feel
emphatically  that  to-day  is  for  work;  to-morrow,  the  to-morrow  of  eternity  for  rest.

Braden  on  this  (ver.  5 — 16)  condensed  : —

Theme. — Intkoduction  to  a  Future  Wife.

Divine  Providence  led  Ruth  into  that  particular  harvest-field,  and  under  the
same  mysterious  guidance,  Boaz  directs  his  steps  thither.  Judging  from  the
subsequent  history,  may  we  not  say,  that  God  designed  this  meeting  in  order  that
the  two  might  become  husband  and  wife?  The  truth  of  the  proverb  (not  always
applicable,  however,)  that  marriages  are  made  in  heaven,  illustrated  here.

1.  Notice  here  Boaz's  introduction  to  his  future  wife.  As  he  enters  the  field,
he  notices  a  stranger, — his  curiosity  aroused,  little  dreaming  what  consequences
would  follow.  May  have  been  attracted  by  the  beauty  of  her  face,  by  her
industry  in  the  field,  or  her  Moabitish  dress.  Inquires  "Whose  damsel  is  this  ?"
(ver.  5.)  The  reply  shows  how  well  known,  and  equally  appreciated  is  her  behaviour
to  her  mother-in-law.  Evidently  the  universal  theme  of  conversation.  Good
deeds  done  modestly  need  no  trumpeter,  they  are  speedily  recognised.

(2)  Notice  the  first  conversation  betueeyi  this  future  husband  and  wife.  Ruth,
absorbed  in  her  work,  heard  not  Boaz  speaking  to  her  (ver.  8,  9).  Note  how
sensitive,  thoughtful,  and  delicate  his  offer.  He  makes  provision  that  she  shall
not  only  be  unmolested,  but  refreshed  (ver.  9).  Seems  a  little  thing  to  do,  but
character  is  shown  more  in  small  than  great  deeds.  The  needy  often  deeply
touched  by  trivial  gifts.  Ruth  deeply  moved.  *'  Why  have  I  found  grace  ?  "  etc.
(ver.  10).  Has  no  vanity,  no  pride  ;  she  knows  how  to  receive  a  gift.  Does  not
regard  this  generosity  as  a  right,  nor  accept  it  with  grim  sullenness.  Evidently
Naomi  has  told  the  story  of  her  daughter-in-law's  fidelity,  love,  and  self-sacrifice.
An  Israelite,  like  Boaz,  devotedly  attached  to  Bethlehem,  appreciates  the  intensity
of  affection  which  could  so  unreservedly  forsake  the  home  of  childhood  and  the
associations  of  youth, — a  rare  instance  of  high  virtue  (ver.  12).  Did  not,  how-
ever, let  his  admiration  rest  in  fine  utterances  of  praise,  but  gives  substantial  proof
of  its  sincerity  in  gifts.  His  sympathy  and  benevolence  unlike  that  described
by  James  ii.  15,  IG.  His  kindness  exquisitely  delicate.  He  will  not  offend  her
sense  of  independence,  so  practises  a  little  harmless  deception.  She  shall
gather  much,  and  go  home  fancying  her  abundance  is  the  result  of  her  own
industry.  The  secret  of  judicious  giving  is  to  help  the  poor  in  all  possible  ways,
and  not  destroy  the  proud  and  noble  virtue  of  self-reliance.  Indiscriminate  charity
has  produced  the  pauperism,  and  lazy  beggardom  under  which  society  so  grievously
sufi'ers.

105


nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  RUTH.


CHAP.  II.  7.


(3)  Observe  Jiow  Ruth  won  his  affection.  Not  by  art,  stratagem,  nor,  perhaps,
even  by  her  personal  beauty.  But  by  her  virtues,  by  her  faithful  attachment  to  a
poor,  distressed  mother-in-lavsr,  by  her  steady  industry,  by  her  sweet  humility,
and  above  all,  by  her  love  to  the  God  of  Israel.  In  all  this  Kuth  an  example  to
English  maidens.  Unfortunately,  many  seek  husbands,  if  husbands  do  not  seek
them — attempt  to  catch  them  by  meretricious  guile  and  superficial  qualities.

(4)  Notice  ivhere  Ruth  won  the  affection  of  Boaz.  In  the  harvest-field.  Engaged
in  common  and  humble  tasks.  A  hint  as  to  the  best  place  in  which  to  estimate  a
woman's  virtue :  not  in  the  ball-room  or  the  music-hall,  not  in  the  excitement
of  a  holiday  or  of  the  social  party,  not  on  the  Sunday  and  in  company,  but  in  the
quiet  routine  of  her  ordinary  life.  This  followed,  and  there  would  be  fewer
mistakes  made  in  matrimonial  alliances.  Look  for  a  wife,  not  amongst  those  who
gad  about  in  ostentatious  grandeur,  nor  amongst  those  whose  chief  amusement  is
gossip  and  flirtation  ;  but  seek  one  whose  gentle,  unassuming  manners,  industrious
habits,  and  filial  affection,  will  ensure  a  happy  future,  and  make  a  real  home.
Beware  of  marrying  a  slothful  woman,  or  one  who  speaks  against  her  parents,
or  one  who  does  not  lovingly  perform  all  home  duties.  Essentially  true  that  a
good  daughter  makes  a  good  wife.


"Thus  the  Saviour  comes  to  visit  His  earthly
field,  and  calls  the  servants  to  account  for
their  charg^e.  He  walks  amidst  the  candle-
sticks, and  holds  the  stars  in  His  right  hand.
His  ministers  watch  for  souls  as  they  who
must  give  an  account.  Not  the  poorest
stranger  is  unnoticed,  or  forgotten  by  Him.
It  is  a  blessed  thought.  The  Saviour  sees.
The  poor,  the  lonely,  the  neglected,  in  all
their  needs  and  sorrows,  are  marked  by  His
eye.  The  poor  widow's  two  mites  were  not
forgotten.  The  Syro-Phoenician  was  not  sent
away.  Bartimeus  was  not  despised.  Lazarus
was  not  rejected.  Jesus  may  be  considered
as  asking  His  ministers  continually,  of  one
and  another  in  their  flock,  '  Who  is  that  ? '
And  they  should  be  able  to  reply.  He  will
call  them  at  last  to  an  account  for  all,  and
for  every  soul  entrusted  to  them  they  must
answer." —  Tyng.

"  To  create  and  maintain  a  familiar  and
intimate  acquaintance  with  the  members  of
the  flock  committed  to  him  is  a  most  important
instrument  of  usefulness  to  a  faithful  pastor."
—IhU.

"  The  first  thing  required  in  stewards  is,
*  that  a  man  be  found  faithful '  to  his  em-
ployer; but  it  is  also  a  good  property  in
a  steward  to  be  humane  towards  his  lord's
servants,  and  towards  all  that  have  any  de-
pendence upon  him  for  employment  or  favours.
The  man  that  was  set  over  the  reapers  of
B  )az  had  already  shown  such  favour  to  Ruth
as  it  was  the  part  of  a  steward  to  do,  and  by
his  answer  to  his  master's  question  concern-
ing her,  he  was  a  means  of  procuring  her
such  favour,  as  a  steward  could  not  confer
without  permission.  Words  fitly  spoken  may
do  much  good,  and  indicate  good  sense  and
good  disposition  in  the  speaker." — Larvson.

"Let  masters,  therefore,  in  choosing  the
stewards  to  be  set  above  the  rest,  take  such
as  are  qualified,  like  Jethro's  description  of
inferior  judges  (Exod.  xviii.  21),  'men  of
courage,  fearing  God,  dealing  truly,  haling
covetousness. '    And  however  they  piivilege

106


them  to  be  above  the  rest  of  their  servants,
yet  let  them  make  them  to  know  their  duty
and  their  distance  to  their  masters,  lest  that
come  to  pass  which  Solomon  foretelleth  (Prov.
xxix.  21)  :  '  He  that  bringeth  up  his  servant
delicately  in  his  youth  will  make  him  like
his  son  at  the  last.'  Let  stewards  not  be
like  that  unjust  one  in  the  Gospel,  who  made
his  master's  debtors  write  down  fifty  measures
of  wheat,  and  fourscore  measures  of  oil,  when
both  severally  should  have  been  a  hundred  ;
but  let  them  carefully  discharge  their  con-
science in  that  office  wherein  they  are  placed ;
whilst  inferior  servants,  that  are  under  their
command,  must  neither  grieve  nor  grudge  to
obey  them,  nor  envy  at  their  honour.  But
let  this  comfort  those  underlings,  that  if  they
be  wronged  by  these  stewards,  their  appeal
lies  open  from  them  to  their  master,  who,  if
good,  will  no  doubt  redress  their  grievances."
— Fuller.

"  No  sooner  is  she  come  into  the  field,  but
the  reapers  are  friendly  to  her.  No  sooner  is
Boaz  come  into  the  field,  but  he  invites  her
to  more  bounty  than  she  could  have  desired.
Now  God  begins  to  repay  into  her  bosom,  her
love  and  duty  to  her  mother-in-law.  Reve-
rence, and  loving  respect  to  parents,  never
yet  went  away  unrecompensed ;  God  will
surely  raise  up  friends  amongst  strangers,  to
those  that  have  been  dutiful  at  home." —
Bishop  Hall.

"  Had  a  sister  Moabitess  met  her  in  this
employment,  and  inquired  what  it  was  that
could  urge  her  to  it,  she  would  have  answered
her  as  Elger  von  Hohenstein  did  his  brother,
who,  finding  him  away  from  his  castle  and
its  life  of  ease,  engaged  in  taking  care  of  the
poor,  exclaimed,  '  Alas,  my  brother  1  what
are  you  doing  1  What  distress  compels  you
to  this?'  'Sir  brother  mine,'  was  the  an-
swer, '  distress  compels  me  not;  but  the  love
of  Christ  my  Lord  constrains  me.'" — Lange.

"  Observe,  that  what  happened  to  Ruvh  is
analogous  to  what  happened  to  us.  For  she
was  a  stranger,  and  had  fallen   into   th#


CTiAP  ri.  8-12.      nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   RUTH.


extremcst  distress  ;  but  Boaz,  when  he  saw
her,  neither  despised  her  poverty,  nor  con-
temned the  lowliness  of  her  family.  So
Christ  took  up  the  Church,  and  chose  the
stranger,  who  lacked  the  most  necnssary
possessions,  for  His  bride.  But  as  Ruth
would  never  have  attained  to  such  n  union
had  she  not  previously  left  her  parents  and
piven  up  people,  home,  and  kindred,  so  the
Church  also  does  not  become  dear  and  de-
serving in  the  eyes  of  her  Bridegroom  until
she  has  left  her  ancestral  (heathen)  morals
and  customs." —  Chry.wstom.

"  Even  the  greatest,  in  respect  of  God,  is
but  a  gleaner,  God,  He  is  the  Master  of
the  harvest;  all  gifts  and  graces,  they  are
His,  in  an  infinite  measure  ;  and  every  godly
rnan,  more  or  less,  gleans  from  Him.  Abra-
ham gleaned  a  great  glean  of  faith  ;  Moses,
of  meekness;  Joshua,  of  valour;  Samson,  of
strength  ;  Solomon,  of  wealth  and  wisdom ;
St.  Paul,  of  knowledge  and  the  like.  Now,
if  we  would  be  glad  at  our  hearts  that  the
Lord  would  give  us  free  leave  and  liberty  for
to  glean  graees  out  of  His  harvest,  let  us  not
grudge  and  repine  that  poor  people  glean  a
little  grain  from  our  plenty.  To  conclude :
when  God  hath  multiplied  our  '  five  loaves,*
that  is,  when  of  our  little  seed  He  hath  given
us  a  great  deal  of  increase,  let  poor  people,
like  Ruth  in  the  text,  be  the  '  twelve  baskets '
which  may  take  up  the  fragments  of  gleanings
which  are  left." — Fuller,


"  The  plume-like  waving  of  the  autumn  corn,
By  soft  winds  to  a  dreamy  motion  fanned,
Still  bring  me  back  thine  image,  O  forlorn,
Yet  not  forsaken,  Ruth  1     I  see  thee  stand,
Lone  'midst  the  gladness  of   the   harvest-
band,
Lone  as  a  wood-bird  on  the  ocean's  foam,
Fallen  in  its  weariness.     Thy  fatherland
Smiles    far   away  1     Yet   to   thy   sense  of

home.
That  finest,  purest,  which  can  recognise
Home  in  affection's  glance,  foi*  ever  true,
Beats  thy   calm  heart ;   and  if  thy   gentle

eyes
Gleam  tremulous  through  tears,  'tis  not  to  rue
Those  words  immortal  in  their  deep  love's

tone.
Thy  people  and  thy  God  shall  be  mine  own/*

3Irs.  Ilemans.

"  It  is  related  that  when  Phidias,  the  great
sculptor,  who  carved  statues  for  one  of  the
temples  in  antiquity,  was  labouring  with
minute  fidelity  upon  the  hair  on  the  back  of
the  head  of  one  of  the  historic  figures,  which
was  to  be  elevated  from  the  pavement  to  the
very  apex  of  the  building,  or  place;!  along  the
frieze,  some  one  expostulated  with  him,  say-
ing, '  Why  do  you  take  such  great  pains  with
the  hair  ?  it  is  never  to  be  seen. '  His  simple
reply  was,  '  The  gods  will  see  it.'  So  he
laboured  thoroughly  in  the  minutest  things,
not  for  the  eyes  of  men,  but  for  the  eyes  of
the  gods." — liceciufr^


VERSES   8—12.

Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes. — Ver.  8.  Then  said  Boaz  [and  Boaz  said],  Hearest
thou  not?  Dost  thou  hear  {i.e.,  thou  hearest,  dost  thou  not?  interrogatio,  blande  afhrmat)
{Keil).  Lit.  Hast  thou  not  heard  1  (in  the  perfect,)  the  effect  of  the  use  of  this  tense  being  to
mark  the  permission  to  glean  as  irrevocably  fixed,  not  subject  to  uncertainty  or  change
{Speakers"  Commentary).  My  daughter.  A  kind  phrase,  indicating  at  the  same  time  Boaz's
mature  age  {ihi/l.).  He  recognizes  the  existence  of  a  certain  relationship,  the  benefit  of  which
is  due  to  Ruth  {Lange).  The  good  report  of  the  overseer  (ver.  7)  would  stiengthen  any  claim
he  felt  Ruth  had  upon  him  through  Naomi.  Spoke  with  fatherly  kindness  therefore  {A'cil).
Neither  go  from  hence,  and  go  not  away  from  here  {Keil).  He  has  called  her  to  him  where
he  stands  by  the  reaj)ers(Z/^/«/76').  Abide  here.  Lit.  cleave  {Words  tvortJi).  Ko\\i]di}Ti  {LXX.).
Fast  by  my  maidens.  And  keep  so  to  my  maidens  {Keil).  The  gleaner  who  v\  as  allowed  to
approach  nearest  the  reapers  had  the  best  opportunity  {Lange).  Boaz  seems  to  have  had
women-servants  employed.  Also  perhaps  other  gleaners  in  the  field,  whom  he  would  include
among  his  maidens  {Steele  ami  Terry).  Robinson  saw  nearly  two  hundred  reapers  and
gleaners  at  work  in  one  field  (ii.  Hl)4).  Gleaning  was  often  almost  as  important  as  reaping,
since  the  latter  was  done  in  a  very  slovenly  manner.

Ver.  9.  Let  thine  eyes.  Thine  eyes  (directed)  upon  the  field  which  they  reap,  go  behind
them  {i.e.,  behind  the  maidens,  who  probably  tied  up  the  sheaves  whilst  the  men-servants  cut
the  com  {Keil).  The  maidens  were  probably  only  gleaners,  for  the  verb  they  do  reap  is  in  the
masculine,  while  after  them  is  in  the  feminine  {Speahers'  Commentary).  In  the  absence  of
fences,  Kuth  might  go  unlicensed  on  another's  possessions  ;  hence  the  charge  to  kee{)  near  his
maidens  {Steele  and  Terry).  Have  I  not  charged  the  young  meni  Such  ])recautions  are  not
out  of  place  at  this  day.  The  reapers  are  gathered  from  all  parts  of  the  country,  and  lar  ely
from  the  ruder  class,  and  being  far  from  home,  throw  off  all  restraint,  and  give  licence  to  their
tongues,  if  nothing  more  {JJr.  Thom.wn).  That  they  should  not  touch  [molest]  thee.  'J'hat  is,
either  to  hinder,  or  to  injure.  Go  unto  the  vessels.  Doubtless  a  special  indulgence  t(j  a
gleaner.     The  harvest-field  was  often  at  a  distance  from  springs  or  wells  {Steele  and  Terry).

Ver.  10.    She  fell  on  her  face.    With  Oriental  reverence  {Speakers'  Commentary).    [Cf.  Gen.


xxxiii.  ,'i ;    1  Sam.  xxv.  2.'5,  and  2  Sam.  i
(  Wriyht).    Why  have  I  found  grace  /


2  ]    Bowed  herself  to  the  ground.    TowarcU  the  eai  th
[Cf.  2  Sam.  vii.  i8,  19,  and  Luke  i.  43.]     A  stranger.

X07


EOMTLETIC  COMMENT ABY  :  RUTH.        chap.  ii.  8,  9.


She  is  so  unassuming  as  to  deem  this  very  fact  an  enhancement  of  his  kindness  (Lnnge),
Keil  trans.  "  Why  have  I  found  favour  in  thine  eyes,  that  thou  regard  est  me,  who  am  only  a
stranger  ? "

Ver.  11.  It  hath  been  fully  shown  me.  Everything  has  been  told  me  (A'eil).  Eoaz  could
have  derived  his  knowledge  only  from  narrations  proceeding  from  Nr.omi  (Lrmf/e).  All  that
thoTi  hast  done.  So  Christ  knows  all  concerning  those  who  would  be  recipients  of  His  favour
(ver.  30 — 36  ;  John  i.  48).  And  how  thou  hast  left.  FTast  therefore  done  what  God  commanded
Abraham  to  do  (Gen.  xii.  1)  (A'eil).  Thy  father  and  thy  mother.  [Cf,  Matt.  x.  37,  xix.  29.]
One  of  the  plain  signs  of  discipleship.  Unto  a  people  which  thou  knewest  not  heretofore.
Lit.  Which  thou  knew^est  not  the  day  before  yesterday  {Wright).  Here  also  is  a  figure  of  the
Gentile  Church  coming  to  Christ ;  see  Ps.  xlv.  11 — 17  {Wordswortli).

Ver.  12.  The  Lord  [Jehovah].  And  a  full  reward.  A  complete  reward  (Lange).  And  let
thy  reward  be  perfect  (Keil).  Recalling  Gen.  xv.  1  {Keil).  Under  whose  wings.  A  figure  of
speech  derived  from  Deut.  xxxii.  11  {Wordsworth).  Jehovah  represented  as  an  eagle  there,
spreading  abroad  her  wings  over  her  young.  Others  think  the  allusion  is  to  the  mercy
seat  overshadowed  by  the  outstretched  wings  of  the  cherubim.  Cf.  also  Ps.  xci.  4,  xxxvi.  8,
Ivii.  2  ;  and  our  Saviour's  words,  Matt,  xxiii.  27.  In  these  words  we  see  the  genuine  piety
of  a  true  Israelite  {Keil,  Groser).  The  Syriac  renders  this  verse  quod  sensiim,  thus,  "  May
the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel,  reward  thee,  and  give  thee  thy  reward,  to  whom  thou  hast
come,  that  He  may  protect  thee  under  His  wings."     Very  similarly  the  Arabic  (  Wright),

VERSES   8,  9.
Theme, — Care  for  the  Stranger  at  tee  Gate.

"  With  countless  sheaves  of  golden  grain
The  joyful  reapers  strew  the  plain."' — Anon,

**  She  was  a  phantom  of  delight

When  first  she  gleamed  upon  my  sight )

A  lovely  a{)pariti(in.  sent

To  be  a  moment's  ornament.

If  *  «  ♦  •

I  saw  her  upon  nearer  view,

A  spirit,  yet  a  woman  too  ;

Her  household  motions  light  and  free,

And  steps  of  virgin  liberty;

A  countenance  in  which  did  meet

Sweet  records,  promises  as  sweet;

A  creature  not  too  bright  or  good

For  human  nature's  daily  food." — Wordsn'orth.

Th(^  said  Boaz  ,  .  .  Hearest  thou  not,  my  daughter?     Go  not,  etc.     Have  I  not
charged  the  young  men  ?  etc.     And  when  thou  art  athirst,  etc,

Grace  humbles  even  mighty  men  of  wealth  to  utter  the  law  of  kindness  to  the
poor  and  needy  (Macgowan).  With  Boaz,  Naomi's  nearness  of  kin,  and  Ruth's
worth,  were  both  at  work  to  produce  this  favourable  treatment.  He  recognises
the  latter  (ver.  11,  12)  even  more  plainly  than  he  does  the  former  ;  for  to  good
men  virtue  is  even  more  precious  than  kinship,  and  goodness  will  make  itself
friends  always,  as  here.     His  good- will  shown  at  once.

(1)  He  has  a  care  to  he  understood.  Hearing  is  often  without  taking  heed
i^Macgowan).  Age  and  experience  may  fittingly  claim  a  special  attention  from
the  young.  Note.  This  was  a  favourite  method  of  appeal  on  the  part  of  the  Great
Teacher.  (1)  Commands  attention.  (2)  Claims  a  special  and  thoughtful  consider-
ation for  what  follows.  [Cf.  Num.  xii.  6  ;  Isa.  i.  2  ;  Jer.  v.  21 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  13,
vii.  26  ;  Luke  viii.  8,  etc.]

(2)  He  has  a  care  to  jntt  her  in  her  right  position  as  toward  himself.  Calls  her
daugliter ;  a  respectful,  even  afi'ectionate,  yet  delicate  form  of  salutation,  most
appropriate  under  the  circumstances.  Rich  men  who  have  poor  relations  are  not
always  found  saluting  them  in  this  way.  The  same  noble  yet  thoughtful  spirit  is
to  be  seen  in  every  word  he  utters.

I.  See  the  delicacy  of  his  help.  (1)  Does  not  despise  her  labour,  respects  it,
forwards  it,  helps  it, — the  sign  of  a  truly  noble  spirit.  He  calls  her  near,  and
makes  her  gleaning  more  productive.     So  the  Saviour,  signalized  His  appro ich  t>Q

108


CHAP.  n.  8,  9.         HOMILETIG  COMMKNTARY:  EUTH,


His  disciples,  on  a  memorable  occasion,  by  a  miraculous  draught  of  fishes.  He
entered  into  their  toils,  and  increased  its  returns  so  much,  Uiat  the  net  brake,
etc.  (Luke  v.  6;  cf.  also  John  xxi.  6).

(2)  He  managed  to  supjily  her  wants  without  takinrj  away  her  sense  of  independence,
A  hint  to  the  benevolent,  too  often  forgotten.  Note.  Charity  itself  niaij  he  and  is
an  evil,  if  it  pauperize  the  poor.  Depend  upon  it,  the  best  way  is  to  help  them  to
help  themselves.  The  benevolence  of  Boaz  a  model  in  this :  (a)  practical ;
(b)  unostentatious.  Made  the  obligation  as  light  as  possible,  and  apparently
scarce  of  a  pecuniary  nature  (Macartney).

II.  See  its  genuineness.  Is  not  anxious  to  get  rid  of  the  burden,  or  to  share
it  with  another  ;  rather  would  take  it  all  upon  himself,  be  it  much  or  little.
*'  Go  not  to  glean  in  another  field  .  .  .  abide  here  fast  by  my  maidens."  As  if
he  had  said,  "Depend  upon  me  and  mine."  A  right  royal,  large-hearted  spirit;
he  has  at  least  enough  and  to  spare  for  her.  Note,  (a)  It  is  so  he  begins  to  show
himself  already,  her  Goel,  her  kinsman.  Mercy  is  never  miserly.  Boaz  in  all
this,  his  giving  and  his  doing,  an  illlustration  of  the  way  Christ  receives
{a)  strangers,  (b)  gleaners  in  the  gospel  fields,  (c)  young  converts.  His  pro-
visions are  ample — there  is  enough  and  to  spare;  His  fic4ds  are  wide — there  is  no
need  to  wander  from  them.  Nay,  He  is  even  jealous  at  the  thought  of  our  looking
elsewhere.  Note.  (6)  In  wandering^  a  snare  is  more  likely  to  be  met  with  than  a
bless  ing  (  Ma  ego  wan) .

III.  See  its  thoroughness.  He  offers  not  only  help,  but  protection,  and
provision  for  all  her  wants.  (1)  He  jjro rides  for  her  society.  '*  Abide  fast  by  my
maidens."  Hence  we  gather  it  is  most  decent  for  women  to  associate  with  those
of  their  own  sex  {Fuller).  The  disciples  wondered  that  Christ  talked  with  a
woman  (John  iv.  27),  showing  hereby  that  it  was  not  His  ordinary  course  to
converse  alone  with  one  of  another  sex  (ibid).

(2)  He  provides  for  her  safety.  "  Have  I  not  charged  the  young  men  ?"  etc.
Boaz  evidently  felt  that  his  servants  had  need  of  the  caution,  and  that  they  would
stand  in  awe  of  his  word.  Note,  (a)  Servile  natures  are  most  prone  to  wrong  strangers,
{b)  It  is  the  part  of  a  good  master,  not  o7ily  to  do  no  harm  himself,  but  also  to  take
care  that  his  servants  do  none  [Fuller).  This  instinct  to  protect  the  young  and
the  defenceless  from  wrong  and  harm,  belongs  to  every  truly  noble  nature,  and
the  want  of  it,  is  a  certain  sign  of  baseness  and  churlishness  of  spirit.  See  how  it
finds  its  noblest  expression  in  the  pathetic  words  of  Christ,  "  How  often  would  I
have  gathered,"  etc.  He  would  that  all  men  should  come  unto  Him  and  find
safety,  salvation,  life  eternal.

(3)  He  provides  for  her  refreshment.  "  When  thou  art  athirst,"  etc.  Matthew
Henry  thinks  the  water  was  drawn  from  the  famous  well  of  Bethlehem,  which
was  by  the  gate,  the  water  of  which  David  longed  for  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  IG).
Wherever  it  came  from,  there  it  was  (a)  already  provided  ;  (b)  freely  offered  ;
[cf.  Rev.  xxii.  17]  ;  (c)  to  be  partaken  of  whenever  thirsty  [cf.  Isa.  li.  1].  Note.
(a)  Thus  generosity  a  faint  type  of  the  liberality  of  Christ  (John  iv.  10).  (b)  A
work  of  mercy  and  love  may  be  shown  in  a  small  matter  (Bernard).

"  Mothers  and  nurses  are  very  careful,  ten-  ncss  He  attrac^ts  her  love,  showing  more  of

derly  to  handle  infants  when  they  are  but  the  kindness  of  His  heart  in  acts  for  her  than

newly  born.      So    Kuth  :    Christ  was  newly  by  any  personal  expressions  of  tenderness :

foraicd  in  her,  a  youn<j;  convert,  a  fresh  prose-  *  Have  I  not  charged  ? '  etc.     Christ  forgets

lyte;  and  therefore  P>oaz  uscth  her  with  all  not  the  sensitiveness  of  the  newborn  spirit ;

kindness,  both  in  words  and  works  :' Hearcst  vigorous  faith  shall  not  boast  itself  against

thou,  my  daughter?'" — Fvller.  budding  hope,  neither  shall  the  strength  of

"  Christ  knows  the  heart  of  a  'stranger' —  manhood  urge  beyond  its  power  the  feeble-

a  stranger  to  the  work  of  grace,  yet  a  seeker  ness  of  childhood;  rather  growing  experience

after  it — and  He   bids   such   stay   by    Him,  shall  lend  a  helping  hand  to  new-born  desires;

among  His  people,  and  in  His  pastures  :  '  Go  and   fi-eely   as  we   have  received,  we  nuist

not  to  glean,'  etc.     He  shows  not  tlie  fulness  freely  give." — 2'he  Belt  ever  Filled  tvith  Christ's

of  His  love  all  at  once,  lest  the  trembling  soul  Strength.

should  be  overpowered;  but  by  His  gentle-  "  You  have  with  you,  and  around  you,  many

109


nOMIlETlC  COMMENTARY :  nVTII.        cuap.  it.  8,  0.


who  are  striving  to  walk  in  the  strait  and
narrow  way  which  leadeth  unto  life.  Their
light  shines  before  you  ;  their  daily  walk
encourages  and  animates  you.  Keej)  fast  hy
them.  You  have  a  faithful  and  simple  mi-
nistry of  the  gospel.  You  have  a  pure  and
blessed  form  of  public  worship.  Every  benefit
and  advantage  for  you  is  there.  You  have
the  simple  and  appropriate  ordinances  of  the
Lord's  house.  Jesus  has  promised  to  meet
you  there.  Itn-ill  he  good  fur  you  to  he  found
in  no  other  field.''* — Tyng.

"According  to  a  proverb  of  the  fathers,
benevolence  is  one  of  the  pillars  upon  which
the  world  rests.  *  The  world,'  said  they,  '  is
sustained  by  virtue  of  three  things — the  law,
Divine  worship,  and  active  benevolence.'  .  .  .
To  do  a  person  a  favour  is  to  act  beneficently
towards  him,  without  any  hope  or  desire  of
return,  and  may  be  practised  in  two  cases —
to  oblige  a  person  to  whom  we  are  not  under
obligation,  and  to  accommodate  or  oblige  a
person,  with  more  trouble  to  ourselves  and
more  gain  to  him  than  he  deserves.  The
mercy  which  is  mentioned  in  the  Bible  is
that  which  is  given  fi^eely  and  without  desert
upon  the  part  of  one  to  whom  it  is  granted  ;
for  instance,  the  benevolence  of  God  is  called
mercy,  because  we  are  in  debt  to  God,  and
He  owes  us  nothing." — Talmud.

"  Rabbi  Jochanan  has  said  that  it  is  as
pleasing  in  God's  sight  if  we  are  kind  and
hospitable  to  strangers,  as  if  we  rise  up  early
to  study  His  law  ;  because  the  former  is  in
fact  putting  His  law  into  practice." — Ihid.

•*  The  pilgrim  and  the  stranger,  who  through
the  day
Holds  over  the  desert  his  trackless  way,
Where  the  terrible  sands   no  shade  have

known.
No  sound  of  life  save  the  camel's  moan.
Hears  at  last,  through  the  mercy  of  Allah

to  all,
From  his  tent-door,  at  evening,  the  Be-
douin's call :
*  Whoever  thou  art,  whose  need  is  great,
In  the  name  of  God,  the  Compassionate
And  Merciful  One,  for  thee  I  wait  1 '

For  gifts  in  His  name,  of  food  and  rest,
The  tents  of  Islam  of  God  are  blest.
Thou  who  hast  faith  in  the  Christ  above.
Shall  the  Koran  teach  thee  the  Law  of  Love?
O  Christian  1  open  thy  heart  and  door —
Cry,  east  and  west,  to  the  wandering  poor,
'  Whoever  thou  art,  whose  need  is  great,
In  the  name  of  Christ,  the  Compassionate
And  Merciful  One,  for  thee  I  wait  1 ' "

Vi^liittier.

"  In  this  wonderful  universe  around  us,
when  the  full  play  of  life  is  seen,  it  is  all  a
giving,  the  ocean  to  the  clouds,  and  the  clouds
to  the  earth,  and  the  earth  to  the  rivers,  and
the  rivers  to  the  ocean  back  again  ;  the  sun
sends  its  radiant  beams  and  benign  influences
among  the  stars,  and  the  planets  reflect  them
around,  each  in  his  lesser  sphere  ;  the  ground
yields  its   sustenance  to  the  trees,  and  the

130


trees  their  fruit  and  foliage  to  man  ;  the
flowers  send  their  perfumes  abroad  to  the
winds  of  heaven,  nor  is  there  a  cessation  of
these  sweet  interchanges  until  that  moment
when  activity  ceases,  and  the  stagnation  of
decay  begins.  The  penurious  spirit,  tb.e  spirit
which  has  but  to  withhold,  is  an  anomaly,  a
blot  in  the  whole  realm  of  nature.  Nothing
is  made  for  itself,  and  it  is  a  sign  of  death
rather  than  life  when  the  creature  begins  to
circumscribe  its  influences,  and  ceases  or  re-
fuses to  give." — B.

"  Nature  says  it  is  '  good,'  but  grace  says  it
is  '  hetter  to  give.'  Nature  knows  something
of  that  lavishness  which  bestows,  because  it
must  bestow,  which  feels  and  knows  that
withholding  is  to  poverty  ;  but  grace  teaches
a  higher  thing,  that  '  giving  to  the  poor  is
lending  to  the  Lord.'  " — B.

"  One  day  a  philosopher  inquired  of  Rabbi
Akiba,  '  If  your  God  loves  the  poor,  why  does
He  not  support  them  V  '  God  allows  the  poor
to  be  with  us  ever,'  responded  Akiba,  '  that
the  opportunities  for  doing  good  may  never
fail.'  ''—Talmud.

"  I  have  noticed  in  travelling,  that  when
one  with  a  face  wrinkied  and  worn  walks
into  the  car,  there  is  not  a  seat  to  spare  for
her  ;  and  I  have  noticed  that  if  one  comes  in
who  is  young  and  blooming,  of  radiant  eye
and  most  comely  face,  there  is  not  one  in  the
car  who  has  not  a  scat  for  her.  Beauty  wins
its  way.  And  if  it  be  so  in  the  outward  life,
which  is  but  a  mere  shadow  of  the  inward,
how  much  more  is  it  so,  in  the  inward  1  And
nothing  is  more  beautiful,  than  dutyperformed
under  adverse  circumstances."' — Bcecher.

"  He  [Boaz]  begged  she  would  keep  to  his
grounds  during  the  harvest,  and  not,  in  the
hope  of  bettering  herself  on  the  one  hand,  or
in  the  fear  of  presuming  on  the  other,  remove
to  the  lands  of  any  other  person.  And  it  will
be  observed  how,  in  the  absence  of  enclosures,
he  gives  her  the  means  of  knowing  his  grounds,
by  telling  her  to  adhere  to  the  company  in
which  she  already  finds  herself,  that  of  his
own  labourers,  among  whom  she  might  rely
upon  being  perfectly  safe.  We  gather  that
the  persons  employed  in  the  field  were  men-
servants,  women-servants,  and  day-labourers,
the  women  seemingly  being  chiefly  employed,
in  ministering  to  the  wants  of  the  men  engaged
in  active  toil,  and  in  performing  some  of  the
lighter  labours.  One  of  the  most  important
provisions  of  the  harvest  field  was  water,  often
necessarily  brought  from  some  distance,  and
placed  so  as  to  be  kept  cool." — KUto.  I

"  Had  he  been  actuated  by  the  spirit  of  !
modern  sentimentality  ,he  would  probably  have  ^
been  ashamed  of  her.  He  would  have  offered
her  a  piece  of  money,  and  sent  her  away,  that
it  might  not  become  known  that  this  Moab-
itish  beggar  is  his  relative.  He  would  at  all
events, not  have  allowed  her  to  go  on  gleaning.
But  according  to  the  ancient  delicate  and
religious  view,  he  cannot  act  thus.  Nothing
has  been  asked  of  him  ;  consequently  he  has
no  right  to  wound  the  self-respect  of  others.
The  privilege  of  gleaning  belongs  of  right  to


rf(AP    II.  10.


VnmtETlC  COMMENTARY :  BVTB.


the  widow  and  the  stranger.  It  is  not  well
that  she  needs  it ;  but  needing  it,  he  cannot
hinder  her  from  using  it.  Even  while  he
admits  her  relationship,  he  can  only  support
her  in  the  right,  and  enlarge  its  advantages.
And  this  is  what  he  does  Ruth  had  modestly,
gleaned  at  a  distance  froni  the  reapers  and
binders.  He  calls  her  nearer,  and  says,  'Go
not  to  glean  in  another  field.'  In  these  words
be  acknowledges  the  first  degree  of  the  in-
terest to  which  his  relationship  binds  him." —
Lange.

*•  Young  men,  in  any  station  of  life,  are
often,  by  their  rudeness  or  licentiorsness,  the
terror  of  modest  young  ^'omen  ;  but  Boaz
would  allow  of  no  indecency  in  words  or
conversation  amongst  his  servants.  A  good
man  will  not  only  refrain  from  doing  or
speaking  evil,  but  will  restrain  all  that  depend
on  him  from  licentious  or  rude  behaviour.
Paul  will  have  none  to  be  admitted  to  the


office  of  elders  in  the  church,  who  do  not  rule
well  their  own  houses.  Not  that  it  is  a  duty
incumbent  on  elders  only,  to  keep  their  families
in  due  subjection,  but  because  elders  must  be
exemplary  in  everything  worthy  of  praise.
We  are  all  accountable  for  those  evils  which
it  was  in  our  power  to  have  prevented. —
Laicson.

"  'Tis  a  little  thing
To  give  a  cup  of  water  ;  yet  its  draught
Of  cool  refreshment,  drained  by  fevered  lipa,
May  give  a  shock  of  pleasure  to  the  frame
More  exquisite  than  when  nectarian  juices
Renew  the  life  of  joy  in  happiest  hours."

Talfourd.

"  The  Rabbis  particularly  insist  that  we  are
not  to  confine  the  exercise  of  charity  to  our
own  people,  for  the  law  of  Moses  inculcates
kindness  and  hospitality  towards  the  stranger
within  our  gates." — Talmud,


VERSE  10.
Theme. — The  Lowly  Attitude  of  a  Grateful  Heart.

"  When  gratitude  o'erflows  the  swelling  heart,
And  breathes  in  free  and  uncorrupted  praise
For  benefits  received,  propitious  Heaven
Takes  such  acknowledgment  as  fragrant  incense,
And  doubles  all  its  blessings." — lAllo.

Then  she  fell  on  her  face,  .  .  .  Why  have  1  found  grace  in  thine  eyes  •  •  •  seeing  1

am  a  stranger?

Outward  courtesies  should  be  done  in  humility  of  heart,  not  out  of  mere  compli-
ment or  affectation,  or  an  apish  imitation  of  others.  Our  finest  feelings,  like  the
flowers,  open  and  display  themselves  almost  insensibly  and  unconsciously.  If  Boaz
proves  himself  the  ideal  of  a  true  gentleman,  Ruth  displays  no  less  delicacy  and
refinement  of  feeling  throughout  the  whole  interview.

Observe,  I.  What  deep  and  touching  humility  is  expressed  here.  Modesty,  un-
ostentatious unassuming  worth  and  humility,  are  always  becoming  in  the  young —
more  especially  so  when  they  are  recipients  of  favours,  as  here.  She  cast  down
her  eyes,  not  looking  impudently  upon  him ;  she  bowed  to  the  ground  {Bernard)^
wondering  at  his  great  kindness,  though  it  was  but  permission  to  glean  and  to
drink  water  out  of  the  vessels  (ver.  9).  Neither  regarded  this  as  her  right,  nor
an  insult  to  her  independence.

Again,  II.  What  affectionate  gratitude  is  here.  How  thankfully  doth  Ruth
take  these  small  favours  from  Boaz  !  Perhaps  some  rich  jewel  in  Moab  would
not  have  been  so  welcome  [Bishop  Hall).  Her  words  were  few  and  to  the  point,
a  rare  grace  in  man  or  woman.  Note,  {a)  Gratitude  in  the  recipient  is  as  heauti-
ful  as  generosity  in  the  hemfavtor.  It  requires  as  much  grace  to  receive  a  favour
becomingly,  as  to  bestow  one.  (6)  The  humble  are  always  disposed  to  be  thankful.
They  think  everything  better  than  they  deserve.

We  have  a  rebuke  here.  (1)  To  such  as  receive  favours,  and  will  not  acknow-
ledge them,  like  the  nine  lepers  (Luke  xvii.  18).  (2)  To  such  as  scornfully  refuse
favours,  and  will  not  be  beholden  to  others.  Note,  (c)  Ingratitude  is  a  soul-sin,
a  stoppage  to  aU  favours  [lUniard).

Again,  III.  What   confessions   of  unworthiness  are  here.      Humble  souls

111


SOMILETIO  COMMENTARy  :  KVTII.


OllAP.  11.  10.


wonder  at  kindnesses,  however  small,  rather  than  make  light  of  them  and  disparage
the  givers  ;  look  into  themselves  and  their  own  unworthiness,  rather  than  re-
member anything  that  is  of  worth  in  them,  or  might  win  them  attention.  60  ivith
Ruth.  Her  mind  is  fixed  upon  that  which  might  have  hindered,  viz.,  the  fact  that
she  is  a  stranger,  rather  than  upon  anything  else.  So  luith  the  pardoned  sinner.
He  feels  himself  the  object  of  such  grace  and  boundless  mercy,  that  his  own
unworthiness  and  guilt  arc  more  apparent  to  bim  than  ever  (Tync/).

Lastly,  IV.  What  consciousness  of  need  is  here.  She  knows  what  she  is,  a
*'  stranger,"  but  does  not  attempt  to  disguise  the  fact,  and  all  that  it  means,  either
from  herself  or  Boaz.  A  perilous  test  this,  for  nothing  but  goodness  in  a  man
will  make  him  kind  to  strangers  (cf.  Matt.  v.  43 — 46).  Note.  Her  very  frankness
is  an  appeal  to  his  better  nature  for  a  continuance  of  his  succour  and  protection.
So  humble  souls  cast  themselves  always  at  the  feet  of  Christ.  They  disguise
nothitig,  they  feel  that  they  deserve  nothing.

Notice  that  two  things  were  in  her  favour,  and  would  naturally  tend  to  lead
Boaz  to  listen  to  her  appeal.  (1)  His  own  mother,  Rahab,  was  once  a  stranger  to
Israel's  hope.  (2)  The  children  of  Israel  had  themselves  been  strangers,  and  were
required  to  remember  this  (Deut.  x.  19).  Buth,  however,  very  properly  looks
upon  her  position  as  enhancing  this  kindness.  So  with  man's  low  estate  and  the
lovingkindness  of  God  as  displayed  in  the  gift  of  Christ  (Luke  i.  48).  Man's
salvation  must  ever  be  a  wonder  to  man,  a  source  of  never-ending  gratitude  and
adoration.  '*  Why  have  I  found  grace  m  Thine  eyes,  that  Thou  shouldest  take  know-
ledge  of  me  ?  "  the  language  of  every  regenerate  heart  (cf.  Ezek.  xvi.;  Johnxv.  16).

Lessons.  (1)  "He  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased,  but  he  that  humbleth
himself  shall  be  exalted."  Notice.  That  this  was  a  presage  of  her  better  estate.
Those  which  shall  receive  great  blessings  are  ever  thankful  for  little  (Bishop  Hall),
(2)  If  poor  souls  be  so  thankful  to  us  for  a  handful,  or  a  sheaf,  how  should  we  be
ali'ected  to  our  God,  for  whole  fields-full,  for  full  barns,  full  garners  !


"  He  that  has  nature  in  him  must  be  grateful;
*Tis  the  Creator's  primary  great  law,
That  hnks  the  chain  of  beings  to  each  other,
Joining  the  greater  to  the  lesser  nature,
Tying  the  weak  and  strong,  the  poor  and
powerful."  Madan.

"  In  her  humility,  Ruth,  who  had  done  so
much  for  Naomi,  and  made  so  many  sacri-
fices, expects  no  grace  or  help  from  others.
Even  the  slight  kindness  of  Eoaz  overwhelms
her  with  gratitude.  She  flings  herself  at  his
feet,  and  pours  out  her  thanks  for  the  kindly
notice  he  has  taken  of  an  alien  and  a  stran-
ger."—  Cox.

"  The  Scripture  often  noteth  this  civil
gesture  and  comely  behaviour  as  worthy  imi-
tation. .  .  .  What  difference  [is  there]  be-
tween this  which  is  done  to  men  and  that
which  is  done  to  God  Almighty  1  Surely,  in
]cs[)ect  of  the  outward  act,  no  diffeience  is
there  at  all,  but  of  the  mind,  which  doth
conceive  of  God  herein  as  God.  and  so  this
outward  humiliation  becometh  divine  adora-
tion ;  and  of  man,  but  as  man,  worthy  of
reverence  and  honour  for  his  place,  his  age,
and  gifts;  and  so  the  reverence  and  worship
done  him  is  only  civil." — Bernard.

"  Civil  honour  may  and  must  be  given  to
all  in  authority,  according  to  the  usual  ges-
tures of  the  country.  Now  such  bowing  was
the  custom  of  the  Eastern  people  (Gen.
xxxiii.  3).     As  for  Mordecai's  instance,   it

112


makes  not  against  this,  he  being  either  im-
mediately warranted  by  God,  or  else  he
refused  to  bow  to  Haman  as  being  an  Ama-
lekite,  betwixt  which  cursed  brood  and  the
Israelites  the  Lord  commanded  an  eternal
enmity."  — Puller.

"  It  is  a  beautiful  thing  to  see  persons  in
reduced  circumstances  really  humbling  them-
selves to  their  situation,  and  receiving  kind-
ness as  it  is  intended.  It  is  sad  to  witness
the  sullen  contempt,  the  haughty  dissatisfac-
tion with  which  every  benefit  is  received  by
such  persons,  when  their  hearts  are  not
softened  by  grace.  It  is  more  blessed  to  give
than  to  receive,  and  far,  far  easier  to  give  in.
a  right  spirit  than  to  receive  aright.  It  ia
most  difficult  to  find  the  correct  medium  be-
tween a  proud  rejection  of  needful  relief  and
an  indolent,  self-indulgent  dependence  ;  be-
tween a  haughty  ingratitude  of  manner,  if
not  of  mind,  and  degrading  sycophancy  ;  but
all  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth;
and  he  who  has  ti-easure  and  a  name  in
heaven  will  know  how  to  give  to  the  things
of  earth  their  due  value;  and,  governed  by
the  will  of  God  rather  than  by  the  ebullitions
of  pride  and  selfishness,  will  tread  the  narrow
way. " — jSlacartney.

"  It  may  be  clearly  seen  here,  that  only
such  as  can  exercise  love  understand  how  to
receive  it.  No  one  is  humbler  than  he  who
truly  gives  from  love  ;  of  that  Kuth  is  a
proof ;  and   for  that  reason  humility  never


CHAP.  II.  11.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  HUTU.


shows  itself  more  beautiful  than  when  love
receives.  Ruth  had  made  the  greatest  sacri-
fices, although  no  one  bad  a  right  to  expect
them  fi'ora  her,  and  is  withal  so  unassuming
as  not  to  look  for  nnything  ivoxn  others.
Most  people  in  her  place  would  have  made
the  first  favour  shown  them  the  occasion  for
saying,  that  in  truth  they  were  not  at  all
used  to  such  work.  Their  thanks  would  have
been  combined  with  complaints  and  accusing
insinuations  about  the  distress  in  which
they  found  themselves,  although  they  had
exchanged  the  people  and  god  of  Moab  for
those  of  Israel.  Ruth's  love  did  not  spring
from  selfishness,  and  hence  did  not  give  birth
to  any  proud  self-consciousness." — Lange.

"  Oh,  then,  if  Ruth  interpreted  it  such  a
kindness  that  Boaz  took  notice  of  her,  being
a  stianger,  how  great  is  the  love  of  God  to  us,
who  loved  us  in  Christ  when  we  were  '  stran-
gers and  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of
Israel.'  As  the  never-failing  foundation  of
the  earth  is  firmly  fastened,  for  ever  fleeting,
jet  settled  on  no  other  substance  than  its
own  ballasted  weight ;  so  God's  love  was
founded  on  neither  cause  nor  condition  in  the


creature,  but  issued  only  out  of  His  own  free
favour.  So  that  in  this  respect  we  may  all
say  unto  God  what  Ruth  doth  unto  Boaz
in  the  text,  '  Why  have  we  found  favour  in
Thine  eyes,  that  Thou  shouldcst  take  know-
ledge of  us,  seeing  we  are  but  strangers  ? '  "—
Fuller.

"  Here  shines  forth  her  humility,  modesty,
and  many  other  graces:  she  was,  as  Gualther
saith  of  the  Lady  Jane  Grey,  '  Pietatis,  pru-
dentiae,  et  modesticB  delicium.'  Hence  she
found  so  much  favour,  for  true  goodness
is  very  lovely,  om  y^akov  <pi\ov  ean  ....
*  Non  sum  dignus.  Domine,  quem  diligas,'
saith  Augustine.  Every  saint  may  say  with
admiration,  as  he  did  in  John  xiv.  22,  '  Lord,
how  is  it  that  Thou  hast  manifested  Thyself
to  us,  and  not  to  the  world  1 '  " — Trapjy.

"  Receiving,  unless  we  keep  a  watch  upon
our  hearts,  tends  to  nurture  the  meaner  and
the  baser  self,  the  churl  spirit  within  us,
which  is  ever  stretching  out  its  greedy  hand
for  gain  ;  but  giving  belongs  to  that  larger
life,  which  was  ours  when  man  was  made  in
the  image  of  his  God,  '  for  it  is  God  that
giveth  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not,' " — 2?,


VERSE  11
Theme, — The  Second  Geacious  Approval.

**  Kindness  in  woman,  not  her  beauteous  looks,
Shall  win  my  love." — Sliakes^eare.

"  Think  not  the  good.
The  gentle  deeds  of  mercy  thou  hast  done,
Shall  die  forgotten  all :  the  poor,  the  pris'ner,
The  fatherless,  the  friendless,  and  the  widow,
Who  daily  own  the  bounty  of  thine  hand,
ShaU  cry  to  Heaven,  and  pull  a  blessing  on  thee."-


-Horve,


And  Boaz  answered^  It  hath  been  fully  showed  me  all  that  thou  hast  done  •  •  •  •
and  how  thou  hast  left  thy  father  and  thy  mother  ....  and  art  come,  etc.

Never  was  there  givcD  to  man  such  a  manual  for  elegance  and  delicacy  in  his
social  relations  as  the  Bible  gives  (Tyng).  Many  of  the  Old  Testament  saints
models  in  this  respect.

"  He  is  gentle  that  doth  gentle  deeds." — Chaucer.

Boaz  an  instance  of  politeness  growing  out  of  real  sympathy  and  benevolence.
We  have  in  his  words  condescension  without  haughtiness,  commendation  without
assumption,  familiarity  without  coarseness,  delicacy  without  pretence.  Note,  (a)
Defect  in  manners  is  usually  the  defect  of  fine  perceptions  (^Emerson),  {h)  Refinement
of  heart  springs  only  from  faith  (Lange).  It  is  the  natural  outgrowth  of  a  dispo-
sition permeated  with  the  humility  of  the  gospel  of  truth  (ihid.).

Observe,  I.  We  can  never  live  a  truly  noble  life  without  its  being  known
sooner  or  later.  Fame  follows  virtue  as  the  shadow  does  the  body  (Trapp).
Well-doing  not  only  deserves  praise,  but  brings  favour.  Beauty  may  be  defaced,
strength  may  decay,  but  virtue  must  always  be  lovely  to  those  who  themselves
are  virtuous.  They  seek  it,  appreciate  it,  love  it  wherever  it  is  to  be  found.
So  Kuth,  and  even  Orpah,  with  that  which  they  saw  in  Naomi  (i.  10),  and  now
Boaz  with  that  which  he  sees  in  Ruth.

I  113


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  RUTH.  chaimi.  11.


"  He  whose  mind
Is  virtuous,  is  alone  of  noble  kind;
Though  poor  in  fortune,  of  celestial  race." — Bryden.

Ruth's  virtues  shine  conspicuous  (cC)  in  her  good  deeds  to  Naomi  and  the  dead
(see  on  i.  ver.  8,  9,  p.  39);  (5)  in  that  which  she  denied  herself;  (c)  in  her
choice  of  Israel  and  Israel's  God  [i.  14 — 17,  pp.  60 — 70].

Notice.  (1)  She  did  no  more  than  she  apprehended  to  he  her  duty — no  more  tbnn
satisfied  her  own  conscience.  Hence  her  surprise.  "Why have  I  found  grace  ?"
(ver.  10.)  So  with  the  Psalmist.  "  What  is  man,  that  Thou  art  mindful  of  him?"
etc.  A  common  attribute  of  noble  spirits  displayed  here.  They  do  not  see
the  dignity  of  the  life  they  lead.  It  seems  insignificant,  even  commonplace.  What
could  be  more  insignificant  than  a  gleaner's  history  ?  Still  conscience  reigns  ;
there  is  loyalty  to  duty,  to  convictions,  to  God ;  and  it  is  this  that  will  elevate
and  ennoble  the  meanest  life.

(2)  She  thought  herself  unknown  and  perhaps  neglected.  This  gracious  stranger
appears  to  be  perfectly  familiar  with  her  whole  history.  So  our  fidelity  may  be
secret :  He  with  whom  we  have  to  do  brings  our  secret  things  to  light.  "  There
is  nothing  covered  that  shall  not  be  revealed,  nor  hid  that  shall  not  be  known  "
^a  promise  often  and  partially  fulfilled  in  this  world,  certainly  and  completely
in  the  next.  It  hath  been  fully  shoived  me.  Note.  God's  revealing  a  full  one,
when  His  purposes  are  ripe.

II.  We  can  never  do  good  to  others  without  its  bringing  a  due  and  appro-
priate reward.  Naomi  must  have  spoken  and  told  all;  How,  indeed,  could  she
keep  silent  ?  Note.  Virtue  shall  not  want  trumpeters  {Bernard).  Even  the  very
stones  would  have  cried  out,  when  Goodness  incarnate  stood  among  men,  and  the
hour  of  His  triumph  had  come  (Luke  xix.  40),  rather  than  that  He  had  been  without
the  praise  which  was  His  due.  A  story  like  Ruth's  sure  to  touch  a  cord  of
sympathy  somewhere  or  other.  Who  can  tell  where  or  how  ?  Note.  The  luays
in  which  reward  is  to  come,  mysterious,  hut  certain — unexpected,  hut  how  often  nearer
than  we  could  have  imagined  !  Ruth  begins  to  reap  now  for  all  her  past  fidelity.  Faith-
ful in  that  which  is  least,  she  is  to  be  rewarded  with  that  which  seemed  to  be  much.

III.  We  can  never  really  come  to  trust  in  God,  and  be  disappointed  either
of  recognition  or  recompence.  This  at  the  root  of  all  else,  the  moral  of  the
whole  history.  Ruth  had  honoured  God,  now  she  finds  God  begin  to  honour  her.
Little  did  she  expect  it!  Had  not,  could  not  have  had,  the  remotest  idea  of
temporal  reward.    Naomi's  words  were  too  plain.    [See  on  i.  11 — 13,  pp.  46 — 48.]

So  with  all  those  in  the  position  pathetically  described  by  Mynster,  the  Danish
bishop:  "I  know  that  I  am  among  the  called,  and  I  muse  night  and  day,  in
watching  and  praying,  that  I  may  be  also  among  the  chosen,"  So  with  Abraham
leaving  his  fatherland,  like  Ruth,  for  God.  So  with  Moses  leaving  the  court  of
Pharaoh  to  be  with  God's  people  in  affliction.  So  with  the  apostles,  who  became
aliens  for  Christ's  sake.  So  with  true  converts  and  proselytes  in  all  ages  ;  they
come  out,  leaving  all,  not  knowing  whither  they  go.

Notice,  then,  as  encouraging  and  always  true  of  such.  God  gives  to  them
(1)  reception  ;  (2)  recognition  ;  (3)  recompence.  (1)  He  receives  such;  not  a
single  instance  of  one  ever  having  been  rejected.  '*  Him  that  cometh  unto  me,  I
will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  Even  sin  cannot  hinder,  if  we  are  persuaded  ;  for  it  is
said  of  Him  to  whom  we  come,  "  This  man  receiveth  sinners."  (2)  He  recognizes
such;  knows  them  as  His  own  (John  x.  3,  14),  and  causes  them  to  be  known  as
His.  **  His  Church  is  to  be  as  a  city  set  upon  a  hill  "  (Matt.  v.  14).  His
people  are  to  be  **  as  the  stones  of  a  crown,  lifted  up  as  an  ensign  "  (Zech.  ix.  16).
Said  that  **  by  faith  the  elders  obtained  a  good  report;"  and  Paul,  writing  to  the
Thessalonians,  says,  "In  every  place  your  faith  Godward  is  spread  abroad**
(1  Thess.  i.  8).     (3)  He  recompenses  such.     (See  next  outline.)

Lessons. — (1)  Well-doing  provides  favour  to  the  poor,  though  strangers,  at  the
liands  of  the  virtuous  (Bernard),     (2)  Let  the  rich  in  Christ  learn  where  the  first

lU


CHAP.  II.  11.


HOMILETtG  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.


claim  upon  their  charity  must  always  lie,
hold  of  faith."  (3)  Let  the  poor  labour
they  may  deserve  help  when  they  need  it

"  Always  say  a  kind  word  if  you  can,  if  only
that  it  may  come  in,  perhaps,  with  sinj^ular
opportuneness,  entering  some  mournful  man's
darkened  room  like  a  beautiful  firefly,  whose
happy  circumvolutions  he  cannot  but  watch,
forgetting  his  many  troubles." — Helps.

"  Did  it  ever  strike  you  that  goodness  is  not
merely  a  beautiful  thing,  but  the  beautiful
thing, — by  far  the  most  beautiful  thing  in  the
whole  world  ?  So  that  nothing  is  to  be  com-
pared for  value  with  goodness  ;  that  riches,
honour,  power,  pleasure,  learning,  the  whole
world  and  all  in  it,  are  not  worth  having  in
comparison  with  being  good  ;  and  the  utterly
best  thing  for  a  man  is  to  be  good,  even  though
he  were  never  to  be  rewarded  for  it.' ' — Kingsley,

"  A  beautiful  form  is  better  than  a  beautiful
face  ;  a  beautiful  behaviour  is  better  than  a
beautiful  form  :   it  gives  a  higher  pleasure  ,
than  statues  or  pictures  ;  it  is  the  finest  of
the  tine  arts." — Emerson.

"As  might  have  been  expected,  the  generous
heart  of  Boaz  opens  all  the  wider  as  he  listens
to  her  thanks,  and  learns  how  unassuming  she
is,  how  grateful  even  for  the  easy  kindness  he
has  showTi  her.  He  knows  who  she  is  and
what  she  has  done.  And  the  piety  as  well  as
the  generosity  of  the  man  comes  out  in  his
reply  :  '  You  have  left  all,'  he  says, '  in  your
love  for  Naomi, — father,  mother,  and  the  land
of  your  nativity.  The  Lord  recompense  you
for  this  good  deed,'  etc.,  etc.  Obviously,  Boaz
had  the  history  of  his  great  ancestor  in  his
mind.  Like  Ruth,  Abraham  had  left  all,  and
gone  out  into  a  strange  country.  And  to  him
God  had  said,  '  I  am  thy  great  reward.'  May
the  blessing  of  faithful  Abraham  come  on
faithful  Ruth  ;  this  is  the  wish  and  prayer  of
Boaz.  He  speaks  not  as  a  Hebrew  landowner
to  a  Moabitish  vagabond  and  beggar,  but
rather  as  a  Hebrew  judge  and  prophet, — as  a
prophet  who  knew  that  even  the  stranger  who
works  righteousness  and  shows  kindness  is
acceptable  to  God." — Cox.

"  Nothing  can  be  meaner  than  flattery  ad-
dressed either  to  the  rich  or  poor,  but  it  may
frequently  be  proper  to  praise  those  who  de-
serve to  be  praised.  Our  Lord  praises  His
disciples  when  He  tells  them  that  they  were
the  men  who  had  continued  wath  Him  in  His
temptations.  Paul  often  commends  the  Chris-
tians to  whom  he  wTote  his  epistles,  although
he  never  failed  to  remind  them  that  they  were
indebted  to  the  grace  of  God  for  all  that  was
worthy  of  praise  in  their  conduct  or  temper.
P>oaz  commended  Ruth,  not  to  inspire  her  with
vanity,  but  to  animate  her  resolution,  to  com-
fort her  dejected  spirit,  and  to  encourage  her
to  use  those  freedoms  which  he  wished  her  to
use  with  himself  and  with  other  Israelites." —
Laicvm.

"  Let  this  encourage  men  in  their  virtuous
proceedings,  knowing  that  their  worthy  deeds
shall  not  be  buried  in  obscurity,  but  shall  find
tongues  in  their  lively  colours  to  express  tliem.
Absalom,  having  no  children,  and  dejsiious  to


viz.,  to  the  poor  who  are  of  the  *'  house-
for  grace  and  godliness   (Bernard),   that

perpetuate  his  name,  erected  '  a  pillar  in  the
king's  dale,'  and  the  same  '  is  called  Absa-
lom's pillar  unto  this  day.'  But  the  most
compendious  way  for  men  to  conseci-ate  their
memories  to  eternity  is  to  erect  a  pillar  of
virtuous  deeds,  which  shall  ever  remain,  even
when  the  most  lasting  monument  in  the  world
shall  be  consumed,  as  not  able  to  satisfy  the
ravenous  appetite  of  all-consuming  time.  And
to  put  the  worst,  grant  the  envious  men  with
a  cloud  of  calumnies  should  eclipse  the  beams
of  virtuous  memories  fi"om  shining  in  the
world,  yet  this  may  be  their  comfort,  t1iat
God  that  '  sees  in  secret '  will  '  reward  them
openly. '  " — Fuller.

"  The  merit  which  Boaz  imputes  to  Ruth  is
of  a  twofold  nature.  Induced  by  affection,
she  has  left  the  highest  possessions  of  life.
She  was  no  orphan  ;  she  was  not  homeless  ;
she  had  what  she  needed  ;  but  left  all,  and
that  for  something  unknown,  the  value  of
which  she  was  not  able  to  estimate.  '  Thou
earnest,'  he  says,  '  to  a  people  which  yesterday,
and  the  day  before  yesterday  (formerly),  thou
didst  not  know.'  How  ?  had  she  not  known
her  family,  Naomi,  and  her  own  husband,
who  were  of  Israel  ?  But  this  family  lived
in  Moab,  where  Israel's  law  was  not  in  force.
The  national  usages  and  institutions  which
had  been  impressed  upon  Israel  by  Israel's
God  she  did  not  know  ;  and  notwithstanding
this  she  had  said,  '  Thy  people  is  my  people,
and  thy  God  my  God.'  " — Lange.

"  Many  who  are  connected  by  aflSnity  think
that  no  more  duties  remain  to  be  performed
when  the  bond  of  connection  is  broken  by  the
death  of  that  husband  or  "wife  on  whom  the
relation  depended.  Naomi  and  Ruth  were  of
a  diffeient  spirit.  Naomi  never  could  forget
Ruth's  kindness  to  her  son.  Ruth  testified
her  regard  to  the  memory  of  her  deceased
husband  by  her  attentions  to  his  mother.
She  not  only  did  '  good  and  not  evil '  to  her
husband  '  all  the  days  of  her  life,'  but  she  did
all  the  good  she  could  to  him  when  he  was
dead,  by  performing  those  services  to  his
mother  which  he  would  gladly  have  performed
if  he  had  been  still  alive.  The  apostle  John
testifled  his  affection  to  his  departed  Lord  by
taking  His  mother  to  his  own  house  and
treating  her  as  a  mother.  1'here  are  kind-
nesses due  to  the  dead  as  well  as  to  the  living,
and  in  these  a  generous  spirit  will  be  careful
not  to  fail." — Lawson.

"  Rouse  to  some  work  of  high  and  holy  love.
And  th(  uaa  angel's  happiness  sh.alt  know, —
Shalt  bless  the  earth  while  in  the  world  above;
The  good  begun  by  thee  shall  onward  flow
In  many  a  branching  stream,  and  w  ider  grow;
The  seed  that  in  these  few  and  fleeting  hours
Thy  hands  unsparing  and  unwearied  sowed.
Shall   deck   thy   grave   with   amaranthine

flowers.
And  yield  thee  fruits  divine  in  heaven's
immortal  bowers."  Wilcoai

115


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.  chap.  ii.  12.


VEKSE  12.
TJieme. — The  Eecompence  of  Eeward.

"The  soul  that  worts  and  lives  throughout  all  time
Embrace  you  in  the  happy  bonds  of  love." — Goethe,

"  'Tis  Thine  alone  to  calm  the  pious  breast
With  silent  confidence  and  holy  rest  ;
From  Thee,  great  God  I  we  spring — to  Thee  we  tend,
Path,  Motive,  Guide,  Original,  and  End." — Johnson.

The  Lord  [Jehovah]  recompense  thy  work,  and  a  full  reward  be  given  thee,

Naomi  in  her  poverty  had  blessed  Ruth  (i.  8,  9),  now  Boaz  takes  up  the  same
strain.  Must  be  something  good  in  those  whom  poor  and  rich  alike  join  to  praise.
Note,  [a]  The  craving  of  the  human  heart  for  the  approval  of  others  not  necessarily
wrong  in  itself.  It  is  the  unduo  craving,  etc.  Unexpected,  unsought  in  the  present
instmce,  and  therefore  all  the  sweeter.  When  we  have  the  prayers  and  good
wishes  of  the  righteous,  heaven  itself  is  touched  ;  and  when  we  win  their  approval
and  blessing,  it  is  as  though  the  benediction  of  God  rested  upon  us  (Ps.  xxxvii.
22).  Note.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  every  believer  may  he  a  priest  and  prophet  to
those  around  him  [cf.  on  i.  8,  9,  p.  39 J.

Remark,  I.  On  tli3  Divine  recompence  as  expected  and  looked  for  by  the
righteous.  "I  know  it  shall  be  "well  with  them  that  fear  God;"  the  language
of  every  truly  believing  heart.  Much  that  seems  against  this  ;  but  faith  looks
through  the  darkness,  and  beyond  the  shadows  ;  knows  that  there  is  a  power
that  works  for  righteousness  at  the  centre  of  all  things,  and  that  every  deed  of
love  is  sure  to  meet  with  its  due  acknowledgment,  and  cannot  pass  unregarded
of  God  (Matt.  X.  41 — 43).  Note.  It  is  only  our  little  side  of  the  world  which  is
in  the  shadow  at  night  time,  the  whole  universe  else  is  filled  with  light.

Mark,  (1)  then,  That  there  is  a  recompence  of  reward  [Gen.  xv.  1;  Ps.  xix.  11],
God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  In  every  nation  he  that  feareth  Him  and  worketh
righteousness  is  accepted  (Acts  x.  34,  35).  Such  have  the  promise  of  this  life  and
of  that  which  is  to  come.  Note,  Our  doings  stand  linked  in  Scripture  with  our
reward.  Not  that  they  earn  the  recompence,  but  that  they  regulate,  they  measure,
they  foreshadow  that  which  is  to  be  given  as  only  God  can  give  [Matt.  vii.  2,
XXV.  21,  23].

Mark,  (2)  That  the  godly  earnestly  desire  this  recompence  of  reward,  [a)  For
themselves.  They  look  forward,  as  the  hireling,  to  the  end  of  the  day,  when  rest
begins,  and  every  man  shall  receive,  etc.  (Matt.  xx.  1 — 16).  Not  that  they  look
forward  merely  with  the  hireling's  spirit.  No  !  but  reward  means  with  them,  life
completed,  holiness  manifested,  nearness  to  Christ.  Therefore  they  have  a  desire,
like  Paul  (Phil.  i.  23  ;  2  Tim.  vi.  8).  {b)  For  others,  as  here.  They  see  the
righteous  in  times  of  trial  and  poverty,  as  Boaz  saw  Ruth.  They  feel  how  inade-
quate is  any  reward  they  themselves  may  bestow.  And  where  they  fall  short,
they  turn  to  God  :  "  The  Lord  recompense,"  etc.  Note.  Boaz  did  something  to
hring  about  this  recompence  himself — a  hint  to  such  as  are  lavish  in  good  wishes,  lax
in  corresponding  deeds.

Remark,  II.  then.  On  the  Divine  recompence  as  prayed  for  by  the  righteous.
(1)  These  prayers  for  the  recom^^ence  of  reward  may  have  a  personal  aspect,  as  here.
There  are  some  deeds  that  men  can  repay ;  others  God  Himself  only  can  recom-
pense. Ruth's  heroism  and  self-denial,  a  type  of  that  which  is  sustained  "  as
seeing  things  that  are  invisible  ;"  which  looks  for  a  reward  not  manifested  as  yet.
Note,  (a)  Boaz  prays  for  God's  recompence,  not  man^s  ;  a  full  reward,  abundant  as
His  love  ;  so  that  she  shall  miss  nothing,  but  recover  all  [Lange).  But  mark,  he
prays  for  this  only  in  the  measure  of  her  worth  and  her  work.  His  prayer  has
respect  to  what  he  has  seen  and  heard,  even  while  he  is  calling  upon  the  Unseen

116


CHAP.  II.  12.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   RUTH.


for  a  blessing  beyond  the  power  of  man  to  bestow — a  cbaraci eristic  of  all  true
prayer.  There  is  nothing  wild,  nothing  random,  nothing  extravagant,  in  the  good
wislies  and  su). plications  of  the  righteous.  But  again  note,  (h)  that  GocFs  reward
vi  ahvai/s  a  full  reward.  Oh  !  the  sure  and  bountiful  p-ymcDts  of  the  Almighty  !
Whoever  came  under  His  wing  in  vain  ?  Whoever  lost  by  trusting  Him  ?  Who-
ever forsook  the  Moab  of  this  world  for  the  true  Israel,  and  did  not  at  last  rejoice
in  the  change  ?  (^Bishop  Hail.)

(2)  These  2)rai/ei's  for  the  recommence  of  reward  may  have  a  wider  aspect.  There
is  a  mysterious  connection  between  prayer  and  Christ's  own  recompence  upon
earth.  He  is  to  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  but  this  only  as  the  Church  waits
upon  God  in  prayer.  For  this  He  will  be  enquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel
(Ezek.  xxxvi.  37).  The  righteous  prosper  as  prayer  prevails,  the  kingdom  of  heaven
spreads  as  men  have  power  with  God.  Hence  the  Church  is  always  to  be  a
praying  Church  ;  and  when  her  arms  are  weary,  as  with  Moses  (Exod.  xvii.  11,  12),
the  enemy  prevails,  and  the  Divine  recompence  lingers.  Wrong,  confusion,  evil,
seem  to  have  the  best  of  it.  It  is  an  age  in  which  the  spirits  of  the  martyred
ones  are  represented  as  crying  out,  "  How  long,  0  Lord  ?  "  (Rev.  vi.  16.)

Remark,  III.  On  the  Divine  recompence  as  certain  to  the  righteous.
Dionysius  is  said  to  have  promised  a  great  reward  to  some  musicians  who  played
before  him.  When  they  came  for  it,  he  told  them  it  was  theirs  already.  They
possessed  it,  in  their  very  hope  and  expectations  of  it.  A  truth  taught  in  this,  but
not  the  w^hole  truth.  Righteousness  is  good  in  and  for  itself,  and  brings  its
present  reward  in  the  glorious  hope  it  inspires.  But  this  is  not  all.  God  does
not  disappoint  His  children.  There  is  something  more  awaiting  us,  something
hereafter.

Notice  then  that  God's  reward  comes  (1)  Sometimes  in  tevipoml  gifts  and  bless-
ings, as  here ;  always  in  the  approval  of  conscience.  The  Mosaic  economy  recognized
both  these,  but  laid  a  stress  upon  the  former ;  while  the  Christian  dispensation
makes  the  spiritual,  the  inner  reward,  the  great  thing.  (2)  Sometimes  in  the  recog-
nition and  approval  of  good  wen,  as  here ;  ahcays  in  the  recognition  and  approval  of
God.  A  craving  for  the  former  becomes  Pharisaism;  and  therefore  the  latter  is  rather
to  be  the  distinguishing  sign  of  Christian  discipleship  [cf.  Matt.  vi.  1 — 6,  16 — 18].
(3)  Sometimes  in  the  spiritual  grouth  and  changes  which  accomjmny  right  doing,  as
here ;  always  in  the  after  reward,  of  eterriity.  No  doubt  that  right  actions  draw  us
nearer  to  God,  bring  peace  and  quietness  of  heart  now,  incline  us  to  become
recipients  of  His  mercy,  who  alone  can  save.  Every  deed  of  righteousness  is  an
acknowledgment  of  the  law  which  He  would  bind  upon  men,  and  so  is  a  turning
to  Him  and  His ;  not  unrew^ard  here,  not  unreward  in  itself,  but  to  be  more  fully
recompensed  hereafter.  Note,  (a)  The  ivorJanaii  is  not  fully  paid  until  his  work  is
done  (Matt.  xx.  8)  ;  and  (b)  That  all  earthly  rewards  are  partial  and  unsatisfactory
(Luke  xiv.  14).  It  is  heaven  that  is  to  compensate  for  the  inequalities  in  the
Divine  recompence  here.  As  the  end  approaches,  the  reward  will  become  more
and  more  apparent  (Ps.  xxxvii.  4 — 6,  22 — 37).

"We  find  in  the  Scriptures  tliree  sorts  of  sense  the  Deity.    Thus  almost  all  the  blessini^s

blessings  among  men.    The  first  is  the  blessing  of  the  patriarchs  were  prophetical,  because  in

of  a  simple  wisb,  which  is  the  most  common.  effect  the  Spii'it  of  God  inspired  them.  .  .  .

Men,    naturally    limited    and    feeble,    have  The   third   kind  are  blessings  of  command,

scarcely  anything  to  l)Ostow  but  g(»od  wishes;  which  are  given  with  authority,  by  a  power

they  can  hardly  give  anything  but  their  pro-  received   from    (Jod    to    bless   in   His   name

mises,  of  which,  for  tlie  most  part,  tliey  are  and  in   His  stead.     Thus  Mcses  blessed  the

not  very  sparing.     J'lieir  blessings  in  this  par-  people  in  the  character  of  their  leader  and

ticularconsistof  pi  avers,  which  they  mutually  mediator.     Melchizcdec,  both  a  king  and  a

offer,  that  the  Almighty  will  deign  to  preserve  priest,  blessed  Abraham,  and  in  his  person  all

— to  fill  with  grace,  with  joy,  and  happiness —  the   patriarchs.     Jesus    Christ,  the   King   of

the  persons  whom  they  bless.  .  .  .  'llie  sectmd  peace  and  righteousness,  blessed  His  apostles,

kind  are  pateinal  blessings,  which   include,  and  in  their  persons  the  whole  Church." —

besides  the  wish,  an  act  of  approbation  and  Svperville.

authority.     Fathers,  then,  represent  in  some  ''  The  kindness  I  show  thee  is  little  in  com-

117


EOMILETIG  COMMENTAIIY :   RUTH,


CHAP.  II.  12.


parison  of  thy  desert ;  God  alone  can  give
thee  a  full  reward  for  thy  kindness  to  thy
husband  and  mother-in-law,  and  He  will  do
it  because  thou  art  come  to  trust  under  His
wing." — A.  Clarhe.

*'  Boaz  does  not  discourse  as  one  would
speak  to  a  Moabitisli  beggar.  Having  heard
who  she  is,  he  looks  upon  her  with  eyes  full
of  joy  over  her  pious  actions.  He  speaks  to
her  as  a  priest  and  prophet.  And  since  he
spake  from  the  enthusiasm  of  piety,  and  she
was  deserving,  his  words  found  fu'filment.
She  received  a  reward  that  was  not  only  full,
but  which  completed  and  wholly  filled  her ;
all  of  which  is  implied  in  the  [Heb.]  words."
— Lange.

"  When  we  begin  to  feel  ourselves  lag  in
Christianity,  let  us  spur  on  our  affections
with  the  meditation  of  that  'full  reward'
which  we  shall  in  due  time  receive ;  with
our  Saviour,  let  us  '  look  to  the  joys  which
are  set  before  us ; '  and  with  Moses,  let  us
have  '  an  eye  to  the  recom pence  of  reward; '
yet  so  that,  though  we  look  at  this  reward,  yet
also  we  must  look  through  it  and  beyond  it.
This  meditation  of  the  reward  is  a  good  place
for  our  souls  to  bait  at,  but  a  bad  place  for
our  souls  to  lodge  in.  We  must  mount  our
minds  higher — namely,  to  aim  at  the  glory  of
God,  at  which  all  our  actions  must  be  directed,
though  there  were  no  reward  propounded  unto
them." — Fuller.

"  Plutarch  tells  of  a  complaint  which  came
from  the  Islands  of  the  Blessed  because  im-
proper persons  were  sent  there  by  the  judges
in  the  earthly  courts.  It  was  found  that  titled
and  noble  persons  went  before  the  judges  with
their  friends,  who  solemnly  swore  that  they
deserved  to  be  sent  to  the  Islands  of  the  Blessed
when  they  deserved  the  contrary.  It  was  then
decreed  by  eternal  doom  that  no  judgment
should  be  passed  till  after  death,  and  then
only  by  spirits  who  could  discern  the  qualities
of  those  whom  they  judged." — Dictlunary  of
Illustrations.

"  There  are  great  rewards  like  jewelled
crowns  ;  there  are  little  rewards  like  diamond
dust ;  the  great  deed  of  love  shall  receive  its
great  reward,  and  the  little  deed  shall  receive
its  measure  too  ;  and  so  it  shall  be  found  here-
after that  nothing  was  forgotten." — Power.

"  Reward  and  recompence  unto  our  good
works  are  not  due  unto  us  for  any  worth  of
our  own,  but  merely  from  God's  free  favour
and  gracious  promise.  For  to  make  a  thing
truly  meritorious  of  a  reward,  it  is  required,
**rst,  that  the  thing  meriting  be  our  own,  and


not  another's.  Now  our  best  works  are  none
of  ours,  but  God's  Spirit  in  us.  Secondly,  it
is  requisite  that  we  be  not  bound  of  duty  to
do  it.  Now  we  are  bound  to  do  all  the  good
deeds  which  we  do,  and  still  remain  but '  un-
profitable servants.'  Thirdly,  there  must  be
a  proportion  between  the  thing  meriting  and
the  reward  merited.  Now  there  is  no  proper
tion  between  our  stained  and  imperfect  works
(for  such  are  our  best),  and  that  infinite
weight  of  glory  wherewith  God  will  reward
us.  It  remains,  therefore,  that  no  reward  is
given  us  for  own  inherent  worth,  but  merely
for  God's  free  favour,  who  crowns  His  own
works  in  us. " — Fuller.

"  Longing  for  heaven,  if  there  be  no  yearn-
ing and  endeavour  for  present  pureness  of  life
and  inward  peace,  .  .  .  can  be  but  an  eager,
sanguine  lust — never  a  solemn,  inspiring
hope. " — Lynch.

"  He  who  sacrifices  a  whole  offering  shall
be  rewarded  for  a  whole  offering ;  he  who
offers  a  burnt-offering  shall  have  the  reward
of  a  burnt-offering ;  but  he  who  offers  humility
to  God  and  man  shall  receive  as  great  a  reward
as  though  he  had  offered  all  the  sacrifices  in
the  world." — Talmud.

"  There  is  an  invai-iable  connection  between
the  outpouring  of  spiritual  influence  and  the
ascent  of  prayer,  and  the  latter  is  the  antece-
dent of  the  former ;  and  we  believe,  verily,
that  there  never  was  an  instance  yet,  in  the
history  of  the  Christian  Church,  signalized  by
the  revival  and  extension  of  true  religion,
which  was  not  preceded  by  another  period
of  humiliation  and  anxious  and  agonizing
prayer.  ...  At  the  sixty-second  chapter  of  the
prophecies  of  Isaiah,  you  read,  '  For  Zion's
sake  will  I  not  hold  my  peace ' — that  u,  in
prayer — '  until  the  righteousness  thereof  go
forth  as  brightness,  and  the  salvation  thereof
as  a  lamp  that  burneth  ;  and  the  Gentiles
shall  see  Thy  righteousness,  and  all  kings  Thy
glory. '  Then  God  speaks  in  the  sixth  verse :
*  I  have  set  watchmen  upon  thy  walls,  O
Jerusalem,  which  shall  never  hold  their  peace
day  nor  night ' — that  is,  in  prayer.  '  Ye  that
make  mention  of  the  Lord,  keep  not  silence  *
—  that  is,  in  prayer  ;  '  and  give  Him  no  rest
till  He  establish  and  make  Jerusalem  a  praise
in  the  earth.'  '  Give  Him  no  rest ' — that  is,
in  prayer.  Shake  off  the  lethargy  which  has
oppressed  you,  enter  into  the  holiest  of  all,
bring  before  it  the  blood  of  piopitiation,  and
stand  before  the  Shekinah  with  unwearied
and  importunate  prayer" — Parsons,


VEKSE    12.

Theme. — The  Wings  of  the  Almighty.

•*The  while  He  sits  whose  name  is  Love,
And  waits,  as  Noah  did  the  dove.
To  see  if  she  would  fly  to  him.

**  He  waits  for  us,  while,  houseless  things,
We  beat  about  with  bruised  wings


X18


CHAP.  II.  12.  nOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.


On  the  dark  floods  and  water-springs,

The  ruin'd  world,  the  desolated  sea  ;
"With  open  windows  from  the  prime,
All  night,  all  day,  He  waits  sublime,
Until  the  fulness  of  the  lime

Decreed  from  His  eternity." — Jean  Ingeloro,

Under  whose  wings  thou  art  come  to  trust.

In  all  ages  and  nations  conversion  is  essentially  the  same  ;  irreligion  or  false
religion  is  exchanged  for  the  spiritual  worship  of  the  true  God  (Scott).  The  alien  in
birth,  or  in  heart  and  life,  comes  to  take  shelter  under  the  wings  of  the  Almighty.
The  hour  of  repentance  and  conversion  is  the  hour  of  this  turning  and  taking
shelter,  whenever  and  wherever  it  may  be.  Note.  We  are  all  aliens  Inj  birth.
Humanity  left  the  Ark  of  shelter  ages  ago,  and  has  been  wandering  about  like
the  poor  fluttering  dove  (Gen.  viii.  9)  ever  since.

You  will  notice —

I.  That  the  Divine  willingness  to  receive  men  is  assumed  here.  And  this,
although  they  are  aliens  to  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  children  of  the  sinful
race  of  Moab.  So  with  ourselves.  There  are  times  when  we  must  have  help  or
perish  ;  there  are  dangers  from  which  none  but  God  can  save  us.  Note.  We  seek
wisely  only  when  we  seek  Godward,  as  here.  The  wings  under  which  Ruth  had
come  to  trust,  (1)  swift,  (2)  broad,  (3)  strowf,  (4)  gentle  {Tabnagc).  She  had
come  to  that  One  who  had  revealed  Himself  to  Israel,  as  a  personal  God,  tender,
sympathetic,  mighty  to  save.  It  is  so  with  all  true  proselytes.  They  come  not
merely  to  Israel,  but  to  Israel's  God ;  not  merely  to  the  Church,  but  to  Him  who
is  Head  of  the  Church.  Note.  The  two  aspects  of  the  Dirine  character  brought
together  here.  God  the  Refuge  is  also  God  the  Re  warder.  So  Christ  (Heb.  xii.  2)
is  the  author  and  finisher  of  faith,  One  strengthening  and  supporting,  and  yet
**  holding  forth  the  crown  of  life."

Observe,  then,  that  when  the  sinner  seeks  pardon,  or  the  soul  seeks  help,
(1)  It  ishere,  in  God.  He  has  undertaken  to  protect,  to  save  such  [cf.  Isa.  xliii.  25,
Iv.  6,  7  ;  John  iii.  16,  17].  (2)  It  is  ready  and  waiting.  The  wings  outsi)read
from  the  foundations  of  the  earth.  Outside  is  danger,  inside  is  protection  ;  out-
side is  wandering,  inside  is  rest ;  outside  is  destruction,  inside  is  salvation.
Note.  The  grace  that  comes  too  late  is  no  grace  at  all.  What  you  and  I  want  is  a
G-od  now  (T(ilmage).

II.  That  the  human  readiness  to  seek  God  is  looked  upon  as  necessary.
Ruth  had  come,  etc.  Blessed  truth  !  for  that  opened  the  way  to  all  the  rest  of  her
history.  Man's  great  sin  always  is  that  he  will  not  come.  More,  Boaz  takes  it
for  granted  that  she  had  faith  ;  for  he  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe,  etc.
{^Bernard).

Men  come  to  God  (1)  To  trust.  Where  else  can  man  find  a  fitting  sphere
for  faith  but  Godward  ?  (2)  To  find  shelter  (Ps.  xci.).  (3)  To  find  deliverance,
(4)  To  find  rest  and  reward.

R.  Macbeth  on  this  : —

Theme. — The  Shelteking  Wino.

We  have  here  one  of  those  grand  and  suggestive  yi//?/r^5  of  speech  with  which  the
Old  Testament  Scriptures  abound,  and  by  which  those  Scriptures  become,  to  the
*'  scribe  well  instructed,"  an  inexhaustible  mine  of  *'  things  new  and  old,"  "  profit-
able for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  and  for  instruction  in  righteousness."

The  figure — suggested  perhaps  in  the  first  instance  by  the  divinely  prescribed
symbolism  of  the  cherubim  overshadowing  with  their  wings  the  mercy -seat — is
of  frequent  occurrence,  with  richly  beautiful  variations  of  aspect,  especially  in  the
earlier  books  of  Scripture  and  in  the  Psalms  [cf.  Exod.  xix.  4  ;  Deut.  xxxii.
11,  12  ;  Ps.  xvii.  8,  xxxvi.  7,  Ivii.  1,  Ixi.  4,  Ixiii,  7,  xci.  4] .  By  this  image  we
are  taught  to  think  of  God —

X19


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  RUTH.  chap.  ii.  12.


I.  As  a  beneficent  sheltering"  power,  to  whom  the  spirit  of  man,  wounded,
wearied,  baffled  by  the  ills  of  life,  turns  and  flees  for  refuge  and  rest  (Ps.
xlvi.  1).  But  this  primary  conception  by  no  means  exhausts  the  significance  of  the
figure.     It  suggests —

II.  The  paternal  relationship  of  God  to  His  people,  and  the  benign  constancy
and  carefulness  with  which  He  Julfils  the  obligations  of  that  relationship.  "As
an  eagle  stirreth  up  her  nest,"  etc.  (Deut.  xxxii.  11,  12).  This  implies  (1)  Nur-
ture, (2)  culture,  (3)  development,  (4)  guidance.

It  suggests  further —

III.  The  beauty,  grace,  and  tenderness  of  the  Divine  action  towards  man.
"We  naturally  ascribe  these  qualities  in  a  special  degree  to  the  feathered  tribes.
And  the  inspired  writer  takes  this  natural  conception  of  ours,  and  fills  it  with  an
inspired  thought  of  God.  Just  as  elsewhere  it  is  said,  "He  that  formed  the  eye,
shall  He  not  see?"  etc.  ;  so  here  we  would  say.  He  that  taught  the  dove  to  soften
the  nest  for  her  young  with  the  feathers  from  her  own  breast,  shall  He  not  deal
tenderly,  graciously,  even  to  self-sacrificing  acts  of  love,  with  those  wh  m  He
regards  as  His  own  offspring  ?  (1)  He  covers  them  with  His  feathers  (Ps.
xci.  4)  j  (2)  He  keeps  them  as  the  apple  of  His  eye  (Ps.  xvii.  8),  etc.  We
have  here,  not  the  mere  negations  of  the  agnostic,  but  the  Grod  of  Israel  revealing
Himself  to  the  hearts  of  men  ;  not  the  vague  sentiment  of  the  Pantheist,  but  the
living,  personal  God,  entering  into  human  relationships  with  human  spirits ;
**  Immanuel,  God  with  us."  Not  the  mere  "  fate,"  or  "  law  "  of  either  ancient
or  modern  paganism,  but  the  loving  Friend  who  knows  His  friends,  and  is  known
of  them  (Prov.  xviii.  24).  In  short,  we  have  here  a  foreshadowing,  *'  as  men
were  able  to  bear  it,"  of  the  final  manifestation  of  the  f.  Iness  of  the  Godhead  in
llim  who  said,  "How  often  would  I  have  gathered  you,"  etc.

E.  Price  on  this  : —

Theme, — The  Habit  of  Holy  Communion.

In  this  benediction  we  see —
I.  A  clear  definition  of  the  happiness  the  soul  desires.

It  would  feel  it  is  under  Jehovah's  protection,  like  a  bird  under  the  wing

of  its  mother.
It  would  find  repose  in  communion  with  Him,  confiding  unsuspectingly  in
His  favour.
II.  The  act  of  the  soul  itself  that  would  enjoy  the  blessing.
It  must  put  itself  under  the  Divine  protection.
God  always  works  through  our  willinghood.
III.  The  law  illustrated  by  the  facts  under  consideration.

The  holier  the  life,  the  deeper  is  to  be  the  enjoyments  of  the  soul.
In  this  sense,  the  fellowship  a  Tiuth  has  with  her  God  is  the  reward  of
grace.

"  The  living  God  was  exhibited  to  the  faith  sufficient  and  only  intended  to  answer  the

of  His  ancient  peeple,  as  the  God  who  dwelt  purpose  of  trying  whether  we  will  serve  God

between   the  cherubims    that   spread   their  or  no." — D?'.  Newman.

wings  over  the  mercy-seat,  the  throne  of  His  "  How  inexcusable  are  we,  if  we  do  not

grace.     It  was  perhaps  in  allusion  to  this  make  the  Lord  our  refuge,  wlien  we  were

symbol    of    God's    residence    amongst    His  born  in  a  land  blessed  with  the  knowledge  of

people,  that  those  who  sought  protection  from  Him,  baptized  in  His  name,  and  trained  up

Him  were  said  to  trust  under  the  shadow  of  to  know  and   serve   Him  !     If  a   Moabitess

His  wings.     *  He  that  dwelleth  in  the  secret  came  to  trust  under  the  wings  of  the  Lord

pla(^3  of  the  Most   High  shall    abide  under  God  of  Israel,  how  shameful  was  it  in  Israelites

the   shadow  of  the  Almighty.     His  feathers  not  to  know  and  trust  the  God  by  whose  name

shall    cover  thee  ;    under  His    wings    sbalt  they  were  called  1  " — Lawson.
thou  trust;    His  faithfulness  shall    be   thy  "  Truly  this  poor  stranger  is  like  some  poor,

shield  and  buckler.'  " — Lanson.  helpless,  fluttering  bird  exposed  to  wild  storms

"This  life  is  but  a  sort  of  outward  stage,  on  and  unfi'iendly  influences  ;  she  needs  shelter

which  we  act  for  a  time,  and  which  is  onlv  and  fostering,  and  God  will  cover  an(l  nurture


CTTAP.  n.  13,  14.     nOMILETlC  COMMENTAPxY:    UUTH.


her  beneath  His  protectinG:  wing — wing  that
ensures  perfect  safety,  but  brings  no  darkness.
Ah  I  it  is  a  grand  belief  this  man  has  in  the
*  God  of  Israel.'  It  is  no  cold  speculation
about  a  distant  incom]^rehensible  Deity,  a
Being  of  icy  mountainous  magnificence,  a
Being  who  is  but  a  combination  of  mysterious
forces  and  laws  ;  but  a  firm  faith  in  One  who
is  a  very  Father,  tenderly  cherishing  the  weak,
caring  for  every  child's  life,  comf(irting  in
sorrow,  sheltering  in  danger,  abundantly  re-
warding every  good  word  and  work.  "Would
that  the  strong  confidence  of  this  man  were
ours  I  " — Braden.

"  There  is  nothing  softer  than  a  feather.
You  have  noticed,  when  a  bird  returns  from
flight,  how  gently  it  stoops  over  the  nest.
The  young  birds  are  not  afraid  of  having
their  lives  trampled  out  by  the  mother- bird,
llie  old  whip-poor-will  drops  into  its  nest  of
leaves,  the  oriole  into  its  casket  of  bark,  the
humming-bird  into  its  hammock  of  moss,
gentle  as  the  light.  And  so,  says  the  Psalmist,
He  shall  cover  thee  with  His  wing.  Oh,  the
gentleness  of  God  1" — Tahnage.

'*  In  summer  the  hen's  wings  are  a  canopy
to  keep  her  chickens  from  the  heat  of  the


scorching  sun  ;  and  in  winter  they  are  a
mantle  to  defend  them  from  the  injury  of  the
piercing  cold.  So  God's  providence  and  pro-
tection makes  His  children  to  sprout,  thrive,
and  prospnr  under  it.  In  prosperity,  God's
providence  kecpcth  tlietn  from  the  heat  of
pride;  in  adverfsily,  it  preserveth  them  from
being  t)enurnl)e(l  witli  frozen  despair.''

"  Let  not  us  trust  to  the  broken  wall  of
our  own  strength,  or  think  to  lurk  under  the
tottering  hedge  of  our  own  wealth,  or  wind —
shaken  reeds  of  our  unconstant  friends  ;  but
fly  to  God,  that  He  may  stretch  His  wings
over  us,  as  the  cherubim  did  over  the  mercy-
seat." — Fvller.

"  Thou,  0  God,  hast  created  us  for  Thyself,
and  our  hearts  are  restless  until  they  find
rest  in  Thee.  ...  I  have  heard  all  that  philo-
sophers can  say,  but  none  of  them  ever  said
what  Jesus  of  Nazareth  has  said,  '  Come  unto
me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,
and  I  will  give  you  rest.'  " — A^ignatine.

"  What  cares  the  child  when  the  mother
rocks  it,  though  all  storms  beat  without  ?  fSo
we,  if  God  doth  shield  and  tend  us,  shall  be
heedless  of  the  tempests  and  blasts  of  life,
blow  they  never  so  rudely," — Beech&r,


VERSES  18,  14.

Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes. — Let  me  find  favour.  I  find  favour  {Le  Clerc,
Berihcau).  This  trans,  not  in  accordance  with  the  modesty  of  humility  which  Ruth  manifests
in  the  following  words  (Keil).  Lange  and  Keil  take  it  as  optative,  and  translate,  "  May  I  find
favour."  The  sense  rather  is  as  in  Psalm  xli.  11.  (By  this  I  know  that)  I  am  finding  favour,
because  Thou  comfortest  me,  etc.  {SjJeaJier's  Com.).  She  had  found  favour  in  his  sight  already.
The  words  are  to  be  translated  as  expressing  this,  and  not  a  further  desire.  So  Gill  and
others.  Spoken  friendly.  Lit,  to  the  heart.  Trans,  kindly  (Gen,  xxiv.  3,  1.  21)  ;  comfortably,
(2  Sam.  xix.  7),  etc.  (Speaker's  Com.).  Be  not  like  unto.  Lit.  be  not  as — that  is,  not  on  a  par
with  them  (  Wordsworth).  But  what  am  I  saying  when  I  call  myself  thy  maiden  1  I  am  not
worthy  to  be  compared  to  the  least  of  thy  maidens  (  Carpzov).  The  LXX.  leaves  out  the  negative
particle,  and  trans,,  "  I  shall  be  as  one  of  thy  handmaidens,"  So  the  Syriac,  which  reads,  "  And
she  said  to  him.  Because  I  have  found  mercy  in  thine  eyes,  my  lord,  and  thou  hast  consoled
me  and  comforted  me,  I  will  be  as  one  of  thine  handmaids."  So  the  Arabic,  with  some  varia-
tions. Boaz  had  placed  her  among  his  handmaids  (ver,  9),  and  goes  on  to  treat  her  as  such
(ver.  14).  Nothing  could  be  more  delicate  or  appropriate  than  the  language  of  the  Syr.  trans,,
or  more  in  accordance  with  Eastern  ways  of  speech,

Ver.  14.  At  mealtime.  Lit.  at  the  time  of  food  (WrigJit).  The  time  of  the  noontide
lunch.  The  principal  meal  was  taken  after  the  labours  of  the  day  were  over  (Steele  and  Terry).
Bread,  provisions  generally.  Vinegar,  Heb.  chomets,  a  cooling  and  refreshing  drink  made  of
sour  wine  mingled  with  oil  ;  still  used  in  the  East  {Keil,  Wordsworth,  Bosen.,  etc.).  A  kind
of  acid  sauce  (A.  Clarke).  Used  because  of  the  heat  of  the  season  {Jarci,  Ahen  Ezra).  The
Midrash  gives  an  allegorical  sense  to  this,  as  meaning  the  chastisement  and  affliction  of  the
Messiah,  Dip  thy  morsel  in  the  vinegar,  Cf.  Christ's  words  when  He  gave  the  sop  to
Judas  (John  xiii,  26),  The  Arabs  to  this  day  dip  the  bread  and  hand  together  {Dr.  Shaw^.
It  is  truly  incredible  how  the  biscuit,  eaten  with  vinegar  and  oil,  strengthens  the  weary  and
exhausted  system,  and  restores  its  powers  {Ileherer).  The  drink  of  the  Roman  soldiers,  called
posca,  consisted  of  water  and  vinegar  {Lange).  Sat  beside  the  reapers.  From  this  ive  may
not  infer  the  two  sexes  ordinarily  took  their  meals  together  {Steele  and  Terry).  Parched
corn.  Made  of  the  best  ears,  when  they  are  not  too  ripe.  Roasted  in  a  pan  or  on  an  iron
plate  {Bohinson).  The  green  ears  become  half  charred  by  the  roasting,  and  there  was  a
pleasant  mingling  of  milky  wheat  and  a  fresh  crust  flavour  as  we  chewed  the  parched  corn
{Tristram).  And  was  sufficed  [satisfied]  and  left  [over].  Was  obliged  to  leave  some,  which
it  seems  (ver,  18)  she  carried  home  to  her  mother-in-law  ( GUI).


121


UOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  BUTE.  chap.  ii.  13.

VEESE  18.
Theme. — The  Heart  realizing  a  Ministry  of  Love,

"Virtue  is  bold,  and  goodness  never  fearful." — Shakespea/re*

"  Low  at  Thy  feet  I  lie,  my  Saviour  and  my  God,
Low  at  Thy  feet  I  lie,  nor  feel  the  chastening  rod  ;
Who  lose  their  all  to  find  the  Spirit  here.
Have  found  this  freedom  from  all  further  fear,

Safe  at  Thy  feet."— ^.

Let  me  find  favour  in  thy  sights  my  lord;  for  that  [or,  I  am  finding,  etc.,  because

thou  hast  comforted,  etc,

A  thankful  heart  will  seek  the  continuance  even  of  undeserved  favours.  Euth
did  not  wonder  more  at  the  kindness  of  Boaz  (ver.  10),  than  show  herself  ready
to  respond  to  it.  The  text  is  not  so  much  a  request  as  an  acknowledgment ; — she
had  found  favour  in  his  sight  already  [see  Crit.  and  Exeg.  Notes], — and  should  be
so  translated.

See  here,  I.  The  secret  of  all  true  and  effective  ministries.  (1)  He  had
*'  spoken  to  the  heart  "  [so  the  Heb.,  LXX.].  The  hidden  springs  of  sensibility  had
been  opened,  and  here  is  the  response.  So  when  the  Jews  comforted  Mary  and
Martha  (John  xi.  19),  the  Syriac  translates,  "  they  spake  with  their  heart."  All
other  speech  ineffective  in  comparison  with  this,  especially  so  when  speaking  on  such
tender  and  momentous  subjects  as  the  soul's  refuge,  "  the  wings  of  the  Almighty."
(2)  He  had  spoken  kindly  in  praising  her  virtues  and  in  praying  for  her.  Kind
words  generally,  if  not  always,  unlock  the  human  heart.  (3)  He  had  comforted
her  in  deed  as  well  as  in  speech.  What  wonder  that  she  says,  or  seems  to  say,  **  I
know  by  this  that  I  am  finding  favour  in  thy  sight "  !

See  here,  II.  A  beautiful  instance  of  the  heart  becoming  conscious  of  this
ministry  of  love.  The  meaning  of  his  kindness  dawns  upon  her,  and  is  dawning,
as  she  recounts  the  manner  of  its  manifestation.  [Trans.  (I  see  that)  I  am  finding
favour  in  thy  sight,  because  thou  comfortest  me  {Speaker's  Com.)\  So  there  is  a
special  moment  in  the  history  of  every  Christian,  when  the  heart  begins  to
realize  the  Divine  love.  His  comforts  and  His  tenderness  to  us  are  seen,  and
shine  out  the  more  conspicuously  as  tokens  of  His  regard.

Note.  She  was  not  one  of  his  handmaids,  and  yet  she  realizes  that  he  is  treating
her  as  such.  Gives  her  a  position  among  them,  etc.  So  the  Apostle  sees  himself
as  one  born  out  of  due  season,  not  meet  to  be  called  an  apostle,  and  yet  raised  to
these  privileges,  etc.  (1  Cor.  xv.  8 — 10).  So  the  prodigal  finds  himself  placed
among  the  children,  and  possessing  a  goodly  heritage  [comp.  Jer.  iii.  19  with
Luke  XV.  21 — 23].  So  with  all  who  are  truly  called  and  chosen  of  God.  They
see  themselves  the  recipients  of  mercies  and  comforts,  as  unexpected  as  they  are
gracious  ;  and  exalted  to  a  position  and  privileges  not  only  dignified,  but  prophetic
of  still  greater  favours  yet  to  come.   *'  Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God,"  etc.

See  here,  III.  An  instance  of  the  heart  responding  to  these  tokens  of  good-
will. Euth  evidently  lelt  that  this  was  her  one  opportunity,  and  acts  as  though
she  felt  it.  Had  not  been  forward  in  making  known  her  claims,  but,  on  the  other
hand,  is  not  backward  in  responding  to  his  kindness.  (1)  She  exalts  her  bene-
factor. She  calls  him  "  my  lord,"  and  so  magnifies  his  mercy.  (2)  She  is  not
unduly  exalted  herself.  Rather  she  feels  her  own  humble  position  the  more,  and
deprecates  her  own  unworthiness  :  "  I  am  not  like  unto  one  of  thine  hand-
maidens." So  the  centurion  did  not  think  himself  worthy  that  Christ  should
come  under  his  roof.  To  the  humble,  every  mercy  comes  as  the  voice  of  unde-
served kindness,  which  encourages  without  puffing  up  {Macartney).

So  in  spiritual  things.  The  soul's  response  to  "  Seek  ye  my  face  "  is,  "  Thy
face,  Lord,  will  I  seek."     While  it  magnifies  the  Divine  mercy,  and  enlarges  upon

122


CHAP.  II.  13.


nOMILETIG  COMMENTAKX  :   BUTE,


the  tokens  of  the  Divine  love,  it  is  ready  like  Ruth  to  humble  itself  in  the  dust  at

the  Master's  feet.

Lessons. — (1)  It  is  lawful  to  give  honourable  titles  to  men,  such  as  befit  their
place  [cf.  Gen.  xxiii.  G ;  Num.  xii.  11 ;  1  Sam.  i.  15  ;  1  Kin^rs  xviii.  7  ;  2  Kings
viii.  12] .  (2)  The  more  humble  men  of  wealth  show  themselves,  the  more  honour
they  get  (Bernard).  Those  stars  seem  to  us  the  greatest,  and  shine  the  brightest,
which  are  set  the  lowest  [Fuller).  (3)  Comfortable  words  do  good  like  a  medicine
(Trapp).  They  do  more,  they  bring  out  that  which  is  good  in  the  recipient.  So
here,  the  more  generously  Ruth  is  dealt  with,  the  more  unassuming  does  she
become.  So  with  the  saints  at  last  (Matt,  xxv.)  :  "  Lord,  when  saw  we  Thee  an
hungred  ?  "  etc.

E.  Price  on  this  : —

Theme. — The  Outward  Proof  op  the  Divtnb  Regard,

He  predisposes  influential  men  to  give  us  their  affection.
Note  the  steps  of  the  process  : —

1.  We  are  rendered  acceptable  to  them,  finding  '*  favour  "  with  them.

2.  We  are  solaced  amidst  the  providential  movements  around  us.  They  comfort
the  heart.

3.  We  are  addressed  by  the  assuring  words  of  sympathy.

They  express  the  affection  borne  to  us,  and  hence  (4)  we  are  astonished  at  the
Lord's  wonderful  condescension  to  our  unworthiness.

Infer.  Humility  bears  direct  proportion  to  our  sense  of  the  Divine  favour.
Whenever  a  Euth  trusts  in  God,  a  Boaz  is  sure  to  appear.


"  To  the  humble  mind  of  Kuth  the  words  of
Boaz  were  the  first  sunbeam  that  broke
through  the  grief  and  tears  of  many  weeks.
Hitherto  she  had  tasted  only  parting  sorrow.
Now,  for  the  first  time,  she  is  addressed  about
the  God  of  Israel  and  His  grace.  The  full
import  of  his  words  her  humble  heart  does
not  presume  to  appropriate.  But  the  kind-
ness of  the  speaker's  voice  is  for  her  like  the
sound  of  a  bubbling  spring  in  the  desert  to
the  thirsty.  A  word  of  love  comes  on  a
loving  heart  like  hers,  long  afflicted  by  sorrow,
like  morning  dews  on  a  thirsty  field." — Cassel
{in  Lange).

"  Oh  that  ministers  had  this  faculty  of
speech  1  not  to  tickle  the  ears,  teach  the
heads,  or  please  the  brains  of  the  people,
but  that  their  sermons  might  soak  and  sink
to  the  root  of  their  hearts.  But  though  this
may  be  endeavoured  by  them,  it  cannot  be
performed  of  them  without  God's  special
assistance.  We  may  leave  our  words  at  the
outward  porch  of  men's  ears  ;  but  His  Spirit
must  conduct  and  lodge  them  in  the  closet  of
their  hearts." — Fuller.

"  Pleasant  words  are  like  an  honeycomb,
sweet  to  the  soul.  Those  words  which  at
once  indicate  friendship  and  nourish  piety
are  doubly  pleasant.  Boa/,  had  not  only
expressed  his  affection  and  esteem  to  Ruth,
but  raised  her  views  to  the  Lord  God  of
Israel,  from  whom  he  encouraged  her  to  ex-
pect her  reward.  His  words  were  no  less
valued  by  her  than  his  gifts.  Words  are
cheap  to  ourselves,  and  they  may  be  very
precious  to  those  to  whom  they  are  addressed,
especially  to  those  who  need  our  sympathy."
— Liitvson.


"  A  little  word  in  kindness  spoken,
A  motion,  or  a  tear.
Has  often  healed  the  heart  that's  broken,
And  made  a  friend  sincere."

Whittier.

"There  are  occasions  when  speech  is  golden
rather  than  silence,  and  when  an  encourag-
ing word  would  be  of  more  real  value  than
the  richest  material  gift.  .  .  .  Some  persons
are  far  too  much  afraid  of  the  effect  of  a  little
generous  and  well-timed  praise.  They  would
keep  all  their  flowers  in  an  ice  house.  Letting
in  a  little  sunshine  upon  them  at  times  would
not  be  amiss.  How  lavish  was  the  wise  and
large-hearted  Paul  with  his  words  of  com-
mendation, whenever  they  could  be  honestly
spoken  or  written  1  " — Br.  A.  Thomson.

"  Opportunity  is  the  flower  of  time,  and
as  the  stalk  may  remain  when  the  flower  is
cut  off,  so  time  may  remain  with  us  when
opportunity  is  gone." — Bond.

"  Augustine  being  asked  what  was  the  first
article  in  the  Christian  religion,  replied,
*  Humility  ; '  and  what  the  second,  '  Humi-
lity; '  and  what  the  third, '  Humility.'  " — Bic.
of  llhistration.t.

"  '  Lord,  when  did  we  do  all  this  1 '  So
completely  is  their  mind  and  memory  filled
with  His  goodness,  that  there  is  no  standing-
place  there  for  any  recollection  of  their  own
acts  of  love  to  Him.  So  abounding  and
immeasurable  appears  His  love  to  them,  that
less  than  nothing,  in  the  comparison,  seems
every  act  of  theirs  for  Him  in  return.  Like
Ruth,  they  can  praise  Him  for  the  comfort
He  has  bestowed  upon  them,  for  the  gracious
and  friendly  way  in  which  He  has  si)oken  to

123


EOMILETIC  COMMENTAIiY :   IlhTB.


rilAP.  TT.  14.


them  ;  but  all  this  only  increases  their  sense
of  their  own  unworthiness  of  such  mercy." —
Tyng,

"The  train  of  our  adorable  Immanuel  is
BO  august,  so  glorious  by  His  communicated
grace,  that  the  poor  believer  cannot  easily  be
brought  to  consider  himself  amonist  the
happy  number.  All  the  holy  angels,  all  the
glorified  saints,  day  and  night  attend  upon
His  pleasure  ;  ten  thousand  times  ten  thou-
sand stand  before  Him,  and  thousands  of  thou-


sands fly  at  His  command.  The  patriarchs
and  prophets,  the  apostles  and  evangelists,
the  noble  army  of  martyrs,  and  all  the  spirits
of  just  men  made  perfect,  swell  His  brilliant
train  ;  and  how  can  I,  who  am  so  black  and
swarthy,  so  wretched  and  sinful,  be  numbered
amongst  company  so  honouiable  1  Whence
is  it  to  me  that  my  Lord  should  regard  me
with  favour,  and  permit  me  to  a]^.proach  Thy
sacred  presence,  and  encourage  me  to  feed  on
the  bounties  of  Thy  grace  ? " — Macgoivan.


VERSE   14.

Hume, — ^pROvisioN  for  the  Stranger  at  the  Gate,

" That  best  portion  of  a  good  man's  life;
His  little,  nameless,  unremembered  acts
Of  kindness  and  of  love."—  Words7vorth.

•*A  poor  man,  served  by  thee,  shall  make  thee  rich  ;
A  sick  man,  helped  by  thee,  shall  make  thee  strong ;
Thou  shalt  be  served  thyself  by  every  sense
Of  service  which  thou  renderest." — Mrs.  E.  B.  Browning,

God  has  from  the  beginning  made  the  cause  of  the  poor  man  His  own  (Baldwin
Brown).  Rich  men,  if  good  men,  are  to  be  His  almoners.  To  such  Christ  says,
**  The  poor  ye  have  always  with  you."  See  how  natural  kindness  is  to  such  I
one  deed  of  love  leading  to  another  and  a  better  almost  unconsciously.  That
of  Boaz  like  an  open  fountain  when  it  has  once  begun  to  flow  (Dr.  Thomson),
From  kind  actions  he  goes  on  to  comforting  words,  and  from  comforting  words  to
kind  actions  once  again.  Wonderful  how  Providence  does  open  the  heart  to
etrangers  !  Joseph  was  so  affected  by  the  treatment  he  received  as  such  in
Egypt,  that  he  called  one  of  his  sons  by  a  name  expressive  of  what  he  felt
(Toller),  Boaz,  in  his  treatment  of  Ruth,  a  beautiful  illustration  of  the  way
Christ  receives  such.

I.  He  invites  her  to  come  and  partake  of  the  meal  provided  for  his  servants.
Not  meet  to  give  the  children's  bread  unto  dogs  (Matt.  vii.  6  ;  Mark  vii.  27) ;  and
yet,  from  the  voice  calling  Adam  in  the  garden,  to  the  Spirit  and  the  bride
saying  "  Come,"  in  the  Apocalypse,  the  Word  of  God  is  full  of  invitations  to
wandering,  weary  men.     [Cf.  also  Luke  xiv.  21 — 23.]

II.  He  seats  her  in  honour  among  his  reapers.  So  the  Saviour  calls  the
Gentiles  to  be  co-heirs  with  His  own  people  ;  puts  the  alien  among  His  children ;
exalts  Saul  the  persecutor  to  be  the  chiefest  among  the  apostles ;  gives  His  saints
at  last  an  inheritance  among  the  angels  of  God.

III.  He  reaches  forth  his  own  hand  to  provide  for  her  wants.     So  the
Saviour  sent  not  a  servant,  but  came  Himself,  to  provide  for  man's  need.     "  He
saw  there  was  no  man,  and  wondered  that  there  was  no  intercessor"  (Isa.  lix.  16)
"Therefore,"  He  says,  "mine  own  arm  brought  salvation"  (Isa.  Ixiii.  6).

IV.  He  satisfies  these  wants  completely.  There  was  plain  fare,  but  it  was
sufficient.  Nature  is  content  with  a  little,  and  hunger  hunteth  not  after  delicacies
(Trapp).  So  in  the  spiritual  realm,  every  real  want  of  man  is  provided  lor  by  the
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.

Spurgeon  on  this  (condensed) : —

Theme. — Mealtime  in  the  Cornfield  :  A  Harvest  Sermon

I.  God's  reapers  have  their  mealtimes.     A  good  master  will  not  muzzle  the
ox  that  treadeth  out  the  corn.     Christ's  reapers  not  only  have  a  blessed  re\\ard
at  last ;  they  have  also  plenteous  comforts  by  the  way.     They  have  (1\  mealtimes^
124


CHAP.  II.  14.  HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:   RUTH.


when  they  come  together  to  listen  to  the  word  preached.  Where  the  doctriues  of
grace  are  plainly  and  boldly  delivered  in  connection  with  the  other  truths  of
revelation ;  where  the  cross  is  lifted  up,  where  the  work  of  the  Spirit  is  not
forgotten,  there  is  sure  to  b^  food  for  the  children  of  God.  Our  hearers  must
have  their  portion  of  meat  in  due  season.  There  mast  be  something  for  all-^^
milk  for  babes,  etc.

(2)  Mealtimes  in  our  private  rradinps  and  meditations.  Meditation  is  dijijestion,
and  the  finest  wheat  is  to  be  found  in  secret  prayer.  The  shepherd  of  Salisbury
Plain  said,  when  his  wallet  was  empty,  his  Bible  was  meat  to  him.  (3)  One  meal-
time that  is  specially  ordained — in  the  supper  of  our  Lord.  In  keeping  the
Master's  command  there  is  great  reward.  Like  poor  Mephibosheth,  we  are
made  to  sit  at  David's  table.     The  prodigal  eats  the  meat  of  children.

(4)  Mealtimes  which  God  gives  us  at  seasons  when  perhaps  we  little  expect  them.
In  the  street,  in  the  middle  of  business ;  when  dull  and  earth-bound ;  suddenly.
In  the  morning,  as  if  the  dew  was  visiting  the  flowers  ;  in  the  evening,  etc.
(5)  Mealtimes  at  certain  seasons  when  we  may  expect  them,.  The  Eastern  reaper  has  a
set  time.  So  in  affliction  we  may  expect  thotn  ;  after  toil  we  may  look  for  them;
and  again,  before  a  trial.  Elijah  must  be  entertained  beneath  a  juniper  tree,  for
he  is  to  go  forty  days  in  the  strength  of  that  meat.  After  trouble  or  arduous
service.

II.  To  these  meals  the  gleaner  is  afFectionately  invitsd.  The  poor  trembling
stranger,  who  has  no  right  to  be  in  the  field,  except  the  right  of  charity,  is  called
to  the  meals  of  the  strong-handed,  full-assured  reaper.

(1)  The  gleaner  is  invited  to  come.  "  At  mealtimes  come  thou  hither.'*  None
should  be  kept  away  from  the  place  of  feasting,  the  hou^e  of  God,  by  personal
character,  or  poverty,  or  physical  infirmities.  A  poor  deaf  woman,  asked  why
she  was  always  there,  replied,  "that  God  was  pleased  to  give  her  many  a  sweet
thought  upon  the  text  while  she  sat  in  His  house."  (2)  Again,  not  only  to  come,  but
to  eat.  Whatever  the  sweet  and  comfortable  word,  the  broken  and  the  contrite
spirit  is  invited  to  partake  of  it.  You  are  saying,  "I  have  no  right;"  but  He
gives  you  the  invitation.  "You  are  unworthy;"  but  He  bids  you  come.  Further,
Ruth  was  not  only  invited  to  eat  the  bread,  but  to  dip  her  morsel  in  the  vinegar^
a  sauce  which  the  Orientals  used  with  their  bread.  So  the  Lord's  reapers  have
not  merely  doctrines,  but  the  holy  unction  which  is  the  essence  of  doctrines —
not  merely  truths,  but  the  hallowing  and  ravishing  delight  which  accompanies
the  truths.

III.  Boaz  reached  her  the  parched  corn.  Christ  does  this  to  believers  (1)
when  He  inspires  their  faith  ;  (2)  when  He  sheds  abroad  the  love  of  God  in  their
hearts  ;  (3)  when  He  gives  us  close  communion  with  Himself;  (4)  when  He  gives
us  the  infallible  witness  that  we  are  born  of  Grod.  Philip  de  Morny  was  wont  to
say  that  the  Holy  Spirit  had  made  his  salvation  as  clear  to  him  as  ever  a  problem
proved  to  a  demonstration  in  Euclid  could  be.

IV.  She  did  eat,  and  was  sufficed,  and  left.  Sooner  or  later  every  penitent
shall  become  a  satisfied  believer — head,  heart,  hope,  desire,  conscience,  judgment,
memory,  imagination,  all  filled.

E.  Price  on  this : —

Theme. — The  Common  Meal.

It  should  be  characterized  by  the  following  particulars  :—

It  should  indicate  the  Divine  hand  in  providing  it.

It  should  minister  to  the  calm  contentment  of  our  hearts.

It  should  indicate  a  self-respect  before  men.

It  should  prepare  for  the  next  duties  in  life.
Hence  conclude —

If  God  provide  for  a  Rathy  the  daily  bread  will  not  only  come  to  the  hand,  but
satisfy  all  the  longings  of  the  heart.

125


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  RUTH.


CHAP.  II.  13.


"  One  fact  I  think  I  ha^e  everywhere  ob-
servrd. :  the  farther  one  moves  from  the  high
road  and  the  busy  marts  of  men,  the  more
people  are  shut  in  by  the  mountains,  isolated
and  confined  to  the  simplest  wants  of  life,
the  more  they  draw  their  maintenance  from
simple,  humble,  and  unchangeable  pursuits  ;
so  much  the  better,  the  more  obliging,  the
more  friendly,  unselfish,  and  hospitable  are
ihQjr— Goethe.

"  You  have  seen  the  stagnant  pool,  over-
grown with  weeds,  into  which  the  rain  falls
and  the  showers  descend,  but  which  gives  out
no  fertilizing  stream  to  water  the  barren  earth
around.  There  is  the  image  of  an  avaricious
and  selfish  life — a  life  stagnant  and  noxious
in  the  sight  of  God  and  man.  And  you  have
se(  n  the  mountain  lake,  clear  as  crystal,  into
which  the  brooks  run  and  the  streamlets  flow,
but  which  sends  them  forth  again  a  broad
river  to  refresh  and  make  glad  the  earth.
There  is  the  image  of  a  life  responding  to  the
law  of  Christian  usefulness,  counting  itself  as
steward  only  for  a  while,  and  not  as  owner  of
all  that  it  possesses." — J3.

*•  Wherefore  doth  the  Lord  make  your  cup
run  over,  but  that  other  men's  lips  might  taste
the  liquor  1  The  showers  that  fall  upon  the
highest  mountains  should  glide  into  the  lowest
valleys." — Seclier.

*'  The  precept  of  love  was  given  also  in  the
moral  law.  That  law  contains  ten  command-
ments, but  they  may  all  be  reduced  to  this,
*  Love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,
and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.'  ...  If  we  go
farther  back  still,  we  shall  find  the  ancient
commandment  in  existence;  for  the  law  of
love  is  as  old  as  human  nature  itself.  '  God
created  man  in  His  own  image ' — gave  him  a
spiritual  nature,  possessed  of  the  powers  of
thought,  will,  conscience,  imagination,  and
the  faculty  of  goodness  or  love.  Two  things
should  be  noticed  with  regard  to  the  last  of
these.  First,  the  faculty  of  love  belongs  to
him  as  man — is  part  of  his  nature.  Treat  the
flower  rightly,  plant  it  where  the  sun-rays
play,  and  it  will  grow  and  become  beautiful,
and  will  fill  the  surrounding  atmosphere  with
its  fragrance,  for  it  is  made  to  give  itself
away ;  and  if  man  had  been  true  to  himself,
if  he  had  avoided  sin,  and  lived  in  all  his
faculties,  his  good- will  and  love  would  have
gone  forth  to  his  fellows  as  naturally  as  per-
fume from  the  flower.  Second,  the  sense  or
feeling  that  love  is  right,  that  it  is  a  duty;
and  that  to  hate  others,  or  even  to  be  indif-
ferent to  them,  is  wrong.  This  is  the  Divine
testimony  in  man's  conscience,  the  *  old  com-
mandment '  of  the  gospel  and  of  the  law  in
another  form — a  silent  commandment  which
makes  itself  heard  and  felt  without  the  use  of
words." — Thomas  Jones.

"  The  very  essence  of  charity  is  disinterested
goodness;  and  although  we  may  like  it  the
better  for  its  returns  of  benefit,  we  must  obey
its  impulses  from  delight  itself.  Where  we
fail  in  this,  our  charity  fails,  although  our
deeds  of  beneficence  still  be  abounding.'^ —
A  non.

126


"  The  rich  man's  superfluity  was  ordained
to  relieve  the  poor  man's  necessity.  A  lady,
on  giving  sixpence  to  a  beggar,  accosted  him
thus:  '  I  have  now  given  you  more  than  God
ever  gave  me.'  To  whom  he  replied,  *  No,
madam;  God  hath  given  you  all  your  abun-
dance.' *  That  is  your  mistake,'  said  she,  '  for
He  hath  but  lent  it  me  that  I  might  bestow  it
on  such  as  you.'  " — Seeker.

*'  Men  resemble  the  gods  in  nothing  so
much  as  in  doing  good  to  their  fellow-
creatures." — Cicero.

"  Seneca  the  heathen  inculcates  a  principle
worthy  the  credence  of  every  Christian:  'I
believe  I  truly  enjoy  no  more  of  the  world's
affluence  than  what  I  willingly  distribute  to
the  necessitous.'  Without  your  mercy  the
poor  cannot  live  on  earth,  and  without  God's
mercy  you  shall  not  live  in  heaven." — Seeker.

'•This  also  is  given  to  pious  souls  by  God,
that  being  devoted  to  Him,  He  often  secretly,
and  even  without  their  becoming  aware  of  it,
impels  them  to  this  or  that  good  action." —
Starke.

"  Is  not  this  the  very  way  in  which  our  rich
Kinsman  deals  with  those  whom  He  loves  and
saves  ?  .  .  .  He  calls  poor  fainting  sinners  to
come  without  doubt  or  fear,  and  take  their
place  among  the  company  of  the  redeemed;
for  everything  is  there  provided  which  they  can
need — abounding  grace  for  abounding  sin.  He
ministers  Himself  to  their  secret  wants.  He
reaches  forth  with  His  own  hand  the  parched
corn  of  His  sacrifice  for  them.  And  in  this
secret,  personal,  divine  ministration,  they  eat
and  are  sufllced." — Tyng  (condensed),

"  *  Oh  1  but,'  says  one,  '  how  can  it  be  ?  I
am  a  stranger.*  Yes,  a  stranger;  but  Jesus
Christ  loves  the  stranger.  *  A  publican,  a
sinner  ; '  but  He  is  *  the  Friend  of  publicans
and  sinners.'  *  An  outcast; '  but  He  '  gather-
eth  together  the  outcasts  of  Israel.'  *  A  stray
sheep;'  but  the  shepherd  ' leaves  the  ninety
and  nine,'  to  seek  it.  'A  lost  piece  of  money,*
but  He  '  sweeps  the  house '  to  find  it.  '  A
prodigal  son; '  but  He  sets  the  bells  a-ringing
when  He  knows  that  thou  wilt  return.  Come,
Ruth  1  Come,  trembling  gleaner  1  Jesus
invites  thee;  accept  the  invitation,  'At
meal-time  come  thou  hither,  and  eat  of  the
bread,  and  dip  thy  morsel  in  the  vinegar." —
Sjjurgeon.

"  We  must  not  look  upon  this  as  being  some
sour  stuff.  No  doubt  there  are  crabbed  souls
in  the  Church,  who  always  dip  their  morsel  in
the  sourest  imaginable  vinegar,  and  with  a
grim  liberality  invite  others  to  share  a  little
comfortable  misery  with  them;  but  the  vine-
gar in  my  text  is  altogether  another  thing.
This  was  either  a  compound  of  various  sweets
expressed  from  fruits,  or  else  it  was  that  weak
kind  of  wine  mingled  with  water  which  is
still  commonly  used  in  the  harvest-fields  of
Italy  and  the  v^armer  parts  of  the  world — a
drink  not  exceedingly  strong,  but  excellently
cooling,  and  good  enough  to  impart  a  relish
to  the  reapers'  food." — Ibid,

"  You  may  suspect  some  danger  nigh  when
your  delights  are  overflowing.    If  you  see  a


r^At*.  II.  15— 17.      noMTtF.fTO  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.


ship  takings  in  ^eat  quantities  of  provision,  it  wrestled  with  God,  and  then  afterwards,  at
is  bound  for  a  distant  port.  And  wlicn  God  Mahanaira,  hosts  of  angels  met  him.  Abra-
sives you  extraordinary  seasons  of  communion  ham  wars  with  the  kings,  and  returns  from
vnth  Jesus,  you  may  look  for  long  leagues  of  their  slaughter;  then  it  is  that  Melchisedec
tempestuous  sea.  Sweet  cordials  prepare  for  refreshes  him  with  bread  and  wine.  After
stern  conflicts.  Times  of  refreshing  also  occur  conflict,  content ;  after  battle,  banquet.  When
after  trouble  or  arduous  service.  Christ  was  thou  hast  waited  on  thy  Lord,  then  thou  shalt
to'npted  of  the  devil,  and  afterwards  angels  sit  down,  and  thy  Master  will  gird  Himself
came    and    ministered    unto    Him.      Jacob  and  wait  upon  thee." — Ibid.


VERSES  15—17.

Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes. — Vcr.  15.    And  when  she  was  risen  np.    Evident

from  this  and  the  previous  phrase  that  Boaz  said,  "  Come  thou  hither,"  as  he  himself  sat  among
his  reapers  at  the  mid-day  meal.  So  that  a  pause  may  be  understood  between  the  first  con-
versation, ending  with  ver.  13,  and  the  invitation  itself,  during  which  Ruth  goes  on  with  her
gleaning.  Then  there  is  the  rest  lasting  throughout  the  hour  of  meals,  in  the  tent  or  house  for
the  reapers,  followed  by  fresh  toil  until  the  evening.  Commanded  hia  young  men.  He  had
charged  them  already  not  to  touch  her  (ver.  9).  Let  her  glean  even  among  the  sheaves.  She
may  also  glean  between  the  sheaves  (ICeil).  A  rare  privilege,  not  allowed  to  ordinary  gleaners
(Steele  and  Terry)  ;  and  a  still  greater  concession  tlian  that  in  ver.  9 — "  after  the  reapers."
And  reproach  her  not.  (Heb.  shame  her  not)  ;  [xr]  KaTaLcrxvvriTe  (LXX.).  Ye  shall  not  shame
her  [do  her  any  injury  (Jud.  xviii.  7)]  {Keil).  In  other  words,  they  were  not  to  say  things  to
her  which  would  make  her  blush  {iMtige),  not  to  remind  her  of  her  poverty,  etc.

Ver.  16.  And  let  fall  also  of  the  handfuls.  Let  fall  also  out  of  your  armfuls  that  you
have  reaped  {Vvlg.).  Pull  out  fi'om  the  bundles  {Lange).  Ye  shall  also  draw  out  of  the
bundles  for  her  {Kvil).  It  is  necessary  to  distinguish  carefully  between  "  the  sheaves  "  (ver.  15)
and  the  "  handfuls."  The  former  is  the  sheaf  already  bound  by  the  maidservants,  and  lying
on  the  ground ;  the  latter  is  the  bundle  as  taken  up  and  still  held  in  the  arm,  manipulus
{Lange).  And  leave  them.  Let  them  lie  (Kell).  And  rebuke  her  not.  Scold  her  not
(Lange,  Ke'd).  These  directions  of  Boaz  went  far  beyond  the  bounds  of  generosity  and  com-
passion for  the  poor,  and  show  that  he  felt  a  peculiar  interest  in  Ruth,  with  whose  circumstances
he  was  well  ac(|uainted,  and  who  had  won  his  heart  by  her  humility,  etc., — a  fact  important
to  notice  in  connection  with  the  further  course  of  the  history  (Keil).

Ver.  17.  And  beat  out,  ippd^dLo-ev  (LXX.).  With  a  stick  (  Wordsworth).  A  process  often
witnessed  by  modern  travellers  in  the  East  (Steele  and  Terry).  About  an  ephah  of  barley.
About  a  bushel  and  a  half  (ibid).  About  twenty  to  twenty-five  lbs.  (Keil).  Impossible  to
ascertain  the  quantity,  still  less  its  weight,  exactly,  but  it  was  considerable,  say  fifty-five
pounds  (Lange).  About  eight  gallons ;  see  Exod.  xvi.  36  (  Word.<iworth).  She  had  gleaned  so
much,  she  could  not  carry  it  home  in  the  ear  (ibid.).  An  ephah  exactly  equal  to  an  English
cubic  foot  (Conder),  The  quantity  of  manna  contained  by  the  ephah  was  sufficient  for  ten
men  (ct  Exod.  xvi.  16,  with  ver.  36).

VERSES   15,  16.
Theme. — ^Liberal  Giving,  like  God'h

"  And  the  more  thou  spendest
From  thy  little  store  ;
With  a  double  bounty,

God  shall  give  thee  more."

••  Thrice  happy  man  1  enabled  to  pursue
What  aU  so  wish,  but  want  the  power  to  do  !  ** — Pope,

And  wlien  she  was  risen  up  to  glean,  Boaz  commanded  his  young  men,  saying.  Let
her  glean  among,  etc.^  and  reproach  her  [shame  her]  not.  And  let  fall^  etc.,
and  rebuke  [scold]  her  not.

Rested,  refreshed,  invigorated  with  food,  as  well  as  comforted  by  the  kind
words  of  the  master  of  the  harvest-field,  Ruth  evidently  rises  to  her  labour
with  nev  pleasure  and  fresh  earnestness.  Note,  [a)  Tlie  poor  can  appreciate  and
respond  to  all  this,  without  presuming  upon  it,  or  -without  being  encouraged  to  idleness.
Kindness   to   the   deserving  is  a   stimulus,  an  incentive  to  fresh  enterprise  and

]27


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.  chap.  li.  15.


diligence,     (b)  The  true  use  of  rest  and  food  is  to  strengthen  us  for  resuming  our
toil.

Again,  mark  how  the  diligent  hand  obtains  new  and  ever-increasing  favours.
God's  law  is,  to  him  that  hath  shall  be  given,  and  labour  is  the  appointed  way  of
increase,  from  which  even  Paradise  itself  was  not  exempted  (Gen.  ii.  15).  He
who  would  have  must  get,  and  he  who  would  have  much,  must  get  diligently.
We  are  all  gleaners,  and  the  world  is  our  harvest-field  ;  and  productive  gleaning
is,  and  always  has  been,  to  the  earnest  and  the  industrious.  God  helps  us,  both
in  spiritual  and  temporal  things ;  but  He  in  no  way  does  so  with  a  desire  to  do
away  with  human  responsibility.  He  scatters  His  blessings  around  us,  but  we
ourselves  must  gather  and  make  them  our  own.  His  giving  is  never  intended  to
abate  our  diligence.  Boaz  here  gives  from  pure  goodness  and  nobleness  of  heart,
and  therefore  his  benevolence  is  a  type  of  the  divine  and  perfect  giving  of  God.

I.  He  gives  unexpectedly.  This  is  seen  in  two  ways  :  {!)  He  allows  her  to
" glean  among  the  sheaves"  in  a  place  where  her  labour  will  be  more  productive.
So  the  Divine  hand,  in  reward  for  past  diligence,  and  as  a  proof  of  present  favour,
leads  men  to  new  spheres  and  employments,  more  fertile,  as  well  as  more  dignified
and  productive.  Joseph  is  exalted  in  Egypt,  and  David  in  Israel,  and  Paul  among
the  apostles.  Note.  It  is  lawfid  to  extend  favours  more  to  one  than  another  (Fuller),
in  those  things  which  are  free  favours  (ibid.),  in  those  things  which  are  our  own
(Matt.  XX.  15),  as  with  Boaz  here.  So  with  the  Divine  grace,  and  those  privileges
and  opportunities  God  bestows  in  a  seemingly  unequal  way  among  men.  He  gives
and  rewards  not  without  a  meaning,  and  not  without  a  reason — this  were  im-
possible with  Him ;  but  He  will  be  accountable  to  no  man  for  His  dealings  with
the  most  highly  favoured  among  men.  The  answer  of  sovereign  grace  to  the
caviller  is,  and  always  must  be,  "  Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  do  what  I  will  with
mine  own  ?  "     *'  Is  thine  eye  evil  ?  "  etc.

(2)  He  charges  his  reapers  to  scatter'  handfuls  for  her.  He  increases  her  glean-
ings, and  5 et  makes  it  appear  the  fruit  of  her  own  industry  [Thomson).  [See  on
ver.  8,  9,  div.  I.,  p.  108.]  And  in  our  own  lives  how  often  God  has  given  (a)
beyond  our  fondest  anticipations,  and  (b)  in  ways  which  seem  the  result  of  our
own  thrift  and  endeavours.  [Examples  :  Jacob  in  Laban's  household  ;  Daniel  in
Babylon.]  We  say,  in  our  short-sightedness,  possibly,  that  our  own  hand  and  our
own  wisdom  has  gained  us  all  this  increase  ;  but  is  it  so  ?

II.  He  gives  liberally.  Nowhere  have  the  poor  been  cared  for  so  liberally  as
among  the  Jews  [Baldwin  Brown).  The  law  made  it  a  sacred  duty  not  to  reap
**  wholly  the  corners  of  the  field,"  etc.  (Lev.  xix.  9,  10),  but  to  leave  something
behind  for  the  destitute  and  the  stranger.  Boaz,  however,  goes  beyond  his  creed;
and  so  Ruth,  who  expected  to  gather  a  little,  gathers  abundantly.  This  is  the
Divine  idea,  "good  measure,  pressed  down,  running  over;"  not  the  giving  with
a  niggardly  spirit  and  a  grudging  hand,  but  largely,  overflowingly,  beyond  that
which  is  due,  beyond  that  which  is  expected  or  even  deserved.  (1)  So  good  men
give.  They  live  to  bestow  happiness.  Biches  are  lent,  not  given,  and  bring  the
purest  pleasure  when  scattered  around  upon  the  worthy  and  the  necessitous.
Wealth—

"  By  disburdening  grows
More  fi'uitful,  which  instructs  us  not  to  spare." — Milton.

So  God  gives  (a)  largely,  [b)  liberally,  (c)  lavishly,  (d)  constantly.  Note,  ffe  can
make  the  world,  to  eve7'g  one  of  us^  a  harvest -field,  full  of  temporal  and  spiHtual
blessings.

III.  He  gives  without  reproach  and  without  rebuke.  His  reapers  are  only
his  agents  in  this  matter;  the  master's  will  is  to  control  all.  An  alien,  and  a
daughter  of  the  sinful  race  of  Moab,  shall  glean  in  the  choicest  portions  of  his
harvest-field,  shielded  from  prejudice,  aud  without  a  single  word  to  remind  her  of
her  poverty,  or  her  unworthiness  (as  some  would  think  it),  or  of  the  unexpected

128


CHAK  II.  15,  16.       II'KMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUni


favour  bestowed  upon  her.  A  word  to  a  delicate,  sensitive  spirit  like  thar  she
has  d  splayed  would  spoil  all  ;  therefore  rebuke  her  not.  Note.  Kindness  ihoiv3
itself  not  only  in  doing  good,  hut  also  in  preventing  evil  and  reproach.  How  exactly
all  this  corresponds  to  the  Divine  dealings  with  sinful  men  !  When  they  couic
in  humble,  sup[)li<int  attitude,  it  is  said,  "  None  of  their  sins  shall  be  mentioned
unto  them."  God  shields  from  shame,  as  well  as  bestows  pardon,  and  sovereign
grace  is  always  willing  to  blot  out  the  past.  The  inspired  conception  of  the  Divine
benevolence  is  that  He  "giveth  to  all  men  liberally  and  upbraideth  not "( James i.  5).

Again,  God  charges  others,  lest  they  should  reproach  the  sensitive  and  the
tenderhearted  aniong  His  children  (Isa.  xl.  1,  2  ;  Ixv,  25),  as  well  as  the  wan-
derer and  the  stranger  who  cast  themselves  on  His  protecting  care.  The  Saviour's
disciples  were  reapers  in  a  field  "  white  unto  the  harvest,"  and  yet,  when  they
would  have  rebuked  others  who  were  not  "  of  them,"  He  said,  "  Forbid  them
not"  (Matt.  ix.  39).

IV.  He  gives  in  encouragement  of  her  own  labours.  The  kindness  of  Boaz
suited  (1)  to  her  situation,  (2)  to  her  employ)fieut  as  a  gleaner  in  the  harvest  field.
So  God  gives  in  kind  as  well  as  in  degree,  according  to  our  present  capacity.  He
gives  along  the  lines  we  ourselves  are  laying  down — a  solemn  yet  certain  truth
— and  according  to  the  spirit  and  diligence  we  ourselves  are  displaying.  He  gives
"  wood  and  hay  and  stubble  "  to  such  as  are  seeking  such  ;  the  pure  and  precious
grain  of  the  kingdom  only  to  those  whom  He  is  certain  have  sought,  and  sought
diligently,  for  the  same.

Improvement.  (1)  Charity,  wisely  directed,  will  not  tempt  the  poor  to  idle-
ness (Lawson).  (2)  If  we  come  into  fellowship  with  God,  He  will  protect  our
characters  from  shame  {E.  Price),  as  well  as  our  lives  from  want.  We  are  to  do
our  duty,  and  leave  the  rest  with  Him.  When  led  into  danger,  we  are  to  go
quietly  on,  trusting  to  His  guidance,  as  well  as  to  our  own  integrity.


"  The  end  of  feeding  is  to  fall  to  our  call-
ing. Let  us  not  therefore,  with  Israel,  sit
down  to  eat  and  to  drink,  and  so  rise  up  to
play  ;  but  let  us  eat  to  live,  not  live  to  eat.
We  need  not  m^ke  the  clay  cottage  of  our
body  much  larger  than  it  is  by  immoderate
feeding  :  it  is  enough  if  we  maintain  it  so
with  competent  food,  that  God,  our  Landlord,
may  not  have  just  <  aus^e  to  sue  us  for  want  of
reparations." —  Fuller.

"  That  bird  was  once  a  woman,  and  it  is  a
good  lesson  she  reads  us.  One  day  she  was
kneading  bread  in  her  trough,  under  the  eaves
of  her  house,  when  our  Lord  passed  by,  lean-
ing on  St.  Feter  She  did  not  know  it  was
the  Saviour  and  His  apostle,  for  they  looked
like  two  poor  men  travelling  past  her  door.
'  Give  lis  of  your  dough,  for  the  love  of  God,*
gaid  the  Lord  Christ :  '  we  have  come  far
a<ross  the  field,  and  have  fasted  long.'  Ger-
trude pinched  off  a  small  piece  for  them  ;  but
on  rolling  it  in  her  trough,  to  get  it  into
shape,  it  grew  and  grew,  and  filled  up  the
trough  c.>mf)letely.  She  looked  at  h  in  wonder.
*  No,'  said  she,  '  that  is  more  than  )  ou  want ;'
BO  she  pinched  off  a  smaller  piece,  and  rolled
it  out  as  before  ;  but  the  smaller  piece  filled
up  the  troutih,  just  as  the  other  had  done  ;  so
she  put  th  it  aside  too,  and  pinched  a  smaller
bit  still,  litit  the  mimcle  was  just  as*  appa-
rent, the  Rm?il-er  bit  filling  up  the  trough  the
8an)e  as  ever.  Gertrude's  heart  was  har  ened
still  m^re;  she  put  that  aside  abo.  *  I  cnimot
give  yoa  any  to-day/  said  she;  for  the  ^recd


of  her  heart  was  to  divide  all  her  dough  into
little  bits  and  roll  it  into  loaves.  '  Go  on  your
journey,  and  the  Lord  prosper  you.'  Then
the  Lord  Christ  was  angrv,  and  her  eyes  were
opened,  and  she  fell  down  on  her  knees  to
hear  Him  say,  *I  gave  you  plenty,  but  that
hardened  your  heart,  so  that  plenty  was  n-  t  a
blessing  to  you;  I  will  try  you  now  with  the
blessing  of  poverty;  \ou  shall  henceforth  seek
your  food  day  by  day,  and  always  between
the  wood  and  the  bark.'  " — Norwegian  Legend
of  the  Gertrude  Bird.

*'  We  learn,  that  is  the  best  charity  which
80  relieves  people's  wants  as  that  they  are  sti.'*
continued  in  their  calling.  For,  as  he  wi:.
teacheth  one  to  swim,  though  haply  he  will
take  him  by  the  chin,  yet  he  expecteth  that
the  learner  shall  nimbly  ply  the  oars  of  his
hands  and  feet,  and  stiive  and  struggle  with
all  his  strength  to  keep  himself  above  water  ;
BO  those  who  are  beneficial  to  poor  people
may  justly  require  of  them  that  they  use  both
their  hands  to  work  and  feet  to  go  in  their
calling,  and  themselves  take  all  due  labour
that  they  may  not  sink  in  the  gulf  of  penury.
Relieve  a  husbandman,  yet  so  as  he  may  still
continue  in  his  husbandry  ;  a  tradesman,  yet
so  he  may  still  go  on  in  his  trade  ;  a  poor
scholar,  yet  so  he  may  still  i)rococd  in  his
studies.  Thereby  the  commonwealth  shall  be
a  gainer.  Drones  bring  no  honey  to  the  hive  ;
but  the  painful  hand  of  each  i^rivate  man  con-
trilmti's  some  ])rotit  to  the  public  u-ood.  Here,
by  LUC  able  poor,  the  more  Uiligcut  Ihey  be-

129


DOMlLETtC    COMM.'iNTARy:  RUTH.


CHAP.  n.  .17,


the  more  bountiful  men  Mill  be  to  them ;
wliile  their  booies  are  freed  from  many  dis-
eases, their  suuls  from  maii_)  8ia,s,  wherot  idle-
ness is  the  mother  Lazines-*  makes  a  breach
in  our  soul,  where  the  devil  dui,li  assault  us
with  greatest  advantfige ;  and  when  we  are
must  lule  in  our  voc.iiions,  f  en  he  is  most
busy  in  his  temprations.' — Fu/ltr.

•'There  can  be  no  wrong  in  those  things
which  are  free  favours,  i  am  not  less  just  to
him  to  whom  I  give  less,  but  I  am  more
mercitul  to  him  to  whom  I  give  more.  .  .  .
fohall  it  not  therefore  be  lawful  for  the  Lord
of  heaven  to  bestow  wealth,  honour,  wisdom,
effectual  grace,  blessings  outward  and  inward,
on  one,  and  deny  them  to  another  ?  Yuu,
therefore,  whom  God  hath  suffered  to  glean
among  the  sheaves,  and  hath  scattered  whole
haj  dtuls  for  you  to  gather  ;  you  that  abound
and  how  with  His  favours,  be  heartily  thank-
ful unto  Him.  He  hath  not  dealt  so  with
everyone,  neither  have  all  such  a  large  measure
of  His  blessings." — Fuller.

'•  1  know  some  pieachers  who  never  went  to
Martin  Luther  s  school ;  they  may  have  prayer
and  meditation,  but  they  have  never  been
schooled  by  temptation  ;  and  if  we  are  not
much  tempted  ourselves,  it  we  are  not  emptied
from  vessel  to  vessel  ourselves,  we  are  in  very
great  danger,  when  we  are  dealing  with  these
KuthvS,  lest  we  be  hard  with  them,  and  rebuke
and  reproach  them,  when  instead  thereof  we
should  hear  tho  Master  say,  '  Comfort  ye,  com-
fort ye  my  people  ;  speak  ye  comfortably  unto
Jerusalem.'  ^ow  1  take  it  that  we  do  very
much  reproach  these  tender  ones  when  we  set
up  standards  in  i>ur  mmisti-y  to  uhich  ue  ttll
them  they  inusr  come  or  eli>e  pensh," — ^/juryeon.

"  But  ii.en,  brethren,  you  will  notice  that
the^e  reapers  were  to  et  haudfuls  fail  on  pur-
pose/or her.  Well,  then,  }e  reapers  in  God's
held,  let  your  preachmg  be  very  personal.  Oh  1
1  love,  when  i  dra^  the  bow,  not  to  do  it  at  a
veutuie,  but  to  single  out  some  troubled  heart,
and  speak  to  you  ail  as  though  tnere  were  but
one  here  ;  not  pouring  the  oil  over  the  wound,
but  coming  up  to  the  edge  of  the  gaping  sore
to  pour  in  oil  and  wiue.  These  poor  Kuths
will  not  dare  to  take  the  corn  unless  we  put  it
rif^tA  in  their  way.     They  are  so  faithful,  so


timorous,  that  though  it  seems  to  be  scattered
for  everybody  rhny  think  it  cannot  be  for
them  :  but  it  it  be  there,  put  there  so  that  they
canui't  mistake  it,  tiien  they  say,'  Well,  that
is  for  me  ;  ay,  that  is  what  /  have  felt ;  that
is  what  /  waiit ; '  and  they  cannot,  unbelieving
though  they  be,  they  cannot  help  stooping
down  and  picking  up  the  handful  that  is  let
fall  on  purpose  for  them.  Then,  if  it  be  so,
our  preaching  must  always  be  very  affection-
ate^ — Ibid.

"Dr  Manton  once  preached  in  St.  Paul's
Cathedral,  and  a  great  crovd  went  to  listen
to  him,  A  poor  man,  who  had  walked  fifty
miles  to  hear  the  good  doctor,  afterwards
plucked  him  by  the  sleeve,  and  said,  '  There
was  nothing  for  me  this  morning.'  The
doctor  had  preached  a  very  learne  i  sermon,
full  of  Greek  and  Latin  quotations  which  the
poor  countryman  could  not  understand  ;  but
the  doctor  had  not  expected  him,  and  there
was  nothing  for  him.  1  think  there  should
always  be  in  our  ministry  souie  things  for
poor  Ruth,  so  plain  and  so  simple,  that  the
wiseacres  will  turn  up  their  noses,  and  say,
'  What  platiiudes  I '  Never  mind,  it  Ruth
gets  a  handful  of  Ci»rn,  our  Master  at  the  last
shall  know  who  did  His  errand  best,  and
served  Him  with  a  perfect  heart.' — Ibid,

"  While  SQCii  a  prac  ice  as  is  here  enjoine(fj
would  have  been  dishonest  and  unfaithtul
without  the  express  uuttiority  of  the  maste  ■,
not  to  have  d  me  it  atter  it  was  enjoined
would  have  beeu  undudful  in  its  turn." —
/  hoinson.

*  Doubtless  Boaz,  having  taken  notice  of
the  good  iiJitiire.  dutiful  carriage,  and  the  near
athui  y  of  liuth,  could  not  but  purpose  some
greaier  bene  licence  and  higher  respects  to
her ;  yet  how  he  hts  his  kindness  to  her  con-
dition, ant  gives  her  that  which  to  her
seemed  much,  though  he  thought  it  little.
Thus  doth  the  bounty  of  our  God  deal  with
us.  It  is  not  for  want  of  love  that  He  gives
ua  no  greater  measure  of  grace,  but  for  want
of  our  tituess  and  capacity.  He  hath  re-
served greater  preferuieuts  for  us,  when  it
shall  be  seasonable  fur  us  to  receive  them,"
— Bishop  Hall.


VEtiSE  17.
Theme. — Labuuk  until  the  Evening,

•  When  I  he  corn's  rustle  on  the  ear  doth  come,
When  the  eve's  beetle  sounds  its  diowsy  hum,
Wuen  the  stars,  dewdrops  of  the  summer  sky,
Watch  over  all  with  soft  and  loving  eye." — NicoU,
*'  Night  is  the  time  for  rest ;
How  sweet,  when  labours  close,
To  gather  round  an  aching  oreast

The  curtain  of  repose.
Stretch  the  tired  limbs,  and  lay  the  head
Upon  our  own  delightful  bed.' — J.  Moatgomety,

So  she  gleaned  in  the  fields  until  even,  and  heat  out,  etc

Tt-c  longest  and  most  eventful  day  must  come  to  a  close  at  last.     So   with

130


CiiAP.  II.  17.  HOMTLETIC    COMMENTARY :   RUTH.


this  of  Ruth's  toil,  and  the  beginning  of  her  recompense.  (1)  She  was  n(4  wearr,
in  well  doing.  (2)  She  did  not  presume  upon  the  fact  that  Boaz  had  so  greatly
and  so  generously  increased  her  gleanings.  No  1  She  perseveres  in  her  labour
of  love  until  the  due  and  proper  hour  for  retiring;  then,  pleased  with  what  she
had  gained  by  her  own  industry,  and  careful  to  secure  it,  she  lingers  to  beat  out
the  corn,  instead  of  taking  it  where  it  might  trouble  Naomi — a  though tfulnes^.
surpassing  even  that  of  most  natural  children  to  their  parents.
Learn,  as  suggested  here  —

I.  That  it  is  good  to  abide  where  we  do  well.  Boaz  had  ch  irged  her  aot  t  •
glean  in  another  field,  but  to  stand  fast  by  his  maidens  (ver.  8),  and  hert  is  the
result.  She  reaped  the  fruit  of  her  constancy ;  (1)  a  lesson  to  the  umtahle  in
temporal  things.  Prosperity  only  follows  persevering  labour.  It  is  the  ddigent
hand  that  maketh  rich ;  "the  rolling  stone  gathers  no  moss"  (Braden).  (2)
To  the  unstable  in  the  kingdom  of  God — men  who  wander  from  one  church  to
another,  from  one  preacher  to  another,  from  one  sphere  of  duty  to  another.
Note  Every  man  has  his  appropriate  place  :  the  aim  of  life  should  be  first  to
find  it  and  then  to  keep  it.

II.  That  it  is  good  to  labour  where  God  sends  success.  Can  Ruth  return
to  the  city  with  a  dejected  countenance  'i  Never,  while  Jehovah  lives  (B.  Price)
And  why  ]  Evident  that  she  was  in  the  place  God  had  appointed  for  her.  We
misread  the  whole  narrative,  too,  if  we  fail  to  see  that  Boaz  is  only  an  instrument
in  the  Divine  hands.  In  all  labour,  even  that  of  gleaning,  there  is  profit ;  but
see  what  gleaning  is  when  God  guides  to  the  harvest  field  !  The  humblest  toil
then  becomes  not  only  productive,  but  beautiful,  and  pregnant  with  after  conse-
quences.

III.  That  it  is  good  to  toil  on  until  God's  appointed  time  of  rest.  "  Man
goeth  forth  to  his  labour  until  the  evening."  There  is  a  time,  then,  for  going
iorth,  and  there  is  also  a  time  for  returning.  The  day  for  toil,  the  night  for
repose,  this  is  God's  great  appointed  law.  Labour  is  man's  heritage  (Gen.  ii.
15),  and  we  are  happy  only  as  we  bow  to  this.  Life,  health,  man's  physical  and
moral  well-being  depend  upon  obedience.  But  mark !  Lahoitry  too^  has  ifn
boundaries,  the  time  when  it  must  end  ;  and  from  this  thought  comes  a  stimulus
to  which  even  the  great  Master  Himself  responded,  **  I  ran- 1  work  the  works  of
Him  that  sent  me,  while  it  is  day,^^  as  well  as  a  hope  which  looks  forward  to  rest
and  reward  when  toil  is  over.  Note  lied  time  is  not  waste  time  (^Spurgeon),  The
pause  prepares  mind  and  body  alike  for  further  service.

"  King    Alphonsus    doing  something  with  Great.     Ye'  now-a-days  (snch  ia  the  pride  of

his  hands,  and  lab 'uring  so,  as  some  which  the  world)  people  ot  far  inemer  quality  scora

bt  held   him    found    fault,    smiled    and    said,  so  base  eniphivments." — Fuller.

'  Hath  God  given  hands  to  kings  in  vain  ?'  "  "  Such  diligence  is  supremely  praiseworthy

— Bernard.  and    deserves,     nay,    ensures     an    abundant

"1  do  not  like  to  see  a  Christian  man  too  reward.      It    \%   a   great   thing  in  life  to  he

eager  for  holidays,  nor  doling  out  his  services  wholly  devoted  to  the  work  we  have  in  baud,

in  exact  and  precise  proportion  to  his  wages,  and  to  be  able  to  say,  '  This  one  thing  I  do.*

biiterly  complaining  if  he  is  rt^quested  to  do  For   there    is   an  incalculable   multiiude    of

a  htue  more   than  is  in  *  the  bond,' ready  to  people    who    are  'everything    by  turns    an  I

fling  down  his  tools  before  the  first  stroke  of  nothing  long.'     Shifty,  changeful,  dissaii>fi  d.

the  clock  hag  fairly  struck   which  tells  that  untrustworthy,  they  pass  from  one  occupari-n

the  day's  work  may  cease.     A  man  should  be  to  another  with  the  ease  and  rapidity    wiih

in  love  with  his  work,  and  should  ti'ke  as  the  which  the  wind  veers  round  all  the  points  <f

Hiottoes  for  his  inspiration  the  words,  '  What-  the  compass  ;  busy,  fussy  folk  whoare excited

soever   thy    hand    findeth  to   do,'  etc.,  '  Not  enthusiastic    about    one    thing    to-day,    and

slothful  in  business,  fervent  in  spirit,'  etc."—  equally  excited  and  enthusiastic  about  another

Braden.  and  totally  opposite  thing  to-morroAr.  All  they

*'  barah  kneaded  cakes  ;    Rachel  fed  sheep  ;  undertak^i  is  regarded  of  the  same  importance,

Rebekah  drew   water;    Tamar    baked   cakes.  to  be  entered  upon  with  unresirained  vigour  r

Suetonius  reporttth  of  Augustus  Caesar,  that  but  nothing  prospers  that  tliey  touch,  because

he  made  his  daughters  to  learn  to  spin  ;  and  they   only   touch  it,  and  soon  it  dxoops  and

Pantaelon  relates  the    same  of    Charles    the  fades."— i^racfei*.

131


HOM/LETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH.


CHAP.  II.  13.


"  Seek  a  retentive  memory,  to  koep  in  thy
band  what  thou  hast  ga  hered  or  elso  thou
wilt  be  like  a  silly  gleaner  who  stoops  to
glean  one  ear,  and  drops  another  at  the  same
time.  Carry  home  what  of  truth  thou  canst.
Take  notes  in  thy  heart.  And  when  thou
hast  gathered  and  hast  thy  hands  full,  take
rare  to  discriminat*^.  Kuth,  we  are  told,
threshed  her  corn,  and  left  the  straw  behind,
and  took  h'>me  the  good  wheat.  Do  thou  the
same." — Sf>urgeon.

"  Corn,  evei-  the  fine^^t  kidney  of  the  wheat,
grows  encompassed  with  chaff,  and  therefore
must  be  beaten  out  an ^  winnowed  before  it  is
fit  for  use.  .  .  ,  Paul,  that  incompaable
preacher,  freely  confessed  that  he  saw  and


prophesied  but  in  part  :  if  he  in  part,  surelv
we  in  a  very  li'tle  part  ;  consequently  much
of  our  own  chaff  is  mixed  with  our  Redeemer's
wheat  :  and  that  you  our  hearers  are  called  to
beat  out  what  you  glean,  by  a  diligent  search
of  the  Scriptures,  by  meditation  and  prayer."
— Macgouoan.

*'  The  materials  of  the  temple  were  so  hewed
and  carved,  both  stone  and  wood,  bef'  re  that
they  were  hrouyht  unto  Jerusalen,  that  ttiere
was  not  so  much  as  the  noise  of  a  hammer
heard  in  the  temple.  So  Ruth  fits  all  thingg
in  a  readiness  before  she  goes  home,  that  so
no  noise  might  be  »»  ade  at  home,  to  disturb  her
aged  mother." — Fuller.


VERSES  18—23.

Critical  and  Exegktical  Notes. — Her  mother  in  law  saw.  With  astonishment  at  the
quantity  evidently.  And  she  brought  forth.  And  she  sho^ved  ,  Vulgate,  Si^r.-Arab  Wright,
Lange).  Brought  forth  out  of  a  wnllet  (Targum).  Drew  out  of  her  pocket,  as  the  Chaldee  has
correctly  supplied  (Keil)  That  she  hnd  reserved.  Of  the  parched  corn  (see  ver.  14).  Alter
she  was  sufficed.     Saiisfied  (L  nge).     Lit.  From  her  satiety  (Mojison)

Ver.  19.  Where  wroughiest  tliott  ]  Where  didst  thou  procure  ?  (Z)r.  Casse/)  Where  hast
thou  stajed?  (Wright).  Where  strayedest  thou?  (Gesen).  AsinEV.  LXX  Vulg  Rosen.
Bertheau.  Blessed  be  he.  Naomi  seems  to  have  seen  at  once  that  someone  must  have  treated
Ruth  with  unexpected  and  unwonted  kiiuJness.  Did  take  knowledge.  Friendly  and  special
notice.  'Ihe  same  word  used  by  Ruth  (ver.  10)  in  expressing  her  gratitude  to  Boaz  (^Lange)
With  whom  I  wrought.  Certainly  a  better  translation  than  '*  with  whom  I  spent  my  time,"  aft
Wright  would  appear  to  pro{»ose.  Biaz.  She  could  not  know  what  a  consolation  and  joy  tha
utterance  of  this  name  conve3ed  to  N«onii  (Lange).

Ver.  20.  Who  hath  not  left  off.  Precisely  the  same  expression  Eliezer  uses  when  he  meets
Rebekah,  after  having  prayed  for  guidan<  e  (Gen.  xxiv.  27).  There,  however,  it  is  Jehovah
Himself  who  is  pronounced  "  blessed  "'  {Spea/cer's  Com.),  Naomi  possibly  only  applied  a  general
formula  or  even  a  common  proverb  to  her  special  case,  and  in  this  sense  Jehovah  alone  is  to  be
seen  as  the  source  of  kindness  to  the  living  and  the  dead.  So  the  Striae,  Arab,  Bertheau,
Keil,  LanjiC,  &c.  The  Chaldee,  LXX.,  and  Vulg.  apply  the  words,  however,  to  Bonz  [See  on
ch.  i,  8,  and  also  cf  Gtn  xiv.  19  ;  Ps.  cxv.  15.]  To  the  living  and  the  dead.  He>e  is  a  profes-
sion of  faith  in  the  exi.^tence  of  the  faithful  after  death  (Wordsworth).  Not  so  (^erMcuu,
Moiison)  If  these  words  do  not  presuppose  the  immortality  of  the  soul  as  an  article  of
Israeliiish  fnith,  what  meaning  can  they  have  ?  (La'ge)  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead  [those
who  have  passed  away  and  are  no  more  for  ever]  but  of  ttie  living  (Matt.  xxii.  32).  Ruth  is
still  the  wife  of  the  dead  in  the  Hebrew  way  of  thinhing  and  speaking  (iv.  5).  And  does  not
this  a»d  kindred  Jewish  notions  as  to  the  dead  having  claims  upon  the  living,  receiving  kind-
nesses from  them,  having  seed  raised  i  p  by  them,  &c ,  necessarily  point  to  an  underlying  con-
viction of  the  continuing'  existence  of  those  who  have  only  passed  away  to  the  outward  senses
and  si^hf,  ?  The  man  is  near  of  kiu.  Is  our  relative  (Keil),  Lit.  Near,  not  in  comparison
with  other  relatives,  but  with  men  in  general  (Lange)  Oae  of  our  next  kinsmen.  One  of  our
redeemers  (Lunge^  Keil)  One  tha-t  hath  a  right  to  redeem  (Kitio).  The  second  in  the  order
of  the  Goeiim  (Alichtielis,  Gesenius)  The  Redeemer  had  a  light  (1)  of  redeeming  the  inherit-
ance of  the  person,  (2)  of  marrying  the  widow,  (3)  of  avenging  the  death  (Speakers  Com.y.
Cf.  Lev.  XXV  25  31,47-55;  Deut.  xxv.  5-10,  xix   1-13;  Jer.  xxxii.  8-12.

Ver.  21.  He  said  unto  me  also.  Even  so  may  he  be  bie.ssed  (Curpzov,  Wordsworth,  Wright),
Hot  i-o  {Lavge ;.  Yea  also  he  said  tome  (Morison).  Morel  I  have  not  told  you  all,  for  he
said,  &c.  (Lange)  Keep  fast  by  my  young  men.  My  people  (Keil).  My  servants  {Lange).
Ihe  people  also  belong  to  my  house  as  distinguished  from  the  pe<ple  of  other  masters  (Knl),
The  masculine  here  to  be  taken  as  inclu<Ung  both  sexes  (Gesen,  Funt,  Maurer).  Boaz  (ver  3)
and  Naomi  (ver.  22),  however,  i  se  the  feminine  form,  which  seems  to  show  that  the  distinction
of  gender  was  no  longer  ne^leced  [Lange).  A  special  point  is  made  of  Ruth  being  allowed
to  glean  among  the  sheaves  close  to  the  reapers  (ver.  15;,  that  is,  the  young  men,  evidently  a
special  and  privileged  place.  The  young  men  had  a  commission,  too,  from  their  master  to
countenance  and  encourage  her  (ver.  16).

Ver.  iJ2.  It  is  good.  The  key  to  much  which  follows  as  well  as  an  approval  of  what  has
p..o  ed.  Tiat  they  meet  thee  not.  Lit,  that  they  do  not  fall  upon  rhee  (Ked,  Wordswort/i).
Originally  means  to  light  upon,  wheiher  for  good  or  evil  (Morison).     Keil  views  the  verb,  how-


vh


CHAP.  II.  18.  HOMILETIC     COMMENTARY:  RUTIL


ever,  fls  having  only  a  bad  meaning,  and  as  signifying  to  fall  upon  a  person  to  smife  and  ill-
treat  hi'i'.  Full  not  upon  thee,  or  solicit  thee  to  lolly.  Vulgo  dicifw  casta  n  es^e  quam  nemc
ngarit  (^Irapf)).  In  h  strange  field  she  would  be  exposed  to  annovaiicfs  and  possibly,
inMilts  {Stef-/e  find  Terry),  from  which  B  )az  has  sjeciallv  guarded  her  in  his  (ver.  9,  15,  16).  To
go  elsewhere  also  would  be  to  show  a  want  of  appreciation  for  the  kiud  wnrds  and  actions  of
which  she  has  hoen  the  recipi^nt  already.  Her  seemingly  needless  repetition  of  this  idea  of
clinging  to  the  fi  Ids  and  strvants  of  Boaz,  is,  indeed,  highly  artistic,  and  t-erves  to  prepare  the
mmd  for  what  is  t-o  Collow.

Ver  23.  So  she  kept  fast.  And  she  kept  gleaning  along  with  the  maiden  of  Boaz  (  Wright)
(cf.  V.  9  ;  21).  Gives  the  of)portunity  for  Boaz  to  acquire  that  knowledge  ot  Ruth  and  respect
for  her  implied  in  iii.  10.  11).  By  the  maidens.  Showing  clearly  that  his  maidens  were  <  nly
gleaners  (^/)m^er'«  Com.).  Unto  the  end  of  barley  and  wheat  harvest.  Unrd  al)  >Nr  rhe  bH^^mning
of  June.  The  two  harvests  would  coAer  from  two  to  ihiee  months.  And  dwelt  wiih  her  mother
in-law.  After  she  returned  to  her  mother-in-law  (Fm/^.,  Zw^/ier,  Coverdaie).  And  lived  with
her  mother-in-law  (Kiel).  A  tacit  allusion  to  the  fact  that  a  change  took  place  when  the  har-
vest was  over  (ibid).  She  did  not  gad  abroad,  but  kept  her  aged  mother  company  at  home
(Patrick),


VERSE   18.
Theme, — The  Bread-winner  and  her  Precious  Burden.

"  Find  out  men's  wants  and  will
And  meet  them  there.     All  worldly  joys  go  less
To  the  one  joy  of  doing  kindnesses." — Herbert.

And  she  took  it  up and  she  brought  forth,  and  gave^  etc

Ruth  returns  to  the  city,  bearing  herself  the  results  of  her  toil,  but  not  for
herself  alone.  True  affection  is  always  carrying  some  burden  or  other,  and  love's
crosses  are  never  her  own  entirely.

She  returns  to  bestow  of  her  labour.  The  needy  may  often  play  the  benefactor  to
others.  Christ  carried  a  bag  to  relieve  those  who  were  in  want,  and  the  poor  widow
had  still  "two  mites  to  spare"  (Luke  xxi.  2).  How  the  text  condemns  the  covet-
ousness  of  such  as  .Nabal,  who  have  plenty  and  yet  give  not  out  of  their
abundance !

I,  She  was  frugal.  Carefulness  as  necessary  as  industry.  That  nothing  be
lost  for  want  of  frugality  comes  with  the  force  of  Divine  authority.  **  Gather
up  the  fragments,"  etc.  Wisdom  teaches  us  to  have  an  eye  upon  the  future  as
upon  the  present.  Even  dumb  creatures,  like  the  ant  and  the  bee,  have  this
instinct.     Note.    Wastefulness  as  much  a  sin  as  idleness.

II.  She  was  frugal  amid  unexpected  abundance.  A  contrast  to  such  as
plunge  into  mad  riot  and  wanton,  reckless  wastefulness  at  such  times.  The
prodigal,  when  he  had  obtained  his  "portion,"  made  all  haste  to  spend  it  among
harlots.  Must  be  confessed  that  the  poor  are  not  always  the  most  careful  when
fortune  favours  them.  "  Beggars  on  horseback  ride  the  faster  to  the  devil."
Note.  A  true  test  of  character  to  be  found  here.

"  Who  cannot  liva  on  twenty  pound  a-year,
Cannot  on  forty  ;  he's  a  man  of  pleasure,
A  kind  ot  thing  that's  for  itself  too  dear." — Herbert.

Ill  She  was  frugal  for  the  sake  of  others.  The  thought  of  Naomi  at  home
Dad  evidently  stiuiulated  her  to  carefulness  as  well  as  industry  in  the  harvest-
field.  Ruth  not  one  lost  in  vacant  reveries  and  so  missing  the  hour  of  service.
The  spirit  of  love  and  self-sacrifice  breathes  in  all  that  she  does.  Note,  (a)
Extravagance  is  especially  rejyrehensible  when  there  may  be  those  in  want  at  home.
Becomes  doubly  a  sin  then  to  waste,  or  to  neglect  opportunities  of  providing  for
them.  (6)  A  kindred  thougldfulness  to  llutlis  not  unusual  among  the  poor  Only
that  while  the  g(jod  deeds  of  the  rich  are  concealed  with  difficulty,  theirs  are
too  often  passed  by  unnoticed.  How  many  a  heart  has  thrilled  with  joy  at  the
thought  of  being  able  to  minister  to  the  joy  of  those  at  home  1     Burns  jrives  us

133


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY :  RUTH.  chap.  ii.  19.


the  picture  of  the  eldest  daughter,  in  his  "  Cotter's  Saturday  Night,"  bringmg
home

"  her  sair-won  penny  fee
To  help  her  parents  dear,  if  they  in  hardship  be."

Ministries  like  this  have  gladdened  and  sweetened  family  life  all  the  world  over.
JNote.  Men  may  and  ought  to  find  the  sweetest  and  noblest  use  of  all  their  gains  at
home.

Lessons.  (1)  Even  love  must  have  its  burden,  if  it  would  enjoy  its  after-
recompense  and  approval.  There  are  who  would  scatter  without  tirst  havmg
gathered,  but  that  is  not  God's  law.  (2)  The  lavishness  of  this  evening  hour
only  follows  the  gleaning  and  carefulness  of  the  day.  (3)  What  is  gained  in  a
nook  of  the  harvest-field  comes  to  bo  seen  and  reported  in  the  city  (Frice).

*'They  come  home  from  their  busy  toil  feeling  note  to  what  weight  their  burthens  amount,

that  they  have   the   day's   sweetest  and   not  and,  no  doubt,  will  accordingly  comfort  them."

always  1  ghtest  task  betore  them— to  lighten  — Fuller.

the  hearts  and  gladden   the   lives  of   those  "  it  is  no  less  necessary  to  be  careful  of  the

whom  they  love   best.     Whatever  the  world  fruit  ot  our  labours,  than  to  labour  with  dili-

has  done  to  them  or  /or  them  they  have  one  gence.     Chriat  Him-^elf,   who  could  multiply

thing  to  do — to  do  the  very  best  they  can  for  bread  at   His  pleasure,  comuiauded  the  frag-

the  Uear  ones  roand  their  tireside.     Not  that  meuts  of    ihe   barley  loaves  and  tishes  to  be

these  are  to  be  kept  always  igaorant  of  the  gattiered  up,  that  nothiug  might  be  lost.    '  In

cares,  troubles,  and  losses  without  wiiich  the  all  labour  thare  is  proht,    says  the  wise  man  ;

world's    business    cannot   be    carried  on.'' —  yet  there  are  some  that  labour  for  the  wind.

Baldwin  Frown.  They   lose   what  ihey  have   wrought,  because

"  tSee  here,  the  shoulders  of  God's  saints  are  they  suffer  it,  througa  their  carelessness,  to
wonted  to  the  bearing  of  burthens.  Little  Isaac  slip  through  their  ti.igers.  This  folly,  bow-
carried  the  faggot  wherewitii  himseli  was  to  ever,  is  mucti  less  freqaenc  in  things  relating
be  sacrificed;  our  Saviour,  His  own  cross,  till  to  the  body  than  in  mo^e  which  relate  to  tho
His  faintness  claimed  Simeon  of  Cyreue  to  be  soul.' — Lawson.

His  successor.     Vyt,  let  not  G>)d  s  saints  be  "  The  Church  is  our  mother,  whom  we  are

disheartened  :  if  their  Father  had  a  •  battle  '  called  to  serve  and  comtort ;  therefore  every

wherein  He  puts  the  tears  which  they  spend,  comlort  you  glean  ou^hc  to  be  brought   home

surely   He  hath  a  balance  wherein  He  weighs  to  her ;  so  dispo  ed  ot  and  applied  that  she

(he  burtheaj  which  they  bear.    He  keeps  a  may  share  in  your  pleasure." — Macgowan.


VERSE  19.
Theme, — Home  Confidences,  Mutual  Confessions,  and  Enquiries.

*'  And  none  can  say  but  all  my  life
1  have  H.s  wordis  kept,
And  summed  the  actions  of  the  day

Each  night  betore  I  slept."— C/<ac<er/o».

**  Think  nought  a  trifle,  though  it  small  appear —
Small  sands  the  mountain,  moments  make  the  year,
And  tritles  li'e." — Young.

And  her  mother-in-law  said.   Where  hast  thou,  etc.  ,  ,  .    Blessed  be  he,  etc.  ,  .  ,

And  she  showed,  etc.

It  is  in  the  very  nature  of  affection  to  feel  the  interest,  solicitude,  anxiety
expressed  here.  Parents  see  their  children  go  out  to  the  snares  and  difficulties  of
life.  Will  they  be  preserved  spotless  %  etc.  More,  it  is  the  duty  of  such  to
ascertain  how  their  children  have  been  employed,  what  associations  they  have
formed,  with  whom  and  where  they  have  been.  Such  sympathetic  questioning
(1)  elicits  confidence,  (2)  shows  thoughtful  interest,  (3)  offers  opportunity  for
wise  counsel  and  encouragement  (Braden).  Carelessness  on  these  points  (1)  un-
aatui-a],  (2)  dangerous.  Even  Eh  did  not  sin  in  neglecting  thia  duty.  He
134


CHAP.  IL  19.  HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:  RUTH.


noticed  and  enquired  (1  Sam.  ii.  23,  24)  His  sin  was  that  he  restrained  not
Hf'ter  knowledge  (iii.  13).

But  see  how  "  love  thinketh  no  evil/'  and  makes  even  a  duty  like  this  free
from  whatever  might  be  otherwise  irksome  or  unpleasant.  Nnomi  asks  from  a
desire  to  know  who  was  the  instrument  in  God's  hands  through  whom  His  bounty
came,  not  from  curiosity  merely,  or  from  any  suspicion  concerning  Ruth.
Favours  bestowed  naturally  bring  the  desire  to  know  from  whom  they  come.

We  have,  I.  A  fitting  conclusion  to  a  well-spent  day.  Note.  Good  to  sum
up  the  actions  of  the  day  (I)  to  ourselves,  (2)  to  others  when  convenient  and
proper,  as  here.  *'  Confess  your  sins  one  to  another."  The  New  Testament  idea
of  a  confessor,  however,  not  that  of  an  official  person,  a  "  priest,"  but  a  friend
whom  we  can  trust  and  to  whom  we  can  unbosom,  as  Ruth  evidently  did  to
Naomi  [cf  Mai.  iii.  16  ;  Judg.  v.  11].  Especially  is  such  confession  one  to  another
good  when  accompanied  and  permeated  by  a  devout  spirit  such  as  breathes
through  the  whole  context.  Note.  When  integrity  directs  oar  steps  there  is  no
need  for  evasion.     Can  give  a  minute  account  of  our  conduct.

II.  A  mutual  stimulus  and  encouragement  to  gratitude.  Gratitude  kindles
gratitude.  Good  deeds  to  ourselves,  recDgnised  and  pointed  out,  bring  thankful-
ness to  other  hearts  beside  our  own,  to  the  devout  everywhere.

"  Whene'er  a  noble  deed  Is  wrought,
Whene'er  is  spoken  a  noble  thought,
Our  hearts  in  glad  sur[jrise
To  higher  levels  rise." — Longfellow,

Many  men  niggardly  in  letting  it  be  known  they  have  received  favours.  They
would  hide  the  sunshine  which  has  gladdened  life  in  their  own  hearts,  were  it
possible.  Not  so  Ruth.  She  brings  to  her  home,  and  to  her  friend,  these
abundant  signs  and  tokens  of  that  which  has  made  the  labour  of  gleaning  a  light
and  pleasant  task.  Christ's  command,  "  Return  to  thine  own  house,"  etc.
(Luke  V.  39),  enforces  the  duty  illustrated  here.

It  is.  III.  A  mutual  stimulus  and  encouragement  to  piety.  The  heart
naturally  looks  upward  and  thanks  God  when  it  comes  face  to  face  with  noble
deeds  of  any  kind.  Men  stifle  the  feeling  if  they  can,  it  may  be,  and  feel
ashamed  of  it,  but  it  is  there.     Note.   Thanksgiving  as  natural  as  prayer.

Here  the  kindness  of  Boaz  and  the  success  of  Ruth  both  come  in  to  fan  the
flame  of  piety  in  the  heart  of  Naomi.  Her  first  thought  is  not  that  the  wants
of  the  morrow  are  satisfied,  and  that  abundantly,  but  **  Blessed  be  he,"  etc.
True  always  that —

*The  tidal  wave  of  deeper  souli

Into  our  inmost  being  rolls,

And  lifts  us  unawares

Out  of  all  meaner  cares."

Noble  deeds,  when  seen  and  realised,  lead  men  almost  unconsciously  to  think
and  to  speak  nobly.  Note.  Prayer  is  sometimes  the  only  possible  way  left  us
of  expressing  our  gratitude.  [On  these  ejaculatory  expressions  see  ch.  ii.  12  pp.
116,  117  J  The  debt  contracted  in  the  currency  of  earth  is  paid  back  in  the
coin  of  heaven  (Thomson).

Improvement. — (1)  We  should  take  special  notice  of  such  as  do  us  good
(Bernard).  (2)  A  good  heart  rejoices  in  the  welfare  of  another  {ibid.).  (3)
How  naturally  the  name  of  God  comes  in  on  occasions  like  these  !  (4)  How
potent  our  kindness  may  be  in  quickening  the  sense  of  God's  k  ndness  (Cox).

E.  Price  on  this  :-  God's  Providence  an  excitement  to  a  question.  Wherever
can  such  a  blessing  have  come  from  1  to  a  benediction.  Blessed  be  God  in  the  fact
and  in  the  agent  of  His  will ;  ajid  to  a  recognition  of  His  inscrutable  but  merciful
designs.  Who  can  this  man  be — cuniing  at  the  very  time  when  needed — but  a
Boai,  and  he  the  father  of  blessings  yet  beyond  the  present  hour?

125


nOMILETlC    COMMESrARY:  RUTH.


CTIAP    II.   iO.


Observe. — A  man  may  be  as  a  stranger  to-day,  and  yet  God  may  cause  him  to
appear  au  angel  of  blest-edness  to-morrow.  Despise  nothing — hope  in  everything,
and  unite  the  actions  of  life  by  the  spirit  of  cheerfuhjess.  If  Providence  be  a
fact,  trust  in  it !

J.  P.  Allen,  M.A„  on  this: — Ruth  ii.  19,  '^  Where  hast  thou  gleane'1  to-day  T'
— A  simple  question  is  sometimes  startling,  and  is  often  stirringly  suggestive.

I.  The  Sphere  :  Life's  opportunities.

(1)  The  law  of  labour  is  the  law  of  life.     In  this  world  but  little  can  be

accomplished  without  energy  and  enterprise.  In  every  department
this  is  true.

(2)  To  the  opeu  and  eager  eye  openings  invite  and  opportunities  multiply.

"Let  me  now  go  to  the  tield."  '  I  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door."
"  The  field  is  the  world."     See  Isa.  vi.  8.

(3)  Forms  of  activity,  how  diversified  they  are.  There  is  not  only  the
reaper  but  the  "gleaner"  also.  "All  works  are  good,  and  each  is  best
when  most  it  pleases  Thee."  "  Gather  up  the  fragments,*'  and  despise
not  *'  the  day  of  small  things."

(4)  Scope  exists  for  all.     "  How  many  serve,  how  many  more  may  to  the

service  come."  "  Even  I,  in  fields  so  broad,  some  dutied  may  fulfil." —
Woman's  work.

(5)  Each  "  day  "  brings  its  demands.     "  To  day."

n.  The  Service  :  Our  use  or  neglect  of  life's  opportunities.

(1)  Neglect  possible.     There  is  no  compulsion.     The  parable  of  the  talent<9.

The  field  of  the  slothful  (Prov.  xxiv).

(2)  Success  attainable.      Satisfaction   in   healthful  industry.      Beneficent

results  are  an  "ephah  of  barley."  "  Neither  man  nor  work  unblest  wilt
thou  Thou  permit  to  be."  "  He  shall  doubtless  come  again  bringing
his  sheaves  with  him."     "  Enter  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."

(3)  Co-operation  here  desirable.     "Let  fall   some  for  her."     "Reproach

her  not."  Community  in  labour.  Unselfishly  thinking  of  others  and
their  work,  without  unkindliness  or  rebuke.  Cp.  moroseness  a  I
malevolence.  "Each  worker  pleases  where  the  rest  he  servts  m
charity."

III.  The  Scmtiny :  Direct  investigation  into  our  use  of  life's  opportunities.

(1)  The  "day,"  however,   varying  in  incident  and  duration,   soon  "goeth

away."  "The  shadows  of  the  evening  are  stretched  out."  "The
night  Cometh  when  no  man  can  work."

(2)  After  that,  the  Tribunal  and  award,     (a)     The   Fact  of   Judgment    [cf.

Matt.  XXV.  19.]  (b)  its  characteristics  {\)  Personal  and  individual  :
"Those."  {'I)  Practical :  "Where."  (3)  Precise:  each  "day"  audits
doings.  How  wise  to  let  the  inquiry  here  anticipate  the  inquiry
hereafter.  Day  by  day  and  every  day  should  conscience  put  the
question — "  Where  hast  thou  gleaned  to-day?"


"  If  we  are  not  our  brethren's,  yet  surely  we
are  our  childrenV  keeperss  ;  and  we  know  what
a  son  Adonijah  proved,  that  had  never  b-en
^hidden.  Parents  should  examine  their
children,  not  to  frighten  nor  discourage  them,
not  so  as  to  make  them  hate  home  or  tempt
ihem  to  tell  alie,  but  tocomiiiend  ttiem  \i  they
lave  'one  well,  and  with  mildness  to  reprove
and  caution  them  if  they  have  done  otherwise."
— Matthew  Hemy.

"  It  is  a  good  question  for  us  to  ask  our-
selves in  the  close  of  every  day, '  Where  have

136


I  gleaned  to  day  ?  What  improvements  have
I  made  in  knowledge  and  grace  ?  What  have
I  done  or  obtained  that  will  turn  to  a  good
account  ?' "

"  Sum  up  at  night  what  thou  hast  done  by  day  ;
And  ill  the  morning  what  thou  hast  to  do.
Dress  nn&  undress  thy  soul  :  mark  the  decay
And  growth  of  it :  if  with  thy  watch,  that  too
Be  down,  then  wind  up  both  ;  since  we  shall

be
Most  surely    judged,   make    thy    accounts
agree."  — Herbert.


CHAP.  II.  20.


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH.


"  Spirits  rest  in  duty,  in  the  interchanjjfe  of
the  commnnica'ions  «"r|  ministries  of  thought
and  love  " — Buldwin  Brown.

"The  reconiing  ot  fht'se  small  matters
showeth  how  dear  to  God  are  His  saints,  and
how  He  is  tnken  with  everythintj  they  say  or
do,  if  not  sinful.' — 7Va/>/>

"They  are  rich  who  have  friends  The'^e
is  no  living  without  friends." — Portuguese
Proverhs

"  And  whether  a  man  be  poor  or  rich,
caressed  of  fortune  or  crushed  under  diffi-
culties, if  he  be  honit^less  in  this  sense,  if  he
have  no  loved  ones  caring  for  him  and  not  for
his  substance,  sympathizing  in  his  trials  and
rejoicing  in  his  successes,  the  veriest  dog  thft
has  a  kennel  to  creep  in  out  of  the  cold  wind
at  niehtSjis  to  be  envied  more  than  he." — B.

"Piety,  however,  does  more  than  indulge  in
curiosity.  The  natural  heart  would  have  re-
joiced, received,  enjoyed,  and  inquired  just  as
Naomi  did,  but  withal  with  no  thought  except
of  self.  She,  on  the  contrary,  before  her  in-
quiries are  answered,  induced  eimplv  by  the
abundance  of  the  gifts  and  the  mani'"est  hap-
piness of  Ruth,  blesses  the  giver." — Lange.

"  The  blessings  of  grace  also  are  scattered
abroad  in  the  gospel  field  in  the  greatest
abundance,  but  they  must  all  be  gathered  in
a  diligent  use  of  the  appointed  means.  Sove-
reiorn  grace  could,  if  infinite  wisdom  saw
meet,  save  its  object  without  the  intervention
of  means ;  and  so  might  Boaz  have  given
Ruth  the  handfnls  unscattered,  but  he  did
not  choose  to  do  that,  neither  does  grace
choose  to  do  this.    God  has  therefore  bound


His  people  to  as  strict,  as  conscientious  a  use
of  the  means,  as  if  upon  them  only  salvation
was  entirely  dependent.  .  .  .  What  He  gives
in  a  way  of  sovereign  goodness  must  be
gifhpred  in  the  way  of  the  strictest  diligence."
— Macgowan.

*  1  f  rhe  rich  can  exchange  their  alms  with
the  poor  for  bl  ssings  they  have  no  cause  to
complain  of  an  ill  bargain  Our  gifts  cannot
be  worth  their  faithful  prayers  :  therefore  it  is
better  to  jrive  than  receive;  because  he  that
receives  hath  a  worthless  alms  :  he  that  srivps
receives  an  invaluable  blessing." — Bishop  Hall.

"  If  we  would  but  recollect  than  life  is  a
mosaic,  mtde  up  of  very  little  things,  and  that
the  very  sntiallest  and  meanest  well  done,  is  as
th%nk worth V  as  the  greatest." — Anon.

*'  Before  even  her  question  can  he  answered,
and  moved  simply  by  the  manifest  happiness
of  Ruth  in  the  abundance  of  her  gleanings,
she  *  blesses'  the  man  who  has  given  her  this
happiness.  For  this  she  does  not  need  to
know  who  he  is.  Whoever  had  been  kind  and
bountiful  to  Ruth  must  have  meant  to  show
that  he  appreciated  her  virtues  and  felt  for
her  misfortunes." — Cox.

I'  •  For  the  last  ten  years  I  (Gambetta)  have
made  a  pledge  with  myself  to  entirely  avoid
introducing  the  name  of  God  into  any  speech
of  mine.  You  can  hardly  believe  how  dif-
ficult it  has  been,  but  I  have  succeeded,  thank
God!'  ('  Dieu  jnerctf).  Thus  the  name  so
sternly  tabooed  rose  unconsciously  to  his  lips  at
the  very  moment  when  he  was  congratulating
himself  on  having  overcome  the  habit  of  using
it:'—E.  D.  Pressense.


VERSE  20.


Theme. — Kindness  to  the  Living  and  the  Deaix

•  Tl  ose  that  he  loved  so  long,  and  sees  no  more,
Loved  and  srill  loves — not  dead,  but  gone  before." — Rogen,

*'  The  dead  are  like  the  stars  by  day,
Withdrawn  from  mortal  eye,
Yet  holding  unperceived  their  way
Through  the  unclouded  sky." — Bernard.

Blessed  he  he  of  the  Lord  [Jehovah]  who  hath  not  left  off  His  kindness  to  the
living  and  the  dead.

It  is  just  possible  these  words  apply  entirely  to  Boaz.  New  favours  cause  a
fresh  remembrance  of  former  courtesies  {Fuller).  Memory  is  busy,  and  Naomi
may  see  in  the  kindness  of  to-day  only  a  continuance  of  similar  acts  to  the  dead
Elimelech  done  years  ago.  If  so,  she  recognises  in  this  tiie  habit  and  spirit  of
his  life.  The  new  benefactor  is  the  benef^xctor  of  old.  He  ''hath  not  left  off,"
&c.  Note.  Benevolence  grows  upon  men.  One  deed  of  charity  leads  to  another,
fosters  the  spirit,  forms,  or  helps  to  form,  the  habit.  Characteristic  of  a  good
man  that  he  has  not  *' left  off"  those  deeds  of  kindness  which  bring  down  life-
long blessings  and  benedictions  upon  him  [cf.  Job  xxxi.  16  2;  xxix.  11-16.J
While  some  give  from  impulse  merely,  and  others  from  ostentation,  he  gives  from
a  heart  permeated  by  the  spirit  of  love,  and  so  he  is  always  ready  to  respond  to

13/


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:  RUTTL  chap  ii.  20.


the  wants  of  those  around  him.     Note.    What  a  noble  and  spontaneous  testimony
to  the  worth  of  Boaz^  if  the  words  are  to  be  so  employed  and  applied.

Again,  the  phrase  is  a  very  significant  one  as  to  the  whole  action  and  scope
of  the  book.  Among  the  HeV)rews  kindness  to  the  widow,  duties  performed  to
and  for  the  bereaved  were  looked  upon  as  done  to  and  for  the  dead.  This  one  of
the  fixed  ideas  in  Naomi's  mind  seemingly  hopeless  it  first  [see  on  i.  11-13;
p.  46]  as  to  any  outward  accomplishment,  but  now  to  be  seen  as  beginning  to
shape  itself  ia  another  way.  Note.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  we  may  he  kind  to
the  dead — to  his  memory,  to  hi-j  loved  one  [see  on  ch.  i.  9,  p.  40  ;  Fuller's
remarks.]

The  very  close  relationship,  however,  between  the  name  of  Jehovah  and  the
following  sentence  seems  to  intimate  that  it  is  the  Divine  Mercy  as  bestowed
upon  the  living  and  the  dead  which  is  filling  her  heart  with  a  gratitude  not  to
be  concealed  [cf.  Crit.  and  Exegetical  Notes.]  She  thinks  of  God,  not  so  much
of  Boaz  as  the  author  of  this  new  kindness.  It  is,  "Jehovah  who  hath  not,"
&c.  Note.  Naomi  recognizes  this  even  more  profoundly  than  Eliezer.  (Gen.
xxiv,  26.)  (Lange.)

May  be  looked  upon  if  taken  in  this  way.  I.  In  the  sense  of  the  unbroken
continuance  of  the  Divine  favour  throughout  the  ages,  to  children,  and  chil-
dren's children.  He  is  the  God  of  Abraham  and  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob.  He
blesses  Ruth  to-day,  even  as  He  blessed  her  husband  yesterday.  To  each  new
generation  there  is  this  revelation  of  new  mercies,  for  He  is  the  God  of  each
*'  succeeding  race."  Men  there  are  whose  charitable  deeds  are  as  rare  as  an
eclipse  or  a  blazing  star  (Fuller),  Not  so  with  Him.  He  ceaseth  not.  "  He
hath  not  left  off,"  &c.

Note.  The  pious  have  recognised  this  in  all  ages.  Moses  saw  Him  as,  keeping
covenant  to  a  thousand  generations  (Deut.  vii.  9)  and  as,  "  the  dwelling-place  "
of  His  people  in  all  generations  (Ps.  xc.  1).  David  conceived  Him  as  keeping
mercy  fur  ever  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  28),  and  as  not  suffering  His  "  faithfulness  to  fail"
(33)  Isaiah  speaks  of  Him  as  hearing  and  preserving  and  establishing  His  own
(Is.  xlix.  8).  Jeremiah  says,  "His  compassions  fail  not — they  are  new  every
morning"  (Lam.  iii.  22,  23).  This  unchanging  faithfulness  and  compassion  of
God  (1)  Comes  from  the  Divine  Nature  (Is.  xlix.  ;  1  Cor.  i.  9  ;  1  Thes.  v.  24).  (2)
Endures  with  the  Divine  existence  [cxlvi.  3j.  (3)  Shows  itself  in  the  Divine  action
at  all  times.

It  may  be  looked  upon  II.  In  that  completer  sense  in  which  God  controls  the
unseen  world  as  well  as  this.  The  dead  are  with  Him  even  as  the  living  are,
and  this  thought  may  possibly  have  been  in  Naomi's  mind.  For  how  can  mercy
be  shown  to  such  as  exist  no  longer?  (Lange).  Would  never  occur  to  speak  of
that  as  mercy  [kindness]  to  the  dead  which  is  mercy  to  the  living  and  nothing
more  [Ibid),  f  See  (  ritical  and  Exeg.  Notes,  and  Lange  in  loco].  Certainly  the
dead  held  a  very  conspicuous  and  important  place  in  Naomi's  speech  and
thoughts  [cf.  i.  8.  21],  as  well  as  in  that  of  the  Hebrews  generally  [iv.  5.  10 j.
And  can  we  imagine  this  as  side  by  side  with  the  conception  that  they  had  ceased
to  exist  for  ever  1  To  do  so  is  to  commit  the  error  of  the  Sadducees,  who  erred,
*^not  knowing  the  Scriptures.^^  All  the  light  of  subsequent  revelation  has  not  made
the  dead  one  whit  more  real  to  us,  more  clearly  identitied  with  ourselves,  than  we
see  them  here.  Why,  then,  refuse  to  believe  that  Naomi  saw  her  loved  ones  as
restiuiT  even  then  in  Abraham's  bosom  %  Where  otherwise  is  the  force  of  Christ's
appeal  (Matt.  xxii.  31,  32),  "  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living?'
Blessed  thought  if  taught  here !  He  comforts  us  to-day,  and  He  comforts
those  who  are  no  longer  with  us  but  with  Him.  Death  has  not  removed  them
from  the  sphere  of  His  kindness.  Separation  from  us  does  not  necessarily  mean
Beparation  from  Him ;  rather  it  means,  with  the  righteous,  to  come  more  com-
pletely within  the  scope  of  His  love  (Rev.  xiv.  13).  They  serve  and  we  servb
(Kev.  vi.  15).     He  feeds  them  (17)  and  He  feeds  us.     He  strengthens  the  heart

J3S


CHAP.  II.  20.


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:  RUTH.


of  the  mourners  here,  and  He  wipes  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes  yonder.  He
hath  not  left  off,  etc.  Note.  The  dead  and  the  living  are  linked  together  still  in
the  eyes  of  God  and  gf  good  men.  Not  so  much  two  worlds  as  one,  that  the  other
side  of  this  an  i  God  over  all  blessed  for  evermore.  Parted  only  by  a  thin  and
perhaps,  from  tlieir  side,  transparent  veil  {Braden).

Lessons.  (I)  Kindness  to  the  livin<^  may  be,  and  is  sometimes,  kindness  to  the
dead.  (2)  As  health  is  the  poor  man's  patrimony,  so  prayers  are  the  poor  man's
requital  (Trap}))

Bernard  on  ^^  Blessed  he  he  of  the  Lord."  (I)  That  prayer  in  and  by  every  true
member  of  the  Church  hath  been  only  made  unto  God.  (2)  That  it  is  the  Lord
who  doth  bless  and  make  happy.  (3)  That  the  Lord  will  bless  the  merciful.
(4)  That  the  poor's  reward  unto  the  rich  for  their  work  of  charity  is  only
their  prayer  to  God  for  them.

E.  Price  on  this  : —Goi's  Blessing.  (1)  In  its  nature,  it  is  "kindness" — the
very  soul  of  tenderness  to  the  God-fearing  among  men.  (2)  In  its  continuance.
He  CMu't  "leave  off"  making  His  children  happy.  (3)  In  its  application  to  both
worlds — to  the  ''living"  as  the  song  of  a  Rath  may  testify;  to  the  "  dead,"  as
the  hope  of  a  Naomi  must  imply.  Both  are  in  the  covenant  of  the  God  of
Israel.  And  (4)  in  its  expression.  He  knows  how  to  prepare  some  lip  to  give  it
adequate  expression  before  the  world.  The  old  shall  ever  confirm  the  faith  of
the  young.

**  It  is  kindness  to  the  dead  as  well  as  to  the
living.  The  natural  human  protectors  are
gone,  but  the  Almighty  Father  has  taken
their  place.  It  is  what  Elimelech  and  Mahlon
would  havedesirerl,  and  it  is  kindness  to  them.
Can  we  not  imagine  that  those  who  have
passed  from  earth,  leaving  p  )or  disconsolate
ones  behind  to  strui^gle  with  life's  difficulties,
often  find,  in  their  glorified  condition,  fresh
and  continuous  reasons  for  rejoicing  became
they  pee  how  the  ever-watchful  love  of  Goi  ig
constantly  shown  towards  beloved  ones,  whose
comfort  was  their  desire  and  endeavour  ?  " —
Bra'itn.

*•  Though  old  Barzillai  be  incapable  of  thy
favours,  let  voung  Chimham  taste  of  thy  kmd-
ncvss.  Though  the  dead  cannot,  need  not,  have
thy  mercy,  vet  may  they  receive  thy  kindness
by  a  proxy — by  their  friends  that  still  are
livinfj.

"  Mercy,  then  to  the  dead,  makes  nothing
for  the  Popish  purgatory,  and  yet  no  w  mder
if  the  Papists  fight  for  it  .  .  .  In  a  word,
were  purgatory  taken  away,  the  Pope  him-elf
would  be  in  purgatory,  as  u;)t  knowing  which
way  to  maintain  his  expensiveness." — Fui'er.

'"Call  upon  the  Almi^^hty,  He  will  help
thee;  thou  needest  not  perplex  thyself  about
an\  thing  else  :  shut  thy  eyes,  and  while  thou
art  asleep,  God  will  chm;ze  thy  bid  fortune
into  good.'' — Arnhian  lights.

"The  Lord  is  th»i  fountain  frim  wh-^m  all
blesseiuess  flows.  Indeed.  Jac  )b  blessed  his
sons;  Moses,  th<!  twelve  tribes;  the  priest-",
in  the  law,  the  jieople  :  hut  thes<;  were  b.it  the
iustiu'nents,  God  the  Principal  ;  thes^i  the
pipe,  God  the  Fountain  ;  th->8e  the  milliliters
to  pronounce  it,  God  the  autuor  who  bestowed
it."— Fuller.

'The  dead.  So  siler>t  now.  Never  to  come
ba  k  for  us  to  touch  imperfecmess  into  riper
go  >d :  never  to  charm  away  with  pleasant
thoughts  tbe  dull  hours;    never  to  till  with


deeper  meanings  of  love  the  half  empty  words ;
never  to  make  more  divine  the  common  ser-
vice of  life ;  never  to  put  the  best  interpreta-
tion upon  conduct  ;   never  to  lift  the  leaden
crown  of  care  from  the  anxious  brow ;  never
to  help  to  transfii^ure  the  mean  and  lowly  with
heavenly  hopes  and  as[)irati>ns.    Gone  1    What
a  world  of  vacancy  and    silence   and   subtle
mystery  1     Is  it  strange  we  should  wish  well
to  those  who  were  kind  to  the  dead  ?     And
Naomi  links  her  own  being  with  them  still.
.    .    .    .     Wi'h  true  hearts  they  can  never

be  disassociated." — Stitham,
*'  Oh,  ye  heloved  ones  I

Though  speechless,  though  nnseen,
Loves  bond  is  strong  to-day,
As  love  has  ever  been.
**  Deathle-8  the  memories,

And  though  unspoken  now  {
Dear  n  imes  and  tender  words,
Binding  as  lover's  vow.
•         •         •         •         •         •        •

*'  Tender  and  trne  ye  were,
All  passit)nless  ye  lie
Beneath  the  churchyard  grass,
The  Weird  wind  waudera  by»

**  We  spoak.  the  murmuring  wind
Wanders  earih-born  above  ;
They  rest  below  ;-  that  calm.
Speaks  God's  best  gft  of  love." — B.

"Jn  ttie  wonderful  prov  dt- nee  of  God  which
made  Ruth  find  a  trie^.d  in  Boaz,  the  rich
relative  of  her  husb.nd,  nhe  feels  herself
ju  tified  to  find  an  iniicaticm  that  God  is  once
m  TC  graci'us  to  her,  and  has  not  left  off  his
kindness.  If  now  it  ^as  through  the  fault  of
her  dear  departed  ones  that  she  had  hitherto
expeiienceii  disiret-s,  then  it  also  follows  that,
since  Gods  goodness  again  manifests  itself
so  conspicuously,  his  ang<  r  against  those  must
likewise  be  come  to  an  end.  For  that  reasou
bhe  speaks  of  his  kindness,  not  only   to  the

139


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH,        chap,  ii  20,  21.


living  but  also  of  the  dead.  For  these  had
died  through  the  same  sin  whi<»h  had  brought
suffering  on  herself.  Hence,  God's  help  to  her
in  her  suffering  is  a  manifestation  of  His  un-
wearied grace  toward  both  the  living  and  the
dead." — Lange.

"If  we  would  enter  into  the  force  of  this
outburst  of  praise,  we  must  remember  that


Naomi  had  lost  her  faith — not  in  God,  indeed,
but  in  the  goodwill  of  G^d  for  her.  .  .  .
Now  she  descries  a  proof  that  God  had  not
wholly  abandoned  her.  No  one  who  has
witnessed  such  a  revulsion  from  spiritual
despair  to  renewed  hope  in  the  Divine  good-
ness and  compassion  will  mnrvel  at  the  ecstasy
which  breathes  in  Naomi's  words." — Cox,


VERSES  20,  21.
Theme. — Kinship  the  Ground  op  Redemptioit.

**  0  God,  0  kinsman  loved  but  not  enough  1
O  man,  with  eyes  majestic  after  death,
"Whose  feet  have  toiled  along  our  pathways  rougb^

Whose  lips  drawn  human  breath  1
By  that  one  likeness  which  is  ours  and  thine,
By  that  one  nature  which  doth  hold  us  kin;
By  that  high  heaven  where  sinless  Thou  dost  shine.
To  draw  us  sinners  in.

•  •  •  •  •

Come,  lest  this  heart,"etc.— Jean  Ingehw.

And  Naomi  said,  the  man  is  near  of  hin    etc,     .     .     .     And  Ruth  said,  He  said
unto  me  also,  etc.     ,     •     .     And  Naomi  said,  it  is  good,  my  daughter,  etc.

In  this  exquisite  dialogue  Ruth  goes  on,  we  can  imagine,  to  relate  and  un-
fold at  greater  length  than  is  here  written  the  goodness  of  Boaz.  She  is
evidently  pleased  to  speak  well  of  him  and  his.  Then  comes  out  in  reply  what
has  all  along  possibly  been  in  the  mind  of  Naomi.  She  had  been  no  boaster  of
her  rich  friend  and  kinsman,  as  many,  and  that  only  to  be  disappointed  at  last.
But  the  right  moment  for  speech  has  arrived.  It  is  not  merely  "  by  chance  "
that  this  Good  Samaritan  has  come  along.  She  sees  that  Providence  has  been
playing  its  part  in  the  unfolding  of  events,  and  the  loneliness  and  bitterness  of
spirit  which  found  expression  in  her  cry,  *'  Call  me  not  Naomi,  call  me  Mara,"  is
already  a  thing  of  the  past.  It  is  no  casual  helper  who  has  come  forward  to
relieve  their  necessities,  but  one  of  the  goelim.  **  The  man  is  near  of  kin  unto
us,  one  of  our  next  kinsmen."

Notice  I.  That  this  nearness  of  kinship  gives  the  right  to  redeem,  (a)  A
principle  underlying  the  whole  Jewish  economy  to  be  seen  alike  in  the  patriarchial
and  Mosaic  systems.  Everything  centred  from  the  family  centre.  Kinship  the
very  cement  of  their  society.

The  law  has,  however,  a  wider  application,  {h)  kinship  is  a  natural  and  so  a
Divinely  ordained  institution.  The  principle  as  true  to-day  as  when  laid  hold  of  by
Naomi.  When  kindred  show  themselves  kind  they  only  follow  and  satisfy  the  law
of  nature.  The  apostle  says,  "  If  any  provide  not  for  his  own,  and  specially  for
those  of  his  own  house,  he  hath  denied  the  faith  and  is  worse  than  an  infidel"
(I  Tim.  v.  8).  So  that  men  even  standing  aside  from  the  claims  of  God,  allow
and  respond  to  these  claims.

Again  (c).  The  law  touches  a  deeper  realm  still,  that  of  spiritual  and  eternal
things.  Christ  Himself  must  conform  to  it  when  He  came  to  redeem.  (1)  There
was  a  necessity  for  this,  a  needs  be.  In  all  things  ^'it  behoved  Him  to  be  made  like
unto  His  brethren,"  says  the  apostle  (Heb.  ii.  16,  17).  (2)  T//£re  was  a  reason
for  it.  Forasmuch  as  the  cliiMren  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood.  He  Himself
took  part  of  the  same,  that  through  death  He  might  destroy,  &c.,  and  deliver
them  who  through  fear  of  death,  &c.  Note.  Christ  is  the  kinsman — Redeemer
of  all  men.  [cf  also  on  iii,  2,  4  ;  iv,  9.]
140


CHAP.  n.  20,  21.        HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:  RUTH.


II  This  nearness  of  kinship  points  out  and  emphasises  the  direction  in
which  to  look  for  help.  Naomi  saw  their  safety  seeured  by  this  intervention,
their  wants  provided  for,  therefore  she  says  in  effect,  *'  Cling  to  the  deUverer
thus  providentially  pointed  out.*'  So  God  often,  and  still  opens  up  the  path  of
safety  and  plenty  in  life  (I)  suddenly,  (2)   unexpectedly,  (3),  unmistakably.

**  It  is  good,"  she  says,  immediately  and  prospectively.  Usual  both  in  the  Old
and  New  Testament  to  put  the  positive  fur  the  comparative  in  this  kind.  [Mary
hath  chosen  the  good  part,  i.e.  the  better  part,  Luke  x.  42.  It  is  profitable  for
thee;  i.e.  more  profitable.  Matt.  v.  29  ]  (Fuller).  Note.  God  not  only  gives  us
providential  directions,  there  are  special  moments  when  He  opens  our  eyes  to  see
them  as  such.  Such  a  moment  comes  when  the  scales  fall  from  our  eyes  and  we
see  Jesus  as  our  kinsman  and  our  all  (cf  Luke  xxiv.  31  ;  John  xi.  40 ;  2  Kings
vii.  7).     It  came  to  doubting  Thomas,  and  he  cried,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God."

Again,  mark  that  just  as  natural  affection,  and  the  Levirate  law  alike,  bound
Boaz  to  render  this  help  :  they  laid  the  obligation  upon  both  Naomi  and  Ruth
look  to  him  for  it  He  had  opened  the  way  to  aright  relationship  between  them,
and  n  w  there  can  be  no  excuse  on  their  side.  JNote  (1)  How  exactly  this  illus-
trates Christ's  position  towards  us.  He  has  taken  the  first  step — given  invitations
which  are  unmistakable  ;  now  it  is  ours — under  charge  of  the  blackest  ingrati-
tude if  we  refuse — to  respond.  (2)  It  is  a  discourtesy  where  we  are  beholden  to
alter  our  dependency  (Bishop  Hall).  Generosity  dislikes  to  have  its  gifts  slighted
or  its  sincerity  doubted  {Thomson).  Ruth  evidently  felt  that  because  the  kind-
ness of  Boaz  was  so  great  her  obedience  and  dependence  should  be  complete,
while  Naomi  encouraged  her  thus  to  regard  his  orders  as  obligatory.

Improvement.  (1)  Follow  Providential  guidances  as  they  nnfold  in  life.  (2)  Fall
in  v\ith  the  natural  and  Divinely-appointed  way  of  redeniption.  (3)  May  we  not
say  that  these  words  express  the  duty  of  the  spiritual  Ruth  to  labour  in  Chri  t's
fields  and  believe  steadfastly  in  Him,  and  not  to  stray  from  His  presence  into
other  fields  even  till  the  end  of  the  world  ( Wordsworth).


**  So  suggestive  i^  tliis  figure,  which  was  not
a  mere  random  selection,  but  an  nibtitution
designed  to  foreshadow  a  great  truth,  that  it
is  constantly  referred  to  in  the  Word  of  God.
We  all  recollect  the  touching  case  of  Job.
In  the  depth  of  his  «ffliction,  when  all  seemed
desperate,  he  said,  *1  know  that  ray  Kedteiner
liveth'  [Ueb.,  'My  Goel  liveth']."  — i)r.
Cummirig

*'  Christ  came  into  our  home,  breathed  our
air,  clad  Himse'f  in  our  dress,  wept  our  tears,
and  was  penetrated  and  pierced  with  more
than  all  the  accumulated  Horrov*?  thnt  humanity
it  heir  to,  that  we  thus — there  being  no  other
process  in  the  world  besides — might  be  rescued
from  our  sins,  and  ni'ght  hear,  ringing  in  the
depths  of  our  hearts,  wiih  the  opening  of  the
I'rison  doors  to  the  captive,  *  There  is  no  con-
demnation to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus.'"
— Dr.   Cummin g.

"  I  have  seen  the  twine-thread  of  a  cordial
friend  hold,  when  the  cable  rope  of  a  lich
kinsman  hath  hnken  Let  thosw  therefore  be
thankful  to  Gt>d,  to  whom  God  hath  given
means  to  be  maintained  ut  themselves,  without


depf  ndance  on  their  kindred.  Better  it  is  to
be  the  weakest  of  substances  to  subsist  of
themselves,  than  to  be  the  bravest  accidents
to  b-   maintained  by  another."—  Fuller.

*  Our  blesi-ed  SMvionr  is  our  Goel  ;  it  is  He
that  hath  a  right  to  redeem.  If  we  expect  to
re(  eive  benefit  bv  him,  let  us  closely  adhere  to
Him,  and  His  fields,  and  His  family  ;  let  us
no?  go  to  the  world  and  its  tields  for  that
whiih  is  t*)  be  had  with  liim  only,  and  which
He  has  encouraged  us  to  expect  from  Him.
Has  the  Lord  dealt  bountifully  wiih  us?  Let
us  not  be  found  in  any  other  field,  nor  peek
for  happiness  and  satisfaction  iu  the  creature.
Tradesmen  take  it  ill  if  those  that  are  in  their
books  go  to  another  shop  We  lose  Divine
favours  if  we  flight  them." — Matt.  Henry.

"Even  the  lump  of  clay,  when  it  was  placed
rear  the  ros»^,  according  to  the  beautiful
Peisian  proverb,  caught  some  of  its  fragrance.
It  is  the  directi'-n  of  Him  in  Wh<»m  are  h  d
all  the  treasu  es  of  wisdom  and  knowledgf^,
'Go  thy  way  f  rth  by  the  footsteps  of  the
flcck,  and  feed  thy  kids  beside  the  shepherd  i
tents.'" — A.  Thomson,  D.D,


141


HOMILETIC    CO\nfENTAHY:   RUTH.  chap,  ii  23.

VERSE  23.
Theme. — Constancy  at  Home  and  Abroad.

**Man  to  thy  lab  >ur  bow,
Thrust  ill  the  sickle  now,
Keap  where  thou  once  did  f  lough-
God  sends  thee  bread.'' — Montgomery.

*  Home  to  calm^^r  bliss  invites.
More  tranquil  aud  more  true." — Bowring,

So  she  kept  fast  hy  the  maidens  of  Boaz  to  glean  unto  the  end^  etc.     And  dwelt  with

her  mother -in  /aw.

The  homely  history  repeats  and  re  repeats  this  idea  of  keeping  fast  by,  etc.
The  wandering  sheep  never  thrives  {l^iomson).  Wisdom  to  prevent  danger  by
not  exposing  ourselves  to  peril  [Bernard).  Naomi  has  wisely  and  affectionately
warned  her  against  the  danger  of  going  elsewhere  (v.  22).  Boaz,  too,  has
Bpoken  to  the  same  end  (v.  8,  21).  Here  we  see  the  good  counsel  (a)  thankfully
accepted,  (h)  carefully  followed  [cf.  Prov.  xiii.  20].

Note.  Muth  an  example  to  the  young  in  this — obedient,  scrupulously  attentive
in  carrying  out  the  adv  ce  which  has  been  given.  Even  Ishmael  obeyed  his
mother  in  matters  of  moment  (Gen.  xxi.  21),  and  Herodias  first  consulted  her
mother  before  she  asked  a  boon  of  her  father  Herod  (Matt,  xiv,  7,  8,).  In  this
respect  they  condemn  many  undutifuj  children  of  our  days  {Fuller).

Labour  and  rest  go  a  long  way  to  make  up  life.     Here  is  constancy  in  both.

Notice  I.  Ihe  commendable  constancy  and  continuity  in  connexion  with
labour  enforced  here.  Harvest  prospects  naturally  (1)  reconcile  to  exertion,  (2)
animate  to  diligence,  (3)  stimulate  to  constant  and  continual  toil.  Whether  as
gleaners  or  reapers  we  should  respond  to  the  appeal.  E-uth  evidently  laboured
as  one  who  felt  that  the  present  gracious  season  of  ingathering  would  not  last
for  long.  Blajed  the  ant  and  not  tke  grasshopper  (Bernard).  A  few  days  or
weeks,  and  it  would  be  all  over — its  opportunities  gone  for  ever.  Reasonable,
therefore,  that  every  other  concern  should  give  place  to  this,  and  that  every
exertion  should  be  made  to  improve  the  short,  but  all-important,  period.

How  true  the  principle  in  other  directions  I  (a)  So  with  Life  iiself — fleeting  —
once  ours,  then  gone  for  ever,  {b)  So  with  gospel  opportunities.  Tiie  season  for
repentance  and  the  ingathering  of  faith  (1)  limited,  (2)  short,  (3)  uncertain  in
duration.  Hence  the  wisdom  of  improving  the  present  opportunity.  To-day
if  ye  will  hear  His  voice,  etc  (Heb.  iv.  7).  He  that  gatheieth  in  summer  is  a
wise  son  ;  but  he  that  sleepeth  in  harvest  is  a  son  that  causeth  shame  (Prov.
X.  5).     Note.    T'he  best  thrift  is  to  use  the  present  opportunity.

Again,  Ruth  laboured  until  the  end  of  the  barley  and  wheat  harvest — a
double  chance,  and  no  part  of  it  neglected.  There  are  who  at  first  have  a
ravenous  appetite  to  work,  but  quickly  surfeit  thereof  [Fuller).  So  in  spiritual
things  many  who  begin  well,  as  Orpah  did,  (I.  14)  (cf.  Gal  iii.  3  ;  iv.  9 ;  Matt,
xiii.  5,  6,  etc.)  Note,  (a)  The  constant  pace  goes  farthest  and  is  freest  from  being
tired  [Fuller),  [h)  He  that  endures  unto  the  end.  is  to  he  saved  (Matt,  xxiv  13).
(c)  Opportunities  neglected  are  not  likely  to  return  again.  How  solemn  the
responsibility,  then,  of  this  present  I  lest  we  should  be  found  saying,  **  The
harvest,  is  past,"  etc.  (Jer.  viii.  2U).

Notice  II.  The  commendable  constancy  and  continuity  in  connection  with
home  and  rest  enforced  here.  And  she  dwelt  with  her  mother-in-law  (1)  Shows
her  discretion.  She  constantly  came  home  to  her  mother  at  night  as  became  a
virtuous  woman  that  was  for  working  days,  and  not  for  merry  nights  [Matt.
Henry)  ;  (2)  Shows  her  affection  for  Naomi.  No  favour  abroad,  or  gain  reaped
there,  made  her  neglect  the  friend  with  whom  she  had  come  from  Moab,
Clinging  iast  to  her  new  aciiuaintances  in  the  hai* vest- Held  did  not  interfere  with
142


CHaP.  II.  23.


n<)MtlLTlC    COMMENTARY :   RtJI  11.


"cleaving  to  Naomi"  at  home.  A  lesson  and  an  example  to  the  inconstant
here.  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  to  change  thy  ways  [cf.  on  I.  i.  p.  11]  ?
(3)  Shews  her  love  for  home.  Had  what  so  many  men  in  these  days  want,  a
centre  for  her  duties  and  affections,  and  was  true  to  that — fixed — not  given  to
change  Christ's  command  to  his  disciples  *' go  not  from  house  to  house;"
eufurces  this  in  connection  with  the  interests  and  spread  of  his  kingdom  (Matt.
X.  16).  Note,  (a)  Children  are  to  cling  to  home  so  long  as  they  may  he  of  use
there.  How  can  they  show  their  gratitude  for  the  past  better  than  as  Ruth  did
by  affection  ami  care  in  the  present  \  (b)  Change  apart  from  Gods  guidance  is
always  a  foolish  thing.

Improvement. — An  interesting  illustration  of  youthful  fidelity  in  the  Saviour's
work  (Tyng).  Such  fidelity  makes  its  distinct  and  decided  choice.  The  aim
single,  the  pursuit  absorbing.  *' This  one  thing  I  do,"  said  Paul.  Suggest
(i)  that  every  one  should  have  his  chosen  field  in  which  to  gather  instruction  ;
(2)  And  that  having  chosen  it  he  ought  to  keep  to  it  {Thomson).  Wandering
may  very  possibly  lead  on  to  dangerous  ground.  (3)  The  necessity  there  is
for  the  "  home  life  " — (a)  guard  it,  {b)  cherish  it.  Go  forth  to  work,  come  home
to  live  (Baldwin  Brown),     Note.  Home  and  heaven  are  kindred  spheres  (Ibid  ).


•*  Maids  are  the  fittest  company  for  maids  ;
amongst  whom  a  chaste  widow,  such  as  liath
was,  may  well  be  recount-  d.  Modesty  is  the
life-guard  of  chastity." — Fuller

*•  IJinah  went  out  to  see  the  daughters  of
the  land,  and  we  know  what  a  disgrace  her
vanity  ended  in.  Ruch  kept  at  home,  and
helped  to  maintain  her  mother,  and  went  out  un
no  other  errand  than  to  j^et  provision  for  her,
and  we  shall  find  afterwards  what  preterment
her  humility  and  industry  ended  in.  Seest
thou  a  man  diligent  in  his  business  ?  Hon-
our is  before  him." — Malt  Henry.

*'  Perhaps  some  will  say,  that  Christ  willeth
us  not  to  take  care.  But  doth  He  ever  will  any
man  not  to  labour  ?  The  care  which  Chri.-it
speaketh  of,  is  immoderate  care,  care  without
faith,  or  care  full  of  doubting,  and  little  faith,
and  that  which  is  without  care  of  religion,
the  mind  being  taken  up  wholly  with  the  world  ;
else  men  may,  yea,  and  ought  to  Ubowr  for  the
things  of  this  life  to  be  provident  for  the  lime
to  come,  and  frugal  in  expenses  for  the  time
present.'*-  Bernard.

"It  was  Chrii^t's  counsel  to  His  disciples,
(Matt.  X.  ii.)  to  "  abide  "  in  the  place  wherein
they  did  enter,  and  not  to  go  from  house  to
bouse.  Such  the  settledness  of  Kuth, — where
she  hrsst  fa^tened,thele  she  fixed;  she  '*  dwelt
with  her  nioitier."  Naomi  affords  Ruth  house
room,  Ruth  gains  Naomi  food  ;  Naomi  pro-
vides u  mckiision,  Ruih  prays  for  meat;  and  so
fthey]  mutually  serve  to  supply  the  wants  of
each  other.  If  envy,  and  covetousness,  and
idleness  were  nor,  the  hindrances,  how  might
one  Christian  reciprocally  be  a  help  unto  an-
other 1  All  have  sotmthing,  none  have  all
things;  yet  all  might  have  all  things  in  com-
fortable and  competent  proportion,  if  seriously
suiting  themselves  as  Ruth  and  Naomi  did,  that
what  IS  defect!  e  in  one  might  be  supplied  in
the   other." — Fuller.

'*  This  Ruth  the  Moabitoss,  a  heathen  by
birth,  mav  rise  up  in  judgment  against  such
aa    bhuuid  be   uuturtJ    children,    who   having


gotten  from  under  their  parents,  when  they
can  live  of  themselves,  they  make  no  reckon-
ing of  them  being  altogether  unwilling  lo
live  with  them,  and  most  of  all  to  relieve
them." — Bernard.

The  Saviour's  field  is  perfectly  distinct.  .  . .
We  can  never  doubt  what  positive  and  true
religion  is  in  the  human  character,  or  what  it
requires  of  us ;  our  questions  are  never  on  the
side  of  things  which  are  certainly  right,  but  on
the  side  of  those  which  are  possibly  wrong.
In  such  cases  there  can  be  no  question  that  it
is  right  to  abstain  from  that  which  is  not  per-
fecriy  free  from  doubt  in  its  indulgence.
Happy  is  it  for  the  young  christian  to  take  a
decided,  positive  standard  of  conduct ;  and  ii
all  things  to  seek  and  to  pursue  that  which  is
manifestly  jiood  to  the  use  of  edifying,  an^l
adapted  to  minisrer  to  a  gn-wth  in  g''ace,  and
a  real  likeness  to  a  holy  Master.  Such  will
avoid  the  scenes  and  instruments  of  temptation.
*'  It  is  good  that  they  meet  thee  not  in  any
other  field."— Ty?/^.

**  She  stood  breast  high  amid  the  corn,
Clasped  by  the  golden  light  of  morn.
Like  the  sweetheart  of  the  sun,
Who  many  a  glowing  kiss  had  won
**  On  her  cheeks  an  autumn  flush
Deeply  ripened  —such  a  blush
In  the  midst  of  brown  was  born,
Like  red  poppies  grown  with  corn.
'*  Round  dark  eyes  her  tresst  s  fell,
Which  weie  blackest  none  could  tell.
But  long  lashes  veiled  a  light
That  had  else  been  all  too  bright,
"  And  her  hat  with  shady  brim,
Made  her  tiessy  forehead  dim  ;
1  hn8  she  stood  amid  the  stocks,
Praising  God  with  sweetest  looks.
••  Sure,'  1  said,  '  Heaven  did  not  mean
Where  I  reap  thou  should'st  but  glean
Lay  thy  sheaf  adown  and  come.
Share  my  harvest  and  mv  home.'"

TliOiuas  Hood,

143


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY :    RUTH,       chap.  hi.  1—6.


CHAPTER   III.
THE  CLAIMANT  IN  THE  THRESHING  FLOOR.

Contents. — Ruth,  at  the  instigation  of  Naomi  by  laying  herself  d  wn  at  the  feet  of  Boa z,
claims  an  acknowledgment  of  the  relationshi/j  between  them.  Ih  explains  to  her  that  there  is  a
neam'  kinsman  than  hirns- If ,  but  promises  to  undertake  the  duties  of  a  q<  el  \je  leenter'\  should
the  prior  claim  not  be  insisted  upon.  He  dismisses  her  with  a  present,  and  she  returns  to  JS/aomi
to  await  the  issue.


VERSES  1— «.

Ckitical  and  Exegetical  Notes. — Then  [an(1]  Naomi  .  •  said.  The  plan  had
matured  itself  slowly  in  her  mind  during  the  harvest  season,  now  comes  the  proposal.  Boaz,
by  his  kindness  and  attention  to  Ruth,  has  evidently  removed  whatever  difficulties  she  hns
felt  heretofore  [cf.  on  i.  11-13  :  p.  47] .     Shall  I  not  seek?     I  must  seek  rest  for  thee.  ^^/^

as  usual  an  expression  of  general  admission  or  of  undoubted  certainty,  in  the  sense  of  "  Is  it
not  true  1  seek  for  thee  ?"  It  is  my  duty  to  seek  for  thee  {Keil).  The  obligation  to  enforce  the
claims  of  a  Levirate  marriage  lay  on  the  side  of  Naomi  and  Ruth.  In  accordance  with  ancient
usage  to  leave  the  as-crtion  of  a  right  with  its  possessor  {Lange),  the  widow  could  demand  her
rights  of  the  nearest  relative,  and  if  refused,  put  him  openly  to  shame  (^Ibid).  Rf st  [a  resting
place,  Num.  x.  33]  for  thee.  A  secure  life,  under  the  guardian  care  of  a  husband  (Rossenmuller)
Cf.  on  i.  9  as  to  this  *'  rest  in  the  house  of  a  husband  ; "  with  the  respect  and  protection  it
implied.  That  which  made  the  fate  of  the  daughter  of  Jephthah  so  oad  was,  that  she  never
found  a  resting  place  in  the  house  of  a  husband  (Lange).  That  it  may  he  well  with  thee.
Which  shall  be  good  for  thee  (Carpzov  Rosen.)  That  marriage  may  be  to  thee  a  merry-age
(Trapp).     t:he  assumed  that  every  true  rest  was  good  (Morison.)

Ver.  2.  And  now  is  not  Boaz  of  our  kindred?  Our  relation  (Keil).  Our  acquaintance,  i.e.,
relative  (Lange).  Hence  the  justness  of  the  claim.  Is  he  not  therefore  thy  husband  accordi'  g
to  the  law  ( Wordsworth) .  Can'iot  reasonably  esuppose  that  a  pious  woman  would  counsel
against  the  law  of  God  or  the  morai  sense  of  good  men,  such  as  Boaz.  To  do  so,  would  have
alienated  and  repelled  him,  and  so  have  frustrated  her  own  purpose  (Ibid).  With  whose
maidens  then  wast.  A  delicate  reminder  that  Boast  has  himself  placed  her  on  a  level  with
his  own  Israelitish  people  [cf.  on  v.  13,  14].  Behold  he  winnoweth  barley  to-night.  Naomi
must  have  come  into  closer  connection  with  her  relative.  She  is  minutely  informed  of  what
he  does,  and  where  he  is  (Lange).  The  claim  which  Ruth  had  to  make,  cotild  hardly  be  urged
by  her  publicly  in  the  harvest  field,  in  the  light  of  day  (Wordsworth).  He  winnoweth  barley.
Literally,  he  is  winnowing  the  threshing-floor  of  barley.  He  is  winnowing  the  barley  floor
(birley  on  the  threshing-floor)  (Keil)  Tertormed  by  tossing  up  the  grain  agamst  the  wind
with  a  fork  (Jer.  iv.  11,  12).  Shows  the  simple  rDanners  of  the  times.  This  *'  mighty  man  of
wealth ''  assisted  personally  {Speakers's  Com.).  It  is  not  unusual  for  the  husband,  wife,  and  all
the  family,  to  encamp  at  the  baiders.ox  threshing-floors,  until  the  harvest  is  over  (/>r.  Thomson).
0  night.  Chosen  for  the  advantage  of  the  breeze  which  blew  then  (Gen.  iii.  8).  In  the  night
wind  {Targum).  Much  agricultural  labonrof  various  kinds  performed  on  bright  nights  (Kitto).
In  tte  threshirg- floor.  Nothing  more  than  a  level  place  in  the  field,  ui;der  the  open  heavens
{Keil).  Constrncted  of  a  circular  form,  perhaps  50  feet  in  diameter,  merely  by  beating  down
the  earth  hard  {Robinson)  [cf.  Thomson  ii.  314j.  Both  the  threshing  and  winnowing  are  done
in  the  open  air,  rain  in  harvest  time  being  almost  unknown  (  Wordsworth)  [cf.  Judges  vL
87  ;  2  .Sam.  vi.  6.]

Ver.  3.  "Wash  thyself  therefore  and  anoint  thee.  Not  done  in  order  to  win  Boaz  by  external
beauty;  for  she  is  especially  cautioned  against  allowing  him  to  see  her  by  day  (Lon^c).  Yet
she  is  to  go  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  hu>band,  appropriately  and  symbolically  dres^ed.  And
put  thy  [best]  raiment  upon  thee.  And  ornament  tnyself  with  thy  garments  {Syr.  Arab).  Use
bll  lawful  means  to  ingratiate  {Trapp).  And  gel  thee  down  to  the  floor.  Bethlehem  situated  on
a  hill  {Stanley)^  Q.i.  on  ii.  4  ;  p.  lOi.  Serve  God's  providence  by  demanding  marriage  of  him,
which  in  those  days,  and  in  Ruth's  case,  w^s  neither  unlawful  nor  immodest  (,T/a/>/)).  Con-
silium hoc  est  re  legitinium  specie  inhonestum  (Junius).  Nothing  in  these  directions  which  was
considered  improper  under  the  special  and  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  case  (Kitto).  This
was  a  bold  expedient,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  it  was  undertaken  at  the  instigation  of  an
aged  and  pious  woman,  and  simply  to  remind  Boaz  of  the  relative  pasitionn  in  which  they
stood  to  each  other.  Make  not  thyself  known  unto.  Sulfur  not  thyself  to  be  perceived  b/
{Lange).  The  grain  heaps  probably  si  rrounded  the  threshing  floor,  and  would  otter  a  chance
for  concealment,  even  though  the  place  itself  was  under  the  open  heavens  Until  he  shall  have
done  eating  and  drinking.  Until  the  moment  oi  leisure  and  ease*  Men  more  disposed  to  list«a
aiieutively  then*
144


CHAP.  m.  1.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTAUY :  RXfTII.


Ver.  4.  Thon  shalt  mark.  For  the  sake  of  finding  it  in  the  darkness  cominj?  on.  And
nocover  his  feet,  leather  the  place  of  his  feet,  the  foot  of  his  bed,  as  we  should  say  (*Sp.  Oom  ).
Sleep  ar  his  feet  (  ^y>\  Arah').  Boaz  probably  sleot  under  a  r\x^,  sheep  skin,  or  thick  quilt,  and
was  covere<l  with  another,  or  by  his  cloak  (Kitto).  In  Palestine  men  lay  down  with  their
clothes  on.  but  are  careful  to  cover  their  feet  with  a  long  mantle  now  called  the  Chudda,  a
wrapper  of  coarse  cloth  (Postans).  All  that  ihou  sayest.  Her  consent  that  of  faith  and  obedi-
ence, the  conduct  of  one  conscious  of  her  own  purity  of  purpose,  au'l  willing  to  encounter  sus-
picion in  the  ex^rcis'.  of  datv  (Wordsworth)  Unto  me.  Omit  {Cassel,  Berthfi.au,  Bella  it)  y^
4rc.)  I  will  do.  Evident  that  inclination,  judgment,  and  all  that  she  had  seen  of  Boaz  came  in
to  enforce  Namoi's  advice.  His  aj^e  and  his  character  probably  shrinking  and  diffident,  yet
pious  and  honourable,  encouraged  her  in  obedience.

Ver.  6.    And  bhe  went  down  unto  the  floor.    Probably  while  it  wae  yet  light.

VERSE  1.
Theme. — One  Sefking  Rfst  for  Anothbb.

**  As  if  with  marriage  came  the  end,
The  entrance  into  setrled  rest,
The  calm  to  which  love's  tossings  tencl^
The  quiet  rest." — Jean  Ingelow.
•*  Whatever  hypocrites  austerely  talk
Of  purity,  and  place,  and  innocence,
Defaming  as  impure  whai-  God  declares
Pure,  an  i  commands  to  some,  leaves  free  to  all,
Our  Maker  bids  increase." — Milton.

Shall  I  not  seek  rest  for  thee,  that  it  may  he  well  with  thee  t

All  Scripture  given  by  irispiratioa  of  God  and  profitable  (2.  Tim.  iii.  10),
That  is  when  rightly  understood  and  intrepreted.  Some  passages  however
peculiarly  liable  to  misunderstanding  (r/io?>i.9^>)/i).  Divine  ways  often  strange  at
first  sigbt,  and  seemmgly  unsatisfactory  to  first  judgments.  We  have  to  look
at  them  as  a  whole  before  we  can  see  them  aright.  So  with  the  Divine  Word.
Parts  which  a  false  delicacy  would  expunge  and  which  would  never  have
appeared  had  the  Bible  been  a  merely  human  book.  To  understand  them  aright
you  must  look  (a)  at  their  scope,  (6)  at  the  motive  (c)  at  the  underlying  prin-
ciple. Theend  aimi'd  at  right,  the  spirit  which  prompts  the  aim  right,  rest  assured
that  the  means  employed  will  fall  under  the  same  great  law.  This  true  (1)  of  the
Divine  doings  however  mysterious,  (2)  of  the  doings  of  all  who  are  truly  led  of  Him.

See  how  this  is  illustrated  here.  I.  Naomi's  motive  is  right.  (1)  Justice  to  the
dead.  The  law  of  Israel  was  that  no  branch  of  the  family  tree  should  be  allowed
to  become  extinct.  The  dead  Mahlon  had  claims  upon  Boaz,  and  only  the  fact
that  Ruth  was  of  Moab,  had  prevented  these  claims  being  enforced  earlier.  At
first  the  claim  seemed  a  hopeless  one  (I.  11-13).  Now  thanks  to  the  kindness
of  Boaz,  Naomi  sees  light  beginning  to  break  in  upon  their  gloomy  prospects.
(2)  Justice  to  the  living.  Not  merely  kindness  to  Ruth  and  not  merely  gratitude,
although  these  motives  must  have  moved  Naomi  powerfully,  but  a  deeper  feeling
— that  instinctive  sense  of  right,  which  overleaps  such  petty  boundaries  as
nationalities.  Her  feelings  as  an  Israelite,  exclusive,  conservative,  unyielding
may  find  expression  I.  9-14;  now  comes  out  the  deeper  feelings  of  a  woman  and
a  mother.  Hence  her  wisdom  projected  for  her  daughter,  that  which  her
daughter's  modesty  forbade  her  to  project  for  herself.

-Anxiety,  solicitude  for  the  settlement  of  a  daughter  pardonable,  even  commend-
able, 80  that  modesty  be  not  overstepped,  Naotni  of  the  same  opinion  as
Paul  as  to  the  true  sphere  of  woman :  "  I  desire  therefore  that  the  younger
widows  marry,"  &c.  (1  Tim.  v.  14).  Too  old  to  marry  herself,  she  by  no  means
placed  the  same  restriction  upon  those  younger  than  herself.  Such  prudery  is
often  only  disguised  selfishness  and  callousness  of  heart.  Note  Age  must  not
make  itself  a  standard  for  youth.  Naomi's  care  without  doubt  commend-
able and  recorded  for  imitation  {M.  Henry).  Analagous  to  the  conduct  of  a
gospel  church.     Jerusalem  always  tender  towards  her  daughters  {Macgowan).

U.  I^aumi's  priuciple  \&  right.  That  one  may  seek  rest  for  another — that  ouo


HOMtLETlC    COMMENTARY:    RVtH.  CiiaP.  in.  1.


may,  and  ought  to  forward  the  well-bein^  of  others  the  essential  principle  of  the
gospel  itself  (Luke  xix  10).  So  Christ  sought  not  his  own  (Jolin  v.  30;  viii.  2<-) ;
viii.  50).  So  charity  seeketh  not  her  own  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  5).  So  Paul  **  not  seek-
ing mine  own  profit, '  he  says,  "but  the  profit  of  many"  (1  Cor.  x.  33).  Note.
Bearing  one  another's  burdens  we  '^fdljiV  the  law  of  Christ  (Gal  vi.  2;  1  Cor.  x.
24  ;  Phil.  ii.  20,  21).

Again,  could  Naomi  do  otherwise  for  one  so  near  and  dear  as  Ruth.  Sh^  fulfils
not  only  a  religious  hula  natural  duty.  The  young  have  claims  upon  the  aged,
upon  their  experience,  foresight,  judgment,  &o.  As  wrong  to  withhold  these,  as
to  withhold  more  natural  and  apparent  benefits.  Eli  doubtless  gave  his  children
bread,  but  seems  to  have  withheld  instruction,  direction,  reproof,  restraint,
and  so  came  under  the  anger  of  God  (James  iii.  12,  13).  Note.  Few  greater
responsibilities  in  life  than  this  of  providing  for  the  future  well-being  of  children,
"  Shall  I  not  seek  rest  for  thee,  that  it  may  be  well  with  thee  " — the  burden  of
many  a  parent's  heart  and  prayers.

Once  more  mark  the  kind  of  "rest"  Naomi  sought  for  Ruth — home  rest,
household  well  being,  that  which  is  the  purest  of  earth's  pleasures  and  the  fore-
taste of  heaven's  joys.  Note.  The  inspired  idea  of  marriage  isy  that  it  is  and
ought  to  be  "a  rest.'*  '*  Not  good  for  man  to  be  alone"  (Gen.  ii.  18),  much  less
woman,  naturally  weaker  and  more  defenceless  than  man  :  still  less  a  stranger
like  Ruth,  [cf  on  i.  9  ;  p.  36  ]  With  regard  to  woman  marriage  was  viewed  as
the  natural  fulfilment  of  her  calling,  without  which  her  life  was  helpless  and
defenceless  as  that  of  a  people  without  a  God  [Lange).

The  principle  true  to-day.  Where  love,  patience,  unselfishness,  (fee.  are  found  ;
married  life  as  much  like  "rest"  as  can  be  discovered  in  this  world  (Braden).
Of  course,  cares,  anxieties,  difficulties  are  to  be  expected.  As  it  is  said  of  Kgypt
no  country  hath  more  venomous  creatures,  none  more  antidotes ;  so  marriage
hath  many  troubles,  but  withal  many  keeps  against  trouble  {Trapp).  Note.
Those  are  giddy  indeed  that  marriage  does  not  compose  (M.  Henry).

Naomi  s  plan  is  right — judged  by  the  time  and  circumstances.  Involved  no
impropriety  {Blimey).  The  face,  the  worst  piece  of  it,  the  heart  was  sound
(Bishop  Hall.)  Certainly  it  was  a  bold  expedient  but  not  necessarily  the  worse
because  of  that  She  knew  the  piety  and  chastity  of  Boaz  and  Ruth  {Trapp),
The  customs  of  the  age  and  country  were  simpler,  freer,  but  not  less  pure  than
the  more  formal  customs  of  our  own  land  and  age  {Braden),

Dr.  Thomson  and  others  however  only  vindicate  the  intentions,  while  they
censure  the  measures,  acquit  of  designing  evil,  but  blame  Naomi  for  not  "  abstain-
ing from  all  appearance  of  evil."  Too  much  cunning  and  stratagem,  and  forcing
of  Providence  about  the  whole  transaction  {Thomson)^  Ran  the  hazard  of
sacrificing  a  good  name  in  the  use  of  a  too  bold  and  perilous  artifice  {Ibid).
Note.  Every  action  that  is  reported  is  not  straightway  allowed  {Bishop  Hall).  If
every  act  of  a  holy  person  should  be  our  rule,  we  should  have  crooked  lives  {Ibid).

Improvement. — (1)  Rest  a  natural  desire  of  all  men.  David  would  flee  away
into  the  wilderness,  leave  the  city  and  camp  far  behind,  and  be  at  rest  (Ps.  Iv.  6).
Take  the  broad  sense  of  the  word  and  this  is  what  all  men  are  seeking.  Recog-
nised by  Christ  as  a  necessity.  "  Come  ye  yourselves  apart  into  a  desert  place  and
rest  awhile  (Mark  vi.  31).  This  desire  satisfied  in  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  28,  29;  Heb.iv.  3.
We  which  have  believed,  &c).     Note.  Rest  is  a  thing  to  be  sought,

(2)  Thoughtful  love  a  common  thing  in  human  history.  We  cannot  always  be
with  those  who  are  dear  to  us — we  may  provide  for  their  welfare,  however,  in  that
future  when  we  are  with  them  no  longer.      Bernard  on  this : —

Shall  I  not  seek.  It  is  the  parents'  duty  to  provide  matches  for  their  children  So
did  God,  the  general  Father,  for  His  son  Adam,  Abraham  for  Isaac,  Isaac  for  Jacoh
Samson  entreated  his  father  and  mother  to  get  him  a  wife  (Judges  xiv.  1,  2).

Rest  for  thee.  So  she  called  the  married  estate.  The  word  is  "a  place  of  rest"
to  settle  in.      Note.   The  inari^ied  estate  is  an  estate  ot  rest.

That  ii  may  be  well  with  tJiee,     Marriage  id  lor  liie  well-being  of  such  as  enter
146


CHAP.  III.  2-4.        HOmiETlC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH,


into  the  holy  estate.  Doth  not  Cod  say,  "  It  is  not  good  for  man  to  be  alone"?
It  is  the  estate  in  which  the  holiest  have  lived,  and  in  which  Christ  Himself
would  be  born.  St.  Paul  indeed  commended  single  life,  but  not  simply  but
with  respect  unto  the  then  present  times,  full  of  troubles  and  persecutions.

While  the  women  are  in  distress  it  is  Ruth      th^^ir  own,  such  as  the  Hebrew  Prophefs  had


who  takes  the  initiative  [eh.  ii.  2.]  ;  now,
when  h;>pe  grows  large,  it  is  Naomi.  When
h  trdship  was  to  be  endured,  the  mother  sub-
mitted her  will  to  the  daughter -for  Ruth
was  not  sent  to  glean,  she  went  of  her  own
accord  ;  now,  when  the  endeavour  is  to  secure
the  joy  and  happiness  held  out  in  prospect,
the  daughter  yiehis  iu  all  things  to  the  direc-
tion of  the  m  )ther  The  thought  of  labour
for  the  mother  originates  with  tiie  daughter;
but  it  is  the  mother  who  forms  plans  of  happi-
ness for  the  daughter. — Lanye.

Luck  is  ever  Wiiiting  for  something  to  turn
up.  Labour,  with  keen  eyes  and  stnmg  will,
will  turn  up  something.  Luck  lies  in  hed,
and  wishes  the  pos^tman  would  briui,'  him  the
news  of  a  legacy.  Labour  turns  out  at  six
o'clock,  and,  with  busy  pen  or  ringing  hammer,
lays  the  foundation  ot  a  competence.  Luck
whines.  Labour  whistles.  Luck  relies  on
chance.     Labour  on  character — Cohden.

This  word  "menuchah'  is  used  in  many
weighty  sentences  in  the  Old  Testament
Scriptures.  It  is  used  to  designate  the  asylum
ot  honour  and  freedom  which  a  Hebrew  found
in  the  home  of  her  husband,  her  secure  refuge
from  servitude,  insolence,  and  neglect.  It  is
also  used  to  denote  the  asylum  of  freedom  and
repose  on  which  the  Hebrew  race  entered
when  it  gained  full  possession  of  the  promised
land,  when  in  the  days  of  Solomon,  every  man
might  sit  under  his  vine  or  his  fig  tree,  none
daring  to  make  him  afraid,  It  was  used  by
the  Prophets  in  a  still  higher  sense ;  with  them
God  was  the  true  mtmuchah  or  rest  of  His
people,  nay,  of  the  whole  world  ;  to  them  it
was  revealed  that  only  when  the  Immanuel
came,  the  God-with-us,  would  the  golden  days
of  Paradise  return  ;  and  the  world  enter  into
its  final  and  glorious  rest.  So  that  those  who
first  listened  to  our  Saviour's  gracious  invita-
tion (Matt.  xi.  28-30),  those  on  whose  weary
and  fevered  spirits  His  promise  of  "  rest "  first
fell,  would  understand  that  He  was  offering
them  an  asylum  of  repo^^e,  honour,  and  free-
dom, such  as  the  Hebrew  wife  found  in  her
husband's  house,  such  as  the  Hebrew  race
found  in  the  sacred  land  when  it  was  wholly


found  in  God  in  the  moments  of  their  loftiest
aspirations. — Cox.

Ttiis  is  Naorn  's  conception  of  wedded  life.
Very  beautiful,  but  how  many  realise  it  in
their  experience  ?  Have  we  not  heard  multi-
tudes of  people  declare  that  marriajje  was  the
real  beginning  of  their  troubles  ?  Then
anxiety  about  providing  and  regulating  a
household  has  commenced  ;  then  business  and
domestic  cares  have  taken  away  all  expected
p  easure ;  then  tempers  are  tried  as  never
befo  e  ;  then  disputes  and  bickerings  arise
that  destroy  all  peace  ;  then  the  beautiful  illu-
sions of  youth  have  given  place  to  thehard  and
stern  practicalities  of  maturing  life. — Braden.

The  estate  of  holy  matrimony  is  well  called
a  state  of  rest,  for  the  natural  affections  and
propensities  instinctively  yearn  for  it,  and  in
it  alone  find  their  lawful  gratification.  The
Rabbin's  say  :  "  The  man  is  restless  while  he
misses  the  rib  that  was  taken  out  of  his  side  ;
and  the  woman  is  restless  till  she  gets  under
the  man's  arm,  from  whence  she  was  taken.'*
— Steele  and  Terry.

"I,  as  a  Protectant  have  been  accustomed
to  assert  the  purity  and  dignity  of  the  offices
of  husband,  wife,  and  parent.  Have  I  ever
examined  the  grounds  of  my  own  assertion  ?
Do  I  believe  them  to  be  as  callings  from  God,
spiritual,  sacramental,  divine, eternal  ?  Oram
I  at  heart  regarding  and  usi^g  them,  like  the
Papist,  merely  as  heaven's  indulgences  to
the  infirmities  of  fallen  man  ?"....
Those  miserable  dilettanti,  who  in  books  and
sermons  are  whimpering  meagre  secondhand
praise  of  celibacy,  depreciating  as  carnal  and
degrading  those  family  ties  to  which  they  owe
their  own  existences,  and  in  the  enjoyment  of
which  they  themselves  all  the  while  unblush-
ingly  indulge— insukiu;^  thus  their  own  wives
anl  mothers— nibbling  ignorantly  at  the  very
root  of  that  household  purity  which  consti-
tutes the  distinctive  superiority  of  Protestant
over  Popish  nations" — Kingsley.

Christianity,  be  it  remembered,  proposes  not
to  extinguish  our  natural  desirt-s,  but  to  bring
them  under  just  control  and  direct  them  to
their  true  objects. —  WxLberforce,


VERSKS  2—4.
Theme. — An  Important  Rrminder,

•*  The  grey  old  man  was  honou'cl  there,
1'he  matron's  words  were  cheii^liei,
And  honesty  in  youthful  hearts
By  agw's  Word  was  nourished."  —  Nichol.
(2)  Is  not  Boaz  of  our  kindred,  with  ivkose  maidens  thou  wist  f     Naomi  haa  laid
hold  of  the  fact  th  it  they  are  entitle^!  to  use  a  certaiu  amount  of  free-lorn  in  the
a(f  lir — (I)    because  of  kinship  ;  (2)   because  cf   the  kmdness  Boaz  has  already
shown  to  Ruth.    The  allowing  Ruth  to  gleau  under  especially  favourable  circum-
stance [see  on  ii.  8,  13 — 16]  uot  witb.mt  a  meaning.     Note.    W^e  more  readily  ask

147


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   RU'lH.        chap.  in.  2—1.


favours  /totk  thosi  who  have  already  shown  us  kindness.     In  the  nature  of  such
to  grow  and  become  the  foundation  of  our  future  actions.

I.  An  encouraging  reminder.  We  need  to  put  each  other  in  mind,  as  well  aa
recall  to  our  own  memories  the  thought  of  our  cl  lims  and  privileges.  Naturally  (\)
apt  to  forget ;  (2)  apt  to  delay  action  even  when  remembering ;  (3)  apt  to  re-
member and  yet  not  realize.  "I  will  not  be  nei^ligent  to  put  you  always  io
remembrance  of  these  things,"  says  the  Apostle  Peter,  ^^  though  ye  know  them.''''
This  a  favourite  idea  of  the  Apostle's  in  his  old  age  [cf.  2  Peter  i.  12,  13,  15  ;
iii.  1,  &C.].     So  Paul  writing  to  Timothy  [1  Tim.  iv.  6  ;   2  Tim.  i.  3,  6 ;  ii.  14]

II.  An  implied  argument,  viz.,  that  he  is  bound  in  conscience  to  take  care  of
our  affairs  (M.  Henry).  Is  he  not  our  kinsman?  How  much  a  kindred  question
implies  to  the  believer  in  Christ's  proper  humanity.  (1)  Can  we  fear  to
approach]  (2)  Can  we  do  other  than  expect  a  welcome  "J  [On  the  Kinsman
Redeemer,  see  iv.  9,  10;  ii,  20,  21].

III.  A  duty  beginning  to  unfold  itself.  Why  not  bring  the  claim  to  tlie
notice  of  Boaz]  The  obligation  lay  upon  them  to  take  initiative  [see  Crit.  nnd
Exeg.  Notes].  Time  and  place,  both  opportune  now  that  the  harvest  is  ending.
Note.  A  well-chosen  season  is  one  of  the  best  advantages  of  any  action  [I'rapp)

So  in  spiritual  things  we  must  seek,  knock,  ask,  &c.  In  one  sense  Christ
woos,  in  another  He  waits  to  be  wooed.     No  presumption  in  seeking  his  feet,

"From  labour  health,  from  health  contentment  springs,
Contentment  opes  the  source  of  every  j  >y." — Bealtie,

Verse  2.   Behold  he  winnoweth,  <^c.

Not  ashamed  to  do  tins  himself — lived  in  the  days  of  ancient  simplicity
(Lawson).  Not  too  idle  to  deny  himself  of  sleep  that  it  might  be  done  properly
— a  model  farmer  [cf  on  ii.  2,  4,  p.  93,  100].

See  here,  I.  Work  as30Giat«^d  with  the  character  and  position  of  a  gentleman.
Boaz  was  this,  yet  he  labours  with  his  own  hands.  Modern  refinements  and
etiquette  give  no  more  pleasure  to  the  fashionable  gentleman  than  honest  in-
dustry gave  to  this  grandson  of  a  famous  prince  [Lawson).  Camillus,  Fabricius,
and  other  famous  Roman  consuls  held  the  plough.  .  Edmund  Burke,  in  the  very
height  of  his  fame,  farmed  his  own  lands  near  Beaconsfield.  Note,  (a)  Labour
the  law  of  God  (Gen.  ii.  15;  iii.  19).  All  are  to  work,  some  with  hand,  some
with  brain,      {b)  A  false  pride  that  dislikes  handwork  {Radford  Thomson).

II  Work  associated  with  the  character  and  position  of  a  man  of  God.  The
claims  of  the  higher  life  do  not  exempt  us  from  the  calls  and  cares  of  the  lower.
Christ  Himself  doubtless  laboured  in  the  carpenter's  shop  at  Nazareth.  And  it
was  while  doing  so  that  it  was  written  of  Him  that  He  "  increased  in  wisdom
and  stature  and  in  favour  with  God  and  man."

Verse  3.  Wash  thyself  therefore^  and  anoint  thee.  Ruth  must  seek  to  make  herself
attractive  ;  even  though  the  coming  interview  is  to  be  in  the  dark — a  duty
always.  Preparation  necessary  even  for  a  duty  like  this.  Note.  Cleanliness
enforced  in  the  Scriptures  as  well  as  godliness  ;  comes  down  to  the  lowest  duties
of  life.  Much  that  inspiration  takes  notice  of,  which  men  count  mean  and  un-
worthy of  attention.  These  trifling  details,  however  correct  from  an  artisric
point  of  view,  heighten  the  effect  of  the  whole  picture,  suggest  the  truthf'ilnesa
of  the  narrative,  &c.

Improvement. — (1)  The  Bride  of  Christ  is  pleasing  to  her  Bridegroom  only
when  anointed  with  the  Spirit  and  clothed  in  the  garments  of  salvation
{St<trke).  (2)  We  may  use  all  lawful  means  to  ingratiate,  &c.,  if  our  purpose
be  right.  If  decency  of  apparel  is  not  a  virtue,  slovenliness  is  at  least  an
approach  to  vice  (Latvson).

Bernard  on  this  (condensed)  : —

A  true  friend  is  not  in  show   only,  or  in  well  wishes,  but  in  devising  how  to
bring  to  [)ass  what  they  desire.     So  Jonathan  with  David  (L  Sam.  xix.  2^  ^  ;  xx.
148


CHAi'.  III.  2-4.        HOMILETIC    COMM/'jyTARY :    RUTH,


12,  13),  Abraham  with  Lot  (Gen.  xiv.)  Note.  Godly  parents  seek  to  match  their
children  where  God  alloweth.  Naomi's  ground  was  the  law  of  God,  as  she
thought.

Behold  he  winuoweth  barley  to-night.  See  and  consider  the  providence  of  God!
It  is  as  one  would  wish,  it  falleth  out  opportunely.  Wurrant  from  God,  expe-
rience of  the  love  of  man,  and  fit  occasion  to  effect  a  matter,  are  strong  induce-
ments to  attempt  the  same.  So  Esther  going  in  unto  Ahasuerus  (Esth.  v.  1 — 8).
Note.  It  is  no  unseemliness  for  men  of  birth,  of  place,  of  wealth,  sometime  to
follow  in  their  own  person  mean  labours  of  their  calling.

Verse  3.  Wash  tliyself^  therefore.  Outward  cleanliness  is  praiseworthy.  Our
Christian  profession  is  pure  and  holy,  which  outward  cleanliness  well  befitteth
And  seeing  it  is  of  good  report,  we  are  to  observe  it.  And  anoijit  thee.  Christians
may  lawfully  use  God's  creatures  for  outward  comeliness,  and  to  preserve  that
seemliness  which  is  God's  own  work  in  us  (Psalm  cxiv  15).  And  put  thy  raiment
upon  thee.  Touching  this  necessity  of  wearing  apparel,  nature  teacheth  it,  and
need  enforceth  it.

Get  thee  down  to  the  floor.  The  widow  woman  allowed  by  the  law  of  Moses  to
claim  marriage  of  the  next  kinsman.  No  more  immodest  for  women  to  claim
that  right  then,  than  now  for  one  betrothed  to  challenge  the  man  for  her  husband.
Where  God  alloweth  the  thing  it  taketh  away  the  scandal  and  the  offence.  But
make  not  thyself  known  to  the  man  until  he  shall  hrive  done  eating  and  drinking.
Men  are  more  apt  to  speak  freely  then  and  to  promise  their  goodwill  than  at
other  times.  Note.  Her  mind  must  be  showed  in  private,  and  to  him  alone.
The  night  and  in  private  make  modest  persons  utter  more  freely  their  thoughts
than  otherwise  they  would  in  the  light  and  before  company.

When  he  lieth  down.  Rest  follows  after  labour,  and  the  night  is  appointed  for
the  same.  So  the  Psalmist  teaches  (civ.  13),  and  Jacob  practised  (Gen.  xviii.  2).
This  the  right  use  of  time.

Thou  shale  mark  the  plare.  Careful  observation  prevents  error.  Shows  also
that  in  those  times  they  had  no  set  place  to  lie  down.

Uncover  his  feet.  Aims  at  making  Ruth  his  yokefellow,  yet  teaches  her  to  pro
ceed  in  humility,  to  go  to  his  feet.  Note.  Humility  not  any  hindrance,  but  the
way  to  advancement,

"  Let  us  look  into  providences  ;  surely  they  child  of  God,  and  the  Father  worketh  hitherto,

mean   somewhat.      They  hang   so   together  ;  and   the  Son  also  worketh,  say  others,  and.  I

have  been  po  constant,  so  clear,  so  unclouded."  think,  wiser  and  more  far-sighted  men.     These

— Cromwell.  daily  tasks  are  the  dignity  and  glory  of  our

"Perhaps  the  assurance,  which  long  trial  has  nature,   as  sons  under  discipline." — Baldwin

given  her  of  the  good  government  and  firm  Brown.

chastity  of  her  danghter-in-law,  together  with  "Naomi's  solicitude  for  her  devoted  daugh'er-

her  persuasion  of  the  religious  gravity  of  Boaz,  in-law  is   beautiful  and   motherly.     But   the

made  her  think  that  design  safe,  which  to  firm  into  which  it  ran  and  took  shape  can

others  had  been  perilous,  if  not  desperate.     But  never  recur  in  the  midst  of  the  culture  and

besides  that,  holding  Boaz  next  of  blood  to  customs  of  European  society.    Even  the  method

Elinielech,  she  made  account  of  him  as  the  of  winnowintr  the  golden  grains  of  the  harvest

lawful  husband  of  Ruth  ;  so  as  there  wanted  field  is  antique  and  obsolete.     So,  too,  is  the

nothing  but  a  challenge  of  a  consummation,  method  which  Boaz  adopted  to  watch  over  his

Eothin^f  was  abated  but  some   outward  solem-  cereal  treasures.     He  constituted  himself  his

nities,  which  though  expedient  for  the  satis-  own  watchman  and  policeman." — Pulpit  Com.

faction  of  others,  yet   were  not   essential  to  "  Ruth  was  directed  to  pay  special  attention

marriage;  and  if  there  were  not  these  colours  to  the  adornments  of  her  person,  to  which,  to

for  a  project  so  snspicious,  it  would  not  follow  this  extent  at  lea>t,  she  had  been  a  stranger

that    the   action    were    warrantabe    because  since  the  death  of  her  husband.     She  is  to  lay

Naomi's.     Why  should  her  example  be  m  Te  aside  the  weeds  of  mourning  and  the  garments

8nfe  in  this  than  in   matching  her  sons  with  of  toil,  and,  after  bathing  nnd  anointing,  don

infidels,  than  in  sendinjr  back  Orpah  to  her  the  festive  garb,  for  the  expedi  ion  on  which

father's  gods." — Bish-p  Ball.  she  goes  is   of  a  joyou^i,  bridal   nature.     All

*  Labour  is  the  law  of  man's  life,  in  contrast  this,  however,  is  not  done   in   order  to   win

to  the  creatures      Becau>e  mnn  hec.uue  a  nin-  Bonz  by  ex'ernal  beauty,  for  she  is  specially

ner  and  God  cursed  him  with  it,  K.iys  a  large  cautioned  against  allowing  hira  to  see  her  by

ichool  of  theologians.     Because  man  was  a  daj.     But  why  this   caution  ?     Boaz    was  a


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH.  chap.  iii.  5,  6.


believing  Israelite,  and  therefore  b\so  a  man  Concealment  of  intentions  may  be  very  prorer

of  strict  morals.     It  would  hiive  perplexed  and  and  very  coi'si«<fent  with  nprijjhfness  in  some

di^plcased  him  to  think  that  an}  b(>(iy  else  had  cases      But  we  must  beware  of  doing  anvihing

seen  Ruth,  and  might  suspect  both   her  and  that  will  not  bear  th*^  lit^ht,  or  u-in":  those  arts

himself  of  an  illicit  meeting  on  the  solitnry  of  concealment  in  transacting  lawful  afpaira

thresljing-floor.      He    would    have     scarcely  that  may  be  attended   with  bad  effects   upon

listened  to  her,  but  removed  her  at  once.     The  our   character.      It   was    perfectly   consisent

purpose  for  which  she  came  had  also  an  nppro-  with   uprit^htnfss   in   Samuel    to   conceal    his

priate  symbolism  which  any  previous  meeting  chief  intention  when  he  came  to  Bethlehem  to

would  have  disturbed." — Lar>ge.  anoint  David  ;  and  in  Solomon,  when  he  com-

"  The  church  must  put  on  her  best  attire  when  manded  a  sword  to  be  brought  and  h  s  guards

she  comes  to  Christ.     She  is  brought  to  the  to  slay  the  living  child  about  which  the  two

King  in  raiments  of  needlework,  in  the  Psalms  harlots  contended." — Lawson.
(xiv.  14)  ;  she  puts  on  her  beautiful  garments,

in  Isaiah  (Iii.  1)  ;  she  is  adorned  as  a  bride  for  "  Seek  him  in  private  when  no  eye  but  that

her  husband  in  raiment  pure  and  white,  in  the  of  heaven  is  upon  thee;  corne  secretly  to  his

Apocalypse  (Rev.  xxi.  2)." — Wordsworth.  feef,  and  lay  thy  helpless,  desolate  state  open

"She  wastodiscover  nothing  ot  heriiitetition  before  his  se^t  of  mercy;  freely  confess  the

to  Boaz  when  she  went  to  the  fea^it,  but  rather  b  iseness  of  thine  original;  he  will  not  despise

to  a^oid  any  particular  notice,  that  he  mi.:ht  thee  on  account  of  the  hole  of  the  pit  from

entertain  no  suspicion  of  what  was  to  follow.  whence  thou  wast  digged." — Macyotvan,


VERSES   5,  6.
Theme. — Obedience  in  Innocenob.
•*  Aie,  by  long  experience  well  informed,

As  time  improves  the  grapes  authentic  juice
Jkleil'  ws  and  makes  the  speech  more  fit  for  use,
Anil  cla  lus  a  reverence  in  its  shorttning  day,
That  t  s  an  honour  and  a  joy  to  pay."

All  that  thou  say  est  unto  me  I  will  do.     And  she  went^  et&»

Ruth  once  more  a  model  of  filial  obedieuce,  and  that  when  called  upon  to
di«clmrge  a  difficult  and  delicate  mission,  oi]e  which  must  have  been  trying  to
lier  modesty  as  a  woman.  IShe  errs,  if  at  all,  by  excess  of  complaisance.  The
errors  of  young  peoplo  are  commonly  of  an  opposite  kind  [Lawson).

If  anyone  is  to  be  blamed  it  must  be  Naorni.  Her  acquaintance  with  the
laws  and  customs  of  Israel  are  her  defence.  Ruth,  as  a  foreigner,  was  dependent
upon  her  for  instruction  in  these  things.  Sne  obeys,  although  she  might  very
naturally  shrink  from  the  task.  Gratitude,  respect  for  Naomi,  as  well  as  reason
led  her.     Goes  freely  and  without  fear.     Hesitates  not,  doubts  not.

Three  things  exemplified  and  enforced  here —

I.  Humble  trustfulness  on  the  part  of  the  young  (1)  On  the  lowest  ground
a  duty.  (2)  On  higher  ground  to  be  cultivated  as  a  viitue.  (3)  On  highest,  as
its  own  reward,  a  pleasure.  The  sequel  proves  that  this  obedience  of  Ruth  was
not  tempting  Providence — rather  it  was  acting  upon  faith.  The  trust  that  haa
brought  her  so  far  sustains  her  now.     Goes  with  unshrinking  confidence.

II.  Deference  to  the  opinions  and  judgment  of  the  aged.  An  important
lesson.  Note.  These  more  likely  to  he  correct  than  those  of  the  young.  More
experienced.

III.  That  cheerful  compliance  which  adds  grace  to  obedience.  The  way  we
obey  is  something  as  well  as  the  act  itself  [cf.  on  i.  10,  p.  44,  Macgowaii\.

Note,  (a)  Ruth  not  only  ^promised  hut  performed.  Contrasts  with  many  who
Bay,  and  do  not ;  or  who  will  not  say,  and  yet  do.  More,  (6)  she  carries  out  her
obedience  to  the  slightest  details  of  the  project.  "All  that  thou  sayest  I  will  do."
How  important  is  this  that  obedieuce  should   be  thorough  [through  out].     Thq


CiiAr.  Ill  7-13        liOVilLKTIC   COMMENTARY:    UUTII.


fortune  of  things  of  the  greatest   importance  offen   liantjjs   upon  the  doing  or
leaving  undone  a  thing  which  seems  very  small  (Guicciardiani),

"  That  the  conduct  of  Ruth  was  in  accord-
ance with  the  hi^  under  which  she  lived
cannot  be  donated.  See  Deut.  xxv.  5 — 10,
where  no  option  seems  left  to  ihe  woman.
The  demand  was  a  duty  which  she  owt  d  to
the  memory  of  her  dead  hnbband,  whose  name
she  wa<^  to  continue  ;  to  that  husband's  mother,
who  was  more  thnn  a  parent  to  her,  and  whom
she  miuht  rescue  from  indigence  and  misery;
to  the  nation  whose  tri'ies  and  law  of  inherit-
ance were  thus  appointed  to  be  preserved;  and
to  God,  whose  mandates  were  thus-  obeyed,  snd
who  held  out  to  her  the  pr()pect  that  Mf.'ssiali
possibly  might,  as  we  find  he  actually  did,
spring  from  this  union."' — Macartney.

"Abiahrtm  equivocated;  David  doubly
sinned ;  Peter  denied  his  Lord  ;  Paul  was
not  fauld^ss;  Aaron  enticeii  to  idolatry;
Moses  spoke  U'-advis- dly  with  his  lips;  in
liict  every  vessel  in  the  sanctuary  has  been
flawed  ;  only  one  has  been  pure,  perlect,
spotless,  unimpeachable  ;  that  we  may  all
feel  huw  true  is  that  word, '  If  we  say  that  we


have  no  sin  we  deceive  ourselves,'  and  by  the
contrast  how  magnificent  is  that  character
which  was  holy,  harmless,  and  undefileil,  and
separate  from  sinners.  Suj)pose,  then,  Naomi's
advice  does  not  commend  itself  to  you  as
proper  even  in  these  circumstances  ;  let  it  be
regarded  as  wrong  ;  yet.  the  record  of  what  an
individual  does  in  the  inspired  page,  is  not,
therefore',  the  justification  of  his  conduct.'" —
Cumming.

"Tempting  God  ordiiarily  is  either  by  act-
ing presumptuously  in  carnal  confidence,  or  in
unbelief  through  diffilence.  .  .  .  Not  the
encountering  diffiirulties  therefore  makes  us  to
tempt  God  ;  but  the  acting  before  and  without
faith,  if  the  lord  has  in  any  measure  per-
suaded His  people,  as  generally  He  hath,  of
the  lawfulness,  nay,  of  the  duly,  this  persua-
sion prevailiuL:  upon  the  heart  is  faith  ;  and
acting  thereupon  is  acting  in  faith,  and  the
more  the  difficulties  are,  the  more  the  faith." —
(JroiuiJotiUt


VERSES  7—13.

Critical  and  Exfgettcal  Notks. — Ver.  7.  And  wbea  Boaz.  Illustrates  the  rimpHcity  of
ancient  patiiaichal  times  and  manners  (Lrtn^^).  The  owticts  of  the  crops  came  every  night
and  slept  upon  tht-ir  threshing  floors,  and  this  we  found  to  be  universal  in  all  the  regions  of
Gaza  (Dr.  Robinson)  Had  eaten  and  drunk.  An  Eastern  idea  that  great  men  were  more  kindly
disposed  after  eating  (ct.  Esth  vii.  3)  And  his  heart  wa>  m^'rry  [cheerful].  Not  necessarilv
implying  any  exce.^s  (JSp.  Com),  cheerful  and  happy  over  a  bountiful  h.iTve^t  (Steele  and  Terry).
[Cf.  Judg.  xix.  6  — y  ;  1  Kinys  xxi.  7  ;  2  Sam.  xiii  8]  la  Judges  xviii  20  ;  Prov.  xv.  15  it  de-
notes gladness  without  any  reference  to  eating  and  drinking  Designed  to  point  out  the  danger  en-
countered by  Ruth,  and  the  virtue  of  Boaz  (Lange)  He  went  to  lie  down.  Betakes  himself
to  rest  in  the  solitude  of  the  open  field  (Lnnge).  In  the  open  air  wrapped  up,  «s  it  seems,  in  his
cloak  (Wright).  And  she  came  softly,  ^ee  Judges  iv.  21.  Secretly  (Keif)  Not  so,  but
quiely.  softly — ia  a  muffled  manner  (C'assf/)  And  uncovered  his  feet.  Servants  in  the  East
often  sleep  in  this  position.  If  the  weather  is  cold  usage  allows  this  using  the  covering  of  the
m  'Ster's  bed  (Kitto).  And  laid  ber  down.  And  uncovered  the  skirt  of  his  cloak,  and  fell  (in
s/eejj)  at  his  feet  (Syr.  Aiab).  Natives  of  the  East  care  little  for  sleeping  accommodation,  but
rest  where  weariness  overcomes  them,  lying  on  the  ground  (f^ostans).

Ver.  8.  The  man  was  afraid  [startled,  Lange'].  The  Targum  renders  it,  "and  trembled  "'  -
the  translator  explaining  his  sense  of  the  word  by  the  silly  gloss,  and  his  flesh  was  made  soft
like  a  turnip  (  Wvyht).  And  turned  himself.  Kather  '*  bent  forward,'  so  as  to  feel  what  whs
at  his  feet  (speaker's  Com.).  Same  word  as  Judges  xvi.  29 — "took  hold  of."  "Bent  over"
(Cappel/us,  R' sen,  Gesen    Bertheaii  Wriy't).

Ver.  9.  Who  art  thou  ?  What  is  your  news  ?  (Syr.).  What  is  your  state  ? — i  e.,  What  is  the
matter  with  you  ?  (Arah).  Spread  theiefore.  Lit  And  thou  hast  spread  (Morison).  A  request
as  in  A  V (Lange,  Wordsworth,  iV7ii^ht,  Ofc).  Thy  Sftirt  Thy  wings  (Tremel,  Junius,  Geddes,
Bertheau,  Kel,  Wright,  dec).  Same  word  as  in  ii.  12 — "  Under  whose  wings  thou  art  come,  &c
In  He  trew  marriages  the  bridegroom  places  his  tallith  on  the  head  of  his  bride.  The  phrase
indicates  receiving  the  woman  in  sociefafein  tori  acknowledging  her  as  a  yiiiQ  (Speaker' s  Cum.K
Equivalent  to  "I  have  made  thee  my  wife,"  in  Kzek.  xvi  b  (Writ/ht)  We  are  inclined,  how-
ever, to  adopt  the  opinion  of  those  who  consider  the  w  ord  to  be  empl  jed  metaphorically  of  pro
tection,  as  in  ii.  12,  a  much  more  delicate  way  for  Euth  to  intimate  her  wish  (ihid).  Let  thy
name  be  called  upon  thine  handmaid  (cp.  Is.  iv,  1)  by  taking  her  as  a  wife  {Targum).  But
cover  thy  handmaid  with  a  corner  of  thy  cloak  (S^r.).  A  near  kinsman  [a  redeemer]  a  goel,
one  that  hath  a  ri«;ht  to  redeem.

Ver,  10  Blessed  be  thou.  The  same  phrase  as  in  ii.  20  Thou  hast  showed  more  kindness.
Lit.  Thou  hast  made  thy  last  kindness  better  than  the  first.  The  first  was  faithfulness  to  her
husband  and  her  mother-in-law,  the  last  was  her  willingness  to  accept,  Boaz,  aged  as  he  whs.
This  latter  feeling,  according  to  liosenmuUer  and  Bertheau,  allied  to  her  att^ichment  to  het


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    RUTH.      chap.  hi.  7—14,


former  hnsbnnrl,  for  wbom  she  W'f-hefl  to  rai^e  seed  (  Wrig/it).  The  kindne^c  which  thou  art
showing  to  thy  husband  now  that  he  is  gone  is  still  greater  (han  that  thou  didst  stiow  to  him
vihih  hehved  ( Mich"e/ts).  Inasmuch  as  thou  followedst.  J>it.  In  not  going  after  the  joung
men,  whetlier  [after]  a  poor  one  or  a  lich  one.

Ver.  11.  My  daughter.  Continues  to  speak  as  one  older  than  herself.  Fear  not.  A  common
thing  to  fear  where  there  is  intense  desire.  All  that  thou  required  [sajest].  All  the  city
[Lit.  gate]  cf.  Gen.  xxxiv.  24  ;  Deut,.  xvii.  2  [see  on  iv.  1].  This  not  to  he  understood  with  the
'largumist  tosi^-nify  only  the  couT'cil  of  the  elders,  but  rather  to  mean  all  the  people  who  were
wont  to  assemble  at  the  gate  (Writ/ht).  A  virtuous  woman  -^vvii)  Swa/xeog  {LXX).  Lit.
A  woman  of  strength.  A  good  woman  {Lavge).  Strong  in  a  moral  i^ense.  Corresponds  with
the  common  expression,  man  of  valour  {Steele  and  Terry).  Means  that  Huth  was  strong  in  all
that  constitutes  female  excellenee  and  worth  ;  possessed  force  of  character,  &c.  The  same
Hebrew  word  as  in  Prov,  xxxi.  10  :  "A  virtuous  woman  is  a  crown  to  her  husband."  Bouz
fully  justified  in  ascribing  to  this  very  act  an  honourable  principle.

Ver.  12.  And  now  it  is  true.  Truly  indeed  only  a  goel  am  I  (Bertheau).  >3  in  order  to
strengthen  the  assurance  (Lange).  Howbeit  there  is  a  kinsman  [redeemer]  nearer  than  I.
But  there  is  also  a  goel  nearer  of  kin  than  I  {Speaker's  Com.  ,  From  this  it  appears  that  Naomi
had  laboured  under  some  mistake.  Probably  she  was  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  this  nearer
kinsman  {Steele  and  lerry).  Or  there  n)ay  have  been  on  her  part  a  knowledge  of  his  inability
or  unwilliBgness  to  act  the  part  of  a  redeemer  (iv.  6).  Cox,  however,  thinks  she  had  a
further  purpose.  Of  the  women  Naomi  has  the  first  claim  [upon  her  kinsman].  How  is  she  to
show  that  she  waives  it  in  favour  of  Ruth  ?  Of  the  men  the  unnamed  kinsman  has  the  first
right  to  redeem.  How  is  Naomi  to  indicate  that  she  would  prefer  Boaz?  She  achieves  both
points  at  a  stroke  by  sending  Ruth  to  Boaz  [See  CoXy  p.  1 15 — 6].

Ver.  13.  Tarry  thifj  night.  Dangerous  to  return  to  the  city  in  the  darkness,  but  not  in  the
indistinct  twilight  (ver.  14).  He  cannot,  send  her  away,  uor  is  he  afraid  to  let  her  remain
(^Lange).  If  he  will  peiform  the  part  of  a  kinsman.  Lit.  If  he  will  redeem  thee  {Lange),
Translate  redeem  and  redeemer  throughout  the  verse.


VERSES  7—14.
Theme. — A  Delicate  Mission  Dr.pendeix

**  Fie  on  possession
But  if  a  man  be  virtuous  withal. — Chaucer,

And  when  Boaz  had  eaten,  etc.

We  need  not  dwell  on  this  part  of  the  narrative  except  to  defend  it  from  un-
fair surmises,  and  possibly  from  what  men  have  added  to  the  simplicity  of  the
story.  The  Scriptures  in  this  very  much  like  human  life— we  find  in  them  what
we  take  to  them.  There  are  who  see  evil  suggestiveness  everywhere.  The  eye,
no  longer  single,  the  whole  world  is  full  of  evil.  Nothing  in  these  incidents,
however,  but  what  is  perfectly  in  accordance  with  the  customs  of  the  East,  the
habits  of  the  age,  or  with  modesty  itself.  Note,  (a)  Men  should  be  judged  by  the
standard  of  their  own  times — especially  in  matters  of  custom.  While  virtue  and
vice  are  the  same  always,  manners  and  customs  are  continually  varying.  Note,
(b)  An  Eastern  custom  not  necessarily  a  bad  one  because  we  do  not  approve  of  it
{Cumming).

Look,  1.  At  what  is  certainly  known  in  connection  with  the  incidents  before
us.  (1)  That  Boaz  and  Ruth  must  have  come  into'  daily  contact  during  the
harvest  season.  Hence  mutual  esteem  and  regard  may  be  expected  to  have
sprung  up  (ver.  10)  possibly  admiration  and  affection.  (2)  That  there  were
reasons  for  reticence  on  the  part  of  Boaz  (a)  his  age  {b)  the  fact  that  there  was  a
nearer  kinsman.  (3)  That  the  widow  had  a  right  to  claim  marriage  from  the
nearest  of  kin.  [For  the  Levirate  marriage,  see  extract  from  Lange,  and  Crit.
and  Exeg.  Notes  on  ver.  1,  2  &c.].  If  any  one  might  criticise,  and  com-
plain of  the  project  it  is  Boaz,  yet  he  does  nothing  but  commend,  (ver.  11)
a  plain  proof  that  neither  Naomi  or  Ruth  had  overstepped  what  was  customary
or  lawful  under  the  circumstances.  No  apology  was  made  by  Ruth,  no  surprise
expressed  by  Boaz  (Statham).


CHAP.  III.  7—14.      HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH.


Look    airain    II.    At    what    fairly   may  be  said  in    defence    of   the    act.

(1)  It  was  in  general  accordance  with  the  us((</cs  uf  the  time  and  place.  The  inter-
view in  the  open  air  [see  Crit.  and  Exeg.  Notes].  The  claim  made  by  an  act
expressive  of  taking  the  place  of  a  servant,  and  of  claiming  protection  (Spread
thy  skirt,  &c  ) ;  a  more  delicate  way  after  all  than  if  done  by  Kuth  in  the
harvest  field  before  the  servants  and  reapers  engaged  there.  Note.  The  trans-
action concerned  only  those  engaged  in  it, — was  a  matter  of  the  most  private  and
delicate  nature.  If  followed  by  a  refusal  on  the  part  of  Boaz  it  was  best  for
both  parties,  the  thing  should  be  kept  as  a  secret.  As  the  issue  proved  it
showed  the  confidence  of  both  women  in  the  integrity  of  Boaz.  True  love  it
always  bold  and  may  venture  where  false  would  fail.  Only  in  the  event  of  Boaz
proving  untrue  could  the  end  be  disastrous,  and  we  may  rest  assured  that
Naomi  had  settled  this  point  to  her  own  satisfaction.  She  knew  her  man  and
acted  accordingly.  His  diffidence  must  be  removed,  his  recollection  of  duty
stimulated  in  this  abrupt  and  dramatic  way.  He  must  be  put  upon  his
honour  (Statham).

(2)  Jt  ivas  done  with  a  definite  end  and  purpose^  and  that  in  no  way  connected
with  intrigue  (a)  to  do  honour  and  raise  posterity  to  the  dead  Mahlon.  To  the
pure  all  things  are  pure.  Ruth  simple  concerning  evil.  Had  there  been  the
slightest  immodesty  in  the  place  it  would  have  tended  to  have  defeated  its  own
purpose  and  alienated  Boaz.  (b)  There  was  the  hope  that  Boaz  would  redeem
the  land  (Braden).

(3)  It  was  done  by  the  advice  of  an  elderly  and  pious  woman.  Not  an  English
or  European  mother,  indeed  bound  by  the  sensitive  conventionalities  of  a  highly-
civilised  and  fastidious  society,  but  an  Eastern  mother,  &c.  {Braden),  Note.
Children  do  not  generally  sin  in  collusion  with  their  elders  and  parents.

(4)  This  advice  doubtless  had  respect  to  the  upright  character  and  known  piety  oj
Boaz.  Ruth  sent  not  to  a  young  man  but  to  one  advanced  in  years,  one  who
had  previously  commended  her  purity  and  worth.

Improvement.  (1)  All  agree  that  this  is  not  to  be  drawn  into  a  precedent
(M.  Henry)',  laws,  customs,  etc.  differ  now.  (2)  Ti'ue  also  that  others  may  do
what  it  is  not  wise  for  us  to  do,  go  where  it  would  be  dangerous  for  us  to  go,
\a)  because  ther  motives  are  higher  and  purer  than  ours,  (6)  because  their  spirit
acj  less  liable  to  be  influenced  by  evil.  One  man  is  no  law  to  another  as  to  what
would  be  temptation.  Every  man  must  judge  for  himself  as  in  the  sight  of  God
[cf  on  i.  15,  p.  65].

Ver  7.  And  when  Boaz  had  eaten  and  drunk ^  etc.  No  asceticism  here.  Becomes
the  rich  and  great  to  be  generous  {M.  Henry).  There  is  a  time  to  be  merry.
The  phrase  here  involves  no  excess  (see  Crit.  and  Exeg.  Noies).  Means  that  he  was
physically  comfortable  (^Pulpit  Com.)  Note.  Christ's  glory  to  declare  the  sacred-
ness  of  all  natural  enjoyments  {Robertson).  His  first  miracle  wrought  at  a
marriage  feast,  at  which  the  language  of  the  master  (John  ii.  10)  tells  us  there
had  been,  not  excess  of  course,  but  happiness  and  merry-making.  He  himself
called  a  gluttonous  man  and  a  wine-bibber.


"There  is  but  one  indivisible  point  from
which  we  should  look  at  a  picture  ;  all  others
are  too  near  or  too  distant,  too  high  or  too  low.
Perspective  fixes  this  point  precisely  in  the
art  ot  painfint;  ;  but  who  shall  fix  it  in  regard
to  truth  and  morals  ?  (^Pascal).  Now,  there  are
a  right  and  a  wrong  point  from  which  we  miy
judj^eof  the  scene  described  in  these  verse.s.
Judge  of  it  according  to  the  maxims  and  the
manners  of  our  own  age  and  country,  and  we
shall  inevitably  fall  into  a  most  mistaken
estimate  of  the  characters  and  events  that  pass
Ix'forH  n«.  We  m'ist  be  fully  aware  of  ilio
peculiai  iiit'>  in  anduut  mauuersaud  Utvsi  we


must  stand  in  thought  amid  the  pimpHcities
and  catch  the  colouring  of  Oriental  pastoral
life;  for  this  is  the  "point  neither  too  near
nor  too  distant,  neitl«er  t  'O  high  nor  too  low  "
— the  true  perspective  position  from  which  to
look,  and  to  form  a  correct  moral  judgment
of  the  whole  transaction. — Tliomson

To  understand  the  incidents  of  this  chapter
we  must  have  before  us  the  ancient  custom
and  laws  of  levirate  marriage,  si)  called  from  the
Jjatia  word  levir,  a  brotiier -in-law  We  meet
tlie  first  instance  of  it  in  Gen.  xxxviii.  8,
where  Judah  calls  upon  his  younger  son  Onan
to  marry   Er'a   widow,  and  thus  preserve  his

153


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  RUTH.


CHAP.  III.  9.


brother's  came.  The  custom,  however,  was
not  peculiar  to  the  Hebrews  solely,  but  has
been  found  to  exist  in  several  eastern  coun-
tries. The  Mosaic  law  on  the  subject  is  given
in  Dent.  xxv.  5 — 10,  nnd  is  in  substance  as
follows  :  If  a  man  die  and  leave  no  children,
his  brother  is  under  obligation  to  marry  the
widow,  and  sVte  has  a  right  to  demand  it  of
him.  This  obligation,  however,  is  not  abso-
lutely binding From  this  book

of  Ruth  we  see  that  the  levirate  law  wms  so
contrived  that  in  case  the  decea-ed  husband
had  no  surviving  brother  the  obliuatiou  to
marry  the  widow  devolved  upon  his  next
nearest  kinsman. — Lange.

The  Hebrew  word  for  this  kinsman  is  ^]^J
gotl  whicn  means  a  reHeetuer.  Its  root  is  the
exact  equivalent  of  the  Gnnk  \vo  to  loose,
from  which  comes  the  Ncw  Testament  Xvrpov
a  ransom.  The  meaning  of  the  word  is  pro-
foundly set  forth  in  the  various  grand  his-
torical nnfol'ings  of  its  ideas.  According  to
the  social  philosophy  of  the  Mosaic  law  no
member  of  the  national  organisation  was  to
perish  no  branch  of  the  tree  was  to  wither ;
whatever  had  been  disl  )cated  by  natural  events
was  to  be  reset ;  whatever  had  been  alienated
was  to  be  redeemed.  This  applied  to  lands  as
well  as  to  persons  f  and  the  duty  of  redemp-
tion rested,  as  within  the  nation,  so  within  the
families  into  which  the  nation  brai  ched  out.
No  one  could  redeem  anything  for  a  family
who  did  not  belong  to  it  by  blood  relationship.
The  Great  Liberator  of  Israel  is  God.  He
frees  from  servitude.  For  that  reason  the
Messiah  who  delivers  Israel  is  called  Goel-
Redeemer.    When  He  appears  he  will  come  as


Israel's  blood  relation  and  brother,  as  Christ
truly  was. — Cassel  (condensed).

We  must  remitnbHr  that  delicacy  as  distin-
guished from  morality  consists  not  in  any  par-
ticular action,  but  in  the  conformity  of  that
action  with  the  habits  of  the  society  in  which
we  live  ;  white  morality  often  requires  a  sturdy
opposition  to  those  very  habits.  To  jud^e  of
the  morality  of  an  action  we  must  therefore
inquire  concrrning  its  conformity  to  the
law  of  God ;  to  judge  of  its  delicacy,
its  conformity   to  the  law   of  contemp>rary

opiiii  >n Nothing  can   be

more  unrighteous  than  the  m*  asnre  which
ungodly  persons  apply  to  the  characters  of  the
Old  Testament  saint"* ;  thft  nations  called  Chris-
tian and  Protestant,  receive  from  the  Gospel
notions  of  purity  and  real  delicacy,  of  which
man,  without  that  revelation,  has  no  concep-
tions, They  receive  them,  but  deny  or  forget
the  source  from  whence  they  came  ;  and,  re-
garding these  Gospel  sentiments  as  natural
laws,  represent  these  holy  men  of  God  as  vio-
latinii:  the  first  principles  of  the  natural  law
of  conscience,  when,  in  fact,  they  were  walk-
ing fully  in  accordance  with  the  light  tliey
possessed,  and  earnestly  desiring  to  see  the
rising  of  a  brighter  day. —  Macartney.

What  took  you  there  ?  What  right  had
you  to  be  there  ?  Those  are  the  critical
questions  on  \^hich  everything  depends.  If
you  are  passing  thr()U},5h  temptation  with  your
eye  fixed  on  a  pure,  true  life  beyond  it,  temp-
tation being  only  a  necessary  stage  upon- your
way,  so  long  as  you  keep  that  purpose,  thad
resolution,  that  ideal,  you  shall  be  safe,  if
you  are  in  temptati  )n  with  no  purpose  beyond
it,  you  are  lost. — P.  Brooks,


VERSE     9.
Theme. — A  Cry  for  Shelter  and  a  Cliim  for  Help,

"  Therefore  I  come,  thy  gentle  call  obeying,
And  lay  my  sins  and  sorrows  at  thy  feet,
On  everlasting  strength  my  weakness  staying,
Clothed  in  Thy  robs  of  righteousness  complete.'*

Who  art  thouf     lam  Ruth,  thine  handmaid.      Spread ^  therefore^  thy  shirt  [wings]

over  thine  handmaid.

This  conversation,  a  strangely  interesting  and  suggestive  one.  Fear  may
possess  wise  and  godly  men  (ver.  8),  yet  they  moderate  it  and  are  not  over-
mastered by  it.  Boaz  evidently  has  both  his  terror  and  his  passions  completely
within  control.

Evident,  too,  that  both  actors  in  the  scene  fully  understand  the  meaning  and
the  teaching  of  the  Hebrew  law  as  to  the  relationship  between  them.  By  a  very
delicate  and  thoroughly  national  figure  of  speech,  the  same  Boaz  has  himself
referred  to  and  used,  (ii.  12)  Ruth  claims  the  acknowledgment  of  this  relation-
ship. She  asks  to  do  with  respect  to  Boaz  what  he  has  already  seen  her  do  with
regard  to  Jehovah,  ^.e.,  take  shelter  under  his  protecting  wings.  Aud  she  uses
the  strongest  argument  possible  iu  order  to  prevail,  taken  alike  from  the  law  aud
154


CHAP.  III.  9.  IWMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH.


from  the  word  of  God,  Thou  art  a  near  kinsman.  The  fact  that  she  is  of  Moab
can  no  longer  stand  in  the  w;iy.  Has  he  not  himself  received  and  treated  her  as
an  Israehtish  riiai<ien  1  {Lanye)

In  til  is  act,  I.  She  claims  an  honourable  acknowledgment  of  the  relationship
existing  between  them.  He  owed  it  as  a  duty,  she  asks  it  as  a  right.  Mark,
too,  the  petition  can  no  longer  be  denied  without  disgrace  to  one  or  the  other.
She  conies  with  boldness,  aud  risks  her  fair  name  upon  the  result.  So  with
i*>ther  goinjr  in  to  Aiiasuerus  (list.  iv.  15).  So  with  the  woman  (Luke  viii  43)
approaching  Christ,  upheld  by  a  sinidar  ground  of  hope,  and  a  like  conviction
tiiat  help  lay  in  Hun.  JNIote.  How  brave  and  trusting  is  such  an  approach
(Wordswortli).  This  confidence  itself  is  the  earnest  of  success.  The  kingdom  of
heaven  sutJereth  violence,  etc.

So,  as  between  Israel  and  God,  the  very  same  idea  is  used  to  convey  the  idea
of  covenant  relationships  recognised  as  toward  His  own.  "I  have  spread  my
skirt  over  thee,"  is  equivalent  to  1  have  made  thee  my  wife  (Ezk.  xvi.  8).

II.  She  asks  protection  and  help.  Rest  under  the  guardianship  of  a  husband,
one  of  the  underlying  ideas  of  the  whole  book.  The  covering  of  the  bride-
j^room's  bed  called  a  "  wing  "  among  the  Hebrews  (of.  Deut,  xxii.  30).  In  word
and  in  symbolical  action  alike  Kuth  refers  to  this  fact.  Note.  Husbands  are
or  should  be  a  protection  to  their  wives.

These  7iatural  relationships  have  their  spiritual  analogies.  The  figurative
representation  of  God  in  this  attitude,  as  one  protecting  with  outstretched  wings,
is  a  common  and  familiar  one  in  Scripture.  [See  on  "The  Sheltering  wings,"  ii.  12,
pp.  119,  120]  We  have  here  (1)  a  cry  for  shelter,  (2)  a  claim  for  assistance.
Means  take  my  all  under  thy  care.     So  sinners  come  to  Christ.

"  Rock  of  ages  cleft  for  me,
Let  me  hide  myself  in  Thee."

III.  She  renounces  all  else  to  make  this  claim  (ver.  10).  Her  near  relation-
ship, her  encouragement — she  takes  Boaz  for  better  or  worse.  And  she  does  all
this  with  abundant  and  evident  humility,  self-abasement,  and  self-renunciation
[cf  on  ii.  Ic,  page  111.]

Improvement.  (1)  What  a  lowly  attitude.  (2)  What  a  significant  one.  So
the  Syrophenician  woman  came  to  Christ,  content  to  touch  tlie  hem  of  his
garment  unobserved.  So  the  Gentile  Church  comes  to  Christ,  humbly,  faith-
tully,  and  lovingly  (Wordsworth),

"In  the  present  day,  at  a  Jewish  marriage,  fore  let  this  ruin  be   under  thy  hand;   and

they  alwa3s  take  up  the  corner  of  the  plaid  or  spread  thy  skirt  over  me— be  pleased  to  es-

cloak  of  the  bridegroom,  and  spread  it  over  p mse  me  and  my  cause.'     Thus  mu^'t  we,  by

the  head  of  the  bride.     I  saw  in  the  Roman  faith,  apply  ourselves  to  Jesus  Christ  as  our

Catholic  Church  ot  Notre  Dame  a  marriage,  next  kinsman,  that  is  able  to  redeem  us;  come

at  which  they  seemed  to  retaiu  a  fragmeiit  of  under    His  wings,  as   we  are   invited   (Matt,

the    ancient   usage ;    afier  the    parties    were  xxiii.   37),   and  beg  of  Him   to   spread    His

married,  and  the  priest  was  prcmoun'iug  the  skirt  over  us.     Lord  Jesus,  take  me  into  Thy

benediction,  he  spread  a  robe  over  the  heads  covenant  and  under  Thy  care.     I  am  oppressed,

of  t)0th — a   memorial   of  the  ancient  Jewish  undertake  tor  me.' — Mitt.  Henry.

usage  •  Spread  thy  skirt  over  me '" — Camming  "Marriage  is    a    resting  place.     The  wife

"It  is  our  melancholy  and  miserable  misiip-  finds  rest  under  the  pro.ectiou  of  her  husband,
prehension,  that  we  fancy  there  is  some  re-  as  Israel  tinds  it  under  the  overshadowing
luctance  on  Christ's  part  that  needs  to  be  wing  of  Jehovah.  Even  until  the  latest
overcome,  some  repulse  in  His  mind  thit  we  times,  the  tigiirative  representation  of  God  as
need  to  do  away  wi  h,  and  that  we  have  to  the  living  iiridegroom  of  His  people,  con-
persuade  and  urge  Him  to  do  what  we  yearn  tinues  instructively  and  sublimely,  to  run
to  have  done,  to  forgive  us  all  ou-  sins,  and  through  bcripture  and  tradition.  Christ  says,
to  blot  out  all  our  iiii(iuiiies.  This  is  a  great  (Matt,  xxiii.  37),  'How  often,'  etc.  Israel
mistake;  ten  thous.itM  liiues  more  willing  is  has  rest  (menuchah)  when  God  spreads  out
Christ  to  receive  you,  than  ever  you  were  to  His  wings  over  them.  The  i:*salmi>t  prays  to
nidke  application  to  liim  "" — Ibid.  be  covcr^-d  by  the  shadow  of  Jehovah's  wings.

"'  Thou  art  he  that  has  a  rit;ht  to  redeem  a  Boaz  says  to  Ruth   (Chip.  ii.  12),  *  May  thy

family  and  estate  from  perishing,  and  there-  reward  be  complete,  since  thou  hast  come  to

155


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    RUTH.      chap.  hi.  10,  11.


take  refuge  under  the  wings  of  Jehovah,  the  marvel  if    he  were  amazed  to   find  himself

God  of  Israel.'     That  whioh  Ruth  there  did  ac  ompanied.     Yet   though    his    heart     were

with  re^ipect  to  the  God  of  Bo.tz  .sh-nowa-ks  cheered    with    wine,   the    place    solitary,    the

to  he  permitted   to  do  with  te«ipeet  to   lioaz  night  silent,  the  person  comely,  the  invitation

hims  iP.     The  husband  gives  rest  to  the  wife  plausihl',  could  he  not  be  drawn  to  a  rash  act

b      ><preading  out    hia   wings    over    her.' —  of  last,  his  afipeiite  conld  not  get  the  victory

Lange.  of  reason,  thoug  i  it  had  wine  and  opportunity

*♦  Under  the  sWdow  of  Thv  thronfl  to  help  it.     Herein   Boaz   showed    himself  a

under  tne  shadow  ot  1  hy  throne  .^^j.  ^^^^^^^^  ^^  ^-^  affections  that  he  was  able

Thy  samts  have  dwe  t  secure  ;  »^  ^^^^^^  ^  g^  temptation.     It  is  no  thanks  to

Sufficient  IS  Thy  arm  alone  ^^^^  ^^      ^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^l^      ^3,,.

And  our  deience  w  sure.  — Watts,  i.        ^.u              i.  j       ..      -n   u  .

x*.xx           «».  V.  V.V.  X   oiAiv..  j^.^pg  ^I^Q^  wanted  not  will,  but  convenience.

"  These  times  were  not  dedicate.     This  man,  But  if  a  mm,  when  he  is  fitted  with  all  helps

though  great  in  Bethlehem,  lays  himself  down  to  his  sin,  cm  r^-'pol  the  pie  isire  of  sin  out  of

to  rest  upon  a  pallet,  on   the   floor    ot    his  conscience,  this    is    true   fortitude.'*— ^i^Aop

tMunu       When  he  awakes  at   midnight,   no  Hall.


VERSES  10,  11.
Theme. — Virtue  RECOGNisim  and   BlesshDi

'*  A  gooii  man's  prayers
Will  from  the  deepest  dungeon  cHul)  to  heaven's  height,
And  bring  a  blessing  down." — Joanna  BailUe.

Blessed  he  thou  of  the  Lord,  etc.     For  thou  hast  shown  more  kindness^  etc.     All  the
city  [gate]  doth  know  that  thou  art  a  virtuous  wo/nxn.

A  gfood  maa  will  not  lightly  coudenaa  the  virtaotis  for  some  show  of  evil
(Bernard).  Boaz  iastead  of  blaming  Ruth  blesses  her,  aad  praises  her  virtue,  a
significant  fact  to  those  who  question  her  con  1  ict.  Mikes  nocomplaiut  of  being
disturbed  in  the  night,  nor  of  too  great  importunateness  (L-xnge).  On  the  other
hand  entertains  no  thought  of  abusing  her  confidence  (Ibid).  N^ote  (a)  Actions
are  often  to  he  estimated  from  the  character  of  the  actor  (Lawson).  Some  unknown
cause  may  explain  away  everything  that  otherwise  might  seem  suspicious.  (6)
Piety  'prevails  even  in  a  situation  like  this.  She  calls  herself  *' his  handmaid,"
he  calls  her  "  his  daughter,"  and  tlie  actions  of  both  are  in  keeping  with  this.

Dwell  I.  On  the  benediction,  [cf  on  II.,  4,  p.  100;  tl.,  12,  p.  116  ;  also  on  I.,
8,  9  p  38]  Maybe  looked  upon  either  (I)  a  petition.  (2)  An  expression  of
good  wishes,  the  opposite  of  cursing.  (3)  An  atHcLaation.  Note.  The  godly
although  poor  may  he  hlessed  (Bernard).

Implies  (a)  Piety.  Fervent  prayer,  even  when  a  mere  ejaculation  or  the
expression  of  benevolent  desire,  rd6-^s  tt/?oyi  helitf  in  God  and  His  willingness  to
bless,  (b)  Deference  to  the  Divine  Will.  Bows  to  that  and  is  in  harmony  with
that.  If  the  wurds  are  a  mere  salutation,  they  imply  sympathy  and  express
friendly  and  benevolent  feelings.  \Ao\w  much  of  the  joy  and  pleasantness  of  life
depends  upon  a  word  ''  fitly  sp(jken  1"  Tk^'^se  courtesies  of  life  not  to  he  neglected
by  the  trtte  Christian.  Boaz  did  not  forget  th^m  even  in  sucli  a  trying  situation.
They  are  everywhere  sanctioned  by  Scriptural  usage.

II.  The  Reasons  for  tliis  expression  of  goodwill.  (1)  Thou  hast  showed  more
kindness  at  the  latter  end,  etc.  The  virtuous  are  better  at  last  than  at  first
(Bernard).  Thus  love  grows  stronger  as  dilliculties  abound;  not  only  begins,
but  continues  its  mmistry  and  its  mission.  So  with  Rn  h.  Her  alFection  for
the  dead  Mahlon  to  be  seen  in  her  present  act  [See  on  kindness  to  the  dead  II.,
20j.  Note.  Apostates  like  Judas,  Domas,  Alexander  (the  coppersmith)  were  truly
good  at  the  first — grow  more  evil  at  the  last  just  because  of  this  ^Bernard).

(2)  All  Ike  city  of  my  people  doth  know  tliat  thou  art  a  virtuous  woman.  A  great
recommeijdation — her  virtue  manifest,  known,  seen,  acknowledged.  Graces  may
156


CHAP.  Til  10,11.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   RUTH.


exist  and  yet  he  hidden.  Here  they  shine  forth  conspicuous,  resplendent.  A
stranger,  a  Moabitess,  yet  not  only  escaping  calumny,  but  winning  favour.  Such
was  Huth.     Note.     Virtue  makes  even  the  poor  to  hecome  famous.

Her  virtue  manifested  in  her  circumspect  conduct  towMrds  the  aged  and  the
young,  rich  and  poor  alike.  Manifested  everywhere,  ncognised  of  all.  All  the
city  [gates.]  Note.  Character  tells  everywhere  {Stotham).  The  price  of  such
above  rubies  (Prov.  xxxi    10-31).     Her  works  to  prnise  her  in  the  gates  (31).

Improvkment. — (a)  Virtue  (1)  recognised  (2),  received  (3),  rejoiced  over  (4),
rewarded  by  the  godly.  Note.  Virtue  a  means  of  preferment,  a  source  of  praise,
"  Blessed  be,"  &c.  (b)  See  how  completely  Boaz  turns  what  would  have  been  the
hour  of  temptation  to  many,  into  a  time  when  his  gifts  and  graces  shine  out  the
more  conspicuously.  What  wise  counsel,  what  just  and  appropriate  speech,
what  careful  thoughtfulness  for  others,  what  gentleness,  courtesy,  and  bene-
volence I  Note.  Good  men  praise  virtue  where  others  would  practise  vice.  Its  spell
holds  them  in  the  extremest  moments  of  temptation.


"She  calleth  herself  his  *  handmaid;'  he
calleth  her  his 'daughter.'  There  is  nothing
Io8t  by  humility.  The  humbh;  shall  have
'riches,  and  honour,  and  life'  (Prov.  xxiii.
l)r—Trapp.

'*  How  blessed  is  a  man  the  m'  ment  his
thought  has  come  into  the  realisation  of  this
God,  who  is  to-day  and  to-morrow  night  and
day,  at  home  and  abroad,  everywhere,  thinking
of  him  and  interested  in  him  I  Not  of  a  God
who  is  penned  up  behind  marble  laws  ;  not  a
God  who  is  afar  off,  and  who  requires  that
some  one  shall  ascend  into  the  heaven  and
bring  him  down  ;  but  a  God  with  us ;  a  God
in  us  ;  a  God  for  ns." — Beer  her.

'*  Exemplary  virtue  ought  to  have  its  due
praise  (Fhil.  iv.  8),  and  it  will  recommend
both  men  and  women  to  the  esteem  of  the
wisest  and  best.  Ruth  was  a  poor  vv  oman  and
poverty  often  obscures  the  lustre  of  virtue  :
yet  Ruth's  virtue,  even  in  a  mean  condition,
were  generally  taken  notice  of  and  could  not
be  hid  :  nay,  her  virtues  took  away  the  re-
proach of  her  poverty.  If  poor  people  be  but
good  people  they  shall  have  honour  from  God
and  man.  Kuth  had  been  remarkable  for  her
humilitj,  which  paved  the  way  to  this  honour.


The  less  she  proclaimed  her  own  goodness  the
more  did  her  neighbours  take  notice  of  it.  In
the  choice  of  yolk-fellows,  virtue  should  es-
pecially be  rogarcled.  known  approved  virtue.
Let  religion  determine  the  choice  and  it  will
certainly  crown  the  choice  and  make  it  com-
fortable." -  Matt.  Henry.

"  Instead  of  touching  her  as  a  wanton,  he
blesses  her  as  a  father,  encourages  her  as  a
friend,  promiseth  her  as  a  kinsman,  rewards
her  as  a  patron,  and  sends  her  away  laden
with  hopes  and  gifts  ;  no  less  chaste,  but  more
happy  than  when  she  came  Oh  admirable
temperance,  worthy  the  progenitor  of  Him  in
whose  lips  and  heart  was  no  guile  I  " — Bishop
Hall.

"A  man's  nature  is  best  perceived  in  private*
ness^  for  there  is  no  affectation  ;  in  passion,
for  that  putteth  a  man  out  of  his  precepts  ;
and  in  a  new  case  or  experiment  for  there
custom  leaveth  him." — Bacon.

'*  A  noble  mind  !

With  this  and  pleasures  under  ban,
True  faith  and  holy  trust  in  God,
Thou  art  the  peer  of  any  man  " —

Gallagher,


VERSES  12,  13.
Theme, — Care  for  the  Claims  op  OtherSi

Ah  me  1     How  dark  the  discipline  of  pain.
Were  not  the  suffering  follow  by  the  sense
Of  infinite  ref^t  and  infinite  release  !
This  is  our  consolation  T' — LoTigfellow,

Ver.  12,  13.  1  am  thy  near  kinsman  [redeemer],  hoivbeit  there  is  a  kinsman  nearer
than  I.  If  he  will  perform,  etc.  |_lit.  if  he  will  redeem  thee],  but  if  not  then
I  will,  etc.

Ruth*s  recompense  and  rest  begins  from  this  hour.  The  word  of  an  honorable
man  is  pledged.  "  Fear  not,  I  will  do  to  thee  etc,"  and  she  may  repose  in  confi-
dence upon  that.  Note.  Where  a  godly  and  honed  man  makes  a  promise  there  is
little  /ear  of  failure.     With  such  to  say  is  to  do.

157


HOMtLKTlC   COMMENTARY:    RtlTlL     cha1».  iii.  12,  IS


There  is  a  difficulty,  however,  in  the  way.  of  a  technical  kind  indeed,  hut
none  the  less  a  difficulty  because  of  that.  Evident  that  Ruth  had  impresse  i
Boaz  favourably,  that  inclination  pointed  in  the  direction  outward  circumstances
and  claims  were  pointing.  Note  (a)  The  most  subtle  and  dangeroas  temptations
come  in  this  way.  Come  as  angels  of  light,  etc.  We  persuade  ourselves  we  are
even  serving  others  and  not  ourselves,  {b)  How  good  men  act  under  such  circum-
stances. Boaz  remembers  even  in  this  hour  that  there  is  another  and  a  nearer
kinsman.     Yields  the  preference  to  duty,  not  to  inclination.

Suggests  I.  Care  for  the  claims  of  others— respect  for  their  rights.  Note.
Conscientiousness  a  characteristic  of  good,  men  always.  Justice  to  give  every  one
his  own,  to  do  to  others  as  we  would  they  should  do  to  us.

(a)  The  danger  comes  from  our  feelings  and  desires  in  such  moments.  We
naturally  seek  our  own  interest,  and  we  are  right  in  doing  this,  so  long  as  they
do  not  intrude  into  the  sphere  sacred  to  our  fellows.  Note.  The  more  ardent  the
man  the  more  earnest  the  pursuit,  and  therefore  the  best  of  men  sometimes  feel
this  temptation  to  step  beyond  their  own  sphere  the  strongest.

(b)  These  feelings  and  desires  need  to  be  continually  watched.  Very  easy  to
wrong  others  even  in  our  acts  of  charity  and  kinltiess,  much  more  then  i  )
pursuit  of  our  own  gratification.  Note.  (1)  Those  nighest  to  aright  are  first  to  be
preferred,  (2)  Personal  feelings  always  increase  the  urgency  of  the  claims  of
selfishness.     (3)  Grace  can  conquer  even  these  tendencies  in  a  good  man.

II.  Promptness  to  respond  to  claims  upon  ourselves.  This  request  of  Ruth's
cannot  be  gainsaid — Boaz  does  not  leave  her  a  moment  in  doubt.  Acknowledges
her  at  once  as  a  kinswoman,  and  poor  as  she  is,  responds  to  her  demand  so  far  as
it  falls  upon  him.     He  himself  will  prosecute  the  matter  [Lange).

(1)  How  easy  to  evade  responsibility  A  natural  sloth  and  lethargy  of  soul
towards  duty  in  most  men.  The  priest  and  the  Levite  pass  by  on  the  other
side,  leaving  the  poor  wounded  and  bleeding  ones  to  perish.     (Luke  x,  31,  32.)

(2)  How  natural  to  let  it  rest  upon  others,  to  lay  it  up(ni  them,  and  to
criticise  them  if  they  fail  to  respond  to  it.  Note  (a)  The  man  who  most  respects
the  claims  of  others  is  generally  the  I'eadiest  to  respond  to  those  upon  himself
Boaz  an  instance  of  this  :  tender,  true,  conscientious  all  round.  (6)  Piety,  high
principles^  true  nobility  in  men  run  contrary  to  nature  in  these  things;  make  us
careful  where  we  are  inclined  to  be  careless  [in  regard  to  others]  and  the  reverse.

(3)  Goodness  should  show  itself  in  actions,  faith  be  seen  in  works,  kindliness  of
heart  be  manifested  in  deeds.

Then  will  I  do  the  part  of  a  kinsman  to  thee.  [Then  will  I  redeem  thee]  as  the
Lord  [Jehovah]  liveth.

The  law  made  it  incumbent  on  the  nearest  kinsman  to  marry  the  childless
widow  (Deut.  xxv.  5.)  so  as  to  redeem  the  inheritance  and  prevent  the  name  of  the
dead  husband  being  forgotten  or  blotted  out.  Boaz  acknowledges  that  Ruth's
claim  cannot  be  gainsaid.  What  an  encouragement  this  to  the  humble  seeker  I
Her  rights  deferred,  not  denied.

The  Goel  or  Redeemer  here.  (1)  Responds  to  the  first  application.  No
importunity  needed.  The  seeker  met  half  way.  The  burden  and  responsibility
accepted  at  once.  (2)  Conditionally  promises  all  that  is  asked.  No  right  to
expect  more  than  a  conditional  promise.  Other  rights  beyond  our  own  in  the
universe.  (3)  Does  so  on  the  existence  of  God.  "As  Jehovah  liveth  " — a  solemn
oath,  not  to  be  lightly  taken,  not  to  be  easily  put  aside.  Note.  How  strong  the
hope  that  is  built  upon  such,     [On  the  Kinsman  Redeemer,  see  iv.  9-10,  p.]

"When  Alexander  the  Great  took  Tyre  he  better  title  than  himself  to  the  royal  disunity,

was  informed  of  a  youn^j  prince  who  had  ob-  for  they  were  of  the  ancient  blood  of  the  Tyriau

tallied  a  high  charucter  for  virtue,  and  offered  kinj^s.     Boaz  deserves  no  less  praisi'  than  this

him  the  crown.     The  young  prince  refused  it,  Tyrian  prince.     Such  a  wife  as  lluth  would

because  he  had  an  elder  brother  who  had  a  have  been  preferred  by  Boaz  to  a  royal  diadem  ]

158


CHAP.  111.  14—18.    HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH,


yet  he  would  not  take  her  to  himself  to  wife
whilst  there  live<i  another  man  who  had  a  pre-
ferable claim  to  her,  if  he  was  willing  to  make
use  of  hi»  right  We  ought  to  *  look  every
man  not  on  his  own  things  only  but  every  man
also  on  the  things  of  others.'" — Lawaon.

'*  Howheit  theie  is  a  kinsman  nearer  than  I.
There  are  different  degrees  of  relation,  all  of
which  have  their  respective  duri^^s,  and  their
respective  rights  belonging  to  thera.  We  sin
either  by  neglecting  any  of  the  duties  to  these
relati(ms,  or  by  arrogating  the  rights  peculiar
to  nearer  relations.  Boaz  would  do  everything
to  serve  Ruth  that  became  her  nearest  relation,
but  one ;  and  this  one  thing  he  declined,  be-
cause he  had  no  right  to  do  it.  He  would  not
intrude  into  the  rights  of  another  man  till  they
were  voluntarily  surrendered.  As  every  man
ought  to  abide  in  his  own  calling,  so  we  all
ought  to  keep  our  own  places  in  society.
Much  of  the  unhappiness,  and  many  of  the
sins  of  social  life  originate  in  that  assuming
and  meddling  disposition,  which  renders  some
people  a  pest  to  their  neighbours  and  still
more  to  themselves." — Ibid.

'*  What  true  Christian  chivalry  born  of
faith,  there  was  in  the  heart  of  this  Bethlehem
yeoman.  He  was  not  only  sttrrnly  honest,  but
sensitively  honorable,  bearing  his  escutcheon
without  a  sinister  brand  on  it.  We  trace  the
same  quality  in  some  of  the  most  memorable
passages  in  the  early  life  of  his  illustrious
descendant,  the  greatest  of  Israel's  kings.
David  knew  from  the  prophet  Samuel  that  he
was  divinely  selected  for  the  throne  of  the
Hebrew  Commonwealth.  The  life  of  8aul
was  more  th»n  once  in  his  power,  and  the  un-
relenting persecution  with  which  he  piirsut-d
him  and  sought  to  destroy  him,  would  have
seemed  to  a  conscience  that  was  less  informed
and  scrupulous,  almost  to  warrant  his  taking
his  life,  and  seizing  the  sceptre  as  it  fell  from
his  hands.  Bat  he  will  not  so  much  as  lift  up
his  finger  'against  the  Lord's  anointed,'  or
ascend  to  a  thnme  by  steps  that  are  stained
with  blood.  He  dare  not  force  ProviJence,  or
enjoy  a  blessing  while  sitting  on  the  grave  of
a  murdered  duty.  To  wait  God's  time  is  to
prove  that  *  We  believe  in  God,'  is  not  only  an
article  in  our  creed,  but  an  active  principle  in
our  Christian  lite." — Thomson.

**  A  godly  life  incluiies  every  form  of  moral
virtue — temperance,  wisdom,  fortitude  of  every
kind,  moralities,  whether  on  a  low  scale  of  in-
dividual interest,  on  a  higher  scale  of  society
relations,  or  m  the  highest  form  to  which
patriotism  inspires.  All  these  are  included  in
religion  — Beecher.

*•  He  is  an  Israelite,  not  only  before  men,
but  also  before  God  aloue.  And  it  was  because


he  did  not  forjret,  what  man  is  naturally  so
prone  to  forget,  that  God  8ee«^  him,  that  he  is
so  mindful  of  his  dufy.  Hypocrites,  when
alone,  are  different  from  what  ttiey  appear  in
company.  Israelites  like  Boaz  feel  and  act  in
the  presence  of  the  all-knowing  God  alone
not  otherwise  than  they  would  if  all  the  stars
of  heaven  and  all  the  creatures  of  earth  could
testify  against  them.  Boaz  showed  an  active
faith  when  he  gave  no  place  to  temptation.
Pious  and  offencelesn  as  he  was  when  Ruth
came  to  claim  the  right  of  the  poor,  he  is
equally  so  now  when  she  asks  for  her  right  of
redemption.  Then  the  question  was  only
about  a  few  ears  of  grain,  now  it  involves  his
own  person  and  estate.  Then  he  was  kind  in
the  presence  of  Ruth's  humility,  now  he  is
humble  in  the  presence  of  her  claim  to  be
righted.  Then  he  forgot  herself  in  the  fact
that  she  had  ever  owned  another  law  than  that
of  Israel.  Then  his  tender  delicacy  made
Ruth  assured  of  her  safety  in  his  fields  ;  now
that  same  delicacy  understands  that  since  she
has  come  to  him  the  right  she  claims  must  be
fulfilled.  He  might  have  released  hiiaseJf  by
the  .letter  of  the  law  to  which  she  appeals —
there  was  a  nearer  relative  ;  but  his  faith  is  an
active  faith.  The  question  was  one  of  right,
not  of  ingenious  play  with  the  letter.  The
claimant  must  be  satisfied.  And  he  does  what
he  promised  to  do." — Lange.

*'  According  to  its  derivations,  ^oe/  means  one
who  unlooses,'  unlooses  that  which  has  been
bound,  and  restore.^  it  to  its  original  position.
The  goel  did  his  duty,  for  example,  if  he
redeemed  a  promissory  note  by  pwuiig  it  and
handing  it  back  to  the  man  who  had  given  it  ;
or  if  he  had  redeemed  a  piece  of  land  by  pay-
ing off  the  liens  upon  it  and  restoring  it  to  its
orginal  ovmer ;  or  it  he  redeemed  a  captive
by  payng  his  ransom  and  setting  him  free.
So  that  the  fundamental  idea  of  a  goel
was  that  of  a  man  who  leJeemed,  or  set  loose,
that  which  had  in  any  way  been  bound."—
Cox.

"  It  is  easy  to  understand,  how,  in  process
of  time,  this  title  came  to  be  app'ied  both  to
Jehovah  and  to  Jesus,  Jehovah  was  the
Redeemer  of  Israel ;  for,  again  and  again,
he  interposed  to  save  them  from  captivity,  or
to  ransom  them  when  they  had  been  carried
away  captives  and  to  preserve  them  a  name
and  a  place  in  the  earth.  Jesus  is  the  Re-
deemer of  the  whole  world  ;  for  when  we  were
captives  to  divers  lusts,  aud  groaning  under
the  oppressions  of  evil  th.:;  Son  ot  Man  proved
Himself  our  true  kinsman  by  payiug  a  ransom
for  us  and  setting  ua  free  from  our  intolerable
bonds."— /6ifl^.


VERSES  14—18.

Critical  and  Exf.obtical  Notbs  — Ver.  14.  And  she  lay  at  his  feet.  LiU  The  places  of
his  feet.  Before  oue  could  know  another.  Lit.  Be  lore  a  man  could  know  his  companion.
Recognise  his  friend  {Lanye).  The  Mishna  has  deciiied  dayt>reak  to  begin  when  it  became
possible  to  distinguish  between  white  and  blue ;  E.  Mair  when  a  wolf  and  a  dog — R.  Akiba

159


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH.  chap.  hi.  14.


when  an  ass  and  a  wild  ass — could  be  distingniahed.  Bat  others  said,  when  one  sees  and  recog-
nises another  person  at  the  distance  of  four  ells  (ibid).  And  [ /»r]  he  said,  Let  it  not  be  known.
It  might  (1)  cause  pcandal,  (2)  prejudice  the  other  kinsman's  choice,  (3)  render  it  difficult  for
him  to  prosecute  his  own  suit.  One  susi  ected  of  previous  intercourse  with  a  foreigner,  even
though  she  were  a  convert,  was  not  allowed  to  perform  the  duty  of  a  levirate  marriage  (Mishna).
That  a  woman.  That  *'  the"  woman.  The  use  of  the  article  [the  i.e.,  this  woman]  forbids  us
to  suppose  that  these  words  were  actually  addressed  to  Ruth  (  Wright).  Luther  and  Coverdale
explain,  'And  he  said  in  his  heart."  They  express  Boaz's  opinion  which  he  had  previously
intimated  to  Ruth  (  Wright).  The  Targumist  considers  it  unlikely  from  the  words  that  Boaz
should  have  been  alone  in  the  threshing  floor,  and  renders  it,  Boaz  said  to  his  young  men.  This
idea,  if  true,  should  have  its  due  influence  in  considering  the  whole  chapter.

Ver.  15.  Bring.  "  Allow  me."  Lit.  *'  Give  me."  A  current  phrase  of  courtesy  (Morison).
The  veil.  Sheet  or  apron  (Elliot),  wrapper  (Morison),  mant'e  (Lange),  It  is  merely  a  square
piece  of  cotton  cloth,  and  I  have  often  seen  it  used  for  just  such  service  as  that  to  which  Ruth
applied  hers  (I^r.  Thomson  ;  Land  and  Boo/c).  The  mantle  worn  by  the  poorer  classes  is  very
coarse  and  strong,  and  large  enough  to  envelope  the  whole  person.  The  word  used  here  occurs
again  only  in  Is.  iii.  22,  and  is  translated  "  wimple."  And  he  measured  six  measures  of  barley.
Lit.  Six  of  barley.  A  considerable  load,  for  he  had  to  put  it  on  her  (Lanye).  He  measured
six  sacks  (nearly  two  bushels)  of  barley,  and  placed  it  upon  her.  and  she  received  strength  from
the  Lord  to  carry  it,  and  immediately  it  was  said  in  prophecy  that  there  should  come  of  her  the
six  righteous  ones  of  the  world,  &c  (Cha/dee  Paraphrast)  ,  The  number  six  is  the  symbol  of
labour  and  service,  which  is  followed  by  seven,  the  time  of  rest  (Lange,  Cox).  She  went  into
the  city.  The  pronoun  is  masculine.  He,  Boaz,  went  (Linge).  Possibly  at  once  to  settle  the
matter  (?).     As  in  A  V.  Wright,  Vulg.  Syr.

Ver.  16.  Who  art  thou?  In  what  condition  ?  (i e  ,  in  what  character  ?).  As  the  espoused  of
Boaz,  or  what  ?  Cp.  Judges  xviii.  8.  (So  Vulg.  Bertheau,  Michaelts,  Maurer,  Wordsworth^
Steele  and  Terry,  Sfc^.  Probably  still  dark  when  Ruth  reached  home  (Elliot,  Drusnis).  Naomi
knew  her  daughter,  and  addressed  her  a^  such  (Bellamy).  How  art  thou?  (ibid).  Go  not
empty.     Not  to  return  as  one  unappreciated.

Ver.  18.  Sit  still.  Remain  quiet  (Lange).  Stay  quietly  at  home  (Steele  vnd  Terry).  How
the  matter  will  fall.  How  it  is  decreed  from  heaven  (Targum).  The  man  will  not  be  in  rest.
Omit  "  be  in "  {Lange).  His  actions  and  his  oath  show  that  he  will  quickly  decide  the
matter.


VERSE  14.
Theme. — Caring  for  a  Good  Namhl

"  It  is  a  busy  talking  world
In  which  licentious  breath  hlovs,  like  the  wind,
As  freely  on  the  palace  as  the  cottage." — Rowe.

She  rose  up  before  one  could  know  another  [Lit.  Before  a  man  could  recognise
his  friend].     And  [for]  he  saidy  let  it  not  be  kiown.,  that  a  [the]  woman^  dsc.

Boaz  hopes  she  may  escape  unobserved.  This  necessary,  lest  the  rights  of
the  other  kinsman  might  have  seemed  to  have  been  infringed  upon  [see  Crit.  and
Exeg.  Notes].  They  must  act  not  only  with  strictest  honour  and  propriety,  but
with  the  greatest  circumspection  and  care.  Note.  Certain  situations  and  circum-
stances may  render  it  wise  and  even  necessary  to  do  things  othervnse  uncalled  for  and
improper.  Times  when  secrecy  is  a  duty.  If  we  have  done  anything  that  may
expose  ourselves  or  other  to  unjust  suspicion  if  it  were  known,  it  is  not  incon-
sistent with  integrity  to  conceal  it,  providing  it  can  be  done  without  falsehood  or
dissimulation  (Lawson).

A.  Thomson  on  this  (condensed)  : —

Let  it  not  be  known,  etc.  We,  may  generally,  suspect  the  prudence,  if  not  the
virtue,  of  an  act  whea  it  needs  to  be  concealed      Boaz  possibly  felt  this.

I.  The  duty  of  caring  for  a  good  name      A  treasure  no  wise  man  will  trifle

with.     Boaz  knew  its  value — trembled   when  he  found  himself  unexpectedly  in

circumstances  capable  of  an  injurious  construction — sought  to  screen  Ruth  from

the  withering  blight  of  scandal.     True  (1)  that  the  judgment  of  men  cannot

160


CHAP.  III.  14.  HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY :    RUTH,


affect  our  relation  to  God  ;  (2)  that  the  approval  of  conscience  is  worth  more
than  the  applause  of  a  kingdom.  Yet  there  are  two  things  whereof  every  man
should  be  specially  chary  and  tender — his  conscience  and  his  credit  {St.  Augus-
tine). Moral  power  a  divine  trust.  An  equivocal  reputation  seriously  enfeebles
or  entirely  neutralises  our  influence,  and  so  injures  our  power  of  benefiting  men
and  of  glorifying  God.  "  The  sons  of  God  are  to  be  without  rebuke."  A  good
name  rather  to  be  chosen  than  riches.  This  one  of  the  seals  upon  the  Pente-
costal Christians.  Said  (Acts  ii.  46,  47)  of  them  they  were  *' praising  God  and
having  favour  with  all  the  'people^''

II.  The  duty  of  charity  in  our  judgment  of  others.  Boaz  judged  of  Ruth
by  himself  Tn  the  light  of  the  report  of  her  modest  and  seemly  behaviour,
overlooked  the  boldness  of  the  step  because  of  the  virtuous  motive  that  had
prompted.  The  wisest  course  to  form  our  estimate  of  a  doubtful  action  by  the
character  of  the  actor.     When  we  stand  in  doubt  let  love  turn  the  scale.

Yet  how  difficult  to  teach  the  grand  lesson  of  charity.  Perverse  ingenuity
puts  the  worst  construction,  makes  up  by  surmise  what  is  wanting  in  evidence,
hastens  to  circulate  the  slanderous  tale,  etc.  Characteristic,  however,  of  a  citizen
of  Zion  that  "ke  taketh  not  up  an  evil  report  against  his  neighbour.*'

**  To  be  noble,  we'll  be  good,
I  live  not  in  myself,  but  I  become
Portion  of  that  around  me." — Byron.

Ver.  15.  Bring  the  veil  that  thou  hast,,  etc.  He  measured  six  measures  of  barley^
etc.  A  good  man  will  avail  himself  of  the  smallest  occasion,  the  slii^htest  chance
of  doing  good,  and  conferring  benefits  upon  the  worthy.  The  liberal  heart  is
never  weary  of  well  doing.  Boaz  shows  himself  the  same  bountiful,  large-hearted
man  in  the  threshiug  floor  as  in  the  harvest  field.  [On  ''Liberal  Giving,"  see  II.
15,  16,  pp.  127-8.]  (1)  Here  was  tangible  proof  of  his  regard  and  thoughtfuluess.
Every  grain  a  testimony  to  his  esteem  and  affection  for  the  widow  of  his  kinsman.
He  said,  '*  Go  not  empty  unto  thy  mother-in-law."  Did  ever  a  true  man  send
such  "  empty  "  away  ?  (2)  Possibly  a  gift  in  part  to  avert  suspicion.  Her  appear-
ance laden  with  grain,  would  be  less  likely  to  attract  attention  or  call  for  remark,
as  she  generally  left  the  fields  of  Boaz  laden  in  this  way,  A  harmless  subterfuge
unless  used  to  conceal  actual  guilt.  Everything  else  of  this  kind  must  be  judged
by  the  motive  behind.  (3)  Certainly  a  significant  hint  to  Naomi.  Said  plainly
that  the  claim  had  in  part  been  responded  to.  Lange  and  Cox  see  a  further
significance  in  the  number  of  measures  of  barley,  six.  In  six  days  the  Lord  made
heaven  and  earth,  and  the  seventh  the  Sabbath  of  rest  follows.  [See  Crit.  and
Exeg.  Notes.]  (1)  Naomi  would  see  the  grain  in  bulk,  and  Ruth's  mention  of
six  measures  may  have  been  merely  accidentaL  Just  possible,  however,  that
Boaz  significantly  hinted  the  result  in  this  way,  "  The  day  of  rest  is  at  hand."

"Here  is  a  very  important  lesson  ;    we  are  notice  murmurs  that  must  soon  die," — Cav^-

not  only  to   abstain  from  what   is  evil,  but  ming.

from  even  the  appearance  of  evil.  Some  "  A  holy  Paul,  it  has  been  said,  may  some-
people  are  more  zealous  in  abstaining  from  times  be  found  on  board  a  ship  that  has
the  appearance  than  from  the  evil  ;  others  are  Castor  and  Pollux  for  its  sign.  It  is  recorded
more  zealous,  and  truly  so,  in  abstaining  from  of  the  excellent  Bishop  Ken,  that,  when  his
the  evil  than  from  the  appearance.  Our  duty  copy  of  the  Bible  was  examined  after  his
is  to  abstain  from  both;  not  only  to  do  no  death,  it  opened  spontaneously  at  Paul's  gi eat
evil,  but,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  to  give  to  no  man  chapter  of  the  Corinthians  and  charity."—
the   opportunity  of    misconstruing   the   good  Thomson.

that  we  do.    We  shall  not  escape  misconstrue-  "  There  is  an  over-sensitiveness  and  over-

tion  ;  it  would  be  wonderful  it  we  did.     Mis-  delicacy  which  shows   not   innocence,  but  an

constructions  of  piety  and  Christian  character  inflammable  imagination.    The  f<oul  spreads  its

we  shall  escape  •  but  the  misinterpretations  of  own  hue  over  everything;  the  shroud  or  wedding

envy,  of  pridt,  of  jealousy,  of  ill-nature,  which  garment  of  nature  is  woven  in  the  loom  of  our

are  not  yet  rooted  out  of  the  world,  it  will  be  own  feelings.    Persons  seem  to  each  man  what

impossible  for  any  man   to  avoid,  do    as   he  he  is  to  himself.    One  who  suspects  hypocrisy

please,  and  therefore  the  only  way  is  not  to  in  the  world  \a  rarely  transparent  ;  the  man

161


HOMlLHTtC    COMMESrAaY:  RUTtl.  ciiap.  iii.  18.


constantly  on  the  watch  for  cheatin;*  is  gene-  we   think.     I   am    aware   that    an    immense

rally  dishonest  ;  he  who  suspecLS  impurity  ia  amount  of  scandal  is  not  malicious  in  inten-

prurient." — Rtliertson  tiou,  and  is  uttered  unconsciously.

"If  we  iodu'ge  in  a  tendency  to  criticise  *'  Evil  is  wrought,  from  want  of  thought
our  neighbour's  affairs,  we  shall  soon  find  As  well  as  want  of  heart." — Draden.
ourselves  speaking  things  that,  to  use  "  Christian,  behold  the  kindness  and  gentle-
Solomon's  phrase  are  '  like  the  piercings  of  ft  ness  of  Boaz  !  Will  it  then  be  possible  tt'at
sword.'  We  can  easily  ruin  a  noble  reputa-  God,  when  thou  art  in  need,  will  send  thee
tion,  just  as  a  mischievous  child  can  pull  the  empty  away  ?  Never  1  His  g  nenms  h^ind  is
mast  beautiful  flovver  in  pieces,  but  like  him,  never  closed.  Only  open  Him  thine  heart,
we  cannot  restore  again  its  symmetry  and  fra-  and  divine  ^.itts  flow  in  upon  thee  withouc
grance.     We  are  more  powerful  for  evil  than  any  action  on  thy  part." — S'arke,


VERSE  18.
Theme. — Rest  in  Ourselves  and  Rest  in  Anotheb,

"  Who  may  not  strive,  may  yet  fulfil
The  harder  task  of  standing  still.
And  good  but  wished  with  God  is  done." — Whittier.

Sit  still  [Remain  quiet]  my  daughter  until  thou  knoWy  etc.     For  ike  man  will

not  rest.

The  Hebrew  bride  had  to  remain  at  home  until  her  affianced  husband  came  to
fetch  her  (Cox).  Naomi's  advice  is  evidently  that  Ruth  shall  take  this  position.
Mark,  however !  The  command  only  follows  strenuous  effort.  She  has  done  all
that  she  could,  all  that  lay  on  her  side.  Now  she  must  wait,  not  be  perplexed,
not  unduly  anxious.  Rest  in  herself,  in  her  own  mind,  is  to  foreshadow  and  be
the  earnest  of  rest  in  the  house  of  a  husband  [cf.  on  I.  9  ;  III.  i.].

Dwell,  I.  On  the  principle  underlying  this  injunctioa  A  time  to  speak  and
a  time  to  be  silent ;  a  time  to  act  and  a  time  to  "  sit  atill  "  ;  a  time  for  enterprise
and  a  time  for  remaining  quiet ;  a  time  to  work  and  a  time  to  wait.  Note.  Two
sides  to  lifcy  the  active  and  passive^  and  both  necessa'-y.  Night  the  counterpart  and
complement  of  day,  rest  and  sleep  of  toil  and  activity.  Men  must  fall  m  with
the  claims  of  the  one  as  of  the  other  ;  respond  to  the  laws  of  "  rest"  as  of  motion,
quietness,  as  of  activity.     Note.  A  lesson  for  this  busy  age  here.

**  The  world  is  too  much  with  us  :  late  and  soon.
Getting  and  spending,  we  lay  waste  our  powers." — Wordsworth,

Men  are  naturally  restless  in  critical  moments  like  this.  The  mind  anxious,  per-
plexed, etc.  Yet  it  may  pre-eminently  be  our  duty  to  sit  Htill  then,  (a)  because  it
is  the  Divine  will.  God  said  to  Israel  at  the  most  critical  moment  in  her  history,
the  sea  in  front,  the  mountains  on  either  hand,  the  enemy  behind,  "  Stand  still
and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord"  (Ex  xiv.  13).  So  in  another  critical  moment,
"  Who  is  among  you  .  .  .  that  walketh  in  darkness  and  hath  no  light,  let
him  trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  stay  upon  His  God  *'  (Is.  1.  10).  Note.
In  such  moments  our  strength  is  to  sit  still,  even  when  we  are  saying  with  Saul,
"  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  V

(6)  Because  it  is  the  only  wise  course.  What  can  be  done  by  disquieting  and
anxious  thoughts?  Ruth,  for  instance,  could  not  alter  the  laws  of  the
country.

Note.  (1)  There  are  times  when  it  is  a  ivaste  of  power  to  make  further  effort,  and
a  waste  of  feeling  to  allow  anxiety  to  distress  the  heart  [Radford  Thomas).  The
Psalmist  pictures  such  a  moment  (Ps.  xxxvii.)  when  men  would  naturally  be
fretful  and  anxious ;  and  the  exhortation  to  such  is,  "  Rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait
patiently  for  Him"   (v.  7  cf  also  1 — 3).

Note.  (2)  There  are  times  when  we  are  simply  helpless^  and  effort  ia  impossible,
162


CtiAP.  III.  18.  noMlLETiC    COyniKNTABY:    UUTtl.


Sittiro:  still  certninly  justified  then.     This  the  underljiug  thought  ia  Milton's
exquisite  "  Sonnet  on  his  own  Blindness  "  : —


**Doth  God  exact  day-labour,  Hght  denied  f
•  •  «  «  *

G'  d  doth  not  need

Either  man's  works  or  his  o^t\  gifts.
«  «  «  «  •

n


They  also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait

A  lesson  here  for  those  laid  aside  by  sickness  and  infirmity.  Providence  is  saying
to  such,  "Sit  still."  Difficult,  but  not  impossible,  to  wait  while  others  work.
God's  message  to  such,  "In  quietness  and  confidence  shall  be  your  strength"
(Isaiah  xxx.  15).

II.  The  reasons  given  here  for  this  injunction  (\)  To  give  time  and  past  effort
a  fair  chance.  "  Until  thou  know  how  the  matter  will  fall."  Sometimes  wise  to
wait  for  the  sake  of  observation — where  we  are,  what  we  have  already  done.
The  traveller  has  to  pause  to  find  his  bearings,  the  sculptor  to  see  the  eflfect  of
the  blow  he  has  already  given.  Restlessness  condemned  here.,  that  restlessness
which  would  be  for  ever  rooting  in  the  earth  to  see  whether  the  seed  is  growing.
Note.  Faith  and  patience  are  essentials  in  human  life.  A  lesson  to  Christian
ministers,  among  others.  Preach,  labour  in  season,  out  of  season,  etc. ;  but
learn  also  to  wait,  to  rest  in  the  promises,  to  leave  the  results  with  God.  Over-
doing condemned  here,  that  overdoing  which  undoes  all  that  already  has  been
done.

(2)  To  give  time  and  the  efforts  of  others  a  fair  chance.  "  For  the  man  will  not
rest  until  he  have  finished  the  thing."  The  past  had  proved  how  true  and
honourable  Boaz  was — how  much  to  be  depended  on.  Note,  (a)  We  sit  still  the
more  readily  when  we  know  that  others  are  engaged  on  our  hehalf  Nay,  we  are
such,  so  weak  in  ourselves,  thdiX  we  never  find  rest  at  all  until  we  find  rest  in  another.
A  deep  principle  here  which  lies  at  the  foundation  of  the  marriage  rehitionship
(iii.  1).  Note,  (b)  The  whole  Christian  economy  and  scheme  of  redemption  rests  up)on
this  fact,  that  man  needs  help  from  without — that  h«  cannot  save  himself,  and  that
he  cannot  "  rest''  until  he  finds  it.

Lessons. —  (1)  We  may  "sit  still"  when  duty  has  been  loyally  performed.
(2)  When  another  who  is  competent  has  undertaken  for  us.  Note,  (a)  He  who
rests  in  Christ  rests  not  without  reason ;  has  found  an  advocate,  brother,  friend,
kinsman,  Saviour,  Redeemer;  his  confidence  is  not  that  of  the  slothful,  or  the
careless,  (b)  He  that  is  entered  into  his  rest,  he  also  hath  ceased  from  his  own
works  (Heb.  iv,  10).  Mary  rather  than  Martha  the  type  of  Christian  discipleship
(Luke  X,  42).


Theme, — Promptitude  in  Duties,  Secular  or  Sacred,

**  Make  haste  0  roan  to  do
Wliatever  must  be  done  ;
Thou  hast  no  time  to  lose  in  sloth,
Thy  day  will  soon  be  done." — Bonar,

Dr.  A.  Thomson  (condensed)  on  The  man  will  not  [be  in  (omit)]  rest  until  he  have

finished  the  thing  this  day.

This  favourable  estimate  Naomi  had  formed  of  the  character  of  Boaz.  A  man
who  meant  what  he  said  and  did  it — not  only  held  a  promise  sacred,  but  went
about  its  fulfilment  with  a  will.  Did  the  right  thing  at  the  right  time — a  person
of  probity  and  promptitude.

Another  passage  of  Scripture  kindred  to  this  (Ezra  iii.  4).  The  Israelites,  on
their  return  from  Babylon,  again  offered  the  daily  sacrifice  "  according  to  the  custom
as  the  duty  of  the  day  required^"     A  rich  ethical  meaumg  in  this  word  "  duty"—

163


UOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH  CHAF.  m.  1^


Bomething  due  by  us  to  God.  When  it  is  said  we  "  ought "  to  do  a  thing,  it
means  we  owe  it  to  God  to  do  it.  Not  only  with  the  Israelites  no  omission,  but
DO  delay  until  the  morrow.  Not  "like  silver  bells  out  of  tune,"  their  clock
always  seemed  to  strike  at  the  right  moment.  Note.  One  of  our  Saxon,  Kings
called  Ethelred  the  Unready.  The  subject  then,  punctuality  and  promptitude
in   duties,  whether  secular  or  sacred.

I.  Certain  rules  which  are  indispensable  if  this  is  to  be  our  characteristic  and
babit.  (a)  Not  to  undertake  too  much  work,  grasp  at  more  engagements  than  there  is
a  reasonable  likelihood  of  being  able  to  accomplish.  (6)  Endeavour  by  forethough
to  make  the  most  of  every  hour.  Wise  arrangement  makes  work  easier  and  the  day
longer,  just  as  careful  packing  makes  a  box  contain  twice  as  much,  etc.  (c)  Must
he  no  indolent  procrastination  or  giving  away  before  little  difficulties.  Keep
ourselves  masters  of  circumstances.  Examples.  (1)  Eliezer  of  Damascus  sent  to
seek  a  wife  for  Isaac.  What  deliberation  !  What  concentration  of  aim !  What
promptitude  !  (2)  Nehemiah  building  the  ruined  wall  of  Jerusalem.  Whatso-
ever thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  all  thy  might!

The  benefits  of  this  ordering  of  time  various  and  great.  Makes  what  we  do
likely  to  be  well  done,  saves  time,  conscience,  temper,  etc.

II.  Apply  the  principle  to  some  things  in  detail,  e.g.  the  matter  of  personal
salvation.  Every  other  interest  should  be  made  to  stand  aside  as  a  "  grand
impertinence"  until  the  man  "  has  given  heed  to  the  things  of  his  peace."

Assuming  the  supreme  interest  has  been  cared  for.  (1)  There  are  certain  duties
which  regularly  fall  to  he  performed  by  us,  and  which  maybe  described  as  the  work  of
every  day^  recur  almost  as  regularly  as  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun,  or  the
ebbing  and  flowing  of  the  ocean  tides,  (a)  The  duties  of  our  stated  secular
vocation.  Daily  summoned  anew  in  these  to  serve  God.  Whatever  ye  do,  in
word  or  deed,  etc.  (Col.  iii.  17).  Paul  exemplified  his  own  rule,  preaching  Christ,
and  making  tents  at  Corinth.  The  Christian  disciple  may  find  in  every  hour  of
his  daily  toil—

**  Room  to  deny  himself,  a  road
To  bring  him  daily  nearer  God.**

(6)  The  more  direct  exercises  of  religion,  especially  secret  devotion,  prayer,
reading  of  God's  Word,  etc.

(2)  There  is  another  class  of  special  duties  appropriate  to  particular  times  and
circumstances,  which  may  be  said  to  grow  out  of  them,  (a)  ''  The  weekly  rest  of
the  Lord's  day,"  (b)  **  Last  will  and  testament."  Saves  family  discord.  Do  it  at
once.  The  work  of  the  day  should  be  done  in  the  day.  (c)  Reconciliation  with
friend  or  brother.  Be  magnanimous,  "not  in  rest,"  until  you  have  finished  the
thing  this  day.'*  {d)  Warning  friend  gradually  coming  under  evil  habits,  (e)
Succouring  the  widow,  speaking  a  seasonable  word  for  those  who  are  struggling.
Make  haste  I     To-morrow  may  be  too  late.     Finish  the  thing  this  day.

There  are  opportunities  for  doing  good,  which,  if  allowed  to  pass  unimproved,
can  never  return.  It  is  often  now  or  never.  Other  chances  or  ways  may  be
presented,  but  this  particular  service  never  again.  The  disciples  in  Gethsemane
lost  a  golden  opportunity.  Hence  Christ's  words  of  disappointment,  *'  Sleep  on
now,"  etc.  So  with  our  words  of  warning  and  acts  of  goodness.  If  omitted,
the  opportunity  will  never  return.     Oh,  sad  neglect !  cruel  procrastmatioa  1—

"Make  haste  0  man  to  live,
Thy  time  is  almost  o'er  ;
O  sleep  not,  d  earn  not,  but  arise-^
The  Judge  is  at  the  door."

"What  could  she  now  do  better  than  to  sit  and  all  the  toil  of  men  and  angels  were  jointly

still,  resigning  herselt   to  the   proviMen  e  of  eaipl  y.  d  to  bring  them  about." — Lmvson.
God.     Things  that  will  happ  n  cannot  he  pre-  "  We  live  one  day  at  a  time.     God  has  but

vented  by  our  utmost  solicitude.     Thm^.-j  not  laid  np.m  us  the  burden  of  one  day.     If  we

appointed  will  never  take  place  if  ail  the  care,  will  attend  to  daily  duty  and  daily  devotion,

164


CHAP.  IV.  1—10.        UOMILETIC     COMMEISTAhY:  RUTH


if  we  will  do  the  thing  He  commands,  though  good   time   for    anytbinjsj.      They   apj/ear  to

not  knovvinjj:  whither  they  may  tend,  or  how  have  put  the  clock  of  iheir  time  ten  minutes

they  will  br  nt?  about  good,  lie  will  see  to  the  too  Lite  for  life." — [lam  /ton.

issue." — Li/nch.  "  Tlie  road  of  by-and-by  leads  to  the  tovvn

"  D.  fer  nothing  till  to-morrow  that  may  as  of    ni?ver.        That    which    the   fool   do'^s   in

well  be  done  to-day,  either  for  yourselves  or  the  end  the  "ise  n)an  doea  in  the  bi ginning  "

for  your  friends.     '  Who  knows  what  a  day  — S/iawsh  Proverbs.

will  bring  frth?'     It  i^  Sidd  of  Richard  IL  ••Have  }0U  ever  seen  those  marble  statues

that  he  lost  his  crown  and  lifo  by  being  a  day  in  some  ])ub!ic  square  or  g;irden,  which  art

too '>ite  in  coming  to  join  his  army  in  Wales."  has   so   fashioned   into  a  perennial   fountain,

— Lawson.  that  through  the  lips  or  through  the  hands

*•  It  would  be  well  if  this  testimony  could  the  clear  water  flows  in  a  perpetnHl  stream,  on

always  be  borne  to  us,  that  we  would  not  be  and  on  for  ever;  and  the  niaiblo  stands  there

in  rest  till  we  had  fulfilled  the  duty  th  it  was  — passive,  cold-makingj   no   effort  to  arrest

once  fairly  laid  before  us.'" — Macartney.  the  gliding  water.     It  is  so  that  Time  flows

"It  is  a  comfort  to  have  dealings  with  such  through  the  hands  of  men  ....  so  that  the

men  [as  Boaz].     They  do  not  promise  and  destiny  of  nine  men  out  of  ten  accomplishes

forget  to  perform,  but   are  men  of   honour,  itself  slipping  away  from  them,  aimless,  use-

8trai,zhtforward,  energetic,  doing  we  1,  while  less,  till  it  is  too  late." — Robertson.

other    dilatory    people    would    be    dreaming  "  No  rest  until  work  be  done,  until  dutv  be

about  it" — Bradtn.  fulfilled  I     Then  rest  can  never  be  ours  here.

**  There  are  some  men  who  are  never  in  but  yonder,  for  here  work  is  never  done." — B.


■4««-


CHAPTER  IV.
THE   GO  EL   AT   THE   GATE.

Contents. — Boaz  in  the  prese  ce  of  the  elders  of  Beth/eh  fern  obtains  the  right  of  redeeminq
the  inheritance  of  the  dead  Elimelech.  Anna  the  acclamations  and  conyi  atulations  of  the  people
at  the  ga'e,  he  publicly  takes  Ruth  to  he  his  wife.  Obed  is  born,  and  the  generations  of  Pharez
ar%  traced  as  jar  downuuard  as  David,

VERSES   1-10.

Critical  and  Exfgetical  Notes. — Ver.  1.  Then  went  Boaz  up.  Bethlehem  situated  on  a
hill,  while  the  cornfields  and  threshing  floor  would  be  in  the  valley  below  [cf.  on  ii.  4,  p.  101,
also  p.  6.]  The  gate.  The  place  of  resort  where  business  was  transacted.  I  have  seen  in  cer-
tain places,  Joppa  for  example,  the  Kady  and  his  Court  sitting  at  the  entrance  of  the  gate
hearing  and  adjudicating  all  sorts  of  causis  in  the  audience  of  all  that  went  in  and  out  thereat
{Thomson).  And  sat.  IStone  seats  would  be  there.  The  attitude  expressive  of  deliberation.
Eastern  people  are  never  in  a  hurry  at  such  times.  The  judgts  sat  in  the  g^tes  that  the  coun-
try people  might  not  be  compelled  to  enter  the  cities  and  so  suffer  detriment  {Lange).  Aud
behold.  Set  lorth  as  with  a  starry  note  {Trapp).  Possibly  calls  attention  to  the  fortunate
coincidence  or  Providence  of  the  thing.  Lange  thinks  Boaz  came  early  not  to  mijs  his  man.
Ho  such  a  one.  Kpvt^u  hidden  one  (LXX).  Conveys  the  itiea  of  his  being  kept  anonymous
purposely.  The  Hebrew  words  peloni  al/noni  are  derived  from  palah  to  distinguish,  to  point
out,  and  alam  to  conceal  (Gesfn  58,  677),  and  signify  a  person  who  is  pointed  out,  but  whose
name  is  concealed  (Wordsworth).  At  piesent  any  anonymous  donor  to  the  synagogue  funds
is  habitually  s  yled  ''Almoni  Peloni  "  (^Piccioito).  The  name  of  the  kinsman  was  Toh(Miu7as/i).
Impossible  (Lange).

Ver.  2.  And  he  took  ten  men.  So  Abraham  bargained  for  a  plnce  of  sepulchre  in  the  field
of  Maclipelah,  in  the  presfiiee  of  those  who  stood  at  the  gate  of  Hebron  (Gen.  xxiii.  17,  18).
Possibly  ten  were  chos*  n  because  it  was  a  perfect  number.  The  requisite  number  for  a  local
court  of  magistracy  ( Groser).  In  later  days  ten  men  were  needed  to  form  a  worshipping
a«sombly  in  the  synagogue  (Ibid),  Of  the  elders  of  the  city.  Elderly  persons  of  the  city
(MoribOn).

Ver.  3.  And  he  said  unto  the  kinsman  [redeemer.]  The  narrator  again  avoids  using  the
name,  though  there  is  little  doubt  it  must  have  been  known.

Naomi  that  is  come  ag^iu.  The  A'tieni^ms  had  a  law,  that  no  woman  should  be  permitted
to  plead  her  own  cause.  The  custom  of  all  Eastern  nations  lay  in  the  same  direction.  Selleth
[sold]  a  parcel  of  land.  Rather,  hath  sold  (  Wordstoorth,  Lange,  Wright).  Naomi  had
already  sold  her  interest  in  the  land  during  the  terms  of  years  that  intervened  between  the
date  of  sale  and  the  year  of  jubilee,  when  the  lund  would  revert  to  the  representatives  of
Elimelech  ;  and  the  nearest  of  kin  could  [only]  gam  iiuinediate  possession  by  re«Jeeiiiing  it,

165


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:  RUTh.       chap  iv.  1—10.


that  is,  by  payins:  the  worth  of  the  land  diirins:  the  term  of  years  which  still  remained  to  the
jubilee  (  Wordsworth).  Sbe  had  mortgaged  her  own  and  Ruth's  li^e  interest  in  the  land
(Bradpn).  'I'hat,  contrary  to  the  opinum  of  the  earlier  commentators,  a  widow  could  do  this
— see  Lange  in  Ico.  Probable  that  Kliiiielech  had  Rold  his  interest  before  he  went  info  the
land  of  Moab  {Elliot').  Jn  this  case,  the  reversionary  interest  of  Ruth,  as  the  widow  of  Mahhm,
would  have  to  be  purchased  by  the  next  of  kin,  as  well  as  the  life  interest  of  Naomi  {Ibid).
Others  think  that  the  destitution  of  the  widows  arose,  not  from  havin;^  lost  their  property,
but  from  their  inability  to  turn  it  to  a  profitable  account.  Morison  viuws  the  use  of  the  per-
fect here  as  expressing;  such  an  unalterable  determination  to  sell  the  land,  that  it  mav  be  looked
upon  as  already  accomplished,  and  translates  "  lias  resolved  to  sell,"  80  Drusius,Vatable,€tc.
*•  Offers  for  sale"  (Luther,  Coverdale).  She  may  have  put  up  the  land  for  sale,  for  the  express
purpose  of  putting  the  law  in  motion,  and  compelling  her  kinsman  to  redeem  it  {Cox).  Our
brother  Elimelech's.  Or  kincmtin  Elimelech's.  Ihe  word  not  to  be  interpreted  in  a  strict  sense
[cf.  on  11.  1  Grit,  and  Exeg.  JSotes.  p.  89.]

Ver.  4.  And  I  thought  to  aclveitise  the — Dctf^rmined  to  inform  thoe  (Lavgr).  Lit.,  I  said  [
will  uncover  ihine  ear  ;  cnroKaXvcixo  to  ovg  gov  (LXX.),  by  lifting  up  the  hair  which  covers  it  [cp.
1  Sam.  ix.  15  ;  2  Sam  vii.  27]  (  [Vordsworth).  Buy  it  before  the  iubabitauts.  In  the  presence
of  those  sitting  here  (LXX.  Vulg.  Syr.  Arab).  So  also  Langp,  Wordsworth,  etc.  If  thou
wilt  not  redeem  it.  The  Text.  Recept.  reads,  "  If  he  will  not.  The  common  reading  is  sup-
ported by  Schmidt,  Lan<:e,  Carpzov,  Keil,  etc.,  and  is  more  natural.  So  fifty  MSS.  in  Kenni-
cott  (  Wordsworth).  And  he  said,  I  will  redeem.  Suiuvg  lie  had  the  ability.  Would  add  to  his
own  estate  to  procure  the  poperty  of  the  dead  Elimelech.  Supposed  he  would  only  have  to
pay  Naomi  a  cer'ain  annual  allowance  till  her  dearh,  and  the  inlieritance  would  pass  to  hiui  as
the  lawful  heir  {Stael^.  and  T<  rru  )

Ver.  6.  Thou  must  buy  [thou  buy  est]  it  also  of  Ptuth.  Must  take  the  widow  of  Mahlon  who  had
a  claim  upon  the  land.  The  children  born  of  such  a  marriage  would  mherit  the  state,  to  the
exclusion  of  childi en  by  an  enrlier  wife.  Would  stand  as  the  direct  descendants  of  Mahlon,
and  be  called  by  his  name.  The  Moahitess.  Here  was  the  ditiiciilty,  and  Boaz  presents  it
thus  fairly  and  delicately.  The  goel  does  not  lay  hoi  1  of  the  fact  that  the  law  against  marri-
age with  a  Moabitess,  if  such  existed  [cf.  on  1  4J  may  have  been  suspended  because  Kuth  had
cast  in  her  lot  with  Israel.

Ver.  6.  I  cannot.  Means  I  will  not  for  certain  reasons  [ver.  4],  The  Targum  says  he  had  a
wife  and  children.  Lest  I  mar  [injure]  mine  own  inheritance.  By  spending  time  and  atten-
tion besides  money  upon  that  wtiicu  w.)uld  reverr,  to  the  name  and  estate  of  another.  This
possibly  only  an  excuse.  The  true  reas'on  found  in  his  superstitious  fears.  Thinks  he  ought
not  to  take  into  his  house  a  woman  marriage  with  whom  has  already  been  visited  with  the
extinguishment  [according  to  popular  ideas]  of  a  family  in  Israel  {Lanye).

Ver.  7.  Now  this  was  the  manner  in  former  times  concerning  &c.  Formerly  in  cases  of
redemption  and  exchange  {Laoge).  That  i«  in  every  tjarj^ain  this  was  done.  Shews  that  consider-
able time  must  have  elapsed  between  the  events  recorded  and  the  writitig  of  the  story.  An  old
custom  has  fallen  into  partial  disuse  in  the  meantime  [cf.  Intro,  p.  4],  A  man  plucked  off  his
shoe  and  gave  it  to  his  neighbour.  A  man  pulled  otf  nis  shoe  and  ga^e  it  to  the  otiniv{Lange).
In  acknowledgement  that  he  to  whom  the  shoe  was  ^ivea  mighc  tread  and  own  where  ne
the  seller  had  previously  stood  as  owner.  The  shoe  is  the  symbol  (1)  of  motion  and  wandering,
(2)  of  rest  and  possession  {Lange).  When  the  p-odigal  is  reinscated,  he  has  shoes  put  on  his
feet  (Luke  xv.  22)  (cf.  also  Kx.  lii.  5  ;  Eph.  vi.  15).

Ver.  8.  So  he  drew  off  his  shoe,  i.e  ,  the  kinsman  drew  it  off,  and  so  surrenders  all  claims.  The
woman  had  the  right  in  ordinary  cases  to  pluck  the  shoe  off  herself  and  spit  in  the  face  of  the
kinsman — a  great  dishonour  [cf.  Deut.  xxv.  7].  This  shews  that  the  present  case  was  looked
upon  as  exceptional.  When  an  Arab  divorces  his  wile,  he  sajs  of  her,  '•  She  was  my  slipper  and
1  cast  her  oft',"  ( Thomson).

Ver.  9.  And  Boaz  said.  He  addresses  the  elders  in  their  representative  character.  Under  the
theocracy  the  principle  of  representation  was  early  carried  out  {E.  Pric-<).  Possibly  a  pause  follows
V.  8,  during  which  Naomi  and  Ruth  may  have  been  bron^lit  upcm  the  scene.  Ye  are  witnesses.
Settled  deeds  of  compact  in  our  modern  sense  not  used  or  needed.  Enough,  in  a  simple  tnimi.
tive  age,  that  a  solemn  transaction  should  be  committed  to  the  memory  of  the  people  {E  Pri>  e).
I  have  bought  [acquit ed]  all  that  w.as,  etc.  The  three  dead  relatives  ara  mentioned  with  legal
precision  and  particularity,  although  no  mention  is  anywhere  made  of  Orpah's  claim,  whiclj,  m
contradistinction  to  Ruths,  is  looked  upon  as  fortVite  1  or  lapsed,  if  it  ever  existed.  Of  the  baud
of  Naomi.  Evidently  looked  upon  as  heir  to  the  property  now  her  sons  are  dead.  To  us3  a
modern  legal  phrase,  she  was  consideied  as  a  trustee  unt  I  the  birth  of  a  male  child  {E.  Price).

Ver.  10.  Ruth  the  Moabitess.  Dent,  xxiii.  3.  refers  to  malts,  not  to  women  {KeU,  E.  Price)^
as  with  Canaanitish  women  [Deut.  vii  3].  Have  I  purchased.  Acquired  {Lange).  Means  to
obtain,  to  acquire,  wh'ch  may  be  do.ie  ma  variety  of  ways,  ihe  use  of  the  wO;d  "purchased
unfortunate  {Ibid).  To  raise  up  the  name.  etc.  A  Hebraism  signifying  the  continuance  of  the
relation  he  had  sustained  in  the  geneaio^^y  of  his  tribe  (E.  Price).  Erom  v.  21  it  would  seem  as
though  popular  opinion  were  too  stron-^ly  in  favour  of  Uoaz  to  allow  the  usual  law  to  come  in  to
operation.  The  gate  of  his  place.  iiiC  Cualdee  reads, "  tbe  sauheanm  of  his  place,"  intioducing
a  later  idea  (E.  Price)*

166


CHAF.  IV.  1—5.        HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:   RUTH.


VERSE     1—5.

Theme — Friends  in  Council.

"And  next  the  valley  is  the  hill  aloft,
And  next  the  da»ke  riiabt  is  the  glad  morro«f,
And  also  joy  is  next  the  fine  of  sorrow." — Chaucer^

Then  went  Boaz  up  to  the  gate.

The  interesting  and  fascinating  story  draws  near  to  its  proper  conclusion.
Ruth's  virtue  has  been  seen  "  in  all  the  gate  "  ;  now  her  reward  and  recompense
nre  to  be  as  plainly  apparent  there.  Another, — a  goel,  a  redeemer  has  under-
taken to  peri'oim  the  duties  which  fall  upon  him.  Note.  (1)  Here  is  an  image  of
the  final  perseverance  of  the  saints.  Continuing  first,  then  crowned  afterwards,
steadfast  under  discipline  and  temptation,  then  to  be  owned  of  Christ,  and
niauilested  to  all  as  His  own  in  the  day  of  His  glory  (Rev.  iii.  5,  etc.).  (2)  Here
is  a  picture  and  illustration  of  virtue  triumphant  true  to  all  ages.  After  humilia-
tion, exaltation,  after  the  bitter,  sweet,  after  mourning,  joy.  So  with  Joseph  iu
Ejijpt,  Moses,  David,  etc.

it  is  not  Ruth,  however,  so  much  who  claims  attention  for  the  present,  as  her
goel  intent  on  her  behalf.  We  have  seen  Boaz  *' diligent  in  business  (ii.  4,  iii.
2),  fervent  iu  spirit"  (ii.  4,  12),  courteous  (ii.  4),  quick  to  perceive  goodness  in
others  (ii.  11,  iii.  lO,  11),  ready  to  encourage  and  commend  it  (ii.  12,  iii.  10),
generous  and  hospitable  (ii.  8,  9,  14  16,  iii.  15),  wise  and  circumspect,  aud  having
his  own  spirit  under  couiplete  control,  in  what  otherwise  might  have  been  the
liour  of  temptation  (iii.  10-14),  acting  always  as  in  the  presence  of  God.  And
here  we  are  to  see  him  as  possessing  other  qualities,  which  go  to  make  up  the
hero,  and  the  true  man,  one  commanding  respect  not  less  by  his  moral  earnest-
ness and  diligence  than  by  his  wealth  and  social  rank.  We  follow  him  to  the
gate  and  see  him  among  his  peers,  evidently  received  as  few  men  in  Bethlehem
would  be.

I.  This  is  how  business  should  be  attended  to.

(1)  Speedily.     The  man  is  in  earnest,  "  will  not  rest  until  he  has  finished

the  thino^."     Gets  up  early  to  catch  his  man  [see  Crit.  and  Exeg.  III.
15,  p.  160].

(2)  Expeditiously.   Will  finish  it  before  the  day  is  over  [see  on  III.  18,  p.  164].

All  that  has  ever  been  said  in  praise  of  the  diligent  may  be  said  of
Boaz  here.

(3)  Righteously.     In  the  spirit  of  candour  and  fair  dealing.     Hence  he  seeks

the  advice  of  friends ;   "  the  Council  at  the  gate."     Conceals  nothing,
overstates  nothing,  speaks  apparently  without  bias.     In  few  and  tit
words  he  propounds  the  cause  and  brings  it  to  an  issue  {2'rapp).     Note.
(a)  That  a  true  and  right  result  may  be  obtained  in  this  simple  honour-
able way.     Crooked  courses  are  not  always  the  best  courses.     (6)  An
example  of  the  right  use  of  arbitration  which  might  often  be  followed
with  advantage.     The  justice  may  be  administered   in  a  rough  and
ready  way  to  our  Western  ideas,  but  it  is  justice  none  the  less  that  is
sought  and  obtained.     And  the  decision  arrived  at  will  be  solemnly
ratitied  as  in  the  sight  of  God.
Note. — (a)  Tliat  which  is  done  with  the  heart  is  done  with   cheerfulness  and
readiness.     Love  lends  wings  to  the  feet,  and  strength  to  the  hands,  and  per-
Buasive  eloquence  to  the  tongue.     So  witti  Boaz  in  the  chapter  before  us.     Duty
and  affection  alike  urge  him.    {b)  When  God  appoints  ^  he  prospers  and  gives  wisdom
in  the  direction  of  the  affair.     How  much  there  is  to  be  admired  in   the   way
Boaz  proceeds    to   settle   this   delicate  affair   once  and  for  all.     Aud  as    if  the
Divine  favour  is  to  rest  upon  him  at  once,  the  man  he  seeks  and  upon  whom
everything  depends  comes  by  as  soon  as  the  business  is  fairly  set  afloat   [On
Seemmg  Chances,  Real  Providences,  see  II.  3^  p.  95-6].

167


HOMILETIC    COAJ^UENTAHY:   RUTH.         chap.  iv.  1—5.


(4)  An  honourable  man's  dealings  while  'perfectly  franlc  and  open  are  not  to  he
deficient  in  wise  circumspection.  Boaz  having  to  do  with  a  wily  world-
ling deals  warily  with  him  (Trapp").  Tells  him  first  of  the  land,  and
then  of  the  wife  that  mast  go  along  with  it  {Ibid).  The  man  of  God
is  to  be  wise  as  well  as  harmless  in  his  dealings  with  men.
II.  This  is  how  difficult  affairs  should  be  settled,  delicate  claims  adjusted,
fair  rights  allowed  and  satisfied.

(1)  Openly  and  pub'icly.     That  is  unless  scrupulous  justice  can  be  adminis-

tered privately  in  a  better  way.  The  rights  between  man  and  man
must  not  be  left  to  chance  or  fraud.  Note,  (a)  Greed  and  rapacity
flourish  best  in  secret  Naturally  seek  to  hide  their  deeds.  Honest
men  can  bear  and  covet  the  light.  (6)  The  Jountains  of  justice  are  best
kept  pure  by  being  constantly  open  to  public  inspection.

(2)  By  the  advice  of  wise  men.     We  have  here  an  old  world  picture  of  a  city

council.  (a)  Abundance  of  witnesses  to  attest  the  proceedings,  (6)  of
counsellors  to  give  advice,  (c)  of  judges  to  determine  difficulties.  *•  In
the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses "  every  word  would  *'  be  estab-
lished ;  *'  while  **  in  the  multitude  of  counsellors "  there  would  be
*'  safety."  Notice  again  they  were  the  choice  men  of  the  city  —  aged,
experienced — elderly  men  upon  whom  devolved  the  conducting  of
affairs  in  Bethlehem.  Note.  Age  and  experience  give  weight  to  advice
and  decisions.

(3)  Calmly  and  deliberately.     They  sat  down.     Undue  haste  to  be  depre-

cated in  conducting  important  affairs  like  these.

(4)  With  care  and  exactitude.  Business  should  be  done  ia  a  business-like
manner,  not  only  to  make  provision  against  defects  in  integrity,  but
also  to  prevent  difficulties  arising  from  failures  in  memory,  &c.  Note.
A  Scripture  precedent  here  for  scrupulous  exactness  in  transactions  like
these,  transactions  involving  questions  of  property.  You  have  the  wis-
dom, dignity  and  grave  deliberation,  the  solemn  careful  procedure  such
a  case  demanded

III  This  is  the  way  the  affairs  of  the  destitute  and  needy  especially  should
be  attended  to.  All  this  for  two  poor  widows  !  Yes,  but  this  is  the  public  cai^e.
"The  poor  ye  have  always  with  you."  It  was  no  personal  concern  of  these  elders
and  yet  they  gave  time  and  attention  to  it,  and  that  readily.  Note.  Thus  early  in
human  histoty  the  claims  of  the  weak  were  recognised  and  responded  to  publicly.
Christ  answers  the  question  so  often  asked  as  to  *'  Who  is  responsible?"  in  the
parable  of  the  Good  Samaritan.  So  the  Apostle,  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,
&c.  ]  Look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  &c.  (Phil,  ii,  4).

E.  Price  on  this :    Theme. — Respkct  for  Property.

The  modern  war  against  property  can  never  be  justified  by  the  far-seeing  Laws
of  Moses.  And,  of  course,  Boaz  would  hold  himself  bound  to  observe  them,  as
here  illustrated.

1.  He  conforms  to  the  letter  of  the  enactment  as  for  as  possible.

2.  He  avows  the  fact  publicly  :  before  the  elders  and  the  people.

3.  He  evokes  the  coutirmatory  act  of  adequate  witnesses.

4.  He,  nevertheless,  is  careful  in  stating  his  claims  in  order  to  enforce  his
full  rights.

Observe  then,  how  it  was  through  the  sanctified  '  property  *  the  hopes  of  the  world
were  met,  in  the  advent  of  the  Messiah.  And  (2)  how  the  observance  of
righteous  rules  respecting  this  *  property,'  restricts  no  man's  real  liberty.

**  The  gates  of  ancient  cities  played  many  sively  built,  with  recessed  chambers  or  divans

parts  :    they    were  guard-houses ;    they   were  in  the  sides,    and  often  with   chambers   also

markets,  they  were   courts   of  justice  ;    they  above  the  arch.     Here  the  inhabitants  of  the

were  places  for  public  deUberation  and  audi-  city  were  wont  to    assemble,   either  for   the

ence.    Necessarily,  therefore,  they  were  mas-  transactiou  of  business  or  to  hear  and  tell  the

166


CflAP.  IV.  6.


nOMlLETIC    COMMENTARY :    RUTH,


Dews.  Here  the  judges  sat  and  administered
justice  to  all  comers.  Here  even  kings  came
to  give  audiprct"  to  other  kinrs,  or  to  the  r
am!  asadors  Some  f.  int  n  semblance  to  these
ancient  gates  may  bt'  found  In  the  structures
called  *  Bars,'  in  London  and  Southampton,
though  these  modern  gates  are  much  smaller
than  their  ancient  prototypes;  aud  some  faint
reminiscence  of  their  character  as  seats  of
judicial  and  royal  autlority  in  the  titles
Sublime  Porte,  or  the  Ottoman  Porte — p  rre
meaning  gate — by  which  the  Government  of
Turkey  is  still  de^ignated." — Cox,

"  Boa*  was  worthy  of  the  confidence  reposed
in  him.  He  at  once  Bd  k»  the  nearer  kinpman,
and  brings  the  matter  to  a  decided  is'jue.
How  many  an  hour  of  bitter  anxiey,  of  sus-
pense— a  form  of  anguish  harder  to  bear  than
the  certainty  of  dis^appointment  —  have  the
unhappy  to  undergo,  simply  because  those  who
have  undertaken  their  cause,  gratulating  them-
selves on  the  benevolence  of  their  intentions
8  em  to  think  that,  if  they  accomplish  the
service,  the  time  and  manner  are  of  no  im-
portance, but  that  in  these  they  may  suit  their
own  convenience.  If,  like  Boaz,  we  would
judge  the  fatherless,  and  plead  for  the  widow,
let  us,  like  him,  *  not  be  in  rest  until  we  have
finished  the  thing.'" — Macartney.

*'  'Behold  an  Israelite  indeed, in  whom  is  no
guile  1 '  He  knew  the  preference  which  both
Naomi  and  Ruth  had  for  himself  ;  he  was  con-
scious too  that  he  no  longer  regarded  with
indifference  this  beautiful  daughter  of  Moab,
who  had  'come  to  trust  beneath  Jehovah's
wings ; '  nor  was  he  nn willing  to  paj  even


more  for  the  redemption  of  the  inheritance
than  this  nearest  kinsman  But  he  'would
not  go  beyond  or  defraud  his  brother,'  or  in
the  least  take  advantage  either  of  his  ignor-
ance or  of  Ruths  preference.  All  was  open
and  above-boaid.  His  fine  sense  of  honour
was  not  blunted  either  by  covet ou.sness  or  by
inclination,  nor  would  his  conscience  allow
him,  even  when  seeking  a  good  and  generous
end,  to  have  recouise  to  sharj)  p-actice.  Here
is  that  'clear  and  round  dealing  which  is  the
hon(  ur  of  man's  nature.'  *' — Thomson.

*' Aris  ides  being  judge  b  tween  private
persons,  one  of  them  declared  that  his  adver-
sary had  greatly  injured  Aristides.  *  Relate
rather,  good  friend,'  said  he  interrupting  him,
*  what  wrong  he  hath  done  thee,  for  it  is  thy
cause  not  mine,  that  I  now  sit  judge  of.'
Being  desired  by  Simonides,  the  poet,  who  had
a  cause  to  try  before  him,  to  stretch  a  point  in
his  favour,  he  replied  :  '  As  you  would  not  be
a  good  poet  if  your  lines  ran  contrary  to  the
just  measures  and  rules  of  your  art ;  so  neither
should  I  be  a  good  judge  or  an  honest  man  if
I  decided  aught  in  opposition  to  law  and
justice." — Percy  Anecdotes.

"  There  then  is  the  court  of  justice.  How
simple !  How  primitive  !  No  lawyers  and
expensive  forms  ;  no  long  rhetorical  argu-
ments ;  but  a  quiet  deliberative  meeting,  in
which  the  persons  concerned  'sit'  and  talk
over  the  whole  affair.  Perhaps  many  a
tangled  matter  would  soon  come  out  straight,
many  a  dispute  be  quickly  settled,  if  at  first
people  would  submit  it  to  some  such  Board  of
Arbitration."— .^racfew.


VERSE   6.
Theme, — ^A  Shortsighted  Policy  and  its  Merited  OBUYioa^


**  Despite  those  titles,  power  and  pelf,
The  wretch,  concentred  all  in  self.
Living  shall  forfeit  fair  renown,
And,  doubly  dying,  shaU  go  down
To  the  vile  dust  from  whence  he  spmng,
Unwept,  unhonoured  and  unsung." — Scott,

I  cannot  redeem  it  for  myself,  lest  I  mar  mine  own  inherttanee^

The  kinsman's  conduct  here  stands  out  as  a  contrast  for  all  time  with  that
of  Boaz.  Are  we  wrong  in  seeing  in  him  an  example  of  the  mean  equivocating
worldling  ]  When  it  is  a  question  of  the  land  (ver.  4)  he  will  redeem,  but  when
it  is  a  question  of  the  law  which  binds  him  to  succour  the  widow  as  well  as  take
possession  of  the  land,  he  hesitates.  He  stands  as  a  representative  of  that  large
class  who  say  *'  I  cannot  "  to  every  appeal.  Note  (a)  Something  will  always  come
in  to  hinder  from  the  path  of  duty  if  ive  will  allow  it.  *'  A  lion  in  every  street."  No
man  ever  equivocated,  or  prevaricated  in  such  a  moment  but  the  devil  helped
him  to  a  sufficient  and  plausible  excuse.  (6)  We  may  miss  or  misuse  the  one
opportunity  in  life.  This  man  did  so  undoubtedly.  May  be  profitable  to  look,
L  At  fome  of  the  probable  reasons  for  his  action.

(I)  A  prejudice,  and  belief  in  a  common  superstition.     Ruth  a  Moabitess.     In
Israel   marriage  with   the  daughter  of  au  alien  race  was  held  to  be

169


HOMILETIC    C0MMEj\/AR1      RUTH.  CUAI   1%   6.


"  unlucky "  even  when  it  was  lawful  {Cox).  No  doubt,  the  popular
voice  affirmed  that  Mahlon  and  Chilion  were  cut  off  before  their  time
because  they  married  strange  women  (^Ihid.)  How  superstitious  fear
rides  some  men  against  the  plainest  dictates  of  reason  !  It  needs  a
strong  mind,  a  truly  noble  spirit  to  shake  off  the  control  of  popular
opinion,  to  say  nothing  of  popular  superstition.  No  matter  that
Ruth's  virtues  are  known  "  in  all  the  gate."  That  shadowy,  impal-
pable, intangible  something  which  fear  conjures  up  in  the  hearts  of  so
many  comes  in  probably  to  decide  the  question.

(2)  Selfish  regard  for  his  own  inheritance.     Every  way  the  thing  must  have

seemed  undesirable  to  such  a  man,  indeed  to  most  men.  Ruth  was
poor,  so  was  Naomi,  and  he  must  take  charge  of  both — a  double  burden.
If  an  heir  should  be  born,  he  would  be  called  by  the  name  of  Mahlon, —
if  more  children,  the  inheritance  would  have  to  be  divided  among
many.  A  shrewd,  selfish  man  would  be  sure  to  say  "  No  "  under  such
circumstances,  and  the  unnamed  kinsman  seems  to  have  been  such,
(a)  Took  no  care  (b)  made  no  enquiries  about  the  widows  until  forced
to  do  so  thus  publicly.  A  type  of  those  who  fear  trouble  and  so  say
nothing.  Let  wrong  continue,  fraud,  want,  &c.,  multiply  and  go  on
their  way  as  if  they  were  neither  responsible  to  God  or  man.  Note  on
the  other  hand  a  danger  from  excess  either  way.  Some  will  have  to  say
at  last  ''  They  made  me  keeper  of  the  king's  vineyard,  but  mine  own
vineyard  have  I  not  kept.^'  No  man  is  asked  to  neglect  his  own  affairs,
to  their  serious  detriment.

(3)  Want  of  a  chivalrous  and  heroic  spirit.  This  the  secret  of  all  else.  The
duty  was  clear,  but  the  man  was  living  in  that  state  when  duty  is  only
felt  as  a  burden.  Of  course  there  were  difficulties,  but  they  were  just
of  that  kind  that  a  true  unselfish  man,  would  be  delighted  to  overcome.
Possibly  the  man  was  a  just  mau  according  to  his  lights  (Oox).  May
have  honestly  doubted  whether  he  was  bound  to  marry  Mahlon's
Moabitish  widow.  Probably  one  of  those  cautious,  common-place  souls,
who  fail  under  severe  tests,  and  in  critical  moments,  when  the  law
seems  doubtful,  and  prudence  can  only  discuss  the  question  from  a
selfish  standpoint,  and  who  fail  just  /or  want  of  that  larger  vision,
which  looks  at  the  spirit,  not  at  the  letter.  So  Orpah  failed  where  Ruth
triumphed  [cf.  on  I  14  p.  53  ;  also  on  p.  60].  So  Lot  was  led  to  the
land  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  while  Abraham  remained  with  God  to
receive  the  promises  (Gen.  xiii.  10 — 17).  So  the  kinsman  as  contrasting
with  Boaz.  So  the  **  child  of  sense  "  always  as  contrasting  with  the
child  of  the  spirit.  Note  !  TJte  reluctance  and  inability  of  the  mere
natural  man  to  undertake  and  effect  the  work  of  doing  and  suffering
(  Word:sworth).

Look  II.  At  some  of  the  certain  results  of  his  action.

His  name  is  studiously  avoided  in  the  Scriptures,  simply  called  "  such  a  one,"
almost  an  epithet  of  contempt.  Note.  There  is  an  over -cautious^  calculating
selfishness  which  misses  its  mark  by  over-shrewdness.

This  man  sought  fame  and  the  remembrance  a  large  inheritance  would  give,
and  this  is  what  he  found — feared  that  his  "  name  "  would  be  cut  off  from  Israel,
and  his  inheritance  marred,  since  his  children  would  be  called  by  the  name  of
another,  and  so  he  denied  himself  and  let  another  go  down  to  posterity  as
redeemer.  Curious  he  is  unnamed  in  the  very  book  which  recounts  his  story.  We
know  him  simply  as  the  "anonymous  kinsman"  (Cox).  His  miserable,  narrow
policy  brought  its  own  defeat,  while  Boaz,  who  had  no  such  selfish  desire  or
ambition,  lives  in  the  pages  of  inspiration  as  the  ancestor  of  Christ  Himself.
Note.  A  principle  in  this.  Impossible  that  men  should  live  both  for  the  present
and  future,  in  many  senses.  The  immediate  policy  often  seems  best  when  it  is  a
370


CHAP.  IV.  6.


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    RUTH.


selfish  one,  a  narrow,  degraded  one.    But  wait !    True,  men  exist  from  day  to  day

by  care  and  industry,  but  they  live  to  posterity  by  virtue  of  unselfish  and  heroic

deeds.     There  is  a  losing  the  life  which  is  a  saving   it.     Live  to  yourself  and

you  perish  with  the  present,  but  live  for  others,  and  the   memory    will   be   fresh

and  fragrant  when  you  have  passed  away.     Men  speedily  forget  everything  but

goodness.

•*  Only  the  artions  of  the  just
Smell  sweet  and  blopsom  in  the  dust.'* — Shirhy.

Impfovement.  (1)  The  desire  for  fame  natural  to  the  human  breast.  Nothing
so  wrong  in  it  after  all.  The  desire  to  leave  an  inheritance  behind  not  uncom-
ii5on — not  to  be  condemned  of  itself.  The  whole  question  is  as  to  how  the  accom-
plishment of  these  desires  is  pursued,  whether  (a)  To  the  forgetfulness  of  other
claims  and  duties  as  here  ;  (b)  To  the  neglect  of  others'  rights.  Then  be  sure  it
is  a  bhort-sighted  policy,  seen  through  by  men,  condemned  of  God  ?  Best  to  do
our  duty,  and  leave  the  question  of  fame  and  heritage,  as  everything  else,  with
Him!

(2)  **If  souls  be  made  of  earthly  mould

Let  them  love  gold  ;
If  born  on  high,
Let  them  unto  their  kindred  fly." — Herbert,

(3)  What  is  a  hard  duty  to  the  worldling  may  show  itself  a  delightful  plea-
sure to  the  good  man — to  the  man  of  God.

(4)  Lest  I  mar  mine  inheritance.  (1)  How  easy  to  do  this.  (2)  In  how
many  ways  it  may  be  done — ways  of  which  we  have  no  conception  at  the
time.  Striving  to  save  it  we  may  lose  it,  as  this  man  did.  (3)  How  many  do
this  %  {a)  Ruin  health,  (6)  lose  reputation,  (c)  make  the  estate  bankrupt,  (d)  cast
faith  aside,  etc.


"  How  very  ready  are  we  to  acknowledge
du  iea  which  are  likely  to  benefit  ourselves."
— Macartney

"  This  person  readily  owned  himself  Elime-
lechs  near  relation  and  next  kinsman,  when
the  remnant  of  his  property  was  to  be  got,
and  then  he  had  plenty  of  money  for  the
redemption  :  but  when  other  duties  were  pre-
sented to  him— when  he  was  reniii  ded  that
there  were  \vidows  to  be  cherished,  as  well  as
fields  to  be  giasped— then  he  discovered  the
danger  to  his  own  inheritance." — Macartney.

'*  This  makes  many  ^hv  of  the  great  redemp-
tion, they  are  not  willing  to  e-<pouse  religion.
Heaven  they  could  be  glad  of,  but  holiness
they  can  dispense  with  ;  it  will  not  agjee  with
the  lust  they  have  already  espoused  and
therefore  let  who  will  purchase  Heaven  at
that  rate  they  cannot." — M.  H-nry.

"When  a  man  finds  that  he  is  living  from
coni^cience,  and  not  from  trust  and  love  and
peace ;  when  he  finds  that  he  has  not  spouta
neity  nor  generous  impulses  any  more,  he
feels  that  he  is  going  down  to  the  lower  level  ;
and  he  is  asking  every  day,  "What  is  it  my
duty  to  do  ?"  He  does  not  get  any  higher
than  this.  It  is  a  sign  of  great  retrogression.
It  is  a  sign  that  a  man  has  lost  the  liberty  of
a  son  of  God.  It  is  a  sign  that  he  is  no  longer
a  friend,  but  a  servant.  He  feels  like  doing
his  duty  and  that  is  all." — Btecher.

"  Go  out  with  me  to-day  into  the  woods,
where  the  white  oak  is,  and  where  the  beech
is.  Their  kaves  died  L-st  November,  but  they
all  hang  on  the  trees  yet.  The  trees  have  not
strength  enough  to  slough  them.   They  alwayi


make  me  think  of  a  great  many  people.  Sap
does  not  run  in  them  any  more,  but  their
duties  hang  on  them  like  dead  leaves  all  over.
They  would  not  like  to  drop  their  duties  ;
they  are  not  quite  in  that  state  yet ;  but  those
duties  are  dry,  sapless,  and  enforced" — Ibid.

"  Ho,  such  a  one  I"  The  name  of  the  kins-
man who  fenred  to  mar  his  own  inheritance
is  blotted  out,  whilst  the  name  of  him  who  was
willing  to  marry  the  stranyer  and  the  outcast,
has  been  transmitted  to  honorable  remem-
brance. In  like  manner  the  name  of  the
beggar  has  been  left  on  perpefual  record,
whilst  the  name  of  the  rich  man  at  whose
gate  he  lay  has  utterly  perished." — Elliot.

"  The  Muse  of  History  does  not  trouble
herself  with  useless  names,  but  Jets  thetn  drop
into  a  congenial  oblivion,  and  if  compelled  to
record  some  facts  about  them,  uses  such  a
slightly  contemptuous  epithet — "  Such  a  one.''
A  poor  immortality  that  almost  worse  than
utter  neglect." — Braden.

'*  The  Pyramids  of  Egypt,  selfishly  reared
it  is  thouglit,  to  perpetuate  the  fame  of  the
mighty  monarchs  that  built  them,  refuse  to
whisper  their  ambitious  names  ;  but  the  poor
widow,  who,  without  thinking  of  fame,  silently
dropped  her  two  mites  into  the  temple  treasury,
and  the  we^^ping  penitent  who,  in  the  prodi-
gality of  her  great  love  anointed  the  feet  of
her  Savour  wi(h  her  precious  spikenard,  shall,
wherever  the  gospel  is  preached  to  the  end  of
time,  have  these  acts  spoken  of  for  a  mt^mo-
rial  of  them.  In  the  highest  seu'^e,  every  true
act  of  goodness  is  immortal." — Tuonison.

"  If  kinsmen  dwell  together,  and  one  of  them

171


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    RUTH.  chap.  iv.  9.


die,  and  have  no  child,  the  wife  of  the  dead  refuaeth  to  raise  up  unto  his  kinsman  a  name

shall   not     marry    outside    [i.e.   outsicie  the  in  Israel ;  he  will  not  do  the  duty  of  my  hus-

family  circle],  unto  a  stranger  ;  her  husband's  band's  kinsman. '      Thau  the  elders  of  the  city

kiiisinan  shall  go  unto  her,  and  take  her  to  shall  call  him,  and  speak  unto  him  ;  and  if  he

wife    and   perform  the  duty  of  a  husband's  stand  to  it,  and  say,  I   like  not  to  take   her;

kinsman  unto   her.     And  it  phall  be  that  the  then  shall  his  kinnman's  wife  come  unto  him

first-born  whom  she  beareth  shall  stand  upoa  in  the   presence  of  the  eld  rs,   and   loose   his

the  name  [i.e.  take  the  place,  or  arise  in  the  shoe,  from  off  his   feet,  and  spit  in  his  face,

place]  of  the  kinsman  who  is  dead,  that  his  and  shall  answer  and  say,  *  so  let  it  be  done

name  be  not  wiped  out  of  Israel.     And  if  the  unto    the  mm    who   will    not    build    up   hhi

man  like  not  to  take  his  kinsman's  wife,  then  kinsman's  Louse.'      And  his    name   shall  be

let  his  kinsman's  wife  go  up  to  the  gate,  unto  called  in    Israel,   House    of  the   shoe   taken

the  elders,  and  say,  'my   husband's  kinsman  off." — Deut.  xxv.  6-10.


VERSE  9.
Theme, — The  Kinsman  Redeemer,

••  The  man  most  man,  with  tenderest  human  hands
Works  best  for  man, ...  as  God  in  Nazareth. — Mrs.  Browntng»

Te  are  tvitnesses  this  day  that  I  have  bought  all  that  was  ElimelecNsy  etc.

Charity  should  begin  at  home,  with  that  which  is  nearest.  So  redemption,
deliverance  must  work  along  the  same  lines,  from  the  same  centre.  In  every
way  the  claims  of  the  nearest  are  first.  How  far  Boaz  recognised  the  force  of
this  law  may  be  seen  in  his  respect  for  the  rights  of  the  nearest  kinsman  [cf.  on
iii.  12,  13  ;  iv  3,  4]  That  failing  only,  the  welcomed  claim  falls  upon  himself
[cf.  also  Jer.  xxxii.  7,  8,  etc.].

The  same  law  is  recognised  and  followed  in  the  world-wide  schemes  of  re-
demption. God  is  our  Father,  what  nearer  relationship  can  there  be  than  this  ]
Christ  the  elder  brother.  And  in  this  link  between,  the  human  and  the  Divine  is
the  reason  for  the  incarnation  at  Bethlehem,  the  agony  at  Gethsemane,  the
sacrifice  at  Calvary.  He  was  redeeming  his  own.  The  sin  was  in  the  flesh,  and
the  payment  must  be  in  the  flesh.  Forasmuch  then  as  the  children  are  par-
takers of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same,  etc.
(cf.  Heb.  ii.  14 — 16).  More  emphatically  still  is  this  law  of  kinship  asserting
itself  on  our  behalf  laid  down  in  the  epistle  to  the  Galatians.  The  "  children  "
are  represented  as  seen  "  in  bondage  under  the  elements  of  the  world,"  Then
when  the  *'  fulness  of  the  time  "  had  come,  "  God  sent  forth  His  Son,  made  of  a
woman,  made  under  the  law.  To  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law,  that
we  might  receive  the  adoption  of  sons  "  (Gal.  iv.  3-5).  The  whole  belongs  to  the
family  economy,  the  family  arrangements  for  bringing  back  and  buying  back  its
own.  Hence  it  is  the  spirit  of  Anti-Christ  to  say  that  Christ  has  not  come  in
the  flesh — a  blow  at  the  very  foundation  truth  of  the  gospel — a  denial  of  the
one  and  only  hope  of  humanity.

Notice  then  with  regard  to  the  office  of  this  Kinsman  Redeemer.

I.  It  was  not  an  arbitrary  institutioa  It  was  one  resting  upon  principles
inherent  to  man,  that  help  comes  or  should  come  from  those  nighest  to  us.

1.  It  was  reasonable.  Founded  upon  the  reason  of  things,  and  working  in
harmony  with  all  that  essentially  belongs  to  the  idea  of  human  society.  The
family  estate  remained  unimpaired  because  of  it  for  any  considerable  length  of
time,  and  was  kept  from  passing  to  others.  The  Hebrews  would  not  lose  a
single  family,  or  branch  of  the  family  if  they  could  help  it — a  wise  and  states-
man like  arrangement,    [cf.  also  ii,  20,  21 ;  p.  140.]

6o  ill  the  wider  sphere.     Sin  has  brou^jflit  dist^rder,  alienation,  loss  of  heritage,
into  the  midst  of  the  great  family  ot  G  )d.  But  are  there  no  remedial  processes  thai
i^ing  out  of  the  family  life  and  bond?     Te  deny  this  possibility  is  to  deny  every
172


niAP.  IV.  9.  HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH,


hope  of  humanity,  and  can  belong  to  a  cretd  Icrn  only  (.f  despair.  No  doubt  as  to
the  Scriptural  answer  to  the  question.  They  remembered  that  God  was  their  Rock
and  the  high  God  their  Redeemer  (Psalm  Ixxviii,  35.)  Christ  hath  redeemed,  etc.
(Gal.  iii-  V6).  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price  (1  Cor.  vii.  23).  Cf.  also  1  Peter  18,
19;  1  Tim.  ii.  6;  Matt.  xx.  28;  Mark  x.  45,  etc.,  etc.  And,  however,  we  ex-
plain the  utterance  of  Job  (xix.  25)  it  has  thifi  great  hope  of  humanity  under-
lying it.  I  know  that  my  goel  is  not  cut  off,  but  liveth  ever  to  make  inte'*-
Cession  for  me  ;  he  will  not  forsake  me,  but  will  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  tho
earth,  having  redeemed  for  me  my  forfeited  possession,  etc.  {Macartney's  Trans )

2.  It  was  necessitated.  That  is  if  the  family  tree  be  kept  with  all  its  branches
flourishing.  There  must  be  some  way  of  providing  for  lost  and  forfeited  inheri-
tances. So  as  between  God  and  man,  the  scheme  of  redemption  springs  out  of
the  necessities  of  the  case,  and  is  but  the  outcome  of  the  character  of  God
Himself,  and  His  love  for  Hi-^  alienated  children.

3.  It  was  legally  and  technically  right.  An  express  provision  of  the  law.  Law
indeed  in  its  best  sense  is  only  the  endeavour  to  fix  these  great  principles  of
human  nature  and  give  them  expression.  Note.  (1)  Law  is  not  enough  for  the  law
might  and  must  fail  at  times  as  it  did  here.  Either  it  absolved  this  kinsman,  as
Lange  thinks,  or  it  was  too  weak  to  carry  out  its  own  demands  of  him  in  the
face  of  a  popular  superstition  [see  last  outline].  (2)  Love  alone  can  truly  under-
take to  redeem,  (a)  Looks  through  the  letter  into  the  spirit.  The  spirit  of  the
law  entirely  on  Ruth's  side  even  if  the  letter  were  against  her  [see  Crit.  and  Exeg.
notes],  {b)  Rises  superior  to  all  thought  of  fear,  (c)  Works  promptly  and
willingly  as  here.  One  passage  alone  will  show  how  completely  the  gospel
scheme  of  redemption  is  in  harmony  with  this,  God  so  lovecL  etc.  (John  iii.  16).

4.  It  was  Divinely  sanctioned  [cf.  Deut.  xxv,  5 — 10;   Lev.  xxv,  47 — 54].

II.  It  was  not  a  mere  passing  custom,  but  one  involving  and  foreshadowing
glorious  truths.  Truly  and  in  the  deepest  sense  of  the  word  a  type — a  figure
of  still  better  things  to  come.

See  how  significant  the  work  of  a  goel  is  to  those  who  believe  in  the
redemption  by  Jesus  Christ.  His  first  duty  was  to  purchase  those  who  were  other"
wise  lost.  So  with  ourselves.  We  were  "  sold  under  sin,"  "  led  captive  of  the
devil."  But  He  came,  gave  Himself  a  ransom,  bought  us  with  His  own
blood,  &c.  [1  Peter  i.  18,  19;  Heb.  ix.  12—15;  Eph,  i.  7,  &c.].  The  second
duty  was  to  redeem  the  foyfeited  inheritance.  The  creature  and  the  creation
groan  and  are  in  travail,  but  they  are  redeemed  and  shall  be  delivered
[Rom.  viii.  20].  Man  was  made  heir  and  lord  over  all  (Gen.  i.  26 — 31 ;  Ps.  viii.  6).
He  is  now  only  living  as  a  discrowned  monarch.  But  we  see  Jesus,  the  Apostle
says  (Heb.  ii.  5  —  9),  and  in  Him  we  have  the  hope  of  the  final  redemption  of  all
things.  The  third  duty  was  to  protect  and  take  to  Himself  The  concept  of  the
Almighty  as  the  Goel  or  Redeemer  of  Israel  is  a  very  common  one  in  the  Scriptures
[Is.  xlix.  7,  liii.  3  liv,  8,  &c.].  So  with  Christ  and  the  Church  [see  next  outline].
Note.  Christ  is  the  Goel  or  Redeemer  whose  shoe  is  never  drawn  off  ( Wordsworth).
His  work  of  Redemption  is  for  eternity  (Ibid).

Improvement.  (1)  How  completely  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  !  (2)
And  even  where  the  law  fails  love  triumphs.  (3)  We  have  here  redemption  (a)
proposed,  (b)  accomplished,  (c)  applied.

'•  And  if  the  name  of  Redeemer  be  dear  to  blood  of  humanity  brought  upon  the  Son  of

U8,  conveying  as  it  does  merely  the  idea  of  a  Man  his  S'Te  travail.     The  degeneracy  of  the

benevol  nt  person,  who,  by  purchase,  delivers  race  is  His  humiliation.     What  ever  reproach

a  poor   bondsman  from  porvitude,  how  much  He  may  suffer,    He    will  be   numbered    with

dearer  will  i),  be  when  we  find  it  setting  foith  transgressors,  that  throu;;h  his  straightness  he

to  us  the   brotherhood   into  which  the  High  may  breack  their  bonds,  and  restore  the  inte-

and  Lofty  One,  that  inhabteth  eternity,  enters  grity  of  their  nature.     He  must  redeem  men

with  his  best  creatures, and  the  watchful,  pa-  'because   He  ia  the  Son  of   Man.'     .     .     .     .

tients  care  which  he  exercises  over  them."—  The  great  secret  of  Christ's  power  over  men

Ma<o,rtnejf.  lies  in  the  fact  that  in  Him  humanity  is  Divined

"  Our  ancestors  by  corrupting  the  spirit  and  On   the  ground   of  bis  supreme    hnmanitj,

173


HOMILETW    COMMENTARY:    RUTH.


CHAP.  IV.  10.


rothing  is  more  natural  than  that  He  should
8Hy  *  I  will  draw  all  men  unto  me'  ....
His  drawing  power  was  always  in  principle
the  same,  '  I  drew  them  with  cords  of  a
man'  CHosea  xi.  4,)  ....  In  His  de-
scent into  our  earthly  human  condition  He
becomes  himself  the  first  example  of  his  own
law.  ''Thou  maye^t  not  set  a  stranger  over  thee
which  is  not  thy  hruther.''  (Deut.  xvii.  15,)
Does  not  the  Highest  Authority  for  this  law
vanish  if  we  deny  the  humanity  of  the  Son  of
God?'— Pu/s'orrf.

"  The  kinship  with  the  redeemed  in  short,  is
an  invariable  law  and  condition  of  redemption.
And  this  law  holds  of  the  Divine  Goel.    '  For-
asmuch as  we   were   partakers   of  flesh   and
blood   Christ  also  himself  took  part  in   the
same.'    *  None  but  a  man  could  be  the  Goel
of  men.    No  alien,  bo  stronger,  could  interpose
for  us  ;    only  *the  Man  who  is  near  of  kin
to  us,  our  nearest  kinsman.'      Hence  the  Son
of  God  became  the  Son  of  Man." — Cox.
"  Will  the  vexed  accursed  humanity
As  worn  by  Him,  begin  to  be
A  blessed,  yea,  a  sacred  thing
For  love  and  awe  and  ministering?"

Mrs.  Browning.
"  Under  this  manifold  and  most  appropriate
image  we  have  presented  to  us  the  supreme
facts  in  the  moral  history  of  the  world,  the
truths  which  have  most  profoundly  entered
into  our  spiritual  experiences.  No  poor
Hebrew  who  had  been  compelled  to  part  with


the  fieWs  he  had  inherited  from  his  fathers
suffered  a  loss  comparable  wirh  ours,  when,  by
sin,  we  hid  lost  the  righteousness,  the  right
relation  to  God  and  mnn,  in  which  we  were
originally  placed  by  the  Father  of  our  spirits
No  Hebrew  sold,  or  selling  himself,  for  a  slave
to  a  hard  and  alien  master  ever  endured  a
bondasjfe  half  so  bitter  and  shameful  as  that
into  which  we  fell  when,  sold  under  sin,  we
sank  into  bondage  to  our  lusts.  No  deliver-
ance wrought  by  a  Hebrew  Goel  is  worthy  to
be  compared  wirh  that  by  which  Christ  has
made  it  possible  for  us  to  subdue  our  evil  pas
sions  and  lusts  and  to  possess  ourselves  of  a
righteousness  more  stable,  and  more  perfect.**
—  Cox.

"  Kinsmen.'*  Lit.  Goels.  The  distinc-
tion between  this  and  other  words  used  to
designate  one  near  of  kin,  is  that  whereas
the  latter  denotes  only  relationship,  this  implies
certain  defined  rights  and  obligations.  The
rights  of  the  Goel  who  was  the  nearest  living
blood  relation,  consisted  (1)  in  the  redemption
•f  the  inheritance,  and  when,  he  had  sold
himself  into  slavery,  of  the  person  of  him  who
was  near  of  kin  to  him,  (2)  in  his  claim  to
restitution  or  satisfaction  for  wrong  done  to
such  an  one,  when  he  left  no  son  behind  him,
and  (3)  in  the  avenging  the  blood  of  such  an
one  in  the  case  of  murder  if  intentional,  and
even  if  accidental,  provided  the  manslayer
were  found  without  the  precincts  of  the  cities
of  refuge." — Elliot,


VERSE    10.

Theme. — The  Bridegroom  Redebmeb

"  Love  he  sent  to  bind
The  disunited  tendrils  of  that  vine
Which  bears  the  wine  of  life,  the  human  heart." — Shellejf,

"  But  now  possession  crowns  endeavour,
I  took  her  in  my  heart,  to  grow
And  fill  the  hollow  place  for  ever." — Jean  Ingelow,


Moreover,  Ruth  the  Moahitess  have  I  purchased


16  he  my  wifs^


Buth's  recompense  now  is  to  be  plainly  and  openly  manifested.  As  with  the
wise  men  who  sought  they  knew  not  what,  she,  too,  had  seen  the  star  in  the  East,
and  followed  it  she  knew  not  where.  Faith  had  sustained  her.  With  sublime,
heroic  self  denial,  leaving  all  behind,  she  had  said  to  Naomi,  **  Thy  people  shall
be  my  people,  and  thy  God  my  God."  She  had  come  to  find  neglect  and  penury
in  Israel,  to  be  a  lonely  gleaner  in  the  hot  sun,  known  and  pointed  at  as  the
Moabitish  woman  who  came  back  with  Naomi.  Her  virtue  evident,  and  not
unknown  in  the  gate  ;  whatever  claims  she  had  upon  kinsmen  had  been  ignored,
because  she  was  one  of  an  *'  accursed  race."  That  which  should  have  come  to
her  unsought,  she  has  not  merely  to  demand,  but  to  seek  for  and  plead  for  (iii,
9)  ^'Spread  thy  wing  over  thine  handmaid  for  thou  art  a  near  kinsman."  And
when  her  noble-hearted  protector  had  demanded  public  justice  for  her  the  claim
bad  been  repudiated.  But  the  path  of  the  just  shines  none  the  less  towards  the
perfect  day  because  of  obstacles  like  these.  There  was  one  generous  spirited
man  in  Israel  at  least  who  had  marked  her  virtue,  her  self-respect,  shining  coa-
174


CHAP.  IV.  10.  HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    HUTir.


ppicuously,  not  only  in  the  harvest  field,  but  even  during  the  difficult  and
delicate  interview  in  the  threshing  floor.  And  now  he  shelters  her  under  the
spreading  wings  of  his  own  fnir  name  and  social  position,  rejected  as  she  is,  takes
her  to  himself  before  all.  Did  ever  fiction  conceive  a  more  fitting  climax  to  so
sweet  a  story  ?  "  Marriage  is  honourable"  everywhere  and  in  all  ages,  where
more  so  than  herp  1

I.  Marriage  is  honorable  because  of  principles  to  be  seen  and  illustrated
here. — (1)   The  relationship  opevi?/  aclnoivledged.     A  most  in.portant  thing  this,
which,    if  refused,  can  only   be  refused  from  mean  and  sinister  motives.     Clan-
destine marriages  a  fruitful  source  of  mispry.     Why  should  there  be  any  reason
for  not  acknow^ledging  the  relationship  entered  upon  before  alii     Boaz  was  not
ashamed  of  Ruth,  although  she  was  a  Moahitess.      Not  ashamed  even  of  the
peculiar  motives  which  prompted  his  conduct.     Nor  will  any  true  man  be.     Note.
If  there  he  cause  to  he  ashamed  of  the  moments  confession^  why  should  he  seek  a  life-
long companionship!  Love  may  begin  in  secret,  but  ends  in  being  confessed  openly.
(2).  Puhlicly   recognised.       "  We    are    witnesses,"    they    said.       (a)    Enforces
fidelity,  (6)  gives  legal  protection,  (c)  secures  permanence  to  the  relationship,  (d)
hands  down  a  good  name  to  the  children,  and  preserves  them  from  the  finger  of
scorn.     Note.   He  that  tampers  with  the  institution  of  marriage  touches  the  ark  of
God  {Thomson)  of.  Gen.  ii.  18,  21-25.     [See  also  on   "  Marriages  in  Moab,"  ch.  i.
4,  pp.  26-28.]

(3)  Solemnly  ratified,  (a)  With  prayer.  The  Lord  make,  eta  What  is
religion  intended  for  if  it  is  not  to  come  in  at  times  like  this  1  The  secularisa-
tion of  marriage  means  the  separation  of  human  life  from  divine  things  at  its
most  solemn  moments.  A  sorry  match  that  has  no  prayer  breathed  over  it,  a
disastrous  beginning  likely  to  have  a  worse  end  (Braden).  Rather  our  religion
should  come  in  the  more,  to  touch  life  and  humanity  everywhere,  on  all  sides.
Note.  The  prayers  here  are  not  official  prayers,  but  those  of  the  people,  the  elders
and  inhabitants  of  the  city,  (h)  With  lavish  professions  of  good  will,  neigh-
bourly expressions  of  esteem,  desires  for  prosperity,  etc.  Ruth,  indeed,  taken
with  the  approval  and  acclamation  of  the  people — a  truly  Eastern  picture.
Note.  The  sanction  of  Christianity  must  ever  rest  upon  kindred  scenes.  Christ's
first  miracle  was  wrought  at  a  marriage- feast.

II.  Marriage  is  honorable  because  of  what  it  is  used  to  illustrate  and
shadow  forth.  The  inspired  Word  has  put  honour  by  making  it  to  express,
represent,  and  illustrate  some  of  the  kindred  relationships  between  God  and
man.  (a)  Between  Israel  and  Jehovah :  '*  Thy  Maker  is  thy  husband  "  (Isa.
liv.  5);  (6)  hetween  Christ  and  the  Church  (Eph.  v.  25;  Rev.  xxi.  2).  Note
Relationships  helow  are  often  only  the  faint  shadow  of  grander  relationships  ahove.
What  else  can  we  expect  when  man  himself  was  made  in  the  image  of  God
(Gen.  i,  27).  So  Moses  was  commanded  to  make  the  tabernacle  according  to
the  pattern  God  showed  him  in  the  Mount.

In  the  union  of  Ruth  the  Moabitess  with  Boaz,  of  Bethlehem,  the  future
birth-place  of  Christ,  we  have  a  foreshadowing  of  the  mystical  union  and
marriage  between  Christ  and  the  Gentile  world,  and  of  the  junction  of  Jew  and
Gentile  in  one  body  in  Him  {Wordsworth).  Certainly  the  incident  very  beautifully
illustrates  Christ's  dealings  with  those  who  were  once  alien  and  reprobate.  (1)
He  takes  them  to  Himself,  just  as  Ruth  was  taken  in  her  lowly  estate  and  poverty
a  Moabitess.  (2)  He  covers  them  with  His  wing  [cf.  on  the  Overshadowing  Wing,
page  119,  etc.J.  (»))  He  clothes  them  with  His  righteousness.  Ventured  the
marring  of  his  own  inheritance  to  do  this,  for  though  He  was  rich  yet  for  our
sakes  He  became  poor  (J/.  Henry).  (4)  He  redeems  their  inheritance,  and  presents
them  to  a  more  lasting  heritage.

Improvement. — How  strikingly  the  story  here  exemplifies  the  words  of  Christ,
"  Verily,  1  say  unto  you,  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left  house,  or  brethren,  etc
(Mark  x.  29,  30).

175


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH.     chap.  iv.  l\-^2'l.


**A11  Bethlehem  seemed  moved  to  a  devout  "  Love  is  the  best  investment  (/f  all,  save  c-op-

and  gladsome  sympathy,  with  an  event  which  science  and  the  sentiment  of  duty.     These  era

had  such  a  his! ory  behind  it.     The  little  town  the  treasnre-honses  of  life,  the  great  xnarket

kept  holiday  ;  and  it  was  meet  that  it  should  wherein   the  shares  are  always  rising.     The

do   80.     Tar  from   us  be  that  ur  genial   and  stf  p  can  be  easily  taken,  but  never  retraced,

narrow  spirit,  which  would  frown  upon  cheer-  It  brings  with  it,  in  all  cases,  additional  sorrows

fulness  at  such  an  hour.  It  is  one  of  the  maiks  as  well  as  joys.     The  freedonn  of  the  man  and

of  the  Divinity  of  our  religion  that  it  touches  woman  in  thereby  in  a  certain  sense  limited

our  humanity  on  all  sides.     But  farther  still  and  curtailed.     Then  each  has  to  think  not

be  that  irreligious  spirit  which  would  degrade  alone  of  self,  but,  also,  and  as  much,  if  not

the  marriage  rite  into  a  mere  business  trans-  more  of  another.     Each  has  to  act,  not  with

action,  and  fcrm  a  connection   between   two  a  view  to  pt  raonal  comfort  and  ease,  but  with

human   beings    for   better  or    for   worse,    a  the  loving  purpose  of  contributing  all  possible

union  of  interest  and  affections,  of  hopes  and  satisfactionand  joy  to  another's  life." — Braden,
fears,  so  that  *  they  twain  become  one  flesh,'

and  only  the  grave  has  power  to  break  the  bond  "And  may  our  love  be  ne'er  a  trailing  robe,

with  less  of  deliberation  and  solemnity  than  To  clog  our  feet  along  our  heavenward  way,

men  usually  display  in  the  sale  or  the  pai chase  But  a  warm  garment  for  our  daily  use.

of  an  animal.     Surely  the  formation  of  the  Marriage  is  but  for  earth,  but  holy  love

marriage    bond    pre-eminently    ought  to   be  Will  live  in  Heaven.   Let  us  ever  strive,

*  sanctified    by    the    word  of    God  and    by  To  grow  more  like  to  God — for  God  is  love.'
prayer.'  **'— Thomson.  '^Mrs.  Browning


^^  ^'''\  VERSES     11—22.

Bl*C^TiCAL  AND  ExEGETiCAL  NoTES  — Ver.  11.  We  are  witnesses.  The  business  settled  with-
out lawyers  or  legal  casuistry  (A.  Clarke).  The  Lord  make.  The  birth  of  children  looked
upon  aa  a  direct  interference  of  Providence — a  contribution  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  great  pro-
mise whereon  their  hearts  were  set  (E.  Pnc«).  Like  Rachel  and  like  Leah.  The  two  ances-
ttesises  of  all  true  Israelites.  Like  Ruth  they  had  left  home  for  their  husbands.  The  younger
probably  mentioned  first;  not  only  as  the  favourite  wife,  but  as  connected  with  Bethlehem
(-Gen.  jtxxv.  19  ;  Jer  xxxL  15).  Do  thou  worthily  [manfully].  Lit.  make  thou  strength  or
po_wer.  In  Eph.ratah.  Some  distinguished  Ephratah  as  the  country,  Bethlehem  as  the  town
(Bernard,  Price^.  And  be  famous  in  Bethlehem.  Lit.  call  a  name.  Get  a  nanne  (Lange).
IN^eatit  '*«.ct  the  nc^ble  part  "  QMonson),  The  real  force  of  the  whole  phrase  is  "  Be  thou  influx
^liftl  in  the  e:rowth  of  thy  wealth,  and  be  well  spoken  of  as  far  aa  thy  mfltience  may  be  made
to  extend"  {E.  Price).  These  words  are  prophetic,  for  thence  came  the  birth  of  Him  who  has
made  Bethlehem  famous  in  all  the. world  (Theodoret).

Ver.  12.  Like  the  house  ©f  Pharez  [Gen.  xxxviii.  29  ;  1  Chron.  ii.  4  ;  Matt.  i.  3.]  The  second
son  of  Jndah  (Numb.  xxvi.  20)  and  one  of  the  ancestors  of  Boaz.  His  family  was  Ewre  illus-
ti'ious  and  numerous  than  that  of  his  brother  Zarah.  Perez  also  was  a  son  of  Tamar,  who,
alrhough  a  very  different  character  than  Ruth,  resembled  her  in  history  in  that  she  suffered  in-
JHS'ice  in  having  the  rights  of  marriage  withheld  from  her  [see  Lavge  in  loco.]

Ver.  13  The  Lord  gave  her.  By  a  special  blessing  Bo^z  advanced  in  years  (^Wordsworth),
A  soil.  The  kinsman's  superstitious  fears  [see  on  v.  6]  now  shown  to  be  groundless.
''-■  Ver.  14.  Blessed  be  the  Lord.  Another  rythmical  sentence  [cf.  i,  16,  p.  QQ  ;  also  cp.  Luke  i.
46 — ^55  ;  68—79,  etc.]  Not  left  thee  this  day  without  a  kinsman  [redeemer.]  Thy  grandson
(^Wordsworth).  So  Lange  und  Alcm  son  'Not  so,  Boaz  CS/jeukers  Com.J.  Obed  would  inherit
the  t  state  of  Elimelech,  and  so  he  is  the  real  goal  of  Naomi.  The  grammatical  construction  also
points  to  Obed,  "  the  restorer,  nourisher,  &c.,"  as  well  as  the  phrase  "  this  day."  That  his  name
inay  be.     And  may  his  name  be  (Lange).  . ,  j^

Ver.  15  And  he  shall  be  [may  he  be]  a  restorer. ...nourisher.  Trueliterally  in  her  csise,  tme
spiritually  to  all  the  world  by  Him  who  w^as  born  at  Bethlehem  of  this  seed  according  to  the
fl'e.sh  {TheodorrfJ.  Better  to  thee  than  seven  sons.  Cf.  1  Sam.  i,  8;  ii  5,  for  similar  expressions.
The  women  acknowledge  now  how  far  short  the  legal  friendship  of  Israel  towards  Naomi  has
fallen  in  comparison  with  the  self-sacritice  of  the  daughrer.of  Moab  (Lange).  The  prpspect
Btow  presented  of  her  becoming  the  tribe  mother  of  a  numerous  and  flourishing  family  (iTei/).  .
e-Ver.  17.  Her  neighbours  gave  it  a  name.  Besides  this  he  doubtless  received  a  name  frorii
hjs  parents  {Lange).  This  of  the  women  c  mtinued  and  inserted  in  the  family' genealog:y,  be-
cause seen  to  be  appropriate  (ihid)  Obed,  servant — i.e.,  of  the  Lord  (Woidsworth^  Gesen.
TaTy.^  Befeause  be  served  to  gladden  Naomi's  old  age  {Steele  and  Terry)..  Serving  or  wor-
shipping (.fi^/Zioi).  Must  be  understi'od  in  the  sense  of  serving  as  a  son  [see  Z^aw^re  in  lopo.J
Obed  jib  the  s^nseof  "one  tha,t  serves,"  harmonises  well  with  the  words  in  v.  15  (BertfiedU^'
r,^er.  i^.  Now  tliesQ  aj-ejhe*  generations.  The  tafele  present^  ten  names.'  A  rouild  niimTber,
iSgge'stmgV  it  may  be,  f^atunlM  Ifat^  Befe^n-offlfetei    rTh^  &^¥i^s  wer^  accksto^^d

to  do  this  both  to  ease  their  owa  labour  of  transcription,  and  to  give  additi^n^  ^|j[^ha^^  Mtil^


CHAP.  IV.    1—13.     HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH.


naires  appearing  in  the  received  list  (^.  Price)  [flee  Introdnciion,  p.  4,  5.].  Boak.  Not  Mahlon,
as  might  liave  been  expecteil  from  the  Levirate  law.  David.  Why  end  with  this  name  if  the
hook  were  written,  as  Bertheau,  Davidson,  and  others  seem  to  think,  long  after  the  time  of
Solomon  ?    i*oints  possibly  to  a  reason,  if  he  were  reigning  as  king.


-•o«


VERSES   11—13.
Theme. — Prayers  for  Posterity  and  Prosperity.

Patience  and  abnegation  of  self,  and  devotion  to  others.

This  was  the  lesson  a  life  of  trial  and  sorrow  had  taught  her.

So  was  her  love  diffused,  but,  like  to  some  odorous  spices.

Suffered  no  waste  nor  loss,  though  filling  the  air  with  aroma. — Longfellow.

The  Lord  make  the  woman,  etc.     And  let  thy  house ,  etc.     So  Boaz  took  Ruth^  etc.

Good  wishes  are  to  be  regarded  as  prayers  before  God,  but  those  of  a  people
("all  the  people")  as  the  effectual  ferveut  prayer  which  availeth  much  (^E.  Price).
Good  to  keep  the  heart  in  readiness,  so  as  to  resolve  our  common  emotions  of
sympathy  into  benedictions  as  here.  How  long  did  this  blessing  rest  over  the
house  of  Boaz  % — until  Christ  came  1  The  best  seal  to  a  compact  like  this  found
in  prayers  like  these  which  stretch  out  towards  generations  yet  unborn.

I.  We  have  the  general  truth  taught  here.  That  the  love  of  posterity  may
be  used  of  God  and  sanctified.  How  the  Hebrew  idea  of  "  children,  a  blessing
from  the  Lord "  expresses  itself  in  these  devout  prayers.  Note.  All  natural
emotions  and  tendencies  may  he  worked  hy  the  Divine  wisdom  into  the  great  scheme
of  Providence  and  grace  {E.  Price).  The  Incarnation,  the  direct  issue  and  product
of  preceding  conditions.  God  glorifying  what  is  good  in  the  race,  the  noble  spirit
of  Boaz,  the  virtue  of  Ruth,  the  prayers  of  these  devout  Israelites,  all  leading
upwards,  onwards,  toward  the  Christ  that  is  to  be.  (1)  How  wonderful !  (2)
How  suggestive !  Who  knows  what  His  purposes  may  be  through  our  children,  if
we  are  faithfully  consecrating  them  to  Him  %  Men  make  much  of  a  pious
ancestry.  What  if  we  look  in  the  other  direction,  and  have  faith,  and  use  the
privilege  of  prayer  aright  1

II.  The  particular  truth  is  taught  here  :  That  a  Moabitess  is  thus  introduced
among  the  progenitors  of  our  Lord  Himself.  Cf.  Matt.  i.  5.  Boaz  begat  Obed
of  Kuth.  A  memorable  fact.  A  Gentile  woman  thus  rendered  a  constituent
portion  of  the  Redeemer's  genealogy  (E.  Price).  Why?  (1)  To  indicate  the
heathen  were  not  quite  forgotten  under  the  old  dispensation  severe  and  exclusive  as
it  was  (^Ihid).  (2)  To  emphasise  the  fact  that  God  has  always  appeared  to  work
hy  what  at  some  times  might  he  regarded  as  contraries.  (3)  To  remove  the  suspicion
from  the  sceptic  that  the  Advent  depended  upon  the  mere  natural  course  of  events
(Ihid).  (4)  To  keep  the  devout  student  lovingly  and  reverently  dependent  upon
the  unerring  though  mysterious  will  of  the  Most  High  (Thid),

Theme. — Children  the  Gift  op  Heaven.
E.   Price  on  The  seed  which  the  Lord  shall  give  thee.

The  Jewish  idea  may  be  modified  by  us,  that  the  number  of  children  measures
a  man's  felicity.  Yet  the  truth,  underlying  it,  continues  with  us  :  viz.,  that
pious  descendants  are  always  the  greatest  blessings  which  the  great  Father  can
bestow  upon  us.

Bo  they  not  bind  us  to  heaven  by  sanctified  affections  1
.    Do  they  not  sweeten  home  sympathies  %

Do  they  not  exemplify  the  advantages  of  that  saintly  education,    they  are
supposed  to  be  susceptible  of  1
,  D(i  they  not  become  the  best  support  of  the  declining  years  of  a  happy  parent  1

M  177


UOMILETW    COMMENTARY:    RU'lH.  chap.  iv.  11.


Do  tbey  not  assure  prosperity  to  a  spiritual  church?     And  do  they  not  thus
hand  down  the  tra  lition  of  the  faith  unimpaireii  ?

In  this  sense,  then,  **  blessed  is  the  man  who  has  his  quiver  full  of  them."

"The  man  has  acted  both  unselfishly  and  Gentiles  also,  while  the  worM  lasts,  because  it

honourably  in  upholding  the  family  custom  of  is  mentioned  with  honour  in  the  Book  of  Goil

Israel.     The  public  therefore,  praise  him  and  Both  bad  and  good  actions  are  of  ten  published

wish  him  good.     Such  applause  is  both  desir-  to  a  greater  extent,  and  continue  longer  to  be

able  and  profitable.  Tlie  actions  of  a  good  man  known,  than  the  doers  or  any  of  their  friends

are  fit  subjects  for  praise.     It  stimulates  us  to  expe(;ted."-  Lawson

higher  deeds  when  we  recognise  nobleness  in  "  The  godly  are  memhers  one  of  another,

others.     It  encourages  them  in  acts  of  gene-  therefore   must   needs   have   a    fellow-feeling

rosity  and  honour.     If  any  around  us  do  wise,  ....     but  let  this  be  with  tliem  in  lawful

thoughtful,  open-hearted,  unselfish  deeds,  let  things,  for  charity  rejoiceth   not  in  iniquity.

us  not  fear  to  praise  them."—  Braden.  What  joy  can  it  be  to  a  godly  man  to  see  his

"What  fame  would  be  acquired  in  Israel  by  friend  rich  and  in  glory  by  usury,  bribery,
the  kindness  of  Boaz  to  Ruth  and  Naomi?  oppression,  deceit  and  fraud?"— JS^marrf.
Was  it  to  be  hoped  that  his  goodness  and  "It  is  one  of  the  grand  aims  of  divine  revela-
bounties  to  them  would  be  known  and  praised  tion  to  produce  this  state  of  mind  [the  habit-
aniong  all  the  tribes  ?  It  is  natural  for  men  ual  recognidon  of  God];  and  in  the  case  of
to  think  that  the  actions  which  they  admire,  this  people  it  evidently  had  produced  it  Re-
should  be  known  and  admired  by  all.  The  ligion  was  an  all-pervadmg  life.  ...  It
hopes  of  these  good  women  were,  perhaps,  penetrated  everywhere,  like  the  sunlight.  God
more  sanguine  than  the  case  could  justify  ;  was  beheld  as  the  Cause  of  causes  ;  His  Hand
and  yet  they  were  more  than  realised.  The  was  visible  in  every  occurrence  ;  He  was  a  felt
name  of  Boaz  became  famous  through  all  Presence." — Dr,  A.  Thompson,
Israel,  and  will  continue  famous  among  the


VERSE  11.

Theme, — Manuness,  its  fit  and  proper  sphbr*

"  The  world  waits
For  help.     Beloved,  let  us  love  so  well,
Our  work  shall  still  be  better  for  our  love.
And  still  our  love  be  sweeter  tor  our  work.**— Jl/r*.  Browning.

Do  thou  worthily   \manfully~\  in  Ephratah  and  he  famous  \^et  a  name]  in

Bethlehem.

The  world  wants  men,  always  has  done  so  ;  did  so  even  thus  early  in  its  history
— men  who  play  the  worthy,  manful  part.  Such  will  always  (1)  be  well  spoken
of,  (2)  desired  and  longed  for,  (3)  in  the  highest  sense  "  make  the  best  of  both
*  worlds."  Note.  (1)  Honour ^  the  respect  and  esteem  of  others^  not  to  be  despised
as  cynics  would  teach,  rather  to  be  sought  for  in  legitimate  ways  as  in  the  sight
of  God.  [cf.  Ps.  i.,  cxii.,  Job  xxix.,  Prov.  iv.  8,  9,  etc.]  (2)  To  be  truly
a  man  and  play  the  manly  part  includes  all  virtues^  or  should  do  so.
(a)  So  on  the  gentler  side.  To  be  human  is  to  be  humane,  and  should  be  thus
understood  always.  Note.  Impossible  to  be  noble  in  character  without  tender-
ness, gentleness,  compassionateuess,  etc.  (6)  So  on  the  sterner  side.  The  root  idea
of  the  word  virtue  is  strength.  The  strong  man,  self-contained,  self-balanced,
having  the  mastery  over  his  passion,  is  the  virtuous  man.  This  seemingly  the
idea  of  the  text,  **  Act  the  part  of  a  true  man,  a  strong  man."  A  right  worthy
exhortation  for  such  an  occasion.

I.  The  sphere  of  this  manly  part.  At  home — in  Ephratah,  Bethlehem.  Do
good  among  thy  own  people  [Ezk.  xviii.  18],  be  public-spirited,  though  to  private
disadvantage  (Trajyp).  So  in  Christ's  charge  to  His  disciples,  these  home  claims
and  duties  are  not  forgotten.  "Beginning  at  Jerusalem,"  He  said.  Note  Easy
to  ignore  this  aspect  of  duty — like  Jonah,  to  flee  to  Tarshish  from  the  Nineveh  God
has  pointed  out,  but  this  is  the  Divine  idea,  *'  Begin  at  home."  "  Shine  there,"
17«


CHAP.  IV.  U,  16.      HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH.


coDsecrate  that.  *' Return  to  thine  own  house  and  shew  how  great  things  God
hath  done  unto  thee  "  (Liii^e  viii.  39).  .Note.  A  difficult  rhity  this  always,  as  with
Eli,  Noah,  Lot,  Jndah  [of.  Genesis  xxxviii ;    Song  of  Sol.  i,  6].

II  The  results  of  this  manly  part.  Be  famous,  etc.  The  two  things  linked
toge ohei-,  the  doing  worthily  and  the  fame  that  follows  it.  Note.  All  other  ways
of  making  a  reputation  valueless.  Great  reputations  are  to  be  obtained  by  great
merits,  by  saying  well  and  doing  well,  by  wise  speech  and  wise  actions,  by  being
useful  and  serviceable  in  our  own  day  and  generation.  Note,  (a)  A  great  name
(ften  not  80  much  to  be  coveted,  "  but  a  good  name  is  better  than  precious  ointment  "
(Laivson).  (6)  The  common  and  vulgar  ideas  of  fame,  glory,  martial  renown,
etc.,  not  encouraged  here.     It  is /awe  won  at  home  of  which  the  text  speaks.


*'  Home  is  the  roost  appropriate  sphere  for
Christian  usefulness,  it  i>*  the  place  where
true  piety  is  ever  tested,  and  false  piety  soonest
put  to  the  blush.  It  has  the  first  claims  upon
the  man  of  God,  whatever  his  public  position
may  be.  And  yet  how  ofren  is  this  forgotten
or  ignored.  Eli,  priest  of  the  Living  God,
can  enter  into  the  Holiest  place  and  stand
before  the  Shekinah  glory  in  the  manifested
presence  of  Deity  itself,  and  yet  he  canuvjt
order  his  household  aright,  or  protect  the
sanctuary  of  the  Most  High  tr  )m  the  pollution
of  his  children.  But  it  is  not  so  with  the  truly
devout  and  consecrated  spirit.  As  master,  or
as  servant,  in  the  workshop  and  in  the  count-
ing house,  it  is  there  his  Christ-like  character
shines  to  best  advantage  ;  it  is  there,  by  the
quiet  influence  which  belongs  to  every  life,  the
noblest  testimony  is  borne  for  God.  The  house-
hold is  hallowed,  the  home  life  consecrated,  the
private  walks  sanctified,  the  neighbourhood
blessed  by  the  sweet  and  gentle  aroma  of  a
holy  and  heavenly  life." — B.

**  A  uame  truly  good  is  the  aroma  from  a


virtuous  character.  It  is  a  spontaneous  ema-
nation from  genuine  excellence  It  is  a  repu-
tation for  whatsoever  things  are  honest  and
lovely,  and  of  good  report.  It  is  such  a  name
as  is  not  only  remembered  on  earth  but  written
in  heaven.  Just  as  a  box  of  spikenard  is  not
only  valuable  to  its  possessor,  but  pre-eminently
precious  in  its  diffusion ;  so,  when  a  name  is
really  good,  it  is  of  unspeakable  service  to  all
who  are  capable  of  feeling  its  aspiration." —
Samilton.

"  But  there  are  deeds  which  should  not  pass
away.

And  names  that  must  not  wither,  though  the
earth
Forgets  her  empire  with  a  just  decay.

The  enslavers  and  the  enslaved,  their  death
and  birth,
The  high,  the  mountain  majesty  of  worth

Should  be,  and  shall,  survivors  of  its  woe,
And  from  its  immortality  look  forth

In  the  sun's  face,  like  yonder  Alpine  snow,
Imperishably  pure  beyond  all  things  below."


-««♦•


VERSES  U,  15.
J%em«.— Congratulations  and  Good  Wishes.

The  soul  of  music  slumbers  in  the  shell,
Till  waked  and  kindled  by  the  master's  spell ;
And  feeling  hearts,  touch  them  hut  rigi  tlv.  pour
A  thousand  melodies  unheard  before. — Rogers.

Blessed  he  the  Lord  which  hath  not  left  thee  this  day  without  a  kinsman.

The  birth  of  a  son  and  heir  an  important  event  always ;  more  especially  in  au
eastern  household,  and  with  one  of  the  age  and  position  of  Boaz.  A  memorable
day  this,  too,  in  the  history  of  Israel.  Another  link  added  in  the  chain  Christ-
ward.  The  joy  here  an  earnest  of  the  joy  hereafter,  the  barriers  of  national
privt3  broken  down  in  part ;  prophetic  of  that  glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  peace
on  earth,  goodwill  towards  men  (Luke  ii.  14).  Note.  First  prayer  here  {v.  11)
now  praise.     Blessed,  etc.

In  these  congratulations  there  is  I.  A  glance  at  the  new  circumstances  surround-
ing Naomi,     As  much  our  <iuty  to  rej<;ice  with  those  who  rejoice  as  to  weep  with
those  who  weep,     (a)  We  should  enter   into  their  plans  (6),  sympathise  in  their
successes  (c),  rejoice   especially  at   their  unexpected  prosperity,  as  here.     Note
(1)    We  cannct  help  doing  this  if  we  encourage  that  which  is  good  in  ourselves.     God

179


UOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    RUTH.      chap.  iv.  14,  15.


made  men  to  sympathise  with  each  other,  only  that  sin  has  made  them  selfish
and  envious.

(2)  Mans  duty  is  to  respond  to  these  Divinely  implanted  instincts.  Our  good
wishes  are  not  worth  much  unless  they  find  utteniuce  or  expression  in  some
way.  Here  the  joy  not  only  felt  but  avowed.  *'  The  women  are,  as  is  usual  in
such  times,  full  of  expressive  sympathy.  That  is  quite  a  touch  of  nature." —
*  Rraden.)

There  is  II.  A  glance  heavenv/ard.  The  Lord,  etc.  The  joy  of  the  godly
aas  this  holy  and  religious  expression  naturally  and  always.  Especially  should  we
look  upward  in  these  moments  of  family  rejoicing.  Note.  Whatever  joy  men  may
give  us,  praise  is  due  to  God,  who  thus  makes  them  the  instruments  of  his  benefits.

Right  again  that  this  devout  feeling  should  find  expression.  Is  it  that  our
homes  are  to  be  made  glad  with  his  gifts,  and  our  hearts  with  the  sunshine  of
his  presence,  and  no  sign  be  seen  of  the  gladness  which  is  there  1  A.  holy  anl
profitable  way  of  gossiping  this;  God  praised  and  called  upon  (Trapp).  N<»te.
The  blessings  of  the  Old  Testament  generally  of  a  material  character  [Kiito).  Yet
they  are  not  the  less  often  the  source  of  spiritual  joy  (cf.  Isa.  xxiii).

III.  A  glance  toward  the  future.  He  shall  be  unto  thee,  etc.  (v.  15)  Why
to  Naomi  especially  1  Are  we  not  to  see  in  this  her  revvird  for  all  the  past  1
Note,  (a)  Those  are  to  be  comforted  most  by  us  who  have  b'en  most  humbled.  They
need  it  most,  and  we  should  be  ready  to  speak  the  wor  I  of  consolation.  A  poor
Christian  who  has  no  word  of  congratulitiou  for  a  time  like  this  1  (6)  A  joyous
prospect  may  open  suddenly  even  for  the  sorrowing  and  the  aged.  Call  me  not
Naomi,  she  had  said  (I.  20).  But  God  can  send  light  at  eventide.  [See  next
outline].

E.  Price  on  this  :  Theme  — A  Good  Child.

Women  do  not  always  babble  vain  things.  How  quick  are  they  to  apprehend
the  modifications  of  our  domestic  life.

Study,  then,  the  portrait  of  a  good  son,  which  they  ofifer  here.

God  must  have  given  him.

God  adapts  him  to  special  needs.

God  makes  him  felt  as  a  comforter  (Heb.,  a  Redeemer).

God  in  him  restores  exhausted  life.

God  secures  the  true  honour  of  the  family.

And  God  thus  **  nourishes  "  old  age,  till  it  be  resolved  into  heaven.  Yes  !  God
18  in  all  1

Let  parents  pray,  labour,  and  educate  for  this  high  end.

Let  children  see  to  it  that  their  welcomed  presence  around  the  hearth  may
secure  it.

And  let  "  our  gossips  "  even  change  their  idle  talk  into  kind  congratulations
and  earnest  prayers.

"  It  would  seem  as  if  there  was  already  a  else  would  have  been,  humanly  speaking,  im-
kind  of  joyous  foretaste  of  the  birth  and  in-  possible.  *  An  Amm  .nite  or  a  Mo^bite  shall
fancy  which,  in  after  times,  was  to  be  for  ever  not  enter  into  the  congregation  '  (Deut.  xxiii.
associated  with  the  name  of  Bethlehem.  It  3  ;  Ezra  ix.  1  ;  Neh,  xiii.  1).  This  was  the
was  the  first  appearance  on  the  scene  of  what  letter  of  the  law,  and,  in  the  greater  strictness
may  by  anticipation  be  called,  even  then,  the  that  prevailed  after  the  return  from  the  cap-
Holy  Family,  for  that  child  was  Obed,  the  tivity,  it  was  rigidly  enforced.  Butintheiso-
father  of  Jesse,  the  father  of  David.  Nor  is  lation  of  Judah  from  the  rest  of  Israel,  iu  the
it  a  mere  genealogical  connexion  between  the  doing  of  every  man  what  was  right  iii  his  own
two  generations.  The  very  licence  and  inde-  eyes,  the  more  comprehensive  spirit  of  the
pendence  of  the  age  may  be  said  to  have  been  whole  religion  overstepped  the  letter  of  a  par-
the  means  of  introducing  into  the  ancestry  of  ticular  enactment." — Stanley,
David  and  of  the  Messiah  an  element  which


180


CiiAi'.  IV.  15,  16.       IJOMILETIC   COMMENTAKY:    RUTH.

-  ■  -■    ■  ■  III,  ^.i  ■■■■  — -^-i  ^,^,,,^_^^^^.,^^

VERSES   16,  16.

Theme. — Youth  and  Agb.

**0  thou  bright  tiling  fresh  from  the  hand  of  God.

Nearer  I  seem  to  God  when  looking  on  thee :

'Tis  ajzes  since  He  made  His  youneei^t  star  ;

His  hand  was  on  thee  as  'twere  }esterday." — Akxander  Smith.

He  shall  he  to  thee  a  restorer  of  thy  life^  etc.  And  Naomi  took  the  child,  etc.

How  often  the  children  are  messengers  of  God,  bringing  new  life  into  the
household  as  here.  There  is  a  fountain  of  love  enclosed  in  the  heart  of  the
aged,  and  it  only  needs  the  tiny  infant  fingers  of  some  dear  one's  child  to
unloose  it.  Note.  The  birth  of  a  new  spirit  may  come  in  the  home  with  the  new
life.  New  consecration  to  God,  new  sympathy  with  all  around.  "  Children  are
a  heritage  from  the  Lord."  (a)  What  sacredness  should  surround  them,  (6)  what
prayers  ascend  for  them,  (c)  what  blessedness  be  found  in  them  !  Note.  Ifaman
do  not  find  his  joy  in  the  home^  he  will  find  his  burden  there.

Dwell  on,  I.  What  the  children  expect  from  us.  (a)  Care,  (b)  attention,  (c)
protection,  (d)  love,  (e)  nurture  and  training.  In  the  text  Naomi  seen  as  respond-
ing to  these  demands.  Her  name  still  descriptive  of  her  character  [cf.  on  I.  2,
p.  14J.  Must  be  doing  something.  Felt  that  she  had  a  duty  which  was  no
burden  but  a  pleasure.  "  Took  the  child,"  etc.  Note,  (a)  Whoever  was  once
capable  of  true  love  preserves  its  power  for  ever  after  (Lange).  And  life  all  the
way  through  finds  a  sphere  for  it.  Even  in  old  age,  when  the  maternal  instinct
may  have  been  thought  to  have  almost  died  out,  Naomi  becomes  a  foster-
mother.  So  generally.  Grandchildren  not  loved  less,  but  sometimes  more  than
the  children  themselves.  Note.  (6)  Zove  may  grow  more  intense^  even  as  the  shadows
of  death  begin  to  fall  around.  What  a  tribute  to  and  foreshadowing  of  its  immor-
tality.

II.  What  we  expect  of  the  children.  (1)  They  are  to  he  the  restorers  of  life
and  joy.  "  He  shall  be,"  etc.  Life  intended  to  have  this  twofold,  and  reciprocal
action  and  aspect.  We  do  not  give  more  than  we  get,  if  the  true  conception  of
God's  word  and  of  our  nature  be  carried  out.  Love  brings  its  own  reward.
(2)  They  are  to  he  the  supports  of  old  age.  "And  a  nourisher,"  etc.  The  conditions
will  V)e  reversed  by-and-bye.  Weakness  coming  on  with  us  as  strength  grows
with  them.  Then  this  new  law  is  to  come  into  operation.  They  are  to  succour
and  cherish  in  return  for  the  past,  as  the  trembling  infirmities  of  second  child-
hood claim  us  as  their  own.  Beautiful,  divine  idea,  which  sin  and  selfishness
may  mar,  but  cannot  altogether  destroy  !  The  old  and  the  feeble  never  for-
gotten, but  reaping  then  what  they  have  sowed  in  the  tears  and  joys,  the  sorrows
and  cares,  and  fond  affections  lavished  upon  childhood  and  infancy.

Improvement. — So  the  Church  is  to  foster  young  converts.  In  return  they  will
become  sooner  or  later  her  strength  and  support.  Note.  Spiritual  children  bring
a  greater  blessing  to  her  than  '*  seven  sons^*  according  to  the  flesh  {Lange).

ChiHren  should  nourish  their  old  parents  "  A  certain  Duke  of  Ormond  who  lost  a

and  Hupplv  th  ir  wants,  dtri  TTfXapywv.  S'orks  virtuous  son,   the   Lord  OsHory,  said  that  he

and  mice  feed    their  dnnis  when  old  ;   bv)ugh8  would  rather  be  the  father  of  the  dead  Os.soiy,

incline  and  bend  down  towards  the  root ;  and  than  of  any  living  nobleman  in  England."—

in   summer,  receivini^  from   the  root  leaves,  Lairson.

flowers,  and  fruit,  they  let  them  fall  at:ain  in  "  It  is  one  of  the  many  fine  points  of  the

winter  to  the  fatteuiug  and  nourishing  of  the  story,  that  its  concluding  sentences  are  almost

root.    Unkin.l  and  unnatural  children  are  1  ke  wholly  devoted,  not  to  the  voung  and  hapi)y

kites,  which,  when   grown  strong  expei   ttieir  wife  and  mother,  but  to  Naomi,  who  had  suf-

dams,  jind  with  their  bills  and  wings  beat  them  fered   so  many   calamities,   and    who,  by   the

out  of  the  nest."—  Trapp,  yiety  and  resignation   with   which   ^he    bore

181


HOMILETIC    COMMENIARY:    KUTH.     chap.  iv.  19— 22.


them,  had  drawn  Ruth  from  the  frivolities  of  in  the  Church  it  is  for  priests  and  preachers  to

Moab.     It  is  NHomi  not   Rnth,  whom,  "the  repent,  as  Naomi  did,  and  not  to  excuse  them-

women,  her  neighbours,"  congratulate  on  the       selves And    how    greatly    she  sins,

birth  of  Ruth's  hod.     In  him  they  fee  Naomi's  when  she  does  not  rightly  foster,  those  who

goel— Ruth  already  had  hers  in    Boaz  ;    and  do  come;  exhibiting  neither  love,  nor  wisdom,

they  pray  that,  as  he  grows  up,  he  may  restore  n<ir  faith  in  her  treatment  of  them. — that  too

her  to  her  former  happiiies^,  and  be  the  stay  will  one  day  be  made  manifest.     Impatience

and  gladness  of  her  old  age.    But  though  they  is  not  in  love  ;  and  a  little  money  does  not

speak  to  Naomi,  and  pray  for  her,  they  do  not  make  amends  for  the  coldness  of  consummate

utterly  forget  the  singular  virtue  of  Ruth.    In  self-righteousness." — Lavge.

the  words,  *' Thy  daughter-in-law,  who  loveth  "Of  Boaz  himself  no    warrior  deeds  are

thee,  who  is  better  to  thee  than  beven  sons,"  known,  and  yet  the  greatest  of  Israel's  heroes,

they  pronounce  on  her  an  eul'>gy  such  as  few  the  conqueror  of  Goliath  [There  is  a  tradition

'Vtrange"  women  could  have  heard  from  He-  that  Goliath  descended  from  Orpah,  as  David

brew  lips.    It  is  because  the  boy  is  Ruth's  son,  from  Ruth]  sprang  from  him.     He  conquered

that  be  is  Naomi's  goel ;  for  how  can  he  fail  to  himself,  and    on    that   account   became    the

love  and  cherish  the  woman  whom  his  mother  ancestor  of  Him  who  triumphed  over  sin  and

has  loved  with  a  love  even  passing  the  love  of  death.     Similarly,  Ruth  had    nothing  but  a

women." — Cox.  heart   full   of   love,  and  yet  to   her,  once   a

"Naomi    is  everywhere  an    image  of   the  daughter  of    Moab,    there    was    given    what

Church  of  Christ,  which    wins,  confesses,  and  neither  Deborah  nor  Jael  obtained,  to  become

fosters  through   love.      Men    whose   natural  the  Mother  of  Him  by  whom  all  the  nations

hearts  are  hostile  to  her,  become  her  obedient  are  redeemed." — IbidU
children.     When  there  ig  apostacy  and  misery


-*o«-


Verses     19—22.
Theme. — Links  in  the  Chain  Christward,

"  How  vain  are  all  hereditary  honours,
Those  poor  possessions  from  another's  deeds,
Unless  our  own  just  virtues  form  our  title,
And  give  a  sanction  to  our  fond  assumption." — SMrley.

And  they  called  his  name  Ohed,  etc.     Now  these  are  the  generationsy  etc.

Not  a  dry  list  of  names  merely  useless  and  cumbersome  as  the  stones  of  the
desert.  These  men  lived,  thought,  played  their  part  in  life  as  we  do  now.  Think
of  it.  Then  again  the  names  themtielves,  not  given  haphazard,  but  from  reasons,
and  with  a  motive.  Obed,  for  instance,  means  a  servant,  and  doubtless  he  was
called  so  because  of  the  part  he  was  to  play  towards  Naomi  and  towards  God.

Suggests  I.  The  interest  men  take  generally  in  genealogy.  (1)  Natural,
Few  men  insensible  or  careless  with  regard  to  their  ancestry,  especially  if  it  has
been  one  which  has  played  a  noble  and  dignified  part.  (2)  Allowed  and  en-
couraged by  Scripture.  The  lineage  of  Israel  for  many  reasons  of  especial  and
world-wide  importance.     (3)  May  be  useful  as  a  stimulus  and  inspiration.

II.  The  interest  men  take  in  this  particular  record.  (1)  Because  of  the  men
themselves.  They  were  men  of  fame.  Nahshon  a  prince  in  Israel ;  David  the
king,  etc.  (2)  Because  they  are  links  in  the  genealogy  of  Christ.  It  is  interesting
^o  notice  the  variety  of  rank  and  condition  in  the  ancestry  of  the  Saviour.
Hahab  the  harlot.  Ruth  the  gleaner.  Boaz,  possibly  the  judge.  David  the
king.  "He  who  was  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,"  touches  our  race
at  every  point,  and  claims  kindred  with  it  all.  (^A.  Thomson).  'Note.  How
this  illustrates  the  spiritual  relationship  to  which  Christ  invites  us.  (3)  Because
they  are  helps  in  the  study ^  and  attestation  of  prophecy  and  of  character.  How
much  history  is  condensed  in  such  a  list  !  Expand  it,  and  what  lessons  are  to
be  enforced  !  Here,  for  instance,  Obed  is  called  the  son  of  Boaz  after  all,  and
not  the  son  of  Mahlon  as  might  have  been  expected.  Note.  Laws  and  customs
are  often  borne  down  by  the  force  of  circumstances  and  of  public  opinion.  Is  not
this  the  reward  of  Boaz — the  reward  of  faith  [qL  on  IV.  6].  His  name  stands
132


CHAP.  IV.  19— L>2.      HOXilLETlC  COMMENTARY:    RUTH,


here  contrary  to  the  usual  custom,  stands  as  it  ought  to  do  among  the  ancestors
of  Christ  himself.     [See  also  Introduction  pp.  4,  5  ;  and  on  I.  2,  pp.  14,  15.]

E.  Price  on  this  :  Theme. — Heraldry.

What  a  vanity  these  genealogies  really  are,  although  called  a  science,  forsooth  !
"  The  pride  of  life  "  is  never  more  exemplified  than  when  a  bad  man  is  seen
poring  over  the  long  catalogue  of,  it  may  be,  worthless  predecessors.  A  relief,
then,  to  study  one,  drawn  out  by  God  Himself,  and  suggesting  the  fondest  hopes
of  men  I

From  Pharez  to  David — what  does  the  genealogical  "  tree  "  really  suggest  to
us'i

Why  !  1.  Our  descent  is  only  valuable  as  it  stands  related  to  God's  purpose
in  Christ  Jesus.  What  would  be  the  real  worth  of  David's  name,  if  taken  away
from  that  of  his  great  successor  ]

2.  That  Providence  marvellously  works  up  our  little  lives  into  the  grand  whole
of  His  ^'Counsel."  Some  of  these  names  may  in  themselves  be  worthless,  yet
can  they  not  break  away  from  God's  overruling  purpose  !

And  3.  Regarding  the  descent  of  David  and  of  Christ  the  Lord  as  historical
facts,  the  scheme  of  the  Jewish  ''  Herald  "  continually  reminds  us  of  our  relation
to,  and  gratitude  for^  the  great  and  glorious  Redeemer  of  men — Himself  the  son
of  Adam !

Names  go  for  something,  when  multiplied  into  that  of  Him,  who  is  the  Alpha
and  the  Omega  of  all  human  events  !

"Obed  a  servant.  It  may  be  a  remem-
brancer of  duty.  Just  as  the  matto  of  the
Prince  of  Wales  is  '  Ich  Dien,'  I  serve.  Any
way  it  is  beautiful  never  to  despise  ser-
vice. *  A  Christian  is  to  be  meet  for  the
Master's  use.'  How  many  there  are  who  are
of  no  use  in  the  world  1  Some  dislike  all  ser-
vice, and  prefer  the  dainty  hand  that  is  never
soiled,  and  the  life  that  is  never  separated  from
selfishness." — Statham.

"Orpah,  the  child  of  sense,  dismayed  by  the
difficulties  presented,  goes  back  agaiu  ;  Ruth,
the  child  of  the  Spirit,  *  persuaded  '  of  better
things,  presses  through  all  obstacles  onward
to  join  the  Israel  of  God,  and  to  find  rest  at
last  where  rest  at  first  had  seemed  impossible.
So  the  'anonymous  kinsman,'  fearing  lest  his
name  should  be  blotted  out  from  Israel,  his  in-
heritance marred,  his  chiMren  called  after
another,  misses  the  one  opportunity  of  life
and  goes  down  to  a  nameless  oblivion.  Boaz,
the  man  of  nobler  spirit,  and  larger  faith,  and
keener  insight,  is  deterred  by  no  fear,  held
back  by  no  difficulty;  and,  contrary  to  cus-
tom, we  find  his  name  here  as  the  father  of
Ohed,  in  the  genealogy  of  David  and  of  Christ.
Is  it  hard  to  read  the  morftl  of  such  a  ttorjr  ?


the  moral  which  works  itself  out  everywhere  in
the  pages  of  Inspiration,  and  repeats  itself  to-
day in  the  history  of  a  thousand  lives  ;  that
sense  deceives  and  sight  fails,  and  cunning
defeats  itself  ;  that  the  law  is  fallible  and  the
letter  kills,  while  faith  endures  and  love  con-
quers :  and  that  only  in  obeying  those  instincts
which  are  of  God,  and  which  spring  up  in
hearts  open  to  His  influence,  is  the  safety  and
solution  of  human  life.  This  is  the  victory  of
faith,  which  overcomes  the  world  and  finds  i(8
name  written  at  hist  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of
Life  for  everiuore." — B.

*■  O,  Moab  !  out  of  thee  shall  come  forth  the
unspotted  Lamb  which  bears  the  eins  of  the
world,  and  rules  over  the  whole  earth  I  From
the  rock  of  the  wilderness,  i.e.,  from  Ruth,
widowed  by  the  death  of  her  husband,  Boaz
derived  Obed  ....  and  from  David  came
Ctirist" — Jerome.

"  M  uch  of  Scripture,  and  still  more  of  that
which  is  written  about  Scripture,  is  but  like
the  valley  of  dry  bones  t^)  eyes  of  sense  and
sin.  But  if  the  Spirit,  without  whom  there  is
no  true  understanding  breathe  upon  it,  what-
ever men  say,  it  may  live  again,  and  that  to
the  praise  and  glorj  of  Go(i,"~'J3*


188


INDEX    OF


SUBJECTS    ANALYTICALLY
ARRANGED.


Page
Accidents,  Their  Meaning     ...  ...       95

Atft'Ction,  Expulsive  I'ower  of  a  New...       61
Atfection,  The  First  Trial  of...  ...       37

„         The  Second    „       ...  ...       46

„         The  Failure  of  a  Merely  Earthly     66
,,         The  Third  and  Last  Trial  ot       64
Affection,  A  Pure  and  Passionate         ...       67
Afflictions,  How  they  should  be  Borne

60,80
Afflictions,  Meaning  of  ...  ...       84

„  Sympathy  and   Companion-


,       75
9,50

50.  80
.     181

48

.  118
,  57
57
113
77
31
58


66,


ship  in
„  Necessary

„  Source  of

Aged,  Mission  of     ...  ...  ...

Agreement,  An  Apparent

Almighiy,  The  Wings  of       ...  ...

Apostacy^  Illustration  of

„         Causes  and  Consequences  of
Approval,  The  Second  Gracious  ...

Astonishment,  A  City  in
Awakenir)g,  The,  in  Moab      ...
Backslider,  Illustration  of
Benevolence,   An    Example  of

108,  110,  127,  137
Benediction,  A         ...  ..  ...       38

Bereavement,  The  First  ...  ...       23

„  The  Second  Great  ...       29

Burden,  The  Precious ...         ...  ...     133

Bereavemenr,  Severi'y  of       ...  ...       23

„  Meicy  Connected  with    ...       24

Business,  How  it  should   be  Attended  to

100,  103,  167
Christian,  The  Steadfast       33,  54,  68,  72,  174
Christ,   The    Kinsman    Redeemer

140,  148,  172.  174
„       The  Bridegroom  Redeemer      146,174
„       Cleaving  to...  ...  47,  6(»,  68

„       Forsaken     ...  ...  56,  64

Children,    What    We    may   Expect    of

Them,  etc.  ..^

Child,  A  Good

Claims  of  Destitute,   How  Attended
Claims  of  Others  Respected    ...
Chance,  Meaning  of
Changes  in  Li^e
„       Family
Chances,  Seeming,  Heal  Providences
Christwards,  Links  in  the  Chain
Commencement,  The  Promising
Contidences,  Home  ...
Conjessions,  Mutual...
Council,  Friends  in  ...
Congratulations

Constancy  at  Home  aad  Abroad
Crisis,  The
Courtesy,  Enforced  ...
Character,  Test  of  ...

,,  Earnestness    of     ...

Choice,  Influence  of...

„      Once  and  for  Ever      ...
,.      Of  Youth      ...
CoD'rast  A  Startling  .,,


to

157,


181
180
168
167
95
80
13
95
182
43
134
134
167
179
...  142
...  .')2
100,  108
...  47
...  72
...  17
...  67
...  69
44.  60


135


Page

Cornfield.  Meal  Times  in        •••  ...     124

Crisis  of  Life  ...  ...  52,  62,  96

Death,   Certainty  and   uncertainty   con-
nected with  ...  22,  31
,,       A  Breach  in  the  Family  Circle

29,  31
Dead,  Kindness  to  the  ...  40,  137

Depression,  Spiritual  ..•  ...       79

Despondency,     „  ...  ...       79

Disposing,  God's      ...  ...  ...       15

Duties,  Promptitude  in  ...  ...     163

„      Honourably    Fulfilled    Bring    a

Blessing  ...  ...  ...       39

Discipline,  Necessary  ...  ...         9

Diligence,  Hlustrated  ,„  ...     105

Divine  Action  toward^  Men  ...  120,  123

Decision,  Result  of  a  Wise     ...  ...       33

Earnestness  of  Character        ...  ...       72

Employers  and  Employed,  Relationship
between...  ...  ...  ...     100

Employment,  An  Honest,  Bought        ...       93
Enquiries,  Mutual    ...  ...  ...     134

Evening,  Labour  until  the      ...  ...     130

Exile,  The  ...  ...  ...         7

Example,  Influence  of  an  Unfavonrable

64,  65
Error,  Foolish,  not  Final  always  ...       17

Family,  Remedial  Processes  in  connec-
tion with  .  ...  ...     172

Family  History,  Important  Step  in      ...       13
Family  Circle,  The  First  Breach  in  the       21
Famine,  The  ...  ...  ...         7

Fame,  its  True  and  Proper  Sphere       ...     178
Genealogy,  Pride  of,  etc.        ...  ...     183

Givini£,  Law  of        ...  ...  126,  128

Giving,  Liberal,  like  God's     ...  ...      127

Gleaner,  The  ...  ...  97,  136

Gleaner,  in  the  Harvest  Field  89,  93,  142

God's  Way  of  Dealing  with  Men

48,97,118,138

„     Willingness  to  Receive  Men        ...     118

God,  Surrender  of  Ourselves  unto         ...       62

„     Testifying  Agninst  Man  81,  84

„     Guidance  from  ...  ...       97

„     A  Beneficent,  Sheltering  Power

120,  138
„     Blessing  of     ...  ...  ...     139

Good  Wishes  ...  ...  ...     179

Gratitude,  an  Example  of      ...  ...     Ill

Goel,  Christ  the       ...  140,  148,  172,  174

„     Mission  of       ...  ...     141,167,173

Heart,  The  Lowly  Attitude  of  a  Grateful     1 1 L
Help,  A  Claitn  for  ...  ...  ...     ir)4

Home,  The  Departure  from    ...  ...       10

Home,  Its  Responsibilities      ...  14.  179

Homeward  often  means  Godward  35,  87

Household.  Separation  in       ...  ...       29

Home,  In  a  Fortunate  Way,  at  a  For-
tunate Time  ...  ...  ...       87

Humility,  An  Example  of     ...      93,  111,  154
Inconstancy,  An  Illustration  of  ...       56

Influence,  Secret  of ...  ...  ...       38

Inheritance,  Marred  ...  ...     169


INDEX.


Paok
liuiocence,  Obecjience  in         ...  ...     150

Instability,  An  Illustration  of  ...       56

Judgments,  Come  in  a  Natural  Way    ...         9
Kinship,  The  Ground  of  Redemption

14"),  172,  174
Kinsman  Redeemer,  The        ...  ...     172

Life,  Journey  of      ...  •••  ...       76

„     Crisis  of  ...  ...  52,  62,  97

„     True  Conception  of        ,..  84,  142

„     A  False  Step  in  ...  ...       18

„     Uncertainty  of  ...  ...       21

Living,  The,  Kindness  to       ...  ...     137

Love.    The   Constancy   of    a    Divinely

Kindled  ...  ...  ...       60

Love,  The  Heart  Realising  a  Ministry  of     122

„     Zealous  and  Careful  for  Others  ...        89

liove's  Valediction  and  Benediction     ...       39

Love,  Can  Deal  Faithfully    ...  ...       4^

„      Test  of  ...  „.  ...       47

„     Truthfulness  of  •••  ...       46

„      Choice  of        ...  ...  ...       61

„      Loyalty  of      ...  ,,.  ...       70

„     Ministry  of     ...  ...    122,126,173

Labour,  Not  to  be  Despised    ...     93  127,  147

„       Constancy  in  .,,  ...     142

Mara,  Meaning  of     ...  ,„  80, 83

Marriages,  Mixed     ...  •••  ...       27

„         In  Moab...  ...  ...       27

Marriage,  Inspired  Idea  of     ...  ...     14ti

„        Darker  Possibilities  Connected

with     ...  ...  ...       26

„        Is  Honourable        ...  146,  175

Manliness,  Its  True  and  Proper  Sphere       178
Master,    The  right    Relations    between,

and  Servants     ...  ...  ...     100

Mindedness,  Steadfast  ...  ...       72

Mission,  A  Delicate,  Defended  ...     152

Moab,  The  Sojourn  iu  ...  ...       17

„       Marriages  in ...  ...  ...       26

Moments  Sacred       ...  ...  ...       66

„        Critical    ...  ...  „,       62

Mutability  of  Human  Affairs  ...       11

Meal ,  The  Common  ...  ...     125

Mind's  Transition,  Result  of  ...  32,  56

Ministry  of  Love,  Effective    ...  122,  126

Name,  Caring  for  a  Good       ...  ...     160

Names  Suggestive    ...  ...  15

Nature  Contrasted  with  Grace       55,  170,  18^^
Need,  Consciousness  of  ...  ...     112

Opportunity,  Improved  ...  ,.,     142

Orpah  ;  or,  the  Mere  Professor  ...       58

Parental  Responsibility  ...  ,„       13

Perseverance,  Secret  of  ...  ...       72

Pilgrimage,  The  Homeward  ...  ...       34

Policy,  A  Short-sighted,  and  its  Merited

Oblivion  ...  ...  ...     169

Posterity,  Prayers  for  ...  ...     177

Progress,  Companionship  in  ,„  ...       75

Prosperity,  Prayers  for  ...  ...     177

Providences,  Descend  to  our  Levels,  &c.  18,  96
Providence,  A  Particular       ...  ,.,       98

Punishments  Designed  ...  ...         9

Prayer  Eases  the  Soul  ,,.  ...       40

Prejudice,  Influence  of  ...  ...     I(-;9

Professor,  The  Mere  ...  ...       6-j

Promises  often  proceed  from    Passion,
not  Principle        ...  ...  ...       44

Property,  Respect  for  Rights  of  ...     168

Poor,  Ministry  unto  ...  124, 128


Pagi

Recompense  of  Righteousness  114,  174

„         E'cpected,  Prayed  for.  Certain     116
RedemptiDn,  Kinship  the  Ground  of

140,  147, 172
Recompense,  Humble  Toil  the  First  Step


towards  an  After

Remembrances,  Painful

Redeemer,  The  Bridegroom
,,  The  Kinsman

Reminder,  An  Important

Re^5t,  in  Another      ...  ...  ...

„    in  Ourselves    ...  ...  ...

Rest,  Seeking  ...

Regard,  The  Outward  Proof  of  the  Divine

Reward,  The  Recompense  of...  114,

Resolutions,  Good  but  Frail ...

Restleseness  under  Affliction...

Reproach,  Shielded  from

Rich  and  Poor,  Relationship  between    90,

Righteous  Man,  his  Character  illustrated

100,  128,  167

Rights  of  Others  Attended  to  ...     168

Saints,  Rules  for  Final  Perseverance  of      54

Salutations  ?  Are  Earnest  Prayers

Selfishness,  Overcautiousness  of

Separation,  The  Thought  of  ...
„  A  Final...  ...

Shelter,  God  a  ...  ...

Sincerity,  A  Test  of  ...

Soul,  The  Half-awakened      ...  „.

Sorrow,  Mutual        ...  ...

Sorrows,  The  Beginning  of    ...

Stranger,  Attention  to  ...  ...

„         Care  for    ...

„         Provision  for  ...

Strong,  Claims  of  the  Weak  upon  the  ...

Suffering,  Resignation  in

Spirit,  A  Generous,  Care  and  Thought-
fulness  of  ...  ...         37, 93,  128


92

...  Ot>

...  174
147,  172
...  147
...  162
...  162
...  145
123
116
44
11
128
128


10)

170

42

53

155

37

59

41

8

103

108

124

90

60


119,


Spiritual  Life,  Revival  of

„  Affinities         ...  ...

Step.  A  Decisive     ...  „,  ,,,

Steadfast-mindedness  ...  ...

Strong  and  Weak,  Relationship  Between
Tears,  Natural         ...  ...  ...

„      A  Protestation  of  Fidelity
Thrift,  An  Instance  of  ...  ,,,

Tt)lerance,  A  Christian  Virtue
Truthfulness  of  Love  ...  ...

Un  worthiness,  Confessions  of  ...

Valediction,  A  ...  ...  ...

Virtue,  Recognised  and  Blessed
Vows,  Solemn

Wandering,  Where  it  Leads  and  Ends...
Wanderer,  The         ...  ...

„  The,  Home  again  ...  ...

Wife,  Introduction  to  ...

Winner,  The  Bread  ...  ...

Wife,  A  Good         ...  ,„  ...

Wings  of  the  Almighty
W  idow.  Story  of       ...
Wishes,  Good


35
62
33

72
91
41
42
142
49

4;

111

38
156
66
19
18
87
105

im

28

120

30

38,  100,  116,  135,  178


World,  A  Perplexing  Medley  ...       45

Worldling,  Character  of  (Illustrated)  ...     170
Work,  Not  Degradation         ...       93,  127,  147
Youth         ...  ...  ...  ...     181

„       Choice  of        ...  ...  ...       69

,,       The  Season  of  Warm  and  Gene-


rous Emotions


42


TABLE     OF

THEMES     HOMILETICALLY     TREATED

CONSECUTIVELY    ARRAJMGED,


CHAPTER    L


Thbmb — The  Wanderebi.


Verm
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
8

3

4
5
6

7


8-


-9
9

10
11-13
11-13


The  Famine  and  Exile

The  Beginning  of  Sorrows

The  Departure  from  Home

Family  Changes

Man  Proposing,  God  Disposing

The  Snj  )urn  in  Moab

The  Wanderers  ...  ...

The  First  Breach  in  the  Family

Circle
The  First  Bereavement
Marriages  in  Moab     ...
Ihe  Second  Great  Bereavement
The  Awakening  in  Moab
The  Homeward  Pil^^rimage      ...
The  First  Trial  of  Affection      ...
A  Benediction  and  a  Valediction
Mutual  Sorrow

The  Promising  Commencement
The  Second  Trial  of  Affection...
Resignation  in  Suffering


Page

Verse

7

14

8

10

14

13

15

14

17

14

18

16

21

23

16-17

26

29

16-17

31

18

34

19

37

19

38

20

41

43

21

46

22

60

The  Crisis  and  the  Contrast  Once
Again    ...

The  Failure  of  a  Merely  Earthly
Affection

Orpah  ;  or,  the  Mere  Professor...

The  Constancy  of  a  Divinely
Kindled  Love

The  Third  and  Last  Trial  of
Affection  ...

Sacred  Moments  and  Solemn
Vows     ...  •••

The  Choice  of  Youth  ...  •••

Steadfast-mindedness

Companionship  in  Progress       ...

A  City  in  Astonishment

Spiritual  Despondency  and  De-
pression ...  ...

Painful  Remembrances  ...

The  Wanderer  Home  Again    •••


62

56

58


60

64

66
69
72
75

77

79
83
87


CHAPTER    XL
Theme — The  Gleaner  in  the  Harvest  Fields.


1  The  Claims  of  the  Weak  upon

the  Strong

2  Humble  Toil,  the  First  Step  to-

wards an  After  Recompense
8    Seeming  Chances,   Real    Provi-
dences    ...

3  The  Gleaner

4  The  Right  Relationship  between

Masters  and  Servants
5-7    Attention  to  the  Stranger  at  the

Gate
6-7     Introduction  to  a  Future  Wife...
8-9     Care   for   the    Stranger    at    the

Gate

10  The  Lowly  Attitude  of  a  Grate-

ful Heart  ...

11  The  Second  Gracious  Approval

12  The  Recompense  of  Reward

12     The  Wings  of  the  Almighty     ...
12     The  Sheltering  Widg
12     The    Habit    of    Holy    Commun-
ion ...  .^,


13

The  Heart  Realising  a  Ministry

90

of  Love  ...             ...             ...

122

13

The  Outward  Proof  of  the  Di-

92

vine  Reward

123

14

Provision  for  the  Stranger  at  the

95

Gate      ...

124

97

14

Meal-time  in  the  Com  Field     ...

124

14

The  Common  Meal    ...

125

100

15  16

Liberal  Giving,  like  God's        •••

127

17

Labour  until  the  Evening

130

103

18

The    Bread    Winner    and    Her

1U5

Precious  Burden  ...

133

19

Home  Confidences,  Mutual  Con-

108

fessions,  and  Enquiries

134

19

God's  Presence  an  Incitement  to

111

n  Question

135

113

19

^aily  Gleaning

136

116

20

Kindness  to  the  Living  and  the

118

Dead       ...

137

119

V0  21

Kinship  the  Ground  of  Redemp-

tion       ...             ...

140

120

22

Constancy  at  Home  and  Abroad

li2

INDEX.


CHAPTER    III.


Theme — The  Claimant  in  the  Threshing-Floob.


Tere*

1     One  Seeking  Rest  for  Another...
2-4     An  Important  Reminder
2-4     Work  associated  with  the  Posi-
tion of  a  Gentleman
5-6     Obedii  roe  in  Innocence  ...

7-14     A  Delicate  Mission  Defended    ...
9     A  Cry  for  Shelter  and  a  Claim
for  Help  •••


Pago

verse

145

1(»-11

147

12  13

14

147

18

150

162

18

154


Virtue  Kecognised  and  Blessed...
Care  for  the  Claims  of  Others  ...
Caring  for  a  Good  Name
Rest   in    Ourselves   and    Rest  in

Another...
Promptitude  in   Duties,  Secular

or  Sacred  •••  •••


Page

I5'i

157
l(iO

162

163


CHAPTER    IV.


Theme — The  Goel  at  the  Gath.


1-6    Friends  in  Council
16     Respect  for  Property  ...
6     A  Short-sighted  Policy  and  its

Merited  Obli  ion  ...
9     The  Kinsman  Redeemer
10     The  Bridegroom  Redeemer
11-13    Prayers  for  Posterity  and  Pros-
perity    ...  .••  ...


167

11

168

11

169

14-15

172

14  15

174

15-16

10-22

177

19-22

Children  the  Gift  of  Heaven    ...  177

Manliness,   its    Fit  and    Proper

Sphere    ...  ...  ...  178

Congratulations  and  Good  Wishes  1 79

A  Good  Child  ...  ...  180

Yonh  and  Age  ...  ...  181

Links  in  the  Chain  Christwards  182

Heraldry      ,,,  ...  ...  183


LIST  OF  AUTHORS   CONSULTED.


Allen,  J.  P.,  M.A.    MSS.  on  "  Ruth."
BiRNARD,  Richard  (1628).     «  Ruth's  Recom-
pense."
Binnet,  Thos.,  D.D.     MSS.  on  ''  Ruth."
Braden,  W.  (1874).    "  Beautiful  Gleaner."
"  Book  of  Ruth  ;  or,  the  Guide  of  the

Soul"  (1860).
Casskl.  Paulus,  D.D.     In  "Lange  on  Ruth."
Clarkp,  Adam,  D.D.  (1836).
Cox.  .Samuel  (1876)      "  Ruth's  Recompense."
CuMMl^G,    John,  D  D.   (1859)       "Ruth,   a

Chapter  in  Providence."
Fuller,  Thos,  D.D   (1650).     "Comment,  on

Rath."
Gill  Jo!  n,  D.D.
Gkosser,  W.  H.  (1874).     "Joshua  and  his

.Successors."'
Hall,  Bishop  (1656).     "Contemplations."
Henry,  Matthew  (1708).
Keil  and  DtLiizscH  (1868).     "Commentary

on  Ruth."
KiTTO,   John,   D.D.  (1850).     "Daily  Bible

Illustrations."
Kmgut.  J.  A    (1798).     "Reflections  on  the

liook  of  Ruth."
Lawson,  Geo.,  D.D.  (1805).       «  Lectures  on

r»iiih.  '
Mac  BE  I  ij,  R       '  MSS.  Outlines  "
HACAhTNKY,  H.  B.  (1842).       "  Observations

Q»  Rutjj."


Macgowan,  John  (1781).     "Discourses  on

Ruth."
Patrick,  Bp  (1702).    "  Commentary."
Philpot,  B.,  (1872).     «  Lectures  on  Ruth  "
Price,  Aubrey  (1869).    "  Lectures  on  Ruth."
Price,  E.      '  MSS.  Outlines  "
Pulpit,  The     "  Commentary."
Scott,  John  (1844)      "  P^xplanatory  Notes  *'
Simeon  Charh  s  ( 1 832\    '*  Horae  Homileticae.'*
Speaker's  Commentary  The  (1876).
Spurgeon,  Charles  H.     '  Two  Sermons  on

Ruth."
Stanley.  Arthur  P      "  Jewish  Church."
Terry,  M   S,  (1875).     "  Whedon's  Commen-
tary."
Thompson.  Andrew,  D.D.  (1877;.     "Home

Life  in  Ancient  Palesrme."
Timson,  March      MSS  on  "  Ruth."
Toller  Thomas  N.  (1848).     "  Discourses  on

the  Book  of  Ruth."
ToPSALL,    Edward    (1696).

Religion."
Trapp,    John,    D.D.    (1662)

tary."
Tyng,  Stephen,  D.D.    (1856)

man."
Wordswokth,  Bi>h()p  (1865
Wkight,  Charles  H

Ruth,'   in  Hebrew.

Stc.    et».


"  Reward    of

**  Commen-

*  Rich   Kins-

On  "  Ruth.'*
H.  (lo64).     "Book  of


HOMILETICAL    COMMENTARY


ON  THE  BOOKS  OF


SAMUEL.


BT


EEY.    W.    HARRIS,


AUInOR    0?


HomtUttcal  Commentary  on  the  Bool-  of  Proverbs,  Onf lives  of  Sermons  on  Mil  add  and  Parahlet
of  Old  Test&ment,  and  ^erm,ons  for  Boys  and  Girls,


Krlu  ¥or!t

FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY

London  and  Toronto

1892


CONTENTS.


Introduction


1


BOOK    I.


CHAPTER  I.


VERSES


Critical  and  Expository  Notes

1  Elkanah,  Genealogy  of  ...

2 — 8  Elkanah,  Household  of  ...

9 — 11  Hannah,  Prayer  of

12 — 18  Hannah  and  Eli ...

19 — 20  Samuel,  Birth  of...

21 — 23  Elkanah  in  the  Temple

24 — 28  Hannah's  Vow    •


5

7

i>

11

15

19

20

21

CHAPTER  II.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 10     Song  of  Hannah  ...
12—17     Sons  of  Eli

18 — 21,  26     Samuel  in  the  Temple
22 — 25     Eli's  Reproof  of  his  Sons
27 — 36    Messenger  from  God  to  Eli


23

25
40
44
46
50


1—10
10—21


CHAPTER  HI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes

Samuel,  Call  of   ...

Eli  receives  the  message  from  Samuel  ...


...  •••
. • •  •••
...         ••  •


57
58
62


CHAPTER  IV.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1,  2     Israel's  First  Defeat

3 — 11     Ark,  Capture  of  the

12—22     Eli's  Death


67
68
69
75


CONTENTS.


7ERSES


CHAPTER  V.
Critical  and  Expository  Notes


1 — 5     Dagoii,  Fall  of     ...
6 — 12     Fhilistiiies  Smitten


PAGB

78
79
82


CHAPTER  VI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 21     Ark,  Return  of  the


84
85


CHAPTER  VII

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1,  2     Kirjatli-jearim,  Ark  in   ...
3,  4     Israel's  Repentance
5,  6,  15 — 17     Mizpeli,  Gathering  at
7 — 12     Philistines,  i)efeat  of


89
92
94
97
99


CHAPTER  VIII.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes

1 — 3     Samuel's  Sons     ...

4 — 22    King,  Israel  desires  a


103
104
107


:'_  CHAPTER  IX.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 14     Saul's  Seeks  his  Father's  Asses...
15 — 17     Saul  and  Samuel,  Meeting  of   •••


112
114
118


CHAPTER  X.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 10     Saul,  Anointing  of
11,  12,  27     Prophets,  Saul  among  the
17 — 20     Saul  Proclaimed  Kina:


•••         •••


...         •••


119
122
126
127


CHAPTER  XI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 3     Jabesh-Giilead,  Invasion  of
4 — 15    Saul  Defeats  the  Ammonites     ...


130
132
133


CHAPTER  XII.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 25     Samuel  resiijus  his  Olhce


135
137


CONTENTS.  vii


CHAPTER  XIII.

VERSES  PAGE

Critical  and  Expository  Notes       141

1 — 23     Sauls  First  Act  of  Disobedience          143


CHAPTER  XIV.


Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 16     Jonathan's  Victory  over  the  Philistines
17 — 46     Saul's  Rash  Oath


CHAPTER  XV.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 5     Amalek,  Sentence  upon  ...
10 — 12     Samuel's  Prayer  for  Saul
4 — 9, 13 — 23     Saul's  Second  Act  of  Disobedience
24 — 35    Saul's  Coiiiessiou


CHAPTER  XVI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 5     Bethlehem,  Samuel  sent  to
6 — 12     David,  Anointing  of

13 — 18    David  at  Saul's  Court

19 — 23    David  at  Saul's  Court    •••


CHAPTER  XVII.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes

12 — 29    David's  Visit  to  his  Brothers

1—11,30—58    Goliath  and  David


CHAPTER  XVHI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 4     Jonathan  and  David       ...         •••
5 — 30    David,  Saul's  Jealousy  of


CHAPTER  XIX.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 7     Jonathan's  Intercession  ...
7 — 17     Michal  delivers  David    ...

18,    19     David's  Fli<,dit  to  Hamah

20 — 24     Propliets,  Saul  among  the


...

•  ••

148

...

.  ••

148

...

•  ••

153

•••

•••

155

•••

158

...

...

160

...

...

162

..•

•••

166

•  •••

167

169

172

176

179

...

•••

•••

182

...

...

•••

185

...

•••

•••

187

•••

•••

191

•••

•..

193

•••

•••

195

199

200
201
204
206


Vlll


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  XX.

VERSES

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 42     Jouafchaii,  iSaul's  anger  against ...


«»AOE

209
211


CHAPTER  XXI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 15    Gath,  David's  Flight  to


•••
•••


•••
•••


213
214


CHAPTER  XXIL

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 4     AduUam,  David  in  the  Cave  of...
5     Gad,  Tiie  Pruphet
6 — 23     Priests,  Slaughter  of  the


•  ••

•••

218

•  ••

•  ••

220

•  ••

•  ••

221

•  ••

•••

223

CHAPTER  XXHI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 6     Keilah,  David  delivers    ...
7 — 12     Keilah,  Saul  marches  against    ...
18 — 18     Jonathan's  visit  to  David  in  the  Wilderness
19 — 29    Ziphites,  Treachery  of  the


225

226
228
230
231


CHAPTER  XXIV.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 7     Cave,  Saul  meets  David  in  the  ...
8 — 15     David's  vindication  before  Saul
16 — 22     Saul's  Confession...         ...         ...         •••


233

233

236

238


CHAPTER  XXV.

Critical  and  Expository  iNotes
1     Samuel,  Death  of
2 — 42     Nabal  and  Abiizail


...

...

•  .•

239

...

...

...

242

...

...

•  ••

243

CHAPTER  XXVI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes       251

1 — 95     David  visits  Saul's  Camp  ...         ...         ...         •••         •••         253


CHAPTER  XXVII.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 12     David  in  Gath     ...


..•         •••         •••


257
258


LONTENTS.


CHAPTEll  XXVlll.

VERSES

CiiiTicAL  AND  Expository  Notes
3 — 25     Eiidor,  The  Womaii  of


PAGE

•  ••

•••

2G0

•  ••

•••

262

CHAPTER  XXIX.


Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 11    Acliish,  David,  and  the  Philistines       ••


•••         •••


•••


•••
•••


265
265


CHAPTER  XXX.


Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 31     Ziklag,  David  at...


•••         •••


•••         ...         •••         •••


•••
•••


•••
...


26/
267


CHAPTER  XXXI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 7     Death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan
8 — 12    Jabesh-Gilead,  Gratitude  of  the  men  of


•••

•  ••

•  ••

270

...

•  ••

•  ••

270

•••

•••

•••

272

BOOK    II.


CHAPTER  I.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes

1 — 16     David  receives  tidings  of  Saul's  Death

17 — 27    Lament  of  David  over  the  Death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan


274
275
276


1—7
8—32


CHAPTER  11.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
Hebron,  David  goes  to   ...
Ishbosheth  made  Bang  •••        •••        .


•••
...


278

280
282


1—21
2>— 39


CHAPTER  III.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
Abncr  reiuh^'S  allegiance  to  David       ..
Abner,  Murder  of  ..c         •••         ••


...


•••
•••


•••
•••
•••


284

280
288


CHAPTER  IV.

Critical  and  expository  Notks
1 — 12     Ishbosheth,  Murder  of


•••


291
292


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  V.

VERSES  rA.GB

Critical  and  Expository  NoTr.s       294

1 — 5     King  of  all  Israel,  David            ...  ...          ...         ...          ...         297

6 — 25     Jerusalem,  Conquest  of ...         •••  ..          ...         ...         ...         299


CHAPTER  VI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes       302

1 — 29     Zion,  Removal  of  Ark  to  ...         •••         ...         304


CHAPTER  Vn.

Critical  and  Expository  INotes       311

1 — 7     l^emple,  David  Forbidden  to  Build  the  313

12 — 16     Messiah,  Promise  of  the 316

17 — 24    Messiah,  Promise  of  the  319


CHAPTER  Vni.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes       322

1 — 18     Conquests  and  Establishment  of  David  323


CHAPTER  IX.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes      325

1 — 13    Mephibosheth 326


CHAPTER  X.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes       828

1 — 19    Ammonites,  David  and  the       329


CHAPTER  XI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes       832

1 — 27     David's  Adultery  and  Murder  of  Uriah  333


CHAPTER  XIL

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
1 — 13     Nathan  and  David
14 — 25     Punishment  of  David     ...
26 — 31     Ammon,  Final  Conquest  of


CHAPTER  XHI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes       352

1 — 39     Amnion,  Sin  and  Murder  of      354


TES

•••

•••

•••

•••

838

•  ••

•••

...

...

•••

340

•••

••.

...

...

•••

346

•••

•  ».

...

...

•  ••

351

CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  XIV.

VEKSES  PAOE

Critical  and  Expository  Notes       356

1 — 24     'JV*kt».ili,  the  Woman  of...          ...          ...          ...          ...          ...  358

25 — 33     Absalom,  David  forgives            360


CHAPTER  XV.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes       361

I — 37     Abiialum,  Rebellion  under  363


CHAPTER  XVI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes       367

1 — 4     Ziba,  Treachery  of          ...         ...         ...         ...          ...         ...  368

5 — 19     Sliiiiiei  and  David           ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          ...  36ii

20 — 23     Ahithophel's  Counsel 370


CHAPTER  XVH.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes       •..  371

1 — 24     Ahitliophel,  death  of      ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  ...  372

25 — 29     Mahanaian,  Ddvid  at       ..         ...         ...         ...         -.  .~.  374


CHAPTER  XVni.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes       376

1 — 33    Abs'^'om,  death  of  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         •••        377


CHAPTER  XIX

CiuriCAL  AND  Expository  Notes       381

1 — 15     David's  Restoration        ...         ...         ..  ...         ...         ...  383

16—40     Shiinei,  Mephibosheth,  and  Earziilai 385


CHAPTER  XX.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes       ...         3S.S

C.  xix.  41  to  XX.  2     lShe})na,  the  Rebellion  of     ...  ...         ...         ...  3*.U)

14 — 26     IShebna,  Death  of              ..         ...         ...  ...          ...          ...  3'J.'


CHAPTER  XXI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes       392

1 — 9     Giieonites,  Breach  of  Covenant  with  tliem  punislied  ...         ...  394

Jw — J4     liizuah  and  David  ...  ,,,         ...  ...  ..,  ,,.  ^^^


xii


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  XXII.

VEBSBS

Critical  and  Expository  Notks
David's  t:::ong  of  Tliaiiks<;iviiig —
L      J. «/     Jr3ii*t       1.  •••  •••  •••  •••  ••

20 — 28     Part     IT.

29—40     Part  III

4:7 — OL     larC    J.Y»«»»         •••         •••         •••         ••


PAGE

400

403
403
412
416


CHAPTER  XXIII.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes

1 — 7     David's  Proi)lieey
8—39     Mighti'  ^leii,  the,  and  the  Well  at  Betlilelie:ii...


418

420
423


CHAPTER  XXIV.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes
I — 25    Numberiiig  the  People  ..•        •


•••        •••


••    •••    •••         •••


425

428


HOMTLETIO  COMMENTARY

ON  THE

BOOKS    OF    SAMUEL.


INTRODUCTION.


The  Eooks  of  Samuel  form  but  one  work  in  the  Hebrew  MSS.  The  division
was  first  made  in  the  Septungiiit  translation,  where  they  are  reckoned  as  be-
longing to  the  Books  of  the  Kings,  and  are  called  "  the  books  of  the  kingdoms,"
*'  evidently  with  reference,"  says  Keil,  "  to  the  fact  that  each  of  these  works
contains  an  account  of  the  history  of  a  double  kingdom,  viz.,  the  Books  of
Samuel  the  history  of  the  kingdoms  of  Saul  and  David,  and  the  Books  of  Kings
that  of  the  kingdoms  of  Judah  and  Israel."  The  suitability  of  such  a  title  is
very  obvious  when  we  consider  that  the  book  contains  an  account  of  the
establishment  of  the  monarchy  in  Israel."  Its  date  and  autliorsJiip  rest  entirely
upon  conjecture,  and  scholars  are  divided  in  their  opinions  u])on  both  subjects.
The  Jews  believed  that  the  first  twenty-four  chapters  of  the  first  book  were
written  by  Samuel  himself,  and  that  the  remainder  was  the  work  of  Nathan
and  Gad.  (See  1  Chron.  xxix.  29).  Many  modern  scholars  of  the  Anglican
Church  adopt  this  view.  Keil  and  other  commentators,  however,  regard  it  as
certain  that  the  book  was  not  written  until  after  the  division  of  the  kingdom
under  Rehoboam,  and  found  their  opinion  principally  upon  the  remark  in
1  Sam.  xxvii.  6,  that  "  Ziklag  pertaineth  unto  the  kings  of  Judah  unto
this  day^  There  is  internal  evidence  in  the  contents  and  style  of  the  book
that  it  was  not  written  long  after  the  division  of  the  kingdom.  There  is,
for  instance,  no  reference  to  the  decay  of  the  kingdoms,  and  the
style  and  language  are  free  from  the  Chaldaisms  of  a  later  period.  The  author
of  the  article  on  the  *'  Books  of  Samuel,"  i»  Smith's  Biblical  Dictionary ,  says,
"  The  Book  of  Samuel  is  one  of  the  best  specimens  of  Hebrew  prose  in  the  golden
age  of  Hebrew  literature.  In  prose  it  holds  the  same  place  which  Joel  and  the
undisputed  prophecies  of  Isaiah  hold  in  poetical  and  prophetical  language.  It
is  free  from  the  peculiarities  of  the  Book  of  Judges,  and  likewise  from  the  slight
peculiarities  of  the  Pentateuch.  It  is  a  striking  contrast  to  the  Book  of
Chronicles,  which  undoubtedly  belongs  to  the  silver  age  of  Hebrew  prose;  and  it
does  not  contain  so  many  alleged  Chaldaisms  as  the  few  in  the  Books  of  Kings."
Upon  this  subject  of  its  authorship  Keil  says,  "Judging  irom  the  spirit  of  his
writings,  the  author  was  a  prophet  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  It  is  unanimously
admitted,  however,  that  he  made  use  of  written  documents  made  by  persons
who  were  contemporaries  of  the  events  described."  A  reference  to  one  such
l)erson  is  made  in  2  Sam.  i.  18,  and  it  seems  highly  probable  that  the  other
sources  drawn  upon  by  the  author  were  the  works  of  Samuel,  Gad,  and
Nathan,  mentioned  in  1  Chron.  xxix.  29.  "  It  is  very  evident,"  says  Keil,
"that  the  author  had  sources  composed  by  eye-witness  at  command,  and
that  these  were  employed  with  an  intimate  laiowledge  of  the  facts,  and
with  historical  fidelity,  inasmuch  as  the  history  is  distinguished  by  great
perspicuity  and  vividness  of  description,  by  a  careful  delineation  of  the  cha-
racters  of   the   persons  engaged,  and  by  great  accuracy  in   the   accounts   of

B  i


ROM ILETIC  COMMENTARY'.    SAMUEL,  book  i.


localities,  and  of  subordinate  circumstances  connected  witli  tlie  liistorical
events."  The  chronology  of  the  events  recorded  in  the  book  of  Samuel  in
relation  to  those  of  the  latter  part  of  the  book  of  Judges  has  also  been  a  matter
of  some  dispute.  It  may  be  stated  in  general  that  the  events  recorded  embrace
a  period  of  about  125  years,  and  there  is  strong  reason  to  believe  that  the
judgeshi])s  of  Eli  and  Samson  were  partly  contemporaneous,  and  that  Samuel
was  between  twenty  and  thirty  years  old  when  Samson  died,  the  work  of  the
latter  beini;  confined  entirely  to  the  west  and  south-west  of  the  kingdom.  The
silence  of  the  author  of  the  one  book  concerning  the  principal  persons  mentioned
by  the  other  is  no  argument  against  this  view.  "  Notwithstanding  the  clear
and  definite  account  given  in  the  Book  of  Judges,"  sa3^s  Heugstenberg,  "  it  has
been  too  often  forgotten  that  it  was  not  the  author's  intention  to  give  a
complete  history  of  this  period,  but  that  he  only  occupies  himself  with  a
certain  class  of  events,  with  the  acts  of  the  Judges  in  a  limited  sense,  the
men  whose  authority  among  the  people  had  its  foundation  in  the  outward
deliverance  which  the  Lord  vouchsafed  to  the  nation  by  tlieir  instrumentality.
In  this  sense  Eli  was  by  no  means  a  Judge,  although  in  1  Sam.  iv.  18
it  is  said  that  he  ''judged  Israel."  Eli  was  High-priest,  and  merely
exercised  over  the  affairs  of  the  nation  a  more  or  less  extended  free
influence  which  had  its  origin  in  his  priestly  dignity.  Hence  the
author  of  Judges  had  nothing  to  do  with  Eli,  and  we  are  not  to  conclude
from  the  fact  that  he  does  not  mention  him  that  Eli's  influence  was
not  felt  at  the  time  of  which  he  treats.  And  the  author  of  the  books  of  Samuel
had  just  as  little  to  do  with  Samson.  His  attention  is  fixed  on  Samuel,  and
he  only  mentions  Eli  because  his  history  is  so  closely  interwoven  with  that  of
Samuel.  The  Book  of  Samuel  takes  up  the  thread  of  history  where  the  Book
of  Judges  lets  it  fall,  towards  the  end  of  the  forty  years'  oppression  by  the
Philistines  (1  Sam.  vii.).  The  following  table  is  given  in  Lange's  Commentary
(English  translation) : —

Samson's  judgeship,  -        -        -        B.C.  1120—1100.

Eli's  life  (98  years)  ...        B.C.  1208— 1110.

Eli's  judgeship  (40  years)    -        -        -        B.C.  1150— 1110.

Samuel's  life,      -        -        -  B.C.  1120  (or  1130)— 1060.

Saul's  reign B.C.  1076—1050.

But  the  compiler  doubts  "Whether  we  have  sufficient  data  at  present  for
settling  the  question."

The  history  contained  in  the  Book  of  Samuel  is  the  history  of  a  great  epoch
in  the  history  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  consequently  of  an  epoch  in  the  history
of  the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth.  In  the  language  of  Dr.  Erdmariy
one  of  the  authors  of  Dr.  Lange's  Commentary — "  The  theocracy  was  extri-
cated by  Samuel's  labours  from  the  deep  decline  pictured  in  the  first  book,
and  in  the  Book  of  Judges,  and  under  the  guidance  of  God  was  led  by
this  great  reformer  into  a  new  path  of  development.  Without,  under  Samuel
and  the  royal  rule  introduced  by  him,  political  freedom  and  independence  of
heathen  powers  were  gradually  achieved,  and  within,  the  internal  theocratic
covenant-relation  between  the  people  of  Israel  and  their  God  was  renewed
and  extended  on  the  basis  of  the  restored  unity  and  order  of  political  and

national   life  by  the  union  of  the  prophetic   and  royal   offices From

the  beginning  of  our  books  we  see  the  great  theocratic  significance  of  the
prophetic  order  in  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel ;  in  the  first  place,  as
the  organ  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  the  medium  of  the  Divine  guidance  and
control.  Samuel  appears  here  as  the  true  founder  of  the  Old  Testament
prophetic  order  as  a  permanent  public  power  alongside  of  the  priesthood  and
the  kingly  office.  Wordsworth  says,  "The  Book  of  Samuel  occupies  an  unique
place,  and  has  a  special  value  and  interest,  as  revealing  the  kingdom  of  Christ.
2


CHAP.  I.  UOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   SAMi'KL.


It  is  tlie  first  Imok  in  Holy  Scripture  vvliich  declares  tlie  incarnation  of  Christ  as
Kin^i2^.  It  is  the  first  book  in  Scripture  which  announced  tliat  the  kino(loiu
founded  in  Him,  raised  up  from  the  seed  of  David,  would  be  universal  and  ever-
lasting." An  examination  of  the  book  shows  that  the  author's  purpose  was  not
to  give  a  chronological  statement  of  facts.  It  differs  in  this  respect  widely
from  the  Books  of  Kings.  References  are  made  to  facts  assumed  to  be  known
transactions  apparently  trival  are  narrated  witli  great  fulness,  and  events  which
generally  hold  a  prominent  place  in  historical  works — such  as  great  victories —
are  very  briefly  passed  over.  The  last  four  chapters  are  not  immediate  historic
continuations  of  the  events  related  in  the  preceding  chapters,  and  the
history  of  David  ceases  quite  ahru})tly,  and  makes  it  evident  that  the  author's
aim  was  not  that  of  a  mere  historian  or  biographer.  We  conclude  on  this
subject  with  some  extracts  from  Kcil's  Introduction  to  his  Commentary  on  this
Book  :  "  Throu,:;h  the  establishment  of  the  monarchy,  the  people  of  Jehovah's
possession  became  a  '  world  power  ;'  the  kingdom  of  God  was  elevated  into  a
Idngdom  of  the   world,  as  distinguished  from   other  ungodly  kingdoms  of  the

world,  which  it  was  eventually  to  overcome  in  the  power  of  its  God But

the  Israelitish  mon  irchy  could  never  thus  acquire  the  power  to  secure  for  the
kingdom  of  God  a  victory  over  all  its  foes,  except  as  the  king  himself  was
diligent  in  his  endeavours  to  be  at  all  times  simply  the  instrument  of  the  God-
King,  and  exercise  his  authority  solely  in  the  name  and  according  to  the  will  of
Jehovah  ;  and  as  the  natural  selfishness  and  pride  of  man  easily  made  this  con-
centration of  the  supreme  earthly  power  in  a  single  person  an  occasion  for  self-
aggrandisement,  and  therefore  the  Israelitish  kings  were  exposed  to  the
temptation  to  use  the  plenary  authority  entrusted  to  them,  even  in  opposition
to  the  will  of  God,  the  Lord  raised  up  for  Himself  organs  of  His  own  Spirit,
in  the  persons  of  the  prophets,  to  stand  by  the  side  of  the  kings  and  make

known  to  them  the  will  and  counsel  of  God Whilst  the  predictions

of  the  anointed  of  the  Lord  before  and  in  connection  with  the  call  of
Samuel  (1  Sam.  ii.  27-36,  iii.  11  sqq.),  show  the  deep  spiritual  connection
between  the  prophetic  order  and  the  regal  office  in  Israel,  the  insertion
of  them  in  these  books  is  a  ])roof  that  from  the  very  outset  the  author
had  this  new  organisation  of  the  Israelitish  kingdom  of  God  before  his  mind,  and
that  it  was  his  intention  not  simply  to  hand  down  biographies  of  Samuel,  Saul,
and  David,  but  to  relate  the  history  of  the  Old  Testament  Kingdom  of  God,  at
the  time  of  its  elevation  out  of  a  deep  outward  and  inward  decline  into  the  full
authority  and  power  of  a  kingdom  of  the  Lord,  before  which  all  its  enemies  were
to  be  compelled  to  bow.  Israel  was  to  become  a  kingship  of  priests,  i.e.,  a
Idngdom  whose  citizens  were  priests  and  kings.  The  Lord  iiad  announced  this
to  the  sons  of  Israel  before  the  covenant  was  concluded  at  Sinai,  as  the  ultimate
object  of  their  adoption  as  the  people  of  His  possession  (Exod.  xix.  5,  6).  Now,
although  this  promise  reached  far  beyond  the  times  of  the  Old  Covenant,  and
will  only  receive  its  perfect  fulHlment  in  the  completion  of  the  kingdom  of  God
under  tlie  New  Covenant,  yet  it  was  to  be  realised  even  in  the  people  of  Israel
so  far  as  the  economy  of  the  Old  Testament  allowed.  Israel  was  not  only  to
become  a  priestly  nation,  but  a  royal  nation  also  ;  not  only  to  be  sanctified  as  a
congregation  of  the  Lord,  but  also  to  be  exalted  into  a  kingdom  of  God.
The  establishment  of  the  eaniiiv  monarchy,  therefore,  was  not  only
an  eventful  turning  point,  but  also  an  "epoch-making"  advance  in
the  development  of  Israel  towards  the  goal  set  before  it  in  its  Divine
calling.  And  this  advance  became  the  ])ledge  of  the  ultimate  attainment  of
the  goal,  through  the  promise  which  David  received  from  God  (2  Sam.
vii.  12-16),  that  the  Lord  would  establish  the  throne  of  his  kingdom  for
ever.  With  this  promise  God  established  for  His  anointed  the  eternal  covenant,
to  which  David  reverted  at  the  close  of  his  reign,  and  upon  which  bo  rested


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  i.


his  Divine  announcement  of  tlie  just  ruler  over  men,  the  ruler  in  the  fear  of
God  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  1-7).  Thus  the  close  of  tliese  books  points  back  to  theii
commencement.  The  propliecy  of  the  pious  mother  of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  ii.  10)
found  a  fulfihnent  in  the  kingdom  of  David,  which  was  at  the  same  time  a
pledge  of  the  ultimate  completion  of  the  kingdom  of  God  under  the  sceptre  of
the  Son  of  David,  the  promised  Messiali.  This  is  one,  and  in  fact  the  most
conspicuous,  arrangement  of  the  facts  connected  with  the  history  of  salvation,
which  determined  the  plan  and  composition  of  the  work  before  us.  By  the  side
of  this  there  is  another,  which  does  not  stand  out  so  prominently  indeed,  but
yet  must  not  be  overlooked.  At  the  very  beginning,  the  inward  decay  of  the
house  of  God  under  the  liigh  priest  Eli,  is  exhibited;  and  in  the  announcement
of  the  judgment  upon  the  house  of  Eli,  a  long-continued  oppression  of  the
dwelling  place  [of  God]  is  foretold  (chap.  ii.  32).  Then  in  the  further  course  of
the  narrative  it  is  shown  how  David  first  of  all  brought  the  ark  of  the  covenant,
about  wliich  no  one  had  troubled  himself  in  the  time  of  Saul,  out  of  its  con-
cealment, had  a  tent  erected  for  it  upon  Mount  Zion,  and  made  it  once  more
the  central  point  of  the  worship  of  the  congregation  ;  and  how,  after  that,
when  the  Lord  had  given  him  rest  from  his  enemies,  he  wished  to  build  a
temple  to  the  Lord  to  be  the  dwelling-place  of  His  name  ;  and  lastly,
when  God  w^ould  not  permit  him  to  carry  out  this  resolution,  but  promised
that  his  son  should  build  the  house  of  the  Lord,  how,  towards  the  close
of  his  reign,  he  consecrated  the  site  for  the  future  temple  by  building
an  altar  upon  Mount  Moriah  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  25).  Even  in  this  series  of
facts,  the  end  of  the  work  points  back  to  the  beginning,  so  that  the
arrangement  and  composition  of  it  according  to  a  definite  plan  are  very
apparent.  If  we  take  into  account  the  deep-seated  connection  between  the
building  of  the  temple  as  designed  by  David,  and  the  confirmation  of  his
monarchy  on  the  part  of  God,  as  exhibited  in  2  Sam.  vii.,  we  cannot  fail  to
observe  that  the  historical  development  of  the  true  kingdom,  in  accordance  with
the  nature  and  constitution  of  the  Old  Testament  Kingdom  of  God,  forms  the
leading  thought  and  purpose  of  the  work  to  which  the  name  of  Samuel  has  been
attached,  and  that  it  was  by  this  thought  and  aim  that  the  writer  was  influenced
throughout  in  his  selection  of  the  historical  materials  which  lay  before  him  in
the  sources  which  he  emplo)'ed."  That  our  Lord  and  the  Apostles  recognised  the
Book  of  Samuel  as  forming  a  part  of  the  canon  of  Holy  Scripture  is  shown  by
the  following  references  which  are  made  to  it  in  the  New  Testament : —

Matt.  xii.  3,  4,  etc.,  to  1  Sam.  xxi.  1-6.
Acts  iii.  24  to  the  general  history.
Acts  vii.  46  to  2  Sam.  vii.  1,  2.
Acts  xiii  20-22  to  1  Sam.  ix.  15,
Heb.  i.  5  to  2  Sam.  vii.  14.


CHAP.  I.  UOM I LETW  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


BOOK  L

CHAPTER    I.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes. — Verse  1.    The  site  of  Ramath-Z.)phim  is  declared  by

Dean  Stanley  to  be  "  the  most  dis})nte<l  problem  of  sacred  topography."  It  is  universally  allowed,
and  it  is  inii>lied  by  J()se]>hus  to  be  the  Ramah  in  which  Sanmcl  lived,  dietl,  and  was  l)uiied  ;
bnt  next  to  nothing  of  its  position  can  be  gathered  fronj  the  narrative.  It  is  here  said  to  be  in
Mount  E})hraini,  bv»t  the  limits  of  that  district  are  uncertain.  The  name  Ramathaim — the
doable  eminence — })rol)ably  points  to  a  city  whose  site  was  on  two  hills.  But  there  were  several
cities  of  til  is  name  in  the  land  of  Israel,  and  all  on  more  or  less  elevated  sites.  No  certain
explanation  has  ever  been  given  of  the  audition  Zophim.  There  was  such  a  place  on  the  east  of
Jordan  (Num.  xxiii.  14),  and  "  the  land  of  Zuph  "  is  mentioned  in  chaj  tor  ix.  5.  The  region  may
have  derived  its  name  from  Elkanah's  ancestor.  Some  regard  it  as  a  common  noun  signifying
"  watch-towers  "  from  the  high  position  of  the  city.  Elkanah.  "The  Ltvitical  descent  of  Elkanah
and  Samuel  is  put  beyond  doubt  by  a  comparison  of  the  genealogy  here  with  those  in  Chronicles
(1  Chr.  vi.  22  stj.,  and  verse  33  sq.).  Samuel  is  here  shown  to  beh)ng  to  the  Kohathites.
Elkanah,  i.e.,  he  wliom  God  acquired  or  purchased,  is  both  in  its  signification  and  use  a  Levite
name.  All  the  Elkanahs  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament  (leaving  out  the  one  in  2  Chron,
xxviii.  7,  wliose  tribe  is  not  stated)  were  demonstrably  Levites,  and  belonged  mostly  to  the
family  of  Korah,  from  whom  Samuel  was  descended  "  {Lamje's  Conimentary).

Ver.  2.  **  Two  wives."  "  Perhaps  he  took  the  second  on  account  of  Hannah*s  barrenness  "
( Wordsworth).

Ver.  3.  "  Yearly."  Probably  to  the  Passover,  as  that  was  the  only  feast  which  the  whole
family   were   accustomed   to   attend   (Luke   ii.  41).     "  To   worship   and   sacrifice."     **  The

beautiful  picture  of  Israelitish  piety  which  we  have  in  the  follow  ing  account  of  Elkanah  and
Hannah  is  introduced  by  these  features,  as  the  chief  and  fundamental  ones.  The  worship  relates
to  the  name  of  the  Lord,  who  dwells  in  His  chosen  place  in  the  sanctuary,  and  is  the  expresssion
of  the  remembrance  of  this  name  before  the  Lord.  The  sacri.ice  is  the  embodied  prayer.  In
the  sacrifice  worship  is  presented  to  the  Lord  as  the  act  by  which  the  offerer  brings  himself  and
all  that  he  has  to  the  Lord  "  {Lanye's  Commentary).  If  the  Law  given  by  God  to  Moses  had
been  observed,  Elkanah  would  (unless  he  was  now  more  than  fifty  years  of  age,  which  seems
unlikely)  have  been  required  to  officiate  in  his  turn  in  the  service  of  the  tabernacle.  (See
Numb.  viii.  24-26).  That  he  did  not  do  so  is  only  one  evidence,  among  many,  of  the  low  state
of  religion  at  the  time.  '•  Lord  of  Hosts,"  "Jehovah  Zebaoth."  "  Here  first  used  as  a  Divine
name.  It  represents  Jehovah  as  ruler  of  the  heavenly  hosts,  i.e.,  the  angels  (Gen.  xxxii.  2)  and
the  stars  (Isa.  xl.  26);  it  is  simply  applied  to  Jehovah  as  the  God  of  the  universe"  (Keil).
"  This  appellation  occurs  sixty-two  times  in  Isaiah,  sixty-five  in  Jeremiah,  and  not  once  in
Job  or  Ezekiel  "  (  Wordsworth).  "  Shiloh."  i.e.,  "Rest."  The  tabernacle  was  set  up  here  in  the
days  of  Joshua  (Josh,  xviii.  1).  Its  position  is  described  in  Judges  xxi.  19.  This  minute
description  has  enabled  mod<  rn  travellers  to  identify  it.  "  This  quiet  place,  situated  on  a  hill
(Psa.  Ixxviii.  54),  was  the  scene  of  the  mighty  revolution  brought  about  in  the  history  of  the
theocracy  by  the  call  of  Samuel  to  be  the  prophet  of  God,  and  by  the  overthrow  of  the  priestly
house  of  Eli "  (Lan'je's  Commentary).  **  And  the  two  sons  of  Eli,"  etc.  They  performed  the
priestly  functions  for  their  father,  on  accoimt  of  his  great  age.

Ver.  4.  •'  When  Elkanah  offered."  *'  That  this  sacrifice  was  a  praise  or  thank-offering
(Lev.  vii.  15)  is  clear  from  what  follows"  (Lange's  Commentary ).  "P.  rtions."  Of  that  part  of
the  peace-offerings  which  belonged  to  them  that  offered.  This  was  the  whole,  except  the  fat,
which  belonged  to  the  Lord,  and  the  breast  and  the  right  shoulder,  which  belonged  to  the  priest.
This  feast  was  intended  to  be  of  a  joyful  character  (Deut.  xii.  12,  xvi.  11).

Ver.  5,  "  A  worthy  portion."  This  phrase  has  been  much  disputed,  but  it  seems  most
likely  to  mean  a  double  portion.  This  was  an  Oriental  mode  of  expressing  favour.  See  Gen.
xliii.  34.  "Tiie  Lord  had  shut  up  her  womb."  Childlessness  was  not  only  held  to  be  a
misfortune,  but  a  Divine  punishment  (Gen.  xix.  31 ;  xxx.  1,  23).

Ver.  6.  "  Her  adversary."  i.e.,  Peninnah.

Ver,  7.  "  He  did  so  year  by  year,"  i.e.,  every  year  Elkanah  gave  Hannah  a  double  portion.

Ver.  9.  "  Post,"  or  portal.  *'  Probably  a  porch  which  had  been  placed  before  the  curtain  that
formed  the  entrance  into  the  Holy  ^Vacq'"  ( Keil).  "Temple,"  '^ or  palace,  so  called  not  on
account  of  the  magniHcence  of  the  building,  but  as  the  dwelling  place  of  the  God-king  of  Israel
as  in  Ps;ilm  V.  8"  ( KcdJ.  "I  think  this  is  the  first  place  where  the  temple  oi  Jehovah  is
mentioned.  This  confiims  the  opinion  that  the  book  was  compiled  after  the  building  of  the
Temple  "   A.  Clarke\

6


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,  book  i.


Ver.  11.  *'  Sterile  women  in  the  East  to  this  day  perform  pilgrimages  to  holy  places,  and  often
make  a  vow  that,  in  case  they  should  be  blessed  with  a  son,  he  shall  become  a  monk  {Fausset).
"Vowed  a  Vow."  This  vow  contained  two  distinct  points — (1)  That  she  would  dedicate  her
son  to  the  Lord  in  a  life-long  service,  while  as  a  Levite  he  was  only  bound  from  the  age  of  20  to
50  (Num.  viii.,  24,  25),  and  (2)  that  "no  razor  should  come  upon  his  head,"  by  which  he  was
set  apart  as  a  Nazarite  for  the  whole  of  his  life.  "  There  is  no  notice  in  the  Pentateuch
of    a    Nazarite    for    life ;    but    the    regulations    for  the   vow    of    a    Nazarite    of    days    are

given  in  Num.    vi.  1  21 Of    the   Nazarites   for  life  three   are   mentioned   in   the

Scriptures  :  Samson,  Samuel,  and  John  the  Baptist.  The  only  one  actually  called  a  Nazarite
is  Samson.  The  Kabbis  raised  the  question  whether  Samuel  was  in  reality  a  Nazarite.  It  is
expressly  stated  that  no  razor  shall  come  upon  his  head  ;  but  no  mention  is  made  of  abstinence
from  wine.  It  is,  however,  worthy  of  notice  that  Philo  makes  a  particular  point  of  this,  aiid
seems  to  refer  the  words  of  Hannah,  in  verse  15,  to  Samuel  himself.  We  do  not  know  whether
the  vow  for  life  was  ever  voluntarily  taken  by  the  individual.  In  all  the  cases  mentioned  in
sacred  history,  it  was  made  by  the  parents  before  the  birth  of  the  Nazarite  himself.
According  to  the  general  law  of  vows  (Num.  xxx.  8),  the  mother  could  not  take
the  vow  without  the  father.  Hannah  must  therefore  either  have  presumed  on  her  husband's
concurrence,  or  secured  it  beforehand.  The  Nazarite  of  days  might  have  fulfilled  his  vow
without  attracting  much  notice  until  the  day  came  for  him  to  make  his  offering  in  the  temple.
But  the  Nazarite  for  life,  on  the  other  hand,  with  his  flowing  hair  and  persistent  refusal  of
strong  drink,  must  have  been  a  marked  man.  Whether  in  any  other  particular  his  daily  life
was  peculiar  is  uncertain.  He  may  have  hjid  some  privileges  which  gave  him  something  of  a
priestly  character — there  is  an  ancient  tradition  that  Nazarites  were  permitted  even  to  enter  into
the  Holy  of  Holies.  Perhaps  it  would  not  be  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  half-sacerdotal
character  of  Sanmel  might  have  been  connected  with  his  prerogative  as  a  Nazarite.  Though
not  necessarily  cut  off  from  social  life,  when  the  turn  of  his  mind  was  devotional,  consciousness  of
his  peculiar  dedication  must  bave  influenced  his  habits  and  manner,  and  in  some  cases  probably
led  him  to  retire  from  the  world.  And  as  the  vow  of  the  Nazarite  was  taken  by  his  parents  before
he  was  conscious  of  it,  his  observance  of  it  was  a  sign  of  filial  obedience,  like  the  vow  of  the
Rechabites.  .  .  .  The  meaning  of  the  Nazarite  vow  has  been  regarded  in  different  lights.  Some
deny  that  it  involved  anything  of  an  ascetic  character ;  others  imagine  that  it  was  intended  to  culti-
vate, and  bear  witness  for,  the  sovereignty  of  the  will  over  the  lower  tendencies  of  human  nature  ;

while  some  regard  it  wholly  in  the  light  of  a  sacrifice  of  the  person  to  God That  the  Nazarite

vow  was  essentially  a  sacrifice  of  the  person  is  obviously  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the
Law  (Num.  vi.  2).  In  the  old  dispensation  it  may  have  answered  to  that  "  living  sacrifice,  holy,
acceptable  to  God,  which  the  believer  is  now  called  upon  to  make."  {Smith's  Bible  Dictionary.)
That  part  of  the  vow  of  the  Nazarite  which  had  to  do  with  his  spiritual  nature  was  the  absti-
nence from  strong  drink.  The  other  observances  were  merely  ceremonial,  and  related  only  to
the  outward  man.  But  strong  drink  can  and  often  does  influence  the  mind,  and  may  be  the
means  of  moral  deterioration.  Even  when  not  indulged  in  to  excess,  it  may  be  used  to  such  an
extent  as  to  dull  the  spiritual  sense,  and  to  unfit  men  for  holding  intimate  communion  with  God.
It  was  not  a  mere  arbitrary  statute  when  "  7'ke  Lord  spake  unto  Aaron,  saying,  Do  not  drink
wine  or  strong  drink,  thou,  nor  thy  sons  with  thee,  when  ye  go  into  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,
lest  ye  die'^  (Num.  x.  8-9).

Ver.  13.  **She  spake  in  her  heart."    Prayer  is  almost  always  oral  in  the  East,  even  in

public  {Kitto),

Ver.  14.  **  Put  away  thy  wine  trom  thee/'  i.e.,  sleep  off  the  effects  of  intoxication.

Ver.  15.  "  Neither  wine  nor  strong  drink  has  been  poured  out  unto  me,  but  I  have  poured
out  my  soul  before  the  Lord  "  {A.  Clarke).

Ver.  16.  **  Belial,"  i.e.,  worthlessness  or  wickedness.  The  word  is  not  a  proper  name,  although
it  has  become  impersonified  to  indicate  the  "  wicked  one."  "  Complaint,"  "  meditation,  inward
movement  of  the  heart,  sighing"  {Ktil).

Ver.  17.  This  word  of  the  High  Priest  was  not  a  prediction,  but  a  pious  wish  {Keil),

Ver.  20.  "  Samuel."  **  From  Shama  to  hear,  and  El,  God  (  Wordsworth).  "  The  words  of
Hannah  are  not  an  etymological  explanation  of  the  name,  but  an  exposition  founded  upon  the
facts"  {Keil).

Ver.  21.  "  Yearly  Sacrifice  "  literally,  the  "  offering  of  the  days,"— the  Israelites'  customary
and  obligatory  annual  sacrifice.  The  "  offering  of  the  days  "  is,  as  it  were,  the  yearly  reckoning
with  the  Lord,  the  presentation  of  those  portions  of  the  property  which  fall  to  him  in  the  course
of  the  year  *'  ( Henystenherg).  *'  His  Vow."  Here  is  a  proof  that  Elkanah  had  likewise  vowed
unto  the  Lord  in  reference  to  Samuel.

Ver.  23.  "  Only  the  Lord  establish  His  word."     "  Elkanah  seeks  from  God,  and  suppliantly


cHAf.  1.  UOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:  SAMVEL.


begs  with  prayers,  that,  since  God  has  bestowed  on  him  male  offspring,  He  will  consecrate  him
and  make  him  fit  for  His  service  { Calvin).

Ver.  24.  Hebrew  mothers  were  accustomed  to  suckle  their  children  for  three  years  (2  Mace,
vii  27).  '"  A  child  three  years  old  is  not  troublesome  in  the  East,  and  his  nurture  and  educatum
could  be  committed  to  the  women  that  served  at  the  door  of  the  Tabernacle.  By  the  education
which  the  boy  received  in  the  Sanctuary  he  was  even  as  a  child  to  grow  into  the  service  ;  and
moreover,  as  a  child,  he  could  perform  little  outward  services  "  (Lamie's  Commentani).  «*  Three
bullocks."  Two  would  be  required  for  the  customary  yearly  offering,  viz.,  one  for  the  burnt-
offering  and  the  other  for  the  thank-offering,  the  third  was  probably  a  special  offering  in
connection  with  Samuel's  consecration,  and  on  this  account,  the  only  one  whose  slaying  is
mentioned  in  verse  25.  "  The  child  was  young,"  literally,  "the  child  was  a  child,"  i.e.,  not
merely  in  tenderness  of  years,  but  in  docility,  meekness,  and  gentleness  "  { Wordsworth).

Ver.  28.  Lent.  "  The  meaning  to  lend,  which  the  lexicons  give  to  the  word  both  here  and
in  Exod.  xii.  36,  has  no  other  support  than  the  false  rendering  of  the  Septuagint,  and  is  altogether
unsuitable  both  in  the  one  and  in  the  other.  Jehovah  had  not  lent  the  son  to  Hannah,  but  had
given  him  ;  still  less  could  a  man  lend  his  son  to  the  Lord  "  (Ked).  ••  He  "  refers  to  Elkanah,
and  not  to  Samuel  {Keil).

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  VERSE  1.

The  Value  and  Use  of  a  Genealogy.

I.  The  man  who  possesses  a  genealogy  knows  who  and  what  he  represents
in  the  world.     Every  luiinan  creature,  in    fact  everything  in  the  world  that
possesses  life,  represents  more  than  he  or  it  is.     A  single  corn-seed  represents
all  the  grains  by  which  it  has  come  into  existence— ail  the  seeds   which  have
lived  and  germinated  and  brought  forth  fruit  between  itself  and  the  original
grain  from  which  it  sprung  in  the  beginning.     Every  man  knows  that  he  repre-
sents numerically  more  than  he  is,  and  very  possibly  more  intellectual  power  or
moral  greatness  than  belongs  to  him  as  an  individual,  but  only  he  who  possesses
a  genealogy  knows  certainly  who  and  what  he  represents.     The  written  pedigree
of^'his  ancestors  makes  him  realise  his  oneness  with  the  ages  that  are  past,  and
he  will  feel  ennobled  or  dishonoured  by  the  record  according  as  the  lives  of  his
forefathers  accord  with,  or  are  oi)posed  to,  what  he  considers  worth  representing.
Elkanah  knew  that   he   represented  a  line  of  ancestors  in  one  of  the   most
remarkable  tribes  in  the  Jewish  nation— a  tribe  which  had  numbered  among  its
members  men  of  great  mental  power  and  high  moral  wealth.     Although  per-
sonally he  was  inferior  to  some  of  these  great  men,  he  felt  in  some  degree  that
he  belonged  to  them— that  he  represented  their  worth  and  greatness.     A  tree
growing  in  this  country  may  have  sprung  from  the  seed  of  a  tropical  tree.     It
may  attain  to  sufhcient  size  and  beauty  to  be  a  worthy  representative  of  its
tropical  ancestors,  but  the  difference  of  climate,  as  well  as  some  inherent  weak-
ness in  the  tree  itself,  may  prevent  it  from  reaching  their  gigantic  stature— from
branching  forth  into  their  vast  proportions.     iSo  it  may  be  with  many  a  man
who  represents  an  old  and  worthily  renowned  family  \  circumstances,  as  well  as
mental   inferiority   may   prevent   them   from   attaining   the   renown   of   their
ancestors,  although  they  may  be  good  and  true   men  and  worthily  hll  a  small
space  in   the  world.     iSuch   men  represent  more   than   they  are — not  only  in
numbers,  but  in  ahility  and  renown.     Elkanah  was  such  a  representative  man.
Being  able  as  he  was  to  trace  his  ancestry,  he  knew  that  he  belonged  to  the
tribe  wlience  came  the  most  remarkable  man  of  the  ancient  world — one  who  has
left  an  impress  upon  the  nations  w^hich  will  last  as  long  as  time.     Elkanah,  by
the  possession  of  a  genealogy,  knew  tliat  he  had  the  honour  of  numbering
Moses  among  bis  ancestors,  and  although  he  knew  he  could  never  attain  to  the
renown  of  his  great  forefather,  he  must  have  felt  there  was  honour  in  belonging
to  the  same  tribe  as  the  Jewish  lawgiver.     He  knew  that  he  belonged  to  a  stock

7


nOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,  BOOK  i.


jvho  on  one  memorable  occasion  had  given  proof  that  they  preferred  moral  right
to  blood  relationship — who  had  declared  themselves  on  the  Lord's  side  in  the
day  of  Israel's  firsfc  idolatry — "  who  said  nnto  his  father  and  to  his  mother,  I
have  not  seen  him,  neither  acknowledged  his  brethren,  nor  knew  his  own
children"  (Dent,  xxxiii.  9),  in  other  words,  preferred  the  honour  of  Jehovah's
name  to  all  human  claims  (Exod.  xxxii.  26-28).

II.  The  value  of  such  a  possession,  and  the  teaching^  it  might  sug^gast
1.  The  knowledge  that  those  to  whom  we  are  related  bij  ties  of  blood-relatiunship
have  been  great  and  noble — have  done  deeds  and  spoken  words  which  reflect  a
lustre  upon  their  descendants  long  after  they  have  left  the  world— ought  to
inspire  those  descendants  with  resolution  to  tread  in  their  footsteps.  Although
the  times  in  which  they  live  may  not  demand  the  same  sacrihces — may  not
admit  of  the  same  renown— yet  the  principles  which  govern  the  lives  of  the
tndy  great  and  good  are  the  same  in  all  ages,  and  under  all  conditions  of  life.
Although  Elkanah  could  not  be  a  Moses,  he  could  emulate  his  moral  excellence;
although  he  was  not  called  to  make  such  a  remarkable  demonstration  of  his
fidelity  to  Jehovah  as  his  fathers  had  made  in  the  wilderness,  he  could  always
act  upon  the  principle  of  preferring  duty  to  God  before  any  human  tie  or  any
mere  earthly  consideration.  2.  'I he  knowledge  that  we  belong  to  the  great  and
good  is  also  a  source  of  lawful  comfort  and  satisfaction,  if  we  ourselves  have
enough  godliness  not  to  disgrace  our  ancestry.  To  feel  that  we  are  the  children
of  those  who  have  served  their  generation  according  to  the  wdl  of  God,  and
have  perhaps  been  called  by  Him  to  some  great  and  special  service,  cannot
fail  to  afford  lawful  satisfaction  to  any  man.  Doubtless  Elkanah,  in  his
humbler  and  more  limited  sphere,  felt  a  special  gratification  that  he  was
linked  in  tribal  relationship  with  him  "  whom  the  Lord  knew  face
to  face "  (Deut.  xxxiv.  10),  and  that  he  was  one  of  that  chosen
tribe  who  were  elected  by  God  to  be  the  teachers  of  Israel  and  the  "  body-guard
of  the  sacred  structure  which  was  the  sign  of  the  presence  among  the  people  of
their  unseen  King" — Num.  i.  51,  xviii.  22.  (See  on  Levi  '*  Smith's  Dictionary
of  the  Bible.")  3.  A  genealogy  teaches  a  man  his  own  mortality  and  immor-
tality, and  the  mortality  and  immortality  of  his  fathers.  Every  family  register
proclaims  the  mortality  and  the  immortality  of  man.  It  tells  of  the  body
whose  dust  is  still  with  us,  and  of  the  spirit  that  is  "  absent  from  the  body."
The  life  once  lived  upon  the  earth  made  a  genealogy  possible — linked  the
individual  with  the  long  line  of  progenitors  who  had  gone  before  him  and  with
all  those  who  have  come  and  will  come  after  him.  This  life  could  not  have  been
lived  without  the  body  which  was  mortal  and  has  returned  to  the  earth,  yet
that  body  would  never  have  been  more  than  lifeless  clay  if  it  had  not  been
animated  by  a  "  living  soul,"  who  was,  and  is  still,  tlie  man  himself — still  living
and  feeling  and  acting  in  another  part  of  God's  universe.  To  the  Old  Testa-
ment saints  a  genealogy  spoke  of  those  wdio  were  "gathered  to  their  fathers"
(Gen.  xl.  29,  etc.)  ;  to  us  it  tells  of  "just  men  made  perfect"  in  the  city  of  the
living  God  (Heb.  xii.  23),  who  died  as  to  bodily  life,  but  who  live  still  as  to
spiritual  life.  It  teaches  also  the  earthly  immortality  of  the  race.  The  man
passes  away — the  race  remains.  He  leaves  the  world,  but  his  are  left  in  it.
Abraham  was  h>ng  ago  called  away,  but  his  descendants  are  with  us  to  this  day.
Levi  had  quitted  the  world  long  before  the  days  of  Elkanah,  but  he  lived  still  in
Canaan  in  his  representatives.


8


CHAP.  T.


UOMILETIC  COMMLWTARY:  SAMUEL.


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARA  GRAPH.—  Verses  2—8.

A  Troubled  Household.

I.  A  violation  of  the  Divine  intention  in  the  institution  of  marriage.

Elkjmah  had  two  wives.     God,  by  creating  one  wife  only  as  the  helpmeet  for
the  first  man,  declared  against  polygamy  and  bigamy.     Our  Lord,  in  expouuding
to  the  Pharisees  the  law  of  divorce,  speaks  decidedly  upon  the  subject.        l-or
this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  father  and  mother,  and  sliall  cleave  unto  his  wife,
and  they  twain  shall  be  one  flesh  "  (Matt.  xix.  5).     Apostolic  teaching  reiterates
the  law.     "  Let  every  man  have  his  own  wife,  and  every  woman  her  own  husband
(1  Cor  vii.  2).     "Let  every  one  of  you  in  particular  so  love  his  wije,  even  as
himself"  (Eplies.  v.  i.).     The  violation  of  the  Divine  intention  in  this  institution
orio-inated  in  a  bad  man.     Lamech  is  the  first  person  of  whom  it  is  recorded
thai  he  ''took  unto  him  two  wives"  (Gen.  iv.  19),  and  his  own  words  tell  us
that  he  was  a  man  of  blood.     A  descendant  of  the  first  murderer,  he  trod  in
the  same  murderous  path.     His  example  was  not  followed  by  those  sons  of  Seth,
who  were  honoured  to  re-found  the  human  race.      Noah  and  his  three  sons
entered  into  the  ark,  each  having  his  one  wife  (Gen.  vii.   13),  but  the  sin  of
Lamech  became  more  and  more  common  until  it  grew  into  a  custom,  and  many
better  men  than  he  thus  prof^uied  God's  holy  ordinance.     Abraham,  Jacob,  and
Elkanah  were  good  men,  yet  they  all  in  this  respect  followed  in  the  forbidden  path
first  trodden  by  a  man-slayer.      A  miner  working  in  darkness  unconsciously
becomes  blackened  by  the  dusty  atmosphere  in  which  he  is  working.     Lnper-
ceptibly  to  himself,  one  sooty  particle  after  another  settles  upon  his  body  and
his  raiment,  until  he  becomes  entirely  assimilated  in  colour  to  the  blackness
and  dirt  all  around  him.     The  custom  of  society  unconsciously  colours  men's
characters   and   habits.      Their   very   conscience   is   influenced   by  the  moral
atmosphere  which  they  breathe— they  become  coloured  by  the  thoughts  and
actions  of  those  by  whom  they  are  surrounded,  and  often  yield  their  consent  to
a  wicked  custom,  the  sin  of  which  they  do  not  perceive  because  of  the  moral
darkness  in  which  they  live.     It  was  doubtless  so  with  those  of  the  patriarchs
who  practised  bigamy  or  polygamy,  and  it  was  so  also  with  Elkanah.

II.  This  viol&.£ion  of  Divine  intention  becoming  a  means  of  chastisement.

The  custom  of  polygamy  was  doubtless  very  common  in  the  Hebrew  nation,  and
paved  the  way  to  much  gross  iniquity,  and  led  them  to  the  adoption  of  many
other  corrupt  practices  of  the  heathen  nations,  for  which,  as  a  nation,  they
suffered  severe  chastisement.     Here  we  have  an  instance  of  chastisement  in  the
case  of  an   individual   and   upright   man.     Although   he  had  committed  no
exceptional  sin— although  he  had  only  followed  other  good  men  in  conforming
to  a  very  common  custom — he  could  not  escape  the  inevitable  retribution  which
must  alwa\s  follow  breaking  any  fence  which  God  has  placed  about  man's  patL
Doubtless  "Hannah  would  have  been  sorrowful  at  the  absence  of  children  if  she
liad  been  Elkanah's  only  wife,  but  it  would  not  have  been  aggTavated  by  the
insolence  of  Peninnah.     Custom  had  quarried  these  two  upi)er  and  nether  mill-
stones, and  between  them   Elkanah's  domestic  bliss  must  have  been  ground  to
powder,  for  the  strife  was  so  bitter  that  it  entered  even  into  the  service  of  the
house  of  God.     (See  verse  7.)     The  history  of  the  world  confirms  the  teachmg
of  this  history  of  a  single  family.     The  nations  who  adhere  to  God's  original
intention  in  the  marriage  state  are  spared  from  many  sorrows,  and  avoid  many
crimes  which    must  always    be   the    fruit   of  such   a   morally  unhealthy  and
unnatural  custom.     The  joys  of  the  home  life  are  unknown  where  polygamy  is
practised— a  terrible  penalty  is  paid  by  all  those  nations  who  thus  violate  God's
holy  and  blessed  institution.


MOMILETtC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL  Book  i.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.  1.  Elkanali  was  one  of  the  sons  for  past  blessings  we  Implore   a  still

of  Korali.     Of  that  gainsaying  "sinner  further  increase  of  His  gifts  ;  secondly,

against  his  own  soul"   came  Samuel,  that  confessing  our  sins  as  suppliant

Homo  ille  virtute  simillimus. — Trapp.  and  guilty,  we  pray  Him  to  grant  us

true  knowledge   of    our  sins   and  re-

Ver.  2.  Polygamy  might  now  plead  pentance,  and   to  pardon  us  ;  thirdly,

age  and  example.     Ill  customs  are  like  and   finally,   that    denying    ourselves

fashionsof  attire,  which  at  the  first  are  and     taking     His     yoke     upon     our

disliked  as  uncomely,  yet,  when  once  shoulders,  we  profess  ourselves  ready

they  are  grown  common,  are  taken  up  to  render  Him  true  obedience,  and  to

of  the  gravest.     Yet  this  sin,  as  then  conform  our  affections  to  the  rule  of

current  with  the  time,  could  not  make  His  law  and  His  will  alone. — Calvin.
Elkanah  not  religious ;   the  house  of

God  in  Shiloh  was  duly  frequented  by  Ver.  4.  The  whole  family  take  part

him,    and   once   a  year   with   all   his  in  the  feast  of  the  peace-offerings.     So

family.  Thecontinuanceof  an  unknown  as  to  the  idol-worship  in  Jer.  vii.  18.

sin  cannot  hinder  the  uprightness  of  a  Both  this  passage  and  that,  as  to  true

man's  heart  with  God  ;  as  a  man  may  religion  and  false,  may  impress  upon  us

have  a  mole  on  his  back,  and  yet  think  the  importance  of  family  worship  and

his  skin  clear  ;  the  least  touch  of  wil-  family  religion. — Langes  Commentary.
fulness    mars    his    sincerity. — Bishop

Hall.  Ver.  5.  "  The  Lord  had  shut  up  her

womb."    This  is  the  language  of  piety,

Ver.  3.  Elkanah*s  piety  in  maintain-  which  refers  all  to   God,  and  knows

ing  a  regular  attendance  on  the  Divine  only  one  source  of  blessings  ;  we  only

ordinances  is  the  more  worthy  of  notice,  have   that  which   He   gives,   and   we

that  the  character  of  the  two  priests  cannot  have  that  which  he  refuses  to

who  administered  them  was  notoriously  us. — Duguet.

bad.     But  doubtless  he  believed  and  Peninnah  may  have  the  more  chil-

acted   on   the    belief    that  the   ordi-  dren,    but    barren   Hannah   hath   the

nances  were  effectual  means  of  salva-  most  love.      If  Hannah  should   have

tion,  not  from  any  virtue  in  them,  or  had  both,  she  had  been  proud,  and  her

in  those  who  administered  them,  but  rival   despised.      God  knows   how   to

from    the   grace    of   God  being  com-  disperse  His  favours  so  that  everyone

municated  through  them. — Fausset.  may  have  cause  both  for  thankfulness

This   title,  "The   Lord   of  Hosts"  and   humiliation;   whilst  there  is  no

(see  Critical  Notes),  seems  to  be  in-  one  that  hath  all,  no  one   but  hath

serted  designedly  by  the  sacred   his-  some — Bishop  Hall.

torian  at  the  beginning  of  this  book.  Children  were  tlien  regarded  as  a

which  relates  the  craving  of  Israel  for  blessing,  and  the  correctness   of  this

an  earthly  king,  when  the  Lord  was  view    is    confiruied    by   the    inspired

their  King,  and  the  setting  up  of  an  writers,    Psa.    cxiii.    9 ;    cxxvii.    3-5  ;

earthly  kingdom  in  Saul.     It  is  like  a  cxxviii.    3.       The     contrary    foeling,

preliminary  protest  against  that  act  of  which  is  now  so   rapidly  growing   m

national  faithlessness. —  Wordsworth.  America,  is  evil,  both  in  its  causes  and

The   offering   was  the   deed   which  in  its  consequences. — American  Travis-

established    the   faithlessness    of    the  lator  of  Langes  Commentary.
praying  word. — Starke.

This  subject-matter  of  adoration  is  Ver.  7.     Peninnah  is  an  example  of

to  be  referred  to  the  three  following  those   who    think    theuiselves    to    be

heads  :    Firstly,  that  when    about  to  saints  because  they  participate  in  holy

adore  God  we  recognise  that  we  owe  all  things  and  partake  of  Divine  blessings,

things  to  Him,  and  in  giving  thanks  but  Hannah  is  a  model  of  true  peni-
10


CHAP.  I.  nOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY :    SAMUEL.


tents,  seeking   not   to  justify  herself  it  follows  that  hnshand  and  wife  must

since   the   Lord   seemed   to   condemn  hold  each  other  nearer  and  dearer  than

her.     She  judged  herself  unworthy  to  all  children. — /.  Lauge.
partake  of  the  sacred  fenst  since  she

deemed  herself  under  the  displeasure         Verses  1-8.   The  priestly  calling  of

of  God. — Duguet.  the  man  in  his  house.     1.  In  the  close

connection  of  his  whole  house  with  the

Ver.  8.    In  a  devout  marriage,  the  service    in    the    house   of    the    Lord

love  of  the  cue  party  should  not  only  (prayer  and  offering).  2.  In  tluMiurture

be  to  the  other  a  fountain  of  conso-  and   admonition    of  the   children  for

lation  and  of  quieting   as   to   painful  the   Lord  (see  comment  on  verse  4).

dispensations   of    the    Lord,   hut    for  3.    In    expelling  and    keeping  at    a

whatever  by  the  Lord's  will  is  lacking  distance  the  evil  spirit  of  unlovingness

in  good  fortune  and  joy  it  should  seek  and  dissension   in    the  members  of  a

to  offer  all  the  richer  compensation. —  family.     4.  In  the  constant  exhibition

Langes  Commentary.  ol  faithful,   comforting,    helping    love

In  Elkanah  we  have  an  example  of  a  towards  his  wife.     The  preservation  of

most  excellent  husband,  who  patiently  genuine  piety  amid  domestic  troubles.

tolerated    the     insolent    humour     of  1.    In  persevering   prayer,   when    the

Peninnah,    and     comforted     dejected  Lord    proves   faith    by   not   fulfilling

Hannah   with   words   full    of    tender  particular  desires   and   hopes.     2.  In

affection,    which    was    truly,    in    St.  enduring  patience  towards   vexatious

Peter  s  words,  to  dwell  with  his  wives  members  of  the  family.     3.    In  con-

according  to  hiowledge. — Patrick.  soling   and    supporting   love   towards

As  the  marriage  bond  is  much  closer  those  members  who  are  easily  assailed,

than  that  between  parents  and  children,  Langes  Commentary,


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verm  9-11,

The  Prayer  of  Hannah.

In  this  prayer  we  have —

I.  A  recognition  of  God's  faithful  performance  of  His  promises.     When  a

parent  promises  to  meet  his  child  in  a  certain  place  at  a  certain  time,  and  the
child  is  found  waiting  at  the  appointed  place  at  the  given  time,  the  act  is  a
declaration  of  faith  in  the  parent's  faithfulness.  The  child's  position  and
attitude  denote  a  recognition  of  the  truthfulness  of  the  parent's  word.  God  had
promised  to  '*  meet  the  children  of  Israel "  in  an  esi)ecial  nianner  in  the
tabernacle  (Exod.  xxix.  43)  '*  in  the  place  which  He  should  choose  to  place  His
name  there"  (Deut.  xvi.  11).  Hannah's  choice  of  the  house  of  God  as  the
place  whence  she  would  direct  her  prayer — whence  she  would  look  up  for  help
in  her  sorrow — is  a  declaration  that  she  believed  the  Divine  Word.  Her
presence  there  declares  that  she  believed  in  another  Presence  there — even  of
Him  who  was  known  to  Israel  of  old  to  "dwell  between  the  cherubims"
(Exod.  xxv.  22 ;  1  Sam.  iv.  4).

II.  A  recognition  of  God's  knowledge  of  the  secrets  of  the  human  soul.  "She
spake  in  lier  heart,  only  her  lips  moved  "  (verse  13).  Speech  of  some  kind  is
necessary  if  one  human  being  would  communicate  with  another,  and  there  are
some  thoughts  and  feelings  which,  not  being  cai)able  of  being  put  into  words,
must  remain  for  ever  uncommunicated  to  any  earthly  friend.  In  this  sense  the
heart  is  compelled  sometimes  to  "  know  its  own  bitterness,"  and  "no  stranger"
(no  one  outside  the  spirit)  can  "intermeddle  therewith  "  (Prov.  xiv.  10).  The
human  body  is  the  means  by  which  the  human  soul  reveals  itself,  and  yet  it

11


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY  :  SAMUEL.  book  t


conceals  often  more  than  it  reveals.  So  word  is  the  body  of  tlionght — the  great
means  of  making  thought  known  among  men — yet  it  often  hides  more  than  it
makes  known.  But  "  He  that  searcheth  the  hearts  knoweth  what  is  the  mind
of  the  spirit  *'  (Rom.  viii.  27).  He  stands  face  to  face  with  the  inmost  feelings
— the  deepest  emotions — of  every  human  soul.  He  needs  not  the  information
conveyed  by  words — He  sees  not  through  them  as  "  through  a  glass,  darkly,"
but  without  that  veil  between  reads  the  aspirations  of  the  burdened  heart —
hears  the  "groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered"  (Rom.  viii.  26).  Hannah
recognises  this  truth  when,  without  words,  she  speaks  to  the  Eternal  God.  By
her  silent  prayer  she  shows  she  was  penetrated  with  that  sense  of  the  Divine
Omniscience  which  filled  David's  mind  when  he  wrote  ''  0  Lord,  Thou  hast
searched  me,  and  known  me,  Thou  knowest  my  downsitting  and  mine  uprising y
Thou  understandest  my  thought  ajar  off"  (Psalm  cxxxix.  1,  2).

III.  A  recognition  of  obligation  to  God  before  the  petition  is  granted.
"Thine  handmaid."  Hannah  was  God's  handmaid  whether  the  blessing  she
craved  was  granted  or  withheld.  A  servant  (while  he  acknowledges  the  rela-
tion) is  bound  to  obey  his  master's  commands— to  acquiesce  in  his  will,  whether
that  will  always  coincides  with  his  own  or  not.  While  the  relationship  is
acknowledged  the  obligation  continues.  Hannah,  by  her  own  acknowledgment,
was  a  servant  of  the  God  of  Israel.  She  was  under  an  obligation  to  serve  Him,
whether  He  fulfilled  her  heart's  desire  or  not.  She  recognises  the  fact  that  she
was  already  God's  debtor — bound  to  obey  His  coujmands  and  acquiesce  in  His
will,  whatever  might  be  the  issue  of  her  prayer.  She  admits  that  her  obligation
will  be  increased  if  God  grants  the  desire  of  her  heart :  "If  Thou  wilt  look  upon
Thine  handmaid,"  etc. ;  but  she  does  not  make  her  obligation  to  God  depend
upon  her  prayer  being  answered.

IV.  A  recognition  of  God's  care  for  the  individual.  That  system  of  govern-
ment and  that  code  of  laws  are  most  perfect  which  take  cognisance,  not  only  of
a  nation  as  a  whole,  but  of  the  special  need  of  the  individual — when  it  meets
the  need,  not  of  men  in  a  mass  merely,  but  of  each  man.  This  can  be  done  but
imperfectly  in  human  systems.  Laws  which  are  generally  beneficial  press  hard
in  particular  cases,  or  overlook  particular  exigencies.  But  it  is  not  so  in  the
Divine  administration.  His  laws  take  hold  of  the  individual  man,  and  Plis  pro-
vidence works  for  each  one,  without  injury  to  any.  Each  blade  of  grass  drinks
in  the  sunlight  and  is  watered  by  the  showers,  as  abundantly  and  as  sufficiently
as  though  it  was  alone  upon  the  earth,  instead  of  being  a  unit  amid  countless
millions.  And  so  each  soul  is  as  much  the  object  of  God's  care  as  though  He
had  no  other  creature  to  care  for.  ''Are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  a  farthing  ?
A  nd  one  of  them  shall  not  fall  on  the  ground  without  your  Father,  But  the  very
hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered  "  (Matt.  x.  29,  30).  Hannah's  prayer — a
personal  statement  of  her  own  personal  sorrows  and  desires — shows  that  she
recognised  the  fact  that  the  God  of  Israel  not  only  "knew  the  sorrows"  of  the
nation  as  a  whole,  and  was  "willing  to  come  down  to  deliver  them"  (Exod.  iii.  8),
but  that  He  had  regard  to  the  heart-grief  of  a  single  sorrowful  woman  among
the  thousands  of  Israel.

V.  A  very  specific  statement  of  her  desire.  "  If  Thou  wilt  give  unto  Thy
handmaid  a  man-child."  All  successiul  i)leading  is  specific.  If  it  begins  with
generalities  it  does  not  end  with  them.  When  a  barrister  pleads  for  his  client
he  does  not  content  himself  with  general  ap])eals — he  puts  definitely  before  the
jury  and  the  j^dge  what  he  wants  them  to  do.  The  widow  made  a  definite
statement  of  her  want  to  the  unjust  judge — she  told  him  exactly  what  she
wanted  him  to  do — "Avenge  me  of  mine  adversary"  (Luke  xviii.  3).  It  has
been  said  that  "  Generalities  are  the  death  of  prayer."  Hannah's  prayer  was
12


cn^p.  t.  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ^AMVEL.


most  definite — she  not  only  asks  for  a  cliild — but  for  a  son — and  not  only  for  a
son  but  for  one  who  would  be  in  a  special  iTiann(3r  a  servant  of  Jehovah.

VI.  A  recognition  of  the  Divine  working  in  and  above  natural  laws.
Hannah  acknowledges  God  as  the  only  Giver  of  natural  life.  The  laws  of
nature,  either  in  vegetable  or  animal  life,  are  not  the  causes  of  that  life,  but  the
means  by  which  the  Creator  pleases  to  give  it.  They  are  not  the  gods  to  whom
the  praise  is  due,  but  the  servants  of  the  one  God  who  works  in  them  and  by
them.  Hannah's  prayer  recognises  the  truth  that  life  can  only  come  into  being
by  the  fiat  of  the  Eternal.  She  asks  for  a  living  child  from  the  only  Life-Giver
of  the  universe — from  Him  who  alone*'  hath  life  in  Himself"  (John  v.  26).

VII.  A  dedication  of  the  desired  blessing  to  the  service  of  the  Giver.
*'  If  Thou  wilt  give  unto  Thine  handmaid  a  man-child,  then  I  will  give  him  unto
the  Lord  all  the  days  of  his  life."  The  precious  gift  should  be  returned  to  the
Giver.  God's  gift  to  her  should  be  her  gift  to  God.  "  The  way  to  obtain  any
benefit,"  says  Bishop  Hall,  "  is  to  devote  it,  in  our  hearts,  to  the  glory  of  that
God  of  whom  we  ask  it :  by  this  means  shall  God  both  pleasure  His  servant  and
honour  Himself ;  whereas,  if  the  scope  of  our  desires  be  carnal,  we  may  be  sure
either  to  fail  of  our  suit,  or  of  a  blessing."

In  all  the  points  we  have  noticed — in  its  faith  in  the  Divine  Word — in  its
recognition  of  Divine  Omniscience — in  its  acknowledgment  of  the  Divine  claim
to  service — in  its  confidence  in  the  Divine  care  for  the  individual — in  its
definiteness — in  its  discernment  of  a  Divine  power  in  all  the  laws  of  nature — and
in  its  purpose  to  devote  to  the  service  of  God  the  boon  craved  for  at  His  hands —
this  prayer  of  the  Hebrew  matron  may  serve  as  a  model  for  all  prayers  in  all
circumstances  and  in  all  ages.  It  is  especially  worthy  of  the  study  of  those  who
are  pleading  with  God,  not  for  the  gift  of  children — but  for  the  spiritual  life  of
children  already  given — of  mothers  whose  daily  and  fervent  prayer  is  put  up  to
God  that  those  whom  He  has  given  to  them  may  be,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  *'sons
and  daughters  of  the  Lord  God  Almighty."

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.   10.-  "  If  a  woman  has  prayed  get  comfort.      So  did  David   (Psalm

with  so  much  importunity,"  says  St.  cix.  4)  and  Paul  (1  Cor.  iv.  13),  "Being

Gregory,  "  to  obtain  a  son  from  God,  defamed   we    pray."      If   she  should

how  ought  we  to  pray  to  be  made  His  have  rendered  to  Peninnah  railing  for

children." — De  Sacy.  railing,  there  would  have  been  some-

The  ''hand  of  God  in  history"  might  what  to  do.     Prayer  and  patience  are

be  the  appropriate  title  of  many  of  the  the  best  antidotes  against  contumelies

books   of    Scripture,    for    the    sacred  and  contempt ;  the  one  hot,  the  other

records  largely  illustrate  the  agency  of  cold  ;  the  one  quickening,  the  other

God  in  the  affairs  of  men.  .   .    .   That  quenching.    Prayers  and  tears  are  the

simple  Hannah  on  her  knees,  with  her  saints'  best  weapons;  their  "great  guns

face   toward   the  tabernacle  and  the  and  their  scaling  ladders,"  saith  Luther,

mercy  seat,  and  her  lips  trembling  with  — Trapp.

her  prayer,  became  the  link  of  a  chain  Amid  vexations  and  assaults,  what
in  the  revival  of  piety  and  patriotism  should  impel  us  to  prayer?  1.  The
in  the  promised  land.  Her  day  of  certainty  that  if  men  do  us  hurt,  it
small  things  was  to  be  succeeded  bv  a  does  not  occur  without  the  Divine  per-
llfe  which  would  shed  its  blessings  mission.  2.  The  feeling  that  even  the
upon  the  chosen  people,  and  illuminate  best  human  consolation  cannot  satisfy
a  chapter  of  Hebrew  history. — tsteele.  the  heart  which  is  thirsting  to  be  con-
Herein  she  took  a  right  course  to  soled.     3.  Firm  confidence  in  the  help

13


nOMILtlTtC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


Book  1.


of  the  Lord,  who  in  His  faitlifnlness
will  help  and  in  His  power  can  help,
when  men  will  not  help  or  cannot. —
Langes  Commentary.

Ver.  11.  She  thrice  calls  herself  the
Lord's  handmaid,  out  of  a  profound
sense  of  her  meanness  and  His  majesty,
and  desires  a  man-child  because  only
such  could  wait  upon  the  Lord  in  the
service  of  the  tabernacle.  — Patrick.

It  may  be  asked  whether  Hannah  or
whether  any  parents  have  the  right
thus  to  consecrate  their  children,  and
so,  without  their  consent,  to  interfere
with  their  personal  liberty?  I  answer,
here  was  no  vow  of  perpetual  celibacy
or  of  religious  poverty.  He  had  the
liberty  of  marriage,  for  the  Scripture
speaks  of  his  sons,  and  he  preserved
the  possession  and  use  of  all  his  ])ro-
perty.  The  engagement  into  which
Hannah  entered  on  behalf  of  Samuel
simply  consisted  in  his  being  attached
to  the  tabernacle  service  for  some
years  longer  than  an  ordinary  Levite,
which  was  an  honour,  and  in  being
brought  up  in  the  centre  of  religious
influences.  It  was  a  precaution  against
the  moral  contagion  of  the  times,  and
tended  to  promote  a  natural  growth  of
piety  in  him — to  make  the  love  of
God  within  him  grow  and  strengthen
with  his  years.  It  is  true  Hannah
destined  her  son  for  a  Nazarite,  but
this  was  only  under  the  condition  that
God  made  him  willing  to  accept  the
vow.  She  knew  that  He  who  inspired
her  to  vow  would  inspire  her  child — if
he  were  granted — with  a  willingness
to  perform  his  part  of  it ;  that,  if  God
granted  her  the  son,  he  would  perfect
his  gift  in  inspiring  him  with  a  desire
to  be  devoted  to  His  service.  .  .  .  The
human  spirit,  as  it  is  since  the  fall,
would  never  have  established  the
custom  of  vows.  Such  an  engaging  of
Providence  would  have  a])peared  un-
worthy of  the  Supreme  Majesty.  The
institution  could  only  have  come
through  a  revelation.  The  universal
usage,  diffused  among  all  nations,
proves  that  the  tradition   descended


from  the  family  of  Noah.  God  has
condescended  by  this  religious  com-
merce, to  bind  us  to  Himself  more
firmly  by  means  of  our  wants  and  our
desires.  He  desires  to  impress  upon
our  minds  the  truth  that  He  rules  in
the  least  events  of  our  lives,  and,  by
this  kind  of  contract  that  He  makes
with  us  in  vows,  He  would  awaken  our
faith  by  accepting  the  conditions  that
we  offer,  and  in  accomplishing  that
which  we  expect  ot  Him. — Le  Maistre
de  Sacy.

A  vow  is  to  be  made  with  prayer,
and  paid  with  thanksgiving. —  Irapp.

She  has  received  nothing  as  yet,
and  she  begins  her  prayer  with  a
promise.  She  testifies  already  her
gratitude  to  God,  while  her  hands  are
still  empty.  ..."  I  have  two  pleas,"
it  is  as  if  she  had  said,  "  I  am  Thy
servant,  and  I  am  in  trouble."  "  And
my  child  shall  be  entirely  and  abso-
lutely Thy  servant.  I  give  up  all  my
maternal  rights.  I  desire  to  be  his
mother  only  so  far  as  that  he  shall  owe
his  existence  to  me,  after  that  I  give
him  up  to  Thee."  She  does  not  say,
**  If  Thou  wilt  give  me  three  sons,  I  will
give  Thee  two,  if  Thou  wilt  give  me
two,  I  will  give  Thee  one,"  but  "  If
Thou  wilt  give  me  one  only,  I  will
consecrate  him  entirely  to  Thee."  .  .  .
She  does  not  name  her  rival  in  her
prayer,  she  utters  no  invectives,  she
complains  of  no  injury,  and  speaks
only  concerning  the  matters  which  fill
her  soul.  ...  If  we  are  wise,  not  only
will  our  enemies  be  unable  to  do  us  the
least  harm,  but  they  will  be  the  occa-
sion of  our  greatest  good,  if  prayer  is
our  resource  from  the  vexations  that
they  cause  us. — Chrysostom.

The  local  service  promised  by  the
mother  was  afterwards  interrupted,
chiefly  by  the  call  of  S.aniuel  to  higher
duties  as  prophet.  To  the  mother
the  sanctuary-service  seemed  the  best
pursuit  of  life  ;  but  God  had  some-
thiuG:  better  for  the  son.    Yet  Hannah's

•  •  •  •  1

devout  spiritual  purpose  is  maintained
in  her  son's  life. — Translator  of
Langes  Commentary.


14


CHAP.  I.  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.

MAIN  HOMILETJCS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  12—18.

Hannah  and  Eli.

I.  The  wrong  interpretation  which  Eli  put  upon  Hannah's  conduct  shows—
1.  T/fat  the  occuj're?ice  was  an  uncommon  one.  It  was  not  a  coinniou  thing
in  those  degenerate  days  for  Eli  to  see  a  devout  and  deeply-moved  worshipi)er
in  the  house  of  God.  His  eyes  were  not  accustomed  to  the  sight  of  a  soul  so
absorbed  in  wrestling  with  God,  and  so  filled  with  a  sense  of  the  Divine
presence  as  to  be  oblivious  of  all  external  things.  He  was  used  probably  to  hear
the  audible,  formal  prayers  of  less  spiritual  worshippers,  but  the  silent  communion
of  the  soul  with  its  God  was  apparently  beyond  his  power  of  spiritual  appre-
hension. His  explanation  of  the  unwonted  spectacle  suggests  the  thought  that
Eli  himself  was  not  accustomed  to  very  close  communion  with  God — that  he
was  not  in  the  habit  of  coming  into  the  presence  of  Jehovah  with  a  heart  full
of  emotions  too  deep  for  utterance.  Be  that  as  it  may,  it  has  never  been
uncommon  for  those  who  are  ignorant  of  the  deeper  experiences  of  spiritual
life — whether  of  a  joyful  or  sorrowful  nature — to  refer  them  to  a  wrong
source.  The  fervour  of  the  Christian  Church  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  was
referred  to  the  influence  of  "new  wine"  (Acts  ii.  13).  In  the  days  of
martyrdom  those  who  faced  death  with  joyful  courage,  being  filled  with  the
power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  were  sometimes  charged  by  their  enemies,  or  by
those  who  had  never  drunk  at  the  same  fountain  of  Divine  comfort,  with  being
in  league  with  the  devil  and  with  being  supported  by  him.  Uncommon  spiritual
phenomena,  like  any  uncommon  phenomenon  in  the  natural  world,  are  always
liable  to  be  wrongly  interpreted  and  to  be  attributed  to  a  wrong  source  by  those
who  are  utterly  ignorant  in  such  matters.  Festus  could  only  account  for  Paul's
enthusiasm  concerning  Jesus  of  Nazareth  by — "  Paul,  thou  art  beside  thyselfy
much  learning  doth  make  thee  mad''  (Acts  xxvi.  24).  The  uncommon
phenomenon  of  such  a  j-risoner  at  his  bar  could  be  referred  by  him  to  nothing
else.  The  harsh  judgment  passed  by  Eli  upon  Hannah — his  entire  misappre-
hension of  her  character  and  conduct — is  a  type  of  what  has  happened  ten
thousand  times  in  the  past,  is  happening  now,  and  will  go  on  to  happen  while
men  are  imperfect.  And  it  is  to  be  especially  noted  that  not  only  does  the
w^orld  thus  misunderstand  the  actions  of  the  saints  of  God,  but  one  good  man
or  woman  often,  through  ignorance,  thus  misjudges  another — often  refers  an  act
which  lies  outside  his  or  her  own  range  of  experience  to  a  motive  or  to  a  cause
which  is  the  very  opposite  of  the  real  one.  2.  Ihat  the  kind  of  worshipper
Eli  supposed  Hannah  to  be  was  not  uncommon  in  the  Tabernacle.  Everybody  who
has  had  any  experience  in  the  professing  Church  of  God,  knows  that  indulgence
in  strong  drink  and  attendance  upon  the  services  of  God's  house  are  not  incom-
patible. Men  who  are  lovers  of  wine  are  sometimes  also  very  fervent  and  devout
in  external  service,  and  will  even  utter  prayers  while  under  the  partial  influence
of  intoxicating  drink.  There  is  ahundant  evidence  in  the  Old  Testament
writings  that  drunkenness  was  one  of  the  sins  of  the  ancient  people  of  God.  It
was  inseparable  from  such  a  state  of  things  as  that  descril)ed  in  chapter  ii.  22.
Doubtless  many  **  daughters  of  Belial  "  and  daughters  of  Bacchus  frequented
the  house  of  God  in  Shiloh,  and  Eli  had  often  good  reason  to  say  to  a  devout
drunkard,  '^  How  long  will  thou  be  drunken  ?  Put  away  thy  wine  Jrom  thee."
3.  How  suspicion  fdants  the  power  of  discrimination.  If  a  man  has  reason  to
think  he  ha.s  been  deceived  in  the  past  by  certain  characters  or  by  certain
aspects  of  character,  he  will  lind  himself  always  i)rone  to  suspect  any  person  or
appearance  of  the  same  kind  that  is  presented  to  him.  And  this  suspicion  will
make  him  less  impartial — more  uncharitable — in  his  judgment  than  he  other-
wise would  be.     It  is  one  of  the  saddest  influences  of  crime  upon  good  men

15


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,  book  i.


that  it  sometimes  makes  them  harsh  and  unjust  to  innoceut  people.  Eli  had
seen  so  many  hypocritical  and  vicious  worshippers  in  the  tabernacle  that  he
could  not  discern  a  really  devout  one  when  she  came— he  hastily  leaped  to  the
conclusion  that  this  godly  woman  was  like  most  of  those  who  frequented  the
service  of  God.

II.  Hannah's  reception  of  the  unmerited  accusation.  Consider  how  keenly
she  must  have  felt  Eli's  words.  Constantly  insulted  and  taunted  as  she  was,
by  her  rival  at  home,  sbe  would  naturally  look  for  sjrmpathy  from  the  priest  of
God — to  receive  from  him  an  insult  greater  even  than  she  could  have  ever
received  from  Peninnah,  mnst  have  been  like  a  sword-thrust  to  one  already
deeply  wounded.  Her  defence  is  at  once — I.  Emphatic.  She  meets  the  accusa-
tion with  a  decided  No.  It  is  the  duty  of  all,  when  wrongly  accused,  to  meet
such  an  accusation  with  an  emphatic  denial.  We  owe  it  to  ourselves  to  declare
that  we  are  innocent.  2.  Calm  and  respectful.  "  No,  my  lord."  "  Count  not
thine  handmaid  a  daughter  of  Belial."  Nothing  is  more  likely  than  an  unjust
accusation  to  arouse  angry  feeling.  We  are,  then,  in  imminent  danger  of
forgetting  not  only  what  we  owe  to  the  person  who  accuses  us,  but  what  we  owe
to  ourselves,  and  to  let  our  indignation  override  our  self-command.  Hannah's
calm  reply  shows  that  she  was  a  woman  who  knew  how  to  rule  her  own  spirit,
that  she  had  profited  by  the  home  discipline  to  which  she  had  been  subjected.
There  were  many  things  connected  with  Eli's  family  which,  if  she  had  been  dis-
posed to  retaliate,  she  might  have  used  to  inflict  a  wound  upon  her  accuser.
But  she  was  too  high-minded  a  woman  to  descend  to  the  use  of  such  weapons.
Spirited  as  was  her  reply,  there  was  no  lack  of  respect  to  God's  High  Priest.
3.  J  explanatory.  We  may  often  be  conscious,  when  wrongfully  accused,  that
information  only  is  needed  to  convince  our  accuser  that  he  is  in  the  wrong.  It
is  our  duty  not  to  withhold  this.  Circumstances  which  admit  of  a  very  easy
explanation  may  look  sometimes  very  much  against  us.  It  was  so  in  Hannah's
case.  A  bottle  that  is  full  will  pour  out  its  contents  much  more  slowly  than
one  which  contains  but  little.  So  with  the  heart  full  of  sorrow.  Its  feelings
are  long  in  finding  an  outlet — it  is  long  before  there  is  any  feeling  of  relief  in
prayer.  Hannah  had  continued  long  before  the  Lord  in  silent  prayer,  and  this,
douV)tless,  gave  some  colour  to  Eli's  suspicion.  She  was  not  too  angry,  or  too
proud,  to  give  him  a  full  explanation  of  all  that  had  occurred.

III.  Eli's  benediction.    It  involves  the  admission  that  he  had  erred.    A

block  of  ice  and  a  block  of  marble  may  look  equally  hard  and  feel  equally  cold;
but  if  the  warm  sun  shine  on  them,  how  soon  will  the  difference  be  seen.  The
one  will  remain  as  hard  and  cold  as  ever,  the  other  will  be  melted  into  streams
of  refreshing  water.  So  with  a  good  and  a  bad  man.  Both  may  speak  harsh
words  in  haste,  both  are  liable  to  err  in  judgment,  but  the  one  can  be  melted
into  contrition  for  the  wrong  he  has  done  and  will  acknowledge  his  fault,  while
the  other  remains  proud  and  unsubdued.  Eli's  change  of  speech  and  of  bearing
towards  the  woman  whom  he  had  wronged,  showed  his  desire  to  atone  for  his
error,  and  gave  evidence  that  he  "  rejoiced  not  in  iniquity,  but  rejoiced  in  the
truth  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  6)  ;  that  it  gave  him  no  pleasure  to  utter  stern  rebuke,  but
that  it  gladdened  his  heart  to  be  able  to  say,  "  Go  in  peace,  and  the  God  oj
Israel  grant  thee  thy  petition  that  thou  hast  asked  of  Him."   Thus  we  have  seen  :

I.  The  best  people  and  the  purest  actions  may  be  misconstrued  even  by  good  men.

II.  The  most  vicious  men  may  be  found  observing  the  external  forms  of  religion.

III.  That  care  is  needed  lest  much  experience  of  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked
harden  us  against  the  good.

IV.  That  a  false  accusation  should  not  overthrow  our  self-command.

V.  That  a  good  man  will  not  be  too  proud  to  confess  himself  in  the  wrong,

16


OHAP.  I.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Vers.  12,  13.  A  devout  })rayer  must
proceed  froui  tlie  very  bottom  of  tlie
lieart,  and  may  be  offered  without  out-
ward words  (Ps.  xix.  14,  xxvii.  8,
Ixxii.  8  ;  Isa.  xxix.  13,  14). — Starke.

Her  voice  was  uot  heard  by  man,
but  God  heard  it. — Chrysostom.

Siie  continued  praying,  as  resolved
not  to  give  over  her  suit.  Prayer,
like  those  arrows  of  deliverance,  should
be  multiplied.  We  wring  out  of  God's
holy  hands  that  mercy  which  He  with
an  unwilling  willingness  withholdethfor
awhile,  that  we  may  be  the  more  im-
portunate.— Trapp.

Hannah  had  learned  from  Moses
thus  to  pray,  for  when  he  fell  upon  his
face  before  God,  without  uttering  a
sound,  God  grants  his  request,  and
says,  "  Why  criest  thou  unto  me  ? "
(Exod.  xiv.  15). — Le  JSJaistre  de  Sacy.

The  fervent  prayer  of  troubled  souls
measures  itself  not  by  time,  but  exalts
the  soul  above  time  into  eternity,  and
troubles  itself  not  about  human  obser-
vation and  judgment,  but  is  a  pouring
out  of  the  heart  before  the  living  God.
— Langes  Commentary.

Ver.  16.  Here  we  see  what  account
this  holy  woman  made  of  drunken  per-
sons and  of  drunkenness  ;  she  counteth
them  the  sons  and  daughters  of  Belial.
And,  indeed,  unto  them  fitly  agree  all
the  significations  of  this  word:  —
(1)  They  are  licentious  and  lawless,
without  any  yoke  or  bridle  to  keep  them
in  ;  (2)  they  are  altogether  unprofit-
able, they  neither  do  good  to  others
nor  to  themselves  ;  (3)  and  such  do
neither  prosper  in  this  world,  and  with-
out repentance  do  exclude  themselves
from  the  celestial  inheritance.  —  Willet.

She  calls  herself  Eli's  handmaid,  and
strives  to  remove  his  bad  opinion  of
her.  She  does  not  say,  '*  He  has
wantonly  and  thoughtlessly  accused
me  ;  his  suspicion  is  most  ill-tiD:ied ;  my
conscience  is  clear,  I  will  let  who  will
calumniate  me."  But  she  conforms  to
that  law  of  the  Apostle  who  commands
us  **  to  ap])ear  honest  in  the  sight  of
men. " — Chrysostom.


Defence  against  unjust  accusations.
1.  For  wYiiit  puryose^  As  a  tribute  to
truth,  for  the  honour  of  the  Lord,  as  a
tribute  to  our  own  moral  worth.  2.  In
what  manner  ?  In  quietness  and
gentleness,  without  sinful  passion,  in
humility  and  modesty.  3.  By  God's
help,  with  what  result?  Convincing
the  accusers  of  their  wron'j^,  chanfrinir
their  bad  words  into  blessings,  lighten-
ing our  own  hearts  of  a  heavy  load. —
Langes  Commentary.

Ver.  17.  Hannah  turns  her  accuser
into  her  advocate  by  her  wisdom  and
discretion. — Chrysostom.

Ver.  18.  She  that  began  her  prayers
with  fasting  and  heaviness  rises  up
from  them  with  cheerfulness  and
repast.  The  conscience  may  well  rest
when  it  tells  us  that  we  have  neglected
no  means  of  redressing  our  affliction  ;
for  then  it  may  resolve  to  look  either
for  amendment  or  patience. — Bishop
Hall

The  life  of  faith  can  take  comfort
from  a  word,  and  rest  a  world  upon  a
promise.  Hannah's  affairs  without  the
sanctuary  actually  remained  in  the
same  state  as  before;  but  a  transaction
had  taken  place  within  it,  which  placed
them  in  a  new  point  of  view.  The
favourable  aspect  of  God  gives  a  new
aspect  to  everything  besides. —  Cecil.

I.  It  is  a  fact  of  history  that  prayer
is  answered.  The  history  of  the
Church  of  God  is  a  part  of  the  history
of  the  world — it  is  as  much  a  part  of  it
as  the  history  of  the  empire  of  Rome,
or  the  republics  of  Greece — and  its
existence  and  growth  in  the  world  is
inseparably  connected  with  the  fact
that  God  hears  and  answers  prayer.
The  blessings  that  have  descended
upon  her  members  in  answer  to  their
supplications  are  matters  of  historical
fact.  So  with  the  history  of  the
Hebrew  nation.  It  is  an  in  contest  ible
fact  that  their  history,  as  given  in  the
Scriptures,  is  true,  and  this  being  ad-
mitted, it  cannot  be  denied  that  the

37


IIOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  i.


cases  of  special  Divine  interposition  in  possession.  An  immediate  blessing
answer  to  prayer  are  true  also.  Their  always  follows  earnest  and  heartfelt
wilderness  history  has  many  instances  prayer,  though  the  blessing  sought
of  forgiveness  and  help  being  accorded  may  be  long  delayed,  or  never  granted
to  the  earnest  supplications  of  Moses  in  the  form  which  the  petitioner
on  their  behalf,  and  their  entire  early  desires  at  the  time.  There  is  joy  from
history  is  interwoven  with  records  of  the  asking  as  well  as  from  the  re-
prayers  offered  and  praj^ers  answered,  ceiving — ^joy  from  the  consciousness
The  life  of  the  prophet  Samuel  is  an  that  our  cry  has  entered  into  the  ear
important  part  of  Hebrew  history — he  of  our  Father  in  heaven,  and  will  not
was  destined  to  take  a  foremost  place  be  disregarded  by  Him,  whatever  be
among  its  heroes — and  his  very  name  the  issue.  III.  A  consciousness  of
is  a  record  that  God  gives  ear  to  the  accepted  prayer  sweetens  every  tern-
supplications  of  his  children,  and  often  poral  blessing".  "She  did  eat  and
grants  to  them  the  very  gift  they  ask  drink."  A  child  who  really  loves  his
for.  II.  The  immediate  effect  of  parent  feels  his  young  life  darkened,
prayer  upon  the  human  spirit.     "  The  and  much  of  his  joy  in  existence  gone,

woman   went   her    way, and  if  that  parent  looks   coldly  on  him.

her   countenance  was   no  more  sad."  Doubtless   Hannah  had  regarded  her

Hannah's   sorrow   vanislied   from   the  past  condition  as  a  mark  of  the  absence

hour  in  which  she  poured  out  her  soul  of  Divine  favour,  and  this  had  deprived

before  the  Lord  in  Shiloh.      A  con-  all  the  common  mercies  of  her  life  of

Bciousness  arose   within  her   that  her  sweetness.     But  now  she  felt  that  the

prayer  was    answered — not    that  the  sun  of  God's  approval  was  shining  upon

fulfilment  of  her  desire  was  immediate,  her,  and  this  gilded  with  light  every

but  she  had  an  assurance  that  it  was  social  and   temporal  blessing.      It  is

certain.     This  assurance  made  her  as  this,  and  this  only,  that  can  turn  life's

joyful  in  the  anticipation   as  in  the  water  into  wine.


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  19  and  20.

The  Birth  of  Samuel.

I.  The  vast  importance  of  the  birth  of  a  child.  Every  child  is  a  new  thing
in  the  earth — the  only  new  thing  in  it.  It  has  an  identity  separate  from  all  the
human  creatures  that  have  gone  before  it,  or  will  come  after  it ;  in  some  points
it  differs  from  every  one  of  them.  Forces  are  set  in  motion  upon  the  birth  of
every  child  that  will  not  cease  to  exert  an  influence  through  the  ages  of  eternity.

II.  Godly  families  are  the  cradles  of  great  men.  The  real  greatness  of  a
man  consists  in  the  development  of  all  the  faculties  of  the  soul,  and  first,  and
above  all,  of  the  development  of  his  conscience.  If  the  waters  of  a  stream  flow
through  a  channel  in  wldch  there  is  impure  matter,  it  will  imbibe  some  of  the
poisonous  particles,  and  carry  them  with  it  through  many  miles  of  its  future
course.  So  it  is  with  a  child's  conscience.  It  takes  its  character  from  the
character  of  those  by  whom  he  is  surrounded.  If  he  is  born  in  a  family  of  moral
impurity  his  moral  sense  is  defiled — the  young  life,  passing  through  such  a
channel  on  its  way  to  manhood,  is  tainted ;  and  while  the  taint  remains  there
can  be  no  real  greatness,  for  the  conscience  colours  the  entire  life.  As  one  drop
of  poisonous  matter  diffuses  itself  through  every  part  of  a  vessel  of  water,  so  a
defiled  conscience  makes  its  influence  felt  through  all  the  words  and  deeds  that
go  to  make  up  life.  But  in  a  godly  family  the  child's  conscience  is  not  only
carefully  guarded  from  all  that  might  defile  it,  but  the  holy  exanjple  and  wise
teaching  of  the  parents  develop  and  train  it,  and  so  there  is  every  reason  to

18


CHAP.  I.


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


liope  that  the  whole  after-life  will  possess  the  first  requisite  of  a  ^eat  man — a
liealthy  moral  sense.  Samuel  could  hardly  have  been  the  mi'^lity  power  for
good  in  Israel  which  he  afterwards  became,  if  he  had  not  had  the  blessinf^  of
godly  parentage,  and  consequently  of  early  training  in  the  fear  of  God.  There
have  been  many  men  in  the  world  who  have  been  great  poets,  great  statesmen,
great  warriors — great  with  the  greatness  most  esteemed  by  the  world  in  general
— but  in  how  many  of  them  has  there  been  a  moral  taint,  which  has  deprived
their  famous  w^ords  or  works  of  all  real  power  for  good,  which  has  been  a  blot
upon  all  their  intellectual  greatness.  And  of  those  who  have  been  great  in
goodness  as  well  as  great  in  intellectual  power,  how  large  a  proportion  have  been
born  in  godly  homes.

III.  There  is  no  blessings  of  earth  g^reater  than  to  be  born  in  snch  a  family.

Such  children  are  indeed  "  })revented  with  the  blessings  of  God's  goodness"
(Psa.  xxi.  3).  Contrast  the  lot  of  such  a  child  with  that  of  the  millions  who
first  see  the  light  in  a  home  where  God  is  never  acknowledged — where  the
supreme  importance  of  moral  purity  is  never  thought  of — or  worse  still,  of  those
whose  earliest  exj)eriences  are  those  of  the  lowest  and  most  revolting  exhibitions
of  crime  where  the  infant  breathes  with  its  first  breath  the  atmosphere  of
hell.  Life,  when  it  is  most  impressible,  in  such  a  home  is  surrounded  by  those  who
will  stamp  it  with  images  and  characters  all  but  indelible — with  ideas  that  will
pollute  the  soul  through  its  whole  life.  There  is  more  mystery  involved  in  the
advent  of  a  child  into  such  an  atmosphere  than  can  be  solved  by  any  human
mind — it  must  be  left  in  the  hand  of  Him  whom  we  know  to  be  the  All  Wise
and  Righteous  Ruler  of  the  universe.  But  how  different  is  the  advent  of  a
child  into  a  godly  home.  Blessings  of  all  kinds — love  and  holy  example,  and
tender  and  wise  nurture  are  awaiting  his  arrival.  It  is  as  if  clouds  laden  with
refreshing  showers  hung  in  the  sky  before  the  seed  is  sown  ready  to  descend
upon  it  the  moment  it  is  placed  in  tlie  earth.  Prayers  on  his  behalf  ascend  to
heaven  before  he  draws  his  first  breath — holy  plans  and  purposes  are  formed
concerning  him  before  he  sees  the  light  of  day.  We  can  imagine  how  it  was
with  Hannah  and  Elkanah  while  they  awaited  the  birth  of  this  long-desired
son — this  gift  of  the  Lord — and  so  it  is  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  with  every
godly  parent  as  they  look  forward  to  receiving  such  a  sacred  trust.  Is  there  any
blessing  greater  than  to  begin  life's  journey  under  such  propitious  auspices?


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


Ver.  19.  They  had  ten  miles  to  go;
but  "  they  worshipped  before  the
Lord."  This  whet  they  held  no  let  in
their  journey,  but  a  furtherance
rather,  and  as  oil  to  the  wheels.  It  is
good  to  go  in  God's  name. — Trapp.

Ver.  20.  The  child's  name  was  the
mother's  memorial.  As  often  as  she
looked  into  his  infant  face,  or  named
him  in  her  love,  her  soul  would  swell
within  her  at  the  recollection  of  God's
mercy.  She  saw  the  Divine  gift  in
the  child  of  her  aft'ection,  and  received
a  lesson  of  gratitude  and  dependence
in  his  every  smile  and  tear. — Steel.


Blessed  was  Hannah,  not  in  being  a
mother, but  in  hecoviing o\\Q,\\ot  having
been  one  at  first.  For  the  first  is  the
lot  of  all  her  sex  ;  but  the  second
happiness  is  reserved  for  Hannah.
Blessed,  because  of  her  child-bearing,
not  less  blessed  on  account  of  all  that
had  gone  before  it. — Chrysostom.

I  do  not  find  that  Peninnah  asked
any  son  of  God,  yet  she  had  store.
Hannah  begged  hard  for  this  one,  and
could  not  till  now  obtain  him.  They
which  are  dearest  to  God  do  ofttimes,
and  with  great  difficulty,  work  out
those   blessings    which    fall   into   the

mouths  of  the   careless Aa

19


IIOM I LETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL,  book  i.


this  child  was  the  son  of  his  motlier's  When   pious  parents  receive  theii

prayers,  and  was  consecrated  to  God  children  with  calling  on  God  and  in

ere   his  possibility  of  being  ;   so  now  His  fear,  then  is  every  child  a  Samuel,

himself  shall  know,  both  how  he  came  Starke.

and  whereunto  he  is  ordained The    fact    that,    in   common   with

He  cannot  so  much  as  hear  himself  Isaac,  John  the  Baptist,  and  Samson,

named  ;  but  he  must  needs  remember  his  birth  took  place  beyond  all  human

both  the  extraordinary  mercy  of  God  ho])e  and  expectation  was  calculated  to

and  his  mother's  vow.    .    .  .    There  is  produce  the  conviction  that  God  had

no  necessity  of  significant  names,  but  some  other  object  than  to   turn  the

we  cannot  have  too  many  monitors  to  sorrow  of  a  woman  into  joy. — Heng-

put  us  in  mind  of  our  duty. — Bishop  stenberg.
Ball.

MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Y ERSES  21—23.

Serving  God  in  the  Home  and  in  the  Temple.

I.  An  obedient  recognition  of  Divine  ordinances.  1.  As  to  place.  "And
Elkanah  went  up  to  offer  unto  the  Lord."  The  value  of  laws  or  ordinances
depends  upon  the  wisdom  of  him  who  institutes  them,  and  our  obligation  to
observe  them  depends  upon  the  claim  to  obedience  that  he  has  upon  us  and
upon  their  adaptation  to  meet  our  needs.  In  the  time  of  Elkanah,  the  place  of
the  ark  was  the  place  appointed  by  God  where  his  people  were  to  assemble  to
perform  acts  of  special  worship.  Under  the  New  Testament  dispensation,
Christians  are  commanded  to  assemble  themselves  together  for  the  same  purpose
(Heb.  X.  25),  and  the  command  is  binding  upon  all  because  it  has  been  given
by  Him  who  is  fully  acquainted  with  man's  spiritual  needs,  and  knows  how
those  needs  will  be  most  fully  met.  2.  As  to  time.  Ancient  Israel  was  com-
manded to  assemble  together  at  S})ecial  seasons  and  on  special  days.  Although
it  may  be  disputed  whether  Christians  are  bound  to  observe  any  particular  day,
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  regular  observance  of  a  special  day  such  as  the
Christian  Sabbath,  is  indispensable  to  the  maintenance  of  a  national  sense  of
the  existence  of  a  God,  and  if  it  is  not  absolutely  necessary  to  preserve  divine
and  spiritual  life  in  the  individual  soul,  it  is  in(lisi)ensable  to  its  growth  and
vigour.  The  obligation  of  Christians  to  observe  a  "  Lord's  day  "  has  its  origin
b(jth  in  the  Divine  institution  of  the  Sabbath  at  the  Creation,  in  its  recognition
by  (  hrist  Himself  (Mark  ii.  27J,  and  in  the  manifest  ada})tation  to  meet  their
spiritual  needs.  He  who  knows  man's  needs  made  the  Sabbath  for  him,  and  to
set  it  aside  as  unnecessary  is  to  impute  to  Him  ignorance  as  to  the  S})iritual
wants  of  His  own  creatures.  We  are  as  much  bound  to  recognise  a  place  and  a
period  in  which  to  meet  for  the  public  worship  of  God  as  the  ancient  Jew  was.
Christ  Himself  has  attached  a  special  promise  to  such  a  gathering  in  His  name
(Matt,  xviii.  20),  and  in  two  instances  on  record,  cheered  his  first  disciples  by
fulfilling  it  even  in  His  bodily  presence  on  **  the  first  day  of  the  week  "  (John
XX.  19-26).  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  divine  ordinances  were  observed  not
oiily  by  Elkanah,  but  by  "all  his  house,"  that  is,  as  is  evident  from  the  following
verses,  by  all  who  were  not  prevented  by  age  or  by  home  duties.

II.  A  service  performed  for  God  at  home.  "  Hannah  went  not  up,"  etc.
Hannah,  in  her  present  circumstances,  served  God  to  more  purpose  by  absenting
herself  for  the  time  from  the  public  worship  of  God.  God  permits  His  human
creatures  to  be  co-workers  with  Him  in  the  accomplishment  of  His  purposes.
He  had  purposed  to  bring  about  a  revival  of  true  godliness  in  Israel  by  means  of
bamuel,  but  in  bringing  about  the  accomplishment  of  his  purpose,  He  worked

20


CHAP.  L


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL,


through  ordinary  human  channels  and  used  liuman  instrumentality.  Ilannali,
by  nourishing  the  bodily  life  of  lier  chilil,  and  by  training  his  infant  mind  in  a
knowledge  of  the  God  whose  piophet  he  was  to  be,  was  a  co-worker  with  God  in
the  raising  the  nation  to  a  hi-her  spiritual  condition.  It  is  so  in  all  God's
purposes  in  relation  to  the  workl,  whether  in  the  kingdom  of  nature  or  of  grace
He  has  purposed  that  the  earlli  shall  bring  forth  her  liarvests  year  after  year  to
supply  man  with  bread.  But  lie  calls  man  to  aid  Ilim  in  the  accomplishment
of  His  purpose  (Isa.  xxviii.  26-29).  And  so  in  the  spiritual  kingdom.  And
when  any  man  of  God  is  raised  up  by  Him  for  a  great  work,  he  is  not  the  only
instrument  of  its  accomplishment,  but  all  those  who  have  hi'lped  to  train  him
for  God's  services — especially  his  mother,  if  she  has  been  faithful  to  her  trust —
have  a  share  in  the  honour  and  joy.  It  may  be  questioned  if  anyone  in  the
kingdom  of  Israel  at  this  time  was  doing  so  great  a  work  fa-  God  as  Hannah  in
the  performance  of  her  unobtrusive  work  in  the  privacy  oi  her  home.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Verse  23.  Hannah  looked  upon
her  child,  not  as  a  child  only,  but  as
an  offering  ;  she  had  two  reasons  to
love  him,  one  from  nature  and  one
from  grace.  .  .  .  Those  who  purpose
to  consecrate  cups  or  vessels  of  gold  to
the  service  of  God,  while  they  keep
them  in  their  house  until  the  day  of
consecration,  look  upon  them  no
longer  as  common  objects,  and  do  not
permit  them   to  be  carelessly  or  in-


differently handled.  So  Hannah,  with
much  more  reason,  nurtured  her  child
with  a  special  reference  to  his  intro-
duction to  the  temple  ;  she  loved  him
more  than  as  an  ordinary  child,  she
regarded  him  as  an  offering  to  the
Lord,  looking  upon  herself  as  sanctified
through  him  ;  indeed,  her  house  had
become  a  temple  since  it  enclosed  this
priest,  this  prophet. — Chrijsostom,


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  24—28.

Vows.

I.  When  we  pledgee  ourselves  to  a  certain  act  or  line  of  conduct  on  condi-
tion that  God  grants  us  a  certain  blessing,  we  must  be  very  careful  to  fulfil
our  vow.  If  we  enter  into  such  a  contract  with  a  fellow-creature,  we  hold  our-
selves bound  by  honour  to  observe  every  jot  and  tittle  of  the  contract.  Let  us
be  at  least  equally  scrupulous  in  the  performance  of  any  pledge  which  we  give
to  God.  Hannah  had  placed  before  the  Lord  the  conditions  under  which  she
would  give  to  His  service  a  son,  to  dwell  in  His  house  for  ever.  The  petition
had  been  granted  on  her  own  terms,  and  tliere  is  no  holding  back  on  her  part.
She  evidently  hastened  to  perform  her  vow;  tliere  was  none  of  that  deferring
(Eccles.  V.  4)  which  looks  like  a  re])enting  of  the  promise  made.  "  When  she
had  weaned  him" — as  soon  as  ever  his  age  permitted  his  separation  from  his
mother's  care — ''she  took  him  up  with  her."  And  the  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving
which  accompanied  the  dedication  of  this  darling  child  show  that  the  gift  was
that  of  a  "cheerful  giver" — that  this  great  act  of  devotion  on  her  part  was  per-
formed with  gladness  (Fsa.  c.  2).

II.  Our  faith  is  strengthened,  and  our  gratitude  deepened,  when  our  vows
can  be  paid  on  the  very  spot  where  they  have  been  made.  "Arise,  and  go
up  to  Bethel"  (Gen.  xxxv.  1),  said  the  Lord  to  Jacob.  The  command  indicates
that  to  visit  the  spot  where  he  had  fled  from  the  face  of  Esau,  and  where  he  had
dedicated  himself  to  the  service  of  God,  would  deepen  the  patriarch's  gratitude

^1


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


BOOK  I.


for  all  the  mercy  and  trutli  that  bad  followed  him  since,  and  would  strengthen
his  faith  in  the  "faithful  Creator  "  and  covenant-keeping  God.  "Arise,  and  gu
to  Betliel"  testifies  that  it  is  good  to  pay  our  vow  in  the  place  in  which  it  was
made.  The  very  sight  of  the  spot  brings  before  us  more  vividly  than  anything
else  can  do  the  circumstances  of  the  past,  and  thus  makes  us  realise  more  fully
the  blessings  w^e  have  received  in  answer  to  the  prayers  then  otfored.  Hannah
was  enabled  to  pay  her  vow  in  the  very  spot  where  she  had  made  it;  "I  am  the
woman  that  stood  by  thee  here,  praying  to  the  Lord,"  etc.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


Ver.  28.  A  double  sacrifice  was
celebrated  ;  one  of  the  victims  is  en-
dowed with  reason,  and  the  other  is
not ;  the  one  is  oflered  up  by  the
priest,  the  other  by  Hannah.  That
which  was  offered  by  the  mother  w^as
a  far  more  costly  sacrifice  than  that
presented  by  the  priest.  For  Hannah
offered  the  fruit  of  her  womb ;  she
treads  in  the  steps  of  Abraham,
she  emulates  the  self-sacrifice  of  the
patriarch.  But  Abraham  received
back  his  son  and  led  him  away,  but
Hannah  leaves  hers  in  the  temple  lor
the  rest  of  his  days. — Ch-ysostom.

Hannah's  piety  did  not  cool  when
her  wish  was  gratified. — l^teele.

I'hat  God  gives  in  answer  to  prayer,
and  that  man  devotes  to  God  what  he
obtains,  to  that  God  takes  again  what
He  has  given,  or  lays  claim  to  it  for
the  ends  of  His  kingdom,  is  the  law  of
reciprocity  in  the  intercourse  between
the  living  God  and  His  saints  ;  the
latter  contribute  nothing  for  the
realisation  of  the  S})ecial  ends  of  His
kingdom  which  they  have  not  received
from  Him,  and  are  not  by  Him  enabled
to  contribute. — Langes  Commentary.

True  religion  is  a  divine  life  in  the
souly  which  its  author  first  tries  and
then  honours,     1.  It  is  a  life  of  faith.


hope,  and  love.  2.  It  is  tried  by  Satariy
who  will  seek  to  place  such  men  as
lloi)hni  and  Phhiehas  at  the  altar,  if  it
be  but  to  distress  and  drive  away  from
it  such  worshippers  as  Hannah.  The
family  is  often  our  furnace,  it  has
pains  as  necessarily  secret  as  severe  ;
and  where  they  can  be  told  they  are
told  in  vain  to  any  but  God.  Such
was  the  family  of  Hannah.  The
Church  li^d'i  will  try  the  patience  and
faith  of  its  true  members.  It  will  try
whether  we  can  acknowledge  a  true
minister  of  God,  and  meekly  bear  with
his  itifirmities,  though,  like  Eh,  he
mistakes  our  case;  and  chills  the  heart
which  he  should  cherish ;  whether  we
can  receive  the  promises  of  God  from
His  moutli,  though  it  sometimes  speaka
unadvisedly.  The  Church  is  a  fire  to
try  the  Church.  3.  But  true  religion
will  be  owned  and  honoured  of  him
who  gave  it,  as  was  the  case  with
Hannah.  The  Lord  often  does  so
beyond  all  that  we  ask  or  think.
Hannah  had  asked  for  a  man-child;
but  it  was  not  in  her  contemplation  to
ask  for  a  Samuel — that  light  of  Israel
— that  pr()])het  mighty  in  word  and
deed — that  blessing  and  pattern  to  the
world  in  every  age. — Cecil.


n


OHAP.  II.  BOMILETW  COMMENT  A  R  Y:   SA  MUEL.


CHAPTER   11.

CuiTTCAL  AND  EXPOSITORY  NoTES. — Ver.  1.   "  And  Hannah  prayed."    "  Hymns  are  wont

to  be  comprehended  under  the  name  of  prayers  "  (Pd.  Ixxi.  20).  "  It  was  the  most  ancient  way
of  preserving  the  memory  of  things  to  posterity,  poets  being  more  ancient  than  historians  or
orators."  (Patrick.)  "Mine  Horn."  "There  is  no  reason  for  supposing  here  a  reference
to  the  custom  among  Oriental  women  (Druses  and  others)  of  wearing  silver  horns  on  the
head  to  which  the  veil  is  attached,  and  which,  by  their  position,  indicate  the  woman's  position
as  maiden,  wife,  or  mother.  There  is  no  trace  of  such  a  custom  among  the  ancient  Hebrews.
The  word  translated  horn  is  used  of  the  horns  of  beasts,  of  horns  for  blowing  and  drinking,
or  for  any  horn-shaped  vessel,  and  of  a  mountain  peak.  It  is  the  symbol  derived  from  horned
beasts,  which  carry  the  head  high  in  vigorous  courage  and  consciousness  of  power."  (Lanijes
Commentary.)  "  Mint  horn  is  exalted  "  does  not  mean,  I  am  proud,  but  "  my  power  is  great
in  the  Lord."  (Keil.)  "  This  figure  appears  first  here,  and  connects  this  song  with  that  of
David,  in  2  Sam.  xxii.  3,  and  is  adopted  in  the  Gospel,  and  applied  to  Christ  in  the  song  of
Zacharias"  (Luke  i.  69).  (Wordsworth.)  "The  mouth  is  '■  enLar<jed,'  or  *  opened*  wide,  to
proclaim  the  salvation  before  which  the  enemies  would  be  dumb"     (Keil.)

Ver.  2.  "  Rock."  This  figure  is  another  connecting  link  which  joins  this  song  with  that  of
Moses  (Deut.  xxxii.  4)  with  David,  and  all  with  Christ."  (  Wordsworth.)  {See  on  this  subject
in  Comments.)  "The  symbolical  designation  ot  the  covenant-God  by  Jiock,  which  occurs
frequently,  was  suggested  naturally  by  the  configuration  of  the  ground  in  Palestine,  where
masses  of  rock,  surrounded  by  steep  precipices,  olfered  an  image  of  solid  and  sure  protection."
(Lanye's  Commentary.)

Ver.  3.  "  By  Him  actions  are  weighed."  Keil  translates,  "  To  Him  deeds  are  weighed,"
that  is  to  say,  the  acts  of  God  are  weighed,  i.e.,  are  equal  or  just.  Many  expositors  agree  with
him,  and  about  an  equal  number  understand  it  to  signify  that  God  weighs,  or  rightly  estimates
the  actions  of  men.

Ver.  4.  "  The  bows  of  the  mighty,"  etc.  "  Bows  were  a  principal  part  of  warriors'  weapons
and  their  girdles  a  principal  part  of  their  military  habit  "  {Patrick).

Ver.  5.  "They  that  were  full,"  etc.  "  See  an  instance  in  verse  36  "  {Biblical  Commcntari/).
"  Ceased  "  either  to  be  hungry  or  to  work  for  bread.  "  The  barren  hath  borne  seven,"  i.e.
many.  "  Seven  childi-en  are  mentioned  as  the  full  number  of  the  Divine  blessing  in  children  "
(Ruth  iv.  15). — (Keil.)  "Here  prophecy  concerning  the  Church  mingles  with  her  hymn  of
praise." — (Patrick.)     (On  this  subject  see  Comments  on  the  ISony.)

Ver  6.  *'  The  Lord  killeth,"  etc.  Killing  denotes  (with  a  departure  from  the  ordinary
sense)  bringing  into  the  extremest  misfortune  and  suffering,  whicii  oppresses  the  soul  like  the
gloom  of  death,  or  brings  it  near  to  aeath — making  alive  is  extricating  from  deadly  sorrow  and
introducing  into  safety  and  joy. — See  Deut.  xxxii.   3'J,   Psa.  xxx.  3,  etc.     {Lanye's  Commentary).

Ver.  8.  "  The  beggar  from  the  dunghill."  "  This  alludes  to  a  form  of  wretchedness
known  in  the  East,  and  indicating  the  lowest  degree  of  poverLy  and  humiliation.  The  dunghill
— a  pile  of  horse,  cow,  or  camel  offal,  heaped  up  to  dry  in  the  sun  and  serve  as  fuel— was  ana  is
piled  up  in  the  huts  of  the  poor ;  and  sometimes,  from  necessity,  is  the  haunt  of  wandering
mendicants,  who,  finding  it  in  some  outhouse  outside  the  city,  lodge  there  for  want  of  better
accommodation :  so  that  the  change  that  had  been  made  in  the  social  postion  of  Hannah  appeared
to  her  grateful  heart  as  auspicious  and  as  great  as  tlie  elevation  of  a  poor  despised  beggar  to  the
highest  and  most  dignified  rank  f/'.ru^'j.ci.y  "  The  pillars  of  the  earth."  "  There  is  no  need
to  find  a  geographical  tiieory  in  a  poetical  statement.  And  even  if  it  expresses  the  author's
geographical  views,  it  is  not  the  thought  of  the  passage,  but  only  the  framework  of  the  thought;
the  real  thought  here  is  solely  religious,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  physical  science  "  ( Translat  .r
of  Lamge's  Commentary ).  Wordsworth  calls  it  "a figurative  expression  derived  from  a  palace  or
temple. "     Some  understand  by  the  pillars,  the  rulers  of  the  earth.

Ver.  9.  "  Keep  the  feet,"  etc.  Either  from  error  and  sin  ( Fa  asset)  or  from  misfortune
( Lang e's Commentary).     "Darkness."     Symbolic  of  misfortune.

Ver.  10.  ''  Thunder."  "  Thunder  is  a  premonitory  sign  of  the  approach  of  the  Lord  to
judgment"  (Keil).  "Literally  fulfilled  in  this  history"  (  Wordsworth).  "The  ends  of  the
earth."  "The  object  of  (j!t)d's  judicial  interposition  is  not  only  the  members  of  the  chosen
people,  but  the  whole  world"  (Lange's  Commentary).  "His  anointed"  or  "Messiah."  The
first  time  the  word  is  used  in  Holy  Scripture.

Ver.  11.  "Minister."  "  The  word  is  used  in  three  senses  in  Scripture.  1.  Of  the  service
of  both  priests  and  Levites  (Exod.  xxviii.  35-43,  etc.).     2.  Of  the  ministrations  of  the  Levites

23


EOMILETIC  COMME}:TARr:   SAMUEL  book  t


BS  rendered  to  the  priests  (Numb.  iii.  6),  where  the  phrase  is  nearly  identical  Avith  that  used  here.
3.  Of  any  service,  especially  one  rendered  to  a  man  of  God  (Num.  xi.  28  ;  1  Kings  xix.  21  ;
2  Kings  vi.  15,  etc.).  The  application  of  it  to  Samuel  as  ministering  to  the  liOrd  before  Eli
the  priest  accords  most  exactly  with  Samuel's  condition  as  a  Levite"  ('jB/^Hca^  Commmto?-?/;.
"He  must  have  been  engaged  in  some  occupation  suited  to  his  tender  age,  as  in  playing  upon
the  cymbals,  or  other  instruments  of  music  ;  in  lighting  the  lamps,  or  similar  easy  and  interesting
services  "  (Fausaet).

Ver.  12.  "Sons  of  Belial."     See  on  Chapter  i.  16.

Ver.  13,  14.  They  were  not  content  with  the  portions  assigned  to  them  by  the  Levitical  law,
namely,  the  heave-leg  and  wave-breast  (Lev.  vii.  3"-34),  but  robbed  the  offerer  of  that  portion
which  belonged  to  him  while  he  was  preparing  it  to  celebrate  the  feast  of  thanksgiving  before  the
Lord.

Ver.  15.  *•  The  fat,"  etc.  This  was  the  part  of  the  animal  which  was  to  be  offered  to  God
(Lev.  iii.  16,  vii.  23,  25,  etc.).  "  This  was  high  contempt  of  God  to  demand  their  portion  before
God  had  His  "  (Patrick).  "  In  the  case  of  the  peace  offerings,  the  offerer  slew  the  animal
himself  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  and  the  priest  poured  the  blood  and  burnt  the  fat "
(Biblical  Commentary ).

Ver.  17.  "  The  young  men."  "Not  the  servants  of  the  priests  (Keil)  but  the  priests  themselves,
the  sons  of  Eli  "  ( Lange's  Commentary ).

Ver.  18.  "But."  The  Levite-child  is  contrasted  with  the  grown-up  priest"  (Wordsworth).
*•  Ephod."  "  It  does  not  appear  whether  the  Levites  wore  the  ephod  properly.  Micah  wore
one,  but  that  may  have  been  in  his  character  as  priest  (Judges  xviii,  4,  6,  14),  and  David  when  he
danced  before  the  ark  (2  Sam.  vi.  14).  Possibly  this  was  a  mark  of  Samuel's  special  dedication  "
(Biblical  Commentary).

Ver.  19.  "Coat."  Meil,  rendered  mantle  in  1  Sam.  xv.  27,  xxviii.  14,  etc.  "It  probably
resembled  the  robe  or  '  MeiV  of  the  High-priest  (^Exod.  xxviii.  31),  but  was  made  of  course  of
some  simpler  material,  and  without  the  symbolical  ornaments  attached  to  the  lower  hem,  bv
which  that  official  dress  was  distinguished"  {Keil).  "  It  is  interesting  to  know  that  the  garmci.
which  his  mother  made  and  brought  to  the  infant  prophet  at  her  annual  visit  was  a  miniature  OT
the  official  priestly  tunic  or  robe  ;  the  same  that  the  great  prophet  wore  in  mature  years,  and  by
which  he  was  on  one  occasion  actually  identified.  When  the  witch  of  Endor,  in  answer  to  Saul's
inquiry,  told  him  *  that  an  old  man  was  come  up  covered  with  a  meil/  Saul  perceived  that  it
was  Samuel" — 1  Sam.  xxviii.  14.     (Smith's  Biblical  Dictionary ).

Ver.  22.  "  Very  old,"  "  consequently  listless  "  (Patrick).     "  The  -women  that  assembled."

The  same  phrase  as  that  used  in  Exod.  xxxviii.  8.  Some  commentators  consider  that  these  women
were  employed  in  spinning,  etc.,  for  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  like  those  mentioned  in  Exod.
XXXV.  25.  Others,  as  Hengstenberg,  look  upon  their  service  as  purely  spiritual,  as  that  of  Anna
(Luke  ii.  36).  Others  again  regard  them  as  simply  worshippers.  Kitto  says  that  if  they  M'ere
employed  in  service  they  would  have  been  inside,  not  at  the  doors  of  the  tabernacle.

Ver.  25.  "  If  one  man  sin  against  another,"  etc.  "  A  man  may  intercede  with  God  for
remission  of  a  penalty  due  to  himself,  but  who  shall  venture  to  entreat  for  one  who  has  outraged
the  majesty  of  God."     {Wordsworth.)

Ver.  26.  "  In  favour  "  etc     The  same  words  as  are  used  of  Christ  (Luke  ii.  52).

Ver.  27.  "  A  man  of  God."  A  prophet,  as  in  1  Kings  xiii.  1,  etc.  "  The  only  one  mentioned
since  Deborah."  (Biblical  Commentary.)  "  Thy  Father."  "  Eli  was  a  descendant  of  Ithamar,  the
youngest  son  of  Aaron  "  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  3).  .  .  .  "The  transfer  of  the  high-priesthood  to  him
must  have  taken  place,  because  at  the  death  of  the  last  high-priest  of  the  family  of  Eleazer
Aaron's  eldest  son),  the  remaining  son  was  too  young  and  inexperienced  to  take  his  place."
(Keil.)

V(5r.  28.  "Did  I  not  give,"  etc.  The  bountiful  provision  made  by  God  for  His  priests  is
mentioned  as  the  great  aggravation  of  the  sins  of  Eli's  sons.    (Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  31.  "  The  judgment  did  not  fall  upon  Eli's  house  immediately.  His  grandson  Ahitub
(1  Sam.  xiv.  3),  and  Abiathar,  Ahitub's  giandson  (1  Kings  i.  25  ;  ii.  26),  successively  held  the
office  of  high  priest.  So  much  importance  in  the  East  has  always  been  attached  to  old  age  that
it  would  be  felt  to  be  a  great  calamity,  and  sensibly  lower  the  rtspectal  ility  of  any  family  which
could  boast  of  few  old  men."  (Jausaet.)  Abiatl.ar,  the  last  high  priest  of  Eli's  family,  was
deposed  by  Solomon,  and  the  high-priesthood  reverted  to  that  of  Eleazar,  to  whose  family  Zadok
belonged  (2  Sam.  xv.  24  ;  xvii.  15  ;  xix.  12  ;  xx.  25.     1  Kings  ii.  27).

u


CHAP.  n.  BOMTLETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


Ver.  32.     "This  was  the  captivity  mentioned  in  Judges  xviii.  30.     (Wordsworth.)

Ver.  35.  "A  faithlul  priest."  This  probably  refers,  in  the  first  instance,  to  Samuel,  who
was  evidently  called  by  God  to  perform  priestly  acts  ;  and,  secondly,  to  Zadnk,  the  father  of  a
long  line  of  priests.  It  is  also  generally  regarded  as  pointing  on  to  the  Messiah.  "  It  would
then  seem  best  to  regard  it  as  announcing  a  Itnc  of  faithful  men."  (Tr.  of  Lange's  Commentary.)

Ver.  36.  **  A  piece  of  silver."  The  word  is  used  only  here.  It  signifies  a  small  piece  (.1
money,  and  has  been  rendered  "a  beggar's  coin."  "  Commentators  are  divided  in  their  opinion
AS  to  the  historical  allusions  contained  in  this  prophecy."  {Keil.)


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— VERSES  1—10.

Hannah's  Song.

I.  The  end  of  a  granted  desire  should  be  the  beginning  of  praise.  The  desire
of  the  husbandman  ends  when  the  last  shock  of  corn  is  safely  housed  in  the
barn.  Then  comes  the  harvest  song  indicating  that  desire  has  been  completed
by  fulfilment.  The  ploughing  and  sowing,  the  bearing  of  the  precious  seed,  the
toil,  the  hope,  the  fear,  the  patience  are  all  things  of  the  past,  and  the  end  of
all  these  should  be  a  beginning  of  something  new — of  a  song  of  thanksgiving.
So  it  will  be  in  the  kingdom  of  God  at  the  end  of  the  present  dispensation.  The
groaning  and  travailing  of  the  whole  creation — the  sin,  the  sorrow,  the  tears,  and
struggles  of  the  present  will  one  day  be  ended — the  earnest  expectation  of  the
creature — the  desire  of  the  best  of  the  human  race  in  all  worlds — the  prayer  of
ages — will  end  in  complete  fultilment  :  and  the  end  of  all  the  desire  and  longing
of  the  present  will  be  the  beginning  of  praise.  A  "  new  song  "  will  be  sung  to
celebrate  the  incoming  of  the  new  era — the  birth  of  the  new  heavens  and  the
new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness  (2  Pet.  iii.  13).  The  beginning  of  a
perpetual  thanksgiving  will  celebrate  the  end  of  the  present  state  of  things  and
the  incoming  of  the  new.  And  so  it  should  always  be  in  the  life  of  the
individual.  It  was  so  with  Hannah.  She  had  not  experienced  the  consummation
of  her  desire  without  experiencing  deep  sorrow — without  long  and  patient
waiting  upon  God.  But  the  desire,  the  tears,  the  hope  were  behind  her.  The
child  had  been  born,  the  son  had  been  given.  The  vow  had  been  paid  and  the
gift  of  the  Lord  had  been  given  back  to  Him.  The  tide  of  joy  and  gratitude  had
been  rising  higher  and  higher  in  her  heart  from  the  hour  in  which  she  left  her
home  until  she  stood  in  the  very  same  spot  where  she  had  stood  before — "a
woman  sorrowful  and  grieved  in  spirit."  And  now  she  was  a  joyful  mother,  and
gladness  flooded  her  soul  and  burst  forth  into  a  mighty  song  of  exultation  and
thanksgiving.

II.  The  experience  of  one  indvidual  is  often  symbolic  and  prophetic  of  the
experience  of  many.  The  light  that  shone  upon  Paul  on  his  way  to  Damascus
pained  and  blinded  him  at  first.  And  the  bodily  pain  and  blindness  were
symbolic  of  the  pain  and  darkness  of  Ids  soul  from  the  light  which  shined  into
his  soul.  But  out  of  the  darkness  and  sorrow  came  light  and  joy,  such  as  he
had  never  known  before.  Of  the  experience  of  how  many  was  this  experience  of
Paul  symbolic  and  prophetic  !  How  many  through  his  pain  and  joy  were  bnnight  to
pass  through  a  like  experience  !  To  how  many  was  the  soul  transition  of  this  man
an  earnest  of  th*»  same  transition  from  darkness  to  light  !  Hannah's  experience
was  symbolic  and  projihetic  of  what  was  to  be  the  experience  of  many  of  her
nation.  Those  who  were  godly  among  them  iiad  been  long  grieved  at  heart
because  of  the  persecution  of  their  enemies — because  it  seemed,  indeed,  as  if
God  had  forgotten  to  be  gracious  to  His  (;wn  people.  Many  a  time,  doubtless,
had  I  hey  a^ked  Gideon's  question — "  If  the  Lord  be  with  us,  why  then  is  all  this
befallen  us  i  and  where  be  all  His  miracles  which  our  fathers  told  us  of  V

25


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  i.


(Judges  vi.  13).  But  a  new  era  was  now  to  begin.  Hannali's  joy  coming  aftei
her  long  sorrow  was  anticipatory  of  a  time  when  the  garment  of  praise  should
take  the  place  of  the  spirit  of  heaviness  with  all  true  patriots  and  servants  of
God  in  the  land  of  Israel.

III.  The  languag-e  of  the  human  sonl  in  one  age  is  often  fitted  to  express
its  feelings  in  all  ages.  A  common  life  expresses  its  existence  in  the  "same
general  outward  form  from  age  to  age.  The  life  of  the  rose  or  of  the  lily  tiiuls
expression  in  the  same  general  outward  form  to-day  as  it  did  when  God  first
called  it  into  existence.  There  are  modifications  and  individual  distinctions,
but  the  general  outline  is  the  same.  So  with  the  life  of  the  human  soul.
Although  time  modifies  the  form  in  which  it  gives  expression  to  its  thoughts,
although  each  individual  has  an  experience  which  in  some  respects  differs  from
that  of  any  other  creature,  yet  the  language  spoken  ages  ago  hnds  an  echo  in
the  hearts  of  men  and  women  in  each  generation,  and  expresses  their  feelings
as  well  as  it  expresses  the  feelings  of  the  person  who  first  uttered  them.  How
perfectly  does  the  language  of  some  of  the  P.-alms,  for  instance,  fit  the  experience
of  many  men  and  women  in  this  nineteenth  century.  What  a  close  resemblance
there  is  between  this  song  of  the  happy  mother  of  Israel's  prophet,  and  that  of
the  mother  of  that  prophet,  priest,  and  king,  who  was  not  the  Saviour  of  Israel
merely,  but  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  There  are  slight  modifications,  but  the
great  backbone  of  thought  running  through  the  one  is  the  same  as  that  in  the
other.  And  the  same  words,  with  slight  changes  of  expression,  might  be  used
by  any  soul  who  had  emerged  from  a  long  night  of  sorrow  and  darkness  into  a
new  and  brighter  epoch  in  its  history,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  has  been  so
used  by  the  Church  of  God  in  all  ages,  and  will  be  until  time  shall  be  no  longer.
These  thoughts  are  suggested  by  the  song  as  a  whole.  We  will  now  notice  its
main  subjects.

I.  Thatlthere  is  one  God  in  contradistinction  to  many.  ''There  is  none
beside  Thee."  The  human  soul  and  the  world  around  us  s])eak  alike  of  the
oneness  of  God.  The  heavens  that  declare  His  glory,  and  the  firmau)ent  that
showeth  His  handy  work  speak  of  One  kfupreme  Kuler  who  controls  all  the
forces  by  which  the  hosts  of  heaven  move  in  their  appointed  paths.  The  vast
machine  has  many  complications,  but  the  unity  of  its  movements  and  operations
bear  the  stamp  of  one  ruling  mind.  The  human  soul  cries  out  for  One  God —
for  one  distinct  and  over-ruling  power  above  all  the  principalities  and  powers  of
the  universe.  The  Bible  declares  unmistakably  that  there  is  such  a  Being.
There  is  one  "  everlasting  God,  the  Lord,  the  Creator  of  the  heavens  and  the
earth,  who  hath  meted  out  heaven  with  the  span,  and  comprehended  the  dust  oj
the  earth  in  a  measure,  and  weighed  the  mountains  in  scales  and  the  hills  in  a
balance,"  and  none  "  instructed  Him,  or  taught  Him  knoivledge,  or  showed  to
Him  the  way  of  understanding''  (Isa.  Ix.).  He  alone  is  the  'King  eternal,
immortal,  invisible''  (1  Tim.  i.  17),  who  '  doeth  according  to  His  will  in  the
army  of  heaven  and  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth"  (Dan.  iv.  35).  Tiie
human  soul  may  well  rejoice  in  the  knowledge  that  its  destinies  and  the  des-
tinies of  all  the  creatures  of  the  universe  are  in  the  hands  of  a  distinct  identity
like  itself,  yet  so  much  greater  and  more  powerful  as  to  be  able  to  control  all
the  apparently  conflicting  forces  which  are  at  work  into  a  complete  and  perfect
harmony  for  the  good  of  His  creatures.  The  Israel  of  Jehovah  in  all  ages  have
reason  to  rejoice  in  the  knowledge  that  *'  the  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord  "
(Deut.  vi.  4).

II.  That  this  one  God  is  pure  in  His  character.  "  There  is  none  holy  as  the
Lord."  If  a  human  creature  who  holds  in  his  hands  the  earthly  destinies  of
other  creatures  (who  are  inferior  to  him  in  power)  is  lawless  and  wicked,  of  what

20


OHAP.  n.  BOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    ^AMVEt.

misery  may  he  be  the  cause!  Wlien  an  earthly  judge,  although  skilful  and
learned,  is  known  to  be  morally  bad,  we  feel  that  his  want  of  purity  is  not  only
injurious  to  himself,  but  may  affect  the  destinies  of  those  upon  whom  he  is  calbnl
to  pass  sentence.  So  with  any  ruler  or  judge  of  men  in  any  capacity:  purity  of
character,  perfect  integrity  (so  iar  as  a  human  creature  can  be  pure  and  upright),
is  fe't  to  be  indispensable  to  the  well-being  of  those  whom  they  govern  or  whom
they  judge.  If  this  be  so  in  the  case  of  a  human  and  finite  being,  how  much
more  so  is  it  in  tiie  case  of  tiie  Almighty  and  Infinite  God?  If  such  a  thing  as
a  moral  flaw  in  His  character  could  be  conceived,  how  terrible  would  be  the
issue  1  He  who  is  to  judge  the  world  must  he  perfectly  righteous.  There  muist
be  nothing  in  His  feelings  and  disposition  that  would  tend  to  influence  Him  to
do  anything  but  the  strictest  justice.  Seeing  that  the  destinies  of  untold
millions  are  in  His  hands,  He  must  be  ab.solntely  without  spot  in  His  moral
character.  "Shall  not  the  .Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right?"  (Gen.  xviii.  25)
But  in  order  to  do  right  at  all  times  He  must  be  absolutely  incorruptible  and  un-
defiled.  And  this  He  is  declared  to  be,  this  He  has  shown  Himself  to  be.  He  has
shown  it  in  His  hatred  to  sin.  A  man's  moral  purity,  his  holiness,  may  be  esti-
mated by  the  abhorrence  in  which  he  holds  all  moral  impurity — anything  which
can  defile  his  own  soul  and  the  souls  of  others.  That  God  hates  sin  may  be  seen
in  the  searching  and  binding  character  of  His  law.  Human  lawgivers  make  laws
which  deal  with  man's  outward  life — which  have  to  do  with  him  as  a  citizen  rather
tlian  as  a  man.  If  he  abstains  from  certain  outward  actions,  the  law  allows  him  to
li\e  unmolested.  But  God's  law  is  so  holy  that  it  penetrates  into  the  spirit,
legislates  concerning  thoughts  and  feelings,  passes  sentence  upon  hidden  motives
a."--  well  as  upon  visible  actions.  The  "  exceeding  broadness  "  (Psa.  cxix.  OG)
of  the  law  reveals  the  Lawgiver's  hatred  to  sin,  and  His  consequent  moral  purity.
And  God's  hatred  to  sin,  and,  therefore,  His  holiness  is  seen  in  in  the  extent  of
the  sacrifice  He  has  made  to  put  away  sin.  A  human  ruler's  abhorrence  of  any
evil  law  or  custom  may  be  estimated  by  the  efforts  he  makes  to  abolish  it ;  by
the  self-sacrifice  he  is  willing  to  undergo  to  rid  his  country  of  the  curse.  In
nothing  is  the  absolute  holiness  of  God  seen  so  plainly  as  m  the  fact  that  He
''gave  His  only-begotten  Son  "  to  *' put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself"
(Heb.  ix.  26).  Those  who  sing  the  song  of  the  Lamb  slain  glorify  the  name  '^f
the  Lord  for  }r\\^  holiness  (Rev.  xv.  3,  4).  And  the  contemplation  of  His  work  of
redemption  gives  His  saints  on  earth  the  most  assuring  proof  of  that  holiness
"  at  the  remembrance  "  of  which  they  join  the  first  singer  of  this  song  in
"  giving  thanks  "  (Psa.  xxx.  4).

III.  That  immutability  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  God's  absolute  purity.
"  Neither  is  there  any  rock  like  our  God."  The  unchangeableness  of  any  human
being  depends  upon  his  goodness  and  upon  the  length  of  time  he  has  been  good.
He  will  be  unchangeable  in  his  feelings  and  actions  in  proportion  to  his  moral
purity,  and  the  longer  he  has  lived  a  holy  life  the  more  fixed  and  rock-like
will  be  his  character.  If  a  man  has  pursued  a  line  of  righteous  conduct  for
half-a-century — if  in  all  that  time  he  has  been  a  man  of  unblemished
integritj'- — everyone  will  feel  that  he  is  less  likely  to  change  now  than
he  was  fifty  years  ago.  Every  year  that  has  passed  over  his  head — every
step  that  he  has  taken  in  the  path  of  uprightness — has  added  something
to  the  immutability  of  his  character.  God  has  ever  been  perfectly  holy
— holiness  is  His  most  important  attribute — the  one  which  forms  the  most
weighty  theme  of  the  adoration  of  those  of  His  creatures  who  aie
nearest  to  Him  in  moral  character  (Isa.  vi.  3).  And  because  He  is  so  holy
He  must  be  unchangeable  in  His  character.  His  everlasting  holiness  is  a
guarantee  that  He  will  always  be  the  same  ni  thought,  and  word,  and  deed  ;
while  He  remains  the  Holy  One  of  Eternity,  He  must  continue  to  be  the  un-

27


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.  booki.


changeable  God  (Mai.  iii.  6).  And  that  God  is  thus  unchangeable  may  well
furnish  men  with  a  theme  of  song.  It  is  an  instinct  of  humanity  to  reach  out
after  something  less  changeable  than  themselves — to  endeavour  to  lay  hold  of
some  object  to  which,  as  to  a  rock,  they  may  anchor  for  rest  and  security.  All
the  efforts  of  men  to  secure  for  themselves  permanent  positions  in  the  world —
to  ensure  to  themselves  and  to  their  families  a  source  of  livelihood  which  will
not  fail  them — are  indications  of  their  desire  for  a  rock  of  some  kind  upon  which
they  may  reist.  That  upon  which  they  place  their  dependence  may  be  a  very
unworthy  object  of  trust  for  an  immortal  spirit,  yet  men  will  make  a  rock  of
any  object  rather  than  have  none.  But  those  who,  like  Hannah,  know  the
holy  and  unchangeable  God,  make  Him,  and  Him  otily,  the  object  of  their  entire
trust — the  Rock  of  their  souls.  They  know  from  joyful  experience  that  in  all
their  need  He  has  been,  and  ever  will  be,  **  a  strength  to  the  poor^  a  strength  to
the  needy  in  his  distress,  a  refuge  from  the  storm,  a  shadow  from  the  heat,  when
the  Idast  of  the  terrible  ones  is  as  a  storm  against  the  wall "  (Isa.  xxv.  4).

IV.  God  is  likewise  to  be  rejoiced  in  as  a  God  of  knowledge.  ''Th«
Lord  is  a  God  of  knowledge,"  etc.  1.  iJe  knows  Himself.  This  is
more  than  any  human  creature  can  assert  concerning  his  own  identity.
Tlie  anatomist  who  can  describe  every  bone  and  vein  and  nerve  in  the
hmuan  body  is  looked  upon  as  a  man  of  knowledge,  but  wlu^n  he  has  done
this  there  are  many  mysteries  connected  even  with  the  body  that  are  utterly
beyond  his  grasp — he  stands  before  them  in  absolute  ignorance.  The  student
of  man's  mind  is  considered  to  be  a  man  of  knowledge  if  he  can  say  something
instructive  concerning  the  world  of  thought  and  feeling  within  man — if  he  can
analyse  the  operations  of  the  mind  and  classify  the  mental  faculties  and  throw
some  light  upon  the  relations  of  body  and  soul.  Yet  when  he  has  said  all,  how
little  has  he  said  which  can  unfold  to  us  the  mystery  of  our  own  existence — how
little  does  the  wisest  man  know  concerning  himself.  But  God  has  a  perfect
knowledge  of  His  own  nature,  He  never  returns  from  any  reflection  upon  Himself
with  any  mist  of  ignorance  resting  upon  Him — He  comprehends  the  whole  length
and  breadth  and  depth  and  height  of  His  own  Infinite  Being.  2.  Re  has  a
perfect  knowledge  of  His  own  actions.  **  By  Him  actions  are  weighed  " — not
only  the  acts  of  men  but  His  own.  Man  cannot  pretend  to  any  ]>erlect  judgment
of  his  own  actions.  He  knows  not  the  real  value  of  his  own  deeds — he  does  not
know  whither  they  will  tend — he  can  only  come  to  anapproximate  estimate  of  his  own
motives.  ButGod  can  perfectly  weigh  Hisacts — He  kuowsexactly  whatwill  be  their
effect — He  has  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  motives  which  prompt  them.  3.  Having
this  perfect  knowledge  of  Himself  and  of  all  that  He  does,  the  Divine  Being
must  know  man  in  all  the  mystery  oj  his  complicated  heinq,  and  must  be  able
perfectly  to  estimate  the  worth  of  every  human  action.  The  greater  includes
the  less.  He  who  made  man  must  comprehend  the  nature  of  his  existence;  He
knows  what  constitutes  life  ;  He  compreliends  how  mind  acts  upon  matter,  and
sees  the  subtle  link  which  unites  soul  and  body.  And  in  the  matter  of  human
actions,  He  "  is  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart,  and  all
things  are  naked  and  02^ened  in  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do  "
(Heb.  iv.  12-13).  The  motives  that  prompt  human  deeds,  the  influence  that
those  deeds  will  have  upon  future  ages,  the  nature  of  the  human  will  which  is
behind  every  human  deed  are  all  to  Him  as  an  0})en  book.  4.  'I he  proper  con-
dition of  heart  in  the  presence  of  such  a  God  is  humility.  *'  Talk  no  more  so
exceeding  proudly ;  let  not  arrogancy  come  out  of  your  mouth."  Limited
knowledge  on  any  subject  should  make  men  humble  in  the  presence  of  those
who  are  better  informed.  It  ill  becomes  such  to  assume  to  dictate  to  and  instruct
those  who  are  far  more  competent  to  speak  upon  the  matter.  How  much  more
should  man's  limited  knowledge  of  himself  and  of  his  Creator — of  his  own
28


chaKtt.  nOMILETJC  COMMENfAnr:  SAMUEL.


.actions,  and  of  the  actions  of  the  All- Wise  and  AU-knowitig  God — cause  him,
like  Job,  to  ''lay  lus  hand  upon  his  mouth  "  (Job  xl.  4).  Unable  as  he  is  rii,difcly
to  weigh  even  his  own  actions,  how  can  he  dare  to  constitute  himself  a  judge  in
what  seems  to  liim  dark  in  the  mysteries  of  the  Divine  dealings.  The  only
condition  of  heart  proper  to  finite  creatures  is  that  of  Ilim  "who  is  of  a  contrite
spirit,"  and  who  "  trembles  "  at  the  Divine  VVord  (Isa.  Ixvi.  2).  Our  own
ignorance  and  our  conviction  of  God's  infinite  knowledge  should  lead  us  to  put
unreserved  faith  in  His  declarations,  and  yield  uncompromising  obedience  to
His  commands.  We  make  the  knowledge  of  a  fellow-man  a  ground  of  confidence,
and  we  show  our  confidence  by  obeying  their  word.  Our  narrow  outlook  arouinl
us  and  beyond  us  makes  safety  to  be  found  only  in  listening  to  the  words  of
"  the  God  of  Knowledge/'  in  striving  to  conform  our  lives  to  His  revealed  will,
and  leaving  the  result  with  confident  trust  in  His  hands.

V.  This  holy  immutable  God  of  Knowledge  is  the  author  of  those  inversions
of  the   ordinary   course  of  nature  which  often  occur  in  a  manner  totally

unforeseen  and  unexpected.      *'  The  bows  of  the  mighty  are  broken

The  Lord  maketh  poor  and  maketh  rich He  raiseth  up  the  poor  out

of  the  dust,"  etc.  The  natural  law  of  the  world  is  that  the  strong  wiU  hold
on  their  way  against  what  is  weak,  and  that  they,  being  in  power,  shall  ren)ain
in  possession.  It  is  a  foregone  conclusion  that  the  warrior  who  has  the  gq-eatest
force  at  his  command  will  win  the  victory.  Men  expect  the  race  will  be  won  by
the  swift,  and  the  battle  by  the  strong.  But  God  has  other  forces  which  He
can  bring  into  the  field,  and  if  He  is  not  "  on  the  side  of  the  great  battalions"
He  will  bring  about  such  unlooked  for  combinations  that  those  who  have  fallen
in  the  struggle  will  stand  u})right, ''  being  girded  with  power,"  and  those  who  have
been  mighty  will  be  overthrown,  and  the  lame  will  take  the  prey.  When  the
forces  of  Egypt  overtook  the  Israelites  at  Pi-hahiroth,  the  natural  conclusion  of
a  looker-on  would  have  been  that  nothing  could  j^revent  the  slaves  so  lately
made  free  from  being  overniastered  and  retaken  into  bondage.  But  God,  being
on  the  side  of  the  weak,  brought  auxiliaries  into  the  combat  such  as  Pharaoh  ha(l
never  dreamt  of  having  to  fight  against.  The  water  of  the  Red  Sea  was  turned
into  an  opposing  force  on  behalf  of  the  oppressed,  and  the  army  of  Egypt  was  over
thrown  by  a  power  against  which  their  horsemen  and  chariots  and  their  mighty  men
were  utterly  powerless.  Between  Egypt  and  Israel  there  was  no  comparison  as
to  natural  strength,  but  the  Lord  of  nations  brought  supernatural  reinforcements
to  the  aid  of  the  naturally  weak,  and  thus  "the  bows  of  the  mighty  were  broken,
and  they  that  stumbled  were  girded  with  strength."  The  woman  who  first
uttered  these  words  had  long  been  walking  through  life  with  a  heavy  burden  of
sorrow  weighing  her  to  the  earth  :  gladness  and  exultation  seemed  to  be  the
portion  of  her  persecutor,  but  none  seemed  destined  for  her.  But  the  Lord  who
"bringeth  low  and  lifteth  up,"  brought  laws  into  operation  which  entirely
changed  the  colour  of  her  existence,  and  from  being  an  object  of  scorn  she  became
most  unexpectedly  raised  to  a  position  of  more  than  ordinary  honour.  1.  These
unseen  and  unknown  laws  are  generally  brought  into  opei'ation  in  order  to  punish
the  strong  for  their  oppression  of  the  weak.  God  alone  is  responsible  for  these
inequalities  in  national  or  individual  life;  and  because  He  is  so,  He  will  take
account  of  those  who,  being  endowed  with  greater  physical  or  mental  advantages,
nse  them  to  lord  it  over  those  who  have  not  been  so  favoured.  Hannah's  sorrowX
arose  from  a  cause  entirely  beyond  her  own  control,  and  those  who  opi)ressed  her  J
because  of  it  were  guilty  of  a  great  sin  against  God  Himself  In  the  exaltation
of  her  despised  rival,  Peninnah  receives  a  just  punishment  for  her  wickedness  ;
from  the  birth  of  Samuel  her  influence  in  the  family  must  have  declined,  and\
none  of  her  children  are  even  mentioned  in  the  sacred  history,  while  that  of  \
Hannah's  son  was  honoured  throughout  his  nation  during  his  Hfe,  and  is  held  in  )

29


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  i.


honour  now  that  two  thousand  years  have  passed  away.     And  so  it  Is  with  the
rise  of  one  nation  on  the  stage  of  history  and  the  decline  and  fall  of  another.
"  Therefore  hear  note  this,  thou  afflicted  and  drunken,  but  not  with  wine  :   Thus
saith  thy  Lord,  the  Lord,  and  thy  God  that  pleadeth  the  cause  of  His  people,
Behold,  L  have  taken  out  of  thine  hand  the  cup  of  trembling,  even  the  dregs  of
the  cup  of  my  fury ;  thou  shalt  no  7nore  drink  it  again  :  But  J  will  put  it  into
the  hand  of  them  that  afflict  thee  ;  which  have  said  to  thy  soul,  Bow  down,  that
we  may  go  over''  (Isa.  li.  21-23).     Such  is  the  method  of  the  Divine  govern-
ment— there  is  a  purpose  in  this  subversion  of  natural  order,  and  that  purpose
is  retribution  to  the  strong  oppressor  who  has  trampled  on  the  rights  of  the
weak.     2.  God  has  a  just  right  and  reason  so  to  intervene.     "  For  the  pillars  of
the  earth  are  the  Lord's,  and  He  hath  set  the  world  upon  them."     He  is  the
pi'oprietor  of  the  earth — the  land  upon  which  the  oppressor  dwells  is  His  by  the
most  indisputable  right — that  of  creation.     The  human  proprietor  claims  a  right
over  that  which  he  has  purchased — he  can  eject  tenants  from  his  property  wlio
do  not  meet  his  just  demands.     How  much  more  is  it  the  prerogative  of  Him
who   called    the    earth    into    being  to   eject    from    their   dominion   over    it
those  who  disregard  His  just  demands,  and  abuse  the  power  and  the  position
which  He  has  entrusted  to  them  ?     God  had  a  right  to  call   Abraham  from  Ur
/of  the  Chaldees,  and  to  give  to  his  descendants  the  land  of  the  Canaanite.     He
/had  a  right  to  sweep  the  inhabitants  of  the  cities  of  the  plain  from  off  the  face
!  of  His  earth  when  they  so  grossly  defiled  their  fair  inheritance.     He  had  a  right
;j  to  call  Moses  and  David  from  following  the  sheep,  and  set  them  in  high  places,
I  to  fulfil  His  eternal  purposes.     He  had  a  right  to  take  Nebuchadnezzar  from  his
Hhrone,  and  make  his  dwelling  with  the  beasts  of  the  field,  until  he  knew  ''that
the  Most  High  ruleth  in  the  kingdom  of  men,  and  giveth  it  to  whomsoever  He
'^ill,''  and  until  he  acknowledged  that  all  ''  His  ways  are  judgment,  and  those
fijoho  walk  in  pride  He  is  able  to  abase  *'  (Dan.  iv.  25-37).     "  'J he  earth  is  the
Lord's,"  and  ''they  that  dwell  therein'  (Ps.  xxiv.  I),  and  He,  by  right  of  pro-
prietorship, puts  in  an  absolute  claim  to  dispose  of  that  which  belongs  to  Him  as
He  sees  best.

VI.  God  also  bestows  and  takes  away  human  life.  "  He  bringeth  down  to  the
grave,  and  bringeth  up."  1.  He  alone  can  give  life.  There  are  many  things
in  which  man  can  imitate  God.  He  can  imitate  God's  benevolence  by  bestowing
upon  his  fellow  creatures  gifts  which  will  sustain  and  embellish  their  existence.
He  can  be,  to  some  extent,  an  imitator  of  God's  character  (Ephes.  v.  1).  But
lie  can  in  no  way  imitate  Him  as  the  Giver  of  life.  In  that  the  Creator  stands
absolutely  alone  in  the  universe — this  is  His  sole  prerogative.  Human  life  is
continued  in  the  world  by  the  instrumentality  of  man,  but  human  parents  are  but
instruments.  In  this  respect  there  can  be  no  likeness  between  man  and  God.
God  is  the  only  Being  who  has  ''life  in  Himself"  (John  v.  26).  His  is  the  only
independent  life,  the  highest  archangel — he  who  is  permitted  to  draw  the
nearest  to  the  inaccessible  light  wherein  dwells  the  Divine  Majesty — is
as  much  dependent  for  existence  upon  the  only  source  of  life  as  the
tiniest  insect  that  crawls  beneath  our  feet.  He  was  not  until  God  called
him  into  existence,  and  that  existence  is  sustained  only  by  Him  who
gave  it  at  the  first.  Of  One  alone  can  it  be  said  that  He  "hath
immortality"  (1  Tim.  vi.  16),  because  all  others  receive  it  as  a  gift  from  Him.
2.  He  only  has  the  power  and  the  right  to  take  life.  He  who  gave  has  a  right
to  take,  and  He  only  does  take  it.  For  whatever  may  be  the  second  cause
coming  between,  it  is  by  Divine  appointment  that  men  die.  Coming  to  the
grave  is  not  a  debt  of  nature,  but  a  Divine  appointment.  Nature  is  inexorable
in  exacting  her  debts — she  works  always  by  laws  which  she  cannot  set  aside.
She  is  strong  enough  to  kill,  but  not  strong  enough  to  make  an  exception  to  the
80


CHAP.  n.  HO  MIL  ETIC  COMMENT  A  RY :   SAM  UEL.


rule — she  cannot  go  out  of  her  destinod  course  to  serve  tlie  lii.i^liest  purpose — to
favour  the  most  holy  character.  But  there  have  been  exceptions  to  the  universal
hiw  of  death — exceptions  which  have  been  made  by  Him  who  is  the  Lord  of
Nature,  and  wlio  can  set  aside  her  claims — can  leave  her  debt  unpaid  when  He
sees  fit.  Nature  did  not  make  the  law,  because  she  has  no  power  to  make
exceptions  to  the  rule.  It  is  God  alone  who  "  bringeth  to  the  grave."  Death
is  not  a  chance  which  happens  unto  us.  The  arrow  that  entered  between  the
joints  of  Ahab's  armour  came  from  a  bow  "drawn  at  a  venture,"  but  the  arrow
winged  its  way  by  Divine  appointment.  And  so  it  is  with  all  death's  arrows,
not  one  but  hits  the  mark  to  which  God  has  destined  it.  But  it  must  be
remembered  that  the  appointment  of  death  was  not  part  of  God's  original  plan
in  relation  to  men.  Although  it  is  now  *'  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die  "  (Heb.
ix.  27),  it  was  not  so  from  the  beginning.  God's  purpose  concerning  man  at  the
first  was  to  give  life,  and  not  to  take  it  away  ;  to  bestow  upon  His  creature  an
undying  existence,  a  perfect  and  unending  life  of  body  as  well  as  of  soul.
It  is  man's  disobedience  alone  which  has  brought  about  the  Divine  appointment
of  death.  "  Going  to  the  grave"  is  not  the  outcome  of  God's  original  purpose
concerning  man,  but  an  appointed  penalty  for  man's  transgression.  Death
being  thus  a  Divine  appointment,  dying  should  be  regarded  as  a  duty  to  be
cheerfully  discharged.  Men  face  d(^ath  bravely  and  cheerfully  when  they  feel
that  their  country  or  their  earthly  ruler  has  appointed  them  to  it.  The  good
man  siiould  learn  from  such  examples  to  die  as  a  duty  of  Divine  appointment.
A  Christian  ought  to  die  cheerfully,  seeing  lie  dies  by  the  command  of  the
Lord  of  life.  This  thought  ought  to  reconcile  him  to  the  inevitable,  and  help
him  to  meet  the  last  enemy  without  dismay.  In  proportion  as  a  fellow-creature
is  good,  we  trust  him  with  our  life — with  interests  that  are  dearer  to  us  than
life.  In  proportion  as  he  is  wise  as  well  as  good — especially  if  he  is  powerful  in
addition  to  his  wisdom  and  his  goodness — our  confidence  in  him  is  increased,
our  feeling  of  security  in  his  hands  is  strengthened.  The  claim  of  the  Eternal
and  Infinite  God  to  kill  and  to  make  alive  rests  not  only  upon  His  power,  but
upon  His  character.  He  is  not  only  the  Author  of  life,  but  He  is  the  King  who
cannot  wTong  any  of  his  subjects,  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  who  must,
from  the  necessity  of  his  nature,  do  right  at  all  times  to  all  His  creatures.
If  God  kills,  it  is  not  only  because  He  takes  what  is  His  own,  but  because
He  is  doing  what  is  the  best  thing  to  be  done,  and  in  the  best  manner.
3.  The  resurrection  from  the  dead  depends  U2)0?i  the  Giver  of  lije.  He  not  only
"  bringeth  down  to  the  grave,"  but  He  *' bringeth  up."  (a)  This  we  might
have  regarded  as  probable  if  we  had  no  revelation  upon  the  subject.  We
might  have  conchided  that  He  who  at  first  ''  breathed  into  man  the  breath  of
life,"  and  thus  made  him  a  *'  living  soul,"  could  at  His  pleasure  reanimate  the
dust  and  bring  life  again  out  of  death.  If  God  could  give  life  where  there  was
no  life,  is  it  not  highly  probable  that  He  can  give  it  again  where  it  has  once
existed  ?  (b)  Tliat  He  has  done  so  is  a  matter  of  history.  We  have  it  upon
reliable  authority  that  He  has  restored  dead  men  to  life — that  He  has
reanimated  the  lifeless  clay,  (c)  That  He  must  do  this  for  all  mankind  is
certain.  Those  who  make  promises  ought  to  perform  them  if  they  are  able  to
do  so.  If  a  man  promises  to  redeem  a  pledged  garment  of  his  poorer  brother,
and  is  able  to  fulfil  his  promise,  ought  he  not  to  do  it,  knowing  as  he  does  that
his  needy  brother  is  expecting  anxiously  the  promised  raiment  to  cover  his
scantily  clothed  body  ?  The  raiment  of  God's  children  is  held  in  pledge  by
death — He  holds  the  garment  until  the  time  of  the  "  redemption  of  tlie  body  "
(Kom.  viii.  23).  God  has  promised  to  redeem  that  raiment,  and  He  holds
Himself  bound  to  fulfil  His  promise,  and  we  hold  him  bound  also.  Christ  has
given  His  word  to  bring  from  the  grave  both  the  just  and  the  unjust — "  77ie
hour  is  coming  when  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  Ilis  voice,  and  shall

31


EOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  RY:  SA  M  UEL.  book  i.

come  forth ;  they  that  ham  done  good  unto  the  resurrection  of  life,  and  they
that  ham  done  evil  unto  the  resurrection  of  damnation  "  (John  v.  28,  29).  The
vision  of  the  seer  lias  pictured  for  us  that  great  redemption  day — that  day  of
"  bringing  up  from  the  grave"  of  the  human  race  (Rev.  xx.  12,  13).

VII.  In  all  the  acts  of  His  providence,  in  all  the  unlooked-for  chang^es  which
He  brings  to  pass,  God  has  a  special  oversight  of  His  own  children.  "  He  shall
keep  the  feet  of  His  saints.''  1.  2 he  character  of  the  persons  whose  feet  are
f^^pl — "Saints."  Sainthood  implies  a  soul  transition.  A  man  that  is  known
to  have  been  born  poor  and  is  found  in  after  life  to  be  living  in  wealth  is  known
to  have  experienced  a  great  transition  in  his  outward  circumstances.  By  what
means  or  at  what  time  in  his  life  this  change  took  place  may  not  be  revealed,  but
that  it  has  taken  place  is  a  certainty.  So  with  a  saint.  Such  a  man  is  in  a
condition  to  which  he  was  not  born.  Sainthood  is  "  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will
of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God"  (John  i.  13).  Therefore  every
human  saint  has  been  the  subject  of  a  soul-change.  He  may  have  been  suddenly
raised  from  a  state  of  spiritual  poverty  to  wealth,  or  he  may  have  acquired  his
riches  by  degrees — increasing  little  by  little  in  his  knowledge  of  God  and  in
confidence  in  His  character.  2.  The  change  has  taken  place  by  the  consent  of  his
will.  Change  of  will  brings  about  a  change  of  position.  If  a  child  who  hated
his  lessons  can  be  made  willing  to  learn,  his  position  in  relation  to  knowledge  is
at  once  changed.  A  sinner  passes  into  a  saint  by  becoming  willing  to  learn  of
the  Holy  One  how  to  become  holy.  Willingness  is  the  bridge  by  which  the
sinner  passes  from  a  state  of  opposition  lo  God  into  a  state  of  reconciliation  to
Him,  and  being  thus  reconciled  to  God  is  to  l)e  brought  into  that  fellowship  with
Him  which  constitutes  sainthood.  The  entire  process  of  the  transition  is
described  by  the  Apostle  in  1  John  i.  5-9,  Fellowship  with  God  based  upon  a  know-
ledgeof  His  character  makesaman  a  saint, but  before  this  knowledgecan  beattained
there  must  be  a  willingness  to  learn.  3.  The  saint  needs  a  keeper  Jor  his  feet.
The  child  who  has  but  just  learned  to  walk  needs  a  steady  and  strong  hand  to  guide
his  steps.  The  person  who  "keeps  his  feet "  must  possess  a  wisdom  and  strength
superior  to  that  of  the  child's.  God  is  a  guide  and  an  upholder  of  the  steps  of  His
saints.  He  alone  is  "  able  to  keep  them  from  faUing"  (Jude  24).  They  cannot
see  the  dangers  in  the  distance  coming  to  meet  them,  or  even  those  which  are  now
about  their  path.  Hence  their  need  of  an  eye  that  can  discern  them,  and  a
hand  that  can  deliver  from  them,  a"  God  of  knowledge,"  who  is  perfectly  acquainted
wnth  every  danger  to  which  thoy  can  be  exposed,  and  a  God  of  such  absolute
power  as  to  be  able  to  deliver  them.  And  His  word  of  promise  to  each  one  is,
*'  Fear  thou  not,  for  I  am  with  thee.  Tie  not  dismayed,  for  I  am  thy  God  ;  I  will
strengthen  thee ;  yea,  1  will  help  thee ;  yea,  I  will  uphold  thee  with  the  right
hand  of  my  righteousness  (Isa.  xli.  10).  Their  weakness  and  their  ignorance  are
both  elements  oi  danger,  and  both  are  fully  met  by  their  Allwiseand  Omnipotent
Keeper.  The  other  ])art  of  the  verse  implies  that  they  are  surrounded  by
enemies,  both  seen  and  unseen,  who  do  not  fail  to  watch  for  their  halting,  and
lose  no  o]iportunity  they  can  lay  hold  of  to  trip  them  up;  but  ''the  wicked  shall
be  8i'e»>t  in  darkness,  and  by  strength  shall  no  man  prevail"  against  the  saints  of
God.  T'ley  may,  and  often  do,  prevail  against  a  saint's  earthly  possessions,  and
even  agamst  his  life.  Jezebel  by  strength  did  *'  prevail "  against  Naboth's
vineyard,  against  his  life.  Fur  the  time  she  was  paramount  against  a  good  man.
Herodias  did  likewise  prevail  against  the  liberty  and  life  of  John  the  Baptist,
and  her  strength  was  strong  enough  to  silence  the  voice  that  had  been  lifted  up
against  her  crimes.  And  in  many  like  cases  the  wicked  have  prevailed  against
the  earthly  prosperity  and  life  of  the  saints  of  God  by  His  permissive  providence.
But  notwithstanding  this  permissive  clause  in  the  Divine  code — notwithstanding
the  licence  that  God  thus  gives  to  the  enemies  of  His  saints— there  is  no  relaxing  of
32


CHAP.  n.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


Plis  hold,  either  of  the  saint  or  the  sinner.  The  feet  of  the  saint  are  still  upheld,  and
when  they  pass  throu.L>-h  the  waters  and  the  tire  of  temptation  and  persecution  tliey
"  shall  not  oe  burned,  neither  shall  the  flame  kindle  upon  them  (Isa.  xliii.  2),  theii
cliaracter  and  all  rlicir  real  interests  shall  come  through  the  trial  without  loss  or
injnry.  4.  The  keeping  of  the  saints  feet  arise  from  God's  special  inheritance
in  them.  They  are  "  His  saints."  The  mother  watches  her  chihl's  feet  because
the  child  is  her  own.  She  may  have  a  general  interest  in  all  children,  but  the
feet  of /^er  own  child  are  the  objects  of  her  most  watchful  love.  If  she  is  a
godly  mother,  she  not  only  keeps  the  feet  of  her  child's  body,  but  she  cares
unceasingly  for  the  feet  of  the  moral  nature.  She  lays  herself  out  to  guide  and
to  guard  the  spiritual  as  well  as  the  natural  life.  All  who  are  saints  are  God's
purchased  possession,  and  His  special  relation  to  them,  and  theirs  to  Him,  makes
sure  an  unceasing  care  on  His  part  for  all  their  real  interests.

VIII.  The  inference  to  be  drawn  from  a  contemplation  of  God's  character
and  government  is,  that  contention  against  Him  is  vain.  1.  He  can  overcome
*  His  adversaries  by  His  physical  omnipotence.  "  Out  of  heaven  He  shall  thunder
upon  them."  God's  manifestations  of  power  in  the  material  world  are  sometimes
of  such  a  nature  as  to  make  men  feel  their  utter  powerlessness  in  His  hands.
When  the  seaman  finds  that  all  his  efforts  to  guide  his  vessel  are  as  useless  as
the  dashing  of  the  sea-spray  against  the  rock,  he  becomes  conscious  of  a  power
wdiich  is  far  beyond  that  of  human  skill  and  science.  When  the  lightnings
flash  through  the  heavens  and  the  thunder  shakes  the  earth,  we  feel  most
deeply  how  passive  we  are  in  the  hands  of  the  Almighty  Being,  who  can  thus
hold  back  and  roll  up  the  clouds  of  heaven.  At  such  times  we  not  only  know
how  useless  it  is  to  contend  with  God,  but  we  are  made  to  Jeel  it  ;  we  are
conscious  that  to  contend  with  One  who  has  such  powerful  physical  forces
at  His  beck  is  as  vain  as  it  is  wielded.  The  voice  of  God's  thunder
made  even  the  heart  of  the  hardened  Pharaoh  to  quake  and  to  acknow-
ledge himself  defeated  (Exod.  ix.  27,  28),  and  all  God's  mighty  mani-
festations in  the  natural  world  should  lead  His  creatures  to  humble
themselves  before  Him.  2  l^e  can  confound  them  by  His  superior  wisdom
and  goodness.  "  The  Lord  shall  judge  the  ends  of  the  earth."  'IHie  opponent
in  military  w^arfare  who  can  use  the  movements  of  his  adversary  to  work  his
defeat  and  can  carry  the  battle  into  his  very  camp  and  overthrow  him  on  his  own
ground,  is  not  one  whom  an  enemy  cares  to  meet.  Neither  is  the  opponent  in
argument  to  be  despised  who  can  turn  a  man's  own  reasonings  against  him  and
confound  him  by  his  own  w^ords.  God  has  done  this  with  His  adversaries  over
and  over  again.  He  has  made  the  plans  of  the  wicked  instrumental  in  carrying
out  His  own  purposes  and  in  working  out  their  own  destruction.  Men  ought  by
this  time  to  have  learned  how  useless  it  is  to  contend  with  One  who  "  taketh  the
wise  in  their  own  craftiness:"  so  that  "  the  counsel  of  the  froward  is  carried
headlong''  (Job  v.  13).  The  imperfect  knowledge  of  a  human  judge  may
enable  men  successfully  to  contend  against  him.  The  fact  that  he  is  ignorant
of  many  things  that  he  ought  to  know  may  defeat  the  ends  of  justice,  and  lead
him  to  an  erroneous  decision.  But  God  is  a  perfect  judge — His  decisions  are
always  perfectly  just  and  equitable,  because  he  lacks  neither  the  perfect
knowledge  nor  the  perfect  righteousness,  out  of  which  must  come  a  perfect  ruler.
When  the  final  judgment  comes — when  theSon  of  man  shall "  sit  upon  the  throne
of  His  glory,  and  before  Him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations  "  (Matt.  xxv.  31,  32),
all  men  will  feel  that  it  is  utterly  useless  to  seek  to  evade  His  searching  scrutiny
— that  His  holiness  and  His  omniscience  make  certain  the  overthrow  of  all  that
is  opposed  to  Him.  "  I'he  Lord  cometh  with  ten  thousand  of  his  saints,  to
execute  judgment  upon  all,  and  to  convince  all  that  are  ungodly  amonn  them  of
all  their  ungodly  deeds  which  they  have  ungodly  committed,  and  of  all  their  hard
ipeeches  which  ungodly  sinners  have  spoken  against  Him"  (Jude  14,  15).

0  33


nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


BOOK  1.


IX.  The  end  of  confounding  the  wicked  and  the  end  of  all  God's  dealings  with
men  is  the  establishment  of  a  kingdom  of  righteousness  "  He  shall  give
strength  unto  His  King,  and  exalt  the  horn  of  His  Anointed/'  In  nature  all
change  tends  fco  the  development  of  perfection.  The  blade  and  the  green  ear  are
but  stepping-stones  to  the  fully  ripened  grain.  The  bud  unfolds  into  the  perfect
flower,  the  flower  is  followed  by  the  fruit.  So  is  it  in  God's  kingdom.  All
the  overturnings  and  changes,  all  the  judgments  upon  the  ungodly,  are  but
stepping-stones  to  the  establishment  of  the  kiii<^dom  of  righteousness.  All  the
kings  who  have  ever  sat  upon  the  thrones  of  the  world  have  been  preparing  the
way  for  the  rule  of  "  HisKini^^"  who  is  one  day  to  rule  all  the  nations.  Looking
away  into  the  future  under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  Hannah  foretells
the  advent  of  a  king  who  should  reign  in  righteousness,  and  anticipates  the
Psalmist  King  of  Israel  when  he  sang  of  Him  who  should  ^'  judge  the  poor  oj
the  people "  and  "  save  the  children  of  the  needy,  and  break  in  pieces  the
oppressor ;"  who  shall  *'  have  dominion  also  jrom  sea  and  to  sea,  and  from  the
river  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth ; "  whose  ''  name  shall  endure  for  ever,  and  be
continued  as  long  as  the  sun;"  and  whom  *' all  nations  shall  call  blessed."
(Psahns  Ixxvi.)  To  the  undisputed  reign  of  this  King  aU  the  present  dealings  of
God  with  men  and  nations  are  tending.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Ver.  1.  The  repetition  of  *'  in  the
Lord  "  emphasises  the  fact  that  the
joyous  frame  of  mind  and  lofty  con-
sciousness of  power  has  its  root  in  the
Lord,  and  pre-supposes  the  most  inti-
mate communion  with  the  living  God.
The  mouth  "opened  wide  over  mine
enemies  "  intimates  that  the  joy  and
courage  that  filled  her  soul  had  found
utterance. — Langes  Commentary.

Hannah's  song  of  praise  compared
with  her  former  prayer.  1.  She  was
til  en  in  "  bitterness  of  soul "  (i.  10)  ;
now  her  "  heart  rejoiceth."  2.  Then
she  was  "humiliated"  (i.  5,  8,  11);
now  she  is  "exalted."  3.  Then  her
adversary  "  provoked  her  "  (i.  6) ;  now
her  "  mouth  is  opened  wide  over  her
enemies."  4.  Then  she  "poured  out
her  soul  before  the  Lord  "  (i.  15) ;  now
she  "  rejoices  in  His  salvation."  Often
we  remember  to  pray,  and  then  forget
to  praise. — Translator  of  Langes
Commentary.

There  is  not  one  petition  in  all  this
holy  hymn,  but  thanksgiving  is  a  prin-
cipal part  of  prayer  ;  it  is  also  an
artificial  begging. — Trapp.

How  has  Hannah's  glory  been  ex-
alted ?  "In  the  Lord,"  saith  she.
The  elevation  is  no  more  dangerous,
for  it  has  a  solid  foundation,  a  root
34


that  cannot  be  shaken.  The  glory
that  comes  from  men  is  accompanied
by  the  feebleness  of  those  who  give  it,
so  that  it  is  easily  overthrown,  but  it
is  not  so  with  the  glory  which  comes
from  God.  It  is  the  glory  of  which
the  prophet  speaks  (Isa.  xl.  6,  7,  8).
Hannah  is  a  remarkable  example  of
this  truth.  Kings,  generals,  great  men,
are  forgotten,  notwithstanding  all  their
eftbrts  to  make  their  names  immortal,
notwithstanding  the  magnificent  tombs
that  they  build,  the  statues  that  they
erect,  the  monuments  they  leave  as
tokens  of  their  success,  their  very
names  are  forgotten.  But  Hannah  is
celebrated  to-day  throughout  all  the
world,  her  glory  is  celebrated  wherever

the  sun  sheds  its  light For,

when  God  glorifies  anyone,  death
comes  in  vain,  time  passes  on  in  vain,
the  glory  of  the  mortal  survives,  and
its  flowers  are  kept  unfading  :  nothing
can  throw  a  shadow  upon  that  bright-
ness.— Chrysostom.

Ver.  2.  God  manifests  Himself  as
holy  in  the  government  of  the  kingdom
of  His  grace  by  His  guidance  of  the
righteous  to  salvation. — Keil.

Two  characteristics  of  the  life  of
God's  children  in  their  relation  to  the


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,


living  God:    1.  The  \i\\mh\Q  reverence  mistake  one   thing  for  another;    our

before  Him,  in  view  of  His  holiness,  knowledge  is  but   a   twilight,  we  see

2.    The  heartiest  ron/ideiice  in    Him,  things  many   times  together  and  in  a

in  view  of  His  unchangeable  faithful-  heap,  and  do  but  know  them  in  gross.

ness. — Langes  Commentary.  But  those  things  which  are  of  the  least

Holiness  is  a  chief  and  super-eminent  consideration,   and   have  the  greatest

perfection  of  God,  that  wherein    the  likeness  to  one  another,  the  very  hairs

Divine  excellence  doth  chiefly  consist,  of  your  head,  are  severally  and  dis-

Therefore  it  is  the  most  frequent  epi-  tinctly  known  to  God.     4.  It  is  certain

tliet  given  to  His  name  in  Scripture,  and  infallible.     Everything  almost  im-

We  never  read  mighty  name  or  wise  poses   upon   our  understandings,   and

name,  but  frequently  holy  name.     The  tinctures  our  minds  ;  our  temper  and

holiness  of  God  is  His  ^/or?/ and  ^^ai«^?/.  complexion,    our  education  and  pre-

Tlierefore  He  is  said  to  be  "glorious  in  judice,  our  interest  and  advantage,  our

holiness."     He  is  mighty  in  power,  and  humours  and  distempers,  these  all  mis-

rich  in  grace,  and  glorious  in  holiness,  represent  things   and  betray  us    into

—  Wisheart,  error  :  but  the  Divine  understanding

is  a  clear,  fixed,  constant,  and  undis-

Ver.  3.    The  manner  of  God's  weigh-  turbed  light,  a  pure  mirror  that  receives

ing  actions.      1.    With  perfect  know-  no  stain  from  affection,  or  interest,  or

ledge.      2.    With    absolute   rectitude  any  such   thing.     5.    It  is   easy  and

(Ver.  2).     3.  With  immutable  justice  without  difficulty.     We  must  dier  deep

(Ver.  2). — Langes  Commentary.  for  knowledge  and  take  a  great  deal

The  weighed   or  righteous  acts   of  of  pains  to  know  a  little ;  we  strive  to

God  (see  Keil's  rendering  in  Critical  comprehend  some  things,  but  they  are

Notes)  are  described  in  Vers.  4-8  in  so  vast  that  wo  cannot  ;  other  thinu:s

great  and  general  traits,  as  displayed  are  at  such  a  distance,  that  our  under-

in  the  government  of  His   kingdom,  standing  is  too  weak  to  discern  them  ;

througli  the  marvellous  changes  which  others  so   little,   so    smaU  and    nice,

occur  in  the  circumstances  connected  that   our    understanding   cannot    lav

with  the  lives  of  the  righteous  and  the  hold  of  them  ;  but  God's  understand-

wicked. — Keil.  ing  being  infinite,  it  is  a  vast  compre-

I.  The  perfection  of  God's  know-  hension  of  all  things  without  difficulty
ledge.  1.  It  is  present  and  actual ;  or  pain.  II.  God's  knowledge  of  the
His  eye  is  always  open,  and  everything  heart  teaches — 1.  The  folly  of  hypo-
is  in  the  view  of  it.  The  knowledge  of  crisy.  If  we  deal  with  men  this  is  not
the  creature  is  more  power  than  act;  it  a  very  wise  way,  for  there  is  danger  of
is  not  much  that  we  are  capable  of  discovery  even  from  them,  therefore
knowing,  but  there  is  very  little  that  we  the  best  way  for  a  man  to  seem  to  be
actually  know,  and  'tis  but  one  thing  anything  is  really  to  be  what  he  would
that  we  can  fix  our  thoughts  upon  at  appear  ;  but  having  to  deal  with  God,
once.  But  the  knowledge  of  God  is  to  whom  all  our  disguises  are  apparent,
an  actual  and  steady  comprehension  of  'tis  a  madness  to  hide  our  iniquity  in
things,  all  objects  are  at  once  in  the  our  bosoms.  2.  Charge  yourselves  with
view  of  the  Divine  understanding,  inward  purity  and  holiness,  because  of
2.  It  is  intimate  and  thorough.  Our  the  pure  eyes  which  behold  the  most
knowledge  glides  upon  the  superficies  secret  motions  of  your  souls.  Feir
of  things  ;  we  do  not  know  things  in  and  shame  from  men  lay  a  great
their  realities,  but  as  they  appear  and  restraint  u})on  our  outward  actions,  but
are  represented  to  us  in  all  their  masks  what  a  strange  freedom  do  we  take
and  disguises  :  but  God  knows  things  within  our  own  breasts  !  This  is  an
throughout,  all  that  can  he  known  of  argument  of  the  secret  atheism  that
them.  3.  It  is  clear  and  distinct.  We  lies  at  the  bottom  of  our  hearts,
are  often  deceived  with  the  near  like-  3.  This  is  a  matter  of  encouragement
ness  and  resemblance  of  things,   and  to    us    in  many   cases — "  When  my

35


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,


BOOK  L


heart  is  overirhelmed  within  me,  then
Ihou  knoivest  my  path  "  (Ps.  cxliii.  3)
— in  cases  of  difficulty  which  depend
upon  the  hearts  of  other  men,  which,
though  we  do  not  know,  yet  God  knows
them.  But  especially  is  this  a  matter
of  comfort  to  us  when  we  suffer  by  the
calumnies  and  reproaches  of  men,  when
the  world  chargeth  us  with  crimes,
then  to  be  able  to  appeal  to  the
Searcher  of  hearts.  4.  This  renders
all  deep  and  profound  policies  of  the
wicked  a  vain  thing.  God  sees  those
cobwebs  which  they  are  spinning,  and
can  blow  them  away  at  a  breath.  5.  If
God  onl}'^  knows  the  hearts  of  men,
then  what  art  thou,  0  man,  that  judgest
another's  heart  ?  Will  thou  assume  to
thyself  the  prerogative  of  God  ? —
7  illotson.

Vers.  4,  5.  Every  power  which  will
be  something  in  itself  is  destroyed  by  the
Lord  ;  every  weakness,  which  despairs
of  itself,  is  transformed  into  power. —
Von  Gertach.

Vers.  4-8.  The  unity  amid  change
of  the  opposite  ways  which  the  pious
and  the  ungodly  must  go.  1.  One
starting  point,  the  Lord's  inscrutable
will,  which  determines  them.  2.  One
hand,  the  Almighty  hand  of  the  Lord
which  leads  them.  3.  One  goal  at
which  they  end,  humble  submission
under  that  hand.  The  wonderful
guidance  oj  the  children  of  men  in
quite  opposite  ways.  1.  The  opposite
direction  in  which  they  go,  (a)  from
the  height  to  the  depth,  (h)  from  the
depth  to  the  height.  2.  The  opposite
design  which  the  Lord  has  therein  with
men,  (a)  to  lead  them  from  the  heights
of  pride  and  haughty  self-complacency
to  humble  submission  under  His  un-
limited 1)0 wer,  (b)  to  exalt  them  from
the  depths  of  humble  self-renunciation
to  a  blessed  life  in  the  enjoyment  of
His  free  grace.  3.  The  opposite  end,
according  as  men  cause  the  divine
design  to  be  fulfilled  or  defeated  in
them  :  (a)  everlasting  destruction  with-
out God,  (b)  everlasting  salvation  and
life  in,  and  with  God. — Langes  Com-
mentary.
36


Vers.  3-10.  The  contrasts  which  the
change  in  the  relations  of  human  life
presents  to  us  in  the  light  of  Divine
truth.  \.  God's  holiness  and  man's
sin.  2.  God's  almightiness  and  man's
poiverlessness.  3.  God's  gracious  design
and  man's  destruction. — Lange's  Com-
mentary.

Ver.  5.  The  view  held  by  some,  that
in  Hannah's  barrenness  and  subsequent
fruitfulness  there  is  a  mystical  or
tjrpical  meaning, deserves  consideration.
Hannah  is  said  to  be  the  type  of  the
Christian  Church,  at  first  barren  and
reviled,  afterwards  fruitful  and  re-
joicing. As  to  such  typical  character
we  must  be  guided,  not  by  outward
resemblances,  but  by  fixed  principles
of  Biblical  interpretation.  These  facts
may  guide  us  to  a  decision — 1.  God's
relation  to  His  people  is  set  forth  under
the  figure  of  marriage  (Isa.  liv.,  Jer.
iii.,  Hosea  i. — iii.)  2.  Isaiah  (liv.  1)
describes  G(^d's  spiritual  people  as
barren,  yet  with  the  promise  of  many
children.  3.  Paul  (Gal.  iv.  27)  quotes
this  passage  of  Isaiah,  refers  it  to  the
Church  of  Christ  as  distinguished  from
the  Jewish  dispensation,  and  declares
that  this  antithesis  is  given  in  Sarah
and  Hagar.  .  .  .  What  he  declares
is  that  Sarah  is  the  mother  of  the  child
of  promise,  while  Hagar's  child  is  the
product  of  natural  fruitfulness.  .  .  .
Throughout  his  argument  it  is  the
spiritual  element  of  promise  and  faith
on  which  Sarah's  typical  })osition  is
based.  Only,  theref(jre,  where  we  can
show  such  spiritual  eletnent  are  we
justified  in  supposing  atypical  charac-
ter. There  must  be  involved  the  truth
that  the  origination  and  maintenance
of  God's  people  depend  on  His  promise,
and  not  on  human  strength.  This  is
not  necessarily  involved  in  the  history
of  every  barren  woman  who  becomes
fruitful.  .  .  .  Hannah  seems  to  be
simply  a  pious  mother,  whose  prayer
for  a  son,  contrary  to  human  proba-
bilities, is  granted. — Translator  oj
Langes  Commentary.

Ver.  6.  He  layeth  men  for  dead,  and
then  reviveth  them,  as  2  Cor.  i.  9,  10.


CHAP.  II.


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL


That  great  apostle  was  "  in  doatli's
often  ; "  and  those  ancient  confessors
cry  out,  '*  for  Thy  sake  are  we  killed  all
tiie  day  long  "  (llotu.  viii.  36). — Irapp.

Hannah  assorts  that  supreme  sove-
reignty of  God,  of  which  the  boasting,
arrogant  si>irit,  wliether  found  in
Peninnah's  pride  of  fecundity,  or  in
Sennacherib's  i^ride  of  conquest,  or  in
Nebuchadnezzar's  pride  of  empire,  or  in
Antichrist's  pride  of  rebellion,  is  a
blasphemous  denial. — Biblical  Com-
mentary.

The  word  sheol  signifieth — (1)  The
grave,  the  ])lace  of  dead  bodies  ;  (2)  by
a  metaphor,  a  state  of  adversity  in  this
world  ;  (3)  the  forlorn  estate  of  those
who  are  deprived  of  God's  favour  and
inward  comfort,  whether  for  a  time
and  when  they  are  utterly  cast  off. —
WiUet.

The  Lord  brinueth  down  to  the  grave
by  the  terror  which  He  awakens  in  the
soul  of  justly  merited  punishment,  and
He  bringeth  up  by  humble  faith  that
He  grants  in  His  infinite  mercy  and  in
the  merits  of  the  blood  of  His  Son. —
De  iSacy.

Ver  8.  These  words  contain  the
reason  of  all  that  precedes  in  the  five
foregoing  verses  :  for  the  very  earth
being  founded,  upheld,  and  supported
by  the  Lord,  no  wonder  that  all  the
inhabiters  of  it  are  in  His  power,  to
dispose  of  them  as  He  thinks  good. —
Patrick.

The  plans  of  the  Most  High  are  very
different  from  men's  expectations.  Li
order  to  execute  them  He  rejects  the
great.  While  He  allowed  kings  upon
the  throne  to  ignore  His  greatest
miracle.  He  drew  from  the  dust  twelve
disciples,  and  made  them  the  masters
of  the  nations,  the  judges  of  the  world,
the  instruments  of  the  greatest  event
which  has  ever  taken  place,  the  pillars
of  His  (;hurch,  and  partakers  of  His
eternal  empire.  And  He  takes  from
the  obscurity  of  a  peasant's  home  a
poor,  unknown  girl,  and  makes  her  the
mother  of  the  Highest. — Dug  net.

Ver.  9.  This  is  a  lower  love  and
courtesy  than    to  keep    their   hands


rjohn  xiii.  5,  6).  He  keepeth  them
from  utter  prola])sion,  from  devoratory
evils,  as  TertuUian  saith,  so  as  that
either  they  fall  not  at  all — stumble
they  m;iy,  but  they  get  ground  by  their
stumbling — or  if  they  fall,  they  shall
arise ;  for  the  Lord  putteth  under  His
hand  (Psa.  xxxvii.  24).  There  is  still
a  supporting  grace,  below  which  they

cannot  possibly  fall Augustine,

striving  against  his  headstrong  corrup-
tions in  his  own  strength,  heard  a  voice
saying,  **  Thou  would'st  stand  by  thy-
self, and  therefore  fall  est." — Irapp.

As  Jehovah,  the  (Jod  of  Israel,  the
Holy  One  governs  the  worhl  with  His
almighty  power,  the  righteous  have
nothing  to  fear.  But  the  wicked  will
perish  in  darkness — i.  e.,  in  adversity,
when  God  withdraws  the  liglit  of  His
grace,  so  that  they  fall  into  distress
and  calamity.  For  no  man  can  be
strong  through  his  own  power  so  as  to
meet  the  storms  of  life. — Ileil.

God  keeps  the  feet  of  His  people.
1.  By  the  'prevention  of  sinful  and  evil
occasions,  so  in  that  Pie  does  not  so
easily  suffer  them  to  come  within  the
compass  of  ruin  and  spiritual  destruc-
tion. 2.  By  fortifying  and  strengthen-
ing the  heart  and  mind  against  closing
with  them,  so  that  though  occasions
be  administered,  yet  they  shall  have
no  power  or  efficacy  upon  them.  He
does  this  both  by  the  grace  oifear  and
by  the  grace  o^  faith.  God,  by  stirring
up  in  His  servants  a  holy  tenderness
ami  jealousy  over  themselves,  does  by
this  means  very  much  scare  them,  who,
by  fearing  lest  they  should  sin,  do
come  to  avoid  sinning  itself.  And
faith  is  another  supporter  likewise.  It
lays  hold  upon  all  the  ])r()mises  of
assistance  and  strengthening  which
God  has  made  to  His  servants,  such
as  this  now  here  in  the  text,  therefore
it  is  said,  "  We  are  kept  by  the  power
of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation  "
(1  Pet.  i.  5).  By  the  ])ower  of  God  as
the  principal.  And  by  faith  as  the
instrumental.  We  may  likewise  take
the  words  in  reference  to  temporal
things.  1.  God  will  bless  His  saints
in  their  ways,  not  only  for  the  pre-
serving of  their  souls  from  sin,  but  the

37


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,


BOOK  I.


preserving  of  their  bodies  from  destruc-
tion. He  that  will  keep  the /^^^  certainly
will  not  be  wanting  to  the  breast  and
head.  He  names  the  feet,  that  from  them
we  might  rise  higher  to  all  the  rest.  2.
He  will  bless  them  in  regard  to  their
works.  There  is  a  blessing  upon  a
righteous  hand  whatsoever  it  be  that
he  undertakes.  As  a  blessing  of  pro-
tection u|)on  his  person,  so  a  blessing
oi  success  \\\)m\  his  labour  and  constant

em])l<jvnient As  there  is  a

difference  between  the  wicked  and  the
godly,  in  regard  of  their  disposition,
so  is  there  likewise  in  regard  of  their
condition.  1.  It  is  a  state  of  dark-
ness, (a).  In  the  ignorance  of  their
minds,  (bj.  In  the  inordinancy  of
their  affections — malice  shades  the
mind,  and  so  any  other  unruly  passion.
(c).  In  the  practice  of  all  other  sins
whatsoever,  forasmuch  as  they  seek
the  dark  for  the  commission  of  them.
(d).  In  that  spiritual  blindness  to
which  they  are  delivered  and  given  up.
'I'his  is  the  darkness  of  the  wai/,  there
is  also  the  darkness  of  the  end — the
darkness  of  death,  which  is  common  to
all,  and  the  darkness  of  judgment.  2.
It  is  a  state  oi silence,  (a).  Grief,  horror,
and  per})lexity  shall  seize  upon  them.
Silence  is  an  attendant  upon  grief  and
astonishment  in  their  extremities.
(b).  It  is  a  note  of  conviction,  they
shall  have  nothing  to  say  for  them-
selves, (c).  It  is  a  note  of  abode  and
continuance.  It  does  denote  the  im-
movableness  and  irrecoverableness  of
their  miserable  condition. — Morton.

The  title,  saints,  is  of  all  names  the
most  honourable.  It  literally  signifies
the  holy  ones.  It  associates  the  servant
of  God  with  his  Maker,  "  whose  nan^e  is
holy,"  with  his  Redeemer,  "the  Holy
One  of  Israel,"  and  with  "  the  Holy
Ghost,"  not  to  mention  those  holy  ones
who  veil  their  faces  before  His  throne.
— Jowett.

Ver.  10.  Here  Hannah  casts  a  pro-
phetic glance  at  the  consummation  of
tlie  kingdom  of  God.  As  certainly  as
the  Lord  God  keeps  the  righteous  at
all  times,  and  casts  down  the  wicked,
so  certainly  vvjII  He  judge  the  whole
38


world,  to  hurl  down  all  His  foes  and
perfect  His  kingdom  which  He  has
founded  in  Israel.  And  as  every  king-
d(^m  culminates  in  its  throne,  or  in  the
full  miuht  and  government  of  a  king,
so  the  kingdom  of  God  can  only  attain
its  full  perfection  in  the  king  whom
the  Lord  will  give  to  His  people  and
endow  with  His  might.  'Y\\q  Anointed
of  the  Lord,  of  whom  Hannah  pro-
phesies in  the  spirit,  is  not  one  single
king  of  Israel,  either  David  or  Christ,
but  an  ideal  king,  though  not  a  mere
personification  of  the  throne  about  to
be  established,  but  the  actual  king
whom  Israel  received  in  David  and  his
race,  which  culminated  in  the  Messiah.
The  exaltation  of  the  horn  of  the
Anointed  of  Jehovah  commenced  with
the  victorious  and  splendid  expansion
of  the  power  of  David,  was  repeated
with  every  victory  over  the  enemies  of
God  and  His  kingdom  gained  by  the
successive  kings  of  David's  house,  goes
on  in  the  advancing  spread  of  the  king-
dom of  Christ,  and  will  eventually
attain  to  its  eternal  consummation  in
the  judgment  of  the  last  day,  through
which  all  the  enemies  of  Christ  will  be
made  His  footstool. — Keil.

Hannah's  devout  acknowledgment
that  God  only  is  the  Rock,  and  that  it
is  the  sole  prerogative  of  God  to  raise
up  princes  and  to  give  them  strength,
stands  in  striking  contrast  to  the  people
of  Israel,  who  impatiently  asked  for  a
king  to  judge  them  like  the  nations^
and  to  go  out  before  them,  and  to
fight  their  battles  (chap.  viii.  5-20),
instead  of  waiting  patiently  God's  time,
and  instead  of  rejoicing  in  their  privi-
lege in  not  being  like  the  nations,  but
in  being  the  special  people  of  God,
and  instead  of  relying  upon  His  Al-
mighty arm  to  save  them  from  their
enemies.  She  is  the  first  who  addresses
God  as  the  "  Lord  of  Hosts"  (see
chap,  i  11),  a  title  which  emphatically
declares  the  sovereign<-y  of  the  Unseen
Ruler  of  the  world ;  and  in  this  also,
by  her  faith  in  Him,  she  stands  in
contrast  with  the  faitldess  impatience
of  the  people  of  Israel  who  asked
Samuel  to  make  them  a  visible  head.
Tlie  king  of  whom  Hannah  prophesies


CHAP.  n.  nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


is  "77/5  kini?,"  a  kino^  by  whom   the  in;it(M-ii:il  joy  on  tlie  hirtli  of  Samuel  to

Lord  shall  judge  the  ends  ot"  the  earth,  overtiow   in  outpourings  of  tliankful-

uot  the  king  craved  by  the  people  on  ness  to  God  for  those  greater  blessings

mere  worldly  considerations,  but  the  in  Christ,  of  which  that  birth  was  an

King  to  be  appointed  by  God,  in   Ilis  earnest  and  a  pledge.     In  this  respect

own  time,   and  a  figure  of  Christ  of  it  may  be  compared  to  the  Song  of

whom  Jehovah  speaks  by  David  (Psa.  Moses  (Deut.  xxxii.)  and  the  Song  of

ii.  6;  Ixxii.  1)  to  whom  all  judgment  David  (2  Sam.  xxii.) — VVordsy)ortk
is  given,  and  who  will  put  all  eneni'(3S  The   history  leaves  us  no  room  to

under  His  feet  (John  v.  22-27 ;  1  Cor.  doubt  that  the  immediate  occasion  of

XV.  25-28). —  Wordsworth.  this  song  was  the   birth  of  Samuel;

Ihe  judgment  of  God's  primitive  yet,  if  viewed  in  reference  to  this  occa-
justice.  1.  Whom  it  threatens — the  sion  alone,  how  comparatively  trifling
ungodly,  "  adversaries."  2.  How  God  is  the  theme  !  How  strained  and  mag-
makes  it  approach  with  warning  signs,  niloquent  the  expressions  !  Hannah
'*  out  of  heaven  shall  He  thunder."  speaks  of  her  '*  mouth  being  enlarged
3.  How  it  discharges  itself  against  all  over  her  enemies,"  of  '*  the  bows  of  the
the  world  that  is  opposed  to  God.  mighty  men  being  broken,"  of  "  the
*' The  Lord  shall  judge  the  ends  of  the  barren  bearing  seven,"  of  "the  full
earth."  4.  How  it  promotes  the  per-  hiring  themselves  for  bread,"  and  other
fecting  of  His  kingdom.  "  He  shall  things  of  a  like  nature, — all  how  far
give  strength  unto  His  king." — Langes  exceeding,  and  we  might  even  say  cari-
Commentary,  caturing  the  occasion,  if  it  has  respect

merely  to  the  fact  of  a  woman,  hitherto

Vers.    1-10.      The    Magnificat    of  reputed  barren,  becoming  at  length  the

Hannah  is  an  evangelical  song,  chanted  joyful  mother  of  a  child.      Were  the

by  the  spirit  of  prophecy  under  the  song  an  example  of  the  inflated  style

Levitical  Law.     It  is  a  prelude  and  not  uncommon  in  Eastern  poetry,  we

overture  to  the  Gospel.     It  is  a  con-  might  not  be  greatly  startled  at  such

nection  of  sweet  and   sacred  melody  grotesque  exa  gcrations  ;  but  being  a

between    the   Magnificat    of    Miriam  portion  of  tl  at  Word  which  is  all  given

after  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea — sym-  by  inspiratiiin  of  God,  and  is  as  silver

bolising  the  death,  burial,  and  resur-  tried  in  a  furnace,  we  must  banish  from

rection  of  Christ, — and  the  Magnificat  our  mind  any  idea  of  extravagance  and

of  Mary  after  the  annunciation  of  His  conceit.  Indeed,  from  the  whole  strain

birth.     Let  this  song  of  Hannah  be  and  character  of  the  song,  it  is  evident

read  in  the  Septuagint,  and  then  the  that,  though  occasioned  by  the  birth  of

Magnificat  in  St.  Luke's  original,  and  Samuel,  it  was  so  far  from  having  ex-

the  connection  of  the  two  will  be  more  elusive  reference  to  that  event,   that

clearly  recognised.  .  .  .  The  true  cha-  the  things  concerning  it  formed  one

racteristic  of  sacred  poetry  is  that  it  is  only   of  a   numerous  and   important

not  egotistical.     It  merges  the  indivi-  class  pervading  the  providence  of  God,

dual  in  the  nation  and  in  the  Church  and  closely  connected  with  His  highest

universal.     It  looks  forward  from  the  purposes.    In  a  spiritual  respect  it  was

special  occasion  that  prompts  the  utte-  a   tinie   of  mournful   barrenness  and

ranee  of  thanksgiving,  and  extends  and  desolation    in   Israel:    "the   word  of

expands  itself,  with  a  loving  power  and  the  Lord  was  precious,  there  was  no

holy  energy,  into  a  large  and  sym  pa-  open    vision,"    and    iniquity    was   so

thetic  outburst  of  praise  to  God  for  His  rampant  as  even  to  be  lifting  up  its

love  to  all  mankind  in  Christ insolent  front,  and  practising  its  foul

The  Magnificat  of  Hannah  is  conceived  abominations  in  the  very  precincts  of

in  this  spirit.     It  is  not  only  a  song  of  the   sanctuary.      How   natural,   then,

thanksgiving,  it  is  also  a  jt?r6»;;/!^'C?y.     It  for  Hannah,  when  she  had  got   that

is  an   utterance   of  the   Holy    Ghost  child  of  desire  and  hope,  which  she  had

moving  within  her,  and  making  her  devoted  from  his  birth  as  a  Nazarite  to

39


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,  book  l


the  Lord's  service,  and  feeling  her  soul  reignly  whicli  delights  to  exalt  a
moved  by  a  prophetic  impulse  to  regard  humble  piety,  while  it  pours  contempt
herself  as  specially  raised  up  to  be  *'  a  on  the  proud  and  rebellious.  And  as
sign  and  a  wonder "  in  Israel,  and  to  every  exercise  of  this  ])rinciple  is  but
do^  so  particularly  in  respect  to  that  part  of  a  grand  series  which  culminates
principle  in  the  Divine  government  in  the  dispensation  of  Christ,  her  song
which  had  so  strikingly  developed  itself  runs  out  at  the  close  into  the  sublime
in  her  experience,  but  which  was  de-  and  glowing  delineation  of  the  final
stined  to  receive  its  grandest  mani-  results  to  be  achieved  by  it  in  connec-
festation  in  the  work  and  kingdom  tion  with  His  righteous  administration,
which  were  to  be  more  peculiarly  the  This  song,  then,  plainly  consists  of  two
Lord's.  Hence,  instead  of  looking  ex-  parts,  in  the  one  of  which  only — the
clusively  at  her  individual  case,  and  concluding  portion — it  is  properly  pro-
marking  the  operation  of  the  Lord's  phetical.  The  preceding  stanzas  are
hand  in  what  simply  concerned  her  taken  up  with  unfolding  from  past  and
personal  history,  she  wings  her  flight  current  events,  the  grand  spiritual
aloft,  and  takes  a  comprehensive  survey  idea  ;  the  closing  ones  carry  it  forward
of  the  general  scheme  of  God  ;  noting  in  beautiful  and  striking  application  to
especially,  as  she  proceeds,  the  work-  the  affairs  of  Messiah's  kingdom. —
ings  of  that  pure  and  gracious  sove-  Fairbairn,

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OP  THE  PA HAORA PH. ^Verses  12—17.

The  Sm  of  Eli's  Sons.

I.  Natural  birth  is  not  a  qualification  for  spiritual  service.  It  does  seem  to
fit  men  for  some  professions.  The  sons  of  sailors  and  soldiers  often  seem  to  be
born  with  tendencies  towards  the  profession  of  their  forefathers,  and  very  early
give  proof  that  they  are  intended  by  nature  to  enter  a  service  which  only  requires
nutural  gifts  for  its  right  fulfilment.  But  men  do  not  inherit  qualifications
which  fit  them  to  be  moral  leaders  and  spiritual  guides.  It  is  not  enough  to
possess  the  natural  gifts  which  belong  to  holy  progenitors,  another  and  a  higher
law  must  be  brought  to  exert  its  influence  upon  a  man's  heart  before  he  is  flt  to
succeed  his  parent  in  spiritual  service.  If  he  succeeds  to  his  father's  position
merely  because  he  is  his  son,  it  is  a  transgression  of  the  law  of  God's  kingdom
and  must  end  in  evil.  If  birth  and  blood  and  time-honoured  custom  could
qualify  men  for  a  moral  service,  then  Eli's  sons  would  have  been  fully  fitted  to
succeed  their  father.  They  were  born  to  a  good  social  position — no  man  in  the
kingdom  stood  higher  than  Eli.  They  belonged  to  a  family  peculiarly  honoured
by  God — no  human  being  ever  held  a  higher  spiritual  position  than  the  High-
priest  of  Israel.  They  could  trace  back  their  relationship  to  Moses,  that  miin
of  God,  whose  name  had  for  generations  justly  held  the  highest  place  in  the
history  of  his  nation  and  was  destined  to  become  one  of  the  most  honoured  in
the  kingdom  of  God.  They  were  in  this  respect  "  Hebrews  of  the  Hebrews  " —
members  of  its  most  honoured  family — born  representatives  of  the  nation  of
which  God  was,  in  a  special  sense,  the  invisible  king.  Yet  they  were  utterly
unfit  for  their  important  office.  They  "  knew  not  the  Lord  "  and  therefore  they
were  His  enemies  although  they  were  Eli's  sons.

II.  When  men  thus  throw  away  all  the  advantages  of  birth  and  education,
they  generally  become  sin  ers  of  a  double  dye.  Although  godliness  does  not
come  by  inheritance  there  is  everything  in  a  pious  ancestry  to  favour  its  growth.
The  swimmer  who  finds  himself  in  the  stream  with  both  wind  and  tide  in  his
favour  to  second  his  efforts,  is  doubly  to  blame  if  he  neglects  to  use  his  advan-
tages, and  dies  by  his  own  deliberate  choice  if  he  throws  away  the  opportunity

40


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


he  bad  of  oniniurr  the  shore.  Thonf]jli  time  and  tide  waited  not  for  him,  yet
they  fv'aited  iq^oa  him,  and  he  is  verily  guilty  if  he  refused  to  take  advantage  of
them.  Some  are  born  into  tliis  worhl  to  find  themselves  surrounded  with  social
and  spiritual  inllueuces  which,  like  favourable  winds  and  tides,  wait  to  make  the
road  to  godliness  easy  to  them.  If  they  neglect  to  avail  themselves  of  these
good  giifts  of  God  they  must  become  sinners  of  the  blackest  type,  for  they
harden  their  hearts  against  the  most  softening  influence,  they  sin  against  liglit
and  knowledge.  Thus  did  the  sons  of  Eli.  They  were  launched  into  life  upon
a  stream  whose  current  was  flowing  towards  that  which  was  pure  and  holy — they
were  surrounded  by  influences  which  tended  to  make  them  worthy  to  be  priests
of  the  Most  High  God  and  true  sons  of  Abraham.  But  they  cast  them  all
aside,  and  not  only  did  not  become  spiritually  fit  for  their  service,  but  grew
into  monsters  of  iniquity,  and  turned  the  very  tabernacle  of  God  into  a  home
of  the  grossest  sin.

Til.  No  bond  arising  from  social  position  or  rank  is  strong  enough  to
prevent  the  manifestation  of  the  sin  which  is  in  the  heart.  A  tree  may  at
present  seem  to  be  in  a  healthy  condition,  but  if  there  is  that  in  the  root  beneath
the  ground  that  is  enough  to  kill  the  tree,  nothing  can  prevent  the  fact  from
becoming  evident  in  that  part  of  the  tree  which  is  above  the  surface.  Leaves
and  branches  will,  bye-and-bye,  tell  the  tale.  Nature  is  a  symbol,  and  an
expounder  of  moral  truth  in  this  matter  as  in  many  others.  There  is  nothing
morally  bad  that  is  hidden  in  a  man's  heart  that  wdl  not  manifest  itself  in  his
life,  though  his  reimtation  and  his  rank  call  upon  him  to  conceal  it.  The  secret
sin  will  ere  long  become  too  strong  to  continue  secret,  although  loss  of  position  and
influence  may  be  the  result  of  its  being  made  public.  Social  prestige  is  a  garment
too  narrow  to  conceal  from  view  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart,  however  desirable
it  may  be  to  do  so.  If  the  tree  is  corrupt,  the  fruit  will  be  corrupt  also  (Matt.
xii.  33).  Eli's  sons  had  every  temporal  advantage  to  gain  from  preserving  an
outward  decency  of  conduct — they  must  have  been  fully  aware  that  only  by  so
doing  could  they  command  in  any  degree  the  respect  which  was  usually  accorded
to  men  in  their  position.  But  sin  in  the  human  heart  is  like  pent-up  water,
which  after  being  held  back  for  a  time  rushes  forth  with  a  force  that  brealvs
down  every  dam,  and  sweeps  away  every  obstacle,  and  carries  desolation  where-
ever  it  goes.  Even  the  restraint  of  the  ofhce  of  the  priesthood  was  not  strong
enough  to  hold  back  Hophni  and  Phinehas  from  the  grossest  crimes,  and  their
lust  and  greed  broke  down  every  social  barrier,  and  spread  moral  desolation  aU
around  them.

ly.  Those  who  are  both  irreverent  and  licentious  poison  human  nature  in
its  highest  and  lowest  relations.  The  sin  of  licentiousness  is  a  sin  against
the  animal  part  of  man ;  it  defiles  his  body,  and  causes  the  race  to  degenerate
physically.  It  makes  all  animal  ties,  which  are  intended  to  bring  blessings  to
men,  sink  below  those  of  the  brute  creation.  The  Lord  is  for  the  body  (I  Cor.
vi.  13),  and  He  has  proved  that  He  cares  for  man's  ph3sical  well-being  by  the
strictness  with  which  He  has  fenced  him  round  in  this  respect.  He  who
transgresses  God's  laws  in  this  matter  poisons  the  source  of  man's  physical
well-being,  and  degrades  his  nature  below  the  lowest  animal.  A  river,  while  it
flows  within  its  appointed  channel,  carries  fertility  and  beauty  wherever  it  goes,
but  when  it  bursts  its  banks  it  obliterates  all  the  beauty  of  the  landscape,  and
spreads  destruction  all  around.  So  with  men's  animal  passions.  While  they
keep  within  the  limits  prescribed  for  them  they  are  instruments  of  enjoyment
and  of  blessing,  but  when  the  boundary  is  broken  down  and  they  flow
beyond  their  lawful  channel,  they  leave  nothing  but  a  curse  behind  them.  Eli's
sons  were  guilty  of  thus  defiling  the  body,  and  by  so  doing  they  poisoned  one  of
the  ordained  streams  of  social  blessing  in  tlieir  own  families  and  in  that  of  many

41


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  l


Others  in  Israel.  They  were  also  guilty  of  the  grossest  irreverence,  and  in  this  tliey
sinned  against  man's  higher  nature.  Their  conduct  tended  to  dislodge  from
the  mind  all  conceptions  of  the  holiness  and  purity  of  God.  This  they  did  by
the  place  in  which  they  committed  their  most  open  crimes.  The  hospital  is  the
place  where  men  hope  to  receive  healing  medicine.  If  those  who  are  expected
to  dispense  remedies  give  poisonous  drugs  instead  of  healing,  where  shall  the
sick  turn  for  help  ?  The  house  of  God  is  the  place  where  men  ought  to  find
that  which  will  conduce  to  moral  health.  If  there  they  find  only  moral  corrup-
tion, where  sliall  they  look?  What  higher  crime  can  men  be  guilty  of  than
that  of  turning  the  house  of  spiritual  healing  into  a  moral  pest-house.  Of  what
greater  act  of  irreverence  could  the  sons  of  Eli  have  been  guilty  than  that
whereby  they  corrupted  the  chastity  of  the  women  who  frequented  the
tabernacle  ?  They  also  tended  to  lower  men's  conception  of  God  by  profaning
His  service.  If  a  man  constantly  takes  the  name  of  God  upon  his  lips  in  a  light
and  careless  manner  he  educates  those  about  him  to  think  lightly  of  the  Divine
Being.  This  is  a  tribute  that  a  child  of  the  wicked  one  is  expected  to  pay  to
his  father  the  devil,  that  thereby  the  name  of  the  holy  God  may  be  lightly
esteemed  in  the  world.  But  if  profanity  of  speech  tends  to  dislionour  God  in
the  minds  of  men,  much  more  does  profanity  of  action.  The  sons  of  Eli  were
profane  doers,  and  were  therefore  profane  in  a  manner  more  calculated  to  pro-
duce irreverence  in  others  than  men  of  profane  speech  merely.  They
took  God's  name  in  vain  in  their  actions,  and  despised  the  holy  name  by  which
they  were  called  by  despising  the  offerings  which  were  made  to  God  according
to  His  appointment.  By  open  disobedience  to  God's  plain  command,  by  robbing
the  Lord,  and  by  robbing  those  who  came  to  worship  Him,  those  whose  special
function  it  was  to  hallow  Him  before  the  nation  caused  His  offering  to  be
abhorred.  It  is  treason  to  speak  or  act  against  the  king  in  any  part  of  his
dominion,  but  to  defy  him  in  his  throne-room  would  surely  be  the  most
aggravated  form  of  the  crime.  The  whole  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  to  act  with
irreverence  towards  Him  in  any  part  of  His  dominion  is  a  sin,  but  to  profane
His  holy  ordinances  in  the  palace  of  the  Great  King,  is  a  sin  of  the  blackest
hue.  The  body-guard  of  a  monarch  is  especially  bound  to  render  him  loyal
and  faithful  service ;  if  it  betray  its  trust,  where  is  he  to  look  for  faithful
servants  ?  God's  ministers  in  all  ages  are  the  body-guard  of  the  Eternal  King  ;
if  they  prove  themselves  renegades  and  unworthy  of  the  high  honour  that  He
has  put  upon  them,  others  will  find  in  their  unfaithfulness  a  licence  to  set  Him
at  defiance.  (For  a  parallel  case  in  the  modern  history  of  the  Church,  see
Froude's  "  Annals  of  an  English  Abbey."     "  Short  Studies,"  voL  iii).


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.    12.    So   were    Jehoshua   the  accompanied  with  faith  and  fear  of

high-priest's  sons  (Ezra  x.  18).     Their  God   (Rom.    i.    21 ;    Titus   i.    16). —

parents,  much  employed  about  other  Trapp.

things,  are  oft  not  so  careful  of  well-         If  the   conveyance   of   grace  were

breeding  their  children ;  and  besides,  natural,  holy  parents  would  not  be  so

they  are  apt  to  abuse   their   father's  ill  suited  with  children If

authority  and  powder  to   a  licentious  virtue  were  as  well  entailed  on  us  as

practice.     Eli  brought  up  his  sons  to  sin,   one  might   serve    to    check   the

bring  down  his  house.     'I hey  Knew  not  other  in  our  children  ;  but  now,  since

the  Lord.     Apprehensively  they  knew  grace  is  derived  from  heaven  on  whon*

Him,  but  not  affectively ;  they  had  no  soever  it  pleaseth  the  Giver,  and  that

lively  li^ht,  their  knowledge  was  not  evil,  which  ours  receive  hereditarily
42


CHAP.  IL


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  SAMUEL,


from  us,  is  multi[)lied  by  their  own
currupLioM,  it  can  be  no  wonder  that
good  men  have  ill  children  ;  it  i.s  rather
a  wonder  tliat  any  cliildren  are  not
evil.  ...  If  our  children  be  good,
let  us  thank  (^od  for  it ;  tliis  was  more
than  we  cuuld  give  tliem  ;  if  evil,  tliey
may  thank  ua  and  themselves,  us  for
their  birth  sin,  tlienj.selves  for  the  im-
provement of  it  to  that  height  of
wickedness. — Bishop  Ilall.

Ver.  15.  God  may  well  call  for  the
best  of  the  best ;  but  these  liquorish
Lurcos  would  needs  be  served  before
Him  and  be  their  own  carvers.  Boiled
meat  would  not  content  them.  But  it
ill  becometli  a  .servant  of  the  Lord  to
be  a  slave  to  his  palate.  Christ  biddeth
His  apostles,  when  they  come  into  a
house,  *'  eat  such  things  as  are  set
before  them." — Trapp,

Ver.  17.  It  hath  been  an  old  saying,
De  templo  omne  bonum,  de  templo  omne
mala  III — all  good  or  evil  comes  from
the  temple. — Chrysostom.  Where  the
pastor  is  good,  and  the  people  good,  he
may  say  to  them,  as  Paul  to  his  Corin-
thians, "Are  ye  not  my  work  in  the
Lord?"  (1  Cor.  ix.  1)  Where  the  pas-
tor is  bad,  and  the  people  no  better,
they  may  say  to  him,  Art  thou  not  our
destruction  in  the  world?  It  is  no
wonder  if  an  abused  temple  makes  a
disordered  people.  A  wicked  priest  is
the  worst  creature  upon  God's  earth ;
no  sin  is  so  black  as  that  shall  appear
from  under  a  white  surplice.  Every
man's  iniquity  is  so  much  the  heinouser
as  his  place  is  holier.  The  sin  of  the
clergy  is  like  a  rheum,  which,  rising
from  the  stomach  into  the  head,  drops
down  upon  the  lungs,  fretting  the  most
noble  and  vital  parts,  till  all  the  mem-
bers languish  into  corruption.  The
lewd  sons  of  Eli  were  so  much  the
less  tolerable  by  sinning  in  the  taber-
nacle. Theii  sacritices  might  do  away
the  sins  of  others;  no  sacrifice  could
do  away  their  own,  Many  a  soul  was
the  cleaner  for  the  blood  of  those  boasts
they  shed;  their  own  souls  were  tiie
fouler  by  it.  By  one  and  the  same
service  they  did  expiate  the  people's


offences  and  multiply  their  own.  Our
clergy  is  no  charter  for  heaven.  Such
men  are  like  the  conveyances  of  land  :
evidences  and  instruments  to  settle
otliers  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  while
themselves  have  no  i)art  of  that  they
convey.  It  is  no  impossible  thing  {ov
men  at  once  to  show  the  way  to  heaven
with  their  tongue,  and  lead  the  way  to
hell  with  their  loot.  It  was  not  a  Jewish
ephod,  it  is  not  a  Romish  cowl  that  can
privilege  an  evil-doer  Irom  punishment.
Therefore  it  was  God's  charge  to  the
executioners  of  His  judgment,  "  Begin
at  mine  own  sanctuaiy  "  (Ezek.  ix.  6) ;
and  the  apostle  tells  us  that  "judg-
ment shall  begin  at  the  house  of  God  "
(1  Pet.  iv.  17)  ;  and  Christ,  entering
into  His  prophetical  office,  began  refor-
mation at  His  Father's  house  (John
ii.  15).  Let  our  devout  and  holy
behaviour  prevent  this,  and  by  our
reverent  carriage  in  the  temple  of  God
let  us  honour  the  God  of  the  temple.
....  If  Christ,  while  he  was  upon
the  cross,  saith  Bernard,  had  given  me
some  drops  of  His  own  blood  in  a  vial,
how  carefully  would  I  have  kept  them,
how  dearly  esteemed  them,  how  laid
them  next  my  heart.  But  now  He  did
not  think  it  fit  to  trust  me  with
those  drops,  but  He  hath  entrusted
to  me  a  flock  of  His  lambs,  those
souls  for  whom  He  shed  His  blood,
like  whom  His  own  blood  was  not
so  dear  unto  Him  ;  upon  these  let
me  spend  my  care,  my  love,  my
labour,  that  I  may  present  them  holy
saints  to  my  dear  Lord  Jesus.  But  let
Christians  beware,  lest,  for  the  abuses
of  men  they  despise  the  temple  of  God.
For  as  the  altar  cannot  sanctify  the
priest,  so  neither  can  the  unholiness  of
the  priest  disallow  the  altar.  His  sin  is
his  own,  and  cannot  make  you  guilty  ;
the  virtue  and  comfort  is  from  God,
and  this  is  still  able  to  make  you  holy.
When  we  read  that  "the  sin  of  the
priests  was  great  before  the  Lord,  for
men  abhorred  the  offering  of  the
Lord,"  this,  we  all  confess,  was  ill  done
of  the  priests,  and  I  hope  no  man  thinks
it  was  well  done  of  the  people.  Shall
men,  therefore,  scorn  the  sanctuary,
and  cast  that  contempt  on  the  service

43


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  L


of  God  vvhicli  belongs  to  the  vices  of  mnst  needs  fall  out  with  God  ?  .  .  .  ,

men  ?     This  were  to  add  our  own  evil  We  say  of  the  sacraments  themselves,

to  the  evil   of  others,  and  to   offend  much  more  of  the  ministers — These  do

God  because  He  was  offended.    Cannot  not  give  us  what  God  doth  give  us  by

the  faults  of  men  displease  us,  but  we  them. — 2\  Adams.


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  TEE  PA  RAO  RAPE.— Vers,  18-21,  and  26.

True  Ministry.

I.  Qualification  for  the  service  of  God  is  not  always  on  the  side  of  years.
A  child  may  have  a  more  correct  idea  of  how  to  serve  God  than  a  man.  The
son  may  possess  knowledge  on  this  matter  of  whicli  his  parents  may  be  pro-
foundly ignorant.  This  is  true  of  other  knowledge  than  spiritual.  One  who  is
very  young  in  years  may  far  surpass  his  elders  in  his  aptitude  for  science  or  art.
The  youthful  Watt  had  thoughts  suggested  to  his  mind  by  the  phenomena  of
nature  such  as  had  never  occurred  to  the  ancients  who  had  preceded  him,  and
he  was  thus  at  a  very  early  age  more  qualified  to  serve  his  generation  in  this
department  of  knowledge  than  they  were.  So  in  spiritual  service.  Age  and
experience  do  not  necessarily  qualify  men  to  minister  acceptably  before  the
Lord.  Ho])hni  and  Phinehas  were  old  enough  to  serve  God  acceptably  in  the
priest's  office,  but  while  they  brought  dishonour  upon  Him  in  the  performance
of  the  most  sacred  functions,  the  cliild  Samuel  so  performed  his  more  humble
duties  as  to  make  them  an  acceptable  service  to  Jehovah.  It  is  not  the  office
which  is  held,  but  the  spirit  in  which  its  duties  are  performed,  that  constitutes
the  real  service,  and  that  depends  not  on  years,  but  on  character,  and  often
those  who  have  been  lon<(  nominal  or  even  real  servants  of  God  are  outstripped
in  fervour  and  devotion  by  those  wlio  have  entered  the  lists  many  years  later.
"  Many  that  are  first  shall  be  last,  and  the  last  first  "  (Matt.  xix.  30).  Many
who  take  the  lead  in  the  first  start  of  the  race  are  left  far  behind  when  others
have  reached  the  goal.  Some  who  enter  a  school  long  before  others  are  over-
taken and  outstrii)ped  by  the  later  comers.  And  it  is  so  in  the  Church  of  God.
The  sons  of  Eli  were  in  the  priesthood  before  Samuel  was  in  the  world,  yet  he
was  far  in  advance  of  them  in  the  possession  of  that  "  reverence  and  godly  fear,"
without  which  no  service  to  God  is  acceptable  (Heb.  xii.  28).

II.  When  /regeneration  has  begun  in  the  young  and  (Regeneration  has  set  in
in  those  of  mature  years,  the  pi  ogress  is  commonly  rapid  in  both.  While
Samuel  "grew  on,  and  was  in  favour  both  with  the  Lord  and  also  with  men,"
Hophni  and  Phinehas  hastened  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity.  The
sinful  human  nature  which  is  the  inheritance  of  all  men  was  common  both  to
Samuel  and  the  sons  of  Eli,  and  they  were  both  surrounded  with  influences
favourable  to  the  overcoming  of  evil  tendencies  and  to  the  formation  of  a  holy
character.  But  Hophni  and  Phinehas  strengthened  every  sinful  natural  disposition
by  giving  themselves  up  to  be  ruled  by  their  passions,  by  utterly  disregarding
the  commandment  of  the  Lord,  the  voice  of  conscience,  or  even  their  own  repu-
tation. Such  an  entire  disregard  of  all  the  restraints  whicli  God  had  placed
upon  them  made  rai)id  degeneration  inevitable,  and  they  soon  became  as  bad  as
it  was  possible  for  fallen  men  to  become.  But  Samuel's  upward  growth  was  as
rapid  as  their  descent.  He  had  evidently  already  become  a  sul)ject  of  the
regenerating  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  had  yielded  himself  up  to  that
Divine  guidance  whic-h  is  powerful  enough  to  renew  the  human  heart  and  to  give
a  new  birth  unto  holiness,  and  so  to  make  the  path  of  him  who  is  willing  to  be
moulded  by  it  "  as  the  shining  light  which  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the

44


CHAP.  II.  n  OM I  LET JC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


perfect  day."     The  cliild  grew  and  so  did  the  men.     The  one  ripened  for  a  noble
and  holy  and  useful  life,  the  others  for  the  condemnation  and  judgtnent  of  God.

III.  The  most  godless  and  the  holy  may  be  found  associated  in  the  external
service  of  God.  Samuel  and  the  sons  of  Eli  were  both  engaged  in  the  temple
service.  Samuel  was  ''girded  with  a  linen  ephod,"  and  so,  doubtless,  were  they.
Wheat  and  tares  grow  together  in  the  same  held.  John  and  Judas  sat  at  meat
together  with  the  Lord.  A  saint  of  the  highest  type  may  be  associated  in
external  religious  service  with  a  most  villanous  man,  they  may  worship  in  the
same  house  of  God,  may  sit  together  at  the  table  of  the  Lord.  It  must  and
will  be  so  until  the  harvest  when  the  Lord  of  the  field  will  say  to  the  reapers,
"  Gather  ye  together  first  the  tares,  and  bind  them  in  bandies  to  burn  them  ;
but  gather  the  wheat  into  my  barn'  (Matt.  xiii.  30).


IV.  Fulfilled  obligations  will  not  discharge  us  from  obligations  yet  tc  be
fulfilled.  Hannah  had  taken  her  child  and  given  him  to  Eli  for  the  service  of
the  Lord,  but  her  loving  care  of  him  did  not  end  there.  Her  heart  was  still
with  him,  and  her  hands  still  busy  for  him.  She  "  made  him  a  little  coat,  which
she  brought  to  him  from  year  to  year."  The  performance  of  past  duties  to  God
does  not  free  us  from  the  obligations  of  the  present  any  more  than  debts  discharged
in  the  past  will  release  us  from  those  we  may  contract  in  the  future.  Not  even
a  very  special  work  done  for  God,  or  a  great  sacrihce  made  for  His  service  in  tlie
past,  will  discharge  us  from  the  obligation  to  perform  the  commonest  duties  of
to-day.  When  Hannah  had  performed  her  vow,  and  dedicated  her  hrst-born
son  to  the  Lord,  and  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  had  sung  of  the
coming  kingdom  of  righteousness  and  of  the  Lord's  Anointed,  she  still  regarded
it  as  her  privilege  and  duty  to  care  for  her  child's  every-day  bodily  wants,  and
to  make  his  garment  with  her  own  hands.  She  recognised  the  fact  that  if  the
spirit  is  to  serve  God  in  the  present  life  the  body  nmst  be  cared  for  too,  even  as
did  the  great  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  when,  looking  forward  to  being  shortly
crowned  by  his  Lord  in  Paradise,  he  sent  for  his  "  cloak  which  he  left  in  Troas,"
that  so  long  as  he  was  in  the  Hesh  he  might  keep  his  body  from  cold  and  sickness,
and  so  continue  fit  to  serve  His  Master  until  the  end  should  come  (2  Tim.  iv.
13).  Those  whose  hearts  are  right  will  nob  despise  the  lowliest  or  the  most
ordinary  work,  or  call  anything  that  their  hands  find  to  do  common  or  unworthy
of  their  notice.

V.  We  have  here  a  record  of  Divine  compensation  for  human  sacrifice.
"  The  Lord  blessed  Hannah,  so  that  she  conceived,  and  bare  three  .sons  and  two
daughters."  The  kingdom  of  n.iture  demands  sacrihces  of  men.  The  husband-
man must  cast  away  some  seed  and  give  it  up  as  it  were  to  death,  and  he  must
do  this  without  regard  to  the  wind  or  the  cold.  But  JNature  is  generous  when  she
finds  that  her  conditions  are  fulfilled,  she  gives  an  ear  for  a  single  grain,  and  the
joy  of  harvest  to  compensate  for  the  tod  of  the  sowing-time.  Autl  as  it  is  in
God's  natural  kingdom,  so  is  it  more  abundantly  in  His  spiritual  kingdom.  No
service  rendered  to  Him,  not  '*  even  a  cup  of  cohl  water  in  the  name  of  a
disciple,"  shall  lose  its  reward.  Hannah  gave  her  tirsthorn  son  to  the  Lord  in
the  service  of  the  temple,  and  her  home  was  gladdened  by  five  more  children.
She  found  that  God  heaped  into  her  bosom  "  good  measure  "  and  "  running
over."  In  the  more  8[)iritual  dispensation  of  the  New  Testament  men  must  not
look  for,  nor  do  spiritual  men  desire  such  a  re[)ayment  in  the  same  kind,  but
God  will  be  no  man's  debtor,  and  the  word  of  Christ  is  sure  :  "  And  every  one
that  hath  forsaken  houses,  or  brethren^  or  sisters,  or  father,  mother,  or  wife,  or
children,  or  lands,  for  my  names  sake,  shall  receive  an  hundredfold,  and  shall
inherit  everlasting  life  "  (Matt.  xix.  29).


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


BOOK  L


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Ver.  18.  Samnel  diM  not  merely
worship  and  enjoy  s])iritual  traiiiinor;
be  ministered  before  tbe  Lord,  and  did
wbat  be  could  to  make  bimself  useful.
"Perliaps,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "he
attended  immediately  on  Eli's  person —
was  ready  to  bira  to  fetch  and  brinp^  as
he  bad  occasion  ;  and  that  is  called

ministerini^  to   the   Lord He

could  light  a  candle,  or  bold  a  dish,  or
run  on  an  errand,  or  shut  a  door  ;  and
because  he  did  this  with  a  pious  dis-
position of  mind,  it  is  called  ministering
to  the  Lord,  and  great  notice  is  taken
of  it."  We  have  not  now  a  tabernacle
such  as  there  was  in  Sbiloh,  nor  have
we  such  services  as  Samuel  was  called
upon  to  render  ;  but  in  tbe  Church  of
God  there  is  sphere  wide  enough  for
the  most  active  energy,  diversified
enough  for  many  workers,  and  simj)le
enough  for  the  youngest  to  under-
take ....  Common  obedience  and
everydny  life,  ton,  receive  a  consecra-
tion from  the  godly  motive.  Children,
by  their  infant  pravers,  have  ere  now
awakened  a  parent's  long  silent  heart.
...  An  infant's  hymn  has  awakened
the  hardened,  and  tbe  example  of  a
believing  boy  has  occasioned  an  older
mind  to  inquire,  "  What  must  I  do  to
be  saved  ?" — Steel,


Ver.  19.  This  was  much  in  Samuel's
education.  It  nurtured  tbe  family
feeling,  the  loss  of  which  is  a  great
deprivation.  It  kept  bis  heart  tender,
when  amidst  strangers  bis  feelin^^s
might  be  blunted.  It  provided  foi
him  that  be  might  not  be  reproached.
— Steel.

"  I'etty  little  histories!"  cries  Un-
belief. "What  matters  it  whether  one
knows  that  Samuel  had  a  little  coat
or  no?"  Holy  Scripture  is  not  written
for  the  wise,  but  for  child-souls,  and
a  child-likft  soul  does  not  doubt  thit
even  tbe  little  coat  which  Hannah
prepared  for  her  Samurd  has  its  his-
tory. If  I  thijdv  of  Hannah  as  every
year  sewing  this  coat  at  her  home  in
iRamah,  I  know  that  at  every  stitch
a  prayer  for  her  Samuel  rose  up
to  tbe  throne  of  the  Lord.  The
coat  which  she  was  sewing  would  re-
mind her  that  she  bad  given  him  to
the  Lord ;  and  when  the  coat  was
ready,  and  she  brought  it  to  Sbiloh,
then  every  time  with  the  coat  she
anew  gave  Samuel  to  her  God,  and
said,  "1  give  him  to  the  Lord  again
for  his  whole  life,  because  be  was
obtained  from  the  Lord  by  prayer." —
DaecliseL


MAIN  BOMILETICS  OF  TEE  PARAGRAPH.— Vers.  22-25.

Eli's  Reproof  of  his  Sons.

I.  Impartiality  is  an  essential  qualification  in  a  judge  or  ruler.  Some  sins
against  Divine  laws  are  to  be  dealt  with  by  human  rulers.  Magistracy  is  an
ordination  of  God,  and  in  proportion  as  the  character  of  him  who  administers
the  law  is  good,  and  the  law  itself  is  just,  human  judges  are  reflections  of  God,
and  represent  Him  who  will  not  acquit  the  guilty,  and  will  defend  the  innocent.
But,  above  all  things,  he  who  holds  such  an  office  must  be  impartial.  Eli,  as
tbe  judge  of  Israel,  was  bound  to  imitate  God  in  this  particular,  as  in  all  others.
No  man  can  be  honoured  by  his  fellow-creatures  unless  he  deals  out  evenhanded
justice  to  all  to  whom  he  administers  law,  and  the  man  who  will  allow  rank,  or
position,  or  relationship  to  influence  bis  judgment  is  no  representative  of  Him
who  will  render  to  all  their  dues.  A  man  should  be  specially  guarded  when
called  upon  to  pass  sentence  or  administer  justice  to  one  v/lio  is  connected  with
him  by  the  ties  of  blood  or  friendship.  Such  a  medium  has  a  tendency  to
distort  our  sense  of  right  and  wrong — to  lead  us  to  excuse  the  crime
with  which  we  should  deal  severely  in  a  stranger.  What  we  should  look
46


CHAP  II.  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.


\\\)o\\  as  pure  villany  in  the  one  we  may  be  disposed  to  regard  as  mere
misfortune  in  the  other.  It  needs  a  nnich  higher  standard  of  character
th.in  that  possessed  by  EH  to  deal  out  the  rightful  measure  of  punishment  to
those  \vli(^  are  nearly  connected  with  us.  The  goodness  and  integrity  of
God  leads  Ilini  to  adopt  a  course  directly  opposite  to  that  which  men
generally  pursue  in  such  a  case.  He  punishes  wMth  greater  rigour  in  proportion
as  the  oiTenderhas  been  hitherto  favoured  and  brought  into  near  relation  to  llim.
We  have  reason  to  believe  that  few  of  the  sons  of  God  stood  nearer  the  Eternal
throne  than  Satan.  And  because  it  was  so,  his  punishment  has  been  severe  in
proportion,  the  hell  into  w^hich  he  was  banished  was  deep  in  proportion  to  the
pLice  in  heaven  from  which  he  fell.  No  people  of  ancient  days  stood  in  such
near  and  intimate  relation  to  God  as  did  the  people  of  Israel.  Yet  for  this  very
reason  no  nation  has  received  such  severe  punishment  for  transgression  ''  You
only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth ;  therefore  1  will  pimish  you
for  all  your  iniquities"  (Amos  iii.  2).  God,  being  the  perfectly  righteous
judge  and  governor,  is  the  Being  whose  example  should  be  followed  by  all  luiman
magistrates,  and  the  prominent  feature  in  God's  magistracy  is  His  strict  impar-
tiality. If  Eli  had  imitated  God  in  this  respect  he  would  have  dealt  very
differently  with  his  abandoned  sons.  But  he  looked  at  their  crimes  through
the  medium  of  his  fatherly  relationship,  and  this  medium  so  softened  down  the
blood-red  stains  upon  their  characters  that  when,  as  the  first  magistrate  of  Israel,
he  ought  to  have  sentenced  them  to  death  or  at  least  to  have  excommunicated
them  from  office,  he  contents  himself  with  a  very  tame  remonstrance.  He
touches  them  gently  with  the  back  of  the  sword,  whereas  if  a  Moses  or  such  a
man  as  the  first  Phinehas  had  been  in  his  place,  he  would  have  thrust  the  blade
into  them  up  to  the  very  hilt  (Num.  xxv.  6-11).  His  stern  rebuke  of  Hannah
for  a  fancied  crime  shows  that  he  could  be  severe,  in  speech  at  least,  up^m
occasions,  and  the  contrast  even  in  the  words  used  to  the  unoffending  woman
and  those  in  which  he  reproved  his  sons,  makes  him  stand  convicted  of  gross
impartiality,  and  therefore  as  lacking  the  most  essential  qualification  of  a
magistrate.

II.  Men  who  are  merely  emotional  are  fit  neither  to  govern  men  nor  to
train  children.  Ploney  is  good  for  man's  eating,  and  contains  some  nutriment
and  also  healing  properties.  But  honey  alone  would  be  a  poor  sustainer  or
nourisher  of  human  life.  Wax  is  a  useful  material  for  some  purposes,  but  it
would  be  poor  material  of  which  to  build  a  house.  To  feed  upon  the  first  would
be  to  make  sickness  certain  ;  to  build  with  the  second  would  be  to  ensure  the
fall  of  the  house.  Emotions  have  their  ])lace  in  the  human  soul,  and  a  man
destitute  of  feeling  is  a  monster ;  but  feelings  are  not  to  be  the  guide  of  human
conduct,  and  the  judge  or  the  father  who  is  swayed  entirely  by  his  emotions  will
in  time  forfeit  all  respect  and  confidence.  Tenderness  and  gentleness  are  blessed
and  Divine  attributes  of  character,  but  mere  softness  and  inertness  must  not  be
mistaken  for  them  ;  and  where  they  really  exist  there  is  no  lack  of  capability  for
righteous  indignation,  no  want  of  will  to  administer  deserved  rebuke.  Eli's
failure  in  his  duty  as  a  judge  leads  us  to  infer  that  he  had  been  a  too  indulgent
father— that  which  unfitted  him  to  deal  justly  with  his  grown  sons  would  have
unfitted  him  to  train  them  in  childhood.  Contrast  the  tender  and  long-suffering
Son  of  God  with  the  soft-hearted  Eli,  and  place  the  reproof  of  the  high  priest
side  by  side  with  our  Lord's  denunciations  of  similar  characters  holding  a  like
position,  and  we  see  how  the  tenderest  compassion  is  compatible  with  the  most
terrible  denunciation  of  sin.  "  Woe  unto  you,  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites  !
....  Ye  serpents,  ye  generation  of  vipers,  how  can  ye  escape  the  damnation  of
hellV  etc.— (xMatt.  xxiii.  23-35).

III.  There  are  sins  beyond  the  power  of  human  intercession.    Even  Eli

47


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  1.


allowed  tliis  (ver.  25).  Men  have  committed  and  do  commit  certain  sins,  and
other  men  have  interceded  and  do  intercede  for  them  and  obtain  their  pardon.
Tlds  is  the  case  where  sins  are  committed  against  otiier  men,  and  sometimes
when  sin  is  committed  aijjainst  God.  God  Himself  has  accepted  human
mediation,  and  has  held  back  His  judgments.  This  He  did  often  in  tlie  case  of
Moses  and  the  people  of  Israel.  Many  a  time  He  spared  the  sinful  nation
because  the  voice  of  His  servant  i)leaded  for  them.  But  sometimes  no  inter-
cession of  man  can  avert  Divine  displeasure — no  human  creature  can  prevent
the  thunderbolt  of  God's  judgment  from  falling.  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job  were
men  who  were  highly  esteemed  by  God,  and  whose  prayers  on  behalf  of  others  are
— in  the  case  of  two  at  least — known  to  have  been  effectual  (Job  xlii.  8  ;  Dan.
ix.  20,  23).  But,  if  they  had  all  lived  in  the  days  of  Ezekiel,  their  joint  inter-
cessions could  not  have  saved  the  guilty  Israelites  from  the  chastisement  which
their  sins  had  made  inevitable — "  I  hough  these  three  men,  Noah,  Daniel,  and
Job,  were  in  it,  theij  should  delioer  but  their  own  souls  by  their  righteousness,
saith  the  Lord  God''  (Ezek.  xiv.  14).  The  sins  of  Hophni  and  Phinehas  were  so
outrageously  vile,  and  their  position  and  office  so  aggravated  their  crimes  that
they  were  beyond  the  power  of  human  intercession.  No  prayer  of  p]li,  not
even  the  prayers  of  a  Noah,  a  Daniel,  or  a  Job,  could  now  have  turned  away  the
judgment  of  God  from  them.  The  father  seems  to  feel  that  he  cannot  ask
forgiveness  for  them  in  their  present  state  of  heart — he  exhibits  some  conception
of  the  enormity  of  their  crimes  when  he  says,  "  If  a  man  sin  against  the  Lord,
who  shall  entreat  for  him?"  It  was  his  right  and  privilege  to  draw  nigh  to
God  on  behalf  of  others,  but  the  iniquity  of  his  sons  was  so  great,  that  his  very
position  as  high-priest  forbade  his  pleading  that  God  would  pass  over  their  sins.

IV.  When  sinners  are  beyond  the  reach  of  intercession  and  marked  for
Divine  punishment,  they  will  not  repent.  Tlie  people  of  Sodom  were  in  such
a  condition.  Intercession  for  them  could  not  avail,  because  they  were  so
hardened  in  sin  that  repentance  had  become  a  moral  impossibility.  Even  after
(lod  had  stricken  them  with  blindness  they  persisted  in  endeavouring  to
perpetrate  their  enormous  wickedness,  thus  proving  that  neither  the  persuasions
of  men,  nor  the  judgments  of  God,  could  lead  them  to  repentance.  Eli's  sons
were  as  great  sinners,  for  if  their  crimes  were  not  quite  so  black,  they  were
committed  against  Divine  light  and  holy  influences  such  as  were  not  possessed
by  the  men  of  Sodom.  Where  could  stronger  inducements  to  repentance  be
found  than  those  which  they  had  set  at  nouuht  ?  How  conld  men  be  led  to
re])entance  who  turned  the  very  house  of  God  into  a  house  of  shameless  crime  ?
Before  the  executioner  brings  the  sharp  steel  to  the  neck,  he  blindfolds  the
culprit.  These  men  had  blindfolded  themselves  by  their  persistent  iniquity,
and  nothing  now  could  prevent  God's  axe  from  falling.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  23.  Had  these  men  but  some  importeth.     A  vehement  rebuke  to  a

little  slackened  their  duty,  or  heed-  capital  evil  is  but  like  a  strong  shower

lessly  omitted  some  rite  of  the  sacrifice,  to  a  ripe  field,   which  lays  that  corn

this  censure  had  not  been  unfit ;  but  which  were  worthy  of  a  sickle.     It  is

to  punish  the  thefts,  rapines,  sacrileges,  a  breach  of  justice  not  to  proportionate

adulteries,   incests    of    his   sons  with  the   punishment  to    the   offence :    to

"Why  do  ye  so,"  was  no  other  than  to  whip  a  man  for  murder,  or  to  punish

shave  the   head   which  had  deserved  the  purse  for  incest,  or  to  burn  treason

cutting  off.  .  .  .  An  easy  rebuke  doth  in  the  hand,  or  to  award  the  stocks  to

but  encourage  wickedness,  and  makes  burglary,  is  to  patronise  evil  instead  of

it  think  itself  so  slight  as  that  censure  avenging  it. — Bp.  Hall.
48


CHAP.  n.


IIOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL,


Ver  24.  Too  mild  all  alon^.  He
should  have  said  as  Isa.  Ivii.  3,  4,
*'Draw  near  hither,  ye  sons  of  the  sor-
ceress," etc.,  ye  degenerate  brood  and
sons  of  Belial  and  not  of  Eli.  .  .  .
He  should  liave  said,  "  Woe  is  nie  that
I  live  to  hear  it ;  it  had  been  better
that  I  had  died  loni^  since,  or  that  yoa
had  been  buried  alive,  than  thus  to
live  to  stink  above  ground."  But  he
saith  only,  "  I  hear  ill  of  you  by  all
the  people,"  as  if  he  went  oidy  upon
hearsay,  and  were  put  on  by  the
people  thus  to  check  them. — Trapp.

Ver.  25.  The  duties  which  men  are
required  to  perform  in  society  are  two-
fold, they  owe  duties  to  their  brethren,
they  owe  duties  to  God  ;   or  rather,
considered  in  a  Christian  light,  every
one  of  our  social  duties,  as  it  should  be
performed  on  a  religious  principle,  so
should  it  be  considered  of  a  religious
character.      "  Whatsoever   we  do,  we
should  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."
The  mind  of  man,  however,  is  so  gross
that  it  is  necessary  for  the  sanctions  of
religion  to  be  seconded  by  the  authority
of  human  laws  in  enforcing  the  ob-
servance of  our  social  and  moral  duties.
Not  only,  therefore,  is  the  wrath  of
God  denounced  against  the  sinner  for
his  offences,  every  one  of  which  is  a
violation  of  God's  authority,  but  "  if  a
man  sin  against  another,  the  judge  also
judges  him  " — he  is  amenable  also  to
that  human  authority   which   he  has
despised.     Still,  after  all  that  can  be
done  by  man's  interference,  after  all
the  severity  of  punishment  which  men
can  inBict  upon  the  offender  to  deter
others  from   a  like  offence,  it  is  the
anger   of  God  which   is   most  to   be
avoided,  it  is  the  punishment  of  God
which   is  most  to  be  dreaded.     Com-
paratively trifling  should  be  our  fear
of  them  **  which  kill  the  body,  but  are
not  able  to  kill  the  soul;"  for  com-
paratively feeble  is  their  vengeance,
and  comparatively  light  and  transitory
is  the  punishment  which  they  can  in-
flict ;  but  our  fear  of  the  Divine  wrath
should,  if  possible,  be  great  in  propor-
tion to  the  greatness  of  the  power  of
Him   **  who  is  able  to  destroy  both


body    and    soul    in    hell."  —  Bishop
Mant.

1  read  not  in  the  Scripture  of  a
hypocrite's  conversion,  and  what  won-
der? For  whereas  alter  sin  conversion
is  left  as  a  mea)is  to  cover  all  other
sins,  what  means  to  recover  him  who
hath  converted  conversion  itself  into  a
sin  ? — Trapp.

"  The  Lord  would  slay  them  I"  It
is  a  dreadful  sentence,  and  we  would
fain  know  of  whom  it  was  uttered.  It
is  spoken  of  particular  persons  and  not
generally.  ...  of  the  sons  of  a
priest,  brought  up  amidst  holy  things
from  their  childhood.  .  .  .  What
more  could  have  been  done  unto  the
vineyard  ?  What  greater  means  of
knowledge,  what  better  opportunities
of  being  impressed  with  a  sense  of
God's  majesty  and  holiness  could
possibly  have  been  granted  them  ?  But
these  means  and  opportunities  had
been  neglected,  till  what  was  food  at
first  was  now  their  poison.  They  had
gained  such  a  habit  of  seeing  and
hearing  holy  things  unmoved  that
nothing  could  possibly  work  on  them.
It  is  probable  that  every  fresh  service
which  they  performed  about  the  taber-
nacle did  but  harden  them  more  and
more.  How,  then,  could  they  hearken
to  the  voice  of  their  father,  a  kind  old
man  indeed,  and  a  good  one,  but  one
with  none  of  that  vigour  of  character
which  commands  respect,  even  from  the
evil.  Were  his  words  of  gentle  rebuke
likely  to  move  those  hearts  which  for
years  had  served  every  day  in  the  pre-
sence of  God,  and  had  felt  neither  fear
for  Him  nor  love  of  Him.  Vain  was
it  to  hope  that  such  hearts  should  be
so  renewed  to  repentance.  The  seal
of  destruction  was  set  on  them  but  too
plainly  ;  the  Lord  would  slay  them  ;
the  laws  of  His  providence,  His  un-
changed and  unchangable  providence,
had  decreed  that  their  case  was  hope-
less ;  for  they  had  hardened  their
hearts  greedily  all  their  lives,  and  their
work  was  now  set  so  sure  that  they
could  not  undo  it,  because  they  could
not  now  wish  it  to  be  undone. — Dr.
A  mold.

The  purpose  of  God  was   not   the

49


IIOM I LETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  booe  i.


cause  of  tlieir  disobedience,  but  their  eye    they   will    be    comely    in    tlieir

disobedience  was  a  sign  tliat  they  were  carriage  ;  but  vvlien  they  come  into  his

now  ripe  for  destruction,  and  that  the  presence-clianiber  to  speak  with  him

righteous  purposes  of  God  in  their  case  they  will  be  most  careful.  .  .  .    God  is

should  now  soon  be  executed. — Starke,  very  curious  how  men  carry  themselves

They  were  in  a  state  of  inner  hard-  in   His  courts.  ...    Do  but  observe,

ening,  which  excluded  the  subjective  under  the   law,   how  choice    He  was

condition  of  salvation  from  destruction,  about  all  things  relating  to  His  wor-

and    so    they    hnd    already    incurred  ship:  the  tabernacle  must  be  made  of

God's  unchangable  condenmation.    As  the  best  wood,  the   purest  gold,  the

hardened  offenders  they  were  already  finest  linen,  etc.  .  .  .  And  what  is  the

■appointed  by  God  to  death  ;  therefore  substance   of  all  these   shadows,   but

the  word  of  instruction  had  no  moral  this,  that  God  will  be  served  by  holy

effect  upon  them. — Langes  Commen-  men,  in  the  purest,  holiest  manner? .  .  .

tary.  Dost  thou  not  know  that  He  "  will  be

God  is  more  honoured  or  dishonoured  sanctified  in  them  that  draw  nigh  unto

in  our  religious  actions  than  in  all  the  Him  ?"  (Lev.  x.  3).     Great  persons  are

actions  of  our  lives;   in  them  we  do  impatient  of  contempts  and  affronts,

directly  pretend  His  honour  and  ser-  especially  when  they  are  offered  them

vice,  and  therefore  if  we  do  not  walk  in  their  own  houses ;  God  will  sooner

in  them  watchfully,  and  intend  them  overlook  thy  forgetfulness  of  Him  in

seriously,  the  greater  is  our  sin.     For  a  thy  trade  or  travels  than  in  His  taber-

trespass  committed  against  holy  things  nacle.      When  thou  drawest  nigh   to

the  Jews  were  to  bring  a  ram,  to  be  Him  there.  He  will  be  sanctified,  either

valued  by  the  shekel,  to  the  sanctuary;  in  thee  or  upon  thee.     If  thou  refuse

for  a  trespass  against  their  brethren  a  to  give  Him  glory  in  His  service,  be-

ram  was  required,  but  no  such  valua-  lieve  it.  He  will  get  Himself  glory  by

tion  expressed;  whence  Origen  infers  :  thv  suffering.     His  worship  is  His  face,

'*  It  is  one  thing  to  sin  in  holy  things,  and  look  for  His  fury   if  thou  darest

another  thing  to  sin  beside  them."  .    .  Him  to  His  face. — Swinnock,
When  men  are  some  way  off  in  a  king's

MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  VERSE  27.

A  Divine  Messenger.

I.  This  remarkable  messenger  was  a  nameless  person,  "  There  came  a  man
of  God  unto  Eli."  All  the  prominent  stars  that  stud  our  skies,  and  contribute
tlieir  portion  of  light  to  the  inhabitants  of  earth,  are  known  to  astronomers  by
name,  but  there  are  others  that  are  so  far  off  as  not  to  admit  of  distinction,  and
we  group  them  under  some  general  designation  :  yet  each  one  of  these  far-off
bodies  sheds  some  light  upon  us,  nameless  as  it  is.  There  are  records  in  the
holy  Scriptures  of  many  nameless  persons,  who,  notwithstanding  the  little  that
is  told  about  them,  have  been  used  by  God  to  shed  upon  men  the  light  of  His  truth.
We  group  them  together,  like  a  cluster  of  far-off  stars,  under  the  general  title  of
"men  of  God,"  and  all  we  know  of  their  individual  character  or  history  we  gather
from  the  message  which  they  delivered,  and  which  has  been  left  upon  record  to  slied
a  permanent  light  upon  the  world.  But  although  we  cannot  tabulate  and  name
all  the  myriad  stars  of  heaven,  those  which  are  left  unnamed  by  men  are  known
by  name  to  their  Creator.  "  Be  calleth  them  all  by  names  "  (Isa.  xl.  26).  And
so  it  is  with  those  human  light-givers  whose  names  are  not  known  to  their
fellow-men.  Although  this  man  of  God  remains  unknown  by  name
to  all  who  read  his  words,  yet  he  was  and  is  known  and  named  by
His  Divine  Master,  who  callecl  him  to  His  work,  and  has  long  since  rewarded
him  for  it.  And  as  those  nameless  stars  may  excel  in  magnitude
50


CHAP.  n.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,


and  glory  many  of  those  which,  from  their  nearer  position  to  ns,  seem  to  be
stars  of  the  lirst  magnitude,  so  these  unnamed  prophets  may  be  as  great  in
God's  kingdom,  and  may  have  done  as  great  a  work  in  His  estimation  as  those
whose  names  are  left  recorded  upon  tlie  Divine  page.  And  so  it  may  be  now
with  many  a  God-sent  messenger,  whose  name  is  unknown  to  the  world,  or  even
to  the  Church — he  may  be  more  highly  esteemed  by  Him  whose  name  is  above
every  name,  and  stand  in  much  closer  fellowship  with  Him  than  many  a  one
whose  name  stands  high  in  the  estimation  of  his  fellow-Christians.  But,  after
all  the  general  name  includes  the  particular — the  greater  name  includes  all
lesser  names.  "  A  man  of  God  "  ijicludes  all  that  can  be  said  in  honour  of
either  Isaiah  the  prophet  or  Paul  the  apostle.  For  "  a  man  of  God,"  when  the
designation  is  not  a  misnomer,  signifies — 1.  A  man  who  has  got  his  character
from  God.  An  Englishman  when  he  is  a  true  representation  of  his  country  and
nation,  has  the  disposition  and  tendencies  which  generally  characterize  his
people.  A  child  generally  has  some  of  the  characteristics  of  h's  parent,  because
he  is  of  his  parent.  So  a  man  of  God  is  one  who  possesses,  in  some  degree,  a
God-like  disposition,  is  one  who  is  in  sympathy  with  God,  who  loves  what  He
loves,  and  hates  what  He  hates.  No  particular  name  can  express  more  con-
cerning a  man's  relation  to  God  than  does  this  general  one.  "  We  are  of  God  "
(1  John  iv.  6),  is  as  much  as  can  be  said  of  any  human  creature,  for  these  four
words  include  all  the  blessedness  of  Divine  son.ship — all  the  glory  of  the  life
everlasting.  2.  In  the  Scripture,  a  man  of  God  is  one  who  bears  a  message
from  God.  This  is  a  title  given  both  to  Old  Testament  prophets  and  to  New
Testament  ministers.  "  But  thou,  0  man  of  God,  flee  these  things"  (1  Tim.
vi.  11).  "All  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God  ....  that  the
man  if  God  may  be  ])errected,"  etc.  (2  Tim.  iii.  16,  17).  In  both  these  passages
the  general  name  includes  and  means  more  than  the  particular.  A  "  man  of
(jod"  is  more  than  Paul  or  Timothy — it  is  one  who  is  entrusted  with  a  message
from  the  Eternal  for  his  fellow-man — one  who  has  ''received"  from  God
"  the  things  which  he  speaks"  (1  Cor.  ii.  12,  13).  He  speaks  to  men  of  God
and  for  God — his  life-work  is  that  of  beseeching  men  to  be  "  reconciled  to  God"
(2  Cor.  V.  20) — his  one  business  in  the  world  is  to  declare  the  "message"  which
he  ''has  heard  of  Him,"  viz.,  that  ''God  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness
at  air  (1  John  i.  5).

II.  This  messenger,  though  nameless,  has  been  held  in  much  greater  honour
by  men  than  has  the  well  known  house  whose  doom  he  declared.  Character
is  much  more  important  than  name,  and  the  better  the  deed  or  the  word  the
more  easily  we  can  dispense  with  the  doer  or  the  speaker.  The  names  of  Eli,  of
Hophni  and  Phinehas  stand  out  prominently  upon  the  page  of  Hebrew  history,
but  what  is  recorded  of  the  high-priest  and  judge  himself  is  not  calculated  to
set  him  very  high  in  the  estimation  of  men — he  has  left  little  more  than  his
name  behind  him — while  those  of  his  sons  are  associated  only  with  the  memory
of  their  crimes.  The  nameless  prophet  passes  before  us  like  a  ship  upon
the  horizon  making  for  her  destined  port.  We  know  not  whence  she  came
or  whither  she  is  going,  but  she  leaves  a  pleasing  impression  upon  the  mind.
But  Eli  and  his  sons  remain  like  wrecks  upon  the  shore,  whose  only  use  is  to
warn  others  to  shun  the  rocks  upon  which  they  were  broken.


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH.—  VERSES  27— 3d.

A  Divine  Message.

I.  The  charge.    The  house  of  EH  is  charged  with  ingratitude.     Perhaps  no
greater  crime  is  chargeable  upon  human  nature.     The  slave  who  has  been  freed

51


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  i.


from  the  tyranny  of  a  cruel  master  by  the  putting  forth  on  his  behalf  of  a  strong
arm,  and  who  has  not  only  been  thus  made  a  partaker  of  liberty  but  who  has
been  clothed,  and  fed,  and  educated  by  the  same  benefactor,  is  expected  to
manifest  gratitude  to  him  to  whom  he  owes  all  that  makes  life  worth  havini^.
Gratitude  ought  to  well  up  in  his  spirit  like  water  from  a  living  spring,  and  if
such  a  man  proves  ungrateful  it  indicates  that  he  is  destitute  of  ail  right  feeling,
for  he  sins,  not  against  law  but  against  love.  EU's  family,  in  common  wdth  all
the  other  families  of  Israel,  had  dwelt  in  the  "  house  of  bondage."  They  had  been
for  many  years  in  *'  the  iron  furnace,  even  in  I^Jgijpt''  and  God  had  deliveied
them  from  their  degraded  condition  and  made  them  '' a  people  of  inheritance
unto  Himself  (Dout.  iv.  20).  To  be  ungrateful  to  such  a  deliverer  shows  tliem
to  be  without  natural  feeling.  But  their  ingratitude  was  aggravated  by  their
elevation  above  all  the  other  families  of  the  nation.  '' Did  I  plainly  appear
unto  the  house  oj  thy  Jather,  when  they  were  in  Egypt  in  Pharaoh's  house  ?
And  did  1  choose  him  out  oj  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  be  my  priest  V  This  is
the  head  and  front  of  their  crime.  When  a  number  of  homeless  children  are
taken  from  the  streets,  and  housed  and  cared  for,  those  who  rescue  them  have  a
claim  upon  the  gratitude  of  all.  But  if  out  of  this  number,  one  is  made
the  object  of  special  care  and  is  selected  to  fill  a  higher  position  than
the  rest,  the  ingratitude  of  this  one  will  be  so  much  greater  than  the
ingratitude  of  the  others,  as  the  benefits  bestowed  upon  the  one  have  been
greater  than  those  bestowed  upon  the  rest.  Ingratitude  in  any  would  be
a  sin  ;  but  ingratitude  in  the  one  who  has  been  especially  favoured  would  be  a
sin  of  deeper  die.  The  house  of  Aaron,  of  which  Eli  was  a  member,  was  bound
to  God  by  the  common  ties  of  gratitude  by  which  all  Israel  was  bound  ;  but  God
had  claims  upon  them  which  far  exceeded  tiiose  of  any  other  family  of  the
nation.  'Jlie  members  of  Aaron's  family  had  been  elected  by  God  to  the  highest
possible  honour,  they  had  been  set  apart  to  the  most  sacred  office,  and  they  had
been  sustained  at  the  command  of  God  by  the  offerings  of  the  people.  It  was
demanded  of  them  in  return  that  they  should  show  their  gratitude  for  such
unparalleled  favours  by  reverent  obedience  to  God.  But  the  conduct  of  those
who  now  represented  them  was  of  the  very  opposite  nature.  There  had  been
the  blackest  profanity  instead  of  reverence,  and  those  who  ought  to  have  been
examples  of  holiness  had  been  promoters  of  vice.  Ingratitude  has  been  called
a  monster  in  nature,  and  a  comparison  between  the  privileges  enjoyed  by  those
men,  and  the  returns  they  made,  convicts  them  of  being  guilty  of  this  monstrous
crime  in  an  aggravated  f(jrm.

II.  The  sentence.  The  authority  and  influence  of  Eli's  house  was  to  cease  in
Israel.  That  men  by  misdeeds  entail  a  tendency  to  sin  upon  their  posterity  is
a  fact  plainly  written  in  the  history  of  families  and  the  oracles  of  God.  A  bad
father  generally  leaves  behind  him  bad  children.  This  law  must  work  unless
God  reconstitutes  the  present  order  of  nature  and  makes  each  man's  power  to
work  good  or  ill  to  end  with  himself.  But  while  there  is  the  relationship  of
parent  and  child  this  cannot  be.  Wherever  we  look  we  find  instances  in  which
children  are  born  to  an  inheritance  of  good  or  evil  influences,  and  the  after-life
of  the  greater  number  takes  its  moral  tone  from  the  character  of  their  parents.
Hence  it  is  that  families  as  well  as  individuals  merit  the  blessing  or  the  punish-
ment of  God.  Eli  had  not  used  his  own  authority  and  influence  to  much
purpose,  and  his  sons  had  shamefully  abused  that  which  had  been  entrusted  tG
them  by  God.  Such  men  were  very  unlikely  to  be  the  founders  of  a  house
which  would  be  a  blessing  to  Israel,  therefore  the  sentence  is  directed  not  against
Eli  and  his  sons  only,  but  against  their  posterity.  As  they  had  di-honoured
God,  so  God  would  bring  their  house  to  dishonour.  As  Eli  had  not  used  his
power  and  authority  to  prevent  the  defilement  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  he
5^


CHAP .  II.  HOMILETIG  COMxMENTAR  Y :   SA  M  UEL,

shall  have  no  ])ower  to  hohl  back  the  desolation  of  his  own.  As  he  and  his
sons  had  not  fulfilled  the  conditions  laid  down  for  the  observance  of  the  i)riest8,
their  sons  shall  have  no  conditions  to  observe,  for  the  ])riesthood  shall  be  trans-
ferred to  others.  As  is  generally'  the  case  in  the  jo-dginents  of"  God,  the  nature
of  the  pnnishment  bears  some  resemblance  to  the  nature  of  the  transgression.
*'  IJe  that  leadeth  into  capfivltii  shaH  go  into  cnpttritij  ;  he  that  killeth  with  the
sivord  must  be  killed  with  the  sword  "  (Rev.  xiii.  iO).

III.  The  authority  for  the  sentence.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord.'*  God's  autho-
rity to  pronounce  this  doom  upon  the  house  of  Eli  springs — 1.  From  the  relation
which  He  sustains  to  men  in  general.  God  was  the  ahsnlute  pro})rietor  of  the
lives  of  these  men,  as  He  is  of  the  life  of  ever}^  human  creature.  He,  as  we
have  seen  (see  on  chap.  ii.  6),  is  the  giver  of  life  to  men  ;  to  Him  also  belongs
the  world,  which  He  has  "given  to  the  children  of  men"  (Ps.  cxv.  16)  for  a
dwelling  place,  and,  if  men  abuse  His  good  gifts,  He  has  an  absolute  right  to
de})rive  ihim  of  that  which  He  has  bestowed.  2.  But  God  had  a  special  right
to  judge  the  house  of  I'Jli,  a  right  springing  from  the  special  relation  to  Himself
in  v:hich  He  had  placed  them.  As  we  have  before  seen,  in  considering  the
chnrge,  as  Jsraelites  they  had  been  objects  of  His  si)ecial  favour,  as  men  of  the
house  of  Aaron  they  were  brought  into  a  closer  relationship  to  God,  and  this
threefold  obligation  gave  to  Jehovah  a  threefold  authority  to  pronounce  upon
them  and  theirs  this  terrible  yet  deserved  sentence.

IV.  The  principle  upon  which  God  exercises  this  authority  over  all  men.
"  For  them  that  honcmr  me  I  will  honour,"  etc.  God  can  be  known  so  as  to  be
honoured.  God  must  be  known,  not  only  as  to  His  existence,  but  as  to  His
character,  in  order  to  be  honoured.  Eli  and  his  sons  had  enough  knowledge  of
the  character  of  Jehovah  to  make  it  possible  for  them  to  honour  Him,  they  had
enough  knowledge  to  make  their  "  lightly  esteeming"  Him  a  black  transgression.
Wherever  men  find  moral  excellence  they  are  bound  to  honour  it,  their
consciences  call  upon  them  to  reverence  goodness  wherever  it  is  found,  and  God
here  lays  down  a  law  of  His  government  that  He  will  not  hold  them  guiltless
who  withhold  from  His  perfect  character  the  honour  which  is  His  due.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE   COMMENTS.

Ver.  29.  **  And  honourest  thy  sons  selves  up  to  an  unbridled  indulgence
above  me."  Choosing  rather  to  gratify  of  their  passions  and  their  covetous-
them  than  to  glorify  nje,  by  abdicating  ness. — Biblical  Commentary.
them  from  the  priesthood.  But  it  may  It  is  often  easy  to  be  exposed  to  this
be  Eli  feared  lest  the  high-priesthood  reproach  of  God  without  being  aware  of
should  by  this  means  go  from  his  it.  Those  who  labour  to  spread  the
family,  as  it  had  belbre  from  Elenzar's  light  of  Divine  truth  by  publicly  de-
fer misdemeanour,  which  also  after-  daring  it  to  the  people  certainly  offer
wards  befell  him,  and  he  by  seeking  to  a  sacrifice  which  may  be  very  accep-
prevent  it  hastened  it. — Trapp.  table  to  God.     But  if  they  nourish  in

The  well-fed  beast  beconies  un-  their  hearts  a  secret  pride,  and  it"  they
manageable  and  refractoiy,  and  refuses  seek  in  these  holy  services  their  own
the  yoke,  and  bursts  the  bonds  (Jer.  v.  glory  rather  than  the  glory  of  God,
5,  7,  8).  So  the  priests,  instead  of  they  take  for  themselves  tlie  first-
being  grateful  for  the  provision  made  fruits  of  the  sacrifice.  They  become
foi  them,  in  their  j)ampered  pride  the  end  of  their  acticm,  and  God  is
became  dissatisfied,  wantonly  broke  only  the  means.  They  put  the  creature
the  laws  of  God  which  regulated  their  before  the  Creator,  and  this  is  the
share  of  the  offerings,  and  gave  them-  greatest  of  all  misplacements. -X^^/Sac^.

63


no  MI  LET IG  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


BOOK  I.


Ver.  30.  "  Them  that  honour  Me,  I
will  honour.*'  This  isa  bargain  of  God's
own  making  ;  you  may  bind  upon  it.
**  And  they  that  despise  3Ie.'*  God's
visitation  is  like  chequer-work,  bhick
and  white. — Trapp.

Never  did  man  dishonour  God  but
it  })roved  the  greatest  dishonour  to
himself.  God  will  find  out  ways
enough  to  wipe  off  any  stain  upon
Him  ;  but  you  will  not  so  easily  re-
move the  sliame  and  dishonour  from
}•  ourselves. — Baocter.

There  are  three  sorts  of  men  to  be
considered  with  respect  to  the  honour
due  to  God.  I.  Such  as  despise  Him
instead  of  honouring  Kim.  Such  were
the  sons  of  Eli  who  knew  not  the  Lord.
Those  do  not  know  God  who  des}>ise
His  services.  It  is  impossible  to  despise
infinite  goodness,  and  power,  and  wis-
dom, for  those  are  things  which  all
that  know  them  cannot  but  reverence
and  esteem.  For  a  poor  creature  to
despise  his  Creator,  or  one  that  lives
upon  the  bounty  of  another  to  des])ise
his  benefactor,  seems  to  be  such  an  in-
consistency in   moralit}'',   as  if  human

nature  were  incapable  of  it

But  although  God  cannot  be  des})ised
for  His  glorious  perfections,  yet  His
authority  may  be  despised  when  men
presumptuously  break  His  laws — when
"they  profess  to  know  God,  but  in
works  deny  Him  "  (Tit.  i.  16),  when
they  own  a  God,  and  yet  live  as  if
there  were  none.  II.  There  are  such
as  pretend  to  honour  God,  hut  do  not.
Men  n)ay  be  guilty  of  dishonouring
God  under  a  pretence  of  lionouring
Him,  by  worshipping  their  imagina-
tions instead  of  JJim,  or  hij  doing
honour  to  Him  according  to  their  own
imaginations,  and  not  according  to
His  will.  Persons  form  false  concep-
tions of  God,  and  so  give  their
worship  to  an  idol  of  their  own  fancy,
and  they  pretend  to  honour  Him  not
according  to  His  will,  but  according  to
their  own  fancy.  There  are  some
things  practised  and  defended  in  the
Christian  world,  which  one  would  iiardly
think  possible  to  have  ever  prevailed,
had  it  not  been  that  men  thought  to
do  honour  to  God  by  them.  III.  But
54


there  is  a  way  left  to  give  God  that
honour  which  is  due  unto  Him.  I
shall  not  take  in  all  the  ways  of
lumouring  God,  but  consider  that
which  is  most  proper  to  the  deuign
of  these  words  ....  It  was  not  foi
Eli's  personal  miscarriages  that  God
thought  Himself  so  dishonoured  by
him,  but  for  want  of  taking  due  care
in  suppressing  profaneness  and  corru])-
tion  in  others.  And  this  shows  the
true  way  in  which  God  may  be  honoured
by  those  who  are  bound  to  take  care
of  others.  1.  By  an  universal  dis-
countenancing of  all  sorts  of  vices  and
})rofaneness.  2.  By  an  even,  steady,
and  impartial  execution  of  the  laws
against  vice  and  dehauciiery.  3.  By
a  wise  choice  of  fit  instruments  to
pursue  so  good  an  end. — StlUingfteet.

Outwardly,  we  see  nothing  to  blame
in  the  personal  conduct  of  Eli.  All
that  can  be  expected  is  found;  all  due
respect  for  his  office,  all  pro[)er  solem-
nity in  the  discharge  of  it.  He  is
just  the  character  who  would  have
been  eulogised  by  the  men  of  his  day
as  doing  honour  to  the  post  which  he
filled  ;  who,  as  the  saying  is,  would
have  been  respected  in  his  life  and
lamented  at  his  death  ....  But  we
presently  see  that  he  had  been  only
up  to,  not  beyond  the  mark,  for  what
was  expected  of  him.  He  had  sense
enough  of  propriety  and  decency,
creditably  to  discharge  an  office,  to
the  capability  of  filling  which  this
same  sense  alone  raised  him.  He
had  never  lived  above  his  office.  That
God  had  delighted  in  burnt  offerings
and  sacrifices  he  had  impressed  upon
himself,  and  these  things  were  the
summit  of  his  estimate.  He  had  never
learned  tliat  there  are  things  better
than    sacrifices    and   more   acceptable

than  the  fat  of  rams He  knew

not  that  in  order  to  do  good  a  man
must  live  above,  not  up  to,  his  outward
duties  ;  that  influence  with  others  is
found  not  where  life  is  raised  up  to  the
routine  of  duty,  but  where  that  routine
of  duty  is  quickened  and  inspired  by
a  life  led  in  hi,L'her  places  and  guided
by  nobler  motives.  This  sense  of
decency,  this  fine  conservative  feeling,


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMEyTARY:  SAMUEL.


may  get  one  man  croditnhly  tlironcjli  ful  warrior  to  go  forth  in,  the  young

his  work,   but   it  has  no   power  over  arm  is  at  least  faiiiilinr  vvitli  the  use

those  who  grow  up  around  him  ;  it  has  of  the  simple  sling,  and  knows  where

no  deep  springs,  no  living  and  sparkling  to  cull  the  smooth   stones    from    the

eye,   no  winning  to  something  above  river  of  the  water  of  life,     ^wclx  nations

itself;  all  its  motives  are  secondary  ;  alone  contain  in  them  the  pledges  fur

what   others   did    before,    others    will  sound  and  honourable  progress,  where

think  now Eh  found,  as  men  the  national  religion   is  not  a  system

ever    find,    that    all    this    system    of  u[)held  for  venerahle  association's  sake,

secondary   motive  is  nothing  to  curb  but     is    a    genuine    portion    of    the

the  bounding  heart  of  the  young,  or  to  people's  life,  a  living  seed  expanding

win  the  guidance  of  their  strong  and  through  its  history  .  .  .  On  the  other

precipitous  course.     He  who  dwells  in  hand,  the  man  of  mere  proprieties  gets

the  circumference  of  his  life  gains  no  to  his    grave  in  peace  ;     the  man  of

sympathy  from  those  who  dwell  in  its  selfish  views  wins  his   prize,  and   be-

centre Such  a  state  in  the  in-  comes  great  and  fills  a  space   in  the

dividual,  the  family,  or  the  community,  world,  and  passes  away,  but  who  cares

contains  of  necessity  the  elements  of  for  either?.  .  .  The  family  where  God

decay  and  of  down  ward  progress was  not,  we  have  already  followed  in

What   will  be   the   effect   on  a  com-  the  same   downward   path  ;   but   who

munity  of  the  prevalence  of  a  lifeless  can   tell,  till   the  last  dread  day,   the

and  conventional  reli-ion  ?     First,  and  shame  and  misery  and  ruin  which  have

necessarily,  a   low   standard   of  duty,  overwhelmed  men  in  generation  after

up  to  that  which  is  required  by  man,  generation,   for   want   of   God   as  the

not  beyond  it.     Next,  a  false  estimate  guide  of  their  youth?     And  if  we  ask

of  realities  ;  a  substitution  of  primary  respecting  the  f^ite  of  nations  that  have

objects  for  secondary  ones  ;  a  growing  despised  God — read  it  in   the  desola-

co-viction  that  this  world  is  real,  and  tions  of  Nineveh  and  Babylon:  read

another  world   visionary  ;  that  words  it  in  the  history  of  the  ancient  people

and  ceremonies  will  serve  for  religion  ;  of  God,  scattered  over  the  nations. —

but  that  deeds  all  belong  to  self  and  Alford.

the   world As   Israel    became  God    is    honoured    in    general    by

acted  upon  by  the  system  which  pre-  avowed  obedience  to  Plis  holy  will,  but

vailed  under  Eli,  superstition  succeeded  there  are  some  acts  which  more  signally

to  the  fear  of  God.   .  .  .  Who  taught  conduce  to  God's  glory.     1.   The  fre-

his  people  to  trust  to  the  ark  to  save  quent  and  constant  perjormance  (in  a

them,  and  to  forget  Him.  .  .  To  what  reverent  manner)  of  decotions  immedi-

must  a  people  have  been  degraded,  who  atelij  addressed  to  J I  is  name  (l^salm

could  look  on  that  ark,  accompanied  xxix.  2).    2.  Using  all  things  jyeculiarly

with   two   ministers  of  such    iniquity  related  to   God,   His  holy  name,   His

and   profligacy,   and  greet  its  arrival  holy  word,  IJ is  holy  places,  with  especial

with  shouts  of  triumph  ?  .  .  .  Where  respect  (\^2i,.W\\\.V6).    3.  Yielding  due

life  is  lived  as  unto  God,  and  in   His  observance  to  the  dcjmtics  and  ministers

sight   and    His   revelation  of  Himself  of  God,  as  such  (Kom.  xiii.  4;    Mai.

held  as  a  living  present  truth,  there  ii.  7,  etc.).     4.   Freely  spending  what

is  the  seed  of  all  true  happiness,  of  all  God  hath  given  us  in  tcorks  of  piety,

true   success,    of  all    genuine   honour,  charity,    and    mercy    (2    Cor.   ix.  13 ;

Such  men,  whethei  they  pros])er  or  fall,  Prov.  iii.  9,  xiv.  31).    5.  All  penitential

alone  win  the  real  prizes  of  life  :  solid  acts,  by  which  we  submit  to  God,  and

usefulness,  firm  stability,  inward  peace,  humble   oiirselces    before   Him,    (.losh.

^\iq\\  JamiUes  alone   are  the  nurseries  vii.   19;    Rev.  xvi.  9).     6.   Cheerfully

for  worthy  future  generations,  where  undergoing  afflictions,  losses,  disgraces,

God's    name    is    known    and    loved;  for  the  pj'ofessio?i  of  God's  truth  {,]()\\u

where,  if  there  be  no  glittering  armour,  xxi.  19).     7.  By  discharging  faithfully

no  nicely  jointed  harness  for  the  youth-  those  offices  which  Gi^  hath  entrusted

55


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,


BOOK  I.


US  with,  and  diligeiitly  improving  those
talents  which  God  hath  committed  to
us. — Barrow.

Ver.  33.  Tlie  posterity  of  Eli  pos-
sessed the  high-priesthood  in  tlie  time
of  Solomon,  and  even  when  that
dynasty  was  preserved  to  another
family,  God  preserved  that  of  Eii ;  not
to  render  it  more  happy,  but  to  punish
it  by  seeing  the  prosperity  of  its  ene-
mies, to  the  end  that  it  might  see  itself
destitute  and  despised.  This  shows  the
depth  of  the  judgments  of  God,  and
the  grandeur  of  His  justice,  which  ex-
tends even  to  distant  generations,  and
manifests  itself  to  sinners  both  in  life
and  death — both  in  their  own  disgrace
and  in  the  prosperity  of  their  enemies.
— Calmet,

Ver.  35.  The  exercise  of  the  priestly
office,  which  is  well-pleasing  to  God  :
1.  Its  personal  condition  and  presup-
position, fidelity,  firmness,  steadfast-
ness, "  I  will  raise  Thee  up  a  faithful
priest."  2.  Its  rule  and  measure.
"According  to  that  which  is  in  my
heart  and  soul."  3.  Its  blessing  and
reward.  "And  I  will  build  him  a  sure
house,"  etc. — Langes  Commentary.

Of  the  priests  under  the  law  it  might
be  generally  said  that  they  walked
before  the  Lord's  Anointed  ;  or,  in
other  words,  they  were  appointed  by
His  authority  —  they  acted  by  His
direction,  and  as  his  servants  and
representatives,  till  He  should  come
personally  to  offer  the  one  sacrifice  on
the  strength  of  which  their  offerings
had  been  made  available  on  behalf  of
His  believing  people.  And,  in  this
view  of  the  subject,  the  last  clause  of
the  verse  conveyed  another  and  more
explicit  assurance  that  the  priestliood
should  be  perpetuated  during  the  Old
Testament  disj^ensation,  notwithstand-
ing all  the  calamities  which  might
from  time  to  time  befall  Israel.  But
it  implied  more.  It  contained  a  pro-
mise of  blessing  on  that  priesthood.
To  walk  before  the  Lord's  Anointed
must,  I  think,  have  imjilied  not  only
walking  by  His  directions  as  ser-
vants, but  walking  in  the  Hght  of
56


His  countenance  as  their  approving
Lord  and  Master,  in  so  far  as  11  is
Church  was  dependent  on  their  ser-
vices for  her  edification  and  comfort.
And  how  frequently  then  must  the
peo]»le  of  God,  in  Ohl  Testament  times,
have  been  comforted  and  refreshed  in
seasons  of  ])erplexity  and  trouble  when
they  called  to  mind  this  gracious  assu-
rance. But  it  is  to  the  iNew  Testament
Church  that  this  passage  has  opened
up,  in  all  its  fulness,  the  inexhaustible
fountain  of  consolation  which  it  con-
tains  It  is  impossible  for  us  to

read  the  words  without  at  least  having
Christ  brought  before  us,  and  without
feeling  that  to  Him  alone  can  the
words  be  applied  in  their  full,  literal,
and  absolute  sense.  ....  Christ  is
exalted  to  the  throne  of  the  universe,
but  He  has  not  forgotten  His  priestly
office.  He  regards  it  with  complacency,
and  still  executes  it  with  delight ;  for
"He  is  a  priest  upon  His  throne." —
Dr.  R.  Gordon.

Ver.  36.  See  the  sin  and  its  punish-
ment. They  formerly  pampered  them-
selves, and/^c?  to  the  full  on  the  Lord's
sacrifices,  and  now  they  are  reduced
to  a  morsel  of  bread.  They  wasted  the
Lord's  heritage,  and  now  they  beg  their
bread.  ...  In  religious  establish-
ments vile  persons,  who  have  no  higher
motive,  may  and  do  get  into  the
priest's  office,  that  they  may  chjthe
themselves  with  the  wool,  and  feed
themsehes  with  the  fat,  while  they
starve  the  flock.  Bat  where  there  is
no  law  to  back  the  claims  of  the  worth-
less and  the  wicked,  men  of  piety  and
solid  merit  only  can  find  su}»port,  for
they  must  live  on  i\\Q  free-will  offerings
of  the  people.  Where  religion  is  es-
tablished by  law  the  strictest  ecclesi-
astical discipline  shoidd  Le  kept  up,
and  all  hireling  priests  and  drones
should  be  expelled  from  the  Lord's
vinejard. — A,  Clarke.

Vers.  27-36.  Indulgent  parents  are
cruel  to  themselves  and  their  posterity
Eli  could  not  have  devised  which  way
to  have  plagued  himself  and  his  house
so  much  as  by  his  kindness  to  his  chil-


OHAP.n.  nOMILETiC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,


dren's  sins.     What  variety  of  jiidg-  another;  and  lastly,  "because  be  suffered

ments   does    he   now   hear   from   the  his  sons  to  jilease  their  own  wanton

messenger  of  God  !     First,  because  his  a])petite,  in  taking  meat  off  from  God's

old  age,  which  uses  to  be  subject  to  trencher,  therefore  those  which  remain

choler,  inclined  now  to  misfavour  his  of  his  house  shall  come  to  his  successor

sons,  therefore  there  sliall  not  be  an  old  to  beg  a  piece  of  silver  and  a  morsel

man  left  of  his  house  for  ever ;  and  of  bread  ....  I  do  not  read  of  any

because  it  vexed  him  not  enough  to  fault   Eli  had   but    indulgence  ;    and

see  his  sons  enemies  to  God  in  their  which  of  the  notorious  offenders  wore

profession,  tlierefore  he  shall  f^ee  his  plagued  more?     Parents  need  no  other

enemy  in  the  habitation  of  the  Lord;  means  to  make  them  miserable,  than

and  because  himself  forebore  to  take  sparing  the  rod. — Bishop  Hall
vengeance  of  his  sons,  and  esteemed         God  often  contents  himself  with  a

their    life    above    the    glory    of    his  single  example  of  the   estimation   in

Master,    therefore   God   will    revenge  which  He  holds  the  violation  of  certain

Himself    by    killing     them    both    in  duties.    But  one  lesson  so  terrible  ought

one    day ;     and    because    he    abused  to  be  sufficient  to  instruct  every  age,

his  sovereignty  by  conniving  at  sin,  and  unhappy  is  he  who  does  not  profit

therefore  shall  his  house  be  strip] )ed  of  by  it. — Duguet,
this  honour,  and  see  it  translated  to


CHAPTER  in.

Cbitical  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1.  **The  child  Samuel."  According  to  Josephus,
Samuel  was  now  twelve  years  oltl.  "  Precious,"  i.e.,  rare.  "  The  word  was  rare  that  came
directly  from  the  Lord  by  prophetic  announcement  to  the  people ;  the  proper  organs  were  lacking,
persons  who  were  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  that  they  might  be  witnesses  of  His  word ;
there  was  lacking  also  in  the  people  the  living  desire  for  the  direct  revelations  of  God  in  His
word"  (Lange's  Commentary).  "No  open  vision,"  lit.  "no  vision  spread  abroad."  "Here
vision  includes  all  the  ways  whereby  God  revealed  Himself  to  men.  Which  He  did  then  so
seldom  that,  whatsoever  revelation  there  might  be  privately  to  some  pious  persons,  there  was
none  then  publicly  acknowledged  to  be  a  prophet"  (Patrick).

Ver.  2.  "His  eyes  began  to  wax  dim."  This  mention  of  Eli's  dimness  of  sight  is  introduced
pareuthetically.  It  explains  Samuel's  supposition  that  he  had  been  called  by  Eli  :  the  imperfect
vision  of  the  aged  priest  would  make  him  dependent  ui>on  the  services  of  an  attendant,  and  these
services  Samuel  was  probably  a})])ointed  to  render"  ( Hohson).  "The  lamp  of  God,"  i.e.,  the
seven-branched  candlet^tick.  "  This  stood  in  the  centre,  on  the  left  of  the  entrance,  and  is  now
mentioned  for  the  last  time.  It  was  superseded  in  the  reign  of  Solomon  by  the  ten  separate  candle-
sticks, but  revived  after  the  captivity  by  the  copy  of  the  one  candlestick  with  the  seven  branches,
as  is  still  seen  on  the  arch  of  Titus.  It  was  the  only  light  of  the  Tabernacle  during  the  night  "
(  Dtan  Stanley).  "Wentout."  This  indicates  that  the  time  was  near  morning.  "Temple."  See
on  chap.  i.  9.  **  The  sanctuary  was  so  encased  with  buildings  as  to  give  it  the  name  and
ajipearance  of  a  house  or  tem])le  "  (Dean  Stanley).  "  Samuel  slept  in  the  court,  where  cells
were  built  for  the  priests  and  Levites  to  live  in  when  serving  in  the  sanctuary.  See  ver.  15.
( Ktil).     "  The  high-priest  was  not  in  domestic  residence  at  the  temple,  much  less,  therefore,  at

the  tabernacle But  Eli,  who  was  now  an   aged  man,  with  all  his  family  ^^rown  up  and

settled  in  their  own  households,  might,  both  from  feeling  and  convenience,  incline  to  reside
Constantly  at  his  humble  oflicial  loiigc,  under  the  shadow  of  the  tabernacle.  The  ]>roper  place
of  Sanmel  would  have  been  among  the  attendant  Levites,  but  on  account  of  his  personal  services
to  the  high-priest,  he  rested  not  far  from  hnw"  ( Kitio).  "The  Lord."  Jthocah.  "This
name  stands  after  the  temple  because  it  is  the  Covenant  Uod  who  descends  to  His  people,  and
dwells  with  them,  that  is  brought  before  us.  On  tlie  other  hand,  in  connection  with  the  lamp
and  the  ark,  EloUivi  is  used  in  the  sense  of  the  Divine  in  general"  (Lanye's  CommerUary).

Ver.  4.  •*  The  Lord  called  Samuel.'*  "  Probably  by  a  voice  from  the  ark  in  the  Holy  of
Holies  "  (  Wordsworth,)

67


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  i.


Ver.  5.  **He  ran,"  etc.  "  Which  shows  the  great  readiness  and  promptness  of  his  obedience,
which  made  him  come,  yea,  run  at  his  first  call "  (Patrick).

Ver.  7.  **  Did  not  yet  know,"  etc,  *'  He  had  not  the  special  knowledge  of  God  which  was
given  by  extraordinary  revelation"  (Lange's  Commentary).  "  Revealed,"  literally  uncovered.
*'  The  metaphor  is  transferred  in  a  certain  way  in  Chap.  ix.  15,  where  it  is  said  (Hebrew)  that
the  Lord  uncovered  the  ear  of  Samuel.  Our  word  revelation  may  be  taken  as  including  both
these  ideas  "  ( Hobson).      (See  comments  on  ver.  21.)

Ver.  10.  "  Stood."  The  voice  becomes  a  vision.  "  A  personal  presence,  not  a  mere  voice,  or
impression  upon  Samuel's  mind  is  here  indicated"  (Bisltop  Hervey).

Ver.  11.  "  The  ears  of  every  one  that  heareth  it  shall  tingle."  A  mark  of  dread  and
horror.  (See  2.  Kings  xxi.  12  and  Jer.  xix.  3.)  "As  a  sharp,  discordant  noise  pains  one's  ears,
so  the  news  of  this  harsh  punishment  shall  give  pain  to  all  who  hear  of  it  "  (Lange's  Commentary
on  Kings).

Ver.  12.  "I  will  also  make  an  end."  " He  does  not  mean  that  He  would  begin  and  make
an  end  at  once  ;  but  that  He  would  persevere  in  His  punishments,  and  not  desist  when  He
began,  till  all  His  threatenings  were  fulfilled,  viz.,  in  the  death  of  Eli,  and  of  his  sons,  and  the
slaughter  of  eighty-five  priests  of  this  family  by  Doeg,  and  the  thrusting  Abiathar  out  of  his
office,  and  so  depriving  that  family  of  its  dignity  and  honour  "  (Patrick).

Ver.  13.  "Judge,"  "  To  judge  on  account  of  a  crime  is  the  same  as  to  punish  it."  (Keil.)
"  Restrained."  "  He  contented  himself  with  mere  remonstrance  when,  as  High  Priest  and
Judge  in  Israel,  he  had  severer  measures  at  his  command,  which  he  ought  to  have  employed,
setting  aside  his  personal  feelings  of  parental  tenderness."  (Hobson.)

Ver.  14.  "  Sacrifice  nor  offering."  "  Neither  the  bloody  nor  unbloody  offerings."  (See
Lev.  xvi.  6.)  "  The  sin  of  Eli's  sons  was  so  heinous  as  not  to  be  purged  by  this  appointed
sacrifice."  (Hobson.)

Ver.  15.  "  Opened  the  doors."  "  This  appears  to  have  been  a  part  of  Samuel's  duty.  We
have  not  to  think  of  doors  opening  into  the  Holy  Place,  however,  but  of  doors  leading  into  the
court."  (Keil.)

Ver.  16.  "  My  Son."     "  How  much  is  expressed  in  this  one  word."  (Thenius.)

Ver.  17.  Observe  the  climax  in  the  words  with  which,  in  three  sentences,  Eli  demands
information  from  Samuel  ;  it  expresses  the  excitement  of  his  soul.  He  a.^Ls  for  the  word  of  the
Lord  ;  he  danands  an  exact  and  complete  statement,  he  adjures  Samuel  to  conceal  nothing  from
him."  (Lange^s  Commentary .)

Ver.  19.  "  None  of  his  words  fall  to  the  ground."  "  A  metaphor  from  arrows  shot  out
of  a  bow,  which  hit  the  mark."  (Patrick.)

Ver.  20.  "  From  Dan  to  Beersheha,"  i.e.,  from  the  northern  to  the  southern  extremity  of
the  land.  Dan  (aiiciei;tly  called  Laish)  was  a  northern  frontier  town,  and  Beersheba  was
situated  on  its  southern  border.     "  That  Samuel  was  established  to  be  a  prophet  of  the

Lord."  "A  very  important  statement."  What  Samuel  did  in  offering  sacrifices,  etc.  (see  vii.  9)
was  not,  as  some  seem  to  imagine,  an  irregular  intrusion  into  the  priestly  office.  But  in  a  time
of  great  degeneracy  and  confusion,  when  the  exercise  of  the  ordinary  functions  of  the  Levitical
priesthood  was  in  abeyance,  Samuel  was  specially  raised  up  by  God,  aud  received  an  extraordinary
commission  from  Him  to  do  what  He  did  in  maintaining  the  worship  of  God,  and  all  Israel
*•  knew"  by  visible  tokens,  that  he  was  established  to  be  an  expounder  and  interpreter  of  God's
will  (  Wordsworth).

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  TEE  PARAGRAPH.— VERSES  1—10.

The  Voice  of  the  Unseen.

I.  Special  preparation  qualifies  for  special  revelation.  "Samuel  ministered
unto  the  Lord  before  Eli."  In  any  branch  of  service,  whether  rendered  to  men
or  more  directly  to  God,  training  is  needed  before  a  man  is  fit  to  fulfil  its  duties.
Men  to  whom  the  voice  of  nature  has  spoken  in  any  special  manner  are  generally
men  who  have  been  her  stndents  from  their  early  years,  and  their  hmg  waiting
upon  her  in  lier  temple  has  made  them  capable  of  receiving  special  revelations
from  her.  JNewton  and  Faraday  were  made  partakers  of  some  of  her  secrets  only
58


CHAP.  III.  HO  MI  LET  10  COMMENT  A  RY:  SA  M IJEL.


after  years  of  trainijig  in  lier  school,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  poets  and
artists  whose  ears  have  been  opened,  or  whose  vision  has  been  enlightened  in
an  especial  manner  to  liear  her  voice,  or  to  see  her  beauties.  David's  early  days
were  spent  in  nieditatini;-  upon  the  heavens  that  declared  the  glory  of  God  and
the  firmament  that  showed  the  Divine  handiwork.  Doubtless  this  early  training
had  mncli  to  do  with  his  susceptibility  to  impressions  from  the  works  of  God
in  nature  in  his  after-life,  atid  made  him  able  to  see  God  in  all  the  things  that
He  has  made.  God,  by  early  training,  fitted  him  to  be  not  only  a  king  and  a
soldier,  but  a  poet,  oo  Samuel  was  prepared,  by  early  and  special  training,  to
receive  special  revelations  from  God.

II.  Early  religious  training  fits  men  for  great  and  important  work  in  after
life.  From  his  very  early  days  iSamuel  dwelt  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord,  and
was  in  daily  attendance  upon  the  services  of  His  house.  Corrupt  as  were  some
of  those  who  ministered  in  holy  things,  there  were  doubtless  some  good  and
elevating  influences  around  him  which  would  accustom  him  to  the  thought  of
the  God  of  his  fathers,  and  tend  to  i)repare  him  for  the  special  work  to  which
he  was  destined.  The  comparatively  easy  and  pleasant  ministry  unto  the  Lord
within  His  house  prepared  him  for  the  sterner  service  he  was  to  be  called  to
render  without  the  courts  in  a  more  public  ca{)acity.  The  sailor's  child  is  first
taught  to  handle  an  oar  in  the  sheltered  cove  before  his  father's  cottage,  in  sight
of  home  and  within  reach  of  his  mother's  eye.  But  this  eas)^  exercise  is  to  fit
him  in  after  years  to  move  out  into  the  wide  ocean  and  face  the  perils  of  the
stoim,  and  with  a  skilful  hand  pilot  his  vessel  safely  over  a  dangerous  sea.  The
home-life  of  every  well-trained  child  is  a  calm  and  peaceful  bay,  in  which,
encircled  by  loving  laws  and  gentle  words,  he  is  being  fitted  to  fight  the  difticulties
and  tem[)tations  of  life  outside  the  charmed  circle.  In  due  time  he  moves  out
into  the  vast  sea  of  life,  and  finds  himself  in  a  world  altogether  different  from  his
childhood's  home;  but  the  holy  influences  that  were  around  him  there  have  fitted
him  for  taking  his  place  and  doing  his  work  in  the  world,  so  as  to  glorify  God
and  bless  himself  and  others.  So  it  ought  to  be  with  every  member  of  a  godly
household,  so  it  was  with  Samuel.  The  "  gentleness  of  God  "  (2  Sam.  xxii.  3G)
as  he  experienced  it  in  the  comparatively  calm  and  peaceful  atmosphere  of  his
early  days,  made  him  fit  to  fulfil  the  arduous  mission  to  which  he  was  afterwards
called,  and  strengthened  him  to  fultil  all  the  Divine  commands  even  to  the
terrific  one  of  "  hewing  Agag  in  pieces  before  the  Lord  "  (1  Sam.  xv.  33).  What
a  C(mtrast  was  the  last-mentioned  stern  service  to  the  gentle  ministry  of  his
early  days,  but  obedience  to  the  will  of  God  was  doubtless  the  motive  power
in  both.  This  habit  of  obedience  is  the  one  which  above  all  others,  perhaps,
fits  men  bravely  and  faithfully  to  fulfil  their  duties  to  God  and  men.  If  a  child
has  been  accustomed  from  a  sense  of  duty  to  render  obedience  to  his  human
father  or  guardian  he  will  come  more  readily  to  subject  his  will  to  his  Divine
Father.  Submission  to  the  lesser  and  imperfect  being  prepares  the  way  for
submission  to  the  Almighty  and  Perfect  One.  We  see  from  Samuel's  ready
response  to  what  he  supposed  was  the  call  of  Eli,  how  accustomed  he  was  to
render  implicit  obedience  to  him  who  stood  to  him  in  the  place  of  his  earthly
father,  and  this  submission  to  a  human  will  and  authority  was  one  of  the  most
imprrtant  elements  in  his  early  training  to  fit  him  in  after  life  to  render
unhesitating  obedience  to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  to  shrink  from  no  service
which  He  called  upon  him  to  perform.

III.  God  speaks  when  His  speech  is  most  needed.  Rain  is  never  so  precious  as
when  famine  has  set  in  from  lack  of  it.  When  the  clouds  have  for  long  ceased  to
yield  refreshment  to  the  earth,  then  every  drop  is  as  precious  as  gold.  When
there  is  lack  of  the  rain  of  heaven,  then  there  is  dearth,  and  disease,  and  death.
So  is  it  in  the  spiritual  world  when  there  is  a  lack  of  spiritual  teaching.     From

59


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL,  bookl


this  soiil-famine  tliere  springs  apace  all  kinds  of  spiritual  diseases,  and  souls
perish  for  lack  of  bread.  In  Israel,  at  this  period  of  its  history,  there  was  snch
a  soul-famine,  and  with  few  exceptions  its  whole  "head  was  sick,  and  its  heart
was  taint"  in  consequence,  and  *' wounds,  and  bruises,  and  putrefying  sores  "
broke  out  in  the  lives  of  those  who  ought  to  have  been  lit  mediums  for  the
descent  of  that  spiritual  rain  which  makes  glad  the  wilderness  and  the  solifaiy
place,  and  causes  the  s]jiritual  desert  to  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose.  In  this
time  of  great  need  God  broke  the  long  silence,  and  in  this  word  coming  to  Samuel
there  was  '*  a  sound  of"  that  "  abundance  of  rain  "  which  was  to  be  poured  down
upon  this  higlily-favoured  peo])le  almost  unceasingly  until  the  time  of  Malachi.
This  voice  of  God,  coming  to  the  youthful  Samuel  in  the  night  watches,  was  to  be
the  beginning  of  a  long  series  of  ''open  visions,"  and  of  an  abundant  revelation
of  the  mind  and  will  of  God.  But  the  first  drops  of  the  shower  fell  in  a  time  of
spiritual  drought,  and  famine,  and  disease.

IV.  God  speaks  through  spiritually  qualified  instruments.  A  coloured
glass  is  not  a  fit  medium  to  transmit  the  pure  white  light  of  the  sun.  A
blackened  glass  almost  entirely  shuts  out  his  rays  ;  light  can  hardly  find  any
entrance  through  such  a  medium.  God's  silence  had  been  of  so  long  continuance
because  those  who  ought  to  have  been  fit  mediums  to  transmit  His  word  were
utterly  incapable  even  of  receiving  it.  Neither  Eli  nor  his  sons  were  qualified
instruments  by  which  God  could  reveal  His  will  to  the  people.  Even  the  high-
priest  himself  was  not  one  whose  spiritual  nature  was  sufficiently  awake  to  render
him  capable  of  receiving  visions  of  God.  And  he  who  would  reveal  to  others
the  word  of  the  Lord  must  be  able  first  to  see  and  hear  for  himself.  But  Samuel
was  of  an  entirely  different  nature.  His  ear  had  been  rendered  susceptible  to
spiritual  voices,  his  eyes  were  fitted  to  discern  spiritual  realities,  and  his  will
was  so  far  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God — his  desire  to  serve  the  Lord  was  so
far  single  and  unbiassed, — as  to  render  him  a  fit  medium  through  which  the  light
of  the  Divine  word  could  be  transmitted.

V.  The  unseen  world  is  as  real  as  that  which  is  seen.  The  personality  of
Eli  in  the  tabernacle  was  one  that  could  be  seen — it  was  within  the  reach  of
Samuel's  bodily  senses.  But  he  came  to  be  conscious  of  a  Person,  quite  as  real,
though  ordinarily  beyond  the  reach  of  his  vision.  He  who  spoke  to  Samuel  in
his  sleep  was  as  real  an  existence  as  was  the  priest  to  whom  he  at  first  attributed
the  voice.  That  Samuel  at  first  mistook  the  voice  of  the  invisi])le  God  for  the
voice  of  the  visible  Eli  shows  how  strongly  he  was  assured  of  the  reality  of  the
person  who  spoke  to  him — how  certain  he  felt  that  the  voice  belonged  to  a  real
and  actual  existence.  That  which  is  unseen  by  our  mortal  eye  is  as  real,  and
is  as  near  to  us,  as  that  which  our  bodily  vision  can  ai  prehend,  and  it  only  needs
God  to  awaken  our  spiritual  senses  to  make  us  conscious  of  this.  Many  a  man
can  testify  from  his  own  experience  that  communion  with  God  is  quite  as  much
a  reality  as  any  communion  with  man.  Samuel,  during  his  minority,  had  many
a  conversation  with  the  aged  Eli,  and  had  doubtless  received  some  good  impres-
sions from  his  intercourse  with  the  old  priest.  But  the  intercourse  which  he
held  from  this  time  forth  with  a  person  who  spoke  to  him  from  the  invisible
world  was  as  real  and  far  more  impressive  than  any  he  had  ever  had  with  the
person  before  whom  he  had  so  long  ministered  to  the  Lord.  So  real  was  it,  and
so  strong  an  im])ressiou  did  it  make  upon  him  that  he  could  afterwards  reproduce
the  words  that  had  been  spoken  to  him,  and  felt  that  communion  with  Him
whose  dwelling  is  not  with  flesh,  was  a  more  influential  fact  of  his  life  than  any
intercourse  with  men.  He  had  been  conversant  with  many  facts  concerning
Jehovah  before  this  time,  but  he  now  awoke  to  such  a  personal  consciousness  of
His  existence,  and  such  an  abiding  sense  of  His  nearness,  that  up  to  this  crisis
in  his  history  it  is  said  of  him  that  he  "  knew  not  the  Lord."

60


OITAP.  ITT.


nOMllETia  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Ver.  1.  Since  the  extraordinary-
gifts  stand  in  close  connection  with
tlie  ordinary,  we  must  conclude  that
the  latter  also  were  sparingly  dealt
out,  that  among  the  masses  there  was
a  great  deal  of  lukewarm ness,  and  even
open  apostasy.  The  want  of  a  reforma-
tion was  urgent.  That  the  extra-
ordinary gifts,  however,  liad  not  quite
disappeared,  we  learn  from  the  example
of  the  man  of  God  who  comes  to  Eli  to
upbraid  him  with  his  sins  and  also  to
announce  the  Divine  judgment.  And
with  respect  to  the  ordinary  gifts,  we  are
led  to  the  conclusion  that  there  was  at
that  time  a  not  inconsiderable  eklogOy
not  only  by  the  institution  of  holy
women  (see  Critical  Notes  on  chap.
ii.  21),  but  also  by  the  custom  of  the
Nazarite,  of  which  we  have  two  con-
temporaneous examples  in  Samson  and
Samuel,  and  must  therefore  liave
been  pretty  widely  spread.  Hence  we
infer  that  the  spirit  of  piety  was  by  no
means  dead,  especially  since  an  institu-
tion such  as  that  of  the  Nazarites
stands  in  close  connection  with  the
whole  national  tendency,  and  can  only
flourish  when  more  or  less  supported
by  it. — Hengste7iberg.

Faithful  in  little,  and  therefore
entrusted  with  more,  being  the  next
famous  propliet  to  Moses,  and  called
the  first  (Acts  iii.  24,  2  Chron.
XXXV.  18). — Irapp.

The  time  of  Samuel's  appearance  in
Israel  as  prophet  was  a  time  of  an
internal  judgment  of  God,  which  con-
sisted in  the  lack  of  intercourse  of  God
with  His  people  bf/  revelation.  It  was
a  theocratic  interdict  incurred  by  the
continual  apostasy  of  the  people  from
their  God  .  .  .  Such  a  judgment  came
upon  Saul  (chap,  xxviii.  6,  15)  ....
The  same  law  presents  itself  in  all
])eri()ds  of  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  men
lose  the  source  of  lift'.,  God's  revealed
word,  by  a  Divine  judgment,  when  they
withdraw  from  intercourse  with  the
living  God,  and  will  not  accept  His
holy  word  as  the  truth  which  controls
their  whole  life. — Lange's  Commen-
tary,


Ver.  2.  God  lets  old  Eli  sleep,  who
slept  in  his  sin  ;  and  awakes  Samuel
to  tell  him  what  He  would  do  with  his
master.  He,  who  was  wont  to  be  the
mouth  of  God  to  the  peo])le,  must  now
receive  the  message  of  God  from  the
mouth  of  another  ;  as  great  ])ersons
will  not  speak  to  those  with  whom  they
are  inghly  offended,  but  send  them
their  checks  by  others. — Bishop  Hall.

Ver.  4.  He  answered  "  Here  am  I."
A  hearing  ear  is  a  sweet  mercy;  and  a
heavy  ear,  a  grievous  judgment  (Isa.
vi.  9). — Trapp.

Ver.  5,  6.  He  would  not  have  lain
down  to  sleep  had  he  thought  that
the  Lord  had  spoken  unto  him.  So,
if  men  did  but  consider  that  God
speaketh  unto  them  by  His  ministers,
they  would  hear  and  heed  much  better.
How  oft  do  we  either  turn  a  deaf  ear
to  God's  call,  or  else  mistake,  and  run
another  way,  till  He  please  to  speak
home  to  our  hearts,  and  cause  us  to
hear  Him. — Trapp.

Ver.  10.  For  the  first  time  Samuel
stands  with  consciousness  in  the  pre-
sence of  the  majesty  of  God — and
immediately  all  the  riddles  of  life  begin
to  be  solved  for  him,  and  the  meaning
of  his  own  life  to  become  clear.  What
he  says  bears  the  clearest  stamp  of  a
really  begun  communion  with  the  Lord.
Is  it  not  the  resolve  to  say  and  to  do
all  that  the  Lord  might  show  him  of
His  lofty  thoughts  and  ways — is  it  not
ttus,  and  nothing  but  this,  that  is  ex-
pressed in  "Speak,  Lord,  for  Thy  ser-
vant he.ireth  ?  "  Has  he  nt^t  thereby
once  for  all  renounced  self-knowi  ig
and  self-will  ?  That  was  tlie  faithful-
ness as  a  prophet,  which  all  Israel,  from
Dan  even  to  Beersheba,  recognised  in
him  (ver.  20).  And  that  which  thus
first  established  a  true  communion  with
the  Lord  could  also  alone  be  the
power  that  maintained  it.  The  con-
stant prayer,  **  Speak,  Lord,"  and  the
constant  vow, ''  Thy  servant  heareth" —
that  is  the  hand  which  takes  hold  of

61


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,  book  i.


God's  riglit  liand,  to  be  held  fast  by  it  {h)  steadfast  dependence  on  tlie  Lord

with  everlasting  life.     *'  Sjyeak,  Lord"  in  free  love  \_Thy  servant]  ;  {c)  uncoii-

^io,.,  a  testimony  of  unconditional devo-  ditional,  jo^'ful  obedience  to   His  will

tion  to  the  Lord.     1.  How  such  a  test  I-  [Thy  servant  heareth].     Conditions  of

7W6)?/?/ /^^^^^/^^(^(a),  tlirongli  the  Lord's  a  blessed  fulfilment  of   ones    calling

awakening   call ;    (b),   tlirongh  recep-  for  the  kijigdom  of  God — 1.  The  ex-

tivity   of  heart   for   God's   word  ;    (c)  perience  of  the  power  of   the  Divine

throngh  tlie  deed  of  self-denial  in  the  word  :    I  have  called   thee   by  name,

rennnciation  of  all  self-knowledge  and  2.  The  repeated  call  in  prayer,  ''Speak,

self-will.     2.    What  is  therein  testified  L^ord."     3.  The  fulfilment  of  the  vow  :

and    praised    before    the    Lord — {a)  "  Thy     servant     heareth."  —  Langes

humble     subjection     [speak,     Lord^ ;  Commentary.

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  10—21.

The  Sin  of  Omission  and  the  Giiace  of  Submission.

I.  The  mere  omission  of  one  man  may  be  the  calamity  of  many.     Many

and  terrible  disasters  have  often  been  brought  upon  many  people  by  one  man's
omission  in  the  performance  of  his  duty.  If  the  man  who  stands  at  the  wheel
of  the  vessel  omits  to  look  at  the  compass,  he  may  bring  death  or  ruin  to
hundreds  of  his  fellow -creatures,  as  well  as  loss  of  reputation  to  himself  if  he
should  survive  the  wreck.  If  one  miner  neglects  properly  to  secure  his  light,  the
death  of  all  his  fellow-workmen  may  as  truly  lie  at  his  door  as  if  he  had  slain
each  one  separately  with  his  own  hand.  Omissions  permit  the  play  of  forces
which  are  destructive  to  human  life,  and  therefore  are  sometimes  as  guilty  as
commissions.  Eli's  great  sin  was  a  sin  of  omission :  "His  sons  made  them-
selves vile,  and  he  restrained  tliem  not."  His  omission  of  parental  restraint
permitted  the  unchecked  play  of  the  evil  passions  of  his  children,  and  brought
as  sure  and  as  terrible  a  destruction  upon  them  as  if  he  had  taken  their
lives  with  his  own  hand.  And  the  evil  consequences  of  his  neglect  of
restraint  did  not  end  with  them  ;  the  mischief  which  was  thus  left  to  work
spread  into  every  household  in  the  land,  and  soon  the  whole  nation  had  cause
to  mourn  over  their  higli-priest's  omission  of  his  duty.  If  Eli  had  restrained
his  sons,  he  would  certainly  have  delivered  his  own  soul  from  blood-guiltiness,
and  might  have  delivered  them  from  such  a  public  execution,  and  the  nation  from
overwhelming  disgrace.  Mere  protestation  against  sin  will  do  something  to  stem
the  tide,  or  if  it  is  powerless  to  do  that  it  is  a  witness  against  it.  A  godly  man
can  sometimes  do  no  more  than  can  a  pillar  in  the  midst  of  an  eddying  river.
He  can  but  offer  the  resistance  of  his  own  life  and  words  to  the  prevailing  current
of  iniquity.  He  cannot  check  its  onward  course.  Less  than  this  will  not  deliver
him  from  guilt,  but  this  will  do  it.  "  If  thou  dost  not  speak  to  warn  the  wicked
from  his  way,  that  wicked  man  shall  die  in  his  iniquity ;  but  his  blood  will  1
require  at  thine  hand.  Nevertheless,  if  thou  warn  the  wicked  of  his  way  to  turn
from  it,  if  he  do  not  turji  from  his  way  he  shall  die  in  his  iniquity ;  but  thou
hast  delivered  thy  soul."  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  8,  9.)  This  is  all  that  God  requires  when
men  can  do  no  more.  Eli  had  hardly  done  this  and  his  power  to  do  more — to
hinder  his  sons  from  continuing  their  public  profanation  of  God's  house  and
services — constituted  him  a  partaker  in  their  sins,  and  to  some  extent  in  their
punishment  when  he  "restrained  them  not."  This  great  omission  of  his  life
made  him  the  instrument  of  bringing  the  wrath  of  God,  not  only  upon  his  house
but  upon  his  nation.

II,  A  noble  nature  has  no  pleasure  in  the  downfall  of  a  rival.    A  generous
soul  is  grieved  at  the  afilictions  that  come  upon  men  even  through  their  own  ^jn.
62


CHAP.  in.  IIOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


He  not  only  "rejoicetli  not  ill  iniquity  "  but  rejoiceth  not  in  the  punishment
that  iniquitv  briui^s  even  when  the  downfall  of  the  evil-doer  is  the  occasion  of
his  own  promotion.  If  a  young  man  sorrows  over  the  just  disgrace  of  those
whose  fall  is  his  own  stepi)ing-stone  to  promotion,  he  shows  that  he  is  possessed
of  a  truly  noble  disposition,  Samuel  was  not  gladdened  by  being  thus  honoured
by  God,  seeing  tliat  the  message  he  received  was  charged  with  heavy  tidings
concerning  those  whom  he  honoured  to  some  extent.  Some  consciousness  of  his
own  advancement  njust  have  been  borne  in  upon  him  by  this  revelation — he
n)ust  have  had  some  presentiment  that  the  setting  of  Eli's  sun  would  be  the
rise  of  his  own,  yet  he  sliriid<s  from  showing  the  vision  evidently  not  only  from
unwillingness  to  grieve  his  aged  friend,  but  from  a  sense  of  sorrow  at  the  terrible
retribution  which  awaited  him  and  his.

III.  The  highest  wis'loin  under  Divine  chastisement  is  the  submission
which  justifies  God.  There  are  children  who  will  justify  their  human  parents
even  when  they  are  under  correction,  because  they  have  such  confidence  in  the
character  of  those  parents,  and  because  their  own  consciences  convict  them  of
deserving  that  which  tlipy  nro  now  suffering.  God's  children  should  always  be
able  to  do  this.  'Thoy  ought  to  be  so  assured  of  His  unimpeachable  justice
and  wisdom,  as  well  as  of  llis  love,  as  to  be  able  at  all  times  to  echo  the  words
of  Eli,  and  thus  to  "justify  the  ways  of  God  to  men."  Eli  here  proves  himself
a  true  son  of  Al)raham  in  the  full  assent  he  gives  to  Abraham's  assurance,
"Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?"  (Gen.  xviii.  25)  Being  fully
convicted  of  his  own  negative  sins,  and  of  the  positive  crimes  of  his  children,
he  takes  the  course  of  true  wisdom,  and  yields  himst  If  and  his  family  into  the
hands  of  that  King  who  he  knows  can  do  no  wrong.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  11.  When  God  executes  judg-  ditary  succession  and  the  whole  exist-

ment  upon  anyone,  all  should  trend)le  ing  hierachy  of  Israel. — Stanley.

at   these   examples   of  severity   upon  Parents  cannot  do  God's  work,  and

others,  and  say  with  Paul,  "  Because  God  will  not  do  theirs;  but  if  they  use

of  unbelief  then  were  broken  off,  and  the  means,  God  will  not  withhold  His

tJioa  standest  by  faith.     Be  not  high-  blessing. — A.  Clarke,

minded,  hut  fear''  (Rom.  xi.  20). — De  Oh,  it  is  dangerous  to  do  the  work

tSacy.  of  God  negligently.     Eli  was  a  magi-
strate, and  should  have  put  forth  his

Ver.   12.    Execution    of    justice    is  authority  and  punished  those  ungodly

God's  work,  though  His  strange  work     children That   you    (who   are

(Isa.   xxviii.   21),  and  when  once  He  magistrates)  be  terrors  to  evil-doers  is

beginneth.  He  will  go  thorough-stitch  expressed  as  one  of  3^our  chief  duties

with    it  ;    He   will   neither   dally   nor      (Rom.  xiii.  3) If  you  are  not,

desist  till  it  be  done. — Trapp.  look  to  yourself,   for   God   hath   iron

hands  for  justices  that   have   leaden

Ver.  13.  The  judgment  that  was  to  heels,  and  will  one   day  strike  them

fall  on  Ithamar  is  the   likeness  of  the  home    for   forswearing   themselves   to

judgment  which  has  followed  the  cor-  s])are  others.     He  will  be  a  terror  to

ruption  and  the  nepotism  of  the  clergy  thee  and  make  thee  a  terror  to  thyself,

everywhere.     It  was  to  begin  with  the  who  will   not  at  His  command  be  a

alienation  of  the  people  from  the  wor-  terror  to  evil  doers.     Thou  sinnest  in

ship  of  the  sanctuary  ;  it  was  to  end  others  whilst  thou   sufferest  them  to

in  a  violent  rc'volution,  which  should  sin,  and  thou  shalt  one  day  suffer  with

overthrow  with  bloodshed,  confiscation,  them  (Rev.  xviii.  4).  .  .  .  Cowards  are

and  long  humiliation  the  ancient  here-  more  fit  to  be  slaves  than  rulers.     A

63


hOMlLETlG  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL,


BOOK  I,


magistrate  slioiild  be  like  Moses:  in
his  own  cause  as  meek  as  a  lamb,  in
God's  cause  as  stiff  as  an  oak,  as  bold

as  a  lion He  that  spareth  the

bad  hurteth  the  good.  The  cliirurgeon
must  cut  off  incurable  members,  and  the
pliysician  of  the  State  must  purge  out
the  peccant  humours  of  the  body  poli-
tic, lest  they  infect  and  injure  the
whole. — Svnnnock.

'^ For  the  iniquity  which  he  hnoweth^
Both  by  that  pro})het  (chap.  ii.  29),  and
by  that  domestical  chaplain,  his  con-
science.— Irapp.

Ver.  13,  14.  The  guilt  and  conse-
quences of  parental  unfaithfulness.
1.  The  sin  here  mentioned.  It  is  not
said  that  Eli  set  his  S(ms  a  bad  example.
It  is  evident,  on  the  contrary,  that  his
example  was  good.  Nor  is  he  accused
of  neglecting  to  admonish  them  •;  for
we  are  told  that  he  reproved  them  in  a
very  solemn  and  affectionate  manner.
.  .  .  But  though  Eli  admonished  he
did  not  restrain.  He  did  not  employ
the  authority  with  which  he  was  clothed,
as  a  parent,  to  prevent  them  from
indulging  their  depraved  inclinations.
,  .  .  Every  parent  who  is  not  as  careful
of  the  morals  as  he  is  of  the  health  of
his  children;  everyone  who  takes  more
care  of  the  literary  than  of  the  moral
and  religious  education  of  his  children,
is  guilty  of  this  sin.  II.  The  punish-
ments denounced.  They  are  here  de-
nounced generally  ;  but  are  described
at  large  in  the  preceding  chapter.  1.
'J hat  most  of  his  posterity  shall  die
early.  The  sin  of  which  Eli  was
guilty  naturally  tends  to  produce  the
consequence  here  threatened.  .  .  .
If  parents  wish  their  sons  to  die  before
they  reach  half  the  common  age  of  man,
tliey  cannot  adopt  measures  better
calculated  to  produce  this  effect  than
to  cast  loose  the  reins  of  parental
authority.  2.  That  such  of  his  child-
ren as  were  spared  should  prove
a  grief  and  vexation,  rather  than   a

comfort   to  him This  was  not

less  terribly  fulhlled  in  the  family  of

David We  are  told  res})ecting

one  of  his  children,  that  his  father  had
not  displeased  him  at  any  time,  saying,
64


Wherefore  hast  thou  done  so  ?  We
may  then  conclude  that  he  was  equally
culpable  in  his  treatment  of  his  other
children.  And  what  was  the  conse-
quence ? This    part    of    the

threatened  punishment, like  the  former,
is  the  natuial  and  almost  inevital)le
consequence  of  the  sin  against  which  it
is  denounced.  .  .  .  Especially  will  such
parents  usually  meet  with  unkindness
and  neglect  from  their  children  if  they
live  to  be  dependent  on  them  in
their  old  age.  3.  That  his  posterity
should  he  poor  and  contemptible,
Children  who  are  not  re-
strained by  their  parents  will  almost
inevitably  contract  habits  of  idle-
ness, instability,  and  extravagance,
which  naturally  lead  to  poverty  and
contempt.  Here  again  we  see  the
natural  consequences  of  Eli's  sin  in  its
punishment.  Lastly,  God  declares  that
none  of  the  methods  thus  appointed  to
obtain  the  pardon  of  sin,  should  avail
to  procure  pardon  for  the  iniquity  of
his  house.  This  awful  threat  con-
veyed a  plain  intimation  that  they
should  die  in  their  sins,  and  this  too,
was  the  natural  consequence  of  his
conduct.  He  had  suffered  them  to
follow  without  restraint  those  courses
which  rendered  them  unfit  for  heaven
until  their  day  of  grace  was  past.
....  They  were  given  up  to  a  hard
heart  and  a  reprobate  mind.  They
could  not  now  be  brought  to  repen-
tance, and.  of  course,  no  sacrifice  nor
offering  could  purge  away  their  sins.
....  Tliousands  now  in  the  region  of
despair,  and  thousands  more  on  their
wav  to  join  them  will  for  ever  curse  their
])arents  as  the  authors  of  their  misery.
The  terrible  punishments  denounced
against  this  sin  show  how  exceedingly
displeasing  it  is  to  God.  1.  Because
it  proceeds  from  wicked  and  hateful
principles  .  .  ,  Sometimes  it  proceeds
from  the  love  and  piact ice  of  vice  .  .  .
In  religious  parents,  it  almost  invariably
proceeds  from  indolence  and  selfish-
ness .  .  .  There  is  also  much  unbelief,
much  contempt  of  God,  and  much
positive  disobedience  in  this  sin.  2.
Because  it  entirely  frustrates  His  design
in  establishing  the  family  state.    3.  On


cn.\.i'.  TTI.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    SAMUEL.


account  of  tlie  ijjood  wLIcli  it  prevents,
and  the  infinite  evil  which  it  produces
....  No  sin  tends  to  produce  more
or  greater  evil  and  niisery.  4.  Because
tliose  who  are  guiltv  of  it  act  a  most
nn natural  part.  God  knew  that  it
wonld  not  be  safe  to  trust  us  with  the
education  of  immortal  souls,  unless  we
h  id  powerful  inducements  to  be  faitliful
to  tiie  trust.  He,  therefore,  implanted
in  the  heart  of  parents  a  strong  affection
for  their  offspring,  that  they  might  be
thus  induced  to  educate  them  as  they
ouuflit.  But  those  who  neglect  to
restrain  their  children  do  violence  to
this  powerful  operative  principle,  and
may  be  said  to  be  like  the  heathen,
witliout  natural  affection. — Paijson.

Ver.  15.  As  the  child  Samuel  was
not  elated  by  this  vision  and  revelation
vouchsafed  to  him  in  the  temple,  but
went  humbly  to  Eli,  and  when  it  was
morning  did  the  daily  work  prescribed
to  him, — so  the  child  Jesus,  after  the
honour  paid  to  him  in  the  temj^le,
"went  down  to  Nazareth,  and  was  sub-
ject" to  Mary  and  Joseph  (Luke  ii.  51).
—  Wordsworth.

As  this  is  the  first  circumstance
which  throws  light  u])on  the  character
of  one  who  was  destined  to  become  a
great  man  in  Israel,  it  behoves  us  to
regard  it  well.  Most  lads  of  his  age
evince  much  eagerness  in  communi-
cating anything  surprising,  without
much  regard  to  the  pain  it  may  be
calculated  to  inflict.  Samuel  knew
that  he  had  been  highly  honoured  by
a  special  communication  from  God.
The  burden  of  a  great  doom  had  been
imparted  to  him,  and  such  secrets  of
high  im})ort  it  is  hard  for  youth  to
bear  undisclosed.  But  with  Samuel
there  was  one  consideration  that  over-
ruled every  other.  The  secret  con-
cerned his  venerable  lord,  who  had
been  as  a  father  to  him,  and  could  not
fail  to  afilict  his  spirit. — Kitto.

Ver.  18.  Though  we  must  groan  and
feel  God's  hand,  yet  we  must  not
grumble  and  fret  at  His  dealings.
Patience  is  thy  duty  under  the  sharpest
providence.      He  is   too    just    to   be


M


questioned,  too  good  to  be  sus[)ecred,
and  too  great  to  be  quarrelled  with.
Eli  doth  not  fcill  in  IJis  face  in  a
passion,  but  falls  down  at  His  feet  in
humble  submission. — Swlniiock.

"  Told  him  eoery  wlilt"  Bitter
trufciis  must  be  spoken,  however  they
be  taken,  and  if  ministers  be  mannerly
in  the  form,  yet  in  the  matter  of  their
message  let  them  be  resolute. — Trapp.
If  Eli  have  been  an  ill  father  to  his
sons,  yet  he  is  a  good  son  to  God,  and
is  ready  to  kiss  the  very  rod  he  shall
smart  withal  :  "  It  is  the  Lord,"  whom
I  have  ever  found  holy  and  just,  and
gracious,  and  He  cannot  but  be  Him-
self; "let  llim  do  what  seemeth  Him
good,"  for  whatsoever  seemeth  to  be
good  to  Him,  cannot  but  be  good,
howsoever  it  seems  to  me.  Every  man
can  open  his  hand  to  God  while  He
blesses  ;  but  to  expose  ourselves  will-
ingly to  the  afflicting  hand  of  our
Maker,  and  to  kneel  to  Him  while  He
scourges  us,  is  peculiar  only  to  the
fai  t  li  f  a  I .  —  Blsh  op  flail.

I.  A  judicious  discovery  from  whence
all  evils  come.  "  It  is  the  Lord.''  He
is  omnipotent,  and  who  hath  withstood
His  powe?  He  is  just,  and  will  bring
no  evil  without  good  cause.  He  is
wise,  and  whatsoever  evil  He  bringeth

He  can  draw  it  to  a  good  end

He  remaineth  the  same  God  in  the  fire
and  in  the  earthquake  which  He  was  in
the  still  voice;  the  same  when  He  slew
the  Israelites  as  when  His  light
shone  u])on  their  tabernacle.  His  glo-
rious attributes  cross  not  one  another.
His  justice  taketh  not  from  His
mercy,  nor  His  mercy  from  the  equity
of  His  justice;  but  He  is  just  when
He  bindeth  up,  and  merciful  w^hen  He
woundeth  us.  .  .  .  The  same  God  that
overthrew  Pharaoh  in  the  Red  Sea,
that  "slew  great  and  mighty  kings"
(Psa.  cxxxvi.  15,  17,  18)  did  deliver
up  His  own  people,  did  deliver  up  the
ark  to  Dagon :  for  His  justice.  His
wisdom,  and  His  mercy  "  did  endure
for  ever."  II.  A  well-grounded  resolu-
tion. Let  us  learn  with  Eli  to  "kiss
the  Son,  lest  He  be  angry  "  (Psa.  ii.  12).
nay,  to  kiss  Him,  and  bow  before  Him
when  He  is  angry;  to  offer  Him  up  a


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  SAMUEL.


BOOK  I.


peacc-offeiiiig,  our  wills,  of  more  power
tlian  a  hecatomb,  than  all  our  nume-
rous fasts  and  sermons,  to  appease
His  wrath.  .  .  .  This  is  the  truest
surrendry  we  can  make.  ..."  I  do
not  only  obey  God,  and  do  what  He
would  have  me,  but  I  am  of  His  mind,"
saith  the  heathen  Seneca."  .  .  .  The
stubboruest  knee  may  be  made  to  bow,
ind  obedience  may  be  constrained.  But
the  true  Israelite  doeth  it  with  joy  and
readiness,  and  though  he  receive  a
blow  he  counteth  it  as  a  favour,  for  He
that  gave  it  hath  taught  him  an  art  to
make  it  so. — Anthony  Faringdon.

Ver.  20.  Not  only  of  the  whole
Church  in  general,  but  of  every  Chris-
tian hearer  in  particular,  it  is  demanded
that,  with  reference  to  the  doctrine
taught,  he  shall  perceive  whether  it  is
right  and  true  or  not,  and  stand  his
ground.  In  the  case  of  Samuel  the
word  did  not  hold  good — "the  prophet
has  no  honour  in  his  own  country."
He  comes  before  us  here  a^apy-opJietwho
has  much  honour  in  his  own  country —
(1)  Because  he  was  a  faithful  prophet
of  God ;  (2)  because  he  was  counted
worthy  by  God  of  continual  revehitions
through  His  word  ;  (3)  and  God  con-
firmed his  proclamations  by  the  publicly
manifested  fulfilment  of  them  as  a  ful-
filment of  his  word. — Cramer.

When  Samuel  had  entered  into  an
immediate  relation  to  God,  a  relation
between  him  and  the  nation  also  began.
He  receives  through  them  the  dignity
of  a  prophet,  of  a  mediator  between
God  and  the  nation.  With  him  ])ro-
phecy  mounted  a  new  step.  While  the
pro])hets  had  previously  entered  power-
fully into  the  history  only  in  solitary
decisive  instances, /^zs  prophetic  activity
was  a  continuous  one. — Uengstenherg.

Ver.  21.  God  breaks  through  the
silence  of  m-any  years,  and  reveals
Himself  to  Samuel.  Wherefore  was
this?  Samuel  had  a  childlike  faith;
therefore  he  was  very  dear  to  God.
The  words  are  remarkable,  "  the  child
was  a  child''  (see  notes  on  chap.  i.  24),
and  "he  grew  before  the  Lord."  He
was  a  child  in  innocence,  humility,
66


simplicity,  holiness.  He  was  holy  amid
scenes  of  unholiness.  In  spite  of  the
pernicious  example  of  Eli's  sons,  the
priests  of  God,  the  child  stood  firm  ;
he  was  true  to  God  in  the  most  trying
circumstances,  therefore  God  revealed
Himself  to  him.  The  child  Samuel
was  preferred  to  the  aged  Eli,  the
high  priest  and  judge  ;  and  thus,  as
Theodoret  remarks,  God  showed  that
holy  childhood  is  better  than  hoar
hairs.  He  was  "wiser  than  the  aged,"
and  had  "more  understanding  than
his  teachers,"  because  he  "  kept  God's
commandments  "  (Psa.  cxix.  99,  100).
—  Wordsworth.

The  Lord  r^^'<?aWHimself  to  Samuel.
It  is  with,  perhaps,  one  exception  the
earliest  instance  of  the  use  of  the  word
which  has  since  become  the  name  for
all  Divine  communication.  "The  Lord
uncovered  the  ear,''  such  is  the  literal
expression  ;  a  touching  and  significant
figure  taken  from  the  manner  in  which
the  possessor  of  a  secret  moves  back
the  long  hair  of  his  friend,  and  whisi)ers
into  the  ear  thus  laid  bare  the  word
that  no  one  else  may  hear.  It  is  a
figure  which  precisely  expresses  the
most  universal  and  philosophical  idea
conveyed  by  the  term  "Revelation,"
thence  appropriated  in  the  theological
language  of  both  East  and  West.
"  The  Father  of  Truth,"  says  Professor
Muller — indicating  his  own  use  of  this
phrase  to  describe  the  mission  of  the
Seujitic  races — "  chooses  His  own  pro-
phets, and  He  speaks  to  them  in  a
voice  stronger  than  the  voice  of  thun-
der. It  is  the  same  inner  voice  through
which  God  speaks  to  all  of  us.  That
voice  may  dwindle  away  and  become
hardly  audible  ;  it  may  lose  its  Divine
accent,  and  sink  into  the  language  of
worldly  prudence ;  but  it  may  also
from  time  to  time  assume  its  real
nature  with  the  children  of  God,  and
sound  into  their  ears  as  a  voice  from
heaven.  A  "Divine  instinct"  would
neither  be  an  appropriate  name  for
what  is  a  gift  or  giace  accorded  but  to
few,  nor  would  it  be  a  more  intelligible
word  than  "  special "  revelation.—
Stanley.


oriAP.  nr.  nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


CHAPTER  IV.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1.  "And  the  word  of  Samuel,"  etc.    Commentators

are  diviiled  in  their  opiniou.s  whether  this  clause  is  connected  with  the  rest  of  the  chapter,  and
whether  it  signifies  that  Israel  went  out  to  battle  by  the  command  of  Samuel.  Many  think
they  entered  into  the  conflict  without  Divine  direction  ;  but  Keil  says,  "  The  two  clauses,  *  Tke
word  of  Samuel  ccinie  to  all  Israel'  and  'Israel  went  out,''  etc.,  are  to  be  logically  connected
together  in  the  following  sense  :  '  At  the  word  or  instigation  of  Samuel,  Israel  went  out  against
the  Philistines  to  battle."  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Philistines  were  ruling  over  Israel  at  this
time.  •'  Ebenezer."  This  name  was  not  given  to  the  place  until  a  later  period  (see  chap.  vii.  12).
"Aphek,"  As  this  word  means  strengtli,  ov  firmnens,  it  is  api^licable  to  any  fort  or  fastness  ;  and
there  were  several  places  so  named  in  Palestine.  According  to  chap.  vii.  12  this  Apheh  must
have  been  near  Mizpek,  probably  the  Mlzpeh  of  Benjamin  mentioned  in  Josh,  xviii.  26,  and
identified  by  Robinson  as  the  present  Neby  Samwil,  five  miles  north-west  of  Jerusalem.

Ver.  2.  "Joined  battle."  "This  word  describes  the  sudden  nmtual  assault  of  the  opposing
lines."     (Lange's  Commentary.)

Ver.  3.  "  Let  us  fetch  the  ark,"  etc.  "  In  recommending  this  extraordinary  step,  the
elders  might  recollect  the  confidence  it  imparted  to  their  ancestors  (Numb.  x.  35  ;  xiv.  44),  as
well  as  what  had  been  done  at  Jericho.  But  it  is  more  probable  that  they  were  influenced  by
the  heathenish  ideas  of  their  idolatrous  neighbours,  who,  in  order  to  animate  their  soldiers  and
ensure  victory,  carried  the  statuettes  of  their  gods  in  shrines,  or  their  sacred  symbols  to  their
wars,  believing  that  the  power  of  those  divinities  was  inseparably  associated  with,  or  residing  in,
their  images."     (Dr,  Jamieson.J

Ver.  4.  "  The  people."  "  It  was  the  army  that  here  acted,  rather  than  the  people  in  a
political  capacity,  but  the  word  '  people '  perhaps  points  to  the  absence  of  a  regular  army."
( Tr.  of  Lange's  Commentary.)

Ver.  7.  "  God  is  come  into  the  camp."  "  The  ark  is  called  by  the  sacred  writer  'The  ark
of  the  Lord  (Jehovah) ',  but  the  Philistines,  being  heathens,  say  that  *  Elohim  is  come  into  the
camp  ;'  and  they  speak  of  God  in  the  plural  number — 'These  mighty  gods.'"  (Wordsworth.)
"  Just  as  all  the  heathen  feared  the  might  of  the  gods  of  other  nations  in  a  certain  degree,  so
the  Philistines  also  were  alarmed  at  the  might  of  the  God  of  the  Israelites."  (Keil.)  "There
hath  not  been  such  a  thing  heretofore."  "  The  ark  was  always  carried  by  the  priests  in
the  van  (Numb.  x.  33  j  Josh,  iii.  14),  and,  with  one  solitary  exception,  when  the  attack  upon  the
Amalekites  and  the  Canaanites  was  made  in  spite  of  an  express  prohibition  of  Moses,  it  was
invariably  carried  with  them  in  their  early  wars.  But  when  they  had  become  settled  in  Canaan,
and  the  ark  was  established  in  Shiloh,  the  practice  of  carrying  it  into  the  field  was  discontinued,
till  now  that  ignorance  and  superstitious  fear  revived  it."     (Dr.  Jamieson.)

Ver.  10.  "  There  fell  of  Israel  thirty  thousr.nd  footmen."  "  The  slaughter  in  ancient
warfare  seems,  from  the  record  of  profane  as  well  as  sacred  history,  to  have  been  often  immensely
greater  than  in  modern  times,  since  the  introduction  of  gunpowder  and  artillery.  And  in  the
nature  of  the  case  it  must  have  been  when  the  soldiers  of  opposing  armies  met  in  close  combat
— man  engaged  in  mortal  strife  with  man ;  and  when  tlie  weapons,  too,  were  tipped  with  poison,
the  result  could  not  be  otherwise  than  a  fearful  carnage.  The  great  numbers,  then,  of  the
Israelites  who  are  recorded  in  this  passage  (as  well  as  in  similar  ones)  to  have  fallen  in  battle,
and  which  have  called  forth  the  sneers  of  the  infidels  as  gross  exaggerations,  are,  from  the
character  of  the  context,  perfectly  credible,  and  the  statements  of  the  sacred  historian  are  not
only  in  the  present  instance  corroborated  by  the  testimony  of  Josephus,  but  harmonise  with  the
recital  of  Uerodotus,  and  other  historians,  as  to  the  vast  mortality  that  frequently  marked  the
battles  of  antiquity."     ( Dr,  Jamieson.)

Ver.  13.  "Eli  sat  upon  a  seat  by  the  wayside."  "This  sitting  on  the  side  of  the  way
by  which  the  first  message  must  come  answez's  precisely  to  the  intense  expectation  in  which  Eli
though  blind,  had  taken  this  poeition,  so  as,  if  not  with  the  eyes,  yet  with  the  sense  of  heari no-
te learn  straightway  the  arrival  of  the  first  messenger.  He  sits,  as  in  chap.  i.  9,  at  the  inner  so
liere  at  the  outer,  gate  of  the  sanctuary,  on  his  seat,  and,  as  appears  from  verse  18,  on  the  side  of
the  gate,  which  was  also,  therefore,  tlie  side  of  the  adjacent  way."    (Erdmanu.)

Ver.  14.  "When  Eli  heard  the  noise  of  the  crying."  "His  blindness  explains  the  fact
that  he  failed  to  observe  the  messenger  who  ran  hui-riedly  by  without  noticing  Ixim."  {Ei'dmunn.)

Ver.  15.  "His  eyes  were  dim,"  literally,  ''his  eyes  Hood."  "This  is  a  description  of  the
Bo-called  black  cataract  {amaurosis),  which  generally  occurs  at  a  very  great  age  from  paralysis  of
the  optic  nerve."    (Keil.)

67


nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  SAMUEL.  book  i.


Ver.  21.  <*  Ichabod,"  i.e.,  Not-Glory.  The  narrator  has  in  mind  her  words  upon  which.she
based  that  ejaculation,  but  does  not  state  them  as  hers  till  afterward;  here  he  states  beforeliaiid
the  fact  contained  in  them  as  a  liistoiical  explanation.  We  must  note,  however,  the  difference
between  his  explanation  and  her  reason  for  that  exclamation  in  verse  22.  While  he  mentiong
the  reference  to  the  two  dead,  sAe  bases  the  name  on  the  one  thing  only,  the  capture  of  the  ark,"
(Erdmann.)

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  VERSES  \  and  2,

The  First  Defeat  at  Ebenezer.

On  the  conTiection  of  the  first  clause  of  this  verse  with  the  following  para-
graph  see  Critical  and  Expo.sitory  Notes  on  the  chapter.  Adopting  the  view  of
Kiel  and  others,  we  remark —

I.  That  there  may  be  an  obedience  which  will  bring  punishment.  Upon
the  people  and  upon  the  priests  of  Israel  at  this  time  there  rested  the  curse  of
unpardoned  sin.  Eli's  sons  had  neither  confessed  their  guilt  nor  amended  their
lives,  and  the  religion  of  the  entire  nation  was  very  much  like  that  depicted  by
Isaiah  at  a  later  period,  when,  delivering  the  word  of  the  Lord,  he  tells  both
rulers  and  people  that  their  " incense  is  an  abomination''  and  their  feasts  a
''trouble  and  a  weariness"  unto  the  Most  High  because  they  had  forsaken  Him
in  their  hearts.  (See  Isa.  i.  1-15.)  Therefore  punishment  came  to  them  while
in  the  act  of  obeying  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Samuel.  As  there  had  been  no
obedience  unto  life,  there  was  now  an  obedience  unto  death.  This  act  of
obedience  was  doubtless  in  conformity  to  the  national  desire,  and  the  desire  to
free  tliemselves  from  the  yoke  of  the  Philistines  was  both  natural  and  right  in
itself,  but  it  was  unaccompanied  by  a  willingness  to  submit  to  the  righteous  law
of  Jehovah  and  to  obey  His  w^ord,  and  therefore  it  brought  judgment  instead  of
blessing.  Tliere  are  many  parallel  cases  in  individual  history.  Many  men
make  plans  and  try  to  gratify  desires  which  may  in  themselves  be  lawful,  but
they  cannot  have  the  Divine  blessing  because  they  set  aside  the  indispensable
Divine  condition  of  having  in  the  first  place  a  right  relation  to  God  by  pardon
of  sin  and  righteousness  of  life  ;  and  therefore  their  efforts  to  free  themselves
from  difficulties  or  to  gain  a  more  desirable  condition  often  end  in  placing
them  in  a  worse  position  than  they  were  in  at  first.  But  in  the  case  before
us  it  was  not  the  mere  effort  to  gratify  a  lawful  desire  that  brought  the
judgment,  but  an  undertaking;  engaged  in  in  obedience  to  a  Divine  com-
mand. As  in  the  case  of  Balaam,  obedience  was  made  a  means  of  punishment.
That  false  prophet  at  last  set  out  on  his  journey  in  obedience  to  the
word  of  the  Lord,  but  "  God's  anger  was  kindled  because  he  went "  (Num.
xxii.  22),  and  punishment  came  to  him  even  in  his  obedience.  Israel  at  this
time  desired  a  national  victory  without  national  repentance — they  desired  free-
dom from  the  yoke  of  the  Philistines  without  submission  to  the  yoke  of  Jehovah,
and  thought  that  this  would  be  true  freedom.  Their  numbers  were  great,  and
they  imagined  that  numbers  would  avail  them  in  conflict  with  their  ancient
enemy,  even  althongh  they  lacked  cleanness  of  hands  and  purity  of  heart  before
God.  They  ignored  the  conditions  of  success  laid  down  for  them  by  the  mouth
of  Moses — '' If  thou  shalt  hearken  diligently  unto  the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy
God,  to  observe  and.  to  do  all  His  commandments  which  L  command  thee  this  day^
that  the  Lord  thy  God  will  set  thee  on  high  above  all  nations  of  the  earth.  .  .  .
and  the  Lof^d  shall  cause  thine  enemies  that  rise  up  against  thee  to  be  smitten
before  thy  face  ;  they  shall  come  out  against  thee  one  way  and  shall  fee  seven
ways."  But  they  again  found  from  bitter  experience  that  the  Divine  threaten-
ing was  no  idle  word.  "  Lhit  it  shall  co7ne  to  pass,  if  thou  ivilt  not  hearken
unto  the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  to  observe  to  do  all  his  commandments  and
68


CHAP.  IV.  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,

Ills  statutes  which  1  command  thee  this  day the  Lord  shall  cause  thee  to

be  smitten  before  thine  enemies ;  thou  shalt  go  out  one  way  against  them  and  flee
Seven  ways  before  them''  (Deut.  xxviii.  1,  7,  15,  25).

II.  Where  the  moral  condition  for  victory  is  wanting,  it  is  better  to  have
defeat.  The  Avoid  which  came  to  Israel  and  led  them  out  to  defeat  was  a
blessing,  becanse  defeat  was  just  what  they  needed  at  the  time.  The  defeat  in
circumstance  that  leads  to  an  improvement  in  character  is  a  victory  in  reality.
If  national  or  individual  loss  in  material  things  leads  to  moral  gain,  it  is  better
than  the  most  splendid  worldly  success.  How  terrible  seemed  the  (lei'eat  of  all
the  purposes  and  plans  of  the  mighty  monarch  of  Babylon  when  he  was  "driven
from  men,  and  did  eat  grass  as  oxen  ;"  but  it  was  a  great  moral  victory,  for  it
brought  him  to  a  higher  moral  standing,  and  taught  him  to  ''praise  and  honour
Him  that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever''  (Dan.  iv.  34).  Many  a  man  in  humbler
walks  of  life  has  learned  to  know  himself  and  his  God  in  the  day  which  has
seemed  to  bring  him  nothing  but  defeat  and  ruin.  The  defeat  of  Israel  at  this
time  was  the  first  of  a  series  of  steps  by  which,  under  the  rule  of  Samuel,  they
rose  to  a  more  healthy  state  of  national  life  ;  and,  therefore,  what  was  in  the
first  instance  a  judgment  was  in  the  end  a  blessing.  A  victory  over  the
Philistines,  when  they  were  in  a  state  of  opposition  to  God,  would  have  been  a
far  greater  national  calamity  in  the  end  than  the  two  crushing  defeats  recorded
in  this  chapter.  Freedom  Irom  chastisement,  either  in  the  nation  or  in  ttie
individual,  is  the  most  terrible  curse  which  God  can  inllct.  Far  better  is  it  to
suffer  the  severest  punishment  for  sin.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Verse  1.  Not  only  were  the  people  of    Israel    from   the    oppression    and

to  learn  that  the  Lord  had  departed  dominion  of   its   loes    was  absolutely

from   them,    but  Samuel  also  was  to  impossible  without  its  inward  conver-

make  the  discovery  that  the  deliverance  sion  to  God. — Keil.

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3—11.

The  Capture  of  the  Aek.

I.  Here  is  failure  in  a  lawful  enterprise.  If  a  man  finds  himself  so  oppressed
by  a  stronger  power  that  his  moral  nature  sufters  in  consequence,  it  is  both
lawful  and  right  to  endeavour  to  free  himself  from  the  yoke  of  the  oppressor.
Especially  if  he  finds  himself  the  slave  of  habits  which  tend  to  his  moral
degeneration,  he  is  bound,  out  of  regard  for  his  own  real  interests,  to  use  every
means  within  his  reach  to  obtain  his  freedom.  The  enterprise  against  soul-
oppressiun,  whether  individual  or  national,  is  always  lawful.  If  a  nation  is
under  such  a  yoke  of  bondage,  and  can  find  no  way  to  liberty  except  through
strife — if  it  finds  that  by  reason  of  its  oppression  it  is  sinking  in  the  moral  scale,
and  sees  no  possibility  of  bettering  its  condition,  except  by  the  sword — such  a
nation  is  justified  in  resorting  to  the  use  of  such  means.  Israel  was  so  oppressed
by  the  Philistines.  The  yoke  of  the  heathen  was  not  only  injurious  to  them
materially  but  spiritually.  It  was  not  only  a  national  humiliation  but  it  tended
to  national  degradation  of  soul.  Therefore  they  were  fully  justified  in  using
every  lawful  etlort  to  be  free,  and  they  were  not  defeated  because  they  were
engaged  in  an  undertaking  which  was  in  itself  disi)leasiiig  to  God.

II.  Here  is  failure  in  a  lawful  enterprise  because  undertaken  in  a  wrong  spirit.
Ab  we  have  seen  in  considering  the  hrst  defeat  recorded  in  this  chapter,  Israel

(J9


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    SAMUEL.  book  i.


niidertook  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  the  Philistines  without  submission  to  the
yoke  of  God,  and  this  was  altogether  contrary  to  the  Divine  revealed  will  con-
cerning thern.  They  must  first  submit  to  Jehovah,  and  then  their  enemies
would  submit  to  them.     ''  0,  Israel,  if  thou  wilt  hearken  unto  me,  there  shall

no  strange  god  he  in  thee  ;  neither  shalt  thou  worship  any  strange  god

Oh  that  my  people  had  hearkened  auto  we,  and  Israel  had  walked  in  my  ways  !
I  should  soon  have  subdued  their  enemies,  and  turned  my  hand  against  their
adversaries.  The  hatersofthe  Lord  should  have  submitted  thenuehes  unto  Him;  but
their  time  should  have  endured  for  ever{V^.  Ixxxi.  8-15).  But  they  were  not  willinp-
to  lend  nn  obedient  ear  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  therefore  the  Lord's  hand  was
turned  against  them  in  their  day  of  need.  This  subject  is  full  of  teaching  for  the
individual  man.  The  soul  of  every  man  is  by  nature  more  or  less  enslaved  by
appetites  and  passions  which  will  degrade  him  if  he  does  not  war  against  them.
But  there  is  but  one  way  to  do  this  successfully.  There  must  be  submission  to
the  yoke  of  God  before  we  cnn  cast  off  the  yoke  of  sin  and  Satan.  Man's  will
in  its  present  condition  is  not  strong  enough  to  overcome  the  evil  within  Ins
own  heart.  ^^  To  will"  may  "be  present  with  him,  but  how  to  perform  that
which  he  wills  he  finds  not  ^'  (Rom.  vii.  18).  There  must  be  submission  to  a
higher  will  before  the  Philistines  of  the  heart  can  be  brought  into  subjection.
We  are  ^^  made  free  from  sin"  by  becoming  ''servants  to  God"  (Rom.  vi.  22) —
by  falling  in  with  His  method  of  salvation  by  the  death  of  His  Son,  and  thus
receiving  from  Him  the  Divine  help  by  which  alone  we  can  conquer  sin  within
us.  The  man  who  sets  out  to  free  himself  from  the  bondage  of  any  sinful  habit
in  any  other  way  will  find  himself  in  the  condition  of  Israel  at  this  time — he
will  be  baffled  and  beaten  on  every  side,  and  will  have  to  give  up  the  contest  in
despair.  The  evil  spirit  may  go  out  for  a  time,  but  when  he  returns  he  will
find  the  house  unoccupied  by  any  stronger  power,  and  "  then  goeth  he,  and
taketh  with  himself  seven  other  spii^its  more  wicked  than  himself  and  they  enter
in  and  dwell  there;  and  the  last  state  of  that  man  is  worse  than  the  first**
(Matt.  xii.  43-45).

III,  Failure  in  any  lawful  enterprise  demands  inquiry  into  the  cause  of
the  failure.  Even  Israel  said,  "  Wherefore  hath  the  Lord  smitten  us  to-day  ?"
(ver.  3).  He  who  has  failed  to  overcome  any  sinful  habit  within  himself,  or  has
been  defeated  in  his  efforts  to  lessen  the  power  of  evil  in  the  world,  should  ask
himself  why  it  is  so.  If  he  knows  that  the  end  for  which  he  strives  is  for  the
glory  of  God,  he  will  do  well  to  suspect  that  the  cause  of  the  failure  rests  with
himself,  and  a  searching  and  sincere  inquiry  into  the  state  of  his  own  heart
may  lead  to  some  wholesome  discoveries,  and  prevent  defeat  in  future  efforts.
Israel  here  admits  that  the  hand  of  God  was  behind  the  hand  of  the  Philistines,
and  that  it  was  Jehovah  who  had  smitten  them  by  the  sword  of  their  enemies  ;
but  their  inquiry  lacked  earnestness  and  sincerity.  They  admit  that  their
failure  demands  investigation,  but  they  stop  short  without  arriving  at  the  real
cause  of  their  defeat.  They  were  unwilling  to  push  the  question  to  its  final
issue ;  but  such  a  question  asked  with  a  desire  to  find  the  real  answer  cannot
fail  to  bring  instruction  to  the  man  who  asks  it.

IV.  Unwillingness  to  admit  the  real  cause  of  failure  will  probably  lead  to
the  use  of  means  which  will  end  in  greater  disaster.  The  inhabitants  of  a
house  which  is  built  upon  a  sandy  foundation  may  blame  the  thunder  when  the
walls  rock  and  crack  beneath  the  storm,  and  they  may  seek  to  render  themselves
secure  by  making  the  walls  thicker  and  the  roof  more  firm.  But  all  such  efforts
are  only  making  more  certain  the  ultimate  fall  of  the  building — all  that  ia
added  to  a  structure  upon  such  a  foundation  is  only  hastening  its  downfall  and
the  destiuciion  of  its  inhabitants.     They  have  entii-ely  missed  the  real  root  of

70


CHAP.  IV.  BOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  T:  SA  MrrEL.


the  mischief.  The  thunder  may  be  the  occasion  of  the  (LiinaLje,  but  it  is  not
the  cause.  That  is  to  be  found  in  the  nature  of  tiie  soil  upon  which  the  house
is  built,  and  their  failure  to  find  it  leads  them  to  use  means  which  end  in
greater  disaster.  So  it  was  with  Israel  in  their  first  defeat.  Tliey  did  not
search  deep  enough  to  find  the  real  cause  of  their  discomhture.  The  Philistines
under  God  were  the  occasion,  but  their  own  sin  was  the  cause  of  their  misfortune,
and  failing  to  find  it  they  rushed  to  the  use  of  means  which  resulted  in  a  more
shameful  defeat  and  a  more  terrible  humiliation.  To  send  for  the  ark  of  God
into  the  field  was  useless,  because  that  state  of  heart  was  wanting  which  made
the  symbol  of  God's  presence  anything  more  than  a  chest  of  wood — it  was  but
to  cast  greater  dishonour  upon  the  God  whose  favour  alone  made  the  ark  a
sacred  thing,  and  thus  to  add  another  sin  to  the  many  which  already  stained
their  national  history.  And  God  demonstrates  the  uselessness  and  unlawfulness
of  their  effort  by  permitting  this  most  sacred  symbol  to  fall  into  the  hands  of
the  uncircumcised  Philistines.

V.  Relationship  to  the  victories  of  the  past  without  the  character  of  the
victors  may  lead  to  wrong  inferences  and  fatal  results.  There  are  many  men
of  the  present  day  who  have  a  special  relationsliip  to  the  great  events  of  the
past,  because  they  are  descendants  of  those  who  were  the  actors  in  those  events.
But  if  they  infer  from  their  mere  relationship  that  they  are  as  fit  to  accomplish
great  things  as  their  forefathers  were,  they  fall  into  an  error  which  may  be
fatal  to  themselves  and  others.  They  must  first  make  sure  that  they  possess
the  mental  and  moral  qualities  by  which  their  ancestors  became  so  renowned.
It  is  not  enough  to  be  bone  of  their  bone  and  flesh  of  their  flesh  unless  tliey
partake  of  their  s})irit.  'i'he  children  of  the  great  and  good  must  be  great  and
good  themselves  if  they  would  do  the  great  deeds  of  their  fathers.  If  they
venture  upon  great  enterprises,  looking  for  success  to  their  descent  from  some
hero  of  the  past,  they  will  find  that  it  will  avail  them  nothing  to  bear  his  name
if  they  lack  his  courage,  his  self-denial,  his  fortitude  and  his  faith.  Priests
bearing  the  ark  of  God  had  in  the  past  history  of  Israel  made  a  way  by  which  they
had  advanced  to  glorious  victory.  There  had  been  a  memorable  day  in  their
history  when  "  as  they  that  bare  the  ark  ivtre  come  unto  Jordan,  and  the  feet  of
the  priests  that  bare  the  ark  were  dipped  in  the  brim  of  the  water ^  that  the
waters  were  cut  off  and  the  people  passed  over  right  against  Jericho  "  (Josh.  iii.
16).  And  perhaps  both  priests  and  people  hoped  for  some  such  interposition  of
God  on  the  present  occasion.  But  then  the  ark  was  borne  by  men  who
had  faith  in  God — the  feet  of  those  by  whose  touch  under  God  Jordan  was
driven  back,  were  cleaner  feet  that  those  of  Hophni  and  Phinehas.  The
priests  who  stood  firm  in  the  midst  of  Jordan — the  first  to  descend  into
its  bed  and  the  last  to  leave  it — had  confidence  in  the  living  God,  and
their  courage  and  faith  spread  itself  throughout  all  the  ranks  of  Israel,
and  inspired  them  with  a  like  faith  and  courage.  But  although  the  same
ark  of  God  was  in  the  midst  of  Israel  to-day  it  was  borne  upon  the
shoulders  of  men  who  had  only  a  bodily  kinship  to  their  ancestors,  and
who,  instead  of  inciting  the  people  to  confide  in  the  God  of  their  fathers,
had  brought  His  name  and  His  worship  into  contempt.  It  was  an  act  of  the
highest  presumption  on  their  part  to  bring  the  ark  of  God  into  the  fiehl,
knowing,  as  they  did,  that  though  they  belonged  to  a  priestly  family,  they  had
none  of  the  qualitications  for  the  priestly  office.  If  they  relied  upon  their
relationship  to  the  victors  of  the  past  they  were  soon  to  become  examples  to  all
succeeding  ages  of  the  futility  of  such  a  reliance.

VI.  When  superstition  is  the  foundation  of  joy,  thejoy  will  soon  be  turned
into  sorrow.    It  is  superstition  to  attach  any  value  to  the  symbol  when  that

71


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  l


which  makes  the  symbol  worth  anything  has  departed.  The  human  body  is  a
goodly  and  precious  object,  while  it  is  tenanted  by  a  living  soul  ;  but  without
the  soul  it  is  only  dead  matter.  So  is  it  with  a  symbol,  and  that  wliich  it
signifies.  When  that  which  it  symbolises  is  gone  it  is  as  a  body  without  life.
The  ark  was  intended  to  be  a  sign  to  the  Israelites  of  the  presence  in  their  midst
of  the  invisible  God.  The  mercy  seat,  upon  which  the  blood  of  atonement  had
been  sprinkled,  and  over  which  the  glory  of  God  had  been  visibly  manifested,  had
been  a  token  of  the  favour  of  Him  to  whom  Israel  had  bound  themselves  to
render  obedience.  But  the  covenant  had  been  broken  by  their  faithlessness,
jnd  the  presence  in  their  midst  of  the  symbol  of  what  had  for  a  time  ceased  to
exist,  was  of  as  little  worth  as  the  presence  of  a  corpse  in  the  place  of  a  living
man.  To  attach  any  value  to  it  was  an  act  of  ignorant  superstition,  and  the
hoi)e  founded  upon  such  a  basis  must  end  in  disappointment.  "  When  the
ark  of  the  covenant  came  into  the  camp,  all  Israel  shouted  with  a  great
shout "  (ver.  5),  but  their  triumph  was  of  short  duration  because  it  was
founded  upon  a  superstition.  Joy  springing  from  such  a  source  only  increases
the  bitterness  of  the  disappointment  when  the  true  state  of  things  is  revealed,
and  men  should  look  well  to  the  foundation  of  their  hope  and  joy  and
see  that  it  is  founded  upon  the  truth  of  God,  or  the  false  hope  will  be  but  as
the  lightning  flash  which  is  gone  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  and  makes  the
darkness  all  around  seem  deeper  than  it  was  before.  The  shout  that  now  rang
through  the  Hebrew  camp  was  a  terrible  contrast  to  the  cry  of  despair  that  ran
through  the  host  when  the  ark  of  God  was  taken.

VII.  Men  will  fight  as  valiantly  for  a  bad  cause  as  for  a  good  one.     The

Philistines  fought  as  valiantly  as  the  Israelites  (ver.  10).  History  furnishes  us
with  abundant  testimony  to  the  fact  that  courage  is  born  of  error  as  well  as  of
truth.  He  who  believes  a  lie  may  contend  for  it  as  valiantly  as  he  who  fights
for  the  very  truth  of  God.  The  Israelites,  fallen  as  they  were,  had  more  of
right  and  truth  on  their  side  than  their  enemies  had,  yet  the  Philistines  were  at
least  as  bold  and  brave  as  they  were.  Though  the  heathen  believed  that  they
were  opposed  by  the  mighty  gods  that  smote  the  Egyptians,  they  resolved  to
quit  themselves  like  men,  and  fight  even  unto  death  rather  than  become
servants  to  the  Hebrews.  And  the  issue  of  the  battle  shows  that  their  resolu-
tion did  not  falter.  The  courage  of  the  battle-field  is  to  a  large  degree  of  an
animal  nature,  hence  the  savage  will  stand  and  die  at  his  post  with  as  mncli
fortitude  as  the  citizen  soldier,  and  he  who  fights  without  knowing  what  he
fights  for,  or  for  the  worst  of  causes,  will  be  as  brave  as  he  who  fights  from  the
purest  and  most  patriotic  motives.  No  men  ever  fought  in  a  more  unjust  cause
ttian  the  Spaniards  who  sought  to  crush  the  liberties  of  the  Netherlanders,  and
yet  their  bravery  was  on  niany  occasions  equal  to  that  of  their  opponents,  who
wrire  engaged  in  the  holiest  of  all  struggles — the  struggle  for  religious  freedom.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

V^er.  3.  Tlie  voice  of  many  of  us  bring  me  the  sacrament  that  shall  save
now  is  like  to  the  voice  of  the  Jews  in  me  ;  thou  runnest  to  thy  baptism,  to
the  time  of  their  distress.  "Bring  us  thy  sabbath,  to  privileges,  and  thence
the  ark,"  say  they,  "that  it  may  save  concludest  that  thou  canst  not  be  con-
ns," when,  alas,  they  were  destroyed  demned  ;  when,  alas,  thou  mayest  go
by  the  Philistines  for  all  their  ark.  So  to  hell  fire  for  all  thy  font-water,  and
thou,  reader,  when  conscience  frighteth  to  eternal  torments,  though  thou  hast
thee,  or  death  comes  nigh  thee,  pro-  often  been  at  the  Lord's  table  (Matt,
bably  speakest  in  thine  heart.  Come,  vii.  22).  Baptismal  water  is  not  the
bring  me  the  ark  that  may  save  me,  laver  of  regeneration.  Many  sit  at
72


CHAP.  IV,


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    SAMUEL


tlie  Lord's  taMe  wliicli  do  not  taste  of

11  is  supi)er kSpiritual  privileges

always  commend  God  to  us,  but  not
us  to  God. — Sirinnock.

"  Trust  ye  not  in  lying  words,"  says
the  prophet  (Jer.  vii.  4),  "  saying,  The
temple  of  the  Lord;"  but  if  ye
thoroughly  amend  your  ways,  *'  then
will  I  cause  you  to  dwell  in  this  ])lace
for  ever  and  ever "  (ver.  7).  It  is
observable  that  God  there  refers  to
this  history,  and  says,  "  Go  ye  now
to  Shiloh^  and  see  what  I  did  to  it
for  the  wickedness  of  my  people.
Probably  David  remembered  it,  when
he  refused  to  allow  the  ark  to  be
carried  with  him  in  his  retreat  before
Absalom  out  of  Jerusalem  (2  Sam.  xv.
25). —  Wordsworth.

As  Israel  became  acted  on  by  the
system  which  prevailed  under  Eli,
superstition  succeeded  to  the  fear  of
God.  JNow  superstition  is  the  refuge
of  the  conscience  when  it  has  lost  the
sense  of  God's  personal  presence.  You
may  measure  by  its  prevalence  the
absence  of  God  from  men's  hearts.
It  will  be  natural  that  in  an  age  of
mere  outward  respect  for  religion,
superstition  should  be  advancing  and
regaining  its  hold. — Alford.

It  will  often  happen  that  those  who
are  least  affected  by  the  overwhelming
sense  of  God's  abiding  presence  with
His  Church,  the  authority  of  her
ministry  and  the  power  of  her  ordi-
nances, will  be  found,  and  that  too
because  of  their  little  inward  affection,
most  forward  on  all  occasions  to  talk
about,  and  in  argument  to  contend  for,
the  high  privileges  with  which  Christ
has  endowed  her.  Such  men,  like  the
Israelites  when  defeated  by  the  Philis-
tines, in  the  hope  of  victory  scrujile
not  at  every  conflict  with  their  enemies
to  lay  bare,  as  it  were,  the  veiled  glories
of  the  tabernacle,  and  at  their  own
will  to  bring  forth  the  ark  of  the  cove-
nant, as  if  that  alone  were  wanting  to
strike  dismay  into  the  opposing  ranks

and    ensure    success But   to

make  war  in  the  name  of  the  Lord
against  others  only,  and  not  against
our  own  sins  and  iniquities,  is  to
pollute  the  name  of  God  and  cause


His  offering  to  be  abhorred. — Bishop
FidJ'ord,

Ver.  4.  Jehovah  as  covenant-God
is  more  properly  designated  in  a  two-
fold manner,  corresponding  to  the
situation,  in  which  the  Israelites  desire
His  Almighty  help,  which  they  think
to  be  externally  connected  with  the
ark.  As  Jehovah  iSabbaoth  (Lord  of
Hosts),  He  is  the  Almighty  ruler  and
commander  of  the  heavenly  powers.
As  Jehovah  who  "  dwells  above  the
cherubim,"  He  is  the  living  God,  the
God  of  the  completest  fulness  of  power
and  life,  who  reveals  Himself  on  earth
in  His  glory,  exaltedness,  and  dominion
over  all  the  fulness  of  the  life  which
has  been  called  into  being  by  Him  as
Creator.  This  designation  of  God  is
never  found  excei)t  in  relation  to  the
ark,  which  is  conceived  of  as  the  throne
of  the  covenant-God,  who  dwells  as
King  in  the  midst  of  His  people.  The
cherubim  are  not  representatives  of  the
heavenly  powers,  since  they  are,  as  to
form,  made  up  of  elements  of  the  living,
animate,  earthly  creation  which  cul-
minates in  man.  Kepresenting  this,
they  set  forth,  in  their  position  on  the
ark,  the  ruling  might  and  majesty  of
the  Living  God,  as  it  is  revealed  over
the  maniloldness  of  the  highest  and
completest  life  of  the  animate  creation.
In  these  two  designations  of  God,  then,
reference  is  had  to  the  glory  and  do-
minion of  God,  which  embraces  and
high  exceeds  all  creaturely  life  in  heaven
and  on  earth,  and  whose  saving  inter-
position the  Israelites  made  dependent
on  the  presence  of  the  ark.  In  sharpest
contrast  to  this  indication  of  God's
loftine:^s  and  majesty,  stands  the  men-
tion of  the  two  priests,  Hoplmi  and
Phinehas,  whose  worthlessness  has  been
before  set  forth,  and  who  represent  the
whole  of  the  moral  corruption  and
sham  religious  life  of  the  people. —
Langes  Commentary.

Ver.  5.  When  the  ark  was  brought
into  the  host,  though  with  mean  and
wicked  attendance,  Israel  doth,  as  it
weie,  All  the  heaven  and  shake  the
earth  with  shouts,  as  if  the  ark  and

73


nOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,  book  L


victory  were  no  less  inseparable  than  external  piety,  serve  Him  in  ap])ear-
they  and  their  sins.  Even  the  lewdest  ance  only,  being  in  heart  and  life  far
men  will  be  looking  for  favour  from  from  Him,  He  gives  them  up  for  pun-
that  God  whom  they  cared  not  to  dis-  ishmeiit  to  the  world,  before  which
please,  contrary  to  the  conscience  of  they  have  not  magnified  the  honour  of
their  deservings  ;  presumption  doth  His  name,  but  have  covered  it  with
the  same  in  wicked  men  which  faith  reproach. — Langes  Commentary.
doth  in  the  holiest.  Those  that  re-
garded not  the  God  of  the  ark  think  Ver.  11.  "  The  ark  of  God  was
themselves  safe  and  happy  in  the  ark  talcen"  Why  did  God  permit  this  ?
of  God.  Vain  men  are  transported  I.  In  order  to  show  that  His  presence
with  a  confidence  in  the  outside  of  had  forsaken  Israel,  because  they  had
religion,  not  regarding  the  substance  forsaken  Him.  II.  In  order  to  show
and  soul  of  it,  which  only  can  give  that  visible  ordinances  of  religion  only
them  true  peace. — Bp.  Hall,  profit  those   who  have  the  spirit   of

religion  within  them.     III.    In  order

Ver.    9.      Observe    the    Philistines  to  show  that  though  men  are  bound  to

crying,  ''  God  is  come  into  the  camp  ;  use  the  means  of  grace  which  God  has

woe  unto  us  ! "  etc.     Yet  they  settle,  instituted  for  the  conveyance  of  His

hearten,    harden  themselves   to   fight  blessings  to  them,  yet  God's  presence

against  Him Refractory  and  and   working    are   not   tied   to   those

perverse  affections  make  a  man  frantic,  means.     He  can  act  without  them. —

Tiiere  may  he  a  sober  knowledge,  that  Wordsworth.

the   patient   may  say,  "I  see  better  Instead  of  bewailing  a  nation's  sins,

things,"  and  a  faith   (but  such  as  is  and  preaching  public  repentance  and

incident  to  devils)  "I  allow  of  them,"  interceding  for  mercy  from  a  forgiving

but  where  the  whole  man  is  tyrannised  God,  Hophni  and  Phinehas  had  joined

over  by  the  regent-house  of  irrefragable  in  the  superstitious  desire  to  take  the

affects,  he  concludes  his  course  with,  ark  into  the  field  of  battle,  and  they

*' I  follow  the  worse." — T.Adams.  met  with   a  bloody  and  ignominous

death  as   the  price  of  their  perilous

Ver.  10.  It  is  just  the  same  now,  temerity  and  open  profanity.      It  is

when    we    take    merely    a    historical  ever  dangerous  for  ministers  of  religion

Christ  outside  us  for  our  Redeemer,  to  mix  in  the  strife  of  war.     Not  that

He  must  prove  His  help  chiefly  inter-  it  is  foreign  to  their  duty  to  become

nally  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  to  redeem  pastors  of  soldiers — that  is  a  duty  in-

us  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Philistines  ;      cumbent  upon  them But  it  ill

though   externally   He  must   not    be  becomes  the  minister  of  peace  to  mix

thrown  into  the  shade,  as  accomplish-  in  the  clang  of  arms.     It  was  an  evil

ing  our  justification.     If  we  had  not  day  for  Hophni   and  Phinehas  when

Christ,  we  could  never  stand.     But  if  they  took  the  ark  of  the  covenant  from

we  have  Him  in  no  other  way  than  Shiloh,  and   sought  to  work  on  the

merely  without  us,  and  under  us,  if  w^e  fanaticism  of  the  people  by  unveiling

only  preach   about  Him,  teach,  hear,  the  Holiest  of  all.    They  provoked  the

read,  talk,  discuss,  and  dispute  about  judgment  which  shed  their  blood.     It

Him,  take  His  name  into  our  mouth,  was  an  evil  day  for  Zwingle  when  he

but  will  not  let  Him  work  and  show  left    his   chaplain's    post    to    wear   a

His  power  in  us,  He  will  no  more  help  helmet,  a  sword,   and   a   battle-axe  :

us  than  the  ark  helped  the  Israelites,  covered  with  wounds,  insulted,  killed,

— Berlenberger  Bible.  he  lay  under  a  tree  at  Cappel ;  not  yet

It  is  one  of  the  weightiest  laws  in  forty- eight  years  of  age,  lus  body  cut

the  kingdom  of  God,  that  when  His  and  burned,  and  his  ashes  driven  to

people,  who  profess  His  name,  do  not  the  winds.     "He  had  wielded  an  arm

show   covenant   fidelity  in  faith   and  that      God     had     forbidden,"     says

obedience,  but,  under  cover  of  merely  D'Aubignd  ;  "  the  helmet  had  covered
74


CHAP.  IV.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.


liis  liead,  and  be  had  grasped  the
halberd.  His  more  devoted  friends
were  tliemselves  astonished,  and  ex-
claimed, *  We  knew  not  v\hat  to  say —
a  bisbop  in  arms.'  The  bolt  liad  fur-
rowed the  cloud,  the  blow  had  reached
the  reformer,  and  bis  body  was  no
more  than  a  handful  of  dust  in  the
palm  of  a  soldier." — Steele.

The  ark  of  God  was  taken.  These
words  record  the  most  disastrous  event
that  had  till  then  befallen  the  children
of  Israel.  .  .  .  Even  in  the  worst  times,
when  the  revolt  might  seem  universal,
there  were  always  some,  however  few,
who  constituted  the  Church,  the  true
Israel,  wlio  never  bowed  the  knee  to  a
false  god  ;  and  to  all  such,  Shiloh,  with
the  tabernacle,  the  altar  of  burnt
offering,  and  the  ark  of  the  covenant,
would  be  a  precious  spot,  towards  which
their   thoughts   would  turn   in  every

season  of  distress  and  disaster

So  long  as  there  was  no  visible  intima-
tion that  God  had  deserted  Shiloh,
true  believers  in  Israel  would  still
cherish  the  hope  that,  however  severe
might  be  the  judgments  with  which
God  visited  them,  He  had  not  finally
given  them  up.  .  .  .  But  now  what
could  every  thoughtful  man  in  Israel
conclude,  but  that  all  the  wonderful
deliverances  in  connection  wath  the
ark  of  which  their  fathers  had  told
them,  were  at  an  end  ?  .  .  .  The  state
of  the  people  of  God  at  the  time  here


referred  to,  as  well  as  the  immediate
cause  of  their  being  brought  into  that
state,  reminds  us  of  another  period  in
which  the  Church  must  have  been  in
great  darkness  and  per{)lexity.  I  refer
to  the  time  when  our  Lord  was  de-
livered into  the  hands  of  ungodly  men,
w^hen  He  was  crucitied,  and  remained
for  a  time  under  the  powder  of  death,
I  do  not  say  that  the  one  is  designedly
typical  of  the  other.  But  we  know
that  the  ark  was  in  various  respects  a
remarkable  type  of  Christ,  and  the
passage  before  us  naturally  suggests,  at
least,  his  humiliation  and  death. — B.
Gordon.

Rather  than  God  will  humour  super-
stition in  Israelites,  he  will  suffer  His
own  ark  to  fall  into  the  hands  of
Philistines  :  rather  will  He  seem  to
slacken  His  hand  of  protection,  than
He  will  be  thought  to  have  His  hands
bound  by  a  formal  mis-confidence.
The  slaughter  of  the  Israelites  was  no
plague  to  this  ;  it  was  a  greater  plague
rather  to  them  that  should  survive  and
behold  it.  The  two  sons  of  Eli,  who
had  helped  to  corrupt  their  brethren,
die  by  the  hand  of  the  un circumcised,
and  are  now  too  late  separated  from
the  ark  of  God  by  Philistines,  who
should  have  been  before  separated  by
their  father  ;  they  had  formerly  lived
to  bring  God's  altar  into  contempt,
and  now  live  to  carry  His  ark  into
captivity. — Bishop  Hall.


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH, ^Verses  12—22.

The  Death  of  Ell

I.  All  God's  promises  become  histories.  In  the  natural  world  there  is  promise
of  what  shall  be,  and  in  due  time  there  is  the  history  of  its  having  been.  The
green  blade  of  spring  is  a  promise  of  the  harvest  that  is  by  and  by  a  fact  in  the
history  of  the  world.  The  cloud  no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand  upon  the  horizon
is  the  promise  of  the  storm  that  may  be  presently  set  down  in  the  catalogue  of
destructive  visitations  that  have  devastated  the  earth.  In  the  days  of  Noah  a
promise  of  judgment  hung  over  the  people  of  his  day  for  one  hundred  and
twenty  years.  So  long  was  it  before  the  cloud  burst  that  the  terror  whicb  was
perhaps  aroused  at  the  first  announcement  of  its  appearance  passed  away  long
before  the  storm  burst.  But  it  came,  and  the  flood  is  now  a  fact  in  the  history
of  the  world.  God  had  foretold  the  judgment  which  is  described  in  this  chapter
some  years  before.  If  the  message  which  had  been  sent  to  the  house  of  Eli  had
ever  caused  the  hearts  of  Hophni  and  Phiuehas  to  quake,  the  delay  in  the

75


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  BouK  1.


execution  of  the  sentence  had  probably  only  hardened  them  in  their  sin,  and
perhaps  even  Eli  himself  might  have  begun  to  hope  that  it  would  not  bo  so
terrible  as  it  had  seemed  to  him  at  first.  But  on  this  memorable  day  God  t^ave
a  demonstration  to  all  coming  ages  that  all  His  promises,  whether  of  judgment  or
mercy,  will  one  day  become  lacts  in  the  history  of  the  universe.  A  promise  was
made  to  Isaiah  concerning  the  deliverance  of  his  nation  from  Babylon  long  before
it  went  into  captivity,  but  both  captivity  and  deliverance,  with  all  the  circum-
stances foretohl  concerning  the  latter  in  Isaiah  xlv.,  have  long  ago  become  well-
known  historic  facts.  The  great  fact  in  which  all  history  centres — the  incarnation
of  the  Son  of  God — was  for  ages  only  a  i)romise.  The  dim  outline  given  to  our
first  parents  in  Eden  was  like  the  tiny  germ  bursting  from  the  seed  which  grew
into  the  blade  and  ear  as  the  ages  rolled,  until  the  promise  became  the  great
historic  event  of  the  world.  And  there  are  promises  now  waiting  to  become
histories,  and  they  will  as  surely  have  their  fulfilment  as  those  that  have  gone
before.  What  has  been  is  a  pledge  of  what  will  be.  Men  say,  concerning
Christ's  second  advent,  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming  ? "  But  that
promise  of  the  Lord  will  one  day  as  surely  be  a  fact  of  past  history  as  those  that
have  gone  before.

II.  The  effects  produced  by  the  fulfilment  of  this  promise  of  judgment.
There  was  not  a  family  in  the  land  who  was  not  smitten  with  a  sense  of  national
calamity.  A  stab  at  the  heart  sends  a  pain  through  all  the  frame,  the
extremities  of  the  body  feel  a  blow  aimed  at  the  seat  of  life.  In  countries
where  the  army  is  drawn  from  the  fields  and  workshops  of  the  people,  the
strength  of  the  nation  is  often  found  gathered  upon  the  battle-held,  and  a
defeat  there  is  a  bh)w  at  its  very  heart  and  sends  a  thrill  of  anguish  into  every
home.  Such  was  the  nature  of  the  blow  which  Israel  had  now  sustained,  and
the  entire  body  of  the  nation  felt  the  shock.  Wherever  there  was  a  child  of
Abraham  the  news  of  the  defeat  pierced  him  through  like  a  stab  of  cold  steel.
But  the  calamity  was  more  intensely  felt  by  some  households  than  by  others.
In  any  time  of  national  calamity  the  leaders  of  the  nation  have  to  bear  a  larger
portion  of  the  sorrow  than  the  masses.  They  lose  more  in  every  way.  They
have  more  to  lose — more  in  substance — more  in  honour;  as  their  position  has
been  higher,  their  fall  is  greater,  and  as  more  responsibility  has  rested  upon
them,  so  their  disgrace  is  heavier.  Althoiigh  all  the  families  of  Israel  suffeied
on  this  day  none  suffered  so  much  as  the  house  of  Eli.  Even  if  it  had  not  been
the  execution  of  a  special  judgment  upon  them,  their  position  would  have  made
them  the  greatest  sufferers,  but  the  consciousness  that  the  calamity  was  mainly
due  to  the  sins  of  their  house  intensified  a  thousand-fold  the  severity  of  the
blow.  The  effect  that  the  news  had  upon  the  aged  high-priest  shows  how
eeverely  he  felt  it.  In  felling  an  aged  oak  many  a  stroke  of  the  hatchet  may  be
dealt  before  there  is  any  sign  of  its  fall,  but  at  length  the  woodman  gathers  all
his  strength  tor  a  final  stroke,  which,  following  upon  all  that  have  gone  before,
lays  it  even  with  the  ground.  So  it  is  with  men  and  the  strokes  of  adverse
providence — they  stand  upright  after  having  received  many  a  heavy  blow,  but
one  may  come  at  last  which,  finding  their  courage  and  patience  weakened
by  the  trials  of  the  past,  crushes  them  altogether.  Job  bore  up  manfully  against
repeated  and  heavy  blows,  but  at  last  a  stroke  fell  which  laid  even  this  brave
and  patient  man  prostrate  like  a  fallen  tree.  Eli  had  seen  many  a  sad  day  in
the  course  of  a  life  which  covered  nearly  a  century,  but  he  had  never  seen  a
day  like  this.  Even  now  he  bore  calmly  the  news  of  Israel's  defeat,  and  even
that  of  the  death  of  his  sons,  but  the  tidings  that  the  ark  of  God  was  taken
was  too  much  to  bear  and  live — this  stroke  killed  him.

III.  Calamity  often  reveals  excellencies  which  are  hidden  in  prosperity.
There  are  many  men  in  the  Church  of  God  living  in  ease  and  comfort  who  do

76


CHAP  IV.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL,


not  seem  to  possess  any  extraordinary  heroism.  But  very  often  such  men,  under
circumstances  of  special  trial,  reveal  a  nobility  of  character  that  men  never
knew  before  that  they  possessed.  Like  spices,  they  must  be  crushed  before  tliey
yield  their  fragrance.  What  is  recorded  of  the  life  of  Eli  does  not  leave  the
impression  that  he  was  a  very  exalted  character ;  but  the  fact  that  it  was  the
loss  of  the  ark  of  God  that  killed  him,  and  not  the  news  of  his  own  personal
bereavement,  shows  that  there  was  much  latent  patriotism  in  him,  notwithstanding
his  grave  shortcomings.  We  should  never  have  known  how  much  he  really
prized  the  hallowed  tokens  of  God's  covenant-relation  to  Israel  if  this  calamity
had  not  befallen  him.  The  thought  that  God  had  departed  from  his  people
broke  his  heart  before  he  fell  and  broke  his  neck.  It  is  the  same  with  his
daughter-in-law.  We  should  never  have  known  of  this  woman's  piety  if  this
blow  had  not  fallen  upon  her.  It  was  not  the  death  of  her  father,  or  of  her
husband,  that  made  her  refuse  to  be  comforted  and  to  go  down  to  the  grave
with  Ichahod  upon  her  lips,  but  **  she  said,  The  glory  is  departed  from  Israel ;
for  the  ark  of  God  is  taken.'*


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  13.  There  be  four  reasons  why  God  have  an  interest  in  the  ark.     God
the  people  of  God  are  so  much  troubled  is  the  haven  of  a  child  of  God,  his
when  the  ark   of  God   is  in  danger,  portion    and    inheritance,   and    when
I.  Because  of  the  great  love  they  bear  God  begins  to  forsake  them  they  can-
to it.     As  "  God  loved   the  gates   of  not  but  be  troubled.     The  ordinances
Zion  more  than  all  the  dwellings  of  of  God  are  the  jewels  of  a  Christian
Jacob"    (Psalm    Ixxxvii.    2),   so    the  and  the  treasure  of  a  Christian,  and
people   of    God   love   the    ordinances  the  loss  of  them  cannot  but  trouble
of  God,  and  the  faithful  ministers  of  them.     III.  Because  of  the  mischiefs
Christ.      "  Lord,   I    have    loved    the  that  come  upon  a  nation  when  the  ark
habitation  of  Thy  house,  and  the  place  is  lost.     Woe  be  to  that  nation  when
where  Thine  honour  dwelleth"  (Psalm  the  ark  is  gone.     For  when  the  ark  of
xxvi.  8).     Now  love  stirreth  up  the  God  is  taken  then  the  ivays  oj  Zion
affections,  as  young  Cresus,  though  he  mourn,  and  none  come  to  her  solemn
were  dumb,  yet  seeing  his  father  like  ai<semhlies.     That  is  matter  of  sadness,
to  be  killed,  cried  out  "Do  not  kill  'I  hen  the  ministers  of  Christ  are  driven
my  father  !"     Such  is  the  love  of  the  into  corners.     This  is  matter  of  heart-
saints  of  God  to  the  ark;  they  cannot  trembling.     Then  the  souls  of  men  are
but  tremble  when  they  see  the  ark  in  in  danger.     There  is  cause  of  sadness,
danger,  and  for  Sion's  sake  they  cannot  Then  do  the  enemies  of  God  blaspheme^
hold    their    peace,    and    they   cannot  and  then  is  Jesus  Christ  trampled  under
be    silent  until   the   Lord   make   the  foot.     IV.  Bocause  of  their  accessari-
righteousness     thereof    go     out    like  ness  to  the  losing  of  the  ark.     And
brightness,  and   the  salvation   thereof  this  was  that  which  made  Eli  so  much
as  a  lamp  that  burneth.     II.  Because  troubled,  because  he  knew  that  for  his
of  the  interest  they  have  in  the  ark  sin  God  suffered  the  ark  to  be  taken.
of  God.     Interest  stirreth  up  aflection  And  there  is  none  of  us  so  holy  but  our
as  when    another   man's  house  is  on  consciences  must  accuse  us.     We  have
tire  ;  as  )^ou  had  a  lamentable  and  sad  done  something  that  might  cause  God
])rovidence  this  last  week,  and  it  is  not  to  take  the  ark  from  us. — E.  Calamy,
to   be  forgotten  how  suddenly  in  all  1662.
our  feastings  may  God  dash  all  our

mirth.     Now  consider,  how  were  they  Ver.  22.  With  the  surrender  of  the

alTected  that  had  an  interest  in  those  earthly  throne  of  Ilis  glory  the  Lord

that  were  burned ;   so  the  people  of  appeared     to    have     abolished     His

77


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  L


covenant  of  grace  with  Israel ;  for  the  was  destroyed  by  the  Romans,  and  the
ark,  with  the  tables  of  the  law  and  the  universal  Church  of  Christ  was  raised
capporeth,  wa«  the  visible  pledge  of  up  in  its  stead. — Wordsworth.
the  covenant  of  grace  which  Jehovah  The  union  of  the  heart  with  God
had  made  with  Israel. — Keil.  in  the  deepest  foundation  of  its  being
The  glory  is  departed  from  Israel —  reveals  itself  in  times  of  great  mislor-
so  it  seemed  in  the  eyes  of  men.  But  tune  and  suffering  in  this,  that  the
with  God  there  is  ''  no  variableness  or  sorrow  and  mourning  is  not  restricted
shadow  of  turning  "  (Jas.  i.  17)  ;  and  to  the  loss  of  earthly  human  posses-
in  that  dark  night  of  sorrow  to  the  sious,  but  directs  itself  chiefly  to  the
Hebrew  Church  and  nation  His  glory  loss  and  lack  of  God's  gracious  pie-
shone  forth  most  brightly.  There  is  sence,  and  thus  shows  that  for  the
no  Ichabod  to  God.  His  sovereign  inner  life  the  glory  of  God  and  blessed-
power  and  Divine  independence  were  ness  in  communion  with  Him  is  become
seen  to  work  more  gloriously  and  gra-  the  highest  good.  So  here,  in  tliis
ciously  even  when  the  visible  Church  refraining  from  grief  over  the  loss  of

appeared  to  be  overthrown what  to  the  flesh  was  the  nearest  and

He  inaugurated  a  new  era  in  Samuel,  dearest,  and  in  the  outspoken  sorrow

and  prepared  the  way  for  the  Gospel,  only  over  the  violence  done  to  God's

He  showed  that  the  Aaronical  priest-  honour  and  the  contempt  cast  on  His

hood  was  only  parenthetical  and  pro-  name,  is  verihed  the  Lord's  word,  "  He

visional;  that  the  Levitical  ordinances  who  forsaketh  not  father  or  mother,

were  not  necessary  to  God's  gracious  or  brother,  etc.,  is  not  worthy  of  me."

dealings  with  His  people  ;   that  they  Langes  Commentary.

were  shadows   which   would  one  day  What  cares  she  for  a  posterity  which

pass  away;     that   they   were   like   a  should  want  the  ark  ?    What  cares  she

scaffold  for  building  up  a  house — the  for  a  son  come  into  the  world  of  Israel.

Church   of  Christ God   thus  when   God   was  gone  from  it  ?      Anc)

gave  a  prophetic  foreshadowing  of  what  how   willingly  doth   she   depart   fron/

was  more  fully  displayed  to  the  world  them,  from  whom  God  was  departed'

when  the  material  temple  of  Jerusalem  Bishop  Hall,


CHAPTER  V.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1.  •*  Ashdod."  One  of  the  five  Philistine  satrapies
about  thirty-two  miles  north  of  Gaza,  and  about  a  mile  from  the  sea.  It  is  now  the  little  viUagd
of  Esdfid.

Ver.  2.  "Dagon."  One  of  the  chief  Philistine  deities.  "  With  regard  to  the  imag^  of  Dagon,
compounded  of  a  man  and  fish,  i.e.,  of  a  human  body  with  head  and  hands,  aiid  a  fish's  tail,  see
Stark's  Gaza  and  Layard's  Nineveh,  where  there  is  a  bas-relief  from  Khorsabad,  in  which  *  a
figure  is  seen  swimming  in  the  sea,  with  the  upper  part  of  the  body  resembling  a  bearded  man,
wearing  the  ordinary  conical  tiara  of  royalty,  adorned  with  elephant's  tusks,  and  the  lower  part
resembling  the  body  of  a  fish.'  (Starke.  J  As  the  bas-relief  renresents  (according  to  Layard)
the  war  of  an  Assyrian  king  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  coasts  of  ttyria,  most  probably  of  Sargon,
who  had  to  carry  on  a  long  conflict  with  the  Philistian  towns,  more  especially  with  Ashdod,
there  can  hardly  be  any  doubt  that  we  have  a  representation  of  the  Philistian  Dagon  here.
This  deity  was  a  personification  of  the  generative  and  vivifying  principle  of  nature  for  which  the
fish,  with  its  innumerable  multiplication,  was  specially  adapted,  and  set  forth  the  Giver  of  all
earthly  good."     (  Keil.j

Ver.  4.  "  The  word  were  is  not  in  the  original,  and  would  be  better  omitted  ;  the  head  and
palms  of  Dagon,  being  cut  off,  were  lying  on  the  threshold.  Here  was  the  miracle,  and  it  was
very  significant.  It  was  done  by  the  Divine  power.  The  liead  and  palms  of  Dagon,  the  chiefest
of  his  members,  the  emblems  of  his  strength,  were  lopped  off."  (Wordsworth.)  "Only  the
Stump,"  etc.  Literally,  "only  Dagon,  the  fish  (from  dag^  a._ish),  the  ignoblest  part,  was  left."
(  Wordswoiih, )

78


CHAP.  V.  EOMILETIC  COM  ME  NT AR  Y :   SA  M  UEL.


Ver.  5,  "  Therefore  neither  the  priests — tread  on  the  threshold,"  etc,     "  Cf.  Zeph.  i.  9.

*  On  the  same  day  will  I  punish  all  those  that  leap  on  (or  over)  the  threshold.'  No  doubt  this
phrase  was  intended  (perhaps  with  some  irony)  to  describe  the  worshippers  of  the  Philistian
Dagon."     (Ilobson.)

Ver.  6.  "  Ho  destroyed  them."  From  chap.  vi.  4,  5,  11,  18,  where,  besides  the  votive
offering  referrint;  to  the  bodily  disease,  a  second,  the  golden  mice,  is  expressly  mentioned,  it  is
clear  that,  in  addition  to  the  corporal  plague,  another,  a  land-plague,  had  fallen  on  the
rhibstines.  "He  destroyed  them  "  (like  "  destruction  "  or  '■  desolation,"  in  Mic.  vi.  13,  used
of  persons)  denotes  a  wasting  of  the  land,  that  is,  of  the  produce  of  the  fields,  as  the  sup;)ort  of
human  life,  by  mice  which  "destroy  the  land"  (chap.  vi.  5).  (Erdmana.)  "We  must  go  to
the  Kast  for  parallels  to  these  ancient  plagues.  A  parallel  to  this  plague  of  mice  is  furnished
in  the  recent  history  of  Ceylon.  In  184S,  the  coffee-crop  of  that  fertile  island  was  utterly
destroyed  by  mice,  and  the  people,  losing  their  staple  harvest,  were  reduced  to  the  most  terrible
misery  and  want."  {S.  Cox.)  "Em-rods."  "  The  disease  we  call  bleeding  piles,"  a_  disease
very  common  in  Eastern  lands,  where  the  extreme  heat  induces  indisposition  to  exercise,  and
the  liver  is  very  apt  to  grow  sluggish  and  weak.  The  word  is  vernacular  English  for  the  Greek
compound  from  which  we  derive  the  technical  medical  terms,  "  hemorrhoids,  hemorrhage,"
which  designate  a  flow  of  blood.  {S  Cox.)  "  The  heathen  generally  regarded  diseases  alfectiiig
the  secret  parts  of  the  body  as  punishments  from  the  gods  for  trespasses  committed  against
themselves."     (Jamieson.J

Ver  8.  *'  Let  the  ark  of  the  God  of  Israel,"  etc.  The  princes  of  the  Philistines  probably
imagined  that  the  calamity  which  the  Ashdodites  attributed  to  the  ark  of  G-od,  either  did  not
proc^eed  from  the  ark,  i.e.,  from  the  God  of  Israel,  or  if  actually  connected  with  its  presence,
simply  arose  from  the  fact  that  the  city  itself  was  hateful  to  the  God  of  the  Israelites,  or  that
the  Dagon  of  Ashdod  was  weaker  than  the  Jehovah  of  Israel  ;  they  therefore  resolved  to  let
the  ark  be  taken  to  Gath  in  order  to  pacify  the  Ashdodites."  (Kell.)  "  Gath."  Also  one  of  the
five  Philistian  satrapies.  Its  site  is  not  accurately  known,  but  it  is  generally  identified  with
the  modern  TeU-es-SaJirh,  10  miles  east  of  Ashdod,  and  about  the  same  distance  S.  by  E.  of
Ekron.     {See  Smith's  Biblical  Dictionary.)

Ver.  10.  •'  Ekron."    Another  of  the  princely  cities,  now  AJcir.

Ver.  12.  "  The  cry  of  the  city  went  up  to  heaven."  "  The  disease  is  attended  with  acute
pain  "  {Jaynieson).

jVo^g.—This  chapter,  with  the  following,  strikingly  illustrates  the  non-missionary  character  of
the  old  dispensation.  For  centuries  the  Israelites  were  near  neighbours  of  the  Philistines,  and
had  some  acquaintance  with  their  political  and  religious  institutions.  Yet  the  Philistines  had  at
this  time  only  a  garbled  and  distorted  account  (ch.  iv.  8)  of  the  history  of  the  Israelites,  derived
probably  from  tradition,  and  seemingly  no  particular  knowledge  of  their  religion,  nor  did  the
Israelites  ever  attempt,  though  they  were  in  the  times  of  Samson  and  David  in  close  connection
with  Philistia,  to  carry  thither  a  knowledge  of  what  they  yet  believed  to  be  the  only  true
religion.  This  religious  isolation  was  no  doubt  a  part  of  the  Divine  plan  for  the  development
of  tTie  theocratic  kingdom,  gunrding  it  against  the  taints  of  idolatry,  and  permitting  the  chosen
people  thoroughly  to  apprehend  and  appropriate  the  truth  which  was  then  to  go  from  them  to
all  the  world.  But  if  we  look  for  the  natural  causes  which  produced  this  isolation  in  ancient
times,  we  shall  find  one  in  the  narrowness  of  civilisati(m  of  ancient  times,  where  the  absence  of
means  of  social  and  literary  communication  fostered  mutual  ignorance  and  inade  sympathy
almost  impossible,  and  another  ia  the  peculiarly  national  local  nature  of  the  religion  of  Israel,
with  its  central  sanctuary  and  its  whole  system  grounded  in  the  past  history  of  the  nation,
presenting  thus  great  obstacles  to  a  foreigner  who  wished  to  become  a  worshipper  of  Jehovah.
{Amer.  Tranr.  of  Lange's  Commentary),

MAIN  IIOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAQ RAPE— Verse*  1-6.

The  Fall  of  Daqon.

I.  God  works  in  silence  and  in  secret  ag-ainst  false  systems  of  religion  to
give  men  a  public  and  sudden  proof  of  their  folly.  Damon's  downfall  took
place  in  the  secrecy  of  the  night  :  when  daylight  came,  his  destruction  was
made  apparent.  God's  kingdom  of  nature,  and  His  kingdom  of  grace,  are  alike
in  this,  that  neither  "  come  with  oljservation  "  (Luke  xvii.  20).  All  the  winter
nature  seems  to  be  at  a  standstill,  but  all  the  time  secret  preparation  is  going  on
beneath  the  eround  and  within  the  plants  for  the  outburst  of  life  and  beauty  in

79


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  l


tlie  spring.  And  in  His  spiritual  kingdom  there  have  often  been  times  and
seasons  in  which  uhere  has  seemed  to  be  hardly  any  true  religious  life  left  in  the
world,  when  solitary  believers  in  God  here  and  there  have  been  ready  to  exclaim
with  the  prophet  of  old,  "7,  even  I  only,  am  left''  (1  Kings  xix.  14).  But  it
iias  often  been  found  that  such  seasons  of  darkness  have  been  followed  by  a  day
in  which  the  truth  of  God  lias  won  great  victories  in  the  hearts  of  men,  giving
proof  that  His  spirit  has  Vjeen,  during  all  the  long  night,  working  silently  and
secretly  in  men's  hearts.  So  it  was  before  the  downfall  of  Paganism  after  the
coming  of  Christ,  and  before  the  overthrow  of  the  Papal  tyranny  at  the  time
of  the  Reformation.  When  the  pious  Israelite  lay  down  that  night  and  thought
of  the  sacred  ark  of  the  covenant  in  the  house  of  Dagon,  he  must  have  been
ready  to  exclaim  with  the  dying  wife  of  Phinehas,  "  The  glory  is  departed  from
Israel."  But  God  at  that  very  hour  was  working  in  secret,  and  was  dealing  a
heavy  blow  at  the  idolatry  of  the  Philistines.

n.  Even  miraculous  evidence  does  not  alwavs  suffice  to  brings  men  to
acknowledge  God.  Experience  of  the  fallacy  of  the  advice  of  a  quack  is  the
surest  way,  we  think,  to  lead  men  to  put  faith  in  the  advice  of  a  skilful
physician  ;  and  when  men  have  had  the  powerlessness  of  the  gods  whom  they
worship  proved  to  them  by  unmistakable  evidence,  we  should  expect  them  to
be  ready  to  embrace  a  religion  based  upon  supernatural  evidence  if  history  and
experience  did  not  testify  to  the  contrary.  Dagon  testified  by  his  first  fall  that
"  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world"  (1  Cor.  viii.  4).  But  it  brought  no  conviction
into  the  minds  of  the  Philistine  priests,  l^hey  ''set  him  in  his  place  again."
His  second  fall  upon  the  threshold  seemed  to  tell  them  that  he  was  only  fit  to
be  trodden  under  foot,  yet  they  venerated  the  spot  upon  which  he  fell.  But  the
Philistines  were  not  more  unwilling  to  receive  evidence  of  the  truth  than  the
majority  of  mankind.  Israel  was  formed  into  a  nation  by  miraculous  power,
and  sustained  miraculously  for  forty  years,  and  over  and  over  again  were
delivered  from  their  distresses  by  miraculous  interpositi(Ui,  yet  God's  testimony
C(mcernin2^  them  is,  "  Ephraim  is  joined  unto  idols"  (Hosea  iv.  1.7).  The  Son
of  God  Himself  proved  that  He  came  from  the  Father  by  His  "  mighty  works,"
hut  they  made  no  impression  upon  the  mass  of  the  Jewish  people.  A  delusion
waved  is  not  a  delusion  abandoned.  And  Our  Lord  Himself  tells  us  the  reason
why.  It  is  because  "men  love  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds
are  evil"  (John  iii.  19).

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Vers.  1-5.    Dagon  before  the  ark,  or  before  the  power  of  God,  manifesting

heathenism  conquered  at   the  feet  of  Himself  as  present  in  His  Word  (the

the  living  God.     1.   In  the  domain  of  law  and  testimony  in  the  ark).     2.  Its

its  power — its  own  abode  (verses  1,  2).  power  broken   and  destroyed  through

2.  Through  the  secret  demonstration  the  secretly  working  power  of  the
of  the  power  of  the  Lord  (verses  3,  4).  Spirit   of  God.     3.   Ever  a  more  and

3.  Amid  the  destruction  of  its  power  more  glorious  revelation  of  the  power
and  glory — the  face,  as  a  sign  of  its  of  God,  which  casts  down  heathenism
worthless  glory  and  vain  beauty,  struck  in  the  light  of  the  day  of  salvation. —
down  to  the  earth  ;  the  head  also,  as  Langes  Commentary.

the    seat    of    the    wisdom    which    is  Where  God  comes  with  His  ark  and

alienated  from  God,   and  opposed  to  with   His  testimony,  there  He  smites

God  ;  the  hands,  as  a  symbol  of  the  the  idols  to  the  ground  ;  idolatry  must

powers  of  darkness  which  work  therein,  fall  where  His  gospel  finds  a  place. —

cut    off    (verses    3-5).      The  fall   of  Berlenberger  Bible,

heathenism.      I.    It  is  thrown  down  If  men  did  not  mistake  God,  thej'
80


CHAP.  V.


UO  MI  LET  10  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


could  not  arise  to  such  heights  of  im-
piety ;  the  acts  of  Ilis  just  judgments
are  imputed  to  impotence.     l)agon  bad
never  so  great  a  day,  so  many  sacrifices,
as  now  that  he  seems  to  take  the  God
of  Israel  prisoner.     Where  should  the
captive  be  bestowed,  but  in  custody  of
the  victor  ?     It  is  not  love,  but  insulta-
tion,  that  lodges  the  ark  ch)se  beside
Dagon.     What  a  spectacle  was  this,^  to
see   uncircumcised    Philistines    laying
their  profane  hands  on  the  testimony
of  God's  presence  I  to  see  the  glorious
mercy-seat  under  the  roof  of  an  idol  1
to  see  the  two   cherubims   spreading
their  win^s  under  a  false  god  !     0  the
deep  and  holy  wisdom  of  the  Ahnighty,
which  over-reaches  all  tiie  finite  conceits
of  His  creatures,  who,  while  He  seems
most  to  neglect  Hinibelf,  fetches  about
most   glory   to    His  own   name  I     He
winks  and  sits  still  on  purpose  to  see
what  men  would  do,  and  is  content  to
suffer  indignity  from  His  creature  for
a  time,  that  He  may  be  everlastingly
magnified  in  His  justice  and  power :
that   honour   pleaseth   God  and  men
best,  which  is  raised  out  of  contempt.
....  If  the  Israelites  put  confidence
in  the  ark,   can  we  marvel  that  the
Philistines  did  put  confidence  in  that
power,  which,  as  they   thought,   had
conquered  the  ark  ?     The  less  is  ever
subject  unto  the  greater ;  what  could
they  now  think,  but  that  heaven  and
earth  were  theirs  ?     Security  and  pre-
sumption attend  ever  at  the  threshold
of  ruin.     God  will  let  them  sleep  in  this
confidence  ;  in  the  morning  they  shall
find  how  vainly  they  have  dreamed  !
Now  they  begin  to  find  they  have  but
gloried  in  their  own  plague,  and  over-
thrown nothing  but  their  own  peace.
....  Dagon  hath  a  house,  when  God
hath  but  a  tabernacle  ;  it  is  no  measur-
ing of    religion  by  outward   glory. —
Jiishop  Hall.

The  foolish  Philistines  thought  that
the  same  house  could  hold  both  the
ark  and  Dagon,  as  if  an  insensible
statue  were  a  fit  companion  for  the
living  God.  In  the  morning  they  come
to  thank  Dagon  for  the  victory,  and  to
fill  down  before  him  before  whom  they
thought  the  God  of  Israel  was  fallen  ;


and  lo  !  now  they  find  the  keeper  flat
on  his  face  before  th'^  prisoner.     Had
they  formerly,    of   their   own   acc'>rd,
with  awful  reverence,  laid  him  in  this
posture  of  a  humble  prostration,   yet
God  would  not  have  brooked   the  in-
dignity of  such  an  entertainment.    But
seeing   they   durst   set  up   their  idol
cheek  by  cheek  with  their  Maker,  let
them  go  read  their  folly  in  the  tem[)le
floor,  and  confess  that  He  who  did  cast
their  god  so  low,  could  cast  them  lower.
Such  a  shame  doth  the  Lord  owe  all
them  which  will  be  making  matches
betwixt  Him  and  Belial.      Yet  they
consider    not.    How   should   this   god
raise  us  who  is  not  able  to  stand  or
rise  himself  ?     Stran.!;e  they  must  con-
fess it,  that  whereas  Dagon   was  wont
to  stand,  and  themselves  to  fall  down  ;
now  Dagon  was  fallen  down,  and  them-
selves stood,  and  must   help  up   with
their  own  god.     Yea,  their  god  seems
to  worship  them   on  his  face,  and  to
crave  that  succour  from  them  which  he
was  never  able  to  give  them.     Yet  in
his  place  they  set  him  again,  and  now
lift   up   those   hands    to    him    which
helped  to  lift  him    up  and  prostrate
those  faces  to  him  before  whom  he  lay
prostrate.     So  can  idolatry  turn  men
into  the  stocks  and  stones  which  they
worship  :  "  They  that  make  them  are
like  unto  them''     But  will  the  Lord
put  it  up  thus  ?     No,  the  next  fall
shall   burst   it  to    pieces  ;    that   they
may  sensibly  perceive  how  God  scorns
a   competitor,   and   that    there  is   no
agreement    betwixt    Him    and    idols.
Now,  what  is  the  difference  between
the  Philistines  and  the  Papists  ?     The
Philistines  would  set  God  in  the  temple
of  idols  ;  the  Papists  would  set  idols
in  the  temple  of  God.     Both  agree  in
this,  that  they  would  make  God  and
idols  agree  together. — 2\  Adams.

Ver.  3.  Because  you  have  broken
your  purpose,  do  not  allow  it  to  go
unmended.  Even  the  heathen,  with  so
base  a  conception  of  divinity  as  Dagon
was,  when  Dagon  fell  to  the  ground,
lifted  him  up  again  and  put  him  in  his
place.  When,  not  your  idol,  but  your
bright  ideal,  falls  to  the  ground,  though
G  81


BO'MILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,  book  i.


its  head  and  its  feet  be  broken,  lift  it  the  remnant  of  indwelling  sin.     And

up  and  pnt  it  in  its  place  again.     Be-  while  we  might  unfeignedly  desire  that

cause  yon  have  broken  faith  and  fealty  even  the  stamp  of  sin  and  self  were

to  that  which_  you  meant  to  be,  and  gone,  we  may  well  be  thaiilcful  if  no

meant  to  do,  it  is  no  reason  why  you  more  be  left.    .  .  .  We  know  not  whe-

should  not  swear  again,  and  again  go  ther   the    priests    of    Dagon    erected

forward. — Beecher.  another  idol  upon   the  stump  of  the

broken  one ;  but  this  we  know,  that

Ver.   4.   TJie  prevalence  of  idolatry  mau}^   idols   are   contending    for    the

in  the  heart  of  man.     Dagon  has  still  throne  of  man's  heart,  and  when  one

his  temple  there.     The  great  idolatry  Dagon  is  deposed,  he  leaves  his  stump

of  mankind  is  self.  .  .  .   ('hrist  is  the  upon  which  another  is  quickly  raised,

true  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  when  But  the  same  Almighty  grace  which

He  takes  possession  of  the  tem])le  of  cast  down  one  shall  triumph  over  all.

man's  heart,   then   the  Dagon  of  the  The  covenant  ensures  the  death  of  sin,

place  is  dethroned;  it  loses  its  head  thelifeof  grace,  and  the  crown  of  glory,

and  hands,  its  carnal  wisdom  and  carnal  and  when  grace  has  brought  you  to

works,  at  the  very  threshold  of   the  glory  you  will  rejoice  to  all  eternity,

sanctuary,  but  still  the  stump  is  left ;  that  "  only  the  stump  of  Dagon  was

however  powerful  the  principle  of  in-  left." — F'enn.
dwelling  grace  may  be,  there  is  still

MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  6—12.

The  Judgments  upon  the  Philistines.

I.  When  judgment  begins  with  the  people  of  Grod  it  is  certain  to  extend  to
the  ungodly.  If  a  human  king  is  just  he  will  visit  his  own  family  with  punish-
ment if  they  break  the  laws  of  his  kingdom.  But  the  very  fact  that  he  does  so
is  a  pledge  that  he  will  not  spare  the  rest  of  his  subjects  if  they  are  found  guilty.
Judgment  will  begin  where  transgression  ought,  least  of  all,  to  ai)pear,  and
where,  if  it  appear,  it  ought  to  be  least  tolerated ;  but  should  the  same  sins  be
committed  by  others,  it  may  be  regarded  as  certain  that  it  will  extend  to  them
also.  God  deals  with  men  as  a  good  king  and  father  deals  with  his  children.
He  will  certainly  inflict  chastisement  upon  those  who  are  most  nearly  related  to
Him  by  moral  character,  but  He  will  not  spare  those  who  are  utterly  ungodly.
God's  ancient  people,  at  this  period  in  their  history,  needed  chastisement,  and
they  had  it.  He  avenged  the  dishonour  which  had  been  done  to  His  name  by
those  whom  He  "  had  nourished  and  brought  up  "  as  His  children  (Isa.  i.  2)  by
a  heavy  visitation.  But  He  did  not  spare  the  more  guilty  Canaanites.  When
judgment  "  begins  at  the  house  of  God,"  the  question  forces  itself  upon  the
mind,  "Where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear?"  (1  Pet.  iv.  17,  18).

II.  When  the  ungodly  have  been  used  as  instruments  of  Divine  chastise-
ment, they  are  chastened  themselves  to  teach  them  that  they  were  not
chosen  for  their  moral  excellence.  Sometimes  delay  takes  place  in  the  execu-
tion of  a  criminal,  not  because  there  is  any  reason  to  show  him  favour,  hut  that
he  may  be  used  to  bring  others  to  justice.  When  he  has  been  used  for  this
purpose  he  finds  that  the  same  law  which  convicts  them  punishes  him  also.  It
is  often  so  in  the  righteous  government  of  God.  He  selected  Nebuchadnezzar
to  be  His  battle-axe  when  Israel  needed  chastisement,  but  he  was  but  a  reprieved
criminal,  and  when  he  had  fulfilled  the  Divine  purpose  he  was  made  to  feel  that
it  was  so.  Here  the  Philistines  were  made  the  instruments  of  God's  judgment
upon  His  people,  but  they  soon  found  that  tliey  had  not  been  selected  for  this
work  because  they  were  held  in  favour  by  Jehovah.     The  hand  of  God  upon

32


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


tliem  soon  taught  tbom  that  tlicy  also  were  under  His  displeasure— that  God
had,  in  the  language  of  the  ^n-opliet,  taken  "  the  cup  of  trembling,  even  the  dreg.^^
of  the  cup  of  Ills  fury,  and  put  it  into  the  hand  of  them  that  afflicted  Israel"
(Isa.  li.  22,  23).

III.  There  may  he  an  admission  that  God  has  smitten  without  true  repentance.

The  Pliilistines  confessed  that  the  hand  of  Jehovah  was  sore  upon  them,  and
upon  their  god,  but  it  led  to  no  investigation  into  His  claims  to  their  homage—
to  no  change  in  their  disposition  towards  Him.  Pharaoh  acknowledged  that
"  the  Lord  was  righteous,  and  that  he  and  his  people  were  wicked  "  (Exod.  ix.  27),
hut  his  admission  had  no  effect  u[)on  liis  conduct.  Saul  admitted  that  God  had
forsaken  him,  and  was  visiting  him  for  his  sin,  but  he  turned  not  to  Him  who
had  smitten  him,  but,  in  direct  oj.position  to  the  Divine  command,  sought
counsel  of  a  witch.  Many  men  in  every  age  are  compelled  to  acknowledge  that
God  is  visiting  them,  yet  they  will  not  turn  to  Him  in  repentance.  They  may
cry  to  God  in  their  despair,  but  they  give  evidence  that  it  is  nob  sm  that
troubles  them,  but  the  punishment  of  sin.  Like  the  Philistines,  they  would  be
rid  of  their  suffering,  but  they  are  not  willing  to  give  up  their  Dagons,  and  to
give  glory  and  render  obedience  to  the  Lord  of  hosts.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  6.  The  hand  of  the  Almighty,  than    in    raising    up    extraordinary ;

which' moved  them  not  in  falling  on  neither    doth    He    less    smite    by^  a

their  god,  falls  now  nearer  on  their  common  fever,  thau  by  an  avenging

persons,   and    strikes    them    in   their  angel— ^i?.  Hall.

bodies  which  would  not  feel  themselves  ^  ,,     r,,  -v

stricken    in   their   idol.       Pain   shall  Ver.  10.  The  struggles  of  the  Philis-

humble  them,  when  shame  cannot.—  tines  against  Jehovah  tended  only  to

Bp  Hall  bring  the  ark  nearer  to  its  own  home,

^'          '  and  to  bring  more  evils  on  its  enemies.

Ver    7.    They  should  have  rather  The  sufferings  of  Ekron   were  worse

parted  with  their  sins  than  with  the  than  those  of  Ashdod,  and  the  sulter-

ark    and  have   said   unto   their   sins  ings  of  Gatli  were  more  grievous  than

-Get  thee   hence,"  as   Isa.   xxx.    22.  those  of  Ekron.     So  all  the  assaults  ot

What  have  we  to  do  any  more  with  the  enemies  of  the  faith  against  the  ark

Dagon  who  cannot  save  himself,  much  of  Christ's  church   will  serve  only  to

less  us,  from  the  Divine  vengeance  ?  bring  her  nearer  to  her  heavenly  and

Wicked  men  are  glad  upon  all  occasions  eternal  home.—  Wordsworth.

to  be  rid  of  God  and  His  ark,  His  or-  Thus  they  send  the  plague  o    God

dinances,  which   they,  Philistine-like,  up    and    down    to   their    neighbours,

have  rather  as  prisoners  than  as  privi-  Wicked  men  use  to  draw  others  into

leges.— Trapp.  partnership  of  their  condemnation.—

The  emerods  were  not  a  disease  be-  7rapp.
vond  the  compass  of  natural  causes ;  i.  v;  *
neither  was  it  hard  for  the  wiser  sort  Ver.  11.  When  man  s  heart  mil  not
to  give  a  reason  of  their  complaint ;  give  up  its  worthless  ido  s,  thougli
yet  they  ascribe  it  to  the  hand  of  God :  God's  hand  draw  it  to  Himselt  by
the  knowledge  and  operation  of  secon-  affliction  and  suifering  then  the  cUs-
dary  causes  should  be  no  prejudice  to  tance  between  him  and  the  bod  that
the  first  They  are  worse  than  the  offers  to  be  with  him  becomes  greater
Phihstines  who,  when  they  see  the  in  proportion  to  the  severity  and  pain-
means,  do  not  acknowledge  their  first  fulness  of  the  suffering  felt  by  the  soul
Mover,  whose  active  just  power  is  no  alienated  from  God  and  devoted  to
less  seen  in  employing  ordinary  means  idolatry.     We  shall  at  last  desire  to


nOMlLETIO  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  i.


be  entirely   away   from   God,   as  the  judgment,  wherewith  iron  hearts  might

Philistines  at  last  resolved  to  carry  the  be  made  flexible,  He  would  want  obe-

ark  over  the  border,  that  they  might  dience,    and    the   world    peace. — Bp.

have  nothing  more  to  do  with  the  God  Hall.
of  Israel,  while,   on  the  contrary,  the

ark  should  have  warned  them  to  give  Ver.   12.    The  cry  that  ascends  to

glory  to  the  God  of  Israel,  who  had  so  heaven  over  sufferings  and  afflictions

unmistakably  and  gloriously  revealed  that  are  the  consequences  of  wicked-

Himself  to  them. — Langes  Commen-  ness,  is  by  no  means  a  sign  that  need

tary.  teaches  prayer  ;  it  may  be  made  wholly

God  knows  how  to  bring  the  stub-  from  a  heathen  point  of  view.     The

bornest  enemy  on  his  knees,  and  make  cry    that    penetrates    i7ito   heaven   is

him   do  that   out  of  fear  which   His  ''  Against  thee  h^ive  I  sinned,"  and  is

best  child  would  do  out   of   love  or  the  expression  of  an  upright,  earnest

duty.    .    .    It  is  happy  that  God  hath  penitence,  which  is  awakened  in  the

such  store  of  plagues  and  thunderbolts  heart   by  the   chastisement   of  God's

for  the  wicked  ;  if  He  had  not  a  fire  of  hand, — Lange's  Commentary,


CHAPTER  VI.

Ceitical  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1.  "Country,"  literally  the  field.  It  probably
signifies  the  cultivated  plain.

Ver.  2.  "  Diviners."  '*  That  is,  the  organs  of  the  Deity,  who  reveal  His  counsel  and  will
through  the  mantic  art,  and  whose  decision  is  final.  After  it  had  been  determined  in  the
council  of  the  princes  (chap.  v.  11)  to  send  back  the  ark  to  the  Israelites,  the  priests  and
soothsayers  are  to  tell  how  it  shall  be  sent  back."     ^Erdmann).

Ver,  3.  "Trespass-offering."  Asham,  WteraWy  guilt,  then  a  gift  presented  as  compensation
for  a  fault.  The  gifts  appointed  by  the  Philistines  as  an  ashani  were  to  serve  as  compensation
and  satisfaction  to  be  rendered  to  the  G-od  of  Israel  for  the  robbery  committed  upon  Him  by
the  removal  of  the  ark,  and  were  therefore  called  asham,  though  in  their  nature  they  were  oidy
expiatory  offerings  "  ( Keil).

Ver.  4.  "  Five  golden  mice,"  etc.  "  It  was  a  prevalent  custom  in  heathen  antiquity  to  make
offerirjgs  to  the  gods  expressive  of  the  particular  mercy  received.  Those  saved  from  shipwreck
offered  pictures  of  the  shipwreck  in  the  temple  of  Isis  ;  slaves  and  captives,  in  gratitude  for  the
recovery  of  their  liberty,  offered  chains  to  the  Lares  ;  retired  gladiators,  their  arms  to  Hercules  ;
and  in  the  fifth  century  a  custom  prevailed  among  Christians  of  offering  in  their  churches  gold

or  silver  hands,  feet,  etc.,  in  return  for  cures  effected  in  those  members A  similar  custom

still  prevails  among  the  heathen  in  India "  (Biblical  Commentary ).  The  offering  of  the
Philistines  was  not,  however,  a  thank-offering,  it  was  rather  a  talisman  or  charm.  "  From  the
ancient  writers  of  Arabia  we  learn  how  a  talisman,  or  charm  of  this  kind,  was  composed.  They
held  that  all  earthly  things  are  but  shadows  of  heavenly  things,  and  that  the  celestial  forms  have
an  overruling  influence  on  all  earthly  forms  of  life.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  they  wished  to  give  a
man  a  talisman  that  would  make  him  safe  against  the  bite  of  serpents,  they  got  the  exact
moment  of  his  birth.  Their  books  told  them  what  planet  "  ruled  his  birth,"  what  planet  was
then  in  full  lustre.  They  waited  for  the  moment  when  this  planet  was  "  out  of  combustion,"
i.e.,  was  not  shining  at  its  strength — the  moment  in  which,  thus  shorn  of  its  strength,  it  entered
into  the  constellation  which  they  called  the  Serpent.  The  favourable  moment  having
arrived,  they  made  a  tiny  stone  or  metal  image  of  a  serpent,  engraved  certain  mystic  letters  upon
it,  and  here  was  the  talisman.     So  long  as  the  man  carried  that  about  with  him,  no  serpent  could

linrt  him.     Ancient  literature  is  full  of  marvellous  stories  of  the  power  of  these  talismans

It  is  this  talismanic  method  that  is  alluded  to  in  this  passage,  for,  instead  of  reading  "Ye  shall
make  images,"  etc.,  we  ought  to  read,  "Ye  shall  make  talismans  of  your  emrods,  and  talismans
of  your  mice."  (S.  Cox. )  "  The  Philistine  astrologers  could  not  but  have  heard  that  God  had
shown  His  Divine  complacency  with  the  brazen  serpent,  set  upon  a  pole  in  the  wilderness.  Thi?
they,  with  their  notions,  would  regard  as  a  telesme  (talisman),  and  as  that  image  of  a  serpe  ui


CHAP.  VI.  HO  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL,


was  effectual  against  the  plague  of  serpents,  they  might  not  unreasonably  infer  that  similar
images  of  tlirir  own  inflictions  might  be  ecpially  effectual  ;  indeed,  there  have  not  been  wanting
persons  to  sugg^^st  that  the  whole  ()f  tliis  set  of  ideas  regarding  telesmes  may  have  originated  in
a  distorted  view  of  this  transaction."     (  Kitto.)

Ver.  6.  "As  the  Egyptians."  "  Another  testimony  from  the  heathen  to  the  truth  of  the
Pentateuch,  and  a  proof  that  God's  judgments  on  Egypt  were  not  without  salutary  effects  on
idolatei-s."     { Wordsworth.)

Ver.  7.  "Make  a  new  cart,"  etc.  '*The  new  cart  and  the  young  cows,  which  had  never
worn  a  yoke,  corref>pouded  to  the  holiness  of  the  ark  of  God.  To  place  it  upon  an  old  cart,
which  had  already  been  useii  for  all  kinds  uf  earthly  purposes,  would  have  been  an  offence  against
the  holy  thing  ;  and  it  would  have  been  just  the  same  to  yoke  to  the  cart  animals  that  had
already  been  used  for  drawing,  and  had  had  their  strength  iuipaired  by  the  yoke.  The  i-eason
for  selecting  cows,  however,  instead  of  male  oxen,  was  no  douljt  to  be  found  in  the  further  object
which  they  ho^jed  to  attain."     (A'aV.)

Ver.  9.  "  Bethshemesh."  "  House  of  the  sun,"  an  Israelitish  priestly  city  on  the  border  of
Judah  and  Dan  (Josh.  xxi.  16.)  about  twelve  miles  from  Ekrcm.

Ver.  13.  "  Though  it  was  a  priestly  city  the  inhabitants  of  Bethshemesh  are  expressly
distinguished  from  the  Levites."  (^/i'/'t/z/ia/iM.)  **  Wheat  harvest."  Therefore  about  May  or
June.

Ver.  14.  "  Field  of  Joshua."  "  One  who  bore  the  same  name  as  he  who  had  brought
Israel  and  the  ark  into  Canaan."  {  ^\  ordsworth.)  "A  burnt  offering."  "It  was  lawful  to
offer  the  sacrifice  here,  because  wherever  the  ark  was  offering  might  be  made."  (Erdttiann.)

Ver.  18.  "  The  Philistines  offered  as  many  golden  mice  as  there  were  towns  and  villages  in
their  five  states  ;  no  doubt  because  the  plague  of  mice  had  spread  over  the  whole  land,  wfiereas
the  plague  of  boils  had  only  fallen  upon  those  towns  to  which  the  ark  had  come."  {KeU.)
"  Great  stone  of  Abel."  Great  stone  is  not  in  the  original.  AOel  means  mourning,  and  some
commentators  think  the  stone  was  so  named  because  of  the  lamentation  mentioned  in  verse  19.
Keil,  Erdmann,  and  others,  however,  for  Abel  read  Eben  or  AOen — a  stone,  as  in  verses  14  and  15

Ver.  1 9.  "  Fifty  thousand,"  etc.  In  some  Hebrew  manuscripts  the  statement  reads  seventy
men,  Jifty  thou.saud  men.  feome  do  not  contain  the  words  Jifty  tiioui^and,  and  Josephus  speaks  of
only  tkree  score  and  ten.  These  considerations,  added  to  the  unJikeliliood  that  Bethshemesh  had
so  many  inhabitants  lead  commentati-rs  to  reject  the  'words  Jijty  thousand  as  an  interpolation,  or
to  read  (as  Patrick  and  others)  seventy  men  ;  Jijty  out  of  a  thousand.

Ver.  21.  "Kirjath-jearim,"  i.e.,  city  of  woods  or  forests  (Ps.  cxxxii.  6),  in  the  territory  of
Judah  (Josh.  ix.  17,  xviii.  25,  26),  generally  identified  with  the  present  iL'Mryei-e/-ii'rta6.  "It  was
the  nearest  lai-ge  city  to  Bethshemesh,  on  the  way  to  Shiloh,  to  which,  perhaps,  they  supp^ised
that  the  ark  ought  to  return."  {Wordbivorth.)  "The  inhabitants  belonging  to  the  Jiivite
tetrapolis  were  the  sacred  servants  of  the  sanctuary,  and,  therefore,  the  proper  parties  to  whom,
in  the  emergency,  the  custody  of  the  ark  should  be  committed.  Bethshemesh,  being  in  a  low
plain,  and  Kirjath-jearim  on  a  hill,  explains  the  message,  '  Come  ye  down,  and  fetch  it  up  to
you.'  "  (Jamieson.)

Note. — "  After  the  transaction  recorded  in  this  chapter,  we  hear  no  more  of  any  attempts
among  the  Gentile  nations  to  join  the  Jewish  worship  with  their  own.  They  considered  the
God  of  Israel  as  a  tutelary  deity,  absolutely  unsociable,  who  would  have  nothing  to  do  with
any  but  his  own  people,  or  with  such  particularly  as  would  worship  him  alone,  and,  therefore,
in  this  respect,  different  from  all  other  tutelary  gods,  each  of  which  was  willing  to  live  in
community  with  the  rest."    (  Warourton.)

MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  CHAPTER.

The  Return  of  the  Ark.

I.  No  change  is  needed  in  God  to  eifect  a  change  in  His  dealings  with
sinful  men.  The  physician  is  as  good  when  he  is  inflicting  pain  as  when  he  is
giving  pleasure.  It  does  not  need  a  change  of  disposition  in  him  to  cause  him
to  cease  from  giving  pain  to  his  patient;  the  change  must  be  in  the  sick  man
himself  When  a  sinner  feels  that  matters  are  not  right  between  him  and  his
God,  he  thinks  that  lie  should  be  in  a  better  position  if  he  could  only  change

85


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  I.


God's  disposition  towards  him  ;  but  no  change  is  needed  on  the  part  of  God.  It
is  in  the  character  and  disposition  of  the  sinner  that  the  change  must  be  made,
if  lie  is  to  liave  rest  and  hope  in  his  relation  to  God.  When  the  Philistines  felt
that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  heavy  upon  them,  they  clianged  the  place  of  the
ark,  thinking  thereby  to  pacify  God's  displeasure,  and  change  His  disposition
towards  them.  But  what  was  needed  was  not  change  on  the  part  of  the  Eternal
God,  but  change  in  their  relations  towards  Him.

II.  Divine  blessings  may  be  turned  into  curses  if  men  get  into  wrong
relationship  to  them.  Sunlight  is  intended  by  God  to  be  a  blessing  to  men.
But  the  light  of  the  sun  1  rings  pain  to  a  man  vviiose  eyes  are  diseased.  The
suffering  comes  from  his  eyes  and  the  sun  not  standing  in  that  relation  to  each
other  which  God  intended  tliey  should  do.  Fire  is  a  great  blessing  to  man  while
it  is  kept  in  its  right  relation,  while  it  is  used  as  God  intended  it  shtmld  be  used,
to  minister  to  his  bodily  comfort.  But  if  fire  lays  hold  of  his  raiment,  or
his  dwelling,  a  good  gift  of  God  becomes  a  curse,  by  getting  into  a  wrong
relation.  And  as  it  is  with  the  material  gifts  of  God,  so  it  is  with  His  spiritual
gifts.  All  the  Divine  ordinances  are  intended  as  means  of  blessing  and  sancti-
fication  to  the  heart  of  men.  Yet  to  some  that  which  was  ordained  to  bless
becomes  a  curse — that  which  ought  to  be  a  savour  of  life  becomes  a  savour  of
death.  Men  through  ignorance  or  indifference  do  not  put  the  Divine  ordinances
to  a  right  use — get  into  a  wrong  rehition.^hip  to  them,  and  thus  that  which  was
designed  to  bless  becoujes  a  curse.  The  ark  of  God  was  designed  by  Him  to  be
a  njeans  of  grace  and  blessing  to  Israel  by  helping  them  to  realise  the  presence
and  favour  of  the  unseen  God.  It  would  also  have  become  a  blessing  to  the
Philistines  if  they  had  considered  the  lessons  which  the  fall  of  Dagon  before  it
was  designed  to  teach  them.  But  the  heathen  disregarded  the  voice  uf  God
which  spoke  to  them,  and  thus  the  presence  of  His  ark  became  the  means  of
judgment,  because  they  stood  in  a  wrong  relation  to  it.  And  its  return  to
Israel,  which  ought  to  have  been  an  occasion  of  unmixed  joy,  was  marked  by  a
judgment  upon  the  men  of  Bethshemesh,  because  of  the  thoughtless  irreverence
of  their  conduct — because  they  lacked  a  right  conception  of  the  holiness  of  the
God  whose  presence  the  ark  symbolised.

III.  The  human  conscience  testifies  to  the  need  of  an  atonement  for  sin.

The  heathen,  ignorant  as  they  are  of  the  revelation  of  God,  offer  gifts  and
sacrifices  to  their  deities.  The  Philistines  here  thought  it  expedient  to  try  and
make  some  expiation  of  their  trespass  against  the  God  of  Israel,  and  such  a
feeling  of  the  need  of  atonement  is  found  in  almost  every  people  in  the  world.
And  this  feeling  does  not  grow  weaker  in  proportion  as  men  possess  the
revelation  of  God.  The  conviction  of  the  great  distance  between  the  holy  God
and  sinful  man  increases  as  men  grow  in  their  knowledge  of  Him — the  nearer
view  men  have  of  His  purity  and  greatness,  the  more  are  they  disposed  to
exclaim  with  the  men  of  Bethshemesh,  "  Who  is  able  to  stand  before  this  Holy
Lord  GodV  It  is  when  the  artist  places  his  most  finished  work  beside  the  real
landscape  that  he  realises  how  very  far  short  he  has  come — the  more  closely
they  are  compared  the  more  clearly  does  he  see  the  perfection  of  the  one,  and
the  imperfections  of  the  other.  And  the  more  men  know  of  God — the  more  they
become  acquainted  with  Him  by  the  manifestations  of  His  power  and  nioral
attributes,  the  more  dee])ly  convinced  do  they  become  of  their  own  imperfections,
and  the  more  do  they  cry  out  for  some  atonement.  When  the  Bethshemites,  on
the  return  of  the  ark,  "  offered  burnt  offerings  and  sacrificed  sacrifices  the  same
day  unto  the  Lord,"  they  were  not  only  obeying  the  Levitical  law,  but  they  were
acting  in  conformity  to  a  law  written  in  their  hearts,  and  written  with  more  or
less  distinctness  in  the  hearts  of  all  men.  The  offering  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
86


CHAP.  VI.


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


is  not  only  said  to  be  "oflforpd  to  God,"  but  also  to  the  conscience  of  man  (Heb.
ix.  14,  Horn.  V.  11).     The  return  of  the  ark  also  reminds  us —

IV.  That  the  enemies  of  God's  Israel  are  not  always  to  retain  the  portion
of  His  children  A  battle  was  fought  in  Eden,  and  the  great  enemy  of  (jod  and
man  took  from  man  his  God-given  inheritance.  And  from  that  day  until^  now
the  "kingdoms  of  the  world  and  the  glory  of  them"  have  been  held  by  Satan
(Luke  iv.  5,  6).  This  earth  is  still,  to  a  great  extent,  in  the  hands  of  the
enemies  of  its  rightful  possessor.  But  it  is  being  won  back.  Each  generation
sees  drawing  nearer  the  day  when  there  will  be  ''great  voices  in  heaven,  saying,
Ihe  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  oar  Lord,  and  of  His
Christ"  (Rev.  xi.  15).  And  this  earth  will  be  given  back  to  men  who  have
themselves  been  redeemed  from  the  bondage  of  Satan.  As  Israel  lost  their  ark
so  the  world  has  been  lost  to  man  by  his  own  sin;  but  it  will  not  be  always  in  the
hands  of  his  enemies  —those  who  have  returned  to  their  allegiance  to  their
rightful  sovereign  will  one  day  inherit  a  redeemed  earth.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Ver.  1.  This  was  a  long  while  for
God's  people  to  be  without  that  visible
pawn  of  His  presence  and  glory  ;  so
that  they  might  seem  to  be  as  forlorn
and  forsnken  of  Him.  Such  a  misery
may  befall  any  people,  to  be  bereft  of
God's  ordinances  ;  or  any  soul,  to  be
for  a  time  without  the  sense  of  His
gracious  presence  and  light  of  His
countenance.  But  God  hath  promised
to  His,  to  be  a  "little  sanctuary  unto
them"  (Ezek.  xi.  16),  and  "  not  to  leave
them,"  or  if  He  do  so,  yet  "  not  to
forsake  them,"  (Heb.  xiii,  5),  provided
that  they  look  on  all  other  comforts
as  so  many  Ichabods,  till  He  return
unto  them  in  mercy  and  loving-kind-
ness.— IVapp.

It  had  wont  to  be  a  sure  rule,  where-
soever God  is  among  men,  there  is  the
Church  ;  here  only  it  failed.  The  tes-
tinjony  of  God's  presence  was  many
months  among  the  Philistines,  for  a
punishment  of  His  own  people  whom
He  left ;  for  a  curse  to  those  foreigners
who  entertained  it.  Israel  was  seven
months  without  God.  How  do  we
think  faithful  Samuel  took  this
absence  ?  How  desolate  and  forlorn
did  the  tabernacle  of  God  look  with-
out the  ark !  There  were  still  the
altars  of  God  ;  His  priests,  Levites,
tables,  vails,  censers,  with  all  their
legal  accoutrements ;  these,  without
the  ark,  were  as  the  sun  without  light,
in  the  midst  of  an  eclipse.     If  all  these


had  been  taken  away,  and  only  the
ark  remaining,  the  loss  had  been  no-
thing to  this,  that  the  ark  should  be
gone  and  they  left ;  for  what  are  all
these  without  God,  and  how  all-suffi-
cient is  God  without  these  ! — Bp.  Hall.

Greater  dishonour  is  done  to  God
by  those  who  call  themselves  His
people,  yet  continue  to  slight  and
abuse  the  singular  advantages  with
which  they  have  been  long  favoured,
than  by  the  attacks  of  his  avowed
enemies.  Hence  He  may  often  seem
as  it  were  to  desert  His  own  cause,
and  suffer  the  declared  enemies  of  His
name  to  triumph  for  a  time,  rather
than  take  part  with  hypocritical  pre-
tenders, who  with  their  lips  profess
that  they  know  and  serve  Him,  but  in
works  deny  Him.  Thus  He  permitted
the  sacred  symbol  of  His  own  presence
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  Philistine
idolators,  rather  than  to  remain  dis-
honoured by  idolatrous  Israelites. —
Lindsay.

Ver.  2.  They  say  not,  "  What  shall
we  do  with  it,"  for  they  were  most  of
them  resolved  to  send  it  home  ;  but
"  What  shall  we  do  to  it  ?  How  shall
we  send  it  home  as  it  ought  to  be
sent  ?  "  Fur  they  know  that  it  is  the
manner  that  maketh  or  marreth  an
action.  Sure  it  is  that  in  divine
matters  men  must  look  that  not  oidy
the  body  of  their  service  be  sound,  but
that  the  clothes  be  tit. — Trapp.

87


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


BOOKL


Ver.  5.  These  sorcerers,  like  Balaam
and  Caiai)lia8,  ignorantly  spake  the
truth,  and  promoted  God's  glory  and
hononr.  Feradventure. — Idolators  are
always  at  uncertainty,  and  walking  in
darkness,  know  not  whither  they  go. —
Irapp.

Ver.  6.  Samuel  himself  could  not
have  spoken  more  divinely  than  these

priests  of  Dagon All  religions

have  afforded  them  that  sj^oak  well  ;
these  good  words  left  them  still  Philis-
tines and  superstitious.  How  should
men  be  hypocrites  if  they  had  not  good
tongues.  .  .  .  Who  wouhl  think  that
wisdom  and  folly  could  lodge  so  near
together  that  the  same  men  should
have  care  both  for  the  glory  of  the
true  God,  and  the  preservation  of  the
false  "(—Bp.  Hall.

The  exact  knowledge  that  the  Philis-
tine priests  and  soothsayers  had  of  the
punitive  revelations  of  God  against
the  Egyptians,  and  of  the  cause  of  them
in  the  fact  that  the  people  hardened
themselves  against  Him,  is  an  eminent
example  of  His  government  of  the
world,  which  was  closely  interwoven
with  the  history  of  revelation  in  His
kingdom,  and  in  which  he  penetrated
with  the  beams  of  His  revealed  light
the  darkness  of  heathenism  which
surrounded  His  people,  and  made  pre-
paration for  the  revelation  of  the  New
Covenant,  which  was  to  embrace  the
whole  world.  They  were  in  such  light
to  seek  the  Lord  in  their  ways,  if
haply  they  n)ight  feel  after  Him  and
find  Him. — Langes  Commentary.

Ver.  12.  Andthelordsof  the  Philis-
tines went  after  them.  And  so,  as
servants  and  pages,  they  attend  upon
the  ark,  which  erst  as  conquerors  they
carried  captive. —  Irapp.

Ver.  19.  As  it  is  hard  not  to  over-
joy in  a  sudden  prospeiity,  and  to  use
happiness  is  no  less  difficult  than  to
forbear  it,  these  glad  L-,raelites  cannot
see,  but  they  must  gaze  ;  they  cannot
gaze  on  the  glorious  outside,  but  they
must  be,  whether  out  of  rude  jollity,
or  curiosity,  or  suspicion  of  the  pur-
88


loining  of  those  sacred  implements,
prying  into  the  secrets  of  God's  ark.
Nature  is  too  subject  to  extremities,
and  is  ever  either  too  dull  in  want,  or
wanton  in  fruition  ;  it  is  no  ea^y  matter
to   keep   a   mean,    whether    in    good

or  evil There  was  no  malice

in  this  curious  inquisition  :  tlie  same
eyes 'that  looked  into  the  ark  looked
also  up  to  heaven  in  their  offerings  ;
and  the  same  hands  that  touched  it
offered  sacrifice  to  the  God  that  brought
it.  Who  could  exj)ect  anything  now
but  acceptation  ?  Who  could  suspect
any  danger?  It  is  not  a  following  act
of  devotion  that  can  make  amends  for
a  former  sin. — Bishop  Ball.

God  had  just  vindicated  His  own
honour  against  the  Philistines  ;  it  must
now  be  seen  that  He  would  be  sanctified
in  them  that  come  nigh  Him  (Lev.  x.  3).
It  is  obvious  to  observe  how  the  doc-
trine of  atonement,  and  its  necessity
in  the  case  of  sinners,  is  taught  in  this
and  similar  lessons  as  to  the  awful  holi-
ness of  God. — Biblical  Commentary.

Ver.  20,  21.  Many  appear  joyful  at
the  revival  of  religion,  and  numbers
unite  in  external  observances,  who  have
no  inward  reverence  for  the  Divine
majesty  ....  Instead  of  this  reve-
rence, the  carnal  heart  substitutes  a
slavish  fear ;  and  when  rebuked  for
presumption  or  contempt,  or  alarmed
with  discoveries  of  the  justice  and  holi-
ness of  God,  it  will,  with  the  Gadarenes,
or  with  these  Bethshemites,  request  the
Saviour  to  depart,  and  vaiidy  seek  to
escape  the  Lord's  displeasure,  by  an
entire  forgetfulness  of  Him. — IScott.

When  God,  so  to  speak,  only  passes
by  us,  through  some  temporary  taste  of
His  presence,  it  is  a  favour  which  He
may  also  impart  to  sinners.  But  that
He  may  make  His  abode  in  us,  as  He
promises  in  so  many  passages  of  Holy
Scripture,  that  He  may  be  willing  to
remain  with  us  and  in  us,  for  that
there  is  demanded  great  purity  in  every
respect. — Berlenberger  Bible.

The  attribute  of  hohness  is,  to  our
o\\n  api)rehension,  so  essential  to  the
mere  idea  of  God — is  in  itself  so
obvious  and  self-evident,  that  we  may


CHAP.  VI.


BOM  I  LET IC  COMMENTAHY:   SAMUEL,


at  times  be  inclined  ^,o  wonder  at  the
frequency  with  which  it  is  stated  and
enforced  in  the  ^Scriptures.  But  the
view  of  the  Divine  character  out  of
whicii  this  feeling  arises,  is  itself  the
creation  of  those  scriptuial  declara-
tions on  the  subject ;  and  the  formation
of  this  high  conception  of  God  was
the  use  they  were  designed  to  serve,
and  which  we  thus  find  that  they  have
served.  It  may  also  be  remembered,
that  to  the  Hebrews  the  enforcement
of  this  doctrine  was  of  an  importance
whicii  it  is  scarcely  in  our  power  to
understand  or  appreciate  fully.  Tiie
surrounding  heathen — indeed  all  the
heathen,  had  very  different  and  inferior
notions  of  the  gods  they  served.  Holi-
ness was  not  their  attribute.  They
were  very  capable  of  sin  ;  and  the
choice  of  good  in  preference  to  evil
was  not  essential  to  their  nature.
These  were  above  men  in  their  essence
and  in  their  sovereign  powers  ;  but  in
character  they  were  men,  and  not
always  good  men.  There  was  no  one
attribute  by  which  Jehovah  was  so
pointedly  distinguished  from  the  gods


of  the  nations  as  by  this.  Its  main-
tenance, its  constant  assertion,  was
therefore  of  the  utmost  importance'
among  apeople  whose  tendencies.so  often
were  to  merge  the  worship  of  their  own
Lord  in  that  of  the  neighbouring  idols.
This  attribute  set  a  great  gulf  between
them  whicli  could  not  be  overpassed  so
long  as  its  presence  was  constantly  kept
before  the  mind  of  the  people.  .  .  There
was  another  and  more  general  use  in
it,  in  which  we  share  the  benefit  with
them.  It  is  a  check  to  sin,  and  an
incitement  to  righteousness.  It  seems
impossible  for  anyone  to  realise  a  clear
and  distinct  idea  of  the  holiness  of  God
— that  sin,  that  whatever  defiles,  is
abhorrent  to  His  pure  and  holy  nature,
without  hearing  His  voice  crying  unto
us — "  0,  do  not  that  abominable  thing
which  I  hate."  ....  Instead  of  imita-
ting the  ignorant  Bethshemites,  in
putting  away  the  ark  of  God  from  us,
because  we  cannot  stand  before  His
holiness,  let  us  rather  strive  after
assimilation  to  Him,  that  we  may  be
enabled  to  keep  the  ark  among  us. —
Kitto.


CHAPTER  VII.


Critical  and  Expository  Notes.- — Ver.  1.  "The  house  of  Abinadab,*  etc.  "Why
the  ark  was  not  carried  back  to  Shiloh  is  uncertain.  The  reason  may  be  that  the  Philistines
had  concjuered  ShiloL,  and  now  held  it,  as  Euald  supposes  ;  or  it  may  be  that,  without  a  special
revelation  of  the  Divine  will,  they  were  unwilling  to  carry  the  ark  back  to  the  place  whence  it
had  been  removed  by  a  judgment  of  God,  in  consequence  of  the  profanation  of  the  Sanctuary  by
the  sons  of  Eli  ( Keil)  ;  or  simply  that  the  jjurpose  was  j5rst  and  provisionally  to  carry  it  safely
to  a  large  t'ity  as  far  off  as  possible,  inasmuch  as,  in  view  of  the  sentence  which  had  been  passed
on  Sbiloh,  they  did  not  dare  to  select  on  their  own  authority  a  new  place  for  the  Sanctuary"
(Erdmann).  "  It  is  probable  that  Abinadab  and  his  sons  were  of  the  house  of  Levi.  1.  For
the  catastrophe  at  Bethshemesh  must  inevitably  have  made  the  Israelites  very  careful  to  pay  due
honour  to  the  ark  in  accordance  with  the  law.  2.  The  fact  of  there  being  a  high  place  at
Kiijath-jearim  makes  it  highly  probable  that  there  were  priests  there.  3.  The  names  Eleazar,
Uzzah,  and  Ahio  are  all  names  in  Levitical  families,  and  Abinadab  is  nearly  allied  to  Nadab
and  Ammiuadab,  both  Levitical  names.  4.  It  is  inconceivable  that  the  breachts  of  the  law  in
looking  into  the  ark,  and  in  Uzzah  laying  hold  of  it,  should  have  been  so  severely  punished,  but
the  neglect  to  tmj  loy  the  sons  of  Le\i  according  to  the  law  shoiild  not  be  even  adverted  to."
(Biblical  Comrturitary.j  *'  To  keep  the  ark."  "  JVot  to  miidater  before  it  ;  but  only  to  defend  it
from  such  profane  intrusions  as  had  caused  so  much  suffering  to  the  Bethshemites."
(  Wordswoi'th. )

Ver.  2.  "  Twenty  years,"  i.e.,  twenty  years  before  the  events  occurred  which  are  recorded  in
this  chapter.  It  was  a  nanh  longer  time  before  David  brought  the  ark  again  to  the  tabernacle
(2  Sam.  vi.  1-17),  altiiough  it  is  not  certain  whether  it  remained  in  Kirjath-jearim  until  that
time.     During  these  twenty  years  it  is  obvious  (from  ver.   3)  that  the  Philistine  doiuiuation

H9


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  i.


continued.  "All  the  house  of  Israel  lamented,"  etc.  "The  image  is  that  of  a  child  that
goes  weeping  after  its  father  or  mother,  that  it  may  be  relieved  of  what  hurts  it.  ...  ,  As,
beside  the  constant  pressure  of  the  Philistine  rule,  no  special  calamity  is  mentioned,  we  must
suppose  a  gradual  prejmration  for  this  penitential  temper  of  the  people,  which  now,  after  the
lapse  of  twenty  years  from  the  return  of  the  ark,  was  become  universal.  The  preparation  came
from  within.  By  what  means?  By  the  prophetic  labours  of  Samuel,  from  the  summary
description  of  which,  according  to  their  intensive  power,  their  extensive  manifestation,  and  their
results  in  the  whole  nation  (iii.  19-21),  we  may  clearly  see  that  Samuel,  without  ceasing,
proclaimed  to  the  people  the  Word  of  God.  And  as  in  chap.  iii.  19  it  is  said  that  "  none  of  his
words  fell  to  the  irround,"  we  shall  have  occasion  to  recogni.se  this  penitential  temper,  and  this
following  after  God  with  sighing  and  lamentation,  as  the  fruit  of  Samuel's  prophetic  labours,
which  were  directed  to  the  relation  of  the  innermost  life  of  the  people  to  their  God."
(Erdmann.)

Ver.  3.  **  If  ye  do  return,"  etc.  "  These  words  prove  that  a  profession  of  repentance  on
the  part  of  Israel  had  preceded  them.  .  .  The  profession,  therefore,  must  be  looked  for  in
the  preceding  words,  All  the  house  of  Israel  lamented,"  etc. — {Biblical  Commentary).

Ver.  4.  *'  Baalim  and  Ashtaroth."  The  plurals  of  Baal  and  Ashtoreth.  "  Baal  was  the
supreme  male  divinity  of  the  Phoenician  and  Canaanitish  nations,  as  Ashtoreth  was  their
supreme  femnle  divinity.  Both  names  have  the  peculiarity  of  being  used  in  the  jjlural,  and  it
seems  certain  that  these  plurals  designate  not  statues  of  the  divinities,  but  different  moditications
of  the  divinities  themselves.  .  .  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  very  high  antiquity  of  the
worship  of  Baal.  .  .  "We  need  not  hesitate  to  regard  the  Babylonian  Bel  (Isa.  xlvi.  1),  or  Belu.s
(Herod  i.  181),  as  essentially  identical  with  Baal,  though  perhaps  under  some  modified  form.  .  .  .,
The  great  number  of  adjuncts  with  which  the  name  is  found  is  a  sufficient  proof  of  the  diversity
of  characters  in  which  he  was  regarded,  and  there  must  no  doubt  have  exi.sted  a  corresponding
diversity  in  the  worship.  ...  If  we  separate  the  name  Baal  from  idolatry,  we  seem,  according
to  its  meaning,  to  obtain  simply  the  notion  of  Lord  and  Proprietor  of  all.  .  .  .  '^rhe  worship  of
Ashtaroth  or  Astarte  was  also  very  ancient  and  widely  spread.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the
Assyrian  goddess  Ishtar  is  the  Ashtaroth  of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  Astarte  of  the  Greeks
and  Eomans.  .  .  It  is  certain  that  the  worship  of  Astarte  became  identical  with  that  of  Venus.
...  If  now  we  seek  to  ascertain  the  character  of  this  goddess,  we  find  ourselves  involved  in
perplexity.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  general  notion  symbolised  is  that  of  productive
power,  as  Baal  symbolises  that  of  generative  power,  and  it  would  be  natiiral  to  conclude  tliat  as
the  sun  is  the  great  symbol  of  the  latter,  and  therefore  to  be  identified  with  Baal,  so  the  moon
is  the  symbol  of  the  former,  and  must  be  identified  with  Astarte  "  {Sviith's  Biblical  Dictionary).

"  Mizpeh,  or  Mizpah.  The  word  signifies  a  vjatrh-tower,  and  was  given  to  more  than  one
place  in  the  land  of  Israel.  The  place  here  mentioned  has  been  generally  identified  with  the
present  Neby-Samwil,  an  elevation  near  Ramah  and  G^ba  (see  1  Kings  xv.  '^2 ;  2  Chron.  xvi  6),
and  2480  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  five  miles  from  Jerusalem.  Dean  Stanley  and
Mr.  Grove  (Smith's  Bib.  iHctionary)  consider  that  Neby-Samwil  is  too  far  from  Jerusalem  to
answer  to  the  description  given  of  its  position  in  1  Mac.  iii.  46,  and  identity  it  with  the  Scopus
mentioned  by  Josephus  (B.  I.  2,  19,  4),  as  on  the  north  quarter  of  the  city,  seven  stadia  there-
from, and  now  generally  held  to  be  the  "  broad  ridge  which  forms  the  continuation  of  the
Mount  of  Olives  to  the  nor  h  and  east,  from  which  the  traveller  gains  his  first  view  of  the  holy
city"  {Grove).  "  I  will  pray  for  you."  That  deliverance  from  the  hand  of  the  Philistines
was  not  at  least  immediately  the  object  of  the  intercession  is  clear,  not  only  from  the  phrase
*'  for  you,"  since  otherwise  Samuel  must  have  used  an  expression  to  include  himself,  but  also
from  the  following  words." — [Erdmann).

Ver.  6.  "  Drew  water,  and  poured  it  out  befoi  c  the  Lord,"  etc.  "  It  is  remarkable  that
two  rites  are  brought  together  here  which  belong  respectively  to  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  and
the  Day  of  Atonement.  The  first  is  not,  indeed,  prescribed  by  the  law,  but  it  was  the  custom
for  the  High  Priest  to  fill  a  golden  vessel  with  water  drawn  from  the  fountain  of  Siloam,  and  to
pour  it  over  the  sacrifices  on  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  Allusions  to  this,  which  was  a  joyful
act,  are  supposed  to  be  made  in  Isa.  xii.  3,  and  John  vii.  37,  38.  .  .  .  The  only  fast  enjoined
by  the  law  of  Moses  was  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  upon  the  loth  Tisri.  .  .  .  It  is  likely,  as  in
Ezra  iii.  4,  6,  and  in  Neh.  vii.  73 ;  viii.  1-17,  that  Samuel  also  chose  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  and
the  fast  which  preceded  it,  as  the  occasion  for  assembling  the  people.  The  drawing  water  being
mentioned  before  the  fasting  is,  it  is  true,  rather  against  this  view,  though  not  conclusively,  as
the  mention  of  the  fasting  may  be  supplemental ;  the  real  order  being  that  they  first  fasted  and
confessed  their  sins  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  and  then  joyfully  kept  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.
If  the  fast  here  mentioned  is  not  that  of  the  loth  Tisri,  it  may  be  compared  with  that  of  E/ra  x.  6,
and  those  alluded  to  in  Zech.  vii.  5,  and  perhaps  the  pouring  out  of  water  (which  is  variously
explained),  may  be  taken  in  connection  with  the  fasting  (as  Ezra  did  eat  no  bread,  and  drink  no
water).  .  .  .  Other  explanations  of  the  act  are  (with  the  Targum),  "  they  poured  out  their
hearts  in  penitence  as  it  were  water,"  or  that  it  was  a  symbolical  act  of  expressing  their  ruin

90


CHAP.  VII.  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL


and  helplessness,  according  to  the  saying  in  2  Sam.  xiv.  14,  or  that  the  water  typified  their  desire
that  their  sins  might  be  forgotten  "as  waters  that  pass  away  "  (Job  xi.  16). — {Biblical  Com-
menta/ry.)

''And  Samnel  Judged  Israel."    "With  respect  to  the  position  of  the  judges,  it  is  generally

estimated  falsely  when  they  are  looked  upon  as  proper  judicial  personages  in  our  sense

This  error  has  been  occasioned  by  the  assumption  that  the  Hebrew  word  is  perfectly  synonymous
with  our  jud'jing,  while  in  reality  it  has  a  much  wider  signification.  In  the  Book  of  Judges  it
generally  denotes  the  exerr-ise  of  authority  and  superiority.  .  .  .  Only  of  Deborah  do  we  read,  in
Judges  iv.  5,  that  the  Israelites  went  up  to  her  for  judgment.  But  she  cannot  be  placed  upon
a  level  with  the  judges  througliout.  She  pronounced  judgment  as  a  prophetess  in  matters  where
no  confidence  was  placed  in  the  ordinary  judicial  juiisdiction,  and  a  judgment  of  (;lod  in  the
proiJf-r  sense  was  desired,  just  as,  according  to  Exod.  xviii.,  the  nation  leaving  their  natural
judges,  thronged  to  Moses,  to  draw  justice  immediately  from  its  source.  Samuel's  position  was
exactly  similar  to  that  of  Deborah,  he  was  judge  in  another  sense  than  the  judges  of  the  Book
of  Judges,  — {Henystenherg )

(See  also  on  Ver.  15).

Ver.  7.  "When  the  Philistines  heard,"  etc.  '*  Apprehending  that  such  a  gathering  under
one  so  well  known  as  Samuel  boded  no  good  to  their  dominions,  and  might  be  intended  to
organise  the  assertion  of  the  nation's  own  independence." — (Kitto.)

Ver.  9,  "Samuel,  though  only  a  Levite,  offered  a  burnt  offering  to  the  Lord  at  Mizpeh,
because  the  regular  ministries  of  the  tabernacle  which  was  separated  from  the  ark  were  in
abeyance,  and  God  had  not  yet  chosen  any  fixed  place  to  set  His  name  there,  after  the  destruction
of  Shiloh  ;  and  Samuel  was  raised  up  with  a  special  commission  from  God  to  supply  the
deficiency  of  the  transitory  and  provisional  state  of  things." — (  Wordsworth.)  (See  also  comments
of  this  verse.)

Ver.  12.  "  Shen,"  literally  a  tooth,  doubtless  a  rocky  eminence  in  the  neighbourhood.  It  has
not  been  identified.     "  Ebenezer/'  or  Eben-ha-ezer,  i.e.,  stone  of  help.

Ver.  13.  "They  came  no  more."  "They  no  more  invaded  the  territory  of  Israel  with
lasting  success  as  they  had  done  before."  The  words  which  immediately  follow-  "  the  hand  of
Jehovah  was  against  the  Philistines,"  etc.,  show  that  they  made  attempts  to  recover  their
lost  supremacy,  but  that  so  long  as  Samuel  lived  they  were  unable  to  effect  anything  against
Israel"  (Keil).     The  forty  years  domination,  mentioned  in  Judges  xiH.  1,  now  terminated,

Ver.  14.  "  From  Ekron  even  unto  Gath."  "  This  definition  is  probably  to  be  understood
as  exclusive,  i.e.,  as  signifying  that  the  Israelites  received  back  their  cities  up  to  the  very  bo:  ders
of  the  Philistines,  measuring  these  borders  from  Ekron  to  Gath.  For  although  these  chief
cities  of  the  Philistines  had  been  allotted  to  the  tribes  of  Judah  and  Dan,  in  the  time  of  Joshua
(Josh.  xiii.  3,  4  ;  xv.  45,  46),  yet,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  Judah  and  Simeon  conquered
Ekron,  together  with  Gaza  and  Askelon,  after  the  death  of  Joshua  (Judges  i.  18^,  the  Israelites
did  not  obtain  any  permanent  possession." — \^Keil).

"  And  there  was  peace,"  etc.  "  These  words  suggest  what  is  in  itself  very  probable,  that
in  this  ^var  the  Amorites,  finding  the  Philistines  worse  masters  than  the  Israelites,  made  common
cause  with  Samuel,  and  assisted  the  Israelites  in  their  wars  against  the  Philistines," — {Biblical
Commentary.)

Ver.  15.  "  And  Samuel  judged  Israel."  "We  must  regard  Samuel's  judging  as  a  directing
and  ordering,  in  accordance  with  the  above  act  of  repentance,  of  the  inner  affairs  of  the  people,
who  were  by  that  religious  act  inwardly  again  purified.  It  consisted  both  in  the  administration
of  right  and  justice  according  to  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  in  government  proper,  in  the  wise
carrying  out  of  measures  that  looked  to  the  good  of  the  people.  During  Saul's  life  he  kept
unchanged  the  position  of  a  prophet,  who  employed  the  autlu)rity  of  the  Divine  will  for  the
direction  of  the  national  life — the  mediating  priestly  position  between  God  and  the  people  ;  but
he  also,  as  last  judge,  held  in  his  hands  the  highest  control  of  the  theocracy  and  the  kingdom."
(  Erdmann).

Ver.  16.  "Bethel."  "A  well-known  city  and  holy  place  of  central  Palestine,  twelve  miles
from  Jerusalem,  on  tlie  road  to  Sichem,  where  its  ruins  still  lie  under  the  scarcely  altered  name
of  Beitln."  (Smith's  Bib.  Dictionary.)  "Gilgal."  At  least  two  places  in  ancient  Palestine
were  so  named,  one  in  the  Jordan  valley,  between  that  river  and  Jericho  (Josh.  iv.  I'J),  and  one
south-west  of  Shiloh,  now  culled  Jiljilia  (1  Kings  ii.  1).  It  is  impossilile  to  decide  which  is  the
place  here  mentioned.  Dr.  Erdmann  says,  "  The  question  must  be  decided  in  favour  of  the
former,  for  the  reason  that  Samuel  wovdd  certainly  choose  for  such  assemblies  the  place  that  was
consecrated  by  its  historical  association  and  religious  importance."  Keil  ratlier  leans  to  the
opinion  that  it  was  the  modern  Jiljilia.

Ver.  17.  "Ramah,"  See  note  on  chap.  i.  1.  "There  he  builded  an  altar."  Another
instance  of  Samuel's  deviation  from  the  Levitical  law.     See  note  on  verse  9.

91


SOMIlETlC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  i.


MAIN  HOMJLETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1  and  2.

Care  for  the  Ark  of  God.

I.  The  judgments  of  God  for  contempt  of  His  ordinances  often  make  men
more  careful  in  the  treatment  of  them.  If  the  subject  of  a  well-ordered  state
sets  at  noii<^ljt  its  ordinances  he  finds  himself  visited  with  a  penalty  which
generally  leads  him  to  be  luore  careful  of  his  future  conduct.  He  must  render
honour  where  honour  is  due,  whether  it  be  to  a  person  or  to  a  law,  or  he  will  be
visited  with  punishment  which,  if  he  do  not  proht  by  himself,  will  prove  a
salutary  lesson  to  otliers.  When  a  child  has  plaj  ed  with  the  fire  until  he  has
been  burnt,  he  is  not  only  more  careful  for  the  rest  of  his  life  how  he  trifles  with
it,  but  others  learn  a  lesson  irom  his  sufferings  and  his  scars.  And  when  God
pnnis^hes  men  lor  lightly  Chteeming  that  which  He  has  commanded  them  to
reverence,  it  is  that  those  who  sufier,  and  those  who  see  them  suffer,  may  fear
to  fall  into  the  same  sin.  A  fear  which  brings  reverence  is  a  motive  })Ower  in
the  dispensation  of  the  Gospel,  as  well  as  in  that  which  preceded  it.  In  the
IN^ew  Testament  cases  of  judgment  are  recorded  which  were  as  swift  and  teirible
as  any  found  in  Old  Testament  liistory.  Men  have  needed,  even  in  Gospel
times,  to  be  taught  reverence  for  holy  bemgs  and  holy  ordinances  by  punishment
which  has  worked  fear.  Ananias  and  Sapphira  tliought  it  a  light  matter  to
"  lie  to  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and  their  sudden  death  wrought  "great  fear  upon  all
the  Church"  (Acts  v.  11)  which  led  to  an  increased  reverence  for  the  spirit  of
God.  hlymas  poured  contenipt  upon  the  message  of  salvation  as  preached  by
Paul,  and  was  struck  with  blindness  by  the  man  whose  heart's  desire  and  prayer
to  God  for  all  his  countrymen  was  that  they  should  be  saved.  But  the  judgment
which  fell  upon  the  Jew  led  to  the  salvation  of  the  Gentile,  and  taught  all  who
beheld  it  that  God  will  not  hold  them  guiltless  who  scoff"  at  the  name  of  His
Son  (Acts  xiii.  6-12).  In  the  case  of  the  "seven  sons  of  Sceva"  (Acts  xix.
13-17)  men  learnt  that  they  must  not  lightly  use  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,
and  the  effect  of  the  punishment  of  those  who  did  so  was  that  when  it  "  *t;<^5
known  to  all  the  Jews  and  Greeks  dwelling  at  Ephesus  that  fear  fell  on  them
ill,  and  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  magnified.  Men  of  every  age  have
needed  to  be  taught  not  only  that  "  God  is  love,"  but  that  He  is  "  a  consuming
fire  "  (Heb.  xii.  29),  that  it  is  indeed  His  love  which  leads  Him  to  visit  men
with  judgment  for  contempt  of  His  holy  name  and  ordinances,  in  order  that
others  may  see  it  and  fear,  as  the  visitation  upon  the  men  of  Bethshemesh  led
those  of  Kirjath-jearim  to  be  more  reverent  in  their  treatuient  of  the  ark  of
God.  In  all  the  after  history  of  Israel  we  never  hear  of  their  being  guilty  of  a
similar  act.  The  death  of  the  Bethshemites  w^as  an  effectual  preventive  of  any
more  attempts  of  this  kind.

II.  Those  who  minister  in  holy  things  are  especially  bound  to  live  holy  lives.
The  men  of  Kirjath-jearim  set  apart  a  man  for  the  special  service  of  the  ark.
'*  'i  hey  sanctifieth  Eleazar  his  son  to  keep  the  ark  of  the  Lord."  For  every
service  in  the  world  some  qualification  is  needed,  and  men  are  not  made
custodians  of  men's  hves,  or  even  ot  their  property,  unless  they  are  beheved  to
possess  the  qualifications  indispensable  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  duties  of  the
ofhce.  The  setting  apart  of  men  in  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  to  the
service  of  the  tabernacle  sets  forth  the  truth  that  those  who  minister  in  holy
things  under  the  Gospel  dispensation  are  es])ecially  bound  to  "  come  out  from
the  world  and  be  separate,"  in  a  spiritual  sense,  that  whatever  else  they  lack,  a
high  moral  chaiacter  is  indispensable.  It  also  suggests  the  need  that  such  men
should  remember  the  apostolic  exhortation,  and  give  themselves  "wholly  "to
the  special  work,  and  not  ''entangle  themselves  with  the  affairs  of  this  hfe'*
(1  Tim.  iv.  15  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  4).

92


flHAP.viT.  iJOMTLETIC  COMMESrAtlY:   SAMUEL


III.  Men  learn  the  value  of  Divine  ordinances  when  they  are  deprived  of
them.  When  men  have  abundance  of  bread  and  water  they  have  very  little
sense  of  the  value  of  these  necessaries  of  life.  But  if  they  are  wholly  or  even
partially  deprived  of  them  they  realise  how  precious  they  really  are.  Want
makes  us  sensible  of  the  blessinpj  of  abundance.  Sickness  teaches  us  to  appre-
ciate the  blessin.f,'  of  health,  and  days  of  gloom  make  us  sensi'idc  how  good  a  gift
of  God  is  sunshine.  And  we  never  know  the  true  value  of  religious  ordinances
until  we  are  deprived  of  them.  Those  whom  sickness  has  long  kept  from  the
house  of  God,  or  those  who  have  soj(mrned  in  aland  where  there  were  no  stated
Divine  ordinances,  testify  to  the  truth  of  this.  When  the  soul  of  a  Goodly  man
is  shut  awav  from  God's  hou.se,  and  has  no  opDortmiitv  of  meeting  Him  in  His
sanctuary,  then  the  sigh  goes  up  to  Heaven  "  How  amiable  are  Thij  tabernacles,
0  Lord  of  Hosts !  My  soul  longeth,  yea,  even  fainteth  for  the  courts  of  the
Lord ;  my  heart  and  my  flesh  cry  out  for  the  Living  God.  .  .  .  Blessed  are  they
that  dwell  in  Thy  house :  they  will  be  still  praising  Thee.  .  .  .  For  a  day  in
Thy  courts  is  better  than  a  thousand.  I  had  rather  be  a  doorkeeper  in  the
house  oj  my  God,  than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  wickedness'^  (Psalm  Ixxxiv.  1-10).
This  was  David's  experience,  and  thousands  since  he  penned  these  words  have
used  them  to  express  their  own  feelings.  Israel  had  for  many  years  before  this
time  had  special  religious  privileges — compared  with  the  rest  of  the  nations  they
had  had  a  plentiful  supply  of  spiritual  bread.  But  they  had  treated  it  as
they  had  treated  the  manna  in  the  wilderness — familiarity  had  bred  contempt,
and  they  had  despised  the  means  of  grace,  because  they  had  been  always  in
their  midst  But  the  absence  of  the  ark  from  Shiloh  had  suspended  all  the
usual  tabernacle-service,  and  the  long  famine  of  Divine  ordinances  caused  them
to  "lament  after  the  Lord."

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  1.  Shiloh  was  wont  to  be  the  Jerominh's   (Chap.    xiii.   27),     "Woe

place  which  was  honoured   with   the  unto   thee,    0  Jerusalem  !    wilt  thou

presence  of   the  ark.     Ever  since  the  not   be   made  clean?     When  shall  it

wickedness  of  Eli's  sons,  that  was  for-  once   be  ?      They    refused   to    return

lorn  and  desolate,   and  now  Kirjath-  until  God  stopped  them  with  the  cross,

jearim  succeeds  to  this  privilege.     It  sutlered  the  Thilistines  grievously  to

did  not  stand  with  the  royal  liberty  of  oppress  them,  and  then  "  all  the  house

God,    no,  not   under   the   law,  to  tie  of  Israel  lamented  after  the  law.''  —

himself  unto  places  and  persons.     Un-  Trapp.

worthiness  was  ever  a  sufficient  cau.se  There  is  no  mention  of  their  lament-

of  exchange.     It  was  not  yet  His  time  ing  after  the  Lord  while  He  was  gone,

to  stir  from  the  Jews,  yet  He  removed  but  whin  He  was  returned  and  settled

from  one  province  to  another.     Less  in  Kirjath-jearim.    The  mercies  of  God

reason  have  we  to  think  that  so  God  will  draw    niore    tears   from    His   childien

reside  among  us,  that  none  of  our  pro-  than    his    judgments     do     from    His

vocations   can  drive  Him  from  us. —  enemies.     There   is  no  better  sign  of

Bp.  IJall  good  nature  or  grace  than  to  be  woii

to   repentance  with   kindness  ;  not  to

Ver.    2.     The    time   was  long   ere  think  of  God  except  we  be  beaten  into

Samuel    could    bring    them    to    this  it,  is  servile.     Becau.se  God  was  come

solemn  conversion  related  in  the  verses  again    to    Israel,    therefore    Israel     is

following  :  so  tough  is  the  old  Adam,  returned    to    God  ;    if   God    had    not

and  so  difficult  a  thing  it  is  to   work  come  firsD  they   had  never   come  ;  if

upon    such    as    are    habituated    and  Pie,  that  came  to  them,  had  not  made

hardened  in  sinful  practices.     Samuel's  them  come  to  Him,  they  had  been  ever

80ug    had    been,  as    was    afterwards  parted ;  they  were   cloyed  with  God,

93


BOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


BOOK  I.


wliile  He  was  perpetnally  resident
with  tliem  ;  now  that  His  absence
had  made  Him  dainty,  they  cleave
to  Him  fervently  and  })enitently  in  His
return.  This  was  it  that  God  meant
in  His  departure,  a  better  welcome  at
His  coming  back. — Bp.  I  Jail.

I.  The  persons  lamenting.  God's
peculiar  people.  These  only  love,  and
mind  God's  presence ;  when  the  lords
and  cities  of  the  Philistines  are  weary
of  Him,  and  send  Him  away,  yea,
and  the  inhabitants  of  Bethshemesh,
though  a  city  of  Levites  belonging  to
the  Church  of  God,  through  their  ill
management  of  matters  send  to  get  a
release,  yet  God's  Israel  will  look  after
their  God.  II.  The  object  they  lament
after — not  peace,  plenty,  or  victory
over  their  enemies,  but  after  the  Lord.
Jehovah  is  the  object  of  their  affec-
tions ;  it  is  He  whom  they  love,  and
with  whom  they  long  f  )r  communion.
III.  The  universality  of  the  number-
— all  Israel.  The  whole  house  of
Israel  come  ;  they  that  had  woefully
degenerated  and  had  gone  after  their
idols  ;  what  a  wonderful  act  of  God's
power  and  sovereignty  was  this  upon
their  spirits.  By  this  He  manifests
that  }^e  is  the  true  God,  and  that
Samuel  was  His  servant.  .  .  Christians
should  lament  after  the  God  of  ordi-
nances, or  God  in  ordinances. — I.
Because  God  is  infinitely  more  worth


than  all  ordinances;  His  presence  is
prizahle  for  itself.  This  is  the  marrow
of  heaven,  the  want  of  this  is  hell,
and  this  the  child  of  God  knows!
II.  God  purposely  withdraws  that
men  may  lament  after  Him.  As  when
a  mother  steps  out  of  a  child's  sight,
and  when  she  seems  to  be  gone,  the
child  raises  a  cry  after  her  (Hos.  v.  15).
"I  will  go  and  return  to  my  place,
till  they  acknowledge  their  offence,
and  seek  my  face  ;  in  their  affliction
they  will  seek  me  early."  HI.  Because
sincere  lamenting  after  the  Lord  may
occasion  His  return.  He  purposely
hovers,  waits,  and  expects,  that  His
people  may  call  Him  back  by  their
prayers,  entreaties,  humiliation ;  not
as  though  God  were  moved,  or  changed
by  men's  mournful  complaints  and  out-
cries, but  that  such  an  earnest  lament-
ing qualifies  the  subject,  capacitates
for  mercy,  and  puts  souls  into  the  con-
dition of  the  promise  (Jer.  xxix.  12).
— Oliver  Hey  wood.

The  blessing  of  national  mourning
in  a  time  of  universal  distress.  (1)
Penitent  recognition  of  the  national
sin  ^N\\\Q\\\\2i.'s>  occasioned  it.  (2)  Pain-
ful experience  of  the  mighty  hand  which
has  inMcted  it.  (3)  Sorrowful,  peni-
tent seeking  after  the  Lord's  consola-
tion and  help,  which  ends  m  finding. —
Langes  Commentary,


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3  and  4.

Repentance.

I.  Repentance  is  the  lessening  of  a  moral  distance  between  God  and  man
by  a  moral  turning  of  man  to  God.  "  If  ye  do  return  unto  the  Lord,"  etc.
When  a  man  turns  and  walks  in  an  opposite  direction  he  ciianges  his  course,
and  lessens  the  distance  between  himself  and  the  point  to  which  his  back  has
been  hitherto  turned,  and  from  which  he  has  been  every  moment  getting  fartiier
away.  His  face  is  now  directed  to  an  entirely  opposite  goal,  and  the  distance
between  him  and  that  goal  grows  less  at  every  step.  Repentance  is  not  a  bodily
I  act — it  is  a  turning  of  the  heart.  "  If  ye  do  return  unto  the  Lord  with  all  your
hearts.''  Directly  the  heart  turns  to  God  in  penitence  and  trust  the  nioral
distance  between  that  heart  and  God  is  lessened.  That  turning  is  the  beginning
of  a  new  course  of  life,  which  daily  decreases  the  distance  between  the  man  and
his  former  way  of  life,  and  brings  him  nearer  to  God  in  his  sympathies,  and  in
his  character.  And  this  ^^oes  on  until  there  is  entire  conformity  of  the  character
of  God, — until  the  just  man  becomes  the  perfect  man,  and  all  the  moral  distance
which  once  separated  him  from  God  is  annihilated.  Locally,  God  is  as  near  to
94


CHAP.  viL  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


the  sinner  as  He  is  to  tlie  saint.  He  was  locally  as  near  to  the  Israelites  in
general  as  He  was  to  Samuel  in  p;irticular.  "  G.xl  is  not  far  from  every  one  of
us''  said  Paul  to  the  Athenians  (Acts  xvii.  27).  Yet  God  was  morally  much
nearer  to  Paul  than  He  was  to  any  other  man  on  Mars  Hill,  because  Paul  was
much  more  like  God  in  character  than  they  were.  And  there  was  also  a  great
gulf  of  moral  difference  between  SaMiuel  and  his  hearers,  because  there  was  a
wide  ujulf  between  them  and  Jehovah  in  character  and  disposition.  Paul  had
once  been  far  from  the  (lod  whom  He  now  served,  and  the  Saviour  for  whom
he  was  now  ready  to  die,  but  he  had  diminished  that  distance  by  repentance —
by  an  entire  change  in  his  feelings  concerning  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  aiid  by  a
corresponding  change  of  life.  The  people  whom  Samuel  here  exhorts  were  at
such  a  moral  distance  from  Goil  that  they  had  become  partakers  of  the  debasing
idolatry  of  the  Canaanites,  and  the  worship  of  Baal  had  increased  the  natural
badness  of  the  national  character.  As  the  road  of  iniquity  is  downhill,  every
step  in  the  road  had  not  only  brought  them  farther  from  God,  but  liad  increased
the  speed  at  which  they  had  departed  farther  and  farther  from  Him.  Samuel
here  teaches  that  a  turning  of  heart  to  God  would  be  the  beginning  of  a  moral
transformation — it  would  at  once  begin  to  lessen  the  moral  distance  between
them  and  Jehovah,  and  berin  to  make  a  separation  between  them  and  the  sinful
habits  in  which  they  had  been  living.  He  tells  them  in  effect,  what  another
prophet  afterwards  told  their  descendants,  that  "  The  Lord's  hand  is  not
shortened,  that  it  cannot  save:  neither  is  llis  ear  heavy,  that  it  caymot  hear ;
but  your  iniquities  have  separated  between  you  and  your  God,  and  your  sins
have  hid  His  face  from  you''  (Isa.  lix.  1,  2).

II.  Repentance  is  born  of  a  sense  of  need.  A  local  change  of  place  is  often
brought  about  by  a  sense  of  need.  The  man  feels  dissatisfied  with  what  he
meets  with  in  the  road  in  which  he  is  travelling,  and  his  dissatisfaction  leads
him  to  turn  nmnd  and  take  another  course.  Aijd  so  it  is  in  a  change  of  soul-
direction.  The  prodigal's  .sense  of  need  led  him  to  set  his  face  towards  his
father's  house,  and  Israel  had  now  begun  to  feel  that  they  wanted  something  as
a  nation  which  Baal  and  Ashtaroth  could  not  give  them.  They  "  lamented
after  the  Lord."  Such  a  feeling  of  want  is  a  sign  of  a  re-awakening  conscience
— it  is  like  the  outcry  of  the  man  who  was  thought  to  be  dead  before  the
surgeon's  knife  touched  him — it  is  a  sign  of  returning  consciousness.  The
very  fact  that  he  can  feel  leads  to  the  hope  that  he  may  recover.  He  who
feels  a  sense  of  spiritual  need  is  not  morally  dead — his  conscience  may  have
been  lying  dorujant  for  a  h)ng  time,  but  its  outcry  is  a  sure  sign  that  it  is  not
dead,  and  is  often  the  first  step  to  a  true  repentance.

III.  Human  exhortation  is  often  helpfal  to  repentance.      If  a  man  is

awakening  to  a  sense  of  the  moral  separation  which  sin  has  made  between  him
<ind  God,  the  words  of  a  godly  man  will  often  deepen  the  feeling  and  determine
him  to  turn  to  God.  The  words  of  Peter  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  helped  his
hearers  to  repentance.  His  words  first  pricked  their  hearts  and  then  helped
them  to  accept  Him  whom  they  had  crucified.  Samuel's  words  of  exhortation
meeting  the  feeling  of  need  in  the  hearts  of  Israel,  encouraged  and  stimulated
their  desire  to  return  to  God.

IV.  R^ipentance  is  the  result  of  a  preparation  of  heart,  and  shows  its  reality
in  the  life.  Samuel  here  speaks  of  two  things  as  necessary  to  a  turning
unto  God.  "  Prepare  your  hearts,"  and  "  put  away  Balaam  and  Ashtaroth."
No  thoughtful  man  makes  any  great  change  in  his  life  without  first  making  it
the  subject  of  consideration,  without  counting  the  cost  of  what  he  is  about
to  do.  He  who  thinks  about  leaving  his  native  land,  never  to  return,  does  not
set  out  upon  his  journey  without  well  weighing  the  consequences  of  such  a  step,

95


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY .    SAMUEL.  book  i.


Changes  in  our  modes  and  habits  of  life,  if  made  without  thought,  are  not  likely
to  be  either  satisfactory  or  beneficial.  And  when  a  man  begins  to  think  of  return-
ing to  God  by  repentance  it  is  especially  necessary  that  he  should  ponder  deeply
what  repentance  is — what  is  involved  in  forsaking  sin  and  becoming  a  servant
of  God — in  turning  his  back  upon  his  old  life,  and  beginning  an  entirely  opposite
course.  It  was  when  the  prodigal  "came  to  himself"  that  he  said,  "I  will
arise  and  go  to  my  father."  That  expression  implies  that  there  had  been  much
thinking  on  his  part  about  his  past,  his  present,  and  his  future.  Such  thinking
deepens  and  strengthens  moral  resolution,  and  leads  to  prayer,  and  no  change  of
feeling  is  likely  to  end  in  that  lasting  change  of  heart  and  life  in  which  true
repentance  consists,  unless  it  has  its  birth  in  such  a  preparation.  Samuel
here  insists  on  such  a  though tfulness  and  pra3'erfulness  on  the  part  of  Israel
as  indispensable  to  a  true  and  lasting  return  to  God.  And  repentance  of
heart  must  be  proved  by  a  change  of  life.  Israel  could  not  return  to  God  and
continue  to  worship  the  gods  of  the  Philistines.  ''  No  man  can  serve  two
masters"  (Matt.  vi.  24),  and  he  who  professes  to  desire  the  favour  of  God  must
show  the  reality  of  his  profession  by  putting  off  the  service  of  Satan  and  the
*' works  of  darkness"  (Rom.  xiii.  12),  by  putting  away  everything  in  his  life
that  is  contrary  to  the  mind  and  will  of  God.

V.  After  repentance  comes  liberty.  "  If  ye  do  return,"  etc.,  .  .  .  .  "  the
Lord  will  deliver  you  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philistines."  Every  unrepentant
man  is  a  slave  to  sin.  "  Wiiosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  servant  of  sin"
(John  viii.  34) — he  is  tied  and  bound  by  evil  habits  and  passions.  But  the
formation  of  new  and  holy  desires  and  habits  frees  him  from  the  dominion  of  the
old  ones,  as  the  formation  of  the  new  leaf-buds  on  the  tree  pushes  off  tlie  old
and  withering  leaves.  In  proportion  as  the  former  increase  in  size  and  strength,
the  latter  lose  their  hold  ;  and  in  proportion  as  new  habits,  springing  from  a
new  soul-relation,  gain  strength,  the  old  luibits  lose  their  power,  and  give  the
man  true  liberty.  The  political  freedom  which  Israel  gained  by  turning  from
Baal  to  God  is  a  type  of  the  moral  freedom  which  comes  to  every  man  who  truly
repents.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Samuel  doth  not  presently  cheer  revival  of  religion  ;  so  was  Josiah's.
them  up,  but  presseth  them  to  a  The  nation  of  Judah  was  preserved
thorough  reformation  :  and  giveth  from  idolatry  by  means  of  these  great
them  to  know  that  their  sorrow  must  awakenings.  In  the  time  of  the  build-
bear  some  proportion  to  their  sin.  ing  of  the  second  Temple  there  was  a
See  the  like  done  by  Peter  in  Acts  ii.  revival  of  religion,  which  wrought
37,  38. — Irapp.  most  influentially.      Pentecost  stands

Revivals  of  religion  have  been  the  prominent  in  the  history  of  revivals,

blessed  experience  of  the  Church  in  and  throughout  the  last  eighteen  cen-

every     era     of     its     living     history,  turies  revivals   have  been  occasional,

Whether  we  trace   its  course   in  the  and  form  the  most  interesting  portions

Old  or  New  Testament,  or  in  subse-  of  the   Church's   history Two

quent  times,    evidences  of  occasional  fentures  have  generally  marked  these

awakenings,  with  all  their  happy  re-  periods   of  spiritual   awakening, — the

suits,   abound At  Bochim,   in  poiver  of  prayer,    and   the  power  of

the  early  days  of  the  Judges,  a  great  preaching The  revival  under

revival   took   place.     In  the   days   of  Samuel  was  brought  about  by  prayer

Samuel  the  Church  of  God  was  glad-  and  preaching.     To  this  man  it  is  in-

dened  by  another.     Hezekiah's  reign  strunientally  to  be  traced.    He  wrestled

was  greatly  signalised  by  the  general  in  secret  and  exhorted  in  public.  .  .  .
96


CHAP.  Vll  nOMlLETlC  COMMENT AUl :   SAMUEL.


I.  Samuel  preached  repentance.  This  sincerity.  To  fijive  up  evil  ways  is  o!ie
has  ever  been  the  theme  in  times  of  of  the  earliest  sii^iis  of  a  piMiitent  soul,
attempted  revival.  It  was  the  theme  ....  This  is  the  trial  of  conviction,
of  Noah's  alarm-cry  to  the  gigantic  You  may  profess  anxiety  to  be  saved,
sinners  of  the  old  world.  It  was  the  and  mourn  over  your  sins;  but  so  long
burden  of  Elijah's  prophetic  message,  as  you  do  not  give  up  what  comes
It  was  the  voice  in  the  wilderness  between  your  soul  and  God,  you  have
from  the  lips  of  John  the  Baptist.  It  not  sincerely  repented.  .  . .  HI.  Samuel
was  the  summons  which  the  apostles  urged  a  believing  return  to  the  Lord.
served  in  the  name  of  Christ  upon  a  ....  Repentance  does  not  constitute
godless  world.  It  rang  through  Ger-  ref  )rmation.  It  is  only  the  outer
many  by  Luther's  lips  of  music,  and  court.  By  faith  we  enter  into  the
echoed  among  the  Alpine  valleys  from  holy  place Faith  is  the  re-
Luther's  patriotic  soul.  It  was  the  union  of  the  soul  to  the  Lord.  So
subject  of  Latimer's  blunt  home-tlirusts  when  the  Israelites  gave  up  the  false,
at  the  practical  heart  of  England,  and  they  returned  to  the  true  God.  They
it  thundered  throughout  Scotland  from  forsook  the  many  and  returned  to  the

the  stern    and   fearless   Knox.      The  One The  heart  must  have  an

doctrine  of  repentance  is  the  appendix  object.     No  person  is  without  a  god,

to   every    re-publication    of   the   ten  to  whom  all  his  efforts  are  devoted,

commandments,   and   the   preface    to  and  on  whom  his  affections  are  placed,

every  offer  of  the  Gospel.     So  when  It  may  be  the  world,  or  the  creature,

Samuel  taught,  this  was  his  awakening  or  self,  or  some  superstition,  or  else

theme.   ...   II.  Samuel  sought  fruits  the  true  God.   .  .  .  But  the  awakened

for  repentance.    He  did  not  rest  satis-  conscience  finds  no  satisfaction  in  any-

fied  with  the  expressed  emotion.     He  thing  less  than  the  Lord. — ^teel,
demanded  instant  reproof  of  expressed


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  5,  6, 15—17.

The  Gathering  at  Mizpeh.

I.  If  a  nation  is  to  have  strength  and  liberty  it  must  have  unity.  "  Gather
hX\  Israel  to  Mizpeh."  If  a  human  body  is  to  be  strong,  and  consequently  free
to  act,  there  must  be  a  united  action  of  all  its  members.  Every  limb  and  organ
must  work  harmoniously  together.  So  with  the  human  soul.  All  its  powers
must  gather  themselves  together — there  must  be  a  concentration  of  all  its  forces
— if  there  is  to  be  any  result  of  worth.  Hence  the  Psalmist's  prayer — "  Unite
my  heart  to  fear  Thy  name"  (Psalm  Ixxxvi.  11),  and  the  Apostle's  declaration,
"  This  one  thing  I  do''  (Phil.  iii.  13).  And  the  same  thing  is  true  of  any
corporate  body,  whether  it  be  large  or  small.  It  will  not  have  power  unless  its
action  is  united,  and  if  a  nation  is  not  strong  by  unity  it  will  not  long  be  free.
Samuel  here  aims  at  the  united  action  of  the  whole  nation.  This  unity — 1.  Is
often  brought  about  by  a  common  calamity.  Common  afflictions  and  dangers
have  a  wonderful  power  to  bring  men  together.  If  the  reputation  of  a  fiimily
is  attacked  from  without,  all  its  members  will  forget  little  differences,  and  unite
to  attack  a  common  foe.  The  Church  of  God  needs  nothing  but  a  return  of  the
days  of  persecutiim  to  bring  all  its  members  into  such  a  unity  of  spirit  as  would
astonish  all  her  foes.  It  would  then  be  seen  how  strong  is  the  unseen  bond
which  unites  them  all  to  a  common  head.  When  a  nation  arrives  at  a  great
crisis  in  its  history — especially  when  it  is  threatened  by  a  common  foe — all
minor  differences  of  opinion  are  forgotten  for  the  time — all  party  distinctions
are  laid  aside  and  the  nation  acts  as  one  man.  It  was  the  Philistine  oppression
which  brought  the  Israelites  at  this  timeto  such  unanimous  action.     They  felt

H  97


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  i.


that  tliis  was  not  the  time  for  "  Epliraini  to  envy  Jiidali,  nor  Judali  to  vex
E()liraiin  "  (Isa.  xi.  13).  2.  Such  unity  can  onhj  be  real  and  lasting  by  being
founded  on  right  relations  to  God.  Tlie  fear  of  God  is  the  only  solid  ground
of  national  unity.  Wlien  each  man  is  governed  by  a  desire  to  serve  God,  a
oneness  of  aim  and  purj3ose  in  the  nation  must  be  the  result,  and  in  proportion
as  such  feelings  sway  a  people,  in  such  proportion  will  there  be  concord
in  their  assemblies,  and  unanimity  in  their  actions.  The  unity  of  Israel  at  this
time  was  based  upon  a  common  conviction  of  transgression  against  God,  and  a
desire  to  return  to  Him ;  and  in  proportion  as  these  feelings  were  deep  and
heartfelt,  there  was  ground  upon  which  to  build  a  real  and  permanent  union
of  the  people.  3.  It  is  good  for  such  a  national  unity  to  find  expression  in  a
national  assembly.  Such  a  gathering  increases  the  feeling  of  unity,  and
encourages  the  spirit  of  the  nation  by  giving  it  an  opportunity  of  feeling  its
strength.  It  likewise  intimidates  its  foes.  The  national  gathering  at  Mizpeh
was  helpful  to  the  Israelites  themselves,  and  was  a  just  ground  of  apprehension
to  their  oppressors.

II.  It  is  a  great  blessing  to  a  nation  to  have  a  head  who  is  both  intellectually
and  morally  great.  Men  must  have  leaders,  and  it  matters  little  by  what
name  a  national  leader  is  called — whether  king,  president,  or  prime  minister,
provided  he  exercises  his  power  with  intellectual  ability  and  for  moral  ends.
Such  a  man  should,  like  Samuel,  combine  in  himself  something  of  the  prophet,
the  judge,  and  tlie  priest.  He  teaches  by  his  life,  and  by  his  words,  he  is  a
judge  inasmuch  as  he  is  a  stern  reprover  of  all  wrong,  and  fails  not  to  enforce
penalty  for  transgression  of  national  law,  and  he  is  also  a  priest,  for  such  a  man
will  not  fail  to  bear  on  his  heart  before  God  in  prayer  those  who  look  up  to  him
for  guidance.  Such  a  man  is  a  true  king  of  his  nation,  whether  he  wears  a
crown  or  not.  Samuel  was  such  an  uncrowned  king — a  true  father  of  Israel,  a
true  shepherd  of  his  people.  As  a  prophet,  he  made  known  to  them  the  will
of  Jehovah  ;  as  judge,  he  kept  pnre  the  fountains  of  justice  ;  and  as  at  Mizpeh
he  "cried  unto  the  Lord  for  Israel"  (ver.  9),  we  may  be  sure  that  upon  the
altar  at  Ramah  he  offered  sacrihces,  not  only  for  his  own  sins,  but  also  for  those
of  the  people.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.  5.  Intercession  to  the  Lord  for  wicked  one,  salvation. — hangers  Com-

the  salvation  of  others.    \.  Its  exercise  mentary.
unlimited,  the  individual  as  well  as  the

whole  people  being  its  subject  (comp.  Ver.  16,  17.  Simply  the  vice-regent

1  Tim.  ii.   1,  2).     2.  Its  answer  con-  of  God,  and  no  king,  Samuel  had  no

ditioned  by  the  need  of  salvation,  and  palace  in   Israel.      No  armed  guards

the  capacity  for  salvation  of  those  for  protected    the    person,    nor   gorgeous

whom  it  is  made.  retinue  attended  the  steps  of  Samuel.

No   pomp   of    royalty  disturbed    the

Ver.  6.  The  penitent  confession—  simple  manner  of  his  life,  or  distiu-
'* We  have  sinned  against  the  Lord."  guished  him  from  other  men;  yet
1.  Who  has  to  make  it,  the  individual,  there  rose  by  his  house  in  Ramah  that
family,  congregation,  church,  the  whole  which  proclaimed  to  all  the  land  the
people.  2.  Horn  is  it  to  be  w.ade,  with  personal  character  of  its  ruler,  and  the
attestation  of  its  truth  and  uprightness  principles  upon  which  he  was  to  con-
by  deeds  of  repentance.  3.  What  are  duct  his  government.  In  a  way  not
its  consequences,  forgiveness  of  sin,  to  be  mistaken,  Samuel  associated  the
deliverance  from  the  power  of  the  throne  with  the  altar,  earthly  power
98


CHAP.  VII.  nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


will)  picity,  the  good  of  tlic  country  painted  tabards  and  soiindiiig  trumpets,

with  the  glory  of  Go<l.    That  altar  had  it  proclaimed   to  the  tribes  of  Israel

a  voice  no  man  could  mistake.     In  a  that  piety  was   to    be  the  character,

m:iiinor    more    expressive    than    pro-  and  the  will  of  God  the  rule,  of  his

ciamalion  made  by  royal  heralds  with  government. — Guthrie.

MAIN  IIOMTLETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. —  Verses  7—12.

The  Defeat  of  the  Philistines.

I.  Opposition  to  the  covenant-psople  of  God  furnishes  occasion  for  the

fulfilment  of  the  Divine  promises.  God  had  promised  Abmham  that  He
would  bring  out  His  descendants  from  the  land  of  their  captivity  with  "  great
substance,"  and  ''judge  the  nation  whom  they  should  serve"  (Gen.  xv.  14),  and
the  opposition  of  Pharaoh  furnished  an  occasion  for  the  fulfilment  of  that
promise.  The  Lord  had  answered  Samuel's  prayer  for  Israel's  freedom,  and  even
"while  he  was  offering  the  burnt  offering"  the  Philistines  furnished  an  occasion
for  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  by  ''  drawing  near  to  battle  against  Israel."  In
the  history  of  a  man's  individual  life  the  opposition  from  Satanic  and  human
enemies  often  furnishes  occasion  to  show  that  ''He  is  faithful  that  promised"
(Heb.  V.  23).

II.  The  covenant-promises  of  God  are  fulfilled  also  in  answer  to  prayer.

When  the  time  drew  near  for  the  redemption  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  "their  cry
went  up  to  God  by  reason  of  the  bondage"  (Exod.  ii.  23),  and  the  prayer  and
faith  of  Moses  came  in  to  help  forward  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  of
deliverance.  When  the  seventy  years'  captivity  was  nearly  accomph'shed,  the
supplication  of  Daniel  was  one  instrument  of  bringing  the  fulfilment  of  God's
purpose  of  mercy  (Dan.  ix.).  When  Our  Lord  was  about  to  leave  the  world
He  promised  to  His  disciples  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  they  understood
well  that  they  must  "  continue  in  prayer  and  su})plication  "  for  that  Divine  gift
(Acts  i.  4,  14).  And  the  proniises  given  to  the  individual  Christian  are  all
fulfilled  in  answer  to  prayer.  He  is  to  ''he  careful  for  nothing ;  hut  in  every-
thing hy  prayer  and  supplication  to  let  his  requests  be  made  known  unto  God'*
(Phil.  iv.  6).  The  promise  had  been  made  to  Israel  that  if  they  put  away  their
strange  gods  and  returned  unto  the  Lord,  He  would  deliver  them  out  of
the  hand  of  the  Philistines  ;  but  they  were  right  in  interpreting  this  promise  as
to  be  fulfilled  in  answer  to  prayer,  and,  therefore,  in  beseeching  Samuel  to  cease
not  to  cry  unto  the  Lord  for  them.

III.  Character  has  a  mighty  influence  in  bringing*  answers  to  prayer.
Why  did  Israel  say  to  Samuel,  "  Cry  unto  the  Lord  our  God  for  us?"  It  was
because  they  felt  that  "  the  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth
much''  (James  v.  16).  Much  of  the  availing  power  of  prayer  is  in  the  character
that  is  linked  to  it.  The  cry  of  Moses  for  his  people  was  often  more  effectual
than  the  cry  of  the  thousands  of  Israel.  So  mighty  was  his  power  with  the
Eternal  that,  in  answer  to  his  intercession,  "the  Lord  repented  of  the  evil  which
He  thought  to  do  unto  llis people"  (Ex.  xxxii.  14).  If  this  be  so  in  relation  to
sinful  men,  how  mighty  must  l)e  the  efhcacy  of  the  intercession  of  the  sinless
Son  of  God  on  behalf  of  His  disciples!  If  the  prayers  of  men  of  like  passions
with  ourselves  have  an  inliuence  with  God,  how  mighty  must  be  the  prayers  of
the  sinless  and  Divine  man  !

IV.  Answers  to  prayer  in  the  present  should  bring  thanksgiving  for  like
blessings  in  the  past.  An  act  of  kindness  froi..  a  friend  who  has  befriended  us
many  times  before,  brings  back  to  our  remembrance  all  his  kind  deeds  in  the
past,  all  the  benefits  that  he  has  conferred  in  days  that  are  gone  pass  again

99


IIOMILETIC  COMMEISTART:  SAMUEL.


EOOK  I.


before  us  every  time  we  are  recipients  of  his  bounty.  This  is,  or  ought  to
be,  especially  the  case  with  gifts  received  from  the  hand  of  God,  and  especially
with  good  things  given  in  answer  to  prayer.  Thankfulness  for  the  mercy  of
to-day  ought  to  be  deepened  by  recalling  the  mercies  of  past  days.  When
Samuel  looked  back  at  the  past  history  of  iiis  people,  he  recalled  many  instances
of  God's  loving  kindness  to  a  people  who  had,  notwithstanding,  often  rebelled
against  Him.  And  the  thought  of  the  many  Divine  interpositions  in  the  past
deepened  his  gratitude  for  the  present  deliverance.  His  ''hitherto"  speaks
his  thanksgiving  for  all  the  lielp  of  God  to  Israel  from  the  day  in  which  they
left  Egypt  until  the  day  which  had  just  passed,  and  when  any  man  bows  before
God  in  gratitude  for  a  present  answer  to  prayer,  he  should  connect  it  by  a
hitherto  with  all  that  have  gone  before.

V.  It  is  s^ood  for  our  gratitude  to  God  to  show  itself  in  an  external  form.
We  like  to  express  our  gratitude  to  a  human  friend  in  some  practical  form  as
we  thereby  give  a  body,  as  it  were,  to  that  which  is  itself  unseen.  And  it  is
good  to  testify  our  thard<fulness  to  God  by  some  external  manifestation,  as  we
thereby  perpetuate  a  remembrance  of  His  goodness  and  make  it  known  to
others.  Samuel  desired  that  God's  deliverance  at  this  time  should  live  in  the
metnory  of  the  present  generation,  and  be  handed  down  to  their  descendants,
therefore  he  embodies  his  feeling  in  a  pillar  of  remembrance — "he  took  a  stone,
and  set  it  between  Mizpeh  and  Shen,  and  called  the  name  of  it '  EbejiezerJ"


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


Ver.  7.  The  Philistines  come  up,  and
the  Israelites  fear,  they  that  had  not
the  wit  to  fear,  whilst  they  were  not
friends  to  God,  have  not  now  the
grace  of  fearlessness,  when  they  were
reconciled  to  God.  Boldness  and  fear
are  commonly  misplaced  in  the  best
hearts  ;  when  we  should  tremble,  we
are  confident ;  and  when  we  should  be
assured,  we  tremble.  Why  should
Israel  have  feared,  since  they  had  made
their  peace  with  the  Lord  of  Hosts  ?
Nothing  should  affright  those  which
are  upright  with  God  :  the  peace  which
Israel  had  made  with  God  was  true,
but  tender. — Bishop  Hall.

1.  How  evil  sometimes  seems  to  come
out  of  good.  The  religious  meeting  of
the  Israelites  brought  trouble  upon
them  from  the  Philistines.  2.  How
good  is  at  length  brought  out  of  that
evil.  Israel  could  never  be  threatened
more  seasonably  than  at  this  time,
when  they  were  rei)enting  and  praying.
.  .  .  .  Bad  policy  for  the  Philistines
to  make  war  upon  Israel  when  they
were  making  their  peace  with  God. —

nry.

Ver.  8.    An    evidence   of   Samuel's
lOU


//.


habitual  resort  to  God  in  prayer  for
help.  (See  chap.  xii.  19-23.)  In
Psa.  xcix.  6,  Samuel  is  specially  men-
tioned as  given  to  prayer,  and  as
prevailing  by  prayer.  "  Moses  and
Aaron  among  His  priests,  and  tSamuel
among  them  that  call  upon  His  name :
these  called  upon  the  Lord,  and  He
heard  them  ;'^  and  in  Jer.  xv.  1,  God
says,  "  Though  Moses  and  Samuel
stood  before  Me,  yet  My  mind  could
not  be  towards  this  people."  Samuel
had  been  given  by  God  in  answer  to
His  mother's  prayers,  and  his  whole
life  seems  to  have  been  governed  by  a
sense  of  the  power  of  prayer,  to  which
his  birth  was  due  ....  The  forty
year's  domination  of  the  Philistines
over  Israel  could  not  be  overthrown  hy
the  supernatural  strength  of  Samson,
bat  it  was  terminated  by  the  prayers
of  Samuel  :  so  much  more  powerful
are  the  weapons  of  prayer  in  the  hands
of  righteous  men  than  any  arm  of
flesh. —  Wordsworth.

Ver.  9.  It  is  difficult  to  reconcile
the  severe  judgments  denounced  and
inflicted  for  irregularities  in  the  ritual
service,  with  the  direct  sanction  and


CHAP.VTT.  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAHirLL.


approval  wliich  attended  the  irregular  verse."     It  is  the  Divinely-appointed

actions  of  Sanmol  and  other  prophets  means    of    assistance.       It    has    the

with  regard  to  the  ritual  observances,  promises  which  are  "exceeding  great

The  point  is  of  importance,  for  it  is  and  precious"  attached  to  it.     II.  It

the  action  of  tlie  prn])hets  from  this  was  a  prayer  in  which  they  all  had  a

time  forward  upon  }»ul)lic  affairs  which  believing  interest.   .  .  .   Many  hearts

gives  to  the  history  of  the  Jews  their  united   in   one   exercise.      This   gives

peculiar   character It   would  ])ublic     prayer     a     wondrous     ])ower.

appear  then  that  the  i)rophets,  as  men  III.   It  was  prayer  to  their  covenant

divinely  authorised  and  inspired,  were  God.      They  had  just   renewed  their

regarded  as  having  a  right  to  dispense  covenant  with  God,  and  accepted  Him

with  the  strict  requirements  of  the  law  as  theirs.     '*  Cry  unto  our  God  for  us."

on  special  and  extraordinary  occasions,  They  knew  to   whom   they  addressed

and  that,  as  prompted  by  the  Spirit,  their  cry.     It  was  to  no  unknown  God

it  was  lawful  for  them  to  do  that  which  or    imaginary    Deitv.        IV.    It   was

would  be  most  criminal  in  persons  not  prayer  for  a  definite  object.      They

so   authorised.      And   this  authorised  specihed   their   want — "that   He   will

departuA/e,   when   occasion   demanded,  save  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philis-

from  the  strict  requirements  of  the  law  tines  "  (ver.  8).     Too  many  pray  in  a

could  not  but  operate  beneficially  on  way    so   general   as  to   exhibit   little

the  public  mind.     The  rigid  enforce-  interest  in  what  they  ask.     But  Israel

ment  of  every  jot  and  tittle  of  the  law,  had  a  particular  danger,  hence  they

on  ordinary  occasions,  might  eventually  had  a  particular  request.    Their  prayer

— without  the  presence  of  a  corrective  arose    from    a  felt    necessity

and    counteracting    influence  —  have  Prayer  should   have  a  fixed,  definite

created  a  sort  of  idolatry  for  the  mere  object.     You  should  know  what  you

letter  of  the  law,  and  of  every  ritual  want,  and  let  your  felt  want  urge  your

detail,  as  in  itself  a  divine  thing.    But  earnest  cry.      V.  It  was  offered  by  a

the  permitted  departures  therefrom  by  sacrifice The  sinful  can  have

the  prophets  corrected  this  tendency,  no  claim  upon  the  Holy,  nor  can  they
by  directing  attention  more  to  the  approach  without  mediation.  Hence
spiritual  essence  of  these  observances —  a  system  of  mediation  was  established
teaching,  as  Samuel  hiujself  expressly  when  mercy  was  revealed.  A  media-
declared  on  one  occasion,  that  "obe-  tion  and  an  atonement  were  prefigured
dience  was  better  than  sacrifice,  and  in  the  old  economy. — Steel.
to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams."   The

diligent  reader  of  the  Scripture  is  aware         Ver.  12.    What  a  contrast  between

that  this  upholding  of  the  spirit  above  the  event  now  recorded   at  Ebenezer

the  mere  letter  of  the  ritual  service  and  that  recorded  as  having  occurred

was  a  peculiar  function  of  the  projihets,  a  few  years  before  at  the  same  place,

appearing  with  more   and   more   dis-  At  that  time  Israel  had  the  ark  with

tinctness  as  the  time  advances,  until  them,  the  visible  sign  of  God's  ])resence,

at  last  the  prophets  declare  with  great  but  the  Lord    Himself  had   forsaken

plainnessof  speech  that  the  mere  ritual  them  on  account  of  their  sins;    and

service  in  all  its  parts,  and  the  most  Hophni  and  Phinehas  were  with  the

sacred  solemnities   prescribed   by  the  ark,  and  they  were  discomfited  witli  a

law,  were,  in  the  nakedness   of  their  great  slaughter,  and  the  priests  were

literal  truth — apart  from  the  spiritual  slain  with  the  sword,  and  the  ark  of

influences  whicii  should  be  connected  God  was  taken.     Now  they  have  not

with  them — not  only  unacceptable  to  the  ark,   but   they  have   repented   of

the    Lord,    but    abomination    in   His  their  sins,  and  Samuel  is  with  them ;

sight. — Kitto.  and  the  Lord  hearkens  to  his  prayers,

Samuel's   intercession    was — I.  The  and  the  Phili5>tines  are  smitten  so  that

most  powerful  means  of  aid.    "Prayer  they  return  no  more  into  the  coasts  of

moves  the  arm  that  moves  the  uni-  Israel  during  the  days  of  Samuel,  and

lOl


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.  book  l


Samuel  sets  up  the  great  stone  at  lasting  and  grateful  memorials  of
Ebenezer.  Hence  it  appears  that  the  God's  goodness  to  as,  and  of  our
outward  ordinances  of  a  visible  (yhurch  solemn  engagements  to  him.  What
are  of  no  avail  without  holiness  in  the  God  has  done  is  too  great  to  be  for-
worshippers,  and  that  in  the  most  dis-  gotten,  and  too  gracious  to  be  over-
tressed  condition  of  the  visible  Church  looked.  I.  Look  upvsrard,  and  see  God
God  can  raise  up  Samuels,  and  endue  in  your  history.  We  should  always
them  with  extraordinary  graces,  and  trace  our  mercies  direct  to  the  hand  of
enable  them  to  do  great  acts,  and  give  God,  since,  whatever  be  the  agency,
comfort  and  victory  to  the  Church  of  He  is  the  source.  II.  Look  backward,
God  by  their  means. —  Wordsworth.  and  remember  past   help.     The  text

The  stone  Ebenezer  is  a  monument  supi)oses  that  help   was   needed,   and

of  those  revelations  of  the  might  and  every  Christian  knows  that  his  rlepen-

the  grace  of  a  living  God,  occasioned  deuce   is   constant.      Mark   the   long

by  sin  and  penitence,  wandering  and  continuance  of  your  mercies.    Hitherto

return,  which  are  the  impelling  power  may  be  for  forty,  fifty,  or  even  sixty

in  the  whole  political  history  of  the  years.  III.  Look  forward    Thou  shalt

old  covenant. — Langes  Commentary.  see  greater  things  than  i\iQ^Q.-Thodey ,

It  is  of  great  consequence  to  cherish

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13  and  14.

Victory,  Rest,  and  Restoration.

I.  One  decisive  victory  brings  a  long  season  of  rest.  This  victory  at
Ebenezer  brought  peace  to  Israel  for  many  years,  and  so  the  human  soul,  by  a
decisive  victory  over  one  strong  temptation,  gains  often  a  long  season  of  rest
irom  the  tempter's  snares.  He  gives  by  such  a  victory  such  a  proof  to  the
powers  of  evil  of  his  moral  courage  that  it  is  deemed  hopeless  to  renew  the
conflict  while  the  soul  remains  so  strong  and  watchful.  It  is  written  concerning
the  Son  of  God,  after  His  decisive  victory  over  the  devil  in  the  wilderness,  that
the  tempter  "  departed  from  Him  for  a  season  "  (Luke  iv.  13).  The  total  defeat
he  had  exi)erienced  told  him  how  vain  it  would  be  to  renew  the  assault  while  the
being  whom  he  desired  to  overthrow  remained  in  His  present  frame  of  soul.  In
all  warfare  it  is  best  to  decide  at  once  who  is  to  be  the  master  of  the  field  by
a  decisive  blow,  and  if  a  Christian  desires  any  rest  of  soul  there  must  be  no
parleying  with  his  spiritual  enemies,  he  must — with  the  help  of  the  same  God
by  whom  Israel  routed  the  Philistines  at  Ebenezer — let  them  know  without  delay
who  is  to  be  the  conqueror.  Even  then  the  devil  will  "  depart  for  a  season  "
only,  but  these  seasons  of  repose  will  enable  him  to  gather  strength  for  the
next  attack.

II.  Victory  brings  restoration  of  that  which  has  been  lost  by  subjection.
When  Israel  had  conquered  her  o])pressors  she  regained  the  cities  which  had
been  taken  from  her  in  the  day  of  her  .<>ubjection.  The  human  race  does  not
now  possess  all  that  belonged  to  it  when  God  created  the  first  man,  and  bade
him  '*  replenish  the  earth  and  subdne  it"  (Gen.  i.  28).  God  at  first  ''put  all
things  under  his  feet "  (Psalm  viii.  6).  Put  now  it  is  plain  that  man  is  not
the  absolute  lord,  either  of  the  earth  and  the  phenomena  of  nature,  or  of  the
animal  creation.  He  has  lost  his  rule  by  sin.  "  We  see  not  yet  all  things  put
under  him  "  (Heb.  ii.  8).  But  when  man  is  restored  to  his  original  position  in
the  universe  by  victory  over  sin,  he  will  recover  his  lost  rule  over  material
things.  There  is  to  be  a  "  time  of  restitution'  (Acts  iii.  21),  when  the  powers
which  now  hold  man  in  subjection  will  be  finally  defeated,  and  he  will  recover
his  former  dominion,  not  only  over  hims(  If;  but  over  the  world  and  over  all  the
creatures  below  him  in  the  scale  of  creation.

102


CHAP.  vii.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

The  revival  of  religion  has  ever  had  of  despotism,   and    they  possess    the

a  most   important   bearing  on    social  greatest  amount  of  domestic  quiet.     It

and  moral  improvement.     The  return  was    the    revival    of    religion    which

of  man  to  God   restores   him   to    his  secured    the  Protestant  succession   to

brotlier.     Restoration  to   the  earnest  England,  and  many  of  the  liberties  we

and   hearty    performance  of  religious  now  enjoy.     It  was  the  revival  of  reli-

duties  towards  God,  leads  to  a  corres-  gion  that  gave  such  a  martyr-roll  to

ponding   reformation   in   relative  and  the  Scottish  Covenanters,  and  led  to

political  duties.      Those  countries  in  the  revolution  settlement  of  1688.     In

Europe  which  have  had  the  greatest  Israel   every   revival   of  religion   was

rehgious  reforms,  have  advanced  most  succeeded  by  national  prosperity  and

in  liberty,  civilisation,  and  commerce,  political  independence. — Steel,
They  are  not  trodden  by  the  iron  heel


CHAPTER  VIII.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes.  — Ver.  1.  "  When  Samuel  was  old."  Many  expositors
consider  that  he  was  now  about  sixty  years  of  age,  others  that  lie  was  not  more  than  fifty-four.
It  is  plain  that  he  lived  for  some  time  after  this,  and  continued  to  exercise  his  judgeship.
"  He  made  his  sons  judges,"  etc.  "  The  reason  assigned  for  the  appointment  of  Samuel's
Bons  as  judges  is  his  own  advanced  age.  The  inference  which  we  might  draw  from  this  alone,
namely,  that  they  were  simply  to  support  their  father  in  the  administration  of  justice,  and  that
Samuel  had  no  intention  of  laying  down  his  office,  and  still  less  of  making  the  supreme  office
of  judge  hereditary  in  his  family,  is  still  more  apparent  from  the  fact  that  they  were  stationed
as  judges  of  the  nation  in  Beersheba,  which  was  on  the  southern  border  of  Canaan  "  (Keil).

Ver.  2.  "The  name  of  his  firstborn  was  Joel,"  etc.  ** These  names  may  be  taken  as
indications  of  the  father's  pious  feeling.  The  first,  Joel,  '  Jehovah  i.s  God,'  was,  not  improbably,
a  protest  against  the  idolatry  of  the  Israelites.  The  name  of  the  second  son,  Abiah,  'Jehovah  is
father,'  expresses  trust  in  the  fatherhood  of  God,  an  idea  which  hardly  appears  in  the  Old
Testament  except  in  proper  names"  (Translator  of  Lange's  Commentary ).  "  .46/a/t  records
doubtless  the  fervent  aspiration  of  him  Avho  devised  it  as  a  name,  and,  we  may  lu)pe,  of  many
who  subsequently  adopted  it  after  that  endearing  and  intimate  relationship  between  God  and
the  soul  of  man,  which  is  truly  expressed  by  the  woviXs  father  and  child.  It  may  be  accepted  as
a  proof  that  believers  in  ancient  days,  though  they  had  not  possession  of  the  perfect  knowledge
of  'the  mystery  of  God,  and  of  the  Father,  and  of  Christ,'  or  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
nevertheless  *  received  the  spirit  of  adoption,'  that  God  '  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  into
their  hearts,  whereby  they  cried  Abba,  Father  '  "  (  Wilkinson's  Personal  Names  in  the  Bible).

Ver.  3.  *•  His  sons  walked  not  In  his  ways."  "  The  question  may  arise,  why  Samuel  was
not  punished,  as  Eli,  for  the  misconduct  of  his  sons  ?  But  tlie  answer  is  obvious.  Not  only
was  the  offence  of  Samuel's  sons  of  a  far  less  heinous  criminality,  but  Samuel  might  not  know,
owing  to  this  distance  of  Beersheba,  anything  of  their  delinquency  "  (Jamieson).

Ver  5.  *'  Make  us  a  king  to  judge  us  like  all  the  nations."  *'  This  request  resemT)les  so
completely  the  law  of  the  king  in  Deut.  xvii.  ]  4,  tliat  the  distinct  allusion  to  it  is  unmistakable.
The  custom  of  expressly  quoting  the  book  of  the  law  ia  met  with  for  the  Hrst  time  in  the  books
of  the  captivity.  The  elders  simply  desired  what  Jehovah  had  foretold  through  His  servant  Moses,
as  a  thing  that  would  take  place  in  the  future  and  for  which  He  had  made  provision"  (Kid).  See
also  comments  on  this  verse.

Ver.  6.  "The  thing  displeased  Samuel,"  etc.  "He  did  not,  therefore,  take  it  amiss  that
they  blamed  the  wrong-doing  of  his  sons,  or  that  they  referred  to  his  age,  and  thus  intimated
that  he  was  no  longer  able  to  bear  the  whole  burden  of  office  "  {iiV(/ma/?n).  *' Personal  and
family  feelings  miglit  afl'ect  his  views  of  this  public  movement.  But  his  dissatisfaction  arose
principally  from  tlu;  proposed  change  being  revolutionary  in  its  character.  Though  it  would  not
entirely  subvert  their  theocratic  government,  the  appointment  of  a  visiible  monarch  would
necessarily  tend  to  throw  out  of  view  their  unseen  King  and  Head "  (Jamieson).  (See  also
comments  on  the  verse.)

103


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  i.


Ver  11.  "This  will  be  the  manner  of  the  king,"  i.e.,  "the  right  or  premgative  whicli
the  king  would  claim,  namely,  such  a  king  as  was  possessed  by  all  the  other  nations,  and  such
an  one  aa  Israel  desired  in  the  place  of  its  own  God-king,  i.e.,  a  king  who  would  rule  over  his
people  with  arbitrary  and  absolute  power  "  ( Keil).  "  The  following  is  a  very  just  and  graphic
picture  of  the  despotic  governments  which  anciently  were  and  still  are  found  in  the  East,  and
into  conformity  with  which  the  Hebrew  monarcliy,  notwithstanding  the  restrictions  prescribed
by  the  law,  gradually  slid.  Oriental  sovereigns  claim  a  right  to  the  services  of  any  of  their
subjects  at  pleasure.    The  royal  equipages  throughout  the  East  were  generally,  as  in  Persia  they

still  are,  preceded  and  accompanied  by  a  number  of  attendants  on  foot Cookery,  baking,

and  the  kindred  works  are,   in  Eastern  countries,   female  employments,  and  numbers  of  young
women  are  occupied  with  these  offices  in  the  palaces  even  of  petty  princes  "  (Jamieson).

Ver.  20.  "  The  first  part  of  this  energetic  answer  implies  that  they  were  well  aware  of  the
peculiarity  of  their  civil  government,  by  which  their  governors  were  only  God's  vicegerents —
officers  chosen  and  appointed  by  an  unseen  power — and  they  desired  a  visible  head.  The  second
part  of  it  expressed  a  strong  preference  for  a  permanent  rather  than  an  occasional  or  temporary
magistrate  to  consult  their  interests  by  his  domestic  administration,  and,  with  regard  to  their
foreign  relations,  to  keep  a  standing  army,  ready  at  all  times,  under  his  command,  to  repel  the
encroachments  or  insults  of  neighbouring  states.  Perhaps,  too,  the  corruptions  that  had
prevailed  to  so  great  an  extent  under  the  judges  had  originated  a  secret  but  strong  desire  to  be
freed  from  the  government  of  the  priesthood,  and  they  probably  expected  that,  if  released  from
the  authority  of  sacerdotal  judges,  they  would  find  a  regal  government  less  austere  and  rigid
than  the  old  regime'*  {Jamieson).

Ver.  22.  "  Go  ye  every  man,"  etc.  "  We  must  here  read  between  the  lines  that  Samuel
communicated  the  Divine  decision  to  the  people,  and,  dismissing  the  elders,  took  into  considera-
tion, in  accordance  with  the  Lord's  command,  the  necessary  steps  for  the  election  of  a  king  "
( Erdmann).  "  He  gave  them  time  to  reconsider  their  request,  as  well  knowing  that  God's
permission  was  a  punishment"  (  Wordsicorth).  "Such  was  their  reverence  for  God,  and  their
confidence  in  His  prophet,  that,  instead  of  proceeding  further  to  claim  the  right  of  popular
election,  they  departed  in  full  and  patient  reliance  on  God's  time  and  way  of  granting  their
request "  (Jamieson).


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—Z.

Samuel  the  Father.

Samuel  has  been  called  the  second  Moses  of  Hebrew  history,  but  though
their  personal  character  and  their  life-work  were  very  much  alike,  there  are
some  striking  contrasts  in  their  individual  history.  Moses,  for  instance,  was
not  called  to  begin  his  great  life-work  until  he  was  older  than  Samuel  was  at
the  period  of  his  history  to  which  these  verses  refer,  while  this  latter  servant  of
God  entered  upon  his  special  service  while  he  was  a  child.  But  he  who  cjime
last  retained  his  bodily  vigour  much  longer,  for  at  the  age  of  one  hundred  and
twenty  years  "his  eye  was  not  dim,  nor  his  natural  force  abated"  (Deut.
xxxiv.  7),  while  Samuel,  when  not  more  than  half  so  old,  began  to  feel  the  infirmities
of  age.  Moses  continued  physically  fit  for  service,  yet  was  forbidden  by  God  to
serve  longer.  Samuel  became  unfit  for  active  service,  and  yet  was  permitted  to
continue  it.  Both  were  conjpelled,  the  one  by  Divine  command,  the  other  by
bodily  infirmity,  to  hand  over  their  work  to  others,  but  Moses  is  happy  in
finding  a  suitable  successor,  while  Samuel  is  obliged  to  delegate  his  authority  to
those  who  are  very  unfit  to  exercise  it.  Thus  the  life  of  the  great  law-giver
and  that  of  the  first  of  the  prophets  remarkably  illustrate  the  variety  of  God's
dealings  with  his  servants,  and  lead  us  to  exclaim,  when  we  contemplate  His
providential  leadings,  "  His  ways  are  past  finding  out "  (Kom.  xi.  33).  The
verses  teach  us —

I.  That  time  is  no  respecter  of  character.     Samuel  grew  infirm  although  he

was  so  good.     Character  is  by  far  the  most  important  thing  on  earth  as  well  as

in  heaven,  yet  the  greatest  saint  as  much  as  the  greatest  sinner  realises  in  nis

tnvn  experience  that  "  the  creature  is  made  subject  to  vanity"  {Rom,  viii.  20).

104


CHAP.  vin.  nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,


In  this  respect  Snmnel,  tlie  elect  servnnt  of  God,  was  no  more  higlily  favoured
than  the  most  iHi.uodly  man  in  tlie  kingdom  of  Israel.  The  "  outer  man  "  of
one  as  well  as  of  the  other  was  "perishing  day  by  day  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  16).

II.  But  the  fact  that  it  is  so  Fhows  the  necessity  for  the  full  adoption  of
the  body.  (Rom.  viii.  23).  It  must  be  shown  that  God  is  a  respecter  of  per-
sons. That  the  same  destiny  shouhl  await  the  body  of  a  saint,  which  has  been
an  instrument  of  righteousness,  and  that  of  a  sinner,  which  has  been  altogether
devoted  to  the  service  of  sin,  does  not  accord  with  our  conceptiim  of  the  justice
of  God.  There  is  that  within  us  which  demands  that,  at  some  time  or  other,
there  should  be  some  dilierence  made,  and  God  in  His  revealed  word  tells  us
that  there  will  be.  The  body  of  the  saint  will  have  an  adoi)tion-day — it  will
be  redeemed  from  the  curse  of  sin  (Rom.  viii.  23),  and  will  be  ''fashioned  like
unto  the  glorious  body  "  of  the  Son  of  God  (Phil.  iii.  21).

III.  Family  life  is  consistent  with  the  highest  spiritual  attainments  and
the  most  devoted  spiritual  service.  Samuel  the  prophet  of  God  was  a  husband
and  father.  The  highest  ideal  of  man  is  not  that  of  a  solitary  creature  bound
by  no  human  ties,  and  fulfilling  none  of  the  social  duties  of  life.  But  the  most
))erfect  manhood  is  that  which  is  developed  first  of  all  in  the  head  of  a  house-
hold as  the  father  of  a  family.  When  God  first  created  man  He  did  not  con-
sider him  complete  until  he  became  a  social  head,  and  it  is  as  true  now  as  it
was  then  that  a  man  is  not  developed  on  all  sides  of  his  character  until  he  takes
the  position  for  which  God  evidently  intended  him,  and  fulfils  the  duties  which
belong  to  that  position.  And  this  being  so,  it  is  obvious  that  such  a  life  is  no
hindrance  to  a  man's  spiritual  growth  and  to  his  most  entire  devotion  to  the
service  of  God.  No  man  in  Hebrew  history  stands  before  Samuel  in  purity  of
life  or  singleness  of  aim ;  no  man,  excepting  perhaps  Moses,  was  more  honoured
by  God  as  an  intercessor  on  behalf  of  others,  or  was  more  entirely  devoted  to
the  highest  welfare  of  his  people,  yet  he  was  the  head  of  a  household,  he  was  a
husband  and  a  father.  And  if  we  look  back  upon  the  history  of  the  Church  of
God,  we  shall  find  that  the  greater  number  of  her  most  devoted  servants  have
not  been  monks  and  nuns,  but  husbands  and  wives,  fathers  and  mothers.

IV.  The  most  godly  men  cannot  transmit  their  godliness  to  their  children.

Samuel's  sons  "walked  not  in  his  ways."  There  were  several  reasons  which  we
should  have  supposed  would  lead  them  to  do  so.  From  their  earliest  days  they
had  been  witnesses  of  their  father's  godly  life,  and  nothing  is  more  powerful
than  a  good  example.  Yet  in  this  case  it  had  no  influence ;  all  Samuel's
integrity  was  unable  to  win  his  sons  to  the  practice  of  justice.  I^hen  there  was
the  position  of  responsibility  in  which  they  were  placed.  That  they  held  a
position  in  the  nation  which  was  only  second  to  that  of  their  father  was
favourable  to  the  transmission  of  the  virtues  which  he  had  displayed  as  judge  of
Israel.  But  this  was  not  the  case.  We  cannot  doubt  that  they  also  enjoyed
the  blessing  of  a  father's  prayers  and  instruction.  If  Samuel  was  in  the  habit
of  bringing  all  Israel  before  God  in  prayer,  it  is  certain  that  he  did  not  omit  to
make  special  intercession  for  his  own  children  ;  if  he  ceased  not  to  instruct  and
warn  the  entire  nation,  it  is  most  unlikely  that  he  failed  to  acquaint  his  children
with  the  law  of  God — with  His  dealings  with  the  nation  in  the  past — with
the  judgment  that  he  had  been  called  to  foretell  concerning  the  sons  of  Eli,  and
with  the  great  promises  which  had  been  made  to  Israel  if  they  were  iaithful  to
their  privileges.  But  he  finds  himself  confronted  with  the  fact  that  a  holy  seed
is  born,  not  of  the  blood  of  prophets,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God.  Great
as  are  the  moral  advantages  of  being  born  into  a  godly  taniily,  more  than  the
mere  fact  of  being  so  born,  and  of  being  surrounded  by  every  holy  influence,  is
needed  to  subdue  the  will  of  fallen  man,  and  make  him  a  servant  of  God.

105


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  i.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  1.  Samuel  began  his  acquain-  was  too  partial  to  nature  in  the  sur-

tance  with  God  early,  and  continued  rogation  of  liis  sons.     I  do  not  hear  of

it  long  ;  he  began  it  in  his  long  coats,  God's   allowance   to  this   act ;  if  this

and  continued  to  his  grey  hairs  :  he  had  been  God's  choice  as  well  as  his,  it

judged  Israel  all  the  days  of  his  Hfe.  had  been  like  to  have  received  more

God  doth  not  use  to  put  off  His  old  blessing.  .  .  .  Even  the  best  lieart  may

servants,  their  age  endeareth  tbem  to  be  blinded  by  affection. — Bp.  Hall.

Him  the  more  ;  if  we  be  not  unfaithful  I.  The  children  of  good  men  do  not

to  Him,  He  cannot  be  unconstant  to  always  walk  in  their  parents'  ways*

us. — Bishop  Hall.  It   was   not  the  peculiar  affliction  of

Samuel.  ...  It  was  early  seen  that

Ver.  3.  It  is  amazing  how  this  sin  grace   was  not    hereditary.      In    the

of    coyetousness    perverts   the    moral  family  of  Adam,  there  was  a  Cain,  a

faculties.  ^  Gold,  unlawfully  got,  sears  murderer  ;  in  that  of  Noah,  a  Ham,

the  conscience.     Some  of  the  loftiest  who  mocked   his  father ;    in  that  of

minds  have  been  degraded  by  this  sin.  Abraham,    an    Ishmael,   a  scoffer  at

Perha[)S  there  was  not  a  greater  man  religion  ;   in  that  of  Isaac,  a  profane

in  his  own  a^^e,  or  in  any  age,  than  Esau.     An  incestuous  Reuben,  and  a

Lord  Bacon.  He  is  the  father  of  modern  bloody   Simeon    and  Levi,   distressed

philosophy,  and  revolutionised  the  in-  the   heart   of  good   old   Jacob  ;    two

quiries  of  the  schools.  .  .  .  His  works  drunkards,   Nadab  and  Abihu,   were

must  ever  be  read  with  profit,  and  they  fuund  in  the  family  of  Aaron,  "the

contain  a  vast  store  of  wisdom  expressed  saint  of  God;"  and  Hophni  and  Phi-

in  the  most  felicitous  language.     Yet,  nehas  brought  disgrace  and  ruin  upon

strange  to  relate,  Lord  Bacon  was  one      the   house   of   Eli II.    The

of  the  most  unscrupulous  lawyers,  and  frequent  recurrence  of  this  fact  need

one  of  the  most  disreputable  judges  that  excite  no  surprise  in  those  who  believe

ever  sat  upon  the  English  bench.  ...  in  the  corruptions  of  human  nature

This  philosopher,  who  had  written  so  and  the  sovereignty  of  Divine  Grace.

much  in  praise  of  virtue,  was  impeached  ....  The  children  of  the  godly  are

by  the  House  of  Commons,  and  found  "  by  nature   the   children   of   wrath,

guilty  of  receiving  bribes  to  the  amount  even  as  others."  .  .  .  Something  more

of  £100,100  !     "  This  glimpse  of  the  is  necessary  than  parents  can  confer,

rise  and  fall  of  a  great  man,"  says  Dr.  a  change  of  heart,  which  God  alone

Tweedie,  **  proclaims  aloud  the  insuf-      can    accomplish III.   Causes

ficiency  of  all  but  the  grace  and  truth  why  the   children  of  godly  parents

of  God  to  keep  a  man  morally  erect.—  do  not  often  walk  in  their  parents'

i<,teel.  ways.      Although   this  is  to  be  ac-

Perhaps  Israel  had  never  thought  of  counted  for  by  the  corruption  of  human
a  king,  if  Samuel's  sons  had  not  been  nature,  there  are  certain  subordinate
unlike  their  father.  Who  can  promise  causes  ....  1.  The  untender  and
himself  holy  children,  when  the  loins  uncircumspect  conversation  oj  parents.
of  a  Samuel  and  the  education  in  the  ....  They  will  more  readily  copy
temple  yielded  monsters?  It  is  not  what  is  bad  in  your  example,  than
likely  that  good  Samuel  was  fatuity  in  what  is  good  and  praiseworthy  ....
that  indulgence  for  which  his  own  the  bad  example  will  be  followed,  the
mouth  had  denounced  God's  judg-  good  advice  neglected.  2.  Faults  in
ments  against  Eli ;  yet  this  holy  man  their  education.  Such  as  unjust  par-
succeeds  Eli  in  his  cross,  as  well  as  in  tiality,  as  in  that  of  Isaac  for  Esau,  and
his  place,  though  not  in  his  sin  ;  and  of  liebekah  for  Jacob.  ...  Or  undue
is  afflicted  with  a  wicked  succession,  indulgence,  which  seems  to  have  been
God  will  let  us  find  that  grace  is  by  the  error  of  David,  and  the  ruin  of  his
gift,  not  by  inheritance.  I  fear  Samuel  son  Adonijah.  .  .  .  Excessive  severity
106


CHAP.  VIII.  nOMILETlC  COMME.^TARY:   SAMULU


is  an  error  not  less  fatal,  and  perhaps  even  as  exemplified  in  their  desire  for

as  common.     3.    llie  inflaence  of  bad  a  kin^,^,  was  a  result  of  Samuel's  activity.

company  and  bad  example  in  others.  His  former  activity  was  an  excellent

The  ruin  of  multitu(l(hs  has  proceeded  preparation  for  royalty.   The  conscious-

from  want  of  caution  in  this  matter. —  ness  of  reli^dous  and  civil  union  was

Peddle.  powerfully  re-awakened  by  his  means.

An  able  king  had  only  to  reap  what

Ver.  4.  Theunanimity  of  the  people,  he  had  sown. — Uengstenberg.

MAIN  IIOMILETICS  OF  TUB  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  4—22.

A  King  Desired  and  Granted.

I.  The  generality  of  mankind  prefer  the  visible  to  the  invisible.  There
have  been  men  in  all  ages  of  the  world  who  have  chosen  as  their  portion  that
which  is  unseen  in  preference  to  what  is  seen,  and  they  have  done  so  on  the
most  reasonable  and  substantial  grounds.  The  Invisible  King  had  more  power
to  influence  the  actions— to  control  the  choice— of  Moses  than  the  visible  and
mighty  monarch  of  Egypt.  He  was  so  ruled  by  a  desire  to  serve  Him  whom  he
had  never  seen  that  he  counted  the  wrath  of  Pharaoh  as  nothing  in  comparison.
In  the  day  of  battle  his  eye  was  not  fixed  upon  the  visible  enemy,  but  it  was
raised  to  that  unseen  friend  whose  help  he  sought  for  the  people  whom  he  led.
His  whole  life  was  an  *'  enduring  as  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible  "  (Heb.  xi.  27).
Samuel  also  was  ruled  by  an  abiding  sense  of  the  presence  of  the  Unseen  King.
To  Him  he  cried  in  the  day  of  his  people's  danger,  and  with  reference  to  Him
he  regulated  his  whole  life.  And  in  the  present  day,  as  in  all  past  days,  there
are  those  who  are  ruled,  not  by  the  things  which  are  seen  and  temporal,  but  by
those  which  are  unseen  and  eternal,  who  ''endure  as  seeing  Him  who  is
invisible."  But  these  have  always  been  in  the  minority — most  men,  like  Israel
of  old,  prefer  the  visible  and  the  seeming  to  the  invisible  and  the  real.  Those
who  have  this  preference  justifij  it  because  it  makes  them  like  the  majority.
"iV«?/,"said  Israel,  *'butwewill  have  a  king  to  reign  over  us,  that  we  aha
may  be  like  all  the  nations"  (vers.  19,  20).  The  influence  of  numbers  has
always  had  great  weight  with  mankind.  They  do  not  like  to  be  singular,  and
they  find  a  reason  for  doing  what  they  do,  and  for  having  what  they  desire,  in
the  fact  that  the  generality  of  men  have  and  do  it.  The  great  majority  of  the
Hebrew  nation  were  unwilling  to  be  different  from  the  nations  around  them  ;
those  nations  had  a  visible  king,  and  although  he  was  but  a  man  like  them-
selves, Israel  desired  to  have  such  a  king  rather  than  render  allegiance  to  God
only  as  their  King.

II.  Even  when  a  desired  thing  is  shown  to  be  injurious,  men  will  often
persist  in  desiring  it.  ^  Sometimes  a  physician  finds  a  patient  who  is  so  self-
willed  that  he  will  persist  in  desiring  food  which  has  been  proved  to  be  injurious
to  him.  And  so  a  godless  soul  has  sometimes  the  injurious  consequences  of  a
certain  course  plainly  set  before  him,  and  yet  persists  in  his  determination  to
continue  in  it.  Samuel,  hke  a  wise  moral  physician,  laid  before  Israel  the  con-
sequences of  persisting  in  their  desire  to  have  a  king  like  the  nations.  But,
altliough  he  i)lainly  pointed  out  to  them  the  bondage  to  which  they  would
subject  themselves  by  gratifying  such  a  desire,  they  refused  to  relinquish  it.
In  the  face  of  the  remonstrances  of  one  whom  they  knew  desired  their  real
welfare,  they  held  to  their  determination  simply  because  it  was  theirs.

III.  God,  rather  than  force  the  human  will,  will  grant  peti-tions  which
displease  Him,     God  wiU  not  force  any  man  to  take  His  yoke,     li  men  persist

107


nOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  i.


in  desiring  a  heavier  one,  He  will  often  grant  their  desire.  This  was  more  than
once  the  case  with  the  Hebrew  nation.  He  once  wrought  a  miracle  to  meet
their  wishes,  when  they  incurred  His  deep  displeasure  by  desiring  their  own  way
in  preference  to  His.  Is  was  an  act  of  Divine  judgment  wlien  He  "gave  them
quails  to  the  full"  (Numb.  xi.  33),  and  in  the  instance  before  us  God  granted
their  desire,  but  **  He  gave  them  a  king  in  His  anger"  (Hosea  xiii.  11),  and
Israel  soon  found  that  the  gratification  of  their  self-will  brought  its  own  punish-
ment, and  that  their  self-imposed  yoke  was  a  very  different  one  from  tliat  which
their  Divine  King  had  laid  upon  them.  But  God  leaves  men  free  to  choose  or
to  reject  His  guidance.     He  will  have  none  but  voluntary  subjects.

IV.  In  the  time  of  displeasure  and  perplexity  we  should  take  the  cause  of
both  to  God.  Samuel,  in  this  day  of  disappointment  and  uncertainty,  "cried
unto  the  Lord  ;  "  and  every  child  of  God  should  do  the  same.  He  is  prompted
to  this  act  by  a  spiritual  instinct,  and  encouraged  in  it  by  the  Divine  promises.
It  is  an  instinct  in  human  nature  to  turn  to  the  strong  in  seasons  of  weakness,
and  to  those  who  are  wiser  than  we  are  in  the  season  of  perplexity.  The  child
runs  to  the  parent  for  help,  and  the  inexperienced  turn  to  those  who  have  more
wisdom  than  they  have  when  they  feel  that  their  own  wisdom  is  insufficient  to
guide  them.  In  times  of  great  extremity  almost  every  human  creature  instinc-
tively cries  out  for  supernatural  help,  but  when  a  man  has  a  closer  relation  to
God  than  that  which  is  common  to  every  human  creature — when  he  can  look  up
to  Him  and  cry,  Abba,  Father — he  not  only  turns  his  eye  upward  as  naturally  as
a  flower  opens  its  petals  to  the  sun,  but  he  is  encouraged  and  emboldened  to  do
so  by  the  Divine  promises  of  succour.  God  has  commanded  His  children  to
" call  upon  Him  in  the  day  of  trouble''  and  has  prouiised  them  deliverance
(Psa.  1.  15).  ^'Because  he  hath  set  his  love  upon  Me,  therefore  will  1  deliver
him  ;  .  ,  .  .  He  shall  call  upon  Me,  and  I  will  answer  him:  1  will  be  with  him
in  trouble;  I  will  deliver  him,  and  honour  him"  (Psa.  xci.  14,  15).  Samuel's
experience  at  this  time  is  an  illustration  of  the  truth  of  these  Divine  promises.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.  5.  The  request  of  Israel  brings  over  again,  but  with  greater  intensity,

before  us — I.  A  melancholy  view  of  in  the  persons  of  the  children.     This

the  progress  of  degeneracy  in  a  com-  view  of  the  case  is,  in  a  high  degree,

munity.    Looking  at  their  history  from  admonitory.  None  of  us  perhaps  think

the  time  of  their  entrance  into  Canaan,  enough  of  the  connexion  between  our-

on  the  whole  the  scene  presented  is  selves  and  the  future,  and  yet,  when

that  of  successive  generations  rising  up  we  do,  there  is  much  that  may  well

to   depart    farther  and   farther   irom  fill  our  minds  with  awe.    .    .    .    Each

God,   and   now   we   have   the   dismal  age  exerts  a  very  considerable  influence

consummation  in  their  effort  to  destroy,  on   that   which   succeeds  it,  and  the

as  far  as  they  were  concerned,  that  men  of  any  particular  age  are  respon-

})eculiar  and  interesting  link  between  sible   in   a    very   large    and   affecting

themselves  and  God  which  existed  in  measure  for  the  characteristics  of  the

the  fact  that  besides  being  to  tlieni,  as  period  which  may  come   after  them.

He  is  to  all  creatures,  their  Supreme  ....     In  h)oking  at  the  clamorous

Ruler,  He  condescended  to  act  as  such  assembly  which  the  narrative   brings

in  a  direct  and  immediate  form,  stand-  before  us,  we  cannot  recognise  in  that

ing   actually,  and  to  all  intents   and  crowd  the  immediate  descendants  of  a

purposes,  in  the  same  relation  to  them  race   of  God-fearing   fathers    and    of

as   that   which   an   earthly   sovereign  God-honouring  mothers.   II.  It  teaches

sustains  towards  his  subjects us  the  perilousness  of  allowing  our

It  was  the  sin  of  the  fathers  living  thoughts  to  run  in  an  improper  direc-
108


CHAP.  VIII.


HOMILETIO  COMMENTA RY :    SA M UEL.


tion,  and  our  wishes  to  centre  upon
a  wrong  object.    And  this  because  of
the    absorbing    effect    of   one    wrong
thought,  and  its  consequent  power  to
throw  into  obHvion  all  those  counter-
acting   thoughts    and    objects   which
from  any  other  source  might  be  sug-
gested.   .    .    .    Trace  the  progress    of
this  one  wrong  desire  in  Israel.     Was
there  nothing  to  be  said  on  the  other
side  ?     Is  it  not  exceedingly  easy  to
conceive   of  the   counteracting   effect
which  might;  liave  been  presented  to
such  a  wish  by  a  recollection  of  their
actual  privileges    at    the    moment  ?
There  is  a  matchless  sublimity  about
the  very  idea  of  a  theocracy.     But  if
its  sublimity  did  not  appeal  to  their
moral  sense,  its  peculiar  advantageous-
ness  might  have  appealed  to  their  self-
regard.     No  other  form  of  government
could  be  compared  with  it  for  beneficial
results  to  its  subjects.     For  consider
what  it  involved — the  equal  accessible-
ness  of  the  Sovereign  to  all  His  sub-
jects— the  certainty  of  having  the  best
counsel  under  all  circumstances — the
largest  resources,  both  of  power  and
skill,  at  their  command — the  impossi-
bility of  wrong  motives  affecting  the
Sovereign's  acts — the  freedom  from  the
ordinary  burdens  of  government  when
He  was  king  who  could  say,  ''Every
beast  in  the  forest  is  mine,  and  the
cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills."  .  .  Nor
did   they   admit  another  recollection
which   might   well    have   offered    the
strongest   contradiction   to    their   one
wrong  desire,  even  that  of  t\\Q  faithful-
ness and  the  loving-kindness  with  which
God,  as  their  King,  had  ever  treated
them.    ...     Beware  of  the  first  mis-
direction of  thought.    Be  sure  you  are
right  at  first  in  your  plans  and  pur-
lM>ses,  because  afterwards,  by  reason  of
the  very  force  by  which  wrong  thoughts
indulged  exclude  all  suggestions  to  the
contrary,  it  may  be  too  late  to  alter. —
Miller.

Ver.  6.  A  beautiful  example  of
prayer  to  obtain  the  composure  of
ruffled  feelings  and  to  have  the  judg-
ment directed  aright  by  God's  Holy
Spirit,  when  it  is  in  danger  of  being


overswayed    by    personal    motives. —
Biblical  Commentary.

In  this  there  was  a  twofold  ungodly
element.  (1).  They  desired  asking
instead  of  the  God-established  and
nobly-attested  judge  Samuel.  .  .
The  scheme  is  characterised  as  an  in-
justice against  Samuel,  and  therefore
a  sin  against  the  Lord  who  sent  him
(vers.  7,  8).  (2).  At  the  bottom  of
the  people's  desire  for  a  king  lay  the
delusion  that  God  was  powerless  to
help  tliem,  that  the  reason  of  their
subjection  was  not  their  sin,  but  a
fault  in  the  constitution,  that  the
kingdom  would  be  an  aid  in  addition
to  God.  This  point  of  view  appears
oftener  in  the  narrative  than  the
first  (Isa.  X.  18,  19 ;  XYl).—Hengsten'
berg.

Ver.  7.  It  was  not,  then,  the  mere
desire  for  reform  in  civil  polity.  It
was  the  outburst  in  a  new  form  of  an
ancient  sin  ;  it  was  a  new  disguise  for
a  well-known  delinquency;  it  was  of
a  piece  with  their  frequent  backsliding.
Ungodliness  was  at  the  root  of  their

discontent God,  who  judgeth

the  heart,  recognised  the  former  dis-
obedience in  this  new  request.  How
different  it  seemed,  yet  how  radically
the  same !  Man  would  have  judged
otherwise  and  imputed  the  desire°to
other  motives  ;  God,  who  is  infallible,
attributed  it  to  the  same.  It  is  well
to  consider  our  motives  for  conduct,
this  wouhl  enable  us  to  detect  an  old
sin  in  a  new  form. — Steel.

The  condescension  of  this  answer  is
very  remaikable.  Samuel's  wounded
feelings  are  soothed  by  being  reminded
of  the  continual  ingratitude  of  the
people  to  God  Himself,  upon  whom,
in  fact,  a  greater  slight  was  put  by
this  request  for  a  king  "  like  the  na-
tions," than  upon  Samuel.  It  is  in
the  spirit  of  our  Lord's  saying  to  the
apostles,  *' The  disciple  is  not  above
his  Master,  nor  the  servant  above  his
lord"  (Matt.  X.  24,  comp.  John  xv.
18,  20). — Biblical  Commentary.

Such  an  answer  sounds  at  first  most
strange,  most  perplexing  !  Hearken
unto  them,  for  they  iiave  rejected  me.

109


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  i.


Yield  to  theni,  because  they  are  doing  you    know,   wlilch   will   produce   im-

a  worse  thing  than  you  supposed  they  mediate     sorrows,    but    in    which    is

were  doing No   contradiction  hidden  a  Divine  purpose  for  the  good

can  seem  greater.     And  yet  no  Jewish  and  not  for  the  destruction  of  yonr
statesman  or  prophet  could  do  the  work  people,"     In  a  very  remarkable  sense,
that  was  given  him  to  do,  could  be  then,  the  vox  popuU  was  the  vox  Del,
God's  faithful  witness,  if  he  did  not  even  when  the  two  voices  seemed  most
enter  into  the  very  heart  of  this  contra-  utterly  out  of  harmony.     The  prophet
diction,  if  he  did  not  mould  his  own  was  not  merely  to  notice  the  outward
conduct  according  to  the  deep  truth  and   obvious   discord   between   them  ;
that  was  implied  in  it.     His  impulse  he  was  to  listen  with  purged  ears  till
was  to  maintain  the  order  of  things  he  found  where  one  became  really  the
which  he  found  established  in  his  day.  echo  of  the  other. — Maurice.
He  believed  that  order  was  God's  order ;  The  sin   of  Israel  did   not   consist
he   dared  not  refer  it  to  any  lower  simply  in  wishing  to  have  a  king.    God
source.      He  administered  that  order  had  promised  to  Abraham  that  kings
in  this  faith  ;   if  it  forsook  him,  he  should  come  out  of  him  (Gen,  xvii.  6),
became  careless  and  corrupt.      Could  and   also   to  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxv.   11).
God's  order  then  be  changed?    Was  He  The  Holy  Spirit   had   prophesied   by
not,   by   His   very  nature,    the    Un-  Jacob  that  "  the  sceptre  should  not
changable?     Was  it   not  the  highest  depart  from  Judah  until  Shiloh  come"
duty  to  make  the  people  feel  that  this  (Gen.  xlix.  10)  ;  and  Balaam,  that  a
was  His  character  ?     Was  it  not  thus  ''  sceptre  should  arise  out  of  Israel "
that  their   own   frivolity  and  pnssi(^n  (Numb.  xxiv.  17)  ;  and  God  had  pro-
for  change  would  be  corrected?     When  vided   certain   laws  for  the  kingdom
the  impulse  passes  into  reasoning  you  which   should   arise   in   Israel  (Dent.
cannot  easily  detect  a  flaw  in  it ;  and  xvii.  15-20).     But  their  sin  consisted
yet  it  was  stronger  still  while  it  was  in  W(?^^(;<3f2Y27?^  patiently  for  God's  time,
still  an  impulse  and  did  not  pass  into  when  He  might  think  fit  to  give  them
reasoning.     Nothing  but  prayer  to  the  a  king.     It  consisted  in  not  leaving
unchangable  God  could  show  wherein  the   season  of  the  kingdom  and   the
both   were   false   and   might   lead   to  choice  of  a  king  in  His  hands.    It  con-
falsehood.      The    unchangableness    of  sisted  in  not  asking  Samuel  to  inquire
God  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  of  God  whether  the  time  had  arrived
rigidness  of  a  rule  or  a  system.     If  it  when  they  might  have  a  king  ;  and  in
is  so  confounded,    the    purpose    and  presuming  that  they  were  themselves
nature  of  His  government  are  for^rotten.  the  best  judges  of  what  conduced  to
He — the  Perfect  and  Absolute  Will —  their  own  welfare,  and  needed  not  to
has  created  beings  with  wills,  beings  ask  counsel  of  God.     St.  Paul  notices
made  in  His  own  image.     He  educates  this  in  his  historical  address  to  the
them;    He   desires   that   they  should  synagogue  of  An  tioch  in  Pisidia.    '''God
know  His  Will,  that  is  to  say.  Himself,  gave  unto  them  judges  about  the  space
They  are  to  learn  what  they  themselves  of  four  hundred  and  fifty  years,  and
are,  what  they  would  make  of  them-  afterwards  they  desired  a  king"  (Acts
selves,  what  He  would  make  of  them,  xiii.  20,  21).     It  consisted  in  the  un-
partly  by  an  experience  of  their  own  thankfulness    and   discontent    of    the
wilfulness,  partly  by  results  which  He  people,  dissatisfied  with  their  present
brings  to  pass  in  spite  of  that  wilful-  condition,  when  "God  was  their  King."
ness,  yea,  by  means  of  it.     This  is  the  It  consisted  in  an  eager  desire  to  be
explanation  of  the  paradox  ..."  Let  "  like    all    other    nations,"   who    had
them  know  what  the  general  of  armies,  earthly  kings  ;  whereas  they  ought  to
whom  they  crave  for  as  a  deliverer,  have  deemed  it  a  high  privilege  to  be
will   do   to   bring   them    into    deeper  unlike  other  nations,  in  that  tliey  had
bondage,  but   do   not  resist  a  desire  been  separated  from  all  other  people
which  has  in  it  a  deeper  meaning  than  (Lev.  xx.  26)  and  chosen  from  out  of
110


CHAP.  vrii.


nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL,


otho'-  nations  to  bo  ^peculiar  treamre
to  (lod  above  all  people,  a  hohj  nation,
a  kingdom  of  priests  (p]x()(l.  xix.  .O,  6),
"a  si)Ocial  ))ooi)Io  unto  the  Lord  their
(Jod,  above  all  [)Cople  that  are  upon
the  face  of  the  earth"  (Deut.  vii.  6).
They  thoui^dit  lightly  of  this  pr^Toga-
tive,  and,  like  a  national  Esau,  they
profanely  bartered  their  birthright  for
what  they  deemed  a  temporal  benefit.
—  Wordsworth.

Ver.  8.  Old  sins  are  not  forgotten
with  God,  if  they  are  all  the  time  kept
up  and  not  repented  of  (Exod.  xxxii.
34). —  Wuertemb.  Bible.

Ver.  18.  Cries  that  ivlll  not  be  heard.
1.  Self-will  often  brings  us  unto  dis-
tress. 2.  This  distress  makes  us  cry
to  the  Lord.  3.  Such  cries  the  Lord
does  not  promise  to  hear. — Tr.  of
Langes  Commentary.

These  words  should  make  us  tremble.
For  they  teach  us  that  after  having
for  some  time  followed  with  delight
the^  wanderings  of  our  own  heart
against  the  advice  of  our  counsellors,
we  shall  some  day  find  ourselves  in-
volved in  many  evils.  This  often
happens  to  men.  One  binds  himself
in  one  way,  and  one  in  another — each
walks  according  to  the  desires  of  his
heart,  and  in  the  way  which  he  has
marked  out  for  himself,  and  is  followed
by  sorrows  which  compel  him  to  cry  to
heaven  for  help.  But  God  will  not
hear  these  cries,  unless  they  are  the
fruit  of  a  true  repentance,  and  then
the  ills  that  are  suffered  in  the  path
which  has  been  chosen  are  the  just
punishment  for  our  wilfulness  in  having
entered  it. — De  ISacy.

Ver.  19.  Like  little  children,  the
passions  of  a  people  are  blind  to  the
future.  .  .  .  Thus  the  sinner  w'zY/ have
his  desire,  though  it  imperil  his  soul
for  ever.  The  avaricious  will  have
gol(l,  though  it  become  his  idol,  and
his  immortal  spirit  worship  the  golden
calf.  The  inebriate  will  have  his
drink,  though  he  degrade  his  being,
blast  his  character,  beggar  his  family,
and  damn  his  soul. — Steel,


We  will  ham  a  king.  Why  tlum.
yon  shall,  saith  God,  for  a  mischief  to
you  (IL)sea  xiii.  11).  You  shall  hav.i
your  will,  and  then  I  will  have  mine
another  while.  (See  the  like,  Ilosea
xiii.  11.) — Trap  p.

Ver.  21.  Samuel  can  go  back  to  God
with  the  same  uprightness  as  he  had
come  from  that  sacred  place.  The
tides  of  popular  feeling  did  not  bear
him  away.  He  could  stand  alone  in
his  devotedness  to  God,  if  the  people
should  all  reject  the  word  of  the  Mo  t
High.  .  .  .  He  was  willing  to  abide  by
the  Divine  decision.  His  will  was
according  to  God's.  High  attainment
for  a  sinful  man  ! — Steel.

Ver.  22.  The  history  of  the  world
cannot  produce  another  instance  in
which  a  public  determination  was
formed  to  appoint  a  king,  and  yet  no
one  proposed  either  himself  or  any
other  person  to  be  king,  but  referred
the  determination  entirely  to  God.
Ambition  of  royal  authority. certainly
was  not  the  motive  in  the  leading
men  who  supported  this  measure.  The
whole  of  their  proceedings,  even  in  this
highly  improper  determination,  shows
how  fully  convinced  they  were  that
the  law  of  Moses  was  from  God,
and  that,  even  in  appointing  a  king,
His  directions  must  be  observed,  or
rather,  that  the  decision  must  be
referred  implicitly  to  God  Himself —
Scott.

Few  who  rebuke  so  sharply  and  are
not  followed,  escape  the  animosity  of
the  people,  but  this  man  of  God  con-
ducted himself  with  such  rectitude  and
godliness  as  to  come  forth  from  the
ordeal  with  the  confidence  and  respect
of  all  the  people.  .  .  .  There  are  times
when  such  consistent  piety  would  have
made  him  a  martyr  j  nevertheless,  it
insures  respect,  and  is  most  likely  to
invest  its  possessor  with  an  invulner-
able character  in  the  esteem  of  the
very  people  who  often  refused  his
counsel,  but  had  been  often  benefited
by  his  prayers. — Steel.

Samuel  sorrowfully   dismissed  them
to  their  homes,  that  he  miulit  have

111


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


fcOOK  I.


time  to  take  tlie  necessary  measures
for  ellecting  this  great  change.  .  .  It
was  not  the  wish  of  the  prophet  to
leave  them  to  all  the  consequences  of
tlieir  infatuation.  With  wise  and  noble
patriotism  it  was  henceforth  his  solici-
tude, while  accomplishing  their  wishes,
to  save  them,  as  far  as  possible,  from
the  consequences  they  declared  them-
selves willing  to  incur.  And  if,  in  the
result,  we  find  the  Hebrew  monarchy
less  absolute  than  generally  among
eastern  nations — if  the  people  retained
possession  of  more  of  their  national
and  social  rights  than  in  other  eastern
kingdoms — and  if  the  strong  exertion
of  kingly  power  was,  in  after  a,i;es,
resented  by  them  as  a  wrong  instead
of  being  recognised  as  a  just  prero-
gative, it  is  entirely  owing  to  the
sagacious  care  and  forethought  of
Samuel,  acting  under  Divine  direction,
ill  securing  from  utter  destruction  at
the    outset    the   liberties    which  the


people  so  wilfully  cast  into  the  fire.
In  fact,  the  more  we  contemplate  the
character  of  Samuel,  the  more  its
greatness  grows  upon  us,  and  the  more
distinctly  we  recognise  the  most  truly
illustrious  character  in  Hebrew  history
since  Moses. — Kitto.

This  history  exhibits  the  relation  of
the  Divine  will  to  the  human  will,  when
the  latter  stands  sinfully  opposed  to
the  former.  God  never  destroys  the
freedom  of  the  human  will.  He  leaves
it  to  its  free  self-determination,  but
when  it  has  turned  away  from  His  will,
seeks  to  bring  it  back  by  the  revelation
of  His  word.  If  this  does  not  succeed,
human  perversity  must  nevertheless
minister  to  the  realisation  of  the  pLins
of  His  kingdom  and  salvation,  and  also,
in  its  evil  consequences,  bring  punish-
ment, according  to  His  righteous  law,
on  the  sin  which  man  thus  freely
commits. — Langes  Commentary.


CHAPTER    IX.


Crtttcal  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1.  "Now,  there  was  a  man  of  Benjamin.'*

*'  The  elaborate  genealogy  of  the  Benjamite  Kish,  and  the  minute  description  of  the  figure  of
his  son  Saul,  are  intended  to  indicate  at  the  very  outset  the  importance  to  which  Saul  attained
ill  relation  to  the  people  of  Israel.  Kish  wa.s  the  son  of  Abid:  this  is  in  harmony  with  chap,
xiv.  51.  But  when,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  stated  in  1  Chron.  viii,  33,  ix.  39,  that  Ner  begat
Kish,  the  difference  may  be  reconciled  in  the  simplest  manner,  on  the  assumption  that  the  Ner
mentioned  there  is  not  the  father,  but  the  grandfather,  or  a  still  more  remote  ancestor  of  Kish,
as  the  intervening  members  are  frequently  passed  over  in  the  genealogies  (Kid).  **  A  mighty
man  of  power,"  rather,  "a  rich  wdl-to-do  man"  (Erdmann).

Ver.  2.  "Saul."  "Heb.  Sh'dul ;  i.e.,  desired,  asked  for  :  his  name  was  an  omen  of  his  history*'
(Wordsworth).  "From  his  shouldeis  and  upward."  "It  is  evident  that  he  must  have
been  only  a  little  under  seven  feet  high  "  (Jamieson).     See  also  note  on  chap.  x.  23.

Ver.  3.  "The  asses  of  Kish,"  etc.  The  probalaility  is  that  the  family  of  Kish,  according  to
the  immemorial  usage  of  Oriental  shepherds  in  the  purely  pastoral  regions,  had  let  the  animals
roam  at  large  during  the  grazing  season,  at  the  close  of  which  messengers  were  dispatched  in
search  of  them.  Such  travelling  searclies  are  common  ;  and  as  each  owner  has  his  stamp
marked  on  his  cattle,  the  mention  of  it  to  the  shepherds  he  meets  gradually  leads  to  the
discovery  of  the  strayed  animals.  This  ramble  of  Saul's  had  nothing  extraordinary  in  it,  except
its  superior  directions  and  issue,  which  turned  its  uncertainty  into  certainty  "  (Jamieson).
"  The  superintendence  of  the  cattle  was  anciently  an  occupation  held  in  much  esteem.  It  was
regarded  as   the  proper  office   of  a    son,   and   by  no  means  implies   the  smallness  of   Kish's

possessions  or  his  want  of  servants Among  cattle  in  the  East  at  all  times,  and  especially

ere  horses  were  used  for  riding,  asses  were  esteemed  of  much  importance If  such  an

incident  now  happened  in  Palestine,  it  would  be  at  once  concluded  that  the  animals  had  been
Btolen,  and  it  speaks  well  for  the  state  of  society  in  the  times  of  Samuel,  that  this  suspicion
never  crossed  the  mind  of  Saul  or  his  father"  (Kitto).

1X2


OHAP.  IX.  IIOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


Ver.  4.  **  And  as  he  passed  through  Mount  Ephraim,"  etc.  "  As  Saul  started  in  any
case  from  Gibeah  of  Benjamin,  hits  own  liome  (chap.  x.  10-26,  etc.),  i.e.  the  present  Tul.lel  v.l  Pkid
which  was  an  hour  or  an  hour  and  a  half  to  the  nortli  of  Jerusalem,  and  went  thence  into  the
mountains  of  E})liraim,  he  no  doubt  took  a  north-westerly  direction,  so  tluit  he  crossed  the
boundary  of  Benjamin  somewhere  between  Birch  and  Atarah,  and  passin**-  thronfdi  the  crest
of  the  mountains  of  Epliraim,  came  out  into  the  land  of  Slialisha.  Shd.^ha  is  uiKJueskionably
the  country  round  Baal-shalisha  (2  Kings  iv.  42),  which  was  situated,  according  to  Eusebius
fifteen  Roman  miles  to  the  north  of  Lydda,  and  was  therefore  probably  the  country  to  the  west
of  Jiljilia,  where  three  different  wadys  run  into  one  large  warlj^  called  Kurawa  ;  and  accordin"
to  the  probable  conjecture  of  Thenius,  it  was  from  this  fact  that  the  district  received  the  name
of  Slialisha,  or  Thrcc-lnnd.  .  .  .  Since  they  went  on  from  Shaalim  into  the  land  of  Benjamin
and  then  still  further  into  the  land  of  Zuph,  on  the  south-west  of  Benjamin,  they  probably
turned  eastwards  from  Shalishah  into  the  country  where  we  find  Ikni  Mussah  and  Beni  Salem
marked  upon  Robinson's  and  V.  de  Velde's  maps,  and  where  we  must  therefore  look  for  tlie  land
of  Shaah'm,  that  they  might  proceed  thence  to  explore  tlie  land  of  Benjamin  from  the  north-east
to  the  south-west."  ( Kell).

Ver.  5.  "Land  of  Zuph."  Nothing  is  certainly  known  of  the  land  of  Zuph,  but  "  we  may
infer  with  certainty  that  it  was  on  tlie  south-west  of  the  tribe-territory  of  Benjamin,  from  the
fact  that,  according  to  chap.  x.  2,  Saul  and  his  companion  passed  liachel's  tomb  on  their  return
thence  to  their  own  home,  and  then  came  to  the  border  of  Benjamin."  ( Keil).

Ver.  6.  "  This  city."  Some  commentators  suppose  that  this  city  was  Raraah,  Samuel's
residence  ;  but  Keil,  Jamieson,  Wordsworth,  and  others,  consider  that  several  circumstances  are
against  this  supposition,  especially  the  mention  of  Rachel's  sepulchre  in  chap,  x.  2.  "Per-
adventure  he  can  show  us  our  way,"  etc.  "  We  may  fancy  that  the  man  and  his  master
either  entertained  a  very  higli  sense  of  the  importance  of  their  asses,  or  a  very  low  one  of  the
prophetic  office ;  but  the  man  would  scarcely  have  reached  this  conclusion  unless  it  were
notorious  that  Samuel  had  often  been  consulted  respecting  things  lost  or  stolen.  We  may
therefore  infer  that,  at  the  commencement  of  the  prophetic  office  in  the  person  of  Samuel  it
was  usual,  in  order  to  encourage  confidence  in  their  higher  vaticinations,  and  to  prevent  that
dangerous  resort  to  heathen  divinations,  for  the  prophets  to  afford  counsel  when  required  in
matters  of  private  concernment."  ( Kitto).

Ver.  7.  '•  What  shall  we  bring  the  man?"  "  Then,  as  now  in  the  East,  it  would  have  been
the  height  of  rudeness  and  indecorum  for  anyone  to  present  himself  before  a  superior  or  even  an
equal,  without  some  present,  more  or  less,  according  to  his  degree,  not  by  any  means  as  a  fee  or
a  bribe,  but  in  testimony  of  his  homage,  respect,  or  compliments  "  (Kitto).  "  Thi.s  does  not
exclude  the  supposition  that  the  prophets  depended  for  support  on  these  voluntary  gifts."
(Erdmann).

Ver.  8.  "  Fourth  part  of  shekel  of  silver."  "  Eather  more  than  sixpence.  Contrary  to
our  western  notions,  money  is  in  the  East  the  most  acceptable  form  in  which  a  present  can  be
made  to  a  man  of  rank."  (Jamieson).

Ver.  9.  "  These  words  are  manifestly  a  gloss  inserted  in  the  older  narrative  to  explain  the  use
of  the  term  Seer.  One  among  many  instances  which  prove  how  the  very  letter  of  the
contemporary  narrative  was  preserved  by  those  who  in  later  times  compiled  the  histories."
(Biblical  Commentary).  "Prophet."  "Seer."  "There  has  been  much  discussion  as  to  the
distinction  between  these  two  words  ;  and  it  is  not  easy  to  decide  the  question,  for  in
some  passages,  as  here,  they  appear  to  be  used  synonymously,  or  as  ai)pliea  to  the  same
individuals,  whereas  in  others  they  are  contrasted  (1  Clir.  xxix.  29,  Isa.  xxix.  10,  xxx.  10).
The  first,  from  the  verb  to  see,  sufficiently  shows  that  the  power  of  the  person  arose  from  mental
vision.  The  second,  from  a  verb  to  bubble  up,  as  a  spring  or  fountain,  signifies  tliat  the  message
which  the  Nabi  (prophet)  delivered  was  derived  from  God  ;  and  hence  it  is  always  rendered  a
"  prophet."  Accordingly  Ilaveruick  (Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament)  considers  the  first
term  as  marking  the  receptive  act  of  revelation,  and  the  second  as  describing  the  office  of  the
prophets — that  of  communicating  the  word  of  God.  Hence,  after  the  institution  of  the  schools
by  Samuel,  it  became  the  official  title  of  the  prophets  ;  and  the  two  functions  were  united  in,  or
performed  by  the  same  person."  [Jamieson).     "This  statement  has  special  interest  in  connection

with  the  history  of  the  prophetic  work  in  Israel The  change  of  name  from  Roek  (seer)  to

Nabi  (prophet)  and  CItozeh  (gazer)  had  its  ground  probably  in  the  development  of  the  religions
constitution.  Up  to  some  time  before  the  author  of  "  Samuel  "  wrote,  the  non-sacerdotal,  non-
Levitical  religious  teacher  was  one  distinguished  by  seeing  visions,  or  by  seeing  into  the  will
of  God.  This  is  God's  definition  of  the  prophet  in  Xumb.  xii.  6  ;  it  is  involved  in  I  Samuel
iii.  1.  15,  and  in  the  visions  of  the  patriarchs.  The  Law  of  Moses  was  the  complete  and
sufficient  gui  le  for  life  and  worship,  and  it  was  only  in  special  individual  matters  that  the
diviTie  direction  was  given,  and  then  it  was  through  the  medium  of  a  vision.  He  who  saw  the
vision  was  a  Roeh,  and  it  was  natural  enough  that  he  should  be  consulted  bv  the  people  about

y  113


BOMTLETW  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  i.


many  matters.  But  m  process  of  time  the  mechanicalness  and  deaclness  to  wl'ich  thelojjal  ritiia?
constantly  tended  called  forth  an  order  of  men  who  expounded  and  enforced  the  spirituality  of  the
law,  speaking  as  God  bade  them,  speaking  for  God,  entering  as  a  prominent  element  into  the
religious  life  of  the  nation.     He  who  thus  spake  was  a  NabI,  and  as  he,  too,  might  have   visions,

he  was  sometimes  called  CJwzeh  the  gazer As  this  speaker  for  God  gradually  took  the

place  of- the  old  seer  of  visions,  the  word  Nabi  replaced  Roeh  in  popular  usage.  It  seems  that
the  change  began  in  or  about  Samuel's  time,  and  was  completed  about  three  centuries  later,
Roeh  still  maintaining  itself  in  the  language,  though  rarely  used.  On  the  other  hand,  Nabi
may  have  been  used  infrequently  in  early  times  in  reference  to  Abraham  and  Moses,  and  have
become  afterwards  the  common  term,  or  the  occurrence  of  the  word  in  the  Pentateuch  may  be
the  transference  of  a  late  word  to  earlier  times."  (Transr.  of  Langes  Commentarij).

Ver.  1 2.  "  High  place."  Of  such  "  Bamoth,'^  or  holy  places  on  heights,  where  the  people
assembled  for  sacrifice  and  prayer,  there  were  several  during  the  unquiet  times  of  the  judges,
especially  after  the  central  Sanctuary  at  Shiloh  ceased  to  exist,  till  the  building  of  the  Temple
(comp.  vii.  9;  x.  8  ;  xiii.  8;  xvi.  2,  etc.),  as,  indeed,  the  patriarchs  sacrificed  (m  high  places
(Gen.  xii.  8).  It  was  not  till  after  the  building  of  the  Temple  that  the  high-place  worship,
which  easily  degenerated  into  idolatry,  was  completely  done  away  with"  (2  Kings  xxiii.  4-23)
(Erdmann).

Ver.  13.  **  To  eat."    This  was  a  sacrificial  feast  following  a  peace  offering.

Ver.  15.  "Told  Samuel  in  his  ear,"  lit.,  had  uncovered  his  ear.     See  on  chap.  iii.  7.

Vers.  16,  17.  "The  reason  here  assigned  for  the  establishment  of  a  monarchy  is  by  no  means
at  variance  with  the  displeasure  which  God  had  expressed  to  Samiiel  at  the  desire  of  the  people
for  a  king  ;  since  this  displeasure  had  reference  to  the  state  of  heart  from  which  the  desire  had
sprung."  (Keil)

Ver.  17.  "This  same  shall  reign,"  literally  shall  restrain.  "This  characteristises  his
government  as  a  sharp  and  strict  one."  ( Erdmann).

Ver.  19.  "Go  up  before  me,"  "Letting  a  person  go  in  front  was  a  sign  of  high  esteem  .**
{Keil).

Ver.  20.  **  On  whom  is  all  the  desire  of  Isi'ael,"  not  all  that  Israel  desires,  but  all  that
Israel  possesses  of  what  is  precious  or  worth  desiring.     See  Hag.  ii.  7  (Keil),

Ver.  21.  *•  The  smallest  of  the  tribes,"  etc.  "  The  tribe  of  Benjamin,  originally  the  smallest
of  all  the  tribes  (Numb,  i.),  if  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  are  reclcDued  as  one  tribe,  had  been  nearly
annihilated  by  the  civil  war  recorded  in  Judges  xx.  It  had,  of  course,  not  recovered  from  that
calamity  in  the  time  of  Samuel."   {Biblical  Commentary).

Ver.  22.  *'  He  brought  them  into  the  parlour,"  i.e.,  the  apartment  set  apart  for  the  most
distinguished  guests,  the  rest  of  the  people  no  doubt  encamped  in  the  open  air.

Ver.  24.  "  The  shoulder."  "  If  it  was  the  right  shoulder,  then  Samuel,  to  whose  share  it
fell,  as  performing  the  functions  of  priest  (Lev.  vii.  32),  gave  Saul  of  his  own  portion  ;  or,  if  it
were  the  left  shoulder,  then  he  admitted  Saul  to  the  next  share  after  his  own."   (Wordsworth ).

Ver.  25.  "Upon  the  top  of  the  house."  "Not  surely  for  privacy,  as  some  expound  it»
for  the  house-top  was  the  proverbial  expression  for  publicity  (Isa.  xv.  3  ;  Luke  xii.  3),  but  in
order  to  let  all  the  people  of  the  city  see  the  honour  done  to  the  stranger  by  the  great  prophet."
(Biblical  Commentary ).

Ver.  26.  **  Samuel  called   Saul   from  the  top  of  the  house,"  rather  to  the  top  of   the

house.  Saul  was  most  likely  sleeping  on  the  roof,  a  common  sleeping  place  in  summer  in  the
East,  and  Samuel  called  to  him  from  below  within  the  house.

MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1-14.

Saul's  Search  for  the  Lost  Asses.

I.  This  narrative  reveals  the  action  of  the  natural  and  the  supernatural  in
the  Divine  Providence.  There  is  no  part  of  the  globe  on  which  we  live  that  is
not  under  the  iiifiuence  of  the  sun — tlie  centre  of  the  solar  system.  If  there
are  caves  and  valleys  where  no  sunshine  can  enter,  the  daylight  finds  its  way
into  tl  em,  or  if  they  are  closed  against  the  light,  they  are  still  influenced  by
114


CHAP.  IX.  110  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


the  sun's  gravitating  power,  for  there  is  no  particle  of  the  globe  tliat  is  hid  from
tliis  hold  of  the  sun  upon  it.  And  as  surely  as  there  is  an  all-pervading
influence  from  the  sun  upon  the  entire  material  globe,  so  there  is  a  providence
from  which  no  creature  of  God  is  shut  out — there  is  no  thing  nor  person  upon
whom  His  providence  has  not  a  hold.  Each  blade  of  grass  is  fed  with  its  drop  of
dew  under  the  supervision  of  its  Creator — the  lilies  are  each  clotlied  by  Pli^  hand,
and  He  notes  each  sparrow  that  falls  to  the  ground  as  well  as  the  downfall  of
the  mightiest  monarch.  When  we  read  the  narrative  before  us  we  can  but  be
iujpressed  with  the  fact  that  there  is  a  providence  ruling  in  the  earth.  But  the
Providence  of  God  embraces  both  natural  and  supernatural  agencies.  There  are
incidents  in  human  life  which  appear  to  us  to  be  the  natural  outcome  of  ordinary
circumstances,  and  some  such  incidents  are  related  in  this  narrative.  No  farmer
would  think  it  a  marvel  if  his  cattle  strayed  beyond  the  boundaries  of  home
nor  would  a  fisherman  be  surprised  if  his  boat  now  and  then  slipped  its  cable
and  drifted  a  little  way  from  its  anchorage.  If  the  child  of  some  fond  parent  is
lost  in  the  great  city  no  one  thinks  that  it  is  a  supernatural  occurrence.
Although  the  cattle  do  not  stray  without  God's  knowledge,  and  no  boat  that
slips  from  its  anchorage,  or  child  that  wanders  from  its  home,  is  outside  His
providence,  yet  these  are  all  events  which  happen  within  the  circle  of  His
ordinary  and  every-day  working  and  permission.  And  so  it  was  an  occurrence
inside  God's  ordinary  providence  that  the  father  of  Israel's  king-elect  should
lose  his  asses.  Although  they  were  not  lost  without  the  Divine  knowledge,  and
there  was  an  intention  that  their  loss  should  be  the  first  link  in  a  chain  which
included  supernatural  elements,  the  event  itself  was  a  common  occurrence.  But
God  intended  that  a  great  finding  should  come  out  of  a  comparatively  insignificant
loss.  The  straying  of  the  asses  was  linked  with  the  revelation  to  Samuel,  and
this  last  event  was  of  a  supernatural  character.  The  first  link  of  a  chain-cable
is  a  long  way  from  the  last,  but  they  are  intimately  connected,  and  form  parts
of  one  whole.  The  one  may  be  above  the  water,  and  in  sight,  and  the  other
next  to  the  anchor  in  the  bed  of  the  river,  but  they  are  both  parts  of  the  same
chain.  So  the  supernatural  revelation  to  Samuel  was  the  link  out  of  sight,  and
in  the  region  of  the  higher  law  of  God's  working,  and  the  loss  of  the  asses  was
the  visible  link  in  the  lower  law,  but  the  one  was  as  much  a  part  of  the  chain
which  brought  Saul  to  his  kingdom  as  the  other  was.  Thus  the  natural  and
supernatural  are  interlaced  in  the  Providence  of  God  to  bring  to  pass  His
purposes,  as  the  soul  and  body  of  a  man  are  linked  together  in  order  to  enable
him  to  live  his  life  upon  the  earth.

II.  The  narrative  reveals  to  us  some  of  the  characteristics  of  the  first  king  of
Israel.  1.  His  personal  appearance  was  a  reflection  of  the  nations  desire.
When  we  see  a  man's  ideal  we  know  what  it  is  that  he  considers  of  most  value,
liis  ideal  is  a  mirror  which  tells  us  what  he  regards  as  of  highest  worth.  If  a
nation  is  free  to  elect  its  own  representatives,  we  can  learn  what  qualities  or
gifts  in  men  it  esteems  most  highly  by  becoming  acquainted  with  those  whom
it  has  chosen.  Although  Israel  did  not  choose  their  own  king,  God  gave  them
one  who  was  a  mirror  of  their  minds — one  who  revealed  what  they  held  in
highest  esteein.  They  did  not  want  a  man  like  Samuel — a  nuin  of  moral  and
spiritual  force  whose  prayer  was  more  invincible  than  Saul's  sword.  They
desired  a  king  unlike  God,  one  whom  ihey  could  see  when  they  went  forth
to  battle,  and  who  would  at  least  impress  their  enemies  by  a  commanding
bodily  presence.  And  God  gave  them  their  hearts'  desire  in  this  "goodly
young  man,  who,  so  far  as  stature  went,  was  "  higher  than  any  of  the
people."  2.  Saul  had  also  some  good  points  in  his  character.  He  was  a  man
who  honoured  his  father.  Kish  said  to  Saul  his  son,  "  Take  now  one  of  the
servants  with  thee,  and  arise,  go  seek  the  asses,"  and  he  appears  to  have  obeyed

115


nOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY'.   SAMUEL.  booki.

without  demur.  Obedience  to  human  parents,  when  they  do  not  require
anything  wrong,  is  pleasing  to  God  and  an  indication  of  some  moral  excellence
under  any  circumstances.  But  the  obedience  is  more  praiseworthy  when
the  child  has  arrived  at  manhood,  and  still  more  so  if  the  man  is  qualified
for  higher  employment,  and  yet  sinks  his  own  will  in  that  of  his  parent,  and
performs  some  lowly  duty  in  obedience  to  his  desire.  Saul,  though  a  grown
man,  and  evidently  fitted  for  a  more  dignified  employment,  goes  willingly  to
seek  lost  asses  in  obedience  to  his  fatlier's  desire,  and  thus  shows  that  he  pos-
sesses a  truly  filial  spirit.  He  was  "faithful  in  that  which  was  least"  (Luke
xvi.  10).  He  was  also  evidently  desirous  to  spare  no  pains  to  carry  out  his
father's  wishes.  He  pursued  his  journey  from  place  to  place  over  many  weary
miles,  until  all  the  provisions  and  nearly  all  the  money  with  which  he  and  his
servant  had  set  out  were  exhausted  (vers.  7,  8).  He  did  not  content  hiins^^If
with  such  a  search  as  might  have  contented  many  men  and  have  fulfilled  the
letter  of  his  father's  injunction,  he  was  intent  upon  obeying  the  S|)irit  of  it  also,
and  only  thought  of  giving  up  the  search  when  he  knew  his  lengthened  absence
would  cause  anxiety  at  home.  In  this,  too,  he  showed  himself  as  mindful  of
his  father's  feelings,  and  as  unwilling  to  give  him  trouble,  as  he  was  ready  to
obey  him.  Many  a  young  man,  when  he  had  once  set  out  upon  such  a  journey,
would  have  consulted  his  own  fancy  and  his  own  ease  in  his  return,  but  Saul
was  of  a  better  sort.  His  willingness  to  be  advised  by  his  servant  is  also  an
indication  that  he  was  not  a  haughty,  proud  young  man — that  he  did  not  look
upon  those  who  were  beneath  him  in  station  as  necessarily  inferior  to  him  in
wisdom.  All  that  we  read  of  Saul  in  this  chapter  is  indicative  of  a  good
natural  disnosition.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Vers.  1-14.   The  first  test  to  which  advance  in  the  history  from  the  patri-

God  subjects  His  servant.    It  embraces  arch  and  nomadic  state,  which  concerns

two  main  points.     (1).  Whether  with  us  mainly  by  its  contrast  with  our  own,

certain  natural  talents  and  advantages  to  that  fixed  and  settled  state  which

which   God  has  given  us   he   will   in  has  more  or  less  pervaded  the  whole

humility  and  quiet  obedience  do  the  condition  of  the   Church  ever  since,

work  enjoined  upon  him.     (2).  Whe-  But,   although  in  outward  form  Saul

ther  when  his  work  proves  useless  he  belonged  to  the  new  epoch,  although

will  seek   help  from  the  seer  of  God.  even  in  spirit  he  from  time  to  time

The  Most  High  God  appoints  a  testing  threw  himself  into  it,  yet  on  the  whole

for  His  servant  Saul,  and  so  whoever  he  is  a  product  of  the  earlier  condition,

is  summoned   to  the  service  of   God  Whilst  Samuel's  existence  comprehends

knows  that  for  him  also  there  must  be  and  overlaps  both  periods  in  the  calm-

a  testing. — iJisselhoff,  ness  of  a  higher  elevation,  the  career

of  Saul   derives  its  peculiar  interest

Vers.  1,  2.  Samuel  is  the  chief  figure  from  the  fact  that  it  is  the  eddy  in

of  the  transitional  period  which  opens  in  which   both  streams  converge.     In

the   history   of    the   monarchy.     But  that  vortex  he  struggles — the  centre

there  is  another  upon  whom  the  char-  of   events   and  persons  greater  than

acter  of  the  epoch  is  impressed  still  himself;    and  in  that  struggle  he  is

more  strongly — who   belongs  to    this  borne  down  and  lost.    .    .  .    He  is,  we

j)eriod  especially,  and  could  belong  to  may  say,  the  first  character  of  Jewish

no  other.     Saul   is   the  first   king  of  history  which  we  are  able  to  trace  out

Israel.     In  him  that  new  and  strange  in  any  minuteness  of  detail.     He  is

idea   became  impersonated.      In   him  the  first  with  regard  to  whom  we  can

we  feel  that  we  have  made  a  marked  make  out  that  whole  connection  of  a
116


OHAP.  IX.


UOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL,


large  family — father/,  uncle,  cousins,
sons,  grandsons — which,  as  a  modern
historian  (Palgiave)  well  observes,  is
so  important  in  making  us  feel  that
we  have  acquired  a  real  acquaintance
with  any  personage  of  past  times. —
Stanley.

Ver.  2.  Saul  was  mighty  in  person,
overlooking  the  rest  of  the  people  in
stature,  no  less  than  he  should  do  in
dignity.  The  senses  of  the  Israelites
could  not  but  be  well  pleased  for  the
time,  howsoever  their  hearts  w^ere  after-
ward :  when  men  are  carried  with
outward  shows,  it  is  a  sign  that  God
means  them  a  delusion. — Bishop  Hall.

Vers.  3,  4.  Since,  from  God's  conceal-
ment of  the  future,  we  cannot  tell  what
He  may  intend  to  do  with  us  and  by
us,  it  is  our  duty  to  hold  ourselves  in
readiness  to  undertake  any  service
which  He  may  require  us  to  render,
to  enter  upon  any  position  He  may
call  upon  us  to  fill.  When  we  see
Saul  taken  from  the  quiet  discharge  of
the  common  duties  of  life,  and  placed
upon  the  throne  of  Israel,  we  see  the
truth  set  forth — in  an  extreme  case  we
admit,  but  therefore  oidy  the  more
impressively — that  it  is  utterly  im-
possible for  us  to  predict  what  God
may  have  in  store  for  us.  Of  all  the
possible  or  probable  events  which  might
have  happened  to  Saul,  that  of  becoming
king  would  most  certainly  have  been  set
down  by  himself  as  least  likely  to  occur.
.  .  .  .  And  it  would  not  be  difficult
for  us  to  fix  on  positions  and  duties,
respecting  which,  if  a  fellow-creature
were  to  intimate  even  the  most  distant
l)rospect  of  their  ever  forming  part  of
our  personal  history,  we  should  have
our  reply  ready  at  once,  that  it  was  as
little  likely  as  that  we  should  be  called
to  fill  the  throne  of  these  realms.  Yet
these  may  be  actually  in  store  for  us.
.  .  .  .  But  there  are  certain  qualifi-
cations which  are  requisite  alike  lor  all
positions,  and  which  render  us,  in  a
good  measure,  ready  for  any  service.
Such,  for  instance,  are  diligence  and


fidelity  in  meeting  the  claims  of  our
present  condition,  whatever  it  may
be. — Miller,

Ver.  6.  Most  people  would  rather
be  told  their  fortune  than  told  their
duty  ;  how  to  be  rich  than  how  to  be
saved.  If  it  were  the  business  of  men
of  God  to  direct  for  the  recovery  of
h)st  asses,  they  would  be  consulted
much  more  than  they  are,  now  that  it
is  their  business  to  direct  for  the
recovery  of  lost  souls. — Matt.  Henry.

Great  is  the  benefit  of  a  wise  and
religious  attendant ;  such  a  one  ])uts
us  into  those  duties  and  actions  which
are  most  expedient  and  least  thought
of.  If  Saul  had  not  had  a  discreet
servant  he  had  returned  but  as'  wise  as
he  came ;  now  he  is  drawn  in  to  con-
sult with  the  man  of  God,  and  hears
more  than  he  hoped  for.  Saul  was  now
a  sufficient  journey  from  his  father's
house ;  yet  his  religious  servant,  in
this  remoteness,  takes  knowledge  of
the  place  wliere  the  prophet  dwells,
and  how  lionourably  doth  he  mention
him  to  his  master.

Vers.  12,  13.  This  meeting  was  not
more  a  sacrifice  than  it  was  a  feast ;
these  two  agree  well ;  we  have  never
so  much  cause  to  rejoice  in  feasting  as
when  we  have  duly  served  our  God.
The  sacrifice  was  a  feast  to  God,  the
other  to  men  ;  the  body  may  eat  and
drink  with  contentment  when  the  soul
hath  been  first  fed.  .  .  .  The  sacri-
fice was  before  consecrated  when  it  was
offered  to  God,  but  it  was  not  conse-
crated to  them  till  Samuel  blessed  it;
his  blessing  made  that  meat  holy
to  the  guests  which  was  formerly
hallowed  to  God.  ...  It  is  an  un-
mannerly godlessness  to  take  God's
creatures  without  the  leave  of  their
Maker,  and  well  may  God  withhold
his  blessing  irom  them  which  have  not
the  grace  to  ask  it.  .  .  .  .  Every
Christian  may  sanctify  his  own  meat ;
but  where  those  are  present  that  are
peculiarly  sanctified  to  God,  this  ser-
vice is  fittest  for  them. — Bp.  Hall


117


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,  book  i.


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  15-27.

The  Announcement  to  Saul  of  the  Destiny  that  Awaited  Hm

I.  God  has  respect  to  the  freedom  of  the  human  will.  Althougli  God  had
decided  that  Saul  should  be  king  of  Israel,  He  would  not  do  violence  to  his  will,
and  oblige  bim  to  take  the  office  agninst  bis  inclination.  All  the  dealings  of
Samuel  with  Saul  on  the  occasion  of  this  their  first  meeting  were  designed  to
impress  him  with  tbe  fact  tbat  great  bonour  and  responsibility  were  in  store  for
bim,  and  to  lead  him  to  acquiesce  in  tbe  will  of  God  concerning  him.  He  was
led  gradually  to  accept  as  true  the  startling  announcement  witb  which  Samuel
greeted  bim,  that  upon  him  and  upon  bis  father's  house  was  all  the  desire  of
Israel  Little  by  little  the  reality  must  have  dawned  U})on  him,  and  little  by
little,  we  may  sui)pose,  be  was  made  willing  to  fall  in  witb  the  Divine  plan
concerning  bim.  We  can  well  understand  how  far  from  bis  thoughts  it  was
tbat,  in  seeking  his  father's  asses,  be  should  find  a  crown,  and  how  inclined  he
would  be  to  think  that  the  prophet  was  mistaken  when  be  intimated  that  some
great  promotion  was  in  store  for  bim.  But  when  he  found  himself"  in  the  place
of  bonour  at  the  table  of  tbe  chief  magistrate  of  Israel,  be  must  have  begun  to
think  that  some  great  change  awaited  him,  and  it  is  probable  that  any  lingering
doubts  were  banished,  and  all  bis  future  made  plain  to  him  in  tbe  private  com-
munion wbicli  Samuel  held  witb  him  on  the  following  morning.  In  all  these
dealings  witb  Saul  we  see  how  God  has  regard  to  the  human  will,  which  He  has
made  free.

II.  In  the  reception  which  Samuel  gave  to  Saul  we  have  an  instance  of
true  humility.  Hitherto  Samuel  had  been  the  first  man  in  Israel ;  to  bim  bad
belonged,  and  to  him  had  been  accorded  tbe  place  of  highest  bonour,  and  tbe
choicest  viands  on  tbe  occasions  of  public  assembly,  but  now  he,  although  an
aged  man,  not  only  willingly  gives  way  to  tlie  young  man  who  is  in  some  things
to  take  his  place,  but  is  the  person  who  informs  him  of  bis  call  to  tbe  throne,
and  is  the  first  to  do  him  bonour.  No  man  could  have  acquitted  himself  with
such  grace  and  dignity  under  such  circumstances,  if  he  had  not  been  possessed
by  the  spirit  of  true  humility.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Vers.   15,  27.  Tbe  history  of  Saul's  entertain  and  invite  Saul!    Yet  it  was

call    brings    before    our     eyes    three  be  only  that  should  receive  wrong  by

points  :  (1)   What  an  abundant  bles-  the  future  royalty  of  Saul.   .    .    Wise

sing  there  is  for  obedience — the  call  to  and  holy  men,  as  they  are  not  ambi-

the  service  of  God.     (2)  What  a  great  tious  of  their  own  burden,  so  they  are

danger  lies  hid  in  this  blessing — idle  not  unwilling  to  be  eased,  when  God

self-exaltation  because  of  this  call.   (3)  pleaseth  to  discbarge  them;    neither

To  what  a  blessed  stillness  tbe  danger  can  they  envy  those  whom  God  lifteth

leads  when  overcome— to  pre[)aration  above   their   heads.      They   make   an

for  the  calling. — JJisselhoff.  idol    of  honour  tbat  are   troubled  at

their  own  freedom,  or  grudge  at  tbe

Ver.  17.  What  an  intimate  commu-  pr(»motion  of  others. — Bp.  Hall.

nion  Samuel  must  have  held  with  his  Tbe  beads  of  the  tribes  accompanied

God !     A   constant   familiarity   seems  Samuel   to   tbe   altar,   and   then    sat

to   have   existed    between  them. — A.  around  hi«  board.     The  chief  of  the

Clarke.  government  was  godly  in  both  alike,

and  he  could  bold  the  sweetest  fellow-

Ver.  22.  How  kindly  doth  Samuel  ship  witb  those  who  were  officially  his
118


CHAl\  ix.  lIOMILhrnc  C()M.]fF.M'AnY :  f^AMUEL


inferiors  in  the  land.     lie  lost  not  the  of    concealment  nnri    make  it  manifest

respect  of  the  people  for  his  piety  hy  who  he  was.     So  should  we   also,  if

liis  conduct  at   table,    nor    did    the  God  has  lent  us  gifts  and  wishes  tliem

majesty  of  law  provoke  contempt  by  to  remain  concealed  with   us,   not  be

the  familiarity  of  judge  with  people. —  displeased  at  the   fact  tliat  they  are

iSteel.  not  recognised,  but  quietly  wait  until

the  Lord  Himself,  as  it  seemeth  Him

Vers.   26,  27.   Saul  must  wait  pa-  good,  carries  furtlier  the  matter  that

tiently  until  God  shall  bring  him  out  lie  has  begun. — Bedauberger  BibU,


CHAPTER  X.

Critical  and  Expository   Notes. — Ver.  1.    "  Then   Samuel  took  a  vial  of  oU,"  etc.

"  The  vial  is  a  narrow-uecked  vessel,  from  which  the  oil  fio^ed  in  drops.  The  oil,  we  must
suppose,  was  not  of  the  ordiuaiy  sort,  but  the  holy  anointing  oil  (Exod.  xxix.  7  ;  xxx.  23-33  ;
xxvii.  29),  which,  according  to  the  law,  was  used  in  the  consecration  of  the  sacred  vessels  and

the  priests On  account  of  the  significance   of  the  oil  in  priestly   consecration,  Samuel

would  have  used  no  other  in  the  consecration  of  the  sacred  person  of  the  theocratic  king.
Anointing  as  a  solemn  usage  in  the  consecration  of  a  king  is  referred  to  as  early  as  Judges  ix.
8-15,  and  (besides  Saul  here)  is  expressly  mentioned  as  performed  on  David,  Absalom,  Solomon,
Joash,  Jehoahaz,  and  Jehu.  In  case  of  regular  succession  the  anointing  was  supposed  to
continue  its  eflfect,  Avhence  is  explained  the  fact  that  only  the  above  kings  are  mencioned  as
having  been  anointed.  .  .  .  The  anointed  was  consecrated,  sanctified  to  God  ;  ...  it  signifies,
further,  the  equipment  with  tlie  powers  and  gifts  of  the  Spirit  of  God."  ( Erdmann).  "  And
kissed  him."  "  Subjects  of  rank  were  wont  to  kiss  a  new  king  in  token  of  homage  and  subjec-
tion— just  as  among  us  the  hand  of  a  sovereign  is  kissed  now.  There  was,  no  doubt,  sometiiing
of  this  in  the  kiss  of  Samuel ;  but,  under  the  peculiar  circumstances,  there  must  have  been
something  more.  It  was  also  the  kiss  of  congratulation  upon  the  dignity  to  which  he  had  been
raised  ;  and  while  it  indicated  the  dignified  respect  of  Samuel  to  the  man  appointed  to  reign
over  the  house  of  Israel,  it  also  testified  his  cheerful  acquiescence  in  the  appointment."  ( KittoJ.

Ver.  2.  "Rachel's  sepulchre"  near  Bethlehem  (Gen.  xxxv.  16).  **  After  the  allotment  of
the  country  to  the  several  tribes,  the  territory  of  the  Benjamites  was  extended  by  a  long  strip
far  into  the  south,  to  include  the  sepulchre  of  their  beloved  ancestress."  (Staidcy).

Ver.  3.  '•  The  plain  of  Tabor,"  rather,  the  oah,  or  terebinth  of  Tabor.  The  site  is  unknown,
•*  Three  men  going  up  to  Bethel."  Evidently  to  make  an  offering  to  God.  "  Bethel  had
been  a  consecrated  place  for  the  worship  of  God  since  the  days  of  the  patriarchs,  in  consequence
of  the  revelations  He  had  made  to  Abraham  and  Jacob  (see  Gen.  xii.  8  ;  xiii.  3,  4  ;  xxviii.  18,
etc.).  In  Bethel,  therefore,  there  was  an  altar ;  it  was  one  of  the  places  where  the  people
sacrificed  to  the  Lord,  and  where  Samuel  at  this  time  held  court."  [Erdmann).

Ver.  4.  "  And  give  the  two  loaves."  "  That  this  surprising  prelude  to  all  future  royal  gifts
Is  taken  from  bread  of  ofi'eiing  points  to  the  fact,  that  in  future  some  of  the  wealth  of  the  land,
which  has  hitherto  gone  undivided  to  the  sanctuary,  will  go  to  the  king."  ( Ew(dd).  "An  omen
that  God  Himself  would  feed  and  sustain  him,  if  he  would  only  obey  Him."  (  WordsicorthJ.

Ver.  5.  "  Hill  of  God,"  rather,  Gibeah  of  God,  Saul's  home.  "  Two  things  are  clear ;  one,
that  Said  had  got  home  when  he  got  to  Gibeah  of  God,  for  no  further  journeying  is  so  much  as
hiijted  at,  and  the  same  word  describes  his  home  at  ver.  26  :  the  other,  that  there  was  a  high
place  at  Gibeah  just  above  the  city."  (Biblical  Commentary ).  "A  company  of  prophets."
"  Here  is  the  first  mention  of  an  infiuential  institution  which  owes  its  origin  to  this  period,  viz.,
the  schools  of  the  prophets Even  if  the  schools  of  the  prophets  had  begun  to  form  them-
selves before  the  time  of  Samuel,  which  we  have  the  less  reason  to  doubt,  since  the  book  of
Judges  bears  adecjuate  testimony  to  the  existence  of  prophets,  and  since  it  lay  in  the  nature  of
the  thing  that  individuals  bound  themselves  together  as  closely  as  possible  and  joined  in  a
common  activity  against  the  8]>irit  of  the  time,  yet  we  cannot  suppose  that  there
was  any  great  extension  and  formal  organisation  of  the  institution  previous  to  Samuel,  from
what  is  said  in  1  Sam.  iii.  1.  Add  to  this  the  sporadic  character  of  the  activity  of  the  prophets,
which   we  learn  from  the  Book  of   Judges.      Finally,   in  favour  of  Samuel  having  virtually

119


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    SAMUEL,  book  i


established  the  schools  of  the  prophets,  we  have  the  fact  that  we  no  longer
meet  with  them  except  in  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  This  circumstance  cannot  be  attributed
to  lack  of  information.  The  fact  of  our  not  meeting  with  them  in  the  kingdom  of  Judah  leads
us  to  infer  that  they  did  not  exist,  and  if  this  were  the  case,  it  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  the
8ch(^ols  of  the  prophets  had  taken  deep  root  before  Samuel.  They  appear  as  an  institution
estal)lished  by  him  for  a  temporary  object,  and  only  continued,  where  nectssity  demanded  it,  in
the  kingdom  of  Israel,  whose  relations  were,  in  many  respects,  similar  to  those  in  Samuel's  time,
where  the  prophethood  occupied  quite  another  position  than  in  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  not  being
a  mere  supplement  to  the  activity  of  the  Levilical  priesthood,  but  possessing  the  entire  respon-
sibility of  maintaining  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  Isiael.  The  princii)al  passages  referring  to  the
schools  of  the  prophets,  besides  this  one,  are  1  Kings  xix.  20,  21  ;  2  Kings  ii.  5,  iv.  38,  vi.  1.
The  designation  is  an  awkward  one,  liable  to  cause  misunderstatding.  No  instruction  was  given
in  the  schools  of  the  prophets,  they  were  regular  and  organised  societies.  Taking  all  these
passages  together  it  becomes  evident  that  they  were  in  many  respects  a  kind  of  monkish
institution.  Those  who  were  educated  there  had  a  kind  of  conjmon  dwelling  and  a  common
table  ;  the  most  distinguished  of  the  prophets  standing  at  its  head  as  spiritual  fathers.  JSIusic
was  employed  as  a  principal  means  of  edification,  and  of  awakening  prophetic  insj^iration.  But
what  distinguishes  the  schools  of  the  prophets  from  the  cloisters,  or  at  least  fiom  a  great  number
of  them,  is  their  thorough  practical  tendency.  They  were  hearths  of  spiritual  life  to  Israel.
Their  aim  was  not  to  encourage  a  contemplative  life,  but  to  rouse  the  nation  to  activity  ;  every
prophetic  disciple  was  a.  missionary."  {Hengstcnherg).  "With  a  psaltery,"  etc.  The  psaltery
was  a  kind  of  lyre  with  ten  or  twelve  strings,  triangular  in  form.  The  tabret,  or  tabourine,  or
timbrel  (Exod.  xv.  21)  was  a  species  of  hand  drum.  The  pipe  was  a  kind  of  flute,  and  the
harp  another  stringed  instrument  resembling  the  psaltery.  "They  sball  prcphesy,"  The
emphasis  rests  on  the  words  "  and  they  were  ]>rophesying,"  they  were  in  a  condition  of  ecstatic
inspiration  in  which,  singing  or  speaking,  with  accompaniment  of  music,  they  gave  expression
to  the  overflowing  feeling  with  which  their  hearts  were  filled  from  above  by  the  controlling
Spirit."  {Erdmann).

Ver.  6.  *•  The  spirit  of  the  Lord  will  come  upon  thee,"  lit.,  rush  upon  thee.  "  This  phrase
is  used  of  those  who,  under  the  influence  of  Divine  inspiration,  uttered  truths  supernaturally
revealed  to  them,  in  a  loftj^  poetic  style,  or  who  celtbrated  in  exalted  strains  of  praise  the
glorious  deeds  of  Jehovah  to  His  church.  In  this  latter  sense  it  is  applied  to  Miriam
(Exod.  XV.  20,  21),  to  the  seventy  elders  (Nurrib.  xi.  29),  and  to  the  choir  of  young  prophets,  to
which  Saul  joined  himself,  and  in  whose  sacred  employment  he  participated"  (cf.  I.idce  i.  65,
end).  ( Jamieaon  ).  "  Shalt  be  turned  into  another  man."  "  This  expression  is  a  remarkable
one,  and  occurs  nowhere  else.  Doubtless  it  describes  the  change  in  point  of  mental  power  and
energy  which  would  result  from  the  influx  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  In  the  case  of  Samson  it
was  a  supernatural  bodily  strength,  in  the  case  of  Saul  a  capacity  for  ruling  and  leading  the  people,
of  which  before  he  was  destitute,  which  the  Spirit  wrought  in  him.  The  change  in  the  mental
power  of  the  apostles,  as  described  in  Acts  i,  8,  is  analogous.  The  change  is  described  in  verse  9,
by  saying  that  "  God  gave  him  another  heart."  The  heart  in  the  Hebrew  acceptation  points  more
to  intellect  and  courage  than  to  the  affections  and  conscience."  (Biblical  Commentary ),  "Ecstatic
states,"  says  Tholuck,  "have  something  infectious  about  them.  The  excitement  spreads  involuntarily,
as  in  the  American  revivals  and  the  preaching  mania  in  Sweden,  even  to  persons  in  whose  state
of  mind  there  is  no  affinity  to  anything  of  the  kind.  But  in  the  instance  before  us  there  was
something  more  than  psychical  infection.  The  Spirit  of  Jehovah,  which  manifested  itself  in  the
prophesying  of  the  prophets,  was  to  pass  over  to  Saul,  so  that  he  would  prophesy  along  with
them,  and  was  entirely  to  transform  him.  This  transformation  is  not,  indeed,  to  be  regarded  as
regeneration  in  the  Christian  sense,  but  as  a  change  resembling  regeneration,  which  affected  the
entire  disposition  of  mind,  and  by  which  Saul  was  lifted  out  of  his  former  modes  of  thought  and
feeling,  which  were  confined  within  a  narrow  earthly  sphere,  into  the  far  higher  sphere  of  his
new  royal  calling,  was  filled  with  kingly  thoughts  in  relation  to  the  service  of  God,  and  received
another  heart."  (Kiel).

Ver.  7.  "  Do  as  occasion  serve  thee."  "  For  God  is  with  thee,  and  I  will  not  intrude  upon
thee  with  imperious  dictations  on  each  several  occasion,  but  I  will  leave  thee  to  the  free  exercise
of  thy  royal  authority."  (  Wordsworth).

Ver.  8.  "Thou  shalt  go  down  before  me  to  Gilgal,"  etc.  "This,  according  to  Josephus,
was  to  be  a  standing  rule  for  the  observance  of  Saul  while  the  prophet  and  he  lived — that  in
every  great  crisis,  as  a  hostile  incursion  into  the  country,  he  should  repair  to  Gilgal,  where  he
was  to  remain  seven  days,  to  afford  time  for  the  tribes  on  both  sides  of  Jordan  to  assemble,  and
Samuel  to  reach  it,"  (Jamieaon).  "  Considering  that  at  least  two  years  elapsed  between  this
time  and  that  referred  to  in  chap.  xiii.  8-13;  considering  that  Saul  and  Samuel  had  met  at
Gilgal,  and  offered  peace-offerings  to  the  Lord  on  one  occasion  between  the  times  referred  to  in
the  two  passages,  it  seems  (]uite  impossible  that  this  verse  can  refer  to  the  meeting  spoken  of  in
chap.  xiii.  8-10."  (Biblical  Commentary ).

Vers.  9  and  10.     See  on  verse  6.

120


CHAP.  X.  IWMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


Ver.  11.  "Is  Saul  also  among  the  prophets?"  "According  to  its  origin,  here  given,
this  proverb  does  not  merely  express  surprise  at  the  sudden  unexpected  calling  of  i-,  man  to
another  calling  in  life,  or  to  a  high  and  honourable  position.  The  jiersonal  and  moral  qualities
of  Saul,  perhaps  the  relijjjious-moral  character  of  his  family,  or,  at  least,  the  mean  opinion  that
was  entertained  of  Saul's  qualities  and  capacities,  intellectually,  religiously,  and  morally,  formed
the  ground  of  surprise  at  his  sudden  assumjjtion  of  the  prophetic  character."  ( Erdmann).

Ver.  12.  "Who  is  their  father?"  A  somewhat  obscure  phrase.  The  Septuagint  and
some  other  versions  read,  *  147/0  is  his  father?'  i.e.,  Who  would  have  expected  the  son  of  Kish
to  be  found  among  the  prophets  ?  Other  readings,  as  the  authorised  version,  understand /a^Aer
to  refer  to  the  head  of  the  prophets,  and  the  question  to  reflect  blame  upon  him  for  admitting
s\ich  a  pei-son  as  Saul  into  the  company  of  the  prophets.  Wordsworth  paraphrases,  *  Who  is  the
father  of  the  prophets?  Not  man,  but  God.  And  God  can  make  even  Saul,  whom  ye  despise,
to  be  a  prophet  also.'  Kiel — '  Is  their  father  a  prophet,  then  ? '  i.e.,  have  they  the  prophetic
spirit  by  virtue  of  their  birth  ?  '  The  speaker  declares,'  says  Bunsen,  '  against  the  con-
temptuous remark  about  the  son  of  Kish,  that  the  prophets,  too,  owed  their  gift  to  no  peculiarly
lofty  lineage.  Saul  also  might,  therefore,  receive  this  gift  as  a  gift  from  God,  not  as  a
patrimony."

Ver.  13.  "  When  he  had  made  an  end  of  prophesying."  "  The  gift,  therefore,  in  his
case,  was  transitory,  not  permanent,  as  in  Samuel's  :  compare  the  case  of  Eldad  and  Medad,
and  the  other  elders,  as  contrasted  with  that  of  Moses"  (Numb.  xi.  25).  (Wordsworth).  "The
high  place,"  whence  the  prophets  had  just  descended.  "  Saul  went  up  thither  to  pray  and
sacrifice  in  the  holy  place  after  his  great  experiences  of  the  Divine  favour  and  goodness,  and  so
after  his  return  home  first  to  give  God  the  glory  before  he  returned  to  his  family-life.  He  joined
the  descending  company  of  the  prophets  in  their  solemn  procession  ;  but  when  his  participation
in  the  utterances  of  the  prophetic  ins})iration  were  over,  his  look  rested  on  the  sacred  height
whence  the  men  had  descended,  and  the  impulse  of  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  forced  him  up  thither,
that,  after  the  extraordinary  offering  he  had  made  with  the  prophets,  he  might  make  the  ordinary
ofifering,  and  engage  in  worship."  (Erdmann),

Ver.  16.    "Of  the  matter  of  the  kingdom he  told  him  not."     "This  is  to  be

referred,  not  to  Saul's  unassuming  modesty,  humility,  or  modesty  (Keil  and  Ewald),  or  prudence
(Themius),  or  apprehension  of  his  uncle's  incredulity  and  envy,  but  to  the  fact  that  Samuel,  by
his  manner  of  imparting  the  divine  revelation,  had  clearly  and  expressly  given  him  to  understand
(ix.  25,  '27)  that  it  was  meant  in  the  first  instance  for  him  alone,  and  that  it  was  not  the  Divine
will  that  he  should  share  it  with  others."  (Erdmann).

Ver.  17.  "  Mizpeh."  See  on  chap,  vii,  9.  "Unto  the  Lord."  "Implying  the  presence  of
the  ark,  or  the  tabernacle,  or  the  High  Priest's  ephod."  Comp.  ver.  19."  (Biblical  Commentary ).

Ver.  20  "The  family  of  Matri  ....  and  Saul  the  son  of  Kish  was  taken."  "  When
the  heads  of  the  households  in  tliis  family  came,  and  after  the  different  individuals  in  the
households  were  taken,  the  lot  fell  upon  Saul  the  son  of  lush.  The  historian  proceeds  at  once
to  the  final  result  of  the  casting  of  the  lots,  without  describing   the  intermediate  steps  any

further As  the  result  of  the  lot  was  regarded  as  a  divine  decision,  not  only  was  Saul  to

be  accredited  by  this  act  as  the  king  api)ointed  by  the  Lord,  but  he  himself  was  also  to  be  the
more  fully  assured  of  his  own  election  on  the  part  of  God."  (Keil J.  "How  the  lots  were  cast  is
not  said  ;  commonly  it  was  by  throwing  tablets  (Josh,  xviii.  6,  8,  etc),  but  sometimes  by
drawing  from  a  vessel."  (Numb,  xxxiii.  54).  The  latter  seems  to  have  been  the  method  here
employed."  {Erdmann).

Ver.  22.  "  They  inquired  of  the  Lord  ....  and  the  Lord  answered."  "  The  inquiry
was  made  through  the  high  priest,  by  means  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim.  There  can  be  no
doubt  that  in  a  gathering  of  the  people  for  so  important  a  purpose,  the  high  priest  would  also
be  present,  even  though  this  is  not  expressly  stated."  (Keil).  "  The  high-priest's  oflBce  was
vacant,  some  other,  not  Samuel,  who  presided  over  the  assembly  and  the  election,  but  a  priest,
in  the  high  priestly  robes,  conducted  the  solemn  inquiry,  which  was  exclusively  the  privilege  of
the  priests."  (Erdmann),  "If  the  man  should  yet  come  hither;  "  rather,  has  any  one  else
conuhitlier  f  i.e.,  besides  those  here  present  among  whom  Saul  was  not  to  be  found."  (Erdmann).
"  Among  the  stuff."  "  Eather,  the  baggage.  The  assembly  was  like  a  camp,  and  the  baggage  of
the  whole  conyrcj^ation  was  pnbably  collected  in  one  place,  M'here  the  waggons  were  arranged
for  protection,"  (Biblical  Covnnaitaiy).  "The  groinid  was  his  diffidence  and  sliyness  in  respect
to  appearing  jjublicly  before  the  whole  peojjie.  Aagc/sbach  lightly  remarks  that  his  hiding
behind  the  baggage  during  the  election  is  not  in  conflict  with  the  account  of  his  change  of  mind.
At  so  decisive  a  moment,  which  turns  the  eyes  of  all  on  one  with  the  most  diverse  feelings,  the
heart  of  the  most  courageous  man  may  well  beat."  (Erdmann).

Ver.  23.  "He  was  higher  than  any  of  the  pec  pie,"  etc.  "When  in  battle  much  less
depended  on  military  skill  than  upon  the  bodily  prowess  of  the  chief  in  feingle  combats,  or  in

12i


EOMILETTC  COMBIENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  i.


the  partial  actions  with  which  most  battles  commenced,  it  was  natural  that  the  people  sbcpJd
take  pride  in  the  gigantic  proportions  of  their  leader,  as  calcidated  to  strike  terror  iiito  tlie
enemy,  and  confidence  into  his  followers  ;  besides,  it  was  no  mean  advantai^e  that  the  crest  of
the  leader  should,  from  his  tallness,  be  seen  from  afar  by  his  people.  The  prevalence  of  this
feeling  of  regard  for  personal  bulk  and  stature  is  seen  in  the  sculptures  of  ancient  Egypt,
Assyria,  and  Persia,  and  even  in  the  modern  paintings  of  the  last-iuuued  nation,  in  which  the
sovereign  is  invested  with  gigantic  proportions  in  comparison  witli  the  persons  around  him."
{Kitto).

Ver.  24.  "  God  save  the  king."  Eather,  let  the  Jcing  live.  The  Hebrew  is  equivalent  to
the  French  Vive  le  Roi.

Ver.  25.  "Samuel  told  the  people  the  manner  of  the  kingdom."  On  the  first
establishment  of  the  kingdom  it  was  possible  to  make  conditions  and  to  impose  restrictions,  to
which  any  future  king,  royal  by  birth,  and  on  whom  the  crown  devolved  by  hereditary  right,
would  not  very  willingly  submit.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  people,  under  the  infatuation
which  now  possessed  them,  would  have  put  themselves  under  the  monarchy  without  any  condi-
tions whatever,  and  it  is  entirely  owing  to  the  wise  forethought  of  Samuel,  acting  under  the
Divine  direction,  that  this  evil  was  averted,  and  the  kings  of  Israel  did  not  become  absolute  and
ii-responsible  masters  of  the  lives  and  properties  of  their  subjects."  ('A'ii^o^.  "  This  Zaw  of  the
kini^dom  is  not  identical  with  the  manner  of  the  king  described  by  Samuel  in  chap.  viii.  11-18.
The  Hebrew  word  rendered  manner  in  both  places  is  mhhpat,  which  properly  inea,n9  judgment,
right,  law,  that  which  is  strictly  de  jure  ;  but  it  also  signifies  uwge,  manner,  custom,  that  which
is  de  facto,  and  the  mishpat  of  the  kingdom  here  expresses  the  former,  but  the  mishpat  of  the
Jcing  in  chap.  viii.  comprehends  also  the  latter."  (  Wordsworth).  "  In  content  it  was  no  doubt
essentially  the  same  with  the  law  of  the  king  in  Deut.  xvii.  14-20,  especially  verses  19,  20,  and
therefore  related  to  the  divinely-established  rights  and  duties  of  the  theocratic  king,  the
fulfilment  of  which  the  people  were  authorised  to  demand  from  him."  (Erdmannj.  "Wrote
it  in  a  book."  '*  We  find  here  the  first  trace,  after  the  written  records  of  Moses,  of  writing
among  the  prophets,  long  before  the  literary  activity  to  which  we  owe  what  we  have  now."
(Erdmannj.  "  Laid  it  up  before  the  Lord."  "  It  was,  no  doubt,  placed  in  the  tabernacle,
where  the  law  of  Moses  was  also  deposited."  (Keil).

Ver.  26.  "A  band  of  men,"  etc.  ;  rather,  the  host ;  but  *'  here  it  does  not  signify  a  large
military  force,  l)ut  a  crowd  of  brave  men  whose  hearts  God  had  touched  to  give  him  a  royal
escort,  and  show  their  readiness  to  serve  him."  {Keil\

Ver.  27.  **  Children  of  Belial  "  (see  on  chap.  ii.  12).  "  Presents,"  Minchah.  "  The  token
of  homage  and  ackn()\vledgiuent  from  the  subject  to  the  sovereign,  and  from  the  tributajy  nation
to  their  suzerain  "  (see  2  riamWiii.  2,  (i  ;  Judges  iii.  17,  18;  1  Kings  iv.  21,  etc.).  {Biblical
Conimeidary).  "But  he  held  his  peace."  Literally,  "  He  was  as  heimgdcaf"  i.e.,  he  acted
as  if  he  had  not  heard.

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  l-ld.

The  Private  Cojssecratiou  of  Saul,  and  the  Mibaculous  Attestation

TO  HIS  Call.

I.  The  most  eventful  forces  of  human  life  often  begin  in  secret.  The  great
forces  in  nature  begin  in  secret.  The  mightiest  cedar  of  Lebanon  put
forth  its  first  tiny  germ  beneath  the  earth,  and  wliile  men  slept
showed  itself  above  ground,  and  received  its  first  anointing  of  the
dew  when  no  human  eye  was  there  to  h)ok  on.  And  the  great  men  who
have  become  mighty  forces  in  the  world  have  bad  their  cliaracters  moulded
and  the  direction  of  their  lives  determined  by  incidents  unnoticed  by  the
world.  They  became  kings  among  their  fellows,  but  their  anointing  took
place  in  secret.  They  began  their  career  buried  in  obscurity,  and  their  first
coming  to  the  light  was  a  circumstance  unnoticed  by  any.  It  was  not  tdl  God
publicly  called  them  to  His  service  by  the  voice  of  His  providence  that  men
recognised  who  and  what  they  were.  So  the  anointing  of  the  hrst  knig  ol  Israel
was  witnessed  by  no  one  except  those  engaged  in  the  transaction.  The  conse-
cration of  this  man,  whose  name  has  ever  since  had  a  place  in  human  history,
was  performed  in  the  most  private  manner.  The  first  a^t  in  the  establishment
122


CHAP.  X.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  SAMUEL.


of  tins  kingdom,  like  tliat  of  many  others,  camo  not  with  observation.  Oar  Loni
teaches  that  this  is  an  especial  characteristic  of  the  L;()spel  kiiiodom,  both  in  the
worhl  and  in  the  heart.  He,  its  king,  liiade  His  tir.st  appearance  npon  t lie  earth
in  a  stable  in  the  presence  of  one  or  two  iinmble  peasants,  and  received  His  first
adoration  from  she[)herds  as  He  hxy  in  a  manger.  *'  I'/ie  kingdom  of  heaven  is
like  to  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which  a  man  took,  and  sowed  in  his  field ;  which,
indeed,  is  the  least  of  all  seeds ;  but  when  it  is  grown,  it  is  the  greatest  among
herbs''  (Matt.  xiii.  31,  32).  And  the  beginning  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  the
individnal  heart  is  marked  by  the  same  characteristic.  The  anointing  of  the
Spirit  which  seals  a  hnman  sonl  to  God  takes  place  unobserved  by  others — the
ordination  to  be  a  king  nnto  God  (llev.  i.  6)  is  a  private  transaction  between
the  soul  and  Him  who  has  called  it  ont  of  darkness  to  light — it  is  like  the
hiding  of  the  leaven — an  unnoticed  act — only  known  to  others  by  its  effects
(Matt.  xiii.  33).  Ananias  the  disciple  at  Damascus  was  the  only  human  being
who  was  made  cognisant  ot  the  fact  that  Saul  of  Tarsus  had  nttered  his  first
prayer  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth  ;  but  what  an  eventful  force  was  then  set  in  motion —
how  mighty  have  been  the  influences  which  have  ever  since  been  flowing  from
that  act  of  consecration  to  God — from  the  anointing  of  tliat  mighty  king  in  the
Church  of  Christ.

II.  Epochs  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  and  in  the  history  of  individual
souls,  are  generally  preceded  and  followed  by  signs.      The  exodus  of   Israel
from  Egypt  was  preceded  by  supernatural  events,  and  signs  and  wonders  followed
that  epoch  in  their  history.     The  manifestation  of  God  in  the  burning  bush,
and  the  miracles  done  in   Egypt,  ushered  in  their  national  birth,  which  was
followed  by  the  Divine  manifestation  in  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  by  the  giving  of
bread  from  heaven,  water  from  the  rock,  etc.     At  the  epoch  in  the  world's
history  created  by  the  bringing  into  the  world  the  first-begotten  Son  of  God
(Heb.  i.  6),  there  were  signs  preceding  and  following  in  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost
and  angelic  visits  to  lowly  men  and  women  (Luke  i.  11,  20,  24,  28,  41,  67  ;
ii.  9,  27,  38),  and  before  his  entrance  on  His  public  ministry,  which  was  marked
by  miracles  from  beginning  to  end,  there  was  the  supernatural  manifestations
connected  with  His  baptism.     The  entrance  of  the  apostles  upon  their  great
work  was  an  epoch  in  the  liistory  of  the  world  and  of  the  Church,  and  signs
preceded  it  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  and  followed  it  in  the  conversion  of  three
thousand  souls,  as  well  as  in  the  miracles  of  healing,  and  of  resurrection,  and  of
ludgment  connected  with  their  ministry  and  with  that  of  others  associated  with
them  (Acts  iii.  7;  v.  1-11;  v.  8;  viii.  13;  ix.  40;  xiii.  11;  xv.  3;  xix.  11,  etc.).
"  J  he  word  which  at  the  first  began  to  be  spoken  by  the  Lord,  ivas  confirmed
unto  us  by  them  that  heard  Him,  God  also  beai'ing  them  witness,  both  with  signs
and  wonders,  and  ivith  divers  miracles,  and  gifts  of  the  holy  Ghost,  according  to
His  own  will"  (Heb.  ii.  4).     The  anointing  of  Saul  marked  a  great  epoch  in
the  history  of  the  Hebrew  nation,  and  it  was  in  accordance  with  the  general  rule
of  God's  government  that  it  should  be  preceded  and  followed  by  signs,  some  of
a  more  private  nature,  and  others,  especially  that  of  Saul's  endowment  with  the
spirit  of  prophecy,  of  a  public  character.     And  the  same  truth  holds  good  as  to
epochs  in  the  individnal  soul.     When  that  soul  enters  into  entirely  new  con-
ditions by  entering  into  new  relations  to  God,  signs  follow  and  precede  the
entrance.     Like   those  before   mentioned,   some   are  known   only  to  the  man
himself,   but   some   are  evident     to   onlookers.     Pricking  of    conscience — an
awakening  to  the  sense  of  the  burden  of  unpanhmcd  sin,  is  a  sign  irom  heaven.
This  sign  evidently  preceded  and  accompanied  the  conversion    of  the  great
Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  (Acts  ix.  5,  11),  and  it  is  found  in  a  greater  or  less  degree
wnenever  a  soul  is  turned  "  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God."     But  more
public  signs  follow  in  the  new  life  of  those  who  believe — signs  which  are  not  only

123


nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  i.


for  the  confirmation  of  their  own  faith,  but  for  evidence  to  those  wlio  believe  not.
In  connection  with  the  new  life  to  which  Saul  was  now  called,  the  signs  which
w^ent  before  and  followed  his  consecration  not  only  confirmed  his  own  faith  in  the
really  Divine  nature  of  his  call,  but  some  of  them  were  so  evident  to  others  also
as  to  make  them  conscious  that  a  great  change  had  passed  over  him.  In  many
respects  he  was  another  man.  And  the  new  life,  which  follows  the  new  birth  is
the  most  convincing  testimony  to  the  truth  that  there  is  a  Sj)irit  of  God  working
in  the  world.  "  The  words  of  Christ,"  says  Neander,  *'  assure  us  that  the  com-
munication of  the  life  of  God  to  men  was  the  greatest  of  all  miracles,  the  essence
and  aim  of  all ;  and  further,  that  it  was  to  be  the  standing  njiracle  of  all  after
ages."

III.  Signs  accompanying  a  message  from  God  are  intended  to  lead  to  a
practical  result.  They  are  to  confirm  faith  and  to  lead  to  the  exercise  of  the
gifts  entrusted.  "  And  let  it  be,  when  these  signs  are  come  unto  thee,  that
thou  shalt  do  as  occasion  serve  thee"  (ver.  7).  This  was  the  intention  of  the
sign  given  to  Moses  in  the  burning  bush.  He  was  to  go  to  Pharaoh  in  tlie
certainty  that  God  was  with  him,  and  he  was  to  demand  the  deliverance  of  his
people,  and  become  their  leader  and  lawgiver.  The  signs  here  vouchsafed  to
Saul  were  to  lead  him  to  the  exercise  of  his  newly-acquired  gifts — they  were  an
encouragement  and  a  call  to  him  to  use  the  powers  which  Uod  now  im})lanted
within  him.  So  the  signs  given  to  the  apostles  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  were
not  simply  events  to  be  marvelled  at,  but  the  newly-gotten  gifts  which  they
signified  were  to  be  used  for  the  joy  of  the  receivers,  the  glory  of  the  Giver,  and
the  blessing  of  others.  The  remarkable  signs  which  accompanied  the  conversion
of  the  New  Testament  Saul  were  a  call  to  him  to  "  bear  the  name  "  of  Him  who
had  appeared  to  him  "bejore  the  Gentiles,  and  kings,  and  the  children  of  Israel'^
even  when  the  bearing  of  it  involved  the  suffering  of  ''great  things''  ior  the
sake  of  his  Lord  (Acts  ix.  15,  16).  And  so  it  is  with  every  man  who  is  called
out  of  darkness  into  marvellous  light — by  life  and  word  he  is  expected  to  show
forth  the  praises  of  Him  who  has  called  him  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  1.  The  natural  basis  for  this  of  His  kingdom,  and  then  as  chief  Pro-
symbolism  of  oil  is  its  power  to  dis-  phet  and  Priest.  Samuel's  word,  "7 he
pense  light  a^ud  life,  joy  smd  healing,  Zi?rc?  hath  anointed  thee,"  signifies  that
by  which  it  sets  forth  the  Spirit's  dis-  God  Plimself,  of  His  free  grace, dispenses
pensation  of  light  and  life  and  the  the  powers  and  gifts  of  His  Spirit,  when
therein  contained  gifts  and  powers.  He  calls  to  an  olhce  in  Plis  kingdom
And  in  the  historical  development  of  and  service. — Langes  Commentary.
the  theocracy  and  of  the  Divine  reve-
lations which  point  to  the  perfecting  Ver.  1-9.  How  the  Lord  fits  Bis
and  fulfilment  of  the  theocracy  in  the  chosen  ones  for  the  kingly  calling  in
new  covenant,  the  symbolic  anointing  His  kingdom.  1.  By  quiet  instruction
of  theocratic  kings,  priests,  and  pro-  by  means  of  His  word  He  brings  them
phets,  as  sign  of  the  impartation  of  the  into  a  right  knowledge  of  the  tasks  He
spirit  of  God  and  its  powers,  is  the  type,  assigns.  2.  By  the  anointing  of  His
that  is,  the  historical  foretokening  and  ^>^r^^  He  imparts  to  them  the  needful
prefiguring  ofthe  anointing  of  the  Spirit  power  and  strength  therefore.  ^  3.  By
without  measure  (John  iii.  34),  and  with  the  production  of  injallible  signs  He
the  Spirit  of  might  (Acts  x.  38)  by  gives  them  a  just  certainty  and  joyous
which  Jesus  was  *'the  Christ,"  the  confidence.  '1  he  signs  of  Divine  guid-
anointed  of  God  for  the  New  Testa-  ance  along  the  paths  of  human  life  on
mental  kingdom  of  God,  first  as  King  earth,  how  they — 1.  Pointing  back-
124


«HAP.  X.  IIOMILBTW  COMMENT AUX:    SAMVEL.


war^s    renmul  us  of   grace   in   past         Vers.  6-8.  What  the  royal  anointin?

times  (the    loly  p  aces) ;  2.  Pointing  gives,  and  what  it  demands      IT?

iipwards,  a<lm,misli  us  to  lift  up  the  makes  tiie  aimiuted  one  Ht  for  all  that

heart  from  worthless,  earthly  tlnn.^s  to  his  oHice   may  lay  upon   Cn      2     [

higher  goo,l ;    Z.    PouiUng  forwards  demau.ls  that  the  ano  uted  one  shon  1

demaml  a  new    ,fe  m  the  Spint ;  and  now  do  „otl,in,r  m„re  aocrdin  /      hi,

4  (,all  on  us  to  look  wo  oar  own  heart,  own  choice,  bi.t  every  thin.,  aoco   lin  !

wide  for  the  work  o(  renewal  of  the  to  the  liirection  and  wi  ^of  God

whole  man  they  promise  the  gifts  and  Dissdltoff.  uoa.—

])owers  of  the  Spirit  from  above.      The

appearance  of  special  Divine  signs  in         Ver.  9.  He  h.as  no  lon^^er  the  henrh

\\«mm\U<^— I.   Whence  coming^     Or-  of   a    liusbmdim,,      1,^,  i         .

derei  in  time  by  God's  wise  Pnfvidence,  lu't  fe'  ort  a^d  ^  "bn t  "£

not  spnugmg  from  chance,  not  aimless  ■  heart  of  a  statesman,  a    eneral  and  a

decreed  m  His  eternal   purpose,   not  prince,  whom  God  call^to  any  sele

accidental,    x^^i  groundless  ;    sent  as  He  will  make  fit  for  it  -nZlv

w™rw1  J;2;''  -d  gracious  Saul  had  another  heart, TuThe  had

wm    not  meaningless.     2     Jo  whom  not  a  new  leart.     He  irave  evidencp  nf

lPP¥y?  Jo  him  who  lets  hi,n,self  possessing   the  gifts  of  kii^Xn^^l^^^

he  guided  by  God  ;  to  him  who  holds  none  of  the  gracf  of  holy    v"nt    Whde

sM  when  God  is  guiding  him,  and  to  he  could  he"iceforth  cmn ma  fd  annies

him  who  lets  God  speak  to  him  by  His  and  practise  diplomacy     "e  cared  not

"7L I  v-^^""'  'T-^y»V^  Reminding  for  keeping  a  conscien  IVo  d  o  olnce

of  the  say  ng  and  gracious  presence  of  toward  G.fd  and  man.  .            It  s  not

S-etnrr^nl"-     "-r*  '  T'\r"  ^'''^  <"'"•■«''  *"  I'^e  natnraf  endowments

?o  onrV  .U       •  r'^J^i''"?  •    Po'l'ting  or    learned    attainments  of   skUl    o^

to  onr  tasks,  which  under  the  guidance  wisdom.     Tliese  may  be  Dosses,pH  Z

of  t  e  Lord  are  to  be  fulfilled  (vers,  the  highest  degrTe^hL'^^he  soil  I

I'hi  iiS7i-rt^.L^rgi[r pii^s  ^s^^'  -'  --'-'-•  ^  zii

amSaT'  ^""  '-'^-"^^"^'^     J;[-  Saul's  election  he  occupied  a
•^  ^ei-y  low  standpoint,  intellectually  and

Ver.  6.  The  Spirit  of  the  lord  will     thin^o?s-,„!!,tl'°r'^^  Y^"  ^^u
come  upon  thee.^    I.  A  great  ^vor7of      Ser  I  raeh     1  W  "^  ^''

r::^/tf'ti!f^''T"-'T^4  '"-^-t^tc^SintSTirth:

which  occurs  and  is  experienced  onl>      that  t her     wTa  de^i^ive  .^ha^.e  In
under   dehmte    conditions        S      'n^      ^omI'o  i;^^     ^.^\'   ^«^i^'ve  cnange  in

Ver   7    The  a-reat  wor^    "P„j   •  ^f'  ^^-    S'',"''   ^^  conversing  with

with  thee"     1  %.Zffrn^^  '^  prophets,  prophesied:    see  the  power

w  i^h  a  sure  us  of  i       9  "^^       '  'T''  ^.'"^  .V""*  °^  ''"'^  "^^'V'^^y-     'i'i">se

r^ml/fw  n  -h  tl  „  1       /  ^f  ''T^'"^  ^'''^^  1'^®  ^"">''"  t'>«  s""'^!'  "f  "f  religion

ceives      S   ''t  ,   •    ?"■-   *''T''^  "f-  '''^""°*  b"t  be  somewhat  coloured  of

Tr.      r      ;  i?e  .""i/'^'y  "»^«^««  to  do  their  beams.— 7ram,

£2ief ■? r^lr  ^^^  ffi;GLtl£tStS;;>:^£

knowa.-Xa«^.  .  Commentary/.  Spirit  was  sent  from  heaven  by  Christ


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    SAMUEL.  boor  t.


to  His  church,  to  abide  with  lier  for  even  of  the  wliole  woi    \      For  when

ever  (John  xiv.  16). —  Wordsworth.  the   breath   of   the  Holy  Ghost  came

As  of   Saul  it  is  written  when  the  upon  it,  it  was  cast  into  a  new  mouhl

Spirit  came  upon  him,  "  he  was  chani^^ed  presently,  and  became  a  new  world. —

into   a  new  man  ;"    this  holds   true  Bisliop  Andrewes,

MAIN  UOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Vefi-ses  11-12  and  27.

Saul  among  the  Prophets.

I.  God  often  accomplishes  his  purposes  by  agencies  both  unlooked  for  and
despised.  That  a  Hebrew  slave  should  be  taken  from  a  dungeon  and  made  lord
of  Egypt  was  no  doubt  an  event  as  undesired  as  it  was  unexpected  by  the  nobles
of  Pharaoh's  court,  and  that  this  despised  younger  brother  should  be  the
instrument  of  saving  all  his  house  from  starvation  was  as  equally  far  from  the
desire  and  expectation  of  Jacob's  elder  sons.  That  another  Hebrew  youth
should  be  educated  and  fitted  in  Pharaoh's  court  to  become  the  axe  which
should  be  laid  at  the  root  of  the  tyranny  of  Egypt,  was  another  event  which
men  little  expected  to  come  to  pass,  and  which  crossed  the  wishes  and  desires  of
many.  And  it  as  little  accorded  with  the  expectation  and  wish  of  the  majority
of  the  Israelites  who  knew  Saul  the  son  of  Kish  that  he  should  be  found  first
among  the  prophets  and  then  upon  the  throne.  Those  who  had  known  the
young  man  from  his  youth  never  expected  to  see  him  in  any  other  position  than
that  in  which  he  had  grown  to  manhood,  and  a  larger  number  were  as  surprised
as  they  were  disappointed  when  they  found  that  a  member  of  the  smallest  tribe
of  Israel,  and  one  who  had  given  no  proof  of  his  power  to  rule,  was  to  be
elevated  to  the  throne  of  the  nation.  But  this  has  been  the  general  method  of
the  Divine  working  in  the  world.  Not  only  in  the  establishment  of  the  Gospel
kingdom  but  in  the  accomplishment  of  most  of  His  purposes,  which  are  indeed
all  subservient  to  that  one  great  Divine  purpose — **  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish
things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise  ;  and  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things
of  the  world  to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty ;  and  base  things  of  the
world,  and  things  which  are  despised,  hath  God  chosen,  yea,  and  things  which
are  not,  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are ;  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  His
presence"  (1  Cor.  i.  27-29).  Men  look  in  the  high  places  of  the  earth  for  those
who  are  to  do  the  great  things  of  the  world,  but  God  puts  His  hand  upon  some
obscure  and  despised  and  unlikely  instrument  aiid  uses  him  for  the  work  that
**  they  may  see,  and  know,  and  consider,  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  done
this,  and  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  hath  created  it''  (Isa.  xli.  20).

II.  The  way  in  which  men  ought  to  regard  this  method  of  the  Divine
working.  There  are  many  men  among  the  teachers  of  the  Church  of  God  who
have  been  raised  from  a  much  more  lowly  position.  Yet  when  another  from  a
similar  position  reveals  that  God  has  bestowed  gifts  and  graces  upon  him  also,
those  who  can  boast  no  higher  origin  exclaim  with  astonishment  and  scorn,  *'  Is
Saul  also  among  the  prophets  ? "  It  behoves  all  who  ask  such  a  question  to
consider  the  origin  of  all  intellectual  and  spiritual  endowments — to  remember
that  they  are  all  bestowed  by  the  common  Father,  who  is  not  accountable  to
them  for  the  distribution  of  them.  But  the  spirit  whicli  would  exclude  some
from  a  participation  in  them  manifested  itself  very  early  in  the  Church  of  God.
When  "  the  Lord  took  of  the  Spirit  that  was  upon  Moses,  and  gave  it  unto  the
seventy  elders ;"  and  "  they  prophesied  and  did  not  cease,''  and  "  Eldad  and
Medad  prophesied  in  the  camp,  there  ran  a  young  man  and  told  Moses,  and  said,
Eldad  and  Medad  do  prophesy  in  the  camp.  And  Joshua  the  son  of  iSun,  the
servant  of  Moses,  one  of  his  young  men,  answered  and  said,  My  lord,  Moses,

126


OHAP.  X.  HOMILETia  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,


forbid  them  "  (Nninb.  xi.  25-28).  But  Moses  remembered  and  acknowledged
**  irho  hath  made  man's  mouth,  and  who  maketh  the  dumb,  or  the  seeing,  or  the
blind"  (Exod.  iv.  11) — he  knew  whose  was  the  Spirit  which  had  rested  so
abundantly  upon  him,  and  that  all  the  servants  of  God  had  one  common  Father,
and  he  therefore  answered,  "  Enviest  thou  for  mjj  sake  ?  Would  God  that  all
the  Lord's  people  ivere  prophets,  and  that  the  Lord  would  put  his  Spirit  upon
them''  (Numb.  xi.  29).  This  is  the  attitude  which  becomes  all  God's  servants
to  take  when  they  beliold  a  Saul  amoni^  the  prophets — it  behoves  them  all  to
ask  the  question  asked  by  one  in  the  days  of  Saul,  ''But  who  is  their  father  V
It  was  as  great  a  surprise  to  the  disciples  at  Jerusalem  to  hear  of  the  New
Testament  Saul  amonf]^  the  ])reachers  as  it  was  for  the  inhabitants  of  Gibeah  to
see  the  Old  Testament  Saul  amon^^  the  pro[)liets.  But  the  surprise  in  both
cases  arose  from  forgetfulness  of  the  truth  contained  in  the  heart-searching
question  afterwards  put  by  that  great  apostle  to  the  Ccu-inthian  church — "  For
who  maketh  thee  to  differ  from  one  another?  and,  ivhat  hast  thou  that  thou  didst
not  receive  1  now  if  thou  didst  receive  it,  why  dost  thou  glory,  as  if  thou  hadst
not  received  it?  "  (I  Cor.  iv.  7).

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Vers.  11,  12.  Let  not  the  worst  be  for  the  present,  be  too  much  relied  on  ;
despaired  of,  yet  let  not  an  external  for  Saul  among  the  prophets  was  Saul
show  of  devotion,  and  a  sudden  change      still. — Henry.

MAIN  HOMILETIOS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  17-20.

Saul's  Public  Recognition.

I.— It  is  a  mark  of  the  greatest  folly  and  ingratitude  to  forsake  old  and
tried  friends  for  those  who  are  new  and  untried.  This  was  what  Israel  was
now  doing.  They  were  setting  aside  an  old  and  faithful  human  friend  in  the
person  of  Samuel  for  the  young  man  of  whom  they  knew  nothing  except  that  he
was  endowed  with  a  fine  physical  frame.  But  they  were  guilty  of  far  greater
sin  and  folly.  Although  God  had  elected  their  king,  yet  we  have  seen  (see  on  chap,
viii.  6-22)  He  had  only  done  so  because  He  would  not  compel  them  to  acquiesce
in  His  plans  for  their  welfare  ;  and  in  insisting  upon  having  "  a  king  like  the
nations,"  they  had  forsaken  him  who  *'  Himself  had  saved  them  out  of  all  their
adversities  and  tribulation,"  who  had  '*  delivered  them  out  of  the  hand  of  the
Egyptians,  and  out  of  the  hand  of  all  kingdoms,  and  of  them  that  oppressed
them  "  (vers.  18,  19).  God  had  indeed  been  a  friend  whose  faithfulness  had
been  tried  and  found  unfailing,  and  in  desiring  a  human  king  Israel  gave  proof
of  how  ungrateful  men  can  be,  and  how  an  apparent  advantage  and  a  wron^^
desire  indulged  in  can  blind  men  to  their  own  interest.

II.  Those  who  are  thus  foolish  and  ungrateful  often  find  that  those  whom
they  have  rejected  are  still  indispensable  to  their  welfare.  Israel  had  still  to
look  to  Samuel  to  guard  them  against  some  of  the  evil  fruits  which  would  s}>ring
from  their  own  self-will.  To  him  they  owed  the  preservation  of  some  natioufil
liberty — he  alone  it  was  who  was  able  to  tell  them  the  "  manner  of  the
kingdom,"  and  who  '*  wrote  it  in  a  book"  and  laid  it  up  for  the  use  of  future
generations.  And  they  had  to  look  to  the  King  whom  they  had  forsiken  to
preserve  the  life  and  to  give  success  to  the  king  whom  they  had  chosen  in  His
place.  It  is  vain  for  men  to  try  and  free  themselves  from  obligations  even  to
good  men — they  must  either  directly  or  indirectly  be  indebted  to  them.     But

127


nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


BOOK  I.


it  IS  far  more  useless  and  foolish  for  men  to  try  and  do  without  God,  while  every
good  gift  which  they  enjoy  comes  from  Him  in  whom  they  ''  live  and  move  and
have  their  being."     On  the  first  day  wlien  Israel  set  out  to  do  without  God
they  are  found  appealing  to  Him  for  guidance  and  help.  '

III.  Those  prove  themselves  to  be  true  friends  whi  are  willing  stillto  help
those  who  have  thus  rejected  them.  That  God  was  still  careful  for  the  interests
of  the  children  whom  He  had  ''  flourished  and  brought  up''  but  who  **  had
rebelled  aga'mst  Him''  (Lsa.  i.  2)— that  He  was  still  kind  to  these  "unthankful
and  evil"  (Luke  vi.  35)  Israelites— shows  how  infinitely  good  and  gracious
He  is,  and  how  unfiiiling  is  His  friendship,  and  that  Samuel  should  have
borne  himself  as  he  did  under  the  circumstances  shows  that  he  was  a  true
and  real  patriot  and  friend.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


Ver.  22.  I  cannot  blame  Saul  for
hiding  himself  from  a  kingdom,  espe-
cially of  Israel.  Honour  is  heavy  when
it  comes  on  the  best  terms ;  how
should  it  be  otherwise,  wlien  all  men's
care?  are  cast  on  one  ;  but  most  of  all
in  a  troubled  estate?  No  man  can
put  to  sea  without  danger,  but  he  that
launcheth  forth  in  a  tempest  expecteth
the  hardest  event.  Such  was  the  con-
dition of  Israel Well  did  Saul

know  the  difference  between  a  peaceful
government  and  the  perilous  and
wearisome  tumults  of  war.  The
quietest  throne  is  full  of  cares,  the
perplexed  of  dangers.  Cares  and
dangers  drove  Saul  into  this  corner,  to
hide  his  head  from  a  crown  :  these
made  him  choose  rather  to  lie  obscurely
among  the  baggage  of  his  tent  than  to
sit  gloriously  in  the  throne  of  state. —
Bp.  Hall

Whether  this  act  of  Saul  arose  from
a  culpable  distrust  of  God,  or  an  ex-
cessive diffidence  in  himself,  we  cannot
determine,  but  it  forms  a  singular  con-
trast with  the  spirit  that  marks  his
after  life ;  his  eager  and  extreme
jealousy  of  a  rival,  both  in  his  power
and  popularity.  This  should  convince
us  how  little  we  know  of  ourselves  till
placed  in  circumstances  that  may  call
forth  our  peculiar  tempers  or  passions  ;
for  often  we  are  as  different  persons
at  different  periods  of  our  lives,  as
Saul  at  this  juncture  from  Saul  after
the  lapse  of  some  years,  when  with  un-
governable violence  he  sought  the  life
128


of  David,  dreading  him  as  a  competitor
for  the  throne. — Lindsay.

Ver.  25.  In  the  Word  of  God  there
is  a  clear  definition  of  the  rights  of  the
ruled  as  well  as  of  the  rights  of  the
ruler.  No  man  is  at  liberty  to  tyran-
nize  over    another It   is   a

solemn  thought  that  all  our  engage-
ments are  laid  up  before  the  Lord.
They  are  held  in  all  their  integrity  by
him,  and  he  never  fails  to  fulfil  his
part. — Steel.

Ver.  26.  This  verbal  declaration  of
God  was  not  enough.  There  mnst
also  be  an  actual  one.  God's  election
is  not  vain  and  feeble  ;  if  it  be  real,  it
must  prove  itself  in  the  gifts  and  deeds
of  him  who  is  chosen.  The  people
felt  this,  even  those  who  acknowledged
tiie  election  with  all  their  heart.  Saul
himself  also  felt  it.  Both  waited  for
the  future  actual  ratification  (chap,
xi,).  Until  then  everything  remained
as  it  had  been. — Hengstenberg.

Ver.  27.  If  Saul  had  attached  an
overweening  importance  to  himself  we
should  have  seen  a  very  different
course  of  conduct.  But  it  was  tlie
absence  of  this  which  saved  him.  The
utterances  of  the  men  of  Belial  pro-
ceeded on  the  presumption  that  at  the
moment  self-importance  was  the  pro-
minent principle  at  work  in  Saul's
heart ;  it  was  a  shaft  aimed  at  this,  as
they  imagined  that  it  would  n<ot  only


CHAP.  X,  nOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


be  there,  but   ii])pcnnost.     IMistalcen,  the  rest  of  tlie  pc()})le ;  but,   ah  !  in

liowover,  as  to  th(i   iiiark,  they  failed  how   diCiereiit   a  s.tate   of  iiiiiid   from

in  hitting  and  wouiitliiig.  .  .  .  Many  theirs.      Men  can   often   bear   up   in

are  the  blessings  attciulaiit  on  humility,  pubhc   under    circumstances    beneath

and  among  them  this  is  not  the  least,  which  they  break  down  immediately

that  it   denies  opportunity   to    those  when  alone.  .  .  .  Real   friends   know

who  would  seek  to  wound  us  through  this,    and   hence   they  will    not   say,

pride. — Miller.  because  they  see  a  man  keep  up  in

Notwithstanding  that  they  (1)  ques-  public,  "Ah,  he  is  quite  equal  to  his

tioned  his   capacity,   (2)  despised  his  duties  ;  he  will  do  very  well  now,  we

power,  (3)  re  fused  him  homai-e  and  help,  may  leave  him,"  but  rather  they  will,

he  was  as  though  he  were  deaf,  thereby  because  he  has  kept  up  before  others,

showing  (1)  self-control,  (2)  prudence,  expect  it  is  all  the  more  probable  that

(3)  humility.     Apply  this  to  (1)  public  he  will  not  do  so  in  private,  and  they

oilicers,  (2)  employers  of  servants  and  will  think  of  him  at  home,  and  they

other    subordinates,    (3)    persons     in  will    follow    him   thither   with    their

society,  (4)  church  officials.     There  is  a  prayers  at  least;  but  if  the  opportunity

high  sense  in  which  God  acts  thus,  and  serves,  with  their  presence  too.     They

bad  men  imagine  that   lie   is   really  will  show  that  they  have /^^ar^5 — hearts

deaf.      (Psalm  Ixxiii.  ;  xciv.   7  ;    Job  in  the  worthiest  sense  of  the  term —

xxii.  13). — Translator  of  Lange' s  Com-  and  that  their  hearts  have  been  indeed

mentary,  touched.     All  this  comes  before  us  in

the  history.     Saul  is  not  allowed  to

Ver.  26.  Saul  was  to  have  one  other  go  home  alone.     No  ;  he  must  be  sus-

proof  that  without  hesitation  he  might  tained  by  sympathy  and  friendship;

in  all  the  future  of  his  life  seek  and  he  shall  not  feel  solitary,  he  shall  not

find  his  all  in  God.     What  is  a  man  go  unattended.     But  mark  that  w^ord

without  friends,  especially  if  he  have  — God.     Even  these  emotions  of  sym-

great  responsibilities   pressing  around  pathy — these  proofs  of  attachment —

him,  and  great  cares  devolving  on  him  ?  these  manifestations  of  heart — are  not,

And  who  are  our  best  friends  ?     Not  by  the  liistorian,  allowed  to  pass  before

those  who  talk  about  us  the  most — not  us  as  just  the  natural  working  of  men's

those   who   trumpet   our  praises   and  own  minds  under  the  peculiar  circum-

advertise  our  talents  ;  but  those  who  stances  of  the  case.     God  was  in  them,

think  of  us  in  our   homes,  and  who  God  excited  them,  and  in  the  fact  that

come,  knowing  we  are  careworn,  to  ask  God  touched  their  hearts  and  disposed

if  they  can  help  us,  and  who  stand  them  favourably,  Saul  was  to  gain  a

ready  to  do  us  a  service  which  only  new  encouragement,  a  new  assurance

God's   eye   can   see,    a  kindness  the  of  being  in  the  path  of  duty.     This

knowledge  of  which  is  conhned  to  our  power,   too,   which    God    possesses  of

house,   and  to  the   chambers  of  the  touching   the    hearts   of  men,   is   one

heart    made    glad   by   this    persional  which  it  were  well  if  we  more  distinctly

attention.     If  ever  man  wanted  such  recognised  and  completely  confided  in.

attentions  it  must   have   been   Saul,  ....  It  is  much  better,  easier,  safer,

when  he  found  himself  all  at  once  king  more  dignified  to  get  at  men's  hearts

over  Israel.  .  .  .  The  election  is  over,  through  God's  power  over  them,  than

the  excitement  is  pa^t,  its  bustle  Gub-  to    seek   their  good   opinion   by   any

sided.    He  must  go  home  as  well  as  lower  efi'ort. — Miller.


120


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  bookl.


CHAPTER  XL

Critical  AND  Expository  TToTES. — Ver.  1.  "Nahash.**  He  was  kinfj  of  the  children  ol
Ammon,  as  appears  from  chap.  xii.  Vl  ;  2  Sam.  x.  1,  2,  xvii.  27.  lie  seems  to  have  been  con-
nected with  the  family  of  David,  since  Abigail,  David's  sister,  was  the  daughter  (perhaps
meaning  grand-daughter),  of  Nahash  (2  Sam.  xvii.  25  ;  1  Chron.  ii.  16,  17),  and  perhaps,  in
consequence  of  this  connection,  was  very  friendly  to  David.  Even  after  the  destructive  war
with  his  son  Harun,  in  which  Uriah  fell,  and  when  David  was  in  flight  and  banishment,  we  find
another  son  of  Nahash,  Shobi,  showing  him  marked  kindness.  (Biblical  Dictionary.)  "According
to  chap.  xii.  12,  the  threatening-  war  with  the  Ammonites  was  the  immediate  occasion  of  the
demand  for  a  king.  Naturally  therefore,  Nahash,  having  before  made  his  preparations,  entered
the  Israelitish  territory  soon  after  the  king  was  chosen  and  confirmed."  ( Erdmann.)  "Jabesli-
GUead."  According  to  Josephus,  this  city  was  the  capital  of  Gilead,  and  was  probably  on  the  site
of  the  present  ruins  of  El-Deir,  on  the  south  side  of  the  Wady  Jabis,  not  far  to  the  north  of
Helaweh,  near  the  ancient  road  that  leads  to  Beisan.  The  Ammonites  had  long  claimed  the
right  to  the  possession  of  Gilead,  and  had  been  subdued  by  Jephthah.

Ver.  2.  "On  tliis  condition,"  etc.  "The  left  eye  would  be  covered  with  the  shield  in  battle:
the  right  eye  was  needed  for  aiming  the  spear  ;  they  would  therefore  be  no  better  than  blind  if
they  lost  their  right  eye."  C  Wordsworth,  j  "Lay  it  for  a  reproacli,."  etc  "He  sought  to
avenge  upon  the  people  of  Israel  the  shame  of  the  defeat  which  Jephthah  had  inflicted  on  the
Ammonites."  (Kiel.  J

Ver.  3.  "  If  there  is  no  one  who  saves  us,"  "  TL'o  assumption  of  this  as  possible,  and  the
fact  that  they  sent  to  erery  region  of  Israel,  shows  that  in  this  transition-period  from  the  Judges
to  the  King-dom,  in  spite  of  what  Samuel  liad  done  to  inspire  unity  of  action,  the  old  division  of
powers  in  tribal  isolation  and  the  consequent  weakness  against  enemies  still  contm\xed.{Erdmann.)

Ver.  4.  "Told  the  tidings  in  the  ears  of  tho  people."  Either  they  were  not  aware  of
the  election  of  Saul,  as  Keil  supposes,  or  they  did  not  approve  of  his  appointment,  or  he  was  not
in  Gibeah  and  did  not  return  from  his  ordinary  occupation  until  the  message  had  been  delivered.

Ver.  5,  **What  aileth  the  people?"  Even  the  men  of  Gibeah  did  not  apply  to  Saul,  which
seems  to  show  that  he  was  not  held  in  much  esteem  in  his  native  city.

Ver.  6.  "And  the  Spirit  of  God."  This  time  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  him,  as  upon  the
Judges  before  him,  as  a  Spirit  of  supernatural  energy  and  power — compare  Judges  iii.  10,  v.  34,
xi.  29,  etc. — (Biblical  Dictionary).

Ver.  7.  "And  he  took  a  yoke  of  oxen,"  etc.  "  This  was  a  symbolical  action,  which  struck
the  mind  more  than  words  could  have  done  "  (GlcricusJ,  and  "  was  suited  to  the  character  and
habits  of  an  agricultural  and  pastoral  ipeople." ( Jainicson. )  "After  Samuel."  "The  introduction
of  Samuel's  name  is  a  proof  that  Saul,  even  as  king,  still  recognised  the  authority  which  Samuel
possessed  in  Israel  as  prophet  of  Jehovah."  (Kiel.)  "And  the  fear  of  the  Lord  fell,"  etc.
"Jehovah  is  not  equivalent  to  Elohim,  nor  is  the  fear  of  Jehovah  in  the  sense  of  fear  of  His
punishment,  but  a  fear  inspired  by  Jehovah."  (Kiel. J  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  which  impelled
Saul  to  this  noble  and  vigorous  action,  so  strangely  contrasted  with  his  former  quiet  life  behind
the  plough,  laid  hold  at  the  same  time  on  the  whole  nation,  so  that  it  was  suddenly  lifted  up,  as
it  were  involuntarily,  in  the  uniting  and  strengthening  power  of  this  Spirit  from  above,  to  a  new
life  before  God  (in  His  fear)  and  within  itself  (in  unity  and  union)  against  the  enemies  of  the
theocracy."  (Erdmann.J

Ver.  8.  "  Bezek."  "  In  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  in  the  plain  of  Jezreel,  not  far  from  Bethshean,
at  about  as  great  an  elevation  as  Jabesh,  according  to  Eusebius  (Onomasticon)  seventeen
Bonian  miles  north  of  Nablous,  on  the  road  to  Scjthopolis."  {Erdmann.)  *' The  children  of
Israel,"  etc.  "  This  separate  mention  of  Israel  and  Judah  smacks  of  the  times  that  folloAved
the  division  of  the  Israelites  into  two  kingdoms."  [Olericus.)  "  The  numbers  will  not  appear
too  large  if  we  bear  in  mind  that  the  allusion  is  not  to  a  regular  army,  but  that  Saul  had
summoned  all  the  people  to  a  general  levy."  {Keil.)  "  That  the  large  and  powerful  tribe  of
Judah  has  the  relatively  small  number  (30,000)  of  warriors  over  against  the  300,000  of  Israel,
is  due  to  the  fact  that  a  large  part  of  its  territory  was  in  the  possession  of  the  Philistines,  as
to  whose  further  advance  more  care  had  to  be  taken,  now  that  the  north-eastern  frontier  of  the
country  was  threatened  by  the  Ammonites."  {Erdmann.)

Ver.  11.  "On  the  morrow,"  etc.  "Crossing  the  Jordan — probably  by  the  upper  ford  opposite
Wady  Jabis,  which  comes  down  from  the  east  into  the  Jordan  opposite  Beisan — in  the  evening,
Saul  marched  his  army,  all  night  according  to  J osephus,  thirty  invlongs.'"  {Janiieson.)  "Into
the  midst  of  the  host."  "  Of  the  Ammonites  who  had  gone  forth  to  meet  the  sally  of  the
men  of  Jabesh,  and  found  themselves  between  them  and  Sauls  companies."  {Wordsworth.)^

130


CHAP.  XI.  HO  Ml  L  ETIO  COMMENT  A  RY :  SA  M  UEL,


"They  wliich  remr-.ino  I  were  scattered."  JoKcphus  adds  that  they  made  a  great  slau^diter —
Nahash  beinj,'  amongst  the  number  of  the  slain— and  pursued  the  fugitives  in  a  complete  rout
aeross  the  desert."  {Jamieson.)

Ver.  12.  "And  the  pco>le  said  unto  Samuel."  "  To  wh  ^ra  they  still  looked  as  their  ruler,
and  whose  presence  is  mentioned  to  show  Saul's  moderation  and  clemency  at  this  time  ;  for  it
was  not  Samuel  but  Saul  who  interfered  to  rescue  those  who  had  despised  him."  (  Wordsworth.)

Ver.  13.  "And  Saul  said."  "An  evidence  that  Saul  was  beginning  to  gain  confidence
under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God."  {Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  14.  "  Gilgal."  Doubtless  the  Gilgal  mentioned  in  chapter  x.  1.  Most  commentators
think  it  was  the  one  in  the  Jordan  valley.  See  notes  on  chapter  vii.  16.  "A  very  appropriate
place,  formerly  the  camp  of  Joshua  (Josh.  v.  9  and  vi.  10),  and  connected  with  those  glorious
victories  which  God  had  wrought  by  his  hand  when  He  first  settled  Israel  in  Canaan."
( Wordsworth. )

Ver.  15.  "And  there  they  made  Saul  king  before  the  Lord."  "  These  words  mean  nothing
more  than  the  solemn  announcement  and  presentation  of  Saul  before  the  nation  as  divinely
appointed  king  in  consequence  of  the  divine  legitimation  given  by  his  brilliant  exploit  ao-ainst
the  Ammonites.  The  *  before  the  Lord  '  indicates  the  essential  difference  between  this  act,
and  the  proclamation  and  homage  at  Mizpah,  marking  the  religious  act  of  installation  sealed
with  a  solemn  offering,  by  which  Saul  was  formerly  and  solemnly  consecrated  to  his  office  by  the
invisible  God-kiui:."  {Erdmann.)  "The  late  period  at  which  the  regal  form  of  government
was  established  in  Israel  is  an  evidence  of  the  Divine  origin  of  the  law,  which  in  a  certain
degree  provides  for  it,  and  restrains  it.  It  was  not  unproductive  of  advantage  to  the  permanent
interests  of  religion  that  this  great  change  was  delayed  by  Providence  until  the  Mosaic  law  had
subsisted  long  enough  to  prove  that  its  first  establishment  had  not  originated  in  any  human
policy,  and  that  its  subsequent  support  was  independent  of  any  human  power."  {Graves.)


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PABAGRAPH.—Verses  1-3,

The  Ammonite  Invasion  of  Jabesh-Gilead.

I.  Times  of  weakness  are  times  of  undesired  visitation,  When  a  man  is
commercially  weak,  and  when  he  has  least  desire  to  see  the  face  of  those  who
will  add  to  his  embarrassments,  then  is  the  time  when  they  are  most  certain  to
visit  him.  A  visit  from  his  creditors  would  not  affright  him  if  he  had  where-
with to  meet  their  demands,  but  the  very  fact  that  his  resources  are  inadequate
makes  thom  more  likely  to  visit  him.  Especially  if  he  has  a  creditor  who  is
unkindly  disposed  towards  him,  that  creditor's  visit  will  be  most  undesired  ;
but  a  visit  from  him  may  be  most  certainly  looked  for.  So  there  are  times
when  the  soul  is  depressed — when  many  things  seem  to  combine  to  make  a  man
morally  weak,  and  that  is  the  time  when  he  may  most  certaiidy  expect  a  visit
from  his  great  spiritual  adversary.  The  tempter,  by  bringing  up  all  his  forces
to  assault  the  soul  at  such  a  time,  reveals  his  watchful  subtlety  and  his  power
to  measure  the  resources  of  the  human  soul.  In  times  of  mental  weakness
from  weakness  of  body,  or  from  especially  harassing  circumstances,  we  feel  least
of  all  to  desire  to  have  to  do  battle  with  a  strong  temptation  ;  yet  tlien  is  the
time  when  it  is  almost  certain  to  assault  us.  The  devil  came  to  Christ  when  He
was  physically  weak  from  forty  days'  fasting,  and  when,  without  doubt.  His
human  soul  was  depressed  in  consequence  (Matt.  iv.  2).  And  again,  when  He
hung  upon  the  cross  in  great  pain  of  body  and  sorrow  of  soul,  he  tem[)ted  Him
through  ids  emissaries  with  the  taunt,  "  He  saved  others,  Himself  He  cannot
save ;  if  Thou  he  the  Son  of  God,  come  down  from  the  cross  "  (Mark  xv.  30).
The  geographical  position  of  Jabesh-Gilead  made  its  inhabitants  at  all  times
less  able  to  defend  themselves  from  the  common  national  enemies  than  the
people  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan.  Being  so  far  from  the  centre  of  govern-
ment, they  were  at  all  times  peculiarly  exposed  to  danger.  They  do  not  appear
at  this  time  to  have  taken  part  in  the  national  movement  towards  unity  which

131


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL,  book  l.


had  drawn  together  and  strengthened  the  great  mass  of  the  Israelitish  nation,
and  they  were  consequently  much  less  able  to  defend  tliernselves  than  most  of
their  fellow-countrymen.  As  a  natural  consequence,  their  enemies  chose  this
time  to  invade  them  and  to  insult  them.  At  a  time  when,  by  reason  of  their
tribal  isolation  as  well  as  their  defenceless  geograpliical  position,  they  had  most
to  dread  from  a  visit  of  the  Ammonites,  at  this  time  the  visit  was  made.

II.  Times  of  weakness  subject  men  to  the  insolence  of  their  enemies.  A  con-
sciousness that  we  are  strong,  either  pliysically  or  in  our  circumstances,  has  a
wonderful  tendency  to  make  men  treat  us  civilly.  A  consciousness  tliat  we  are
spiritually  strong  will  tend  to  make  our  spiritual  and  invisible  enemies  less
daring  in  their  assaults.  A  pugilist,  in  the  presence  of  one  who  is  his  equal  in
strength  and  stature,  restrains  bis  natural  insolence.  If  he  meets  a  man  who  is
bigger  and  stronger  than  bimself,  he  becomes  quite  deferential.  But  bring  hiui
face  to  face  with  a  man  of  half  his  own  size  and  strength,  and  he  will  probably
insult  him.  And  so  it  is  with  the  strength  and  weakness  of  social  position.  The
wise  man  says  that  "the  rich  man's  wealth  is  his  strong  city"  (Prov.  x.  15),  and
in  this  he  often  shelters  himself  as  in  a  fortress,  and  shoots  forth  arrows  of
scornful  contempt  and  insolence  upon  those  who  are  socially  dependent  upon
him,  and  who  are  consequently  too  weak  to  retaliate.  And  what  is  true  in
relation  to  individuals  is  true  also  of  nations.  The  strong  nations  of  the  earth
are,  alas  !  often  found  insolently  regardless  of  the  rights  of  those  who  are  too
weak  to  defend  their  own  liberties.  Nahash  would  not  have  confronted  the
men  of  Jabesh-Giload  with  so  insolent  an  air,  and  proposed  to  them  terms  so
humiliating,  if  they  had  not  been  in  his  eyes  in  so  defenceless  a  condition.

III.  Times  of  visitation  from  insolent  enemies  should  drive  us  to  the  strong
for  help.  It  was  wise  of  the  men  of  Gilead  not  to  attempt  to  meet  their  enemies
in  their  own  strength.  It  is  most  unwise  of  men  to  be  too  proud  to  acknowledge
their  own  weakness.  While  it  is  unmanly  to  be  always  depending  upon  others
for  help — while  a  man  is  bound  to  exert  himself  to  the  utmost  to  free  himself
from  difficulties — a  refusal  to  seek  help  from  a  stronger  fellow-creature  is  some-
times sinful.  God  has  ordained  that  the  strength  of  some  should  supplement
the  weakness  of  others,  and  the  inequality  of  men  in  this  respect  is  intended  to
bind  them  to  each  other.  When,  therefore,  a  man  in  distress  from  which  he
cannot  extricate  himself,  chooses  ruin  rather  than  the  aid  of  a  stronger  arm
than  his  own,  he  refuses  to  fall  in  with  a  Divine  ordination.  And  this  truth
can  be  extended  to  the  help  which  can  come  only  from  an  arm  which  is  stronger
than  the  arm  of  flesh.  Times  of  especial  trial  and  temptation  should  make
men  feel  their  dependence  upon  Omnipotent  strength,  and  if  they  do  not  drive
them  to  seek  help  from  the  strong  God,  they  fail  to  fulfil  the  design  of  Him
who  either  sent  them  for  that  purpose,  or  permitted  them  to  happen  that  He
might  be  glorified  in  delivering  those  who  call  upon  Him  in  distress.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Verse  2.     In  spiritual  things  this  is  to  their  Master,  Christ)  as  the  price  of

precisely  what  is  done  by  the  Bishop  communion  with  himself.      If  we  are

of  Rome.      He    is    a    "  Nahash    the  willing  to  allow  him  to  "  thrust  out

Ammonite  "  in  the  Catholic  Church  of  our  right  eyes,"  then  he  will  allow  us

Christ.     He  requires  of  all  Christians  to  communicate  with  himself,  but  not

to  make  a  surrender  of  their  reason,  otherwise. —  Wordsworth,
conscience,  and  their  will  (which  belong
132


CHAP.  XI.  IWMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OP  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  4-15.

Saul's  First  Victory.

I.  Men  need  an  occasion  to  reveal    their  qualifications   for  special  and

important  service.  Mucli  power  lies  hidden  in  the  worhl,  because  it  lias  never
met  with  an  occasion  to  call  it  ont — becanse  it  has  never  been  biou;;ht  into
contact  with  the  combination  of  circumstances  needed  to  make  it  manilesl..  The
power  by  which  men  send  their  tlionghts  round  the  world  by  the  telegraph  wire,
or  make  their  words  audible  at  a  distance  by  means  of  the  telephone,  has  been
in  the  world  ever  since  its  creation,  but  it  has  only  been  nnide  manifest  in
modern  times,  because  men  have  only  lately  learned  how  to  give  it  an  occasion
to  reveal  its  mighty  and  wonderful  capabilities.  If  one  saw  an  acorn  or  a  corn-
seed  for  the  first  time,  and  was  ignorant  of  the  process  of  germination,  he  would
not  dream  of  the  wondrous  ca})abilities  which  lay  hidden  within  ti.em.  And  if
they  were  always  kept  above  the  ground  or  planted  in  an  unsuitable  soil,  or  if
the  rain  and  sun  never  reached  them,  the  hidden  power  within  them  would
remain  hidden  for  ever.  And  so  it  is  with  the  mental  and  spiritual  capabilities
of  men.  They  may  be  there,  but  they  need  an  occasion  to  call  them  forth.  A
soldier  may  be  possessed  of  courage  enough  to  head  a  forlorn  hope,  or  of  en-
durance enough  to  sustain  a  long-continued  siege,  but  if  his  lot  is  cast  in  a  time
of  peace,  his  capabilities  in  this  direction  will  never  be  known  even  to  himself.
There  are  to-day  many  members  of  the  Church  nulitant  who  are  as  courageous
and  faithful  as  the  martyrs  of  the  fifteenth  century — many  good  soldiers  of
Jesus  Christ  who  would  prove  themselves  as  valiant  for  the  truth  as  those  who
have  sealed  it  with  their  hlood  in  bygone  ages.  But  the  s[)iritual  power  within
them  is  hidden  even  from  themselves,  because  the  occasion  to  reveal  it  is
wanting.  It  is  evident  that  at  this  period  of  Saul's  history  the  people  of  Israel
were  ignorant  of  his  mental  ability — they  did  not  think  he  possessed  the  courage
and  the  tact  necessary  to  lead  them  to  battle  and  to  victory,  but  the  attack  of
the  Ammonite  host  furnished  the  needed  occasion  for  the  revelation  of  what  was
in  him.

II.  When  God  has  called  a  man  to  any  special  work,  he  need  not  seek  the
occasion,  because  the  occasion  will  seek  him.  When  a  vessel  has  been
built  for  the  ocean  it  will  be  certain  to  find  an  occasion  to  show  what  it  is  made
of — the  elements  will  seek  it  out  and  test  the  strength  of  its  timbers  and  its
power  to  wtather  the  storm.  Every  wave  that  lashes  its  sides  will  furidsh
an  occasion  for  it  to  prove  what  it  can  do.  So  when  God  has  destined  a  man
to  any  special  service  in  the  world,  there  is  no  need  for  that  man  to  go  out  of
his  way  to  find  an  occasion  to  reveal  what  is  in  him.  He  who  called  him  to  the
work  will  likewise  give  him  the  opportunity  to  reveal  what  he  is  fit  for.  Saul
had  been  anointed  to  the  kingship  of  Israel  by  the  prophet  of  Cod,  and  his
appointment  had  been  ratified  by  lot,  which  was  also  an  expression  of  the
Divine  wilL  He  could,  therefore,  have  felt  no  doubt  in  the  matter.  But  he
did  not  seek  an  occasion  of  displaying  his  fitness  for  the  post  of  honour  and
responsibility  to  which  he  had  been  called,  but  returned  to  the  occupation  of
his  early  life  apparently  in  the  belief  that  the  occasion  would  not  be  wanting  in
which  he  might  prove  his  ability  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  his  new  position.  And
the  occasion  sought  him  when  the  men  of  Cibeah  told  him  the  tidings  brought
by  the  messengers  of  .Jabesh.  So  if  any  man  feels  that  Cod  has  called  him  to
any  special  work  in  the  world,  he  need  not  seek  an  occasion  to  prove  his  fitness
for  it,  for  if  there  has  been  the  call,  He  who  called  him  \\\\\  not  let  the  occasion
be  wanting.  If  he  gives  himself  up  to  Divine  guidance,  and  faithfully  discharges
the  duty  which  comes  next  to  hand,  Cod  will  take  care  of  the  rest.     Paul

133


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  i.


doubtless  knew  tliat  God  luid  chosen  him  to  bear  his  name  "before  kings"  (Acts
ix.  15),  but  he  did  not  go  out  of  his  way  to  find  an  occasion  to  do  it.  He  who
had  destined  him  to  the  service  provided  the  opportunity  for  him  (Acts  xxvi.  2,
2  Tim.  iv.  16).

III.  The  action  of  one  man  is  needed  to  make  many  men  one  in  action.  Men

must  have  leaders — they  must  have  some  one  around  whom  tliey  can  rally  as  a
centre  of  unity  if  they  are  to  band  together  to  do  anything  in  the  world.  And
when  one  man  of  energy  and  ability  concentrates  all  his  own  powers  to  a  certain
end,  other  men  of  less  energy  and  ability  will  concentrate  around  him,  and  their
united  efforts  will  become  a  mighty  power.  The  people  of  Israel  at  this  time  do
not  ai)i)car  to  have  been  unwilling  to  help  their  brethren  of  Gilead,  but  they
did  nothing  but  weep  until  Saul  took  the  initiative  and  called  upon  them  to
follow  him.  When  Saul's  spirit  was  stirred  within  him  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to
summon  all  Israel  into  the  field,  the  fear  of  the  Lord  fell  upon  the  people,  and
they  came  out  "as  one  man"  (see  marginal  rendering).  Granted  that  there  was
a  supernatural  influence  at  work  here,  is  not  the  Spirit  of  God  behind  all  such
great  movements  when  their  aim  is  the  freedom  of  the  human  race  or  of  any
part  of  it  ?  And  does  not  God  always  move  the  mass  to  united  action  by  first
moving  the  heart  of  one  man  to  take  bold  and  decisive  action  ?  The  decisive
action  of  Luther  at  Worms  was  the  fruit  of  the  movement  of  the  Spirit  of  God
upon  his  soul,  and  it  was  the  means  of  inciting  the  Protestant  princes  of
Germany  to  united  action  in  the  defence  of  religious  liberty.

IV.  A  conquest  of  personal  enemies  by  forgiveness  is  more  honourable  to  a
man  than  a  conquest  of  national  enemies  by  the  sword.  One  of  Saul's  successors
has  left  it  u()on  record  that  "  he  who  ruleth  his  spirit  is  better  than  he  that
taketh  a  city"  (Prov.  xvi.  32);  and  it  is  so  because  the  first  victory  is  more
difficult  to  win,  and  is  far  more  complete  and  lasting  than  the  second.  There
are  many  men  who  are  physically  courageous  with  a  kind  of  animal  courage,  who
would  not  miss  an  opportunity  to  avenge  a  personal  insult  if  the  occasion
offered — it  is  harder  to  overcome  malice  in  the  heart  than  an  enemy  on  the  field.
But  he  who  can  do  the  first  overcomes  his  enemy  far  more  completely,  for  in  the
latter  case  it  is  only  the  body  of  the  enemy  which  is  overpowered  by  superior
physical  strength,  and  he  will  be  ever  on.  the  watch  to  renew  the  attack.  But
to  overcome  a  man  by  forgiveness  takes  the  man's  heart  captive,  and,  by  turning
him  into  a  friend,  makes  it  certain  that  the  conquest  is  a  lasting  one.  Saul
showed  his  fitness  to  be  a  king  by  his  brilliant  victory  over  the  Ammonites,  but  he
showed  it  more  by  his  victory  over  himself  when  he  said,  concerning  his  former
personal  enemies,  "  There  shall  not  a  man  be  put  to  death  this  day."


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.  6.  Withoutthiszeal  noanointed  excitability,  from  a  momentary  ebulli-

one  may  be  found.     For  this  word  will  tion  of  natural  compassion,  or  from  being

always  hold  good :  "  Cursed  be  he  that  overcome  by  human  displeasure   and

doeth  the  work  of  the  Lord  sloth  fully,"  anger.     Not  the  strange  fire  which  the

(or  negligently)  (Jer.  xlviii.  10).     But  sons  of  Aaron  took,  but  the  fire  from

in  truth  zeal  alone  is  not  the  right  or-  the   holy  altar,  the  Spirit  of   God —

nament    of    the    warriors    of    Christ,  let    us    learn  it    from    Saul ! — must

Prove  thy  zeal,  whether  it  is  not  per-  overmaster,     inflame,     inspire     us. —

haps  mixed  with  flesh  and  blood,  or  Disselhoff.
even    proceeds    altogether  from    this

fountain,  and  know  that  zeal  for  the  Ver.  7.  There  are  two  sorts  of  fear.

Lord's  c;mse  should  not  flow  from  mere  One  is  a  selfish,  reward-seeking  fear.
184


CHAP.  XI.


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.


In  this  we  avo  caring  for  ourselves,  and
that  is  properly  human  fear.  But
there  is  also  a  fear  of  the  Lord,  the
fear  that  one  has  for  His  sake  alone,
when  one  fears  lest  the  Lord  has  been
grieved  through  our  own  sins,  or  those
of  others,  or  lest  we  or  others  should
not  have  sufficiently  glorified  Him  in
ourselves.  — Berlenherger  Bible.

Ver.  9.  Bold  assurance  of  faith,  wliich
in  a  great  undertaking,  anticipates  its
success  as  an  accomplished  fact. —
Langes  Commentary.

Ver.  13.  The  victory  over  the  foe
is  to  Saul  nothing  but  a  saving  act  of
God  Himself.  He  regards  himself  as
simply  the  instrument  of  God.  This
is  the  ground  for  the  rejection  of  the
demand  ;  none  should  die  that  day.
Thereby  he  gained  a  victory  (1)  over
liimself — he  restrains  himself  in  the
exercise  of  a  right  ;  (2)  over  the  anger
of  those  who  demanded  that  justice
should  be  executed;  (3)  over  his  former
opponents ;  (4)  over  the  whole  people,
who  must  have  been  carried  along  by
him  in  the  path  of  noble  moral  con-
duct, and  lifted  above  themselves  to
the  height  on  which  he  stood. — Langes
Commentary.

As  in  God,    so    in   His   deputies.


mercy  and  justice  should  be  insepara-
ble; wheresoever  these  two  go  asunder,
government  follows  them  into  distrac-
tion and  ends  in  ruin.  If  it  had  been
a  wrong  offered  to  Samuel,  the  for-
bearance of  the  revenge  had  not  been
so  commendable,  although  on  the  day
of  so  hapi)y  a  deliverance  perhaps  it
had  not  been  unseasonable;  a  man
hath  reason  to  be  most  bold  with  him-
self; it  is  no  praise  of  mercy,  since  it
is  a  fault  of  justice  to  remit  another
man's  satisfaction;  his  own  he  may. —
Bp.  Hall

Ver.  15.  How  many  instructive
memorials  of  God's  power  and  love  to
His  people  might  suggest  themselves
to  Saul  at  Gilgal  (see  Critical  Notes).
How  many  pledges  and  earnests  to
himself  if  he  imitated  Joshua  in  faith
and  obedience  to  God,  especially  at
Gili^al  1 —  Wordsworth.

How  absurdly  are  our  judgments  led
away  by  merely  outward  circumstances.
Saul  was  not  less  the  King  of  Israel,  when
following  his  herds  at  Gibeah,  than
when  returning  from  the  conquest  of
the  Ammonites.  His  title  rested  on  the
Divine  ai)pointment,  and  was  not  more
sacred  because  surrounded  by  the
lustre  of  a  victory ;  yet  it  appeared  so
in  the  eyes  of  the  Israelites. — Lindsay.


CHAPTER  XII.


Critical  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1.    "And  Samuel  said,**  etc.     "The  time  and

place  of  the  followiug  address  are  not  given,  but  it  is  evident  from  the  connection  with  the
preceding  chapter,  and  still  more  from  the  introduction  and  the  entire  contents  of  the  address,
that  it  was  delivered  on  the  renewal  of  the  monarchy  at  QWg^V^  ( Kcll. )  *'  I  have  hearkened."
etc.  These  words  correspond  exactly  to  the  words  in  chap,  viii.  7,  21.  Samuel  at  the  same
time  testifies  indirectly  to  the  fact  that  he  had  therein  obeyed  the  command  of  God  :  "  Hearken
to  the  voice  of  the  people."  ( Enbnavn. )  "  By  appointing  a  great  part  of  this  chapter  (viz.  to
ver.  22)  to  be  read  in  the  synagogues  as  a  Haplitarah  to  Numbers  xvi.,  xvii.  and  xviii.,  the
ancient  Hebrew  Church  suggests  the  parallel  between  this  speech  of  Samuel  and  the  address
of  Moses  in  reply  to  Korah  and  his  rebellious  associates."  (Wordsworth.)

Ver.  2.  "  My  sons  are  with  you,"  "  They  are  reduced  to  the  condition  of  private  persons,
and  are  subjects  of  the  king,  as  ye  are."  (Wordsworth. )  "Perhaps  only  an  amplification  of  the
words  *  /  am  old  and  grey-headed.'  His  grown-up  sons  were  evidences  of  his  age.  Possibly,
however,  a  tinge  of  mortified  feeling  at  the  rejection  of  himself  and  his  family,  mixed  \vitii  a
desire  to  recommend  his  sons  to  the  good-will  of  the  nation,  is  at  the  bottom  of  this  mention
of  them."  (Miblical  Commentary,)


IIOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  i.


Ver.  3.  "  Wit  ess  against  me."  "The  venerable  judge,  in  resigninof  his  magisterial  authority,
challenged  the  most  minute  inquiry  into  every  act  of  his  administration  .  .  .  History  scarcely
anywhere  presents  a  more  striking  examjile  of  the  moral  sublime.  Grotius  compares  Samuel  to
Aristides."  ( Jamieson. )  '*  What  Samuel  here  affirms  of  his  official  career  stands  in  direct  con-
trast with  what  is  said  in  chap,  viii.  3,  of  the  blameworthy  conduct  of  his  sons  ;  since  it  is
inconceivable  that  he  did  not  know,  and  had  not  now  in  mind  the  covetousness  and  jDerversion  of
judgment  and  the  resulting  discontent  of  the  people,  which  was  a  co-factor  in  their  desire  for  a
royal  government.  The  mode,  as  well  as  the  fact  and  contents  of  the  following  justification,
naturally  suggest  the  statement  in  chap.  viii.  3,  and  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  this  was  the
occasion  of  this  (otherwise  surprising)  justification  of  his  official  career,  on  which  in  the  eyes  of
the  people  a  shadow  had  fallen  in  consequence  of  the  oppi  isite  conduct  of  his  sons."  (Erd)tiann.)
"His  anointed:"  •*  i.e.,  of  course,  king  Saul.  The  title  Messiah,  or  anointed,  had  been  given  to
the  High  Priests  (Lev.  iv.  3-5,  etc.),  and  in  Hannah's  prophetic  song  and  in  the  prophecy  of  the
man  of  God  sent  to  Eli,  prophetic  mention  had  been  made  of  God's  anointed  ;  but  this  must  be
noted  as  the  earliest  instance  of  an  actual  king  of  Israel  bearing  the  title  of  God's  Christ,  and
thus  typifying  the  true  Messiah  or  Christ  of  God.  The  application  of  the  term  anointed  to  Saul,
makes  it  probable  that  he  had  been  publicly  anointed  by  Samuel  at  Gilgal.  The  secret  anointing,
mentioned  at  chap.  x.  i.,  would  not  be  notorious  enough  to  explain  the  phrase  to  the  whole  people
of  l&vskQV^( BihlicalCommentary.)  "To  blind  mine  eyes  terewith,"  rather  "that  I  should  hide
mine  eyes  at  him."  "The  thought  is  not  that  the  judge  covers  his  eyes  from  the  copher  (or
ransom)  that  he  may  not  see  the  bribe,  but  that  he  covers  his  eyes  with  it,  so  as  not  to  see  and
not  to  punish  the  crime  committed."  (Keil.J  **  1  will  restore."  Compare  Zaccheus's  saying,
Luke  xix.  8.     (Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  6.  "It  is  the  Lord  that  advanced,  etc."  Literally  made,  i.e,,  appointed  them  to  their
office.  "  The  word  make  is  to  be  understood  of  those  excellent  gifts  which  God  had  bestowed  on
Moses  and  his  brother  Aaron,  that  He  might  use  their  ministry  in  leading  the  people  out  of
Egypt."  (Calvin.)  "  Observe  the  constant  reference  to  the  Exodus  as  the  well-known  turning
point  of  their  national  life."  (Biblical  Commentary. )

Ver.  7.  "Stand  still,  that  I  may  reason  with  you."  "Both  verbs  have  a  forensic  sense.
They  would  be  better  rendered  stand  up  (as  if  in  a  court  of  justice)  that  I  may  contend  with  you
before  the  Lord.  Samuel  is,  as  it  were,  the  advocate  of  Jehovah,  vindicating  the  righteousness
of  His  dealings  with  Israel,  and  throwing  all  the  blame  of  their  calamities  on  themselves
(compare  Stephen's  speech.  Acts  vii.)."  (Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  9.  "  Samuel  here  introduces  individual  facts  from  the  times  of  the  Judges,  but  only
prominent  events  as  they  occurred  to  him,  neglecting  their  order,  which  was  in  itself  unessential."
(Erdmann,)

Ver.  11.  "Bedan."  This  name  does  not  occur  in  the  book  of  Judges,  and  only  in  one  other
place  in  the  Bible  (1  Chron.  vii.  17).  As  Samuel  here  places  it  between  the  names  of  two  well-
known  Hebrew  deliverers,  many  commentators  agree  with  Kiel  in  believing  that  it  is  a  co])yist's
error  for  Barak,  the  Hebrew  letters  in  both  words  being  nearly  identical  in  form.  Samuel.
Some  commentators  here  substitute  Samson,  thinking  it  more  natural  than  that  the  prophet
should  mention  himself,  and  omit  the  greatest  of  the  judges.  But  Erdmann  remarks  tliat
"  Samuel  could  mention  himself  without  exciting  surprise,  because  he  was  conscious  of  his  high
mission  as  judge  and  deliverer,  and  the  profound  significance  of  his  office  for  the  history  of
Israel  was  universally  recognised.  By  this  menti<m  of  himself  he  honours  not  himself  but  the
Lord,  who  had  made  him  (like  Moses  and  Aaron  before)  what  he  was  (comp.  vers,  6-9).
Besides,  it  was  under  him  that  the  yoke  of  the  forty  years  dominion  of  the  Philistines  was
broken,  which  work  of  deliverance  Samuel  was  only  able  to  begin."

Ver.  12.  "And  when  ye  saw  that  Nahash."  "It  hence  appears  not  improbable  thatNahash
had  made  incursions  into  the  Hebrew  territory  before  the  Israelites  had  demanded  a  king,  and
after  his  election  had  returned,  and  begun  the  siege  of  Jabesh."  (Clericus).

Ver.  14.  "Translate  If  ye  will  fear  the  Lord,  and  serve  IJim,  and  obey  His  voice,  so  as  not  to
rebel  against  the  mouth  of  the  Lord,  and  will  be  (both  you  and  your  king  that  reiyns  over  you)
followers  after  the  Lord  your  God.^^  (Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  17.  "  Is  it  not  wheat-harvest  to-day  ?"  The  wheat-harvest  occurs  in  Palestine  between
the  middle  of  May  and  the  middle  of  June.  "  In  ordinary  seasons,  from  the  cessation  of  the
showers  in  spring  until  their  commencement  in  October  and  November,  rain  never  falls,  and  the
sky  is  usually  serene."  (Robinson.)  " Thuuderings,  as  'the  voices  of  God'  (Exod.  ix.  28),  are
the  harbingers  of  judgment,"  (Keil.)

Ver.  18.  "Feared  the  Lord  and  Samuel."  "  Compare  the  very  similar  phrase  (Exod.  xiv,  31)."
(Biblical  Commentary. )  ^^ Samuel  is  added  because  he — as  before  b^;  his  word,  so  by  his  intro-
duction of  this  manifestation,  wonderful  and  contrary  to  the  ordinary  course  of  nature,  of  God's
wrath— had  displayed  himself  as  instrument  of  the  judicial  power  and  glory  of  the  God-king."
(Erdmann,.)

136


CHAP.  XII.  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


Ver.  21.  "Vain  things,"  i.e.,  the  idols,  "because  tTiey  are  vain ;"  literally  emptiness,  i.e.,
worthiiss  bclnjs.

Ver.  22.  "  For  His  great  name's  sake,"  "  i.e.,  for  the  great  name  which  He  had  acquired  in
the  sight  of  all  tlie  n  itions  by  the  marvellous  guidance  of  Israel  thus  far  to  preserve  it  against
misapprehension  and  blasphemy."  ( Kell.)

Ver.  24.  "How  great  things,"  etc.  Some  refer  this  to  the  miracle  mentioned  in  verse  18,  but
the  immediate  connection  seems  to  refer  it  to  the  mighty  deliverances  of  which  Samuel  has  just
been  reminding  them.


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  CHAPTER,

Samuel's  Public  Resignation  of  his  Office.

L  A  change  of  relationship  or  position  naturally  suggests  a  review  of  the
past.  When,  on  a  journey,  we  have  for  some  time  been  travelling  in  one  direc-
tion, and  we  suddenly  come  to  a  turn  in  the  road,  we  very  naturally  stand  for  a
moment  and  look  at  the  path  which  we  have  trodden,  and  which  we  are  now
about  to  quit.  If  we  are  journeying  in  a  country  with  which  we  are  unac-
quainted, such  a  review  will  probably  be  useful  to  us — it  will  help  us  to  a  more
detinite  conception  of  our  whereabouts.  So  when  a  man  is  about  to  enter  into
new  relationships,  whether  of  a  private  or  public  character,  it  is  natural  that  he
should  look  back  upon  the  path  which  he  has  trodden  up  to  the  present
moment,  and  if  he  do  this  in  a  right  spirit  it  will  be  helpful  to  him  in  the
future.  It  is  good  for  a  man  to  do  this  wben  he  is  about  to  undertake  a  position
of  responsibility,  whether  public  or  private  ;  and  it  is  good  for  him  to  do  it  also
when  he  is  about  to  resign  any  office  of  trust,  whether  to  a  single  master  or  to
his  country.  Happy  will  he  be  if  at  such  a  time  he  can,  with  Samuel,  call  God
to  witness  that  he  has  performed  his  duties  faithfully.  Samuel  had,  during  a
long  life,  been  God's  vicegerent  in  Israel ;  his  public  work  was  now  about  to
cease,  and  consequently  his  relationship  to  the  nation  would  be  changed.  It  is
not  in  egotism  or  boastfulness  that  he  recalls  the  manner  in  which  he  has  dis-
charged his  trust,  or  reminds  them  that  by  him  (ver.  11)  God  had  delivered
them  out  of  the  hand  of  their  enemies — such  a  review  of  the  past  was  natural
and  right.  But  Samuel  not  only  looks  back  upon  the  road  by  which  he  has
arrived  at  the  present  turning-point  in  his  life,  he  also  bids  the  people  whom
he  is  addressing  recall  the  steps  by  which  they,  as  a  nation,  had  arrived  at  the
position  in  which  tbey  now  stood.  His  relationship  to  them  was  about  to
undergo  a  change,  which  was  in  some  respects  the  natural  result  of  his  advancing
years,  although  it  was  partly  due  to  the  late  national  movement.  But  they  had
by  their  own  choice  taken  an  entirely  new  position,  and  assumed  entirely  new
responsibilities ;  and  although  their  sinful  self-willed  action  in  the  past  could
not  be  recalled,  yet  many  sins  and  much  misery  might  be  avoided  in  the  future
if  they  now  gratefully  and  humbly  remembered  all  the  way  by  which  the  Lord
their  God  had  led  them.

II.  Whenever  a  nation  rejects  God,  such  rejection  will  be  followed  by  signs  of
God's  displeasure.  The  miracle  which  followed  Samuel's  words  was  a  contirma-
tion  of  their  truth.  It  was  a  token  that  he  was  expressing  the  feelings  of  the
Divine  mind  regarding  Israel's  conduct.  The  conception  which  Israel  now  had
of  a  king  was  not  God's  conception,  and  their  desire  to  have  a  king  like  the
nations  was  a  rejection  of  their  Divine  and  invisible  King.  Hence  this  token  of
His  displeasure.  In  later  days  this  same  nation  rejected  this  Divine  King  when
He  came  to  them  in  human  flesh,  and  they  themselves  then  became  what  they
have  ever  since  remained — a  sign  to  the  entire  human  race  of  the  danger  of  not

137


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  boob  i.

improving  national  privileges.  Nations  who  do  not  find  a  God  and  King  after
their  own  heart  in  Him  who  is  their  riglitfal  sovereign  will  make  one  after  their
own  likeness  (Psa.  1.  21) ;  but  signs  will  not  be  wanting  of  His  displeasure.

Ill-  The  servants  of  God  sin  against  Him  when  they  neglect  to  pray  for
their  fellow  countrymen*  1.  They  ought  to  'pray  for  them  because  they  are
their  fellow  creatures.  Paul,  speaking  by  inspiration,  desires  that  ''supplications,
prayers,  intercessions,  and  giving  of  thanls,  he  male  for  all  men  .  .  .  for
this  is  good  and  acceptable  iti  the  sight  of  God  our  t<aviour ;  who  will  have  all
men  to  be  saved,  and  to  come  unto  the  knowledge  of  the  truth''  (1  Tim.  ii.  1,3.  4.)
2.  Because  national  love  ougJtt  to  be  an  element  in  the  character  of  every  godly
man.  The  best  men  are  ever  deeply  interested  in  the  welfare  of  the  nation  to
which  they  belong.  Paul's  love  to  ''his  brethren,  his  kinsmen  according  to  the
flesh"  notwithstanding  all  that  he  had  suffered  at  their  hands,  was  intense
(Rom.  ix.  1-3).  And  he  who  is  a  true  patriot  cannot  serve  his  country  so
effectually  in  any  other  way  as  by  praying  for  the  godliness  of  the  people,  for  a
•  Mlinii's  n^reatness  depends  upon  the  relation  of  its  individual  members  to  the
Living  God.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.  2.    I  have  hearkened  to  your  Vers.  2,  3.  Samuel's  life  is  both  an

voice,  which  was  so  violent  and  impe-  example  and  a  rebuke.    1.  An  example,

tuous.     Now  you  must  hearken  to  my  To  stand  forth  and  make  so  successful

voice,    and   be   told  that   after   your  an  appeal  must  have  presented  to  Saul

peace-offerings  God  hath  still  a  quarrel  an  illustrious  example  of  personal  ex-

with  you. —  Trapp.  cellence   and   of  public   probity.^    He

God  will  not  let  his  people  run  away  thus  saw  that  it  was  possible  to  live  in
with  the  arrearages  of  their  sins,  but,  high  places  and  be  a  righteous  man  ;
when  they  least  think  of  it,  calls  them  to  administer  the  state,  and  retain  in-
to account.  All  this  while  was  God  tegrity  ;  to  direct  the  concerns  of  mil-
angry  with  their  rejection  of  Samuel  ;  lions,  and  receive  their  spontaneous
yet,  as  if  there  had  been  nothing  but  and  unanimous  approval — truths  which

peace,  He  gives  them  a  victory  over     few  governors  have  ever  found

their  enemies,  He  gives  way  to  their  He  was  also  an  example  to  the  whole

joy  in  their  election God  may  people;    for  the  same  goodness  that

be  angry  enough  with  us,  while  we  out-  made  him  faithful,  with  his  many
wardly  prosper  :  it  is  the  wisdom  of  talents  and  his  many  trusts,  could
God  to  take  His  best  advantages  ;  He  supply  them  with  ability  to  use  theirs
suffers  us  to  go  on  till  we  should  come  with  fidelity.  ^  2.  A  rebuke.  The  un-
to enjoy  the  fruit  of  our  sin,  till  we  impeachable  life  of  Samuel  was  a  great
seem  past  the  danger  either  of  con-  rebuke  to  Israel.  They  had  not  im-
science  or  of  punishment ;  then,  even  proved  his  ministry,  and  had  grown
when  we  begin  to  be  past  the  feeling  weary  of  so  godly  a  regime  as  his.  .  .  .
of  our  sin,  we  shall  begin  to  feel  His  Every  good  man's  life  condemns  the
displeasure  for  our  sins.  This  is  only  world  that  refuses  to  follow  his  way. —
where  He  loves,  where  He  would  both  Steel,
forgive  and  reclaim  :  He  hath  now  to

do  with  His  Israel ;  but  where  He  Ver.  9.  When  God's  people  abandon
means  utter  vengeance.  He  lets  men  Him,  He,  by  virtue  of  the  same  right-
harden  themselves  to  a  reprobate  eousness  which  blesses  them  if  they
senselessness,  and  make  up  their  own  are  faithful,  abandons  them  to  their
measure  without  contradiction  as  pur-  enemies,  who  enslave  and  oppress
posing  to  reckon  with  them  but  once  them.  The  "selling"  refers  to  the
for  ever. — Bp.  Mali,  right  of  the  father  to  sell  his  children
138


CHAP.  XII.


IIOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


as  slaves,  liere  exercisod  by  God  as  the
extnMiie.st  paternal  riglit,  as  it  were.
(Judges  ii.  14;  iii.  sf  iv.  2,  9.  Dent.
xxxii.  10.  Isa.  1.  1 ;  Iii.  3.  Ezek.  xxx.
12.) — Langes  Commentary,

Ver.  13.  In  this  declaration  is  set
forth  the  origin  of  Saul's  kingly  i)()si-
tion— (1)  on  its  human  side,  bj  the
words  :  Whom  ye  have  chosen  ;  (2)
on  its  divine  side,  by  the  words  :
Behohl,  the  Lord  hath  set  a  king  over
3'ou — your  demand  sprang  from  an
evil  root,  yet  hath  the  Lord  granted
it  ;  this  king,  though  chosen  and  de-
manded by  yon,  is  yet  alone  the  work
of  God.  By  these  words  is  confirmed
the  truth,  that  the  Lord  is  and  re-
mains king. — Erdmann,

Vers.  14,15.  Withwhom  or  against
whom  is  the  hand  of  the  Lordf  The
answer  to  this  quej>tion  depends
on  the  following  considerations: — 1.
whether  one  has,  or  has  not,  given
himself  to  be  the  Lord's  with  his
whole  heart— (^a)  in  true  fear  of  God,
(h)  in  true  service  of  God.  2.
Whether  one  is,  or  is  not,  in  his
will  thoroughly  obedient  to  the  will
of  the  Lord — (a)  hearkening  uncon-
ditionally to  His  word,  (^^y)  not  resisting
His  commandments.  3.  Whether  one
is,  or  is  not,  in  his  whole  walk  ready
to  follow  the  Lord  in  His  guidance —
(a)  keeping  in  the  way  pointed  out  by
Him,  (h)  keeping  in  view  the  goal  set
up  hy  Him. — Langes  Commentary.

Here  is  a  precedent  for  preacliers,
who  must  one  while  ciiide  their  people,
another  while  comfort  them,  and  always
pray  for  them.  They  must  turn  them-
selves into  all  shapes  and  fashions  of
speech  and  of  spirit  to  bring  men  home
to  God.  This  is  an  excellent  way  of
preaching,  to  mingle  promises  with
threatenings.  Sour  and  sweet  makes
the  best  sauce. — Trapp,

Verses  16—19.  L  Unseasonable
weather  is  one  of  God's  punishments.
We  suffer  sometimes  from  lack  of  rain
to  moisten  the  earth  and  prevent  the
miseries  of  drought.  Such  a  calamity
was  inflicted  upon  Israel  on  account  of


sin   in  the  days  of  Eh'jah    (1  Kings
xvii.  1).     At  other  times  rain  is  un-
seasonable and  injurious,    as  was  the
case  in  the  present  instance.     It  comes
at  the  call  of  the  prophet,  to  mar  the
fruits  of  the  earth,  and  to  injure  the
harvest,     that     the    people     "might
perceive  their  wickedness  to  be  ^■rea"t."
II-   We  must  ask  for  fair  and  sea-
sonable weather  upon  no  other  con-
dition    than     that     of    repentance.
We  must  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for
repentance,  if  we  expect  that  the  earth
should  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  our
sustenance;    for  God  sometimes   sees
fit  to  withhold  these  blessings,  to  make
us  know  their  worth  by  the  want  of
them.     He   is    sometimes  pleased   to
send  us  an  abundance  of  good  things
to  see   how   we  will   use   them,   and
whether  we  will  grow  better  by  them.
But  if  we   consume  them   upon  our
lusts,  as  Israel  did  here,  instead   of
having  more,  that  whicli  we  have  shall
be  taken  away. — Matthew  Hole.

Men  have  so  many  ways  of  shifting
off  their  own  guilt  that  unless  they  be
taken  in  the  act  they  will  hardly
confess  it,  and  when  convicted  of  the
fact  they  will  deny  the  fault  or  the  mea-
sure. To  cut  off  all  excuses,  therefore,
Samuel  appeals  to  God,  the  highest
judge,  for  His  sentence,  and  dares
trust  to  a  miraculous  conviction.  Had
not  Samuel  before  consulted  with  his
Maker,  and  received  warrant  for  this
act,  that  would  have  been  presumption
which  was  now  a  noble  improvement

of    faith Rather    than

Israel  shall  go  clear  away  with  a  sin,
God  will  accuse  and  arraign  them  from
heaven.  No  sooner  hath  Samuel's
voice  ceased  than  God's  voice  begins.
Every  crack  of  thunder  spake  ven-
geance against  the  rebellious  Israelites,
and  every  drop  of  rain  was  a  witness  of
their  sin.  Now  they  found  that  they
had  displeased  Him  who  rules  in  heaven
by  rejecting  the  man  who  ruled  for
iiim  on  earth. —  Bishop  Hall

The  elements  are  exclusively  under
the  control  of  the  Creator,  and  He
alone  can  say  what  shall  be  in  relation
to  the  clouds ;  yet  for  special  ends —
generally  moral  ends — they  have  occa*

139


nOMILETiG  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL


fiOOK  t.


sionally  been  placed  for  a  season  at
the  service  of  men.  'J'his  instnnce  is
a  parallel  to  that  which  occurred  in
Egypt  (Exod.  ix.  23).

'Ihe  revelation  of  the  Lord's  powei
through  Samuel  has  for  its  aim — L
To  glorify  the  name  of  God,  and  to
exhibit  the  people's  high  calling  as
chosen  people  and  God's  property.
II.  To  show  more  strikingly  the  peo-
ple's sin  and  thereby  induce  sincere
repentance.  III.  To  show  the  peni-
tent people  the  source  of  consolation
and  help,  and  fix  in  their  hearts  the
ground  of  hope  for  future  salvation. —
Langes  Commentary.

Vers.  20,  21.  A  threefold  word  oj
exhortation  to  penitent  sinners.  1.  A
word  reininding  of  past  sin.  "  Ye  have
done  all  this  wickedness."  2.  A  word
consolingly  pointing  to  Divine  grace.
"  Fear  not."  3.  A  word  exhorting  to
fidelity.  **  Turn  not  aside  from  the
Lord. ' ' — La  ages  Com  men  ta  ry,

Ver.  23.  In  this  Samuel  sets  a
glorious  example  to  all  rulers,  showing
them  that  they  should  not  be  led
astray  by  the  ini^ratitude  of  their  sub-
ordinates or  subjects,  and  give  up  on
that  account  all  interest  in  their  wel-
fare, but  should  rather  persevere  all
the  more  in  their  anxiety  for  them. —
Berlenberqer  Bible.

Moses  and  Samuel  are  specified  by
God  as  having  extraordinary  power
with  Him  (Jer.  xv.  1) ;  and  why  ?
Because  they  prayed  for  their  enemies.
—  Wordswoi'th,

Ver.  24.  I.  Fear  and  service  go
together.  Serve  the  Lord  in  fear,
saith  David  (Psa.  ii.  11)  ;  Fear  the
Lord  and  serve  Uim,  saith  Joshua
(Josh.  XX iv.  14)  ;  and,  fear  ever  before
service  ;  for  tliat,  unless  our  service
proceed  from  fear,   it   is   hollow  and

worthless Behold    the    same

tongue  that  bade  them  not  fear  (ver.
20),  now  bids  them  fear;,  and  the
same  Spirit  that  tells  us  they  feared
exceedingly  (ver.  18),  now  enjoins
them  to  fear  more.  What  shall  we
make  of  this  %  Their  other  fear  was
140


at  the  best  initial  ;  for  now  they
began  to  rej^ent :  and,  as  one  says  of
this  kind  of  fear,  that  it  hath  two
eyes  fixed  upon  two  divers  objects,  so
had  this  of  theirs  :  one  eye  looked
upon  the  rain  and  thunder,  the  other
looked  up  to  the  God  that  sent  it.
The  one  of  these  is  borrowed  of  the
slavish  or  hostile  fear,  as  Basil  calls  it,
the  other  of  the  filial ;  for  the  slavish
fear  casts  both  eyes  upon  the  punish-
ment ;  the  filial  looks  with  both  eyes
upon  the  party  offended.  Samuel
would  rectify  and  perfect  this  affec-
tion, and  would  bring  them  from  the
fear  of  slaves,  through  the  fear  of  peni-
tents, to  the  fear  of  sons  :  and  indeed
one  of  these  makes  way  for  another.
It  is  true  that  perfect  love  thrusts  out
fear;  but  it  is  as  true  that  fear  brings
in  that  perfect  love  which  is  joined
with  the  reverence  of  sons  :  like  the
needle  or  bristle,  as  one  compares  it,
draws  in  the  thread  after  it.  The
compunction  of  fear,  saith  Gregory,
fits  the  mind  for  the  compunction  of
love.  We  shall  never  rejoice  truly  in
God  except  it  be  with  trembling ;
except  we  have  quaketl  at  His  thunder,
we  shall  never  joy  in  His  sunshine.
....  II.  As  our  service  must  be
grounded  on  fear,  so  our  fear  must  be
reduced  to  service.  Indeed,  the  worst
kind  of  fear  is  that  we  call  servile  ;
but  the  be.st  fear  is  the  fear  of  servants  ;
for  there  is  no  servant  of  God  but  fears
filially.  And  God  hath  no  son  but  he
serves We  all  know  what  ser-
vice means ;  for  we  all  are,  or  were,  I
imagine,  either  servants  or  masters,  or
servants  of  the  public,  or  masters  of
servants,  or  all  these.  We  cannot,
therefore,  be  ignorant  either  of  wOiat
we  require  of  ours,  or  what  our  supe-
riors require  of  us.  If  service  con-
sisted only  in  wearing  of  liveries,  in
taking  of  wages,  in  making  of  courte-
sies, and  kissing  of  hands,  there  were
notliing  more  easy  or  more  common.
....  But  be  not  deceived  :  the  life
of  service  is  work  :  the  work  of  a
Christian  is  ol)edience  to  the  law  of
God.— ^i?.  lialL

Ver.  25.    L    If  there  be  a  moral


CHAP.  XIII.  HOMILETIC  COMMEXTAUY:    SAMUEL.


1  e  h  nh  P    *n  i     •  1    -r  ^'^u\  ^v^'  ^T'^'^'     ^^  ^'^^^^^^  a^l  t^^e  duties  of

lie  IS  able  to  punish  it      III.  Bodies  relative   life;    it   destroys   siilmrdina-

onirinTtei^"^;';^      "   ^'"  r'^  ^^^^•>.  -^-^  ^'^^  tlei  vlich  bl'd

only,  in  eternity  there  are  no  fami-  mankind   together,   and   makes   tliem

countiy  is  to  be  destroyed,  It  IS  tried,  mies   to   each   other.     Social   welfare

W   TWri^V"';^  '"''"If  ^^''-  ^^T^^  ^^^^-^-^  ^^^^  death  of  morak

IV.   iliere  13  a  tendency  in  the  very  and  virtue.— /ay.


CHAPTER  XIII.


Ver.  1.  A  literal  rendering  of  the  Hebrew  text  in  this  verse  would  stand  fhmSaul  wn»
years  old  when  he  began  to  vei^n,  and  he  reujned  ,  and  two  years  ova  T^npr^^l  w  I

numerals  have  evidently  fallen  out,  and  nearly  all  commentatorsC^e  tl  It  S^^^^
to  the  custom  m  the  history  of  the  kings  (2  Sam.  ii.  10,  v.  4  ;  1  Kino-s  xiv  21    ^vT/q  T^Z'

in  adopting  the  first-named  view,  says,  in  the  Biblical  Commentary^ ^^  Then


th  Keil  and  Erdmann
There  is  no  certain  clue  to


to  the  seven  and  a  half  years  bet^ween  the  lath  of  SauL'n/fh^t  of'      hb:*eth'm'akru:    he
forty  years  assigned  to  Sanl's  dynasty  in  Acts  xiii.  21.     Neither  is  there  „„voWt^fV-f      t

OTcceedmg  chapteis.     But  the  appearance  of  Jonathan  as  a  warrior  (ver  2)  comnared  witi,  fh.
;«:"     ;elprm:r?"'°Ke1ird  F  f^^-  '\  '  "°P"^-'  ^"  ''"^"'"  °f  not  iLlrrte;'  oTfift  en

Ls:'2''LtSire^yafte^i,'::'ve^n?rr:tedrtT;rt'':hr^^^^^^^^^

smmssmmsm

ground,  a^nt  1.  .iies  wf tlfJerusai'^Tnnr/srrd.^L^:    t  "^Icht::^  Z.^"^
he  is  the  Nathaniel  of  this  history."  (X^JriX)      4Seah  o    Benjam^'l'^^l"'  f^T'''

141


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  i.


Ver.  6.  "  "When  the  men  of  Israel  saw  that  they  were  in  a  strnit,"  etc.  "  The  position
"f  matters  seems  to  have  been  this  :  The  Philistines  were  in  possession  of  the  village  of  Geba,  on
the  south  side  of  the  Wudy  Suioeinit.  In  their  front  across  the  Wady,  which  is  here  about
a  mile  Mride,  and  divided  by  several  swells  lower  than  the  side  eminences,  was  Saul  in  the  town
of  Michmash,  and  holding-  also  Mount  Bethe/ — the  heiirhts  on  the  noi'th  of  the  great  Wady — as
far  as  Beitin  (Bethel)  itself.  South  of  the  Philistine  camp,  and  about  three  miles  in  its  rear,  was
Jonathan,  in  Gibeah-of-Benjamin,  with  a  thousand  chosen  warriors.  The  first  step  was  taken
by  Jonathan,  who  drove  out  the  Philistines  from  Geba  by  a  feat  of  arms  which  at  once  procured
for  him  immense  reputation.  But  in  the  meantime  it  increased  the  difficulties  of  Israel,  for  the
Philistines  hearing  of  their  reverse,  and  advancing  with  an  enormous  armament,  pushed  Saul's
little  force  before  them  out  of  Bethel  and  Michmash  and  down  the  eastern  passes  to  Gilgal,  near
Jericho,  in  the  Jordan  valley.  They  then  established  themselves  at  Michmash,  formerly  the
head-quarters  of  Saul,  and  from  thence  sent  out  their  bands  of  plunderers  north,  west,  and  east
(verses  17, 18).  But  nothing  could  dislodge  Jonathan  from  his  main  stronghold  in  the  south.  As
far  as  we  can  disentangle  the  complexities  of  the  story,  he  soon  relinquished  Geba  and  consoli-
dated his  little  force  in  Gibeah,  where  he  was  joinnd  by  his  father,  with  Samuel  the  prophet  and
Ahiah  the  priest,  who,  perhaps,  remembering  the  former  fate  of  the  ark,  had  brought  down  the
sacred  ephod  from  Shiloh  (chap.  xiv.  3).  These  three  had  made  their  way  up  from  Gilgal  with
a  force  sorely  diminished  from  desertion  to  the  Philistine  camp  and  flight  (ver.  7  and  chap.  xiv.
21) — a  mere  remnant  of  the  people  following  in  the  rear  of  the  little  band  (ver.  15).  Then
occurred  the  feat  of  the  hero  and  his  armour-bearer  (chap,  xiv.)  (BlNical  Dictionary)  "The
people  did  hide  themselves," etc.  "The  broken  ridges  of  the  neigiibourhood  would  afford
abundant  hiding-places.  The  rocks  are  perforated  in  every  direction  with  crevices  and  fissures,
sunk  deep  in  the  rocky  soil,  subterranean  granaries  or  dry  wells  in  the  adjoining  fields."
{Jamieson,)

Ver.  8.  "  And  he  tarried  seven  days,"  etc.  See  note  on  chap.  x.  8.  "  This  appointment
seems  to  have  been  for  a  trial  of  faith  and  obedience."  (Biblical  Commentary. )  Samuel  came  on
the  seventh  day,  but  not  until  towards  its  clos.e.     "  And  he  ofle  ed,"'  etc.     The  words  do  not

necessarily  inijJy  that  Saul  did  this  with  his  own  hand;  it  is  quite  possible  that  he  merely  com-
manded tlie  priest  to  do  it.  If  so,  his  sin  was  simply  that  of  disobedience  to  the  command  of
God,  as  given  by  Samuel.  Dean  Stanley,  Dr.  Kitto,  and  others,  think  that  he  was  guilty  of  the
double  ofi'ence  of  usurping  the  office  of  the  priest  and  of  disobedience  to  the  Divine  word.
Wordsworth  observes  that  "Samuel  does  not  animadvert  to  any  such  intrusion  on  Saul's  part."

Ver.  14.  "The  Lord  hath  sought  him  a  man**  "It  is  natural  to  infer  from  this  that
David,  who  of  course  is  indicated,  was  already  grown  to  man's  estate,  as  we  know  his  friend
Jonathan  was.  But  as  David  was  only  thirty  years  old  when  he  began  to  reign,  the  incident
here  related  must  have  occurred  during  the  last  ten  or  fifteen  years  of  Saul's  reign."  (Biblical
Commentary.)

Ver.  15.  "Six  hundred  men."  "Saul  had  therefore,  by  his  hasty,  disobedient  conduct,  not
attained  his  purpose  of  liolding  the  people  together.  The  declaration,  *  Thou  hast  done  foolishly,
is  thus  confirmed."  [Erdmann.)

Vers.  16-23.  "The  following  account  is  no  doubt  connected  with  the  foregoing,  so  far  as
facts  are  concerned,  inasmuch  as  Jonathan's  brave,  heroic  deed  terminated  the  war  for  which
Saul  had  entreated  the  help  of  God  by  his  sacrifice  at  Clilgal ;  but  it  is  not  formally  connected
with  it,  80  as  to  form  a  compact  and  complete  account  of  the  successive  stages  of  the  war.**
i,Keil.)

Ver.  17.  "The  spoilers  came  out,"  etc.  The  places  here  mentioned,  so  far  as  they  can  be
identified,  lay  respectively  on  the  north,  west,  and  east— that  is  to  say,  the  predatory  bands
sallying  from  Michmash  ravaged  through  the  valleys  which  radiate  from  it  in  those  directions.

Ver.  19.  *'  There  was  no  smith,"  etc.  This  policy  of  disarming  the  natives  has  often
been  followed.  "  So  Porsenna  allowed  the  Romans  iron  implements  for  agriculture  only."
{Erdmann.)

Ver.  20.  "  Share,  coulter,"  etc.  "  In  Isaiah  ii.  4,  and  Joel  iii.  10,  the  word  here  rendered  coulter
is  rendered  ploughshare,  and  the  word  here  rendered  share,  from  its  etymology,  must  have  that
meaning;  we  must  therefore  suppose  there  was  some  difference  in  the  two  implements  which
cannot  now  be  ascertained.  The  worn  signifying  mattock,  or  some  such  cutting  instrument,
is  nearly  identical  with  that  rendered  share."  {Biblical  Dictionary.)

Ver.  21.  The  meaning  of  this  verse  is  obscure,  and  the  renderings  of  it  very  diverse.
Gesenius  and  many  Hebrew  scholars  read  "  And  so  there  was  dulness  or  notching  of  the  edge."
"  The  parei'thesis  indicates  that  the  result  of  the  burdensome  necessity  of  going  to  the  Philis-
tines was  that  many  tools  became  useless  by  dulness,  so  that  even  this  poorer  sort  of  arms  did
the  Israelites  not  much  service  at  the  breaking  out  of  the  war."  {Bansm.)

142


CHAP.  xin.  EOMILETIC  COMMEJ^'TAIiY  :  SAMUEL.


Ver.  22.  "So  .  .  .  there  was  nolthor  swor?.  nor  s^ca'-  ound"  "  They  had  no  weapons
of  defence  hnt  their  rude  iniplemont'^  of  hus'>;iii  Iry.  I>;iL  by  means  of  these  a  bold  encri^^etic
militia  could  do  great  execution  ;  and  in  the  well-known  instanoes  of  the  royalist  pea-antry  of
La  Vendee  or  the  Ilays  of  Cramond.  in  Scotland,  we  have  exnni])les  of  the  alert  and  effective
manner  in  which  a  pastoral  or  agricultural  people  can  arm  themselves  at  a  moment's  notice."
[Jamieson.)

Ver.  23  "The  passage  of  Michmash."  The  oi)cn  valley  between  Geba  and  Michmash  (see
note  on  verse  6).  "  It  is  about  a  miln  broad  at  this  point,  but  contracts  in  its  descent  eastward
to  the  Jordau  into  a  narrow,  precipitous  defile."  (Jamieson.)

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  CHAPTER,

Saul's  First  Act  of  Disobedience.

I.  Humiliation  of  a  nation  following-  distrust  of  God.  Saul  "chose  liira
three  thousand  men,"  etc.  This  band  of  men  seems  to  have  been  intended  to
act  as  a  body-^uard  to  Saul  and  his  son,  and  to  form  a  kind  of  standing  army  for
the  defence  of  the  nation.  In  this  act  Saul  was  only  following  the  general  custom
of  human  monarchs,  wlio  need  the  arms  and  strength  of  their  subjects  to  protect
themselves  and  to  help  them  to  defend  their  country.  But  tliis  was  quite  a
new  thing  in  Israel,  and  it  was  a  humiliation  for  the  nation.  It  had  liitherto
been  their  glory  that  their  king  needed  no  arm  of  flesh  to  protect  his  person,
nor  any  standing  army  to  defend  them  from  their  enemies.  He  who  had  legions
of  angels  to  do  His  bidding  could  well  dispense  with  the  service  of  a  human  body-
guard, and  so  long  as  they  continued  obedient  to  His  word  there  was  no
need  of  a  standing  army  in  their  midst  to  defend  them  from  their  enemies.
Even  when  they  had  through  disobedience  been  given  over  for  a  season  into  the
hands  of  the  heathen,  their  mighty  and  invisible  King  had  always  raised  up
deliverers  so  soon  as  they  had  by  confession  and  promises  of  amendment  returned
to  Him.  This  act  of  Saul  must  have  forcibly  reminded  the  Hebrew  nation  that
they  had  now  indeed  got  what  they  desired — a  "king  like  all  the  nations"
(chap,  viii  4),  and  if  they  had  reflected  they  would  have  felt  humiliated  in
contrasting  the  comparative  weakness  of  even  the  brave  and  warlike  Saul  with  the
omnipotent  strength  which  they  had  rejected.  But  an  act  of  distrust  in
Divine  power  is  always  followed  by  humiliation.

II.  Humiliation  of  a  monarch  following^  disobedience  to  God.     God  is  a

ruler  who  demands  and  deserves  unconditional  obedience.  An  absolute
monarch  ought  to  be  so  wise  that  all  the  wisdom  of  all  his  subjects  put  together
is  not  equal  to  that  which  he  possesses.  And  His  goodness  ought  so  to  exceed
the  goodness  of  the  best  and  most  benevolent  subjects  of  his  realm  that  all  his
plans  and  purposes,  and  hence  all  his  commands,  will  be  more  adapted  to  the
welfare  of  every  citizen  than  any  plans  which  their  united  wisdom  and  benevo-
lence could  form.  Unless  a  ruler  can  establish  beyond  doubt  that  he  is
thus  immeasurably  superior  to  all  whom  he  desires  to  obey  him,  he  has  no  right
to  demand  from  them  unconditional  obedience.  But  if  such  an  one  can  be
found,  it  is  surely  to  the  interest  of  all  whom  he  commands  to  render  it.  God  is
such  a  King — the  "  King  who  can  do  no  wrong," — and  as  such  He  demands  and
destu'ves  obedience  to  all  His  commands  although  his  subjects  may  not  always
see  why  He  so  commands  them.  This  absolute  obedience  was  the  condition
upon  which  alone  He  had  promised  to  continue  to  be  with  Israel  and  with
Israel's  king  (chap.  xii.  14,  15).  His  past  dealings  with  the  nation,  as  Samuel
had  reminded  them  at  Gilgal,  fully  jubtihed  this  demand  upon  their  loyalty,
and  Said's  individual  experience  ouoht  to  have  made  him  deeply  sensible  that
nothing  less  would  be  accepted  by  that  Absolute  Ruler  who  had  placed  him  on
the  tluoue.     That  the  command  came  to  Saul  through  the  word  of  Samuel

143


UOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL,  cook  i.


made  no  difference — tlie  command  of  a  Idng  is  none  the  less  bindin^^  because
it  is  delivered  through  the  mouth  of  a  subject,  and  Saul  knew  full  well  that
God  spoke  through  the  mouth  of  His  propliet.  Consider — 1.  The  root  of
this  act  of  disobedience.  It  was  distrust.  It  is  quite  evident  that  Saul  had
been  commanded  to  remain  at  Gilgal  until  Samuel  should  arrive,  and  to
postpone  the  sacrifices  which  were  to  precede  any  action  against  the
Philistines  until  the  prophet's  arrival.  There  is  no  doubt  that  Saul
would  then  have  received  Divine  direction  as  to  his  future  movements,
and  that  the  expedition  against  the  national  enemies  would  have  been  followed
by  signs  of  the  Divine  approval.  But  Samuel's  arrival  was  delayed  until  the
last  day  of  the  appointed  time  witliout  doubt  to  test  Saul's  faith  in  the  Divine
word.  Help  on  all  occasions  and  in  all  extremities  had  been  most  certainly
promised  him  on  condition  that  he,  the  king,  as  well  as  his  people,  followed  after
the  Lord  (chap.  xii.  14)  ;  and  an  opportunity  was  now  afforded  him  of  proving
whether  he  believed  the  promise.  By  his  own  confession  he  doubted  it.  "  Thou
camest  not  within  the  days  appointed,  and  the  Philistines  gathered  themselves
together  to  Michmash,  therefore  said  I,  the  Philistines  will  come  down  u])on  me
at  Gilgal."  This  was  saying,  in  effect,  that  he  doubted  whether  God  and  God's
pro})het  would  he  as  good  as  their  word.  The  dishonour  offered  to  Samuel  was
in  reality  a  dishonour  offered  to  God,  inasmuch  as  he  was  doubtless  acting  under
Divine  direction — a  fact  of  which  it  was  impossible  that  Saul  could  be  ignorant.
The  step  from  distrust  to  disobedience  is  easilj  taken — indeed  the  one  is  almost
certain  to  lead  to  the  othel*.  While  there  is  an  unsh.iken  confidence  in  the
character  of  another  there  will  be  a  loyal  adherence  to  his  commands,  for  confi-
dence in  his  character  and  wisdom  will  beget  an  assurance  that  he  will  oidy
command  what  is  just  and  right.  And  this  is  especially  true  of  man  in  his
attitude  towards  God;  hence  it  is  the  great  aim  of  the  tempter  of  men  to
beget  in  them  distrust  of  God,  in  order  to  lead  them  to  disobedience  to  God.
He  did  this  with  our  first  parents.  All  the  questions  which  he  put  to  Eve
evidently  had  for  their  object  the  infusion  into  her  mind  of  a  sus])icion
whether,  after  all,  God  was  the  benevolent  Being  she  had  hitherto  believed
Him  to  be.  If  Saul's  confidence  in  God  had  been  firm,  we  should  have
never  had  this  record  upon  the  page  of  Bible  history.  2.  The  punishment
which  it  brought  upon  Saul.  At  first  sight  it  may  appear  a  very  severe
one.  That  Saul  should  be  rejected  by  God  from  being  the  founder
of  a  kingly  dynasty  for  a  single  act  of  disobedience  may  seem  u])on  the  surface
to  be  a  sentence  out  of  proportion  to  the  gravity  of  the  act.  But  it  must  be
remembered  that  disobedience  to  a  plain  command  is  a  very  great  sin.  Saul
could  not  plead  as  an  excuse  that  he  had  misunderstood  what  he  was  required
to  do,  or  that  the  will  of  God  had  been  implied  rather  than  expressed  ;  he  does,
in  fact,  put  in  neither  of  these  excuses.  He  admits  that  he  knew  what  his
directions  were,  and  that  he  had  knowingly  and  deliberately  acted  in  opposition
to  them.  As  in  the  disobedience  of  the  first  man,  the  plainness  of  the  command,
"  Thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it"  (Gen.  ii.  17),  made  the  eating  an  act  of  open  defiance
of  the  sovereignty  of  Jehovah,  so  it  was  in  this  case.  The  man  wlio  had  been
raised  from  herding  cattle  to  be  God's  vicegerent  in  Israel,  here  lifts  the  standard
of  open  rebellion  against  his  Sovereign.  Then,  again,  an  act  of  disobedience  is
aggravated  by  the  high  position  of  the  offender.  A  common  soldier  who  dis-
obeys martial  law  is  punished  for  his  crime  ;  but  if  the  commander  of  the  army
violates  it,  he  meets  with  a  much  more  severe  sentence.  Men  recognise  the  fact
that  the  transgression  of  such  a  man  deserves  a  heavier  pena.ty,  because  his  high
and  representative  position  makes  his  observance  of  law  doubly  obligatory.  Such
a  man  ought  to  be  a  living  embodiment  of  obedience;  he  ought  to  show  to  those
who  are  socially  beneath  him  a  life  in  perfect  accordance  with  every  jot  and  tittle
the  law  by  which  his  very  position  implies  that  he  is  governed.     Saul  as  king


CHAP.  XIII.  UOM I LETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


of  Israel  was  bound  by  obligations  above  all  bis  subjects  to  observe  every  Divine
conuiiand  witb  tlie  strictest  tidelity.  Upon  his  acts  depended  to  a  very  great  extent
the  moral  tone  of  the  entire  nation — if  he  treated  the  word  of  tbe  Lord  as  a  word
to  be  regarded  or  set  aside  as  his  humour  dictated,  many  of  his  subjects  would
surely  do  tlie  same.  The  welfare  of  the  Hebrew  comnionwealtb  demanded
therefore  tbat  so  open  and  glaring  act  of  defiance  should  be  visited  with  a  i)ublic
and  severe  penally.  The  spirit  in  which  Saul  met  Samuel's  question,  '*  What
hast  thou  done?"  shows  also  tbat  there  was  no  repentance  after  tbe  deed.  The
words  of  tbe  propbet  seem  framed  to  beget  some  acknowledguient  of
guilt — tbe  very  sigbt  of  tbe  man  wbo  had  been  tbe  channel  by  wbich  all  tbe
favours  of  Jehovah  bad  come  to  him,  and  from  wbose  mouth  be  li  ;d  received
so  many  messages  from  the  Most  High  God  was  calculated  to  beget  in  bim
some  sense  of  bis  guilt.  But  tbere  is  no  parallel  to  David's — "I  bave  sinned
against  tbe  Lord"  (2.  Sam.  xii.  13) — he  meets  Samuel's  question  with  words
wbich  bave  no  ring  of  repentance  about  them — which  show  no  sense  of  tbe
greatness  of  tbe  sin  be  had  committed.  Wben  we  consider  all  tbe  circumstances
wbich  surround  this  act  we  can  see  that  tbe  sentence  was  not  heavier  than  the
sin.  3.  Its  woeful  miscarriage  in  the  immediate  future.  Saul's  excuse  for  the
act  was  tbe  urgency  of  tbe  situation — tbe  danger  wbich  tbreatened  tbe  people
at  the  band  of  the  Pbilistines.  Lie  pleads  that  be  bad  disobeyed  God  in  order  to
obtain  from  Him  a  fulfilment  of  His  ])romises — tbat  be  ho})ed  by  breaking  His
law  to  bring  tbat  success  to  bis  arms  wbicb  bad  been  promised  only  on  condition
of  obedience.  Well  might  Samuel  say,  "  Tbou  hast  done  foolisbly,"  and  tbe
foolishness  of  sin  was  soon  afterwards  tbe  bitter  experience  of  botli  king  and
people.  h\  nature  God  has  certain  laws,  or  establislied  metbods  of  working,  by
wbicb  good  tilings  come  into  the  hand  of  men.  But  men  must  work  in  barmony
with  tbem  and  not  in  opposition  to  them  if  they  would  be  partakers  of  tbe
good.  If  a  man  expected  to  obtain  tbe  same  results  by  acts  wbich  were  in  direct
opposition  to  the  known  and  established  laws  of  tbe  universe,  he  would  be
accounted  nothing  less  than  a  madman.  And  tbere  are  physical  laws  tbe
defiance  of  which  all  men  know  will  not  only  be  foUowed  by  no  gain  but  with
physical  loss.  No  rational  man  thinks  that  be  can  throw  biiuself  over  a
precipice,  for  instance,  and  escape  bodily  injury  and  pain.  Disobedience  to  tbe
laws  which  govern  matter  can  never  bring  the  same  results  as  obedience,  and  men
never  expect  tbat  it  will  do  so.  They  know  that  if  they  "  break  "  this  bedge,  "  a
serpent  will  bite  them  "  (Eccles.  x  8).  But  many  a  man,  besides  the  first  king  of
Israel,  has  acted  as  if  he  expected  tbat  observance  and  non-observance  of  moral
law  would  be  followed  by  tbe  same  results.  Saul  desired  to  defeat  the  Philistines,
and  God  bad  promised  to  stand  by  him  and  his  army  so  long  as  they  clave  to
Him.  But  Saul  here  acts  as  though  he  expected  to  obtain  tbe  same  blessing
by  forsaking  God  as  by  following  Him  !  He  offers  a  burnt  ofTering  to  tbe  Being
whom  he  is  defying,  and  looks  for  the  same  results  as  if  he  were  walking  in
obedience  to  His  word.  But  God's  moral  laws,  like  bis  ])bysical  ones,  go  as
straight  forw^ard  as  tbe  migbty  wbeols  in  Ezekiel's  vision  (Ezek.  i.  17).  Yea,
tbey  are  far  more  fixed  and  unalterable,  and  the  [)enalty  of  brea/vi'ng  them  far  more
certain.  God  bas  sus[)ended  tbe  laws  of  His  physical  universe,  but  never  one
of  tbe  laws  of  His  moral  kingdom.  It  is  a  law  as  firm  as  tlie  throne  of  God,
tbat  "whatsoever  a  man  soweth,"  in  moral  acts,  "that  he  shall  also  reap"
(Gal.  vi.  7),  and  men  only  make  manifest  their  exceeding  foolishness  by
expecting  otherwise.  When  Saul  found  his  two  thousand  men  diminish  to  six
hundred,  and  when  the  whole  land  was  devastated  by  incursions  of  the  heathen
sj)oilers,  both  king  and  people  knew  from  bitter  experi(>nce  that  be  does  wisely
who  keeps  the  commandments  of  the  Lord,  and  that  there  is  uo  folly  to  com-
pare with  the  foolishness  of  sia.

L  145


EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:    ISAMUEL.


BOOK  I.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Vers.  8,  13.  The  first  test  of  faith,
wliicli  Saul  had  to  submit  to,  was^a
thfocratic  necessity ;  for  Saul  must
first  ])rove  to  the  jjord  hy  deeds  that
he  wished  to  be  unconditionally  subject
to  the  Lord's  will,  to  yield  otiedience  to
His  word  which  was  to  be  revealed  to
him  by  prophets,  and  to  trust  alone  to
His  help.  Such  tests  as  Saul  had  to
stand,  are,  in  the  life  of  princes  and
peoples,  and  of  individuals,  in  the
church  as  in  every  member  of  God's
people,  a  divine  significance;  failure
to  stand  them  leads  many  from  the
Lord,  brings  to  naught  God's  purposes,
results  in  misfortune  and  destruction.
The  individual  elements  of  Saul's  pro-
bation, the  typical  significance  of
which  elements  for  all  times  and  cir-
cumstances of  the  kingdom  of  God  is
obvious,  are  found  partly  in  his  out-
ward position,  partly  in  his  inner  life.
The  external  position  of  Saul,  as  to
time  and  place,  was  one  of  extreme

distress This  distressing  and

dangerous  position  gave  occasion  in  his
heart  to  the  temptation  to  act  contrary
to  God's  will  and  command.  In  the
first  place  fear  of  the  threatening
danger  seized  on  his  heart;  to  fear
joined  itself  impatience,  which  pre-
vented him  from  waiting  out  the  time
appointed  by  Samuel ;  this  produced
unquiet  in  his  mind,  which  drove  him
to  take  self-willed  measures  to  help
liimself,  and  dissipated  more  and  more
his  trust  in  God;  then  Q2bmQ sophistical
calculation  by  his  carnally  obscurevi
understanding;  his  heart  frame  to-
wards God  of  immovable  trust  and
unconditional  obedience  was  given  up.
It  was  the  root  of  unbelief  from  which
all  this  sprang. — Lange's  Commentary.

L  Sin  is  not  estimated  by  God
according  to  its  outward  form,  but
according  to  the  amount  and  extent  of
the  principle  of  evil  embodied  in  that
form.  There  may  be  as  much  of
downright  rebellion  agaitist  God  in
what  men  would  call  a  little  sin,  as  in
a  series  of  what  men  would  call  flagrant
offences.  And  when  we  say  of  a  re-
quirement of  God  that  it  was  so  small
146


a  matter  as  to  render  it  marvellous
that  God  should  visit  its  violation  with
a  penalty,  we  should  remember  that
the  smaller  it  was  the  more  readily
ouij^ht  obedience  to  have  been  rendered,
and  the  greater  the  proof  of  a  wrong
dis])osition,  when  obedience  was  re-
fused, even  in  a  little  thing.  IL
The  first  wrong  step  is  always  marked
by  a  peculiarity  of  evil  which  does  not
attach  to  any  subsequent  offences.
Men  are  accustomed  to  palliate  the  first
offence,  because  it  is  the  first;  a  more
accurate  estimate  would  show  that
this  habit  of  judging  is  thoroughly
erroneous  and  fallacious.  There  is
more  to  keep  a  man  from  committing
a  first  offence,  than  there  is  to  keep
him  from  committing  a  second  or  any
other  criminal  act.  The  impression  of
the  command  is  at  least  one  degree
deeper  than  it  can  possibly  be  after
it  has  been  trifled  with.  The  first  sin
involves  the  taking  up  of  a  new
position, and  this  is  harder  work  than  to
maintain  it.  It  is  assuming  a  character
of  disobedience,  and  this  requires  more
hardihood  than  to  wear  it  when  it  has
once  been  put  on.  It  is  breaking
through  consistency,  which  is  a  strong
barrier  so  long  as  it  remans  unbroken ;
but  if  once  broken  through  sin  becomes
easy.  All  these  things  call  on  us,  in
fairness,  to  reverse  our  judgments  on
first  offences;  they  suggest  that  these
have  an  aggravation  about  them  which
belong  not  to  other  sins  ;  and  we  thus
are  the  less  surprised  that  God,  whose
every  judgment  is  right,  should  have
visited  Saul's  first  offence  with  pecuhar
displeasure. — Miller,

Our  faith  is  most  commendable  in
the  last  act;  it  is  no  praise  to  hold
out  until  we  be  hard  driven;  then,
when  we  are  forsaken  of  means,  to  live
by  faith  in  our  God  is  worthy  of  a
crown. — Bp.  II all,

I.  This  portion  of  Scripture  history
teaches  us  the  danger  of  infringing  or
trifling  with  the  Divine  commandments

on    the   plea  of  fiecessity

There  are  many  who  w^ouid  hesitate  at
the  employment  of  dishoneat,  or  even


cnAP.  XIII.


UOMILETIC  COMMIiNTAR  Y :    ISA  M UEL,


qtie$tio7iablemeiins  for  the  advancement
of  their  interests  generally,  wlio  wonld
nevertheless  occasionall}^  and  under
difficult  and  trying  circumstances,
dispense  with  the  Divine  law,  and  plecid
the  peculiar  necessity  of  the  case  for
their  justitication.  They  are  too  apt  to
suppose  that  such  a  deviation  from  their
known  duty  is  rendered  necessary,  and
excusable,  from  the  urgency  of  their

peculiar  situation Could

there  be  any  case  of  greater  urgency
than  Saul's  ?  Wbo  can  pretend  to
show  a  greater  or  more  plausible  neces-
sity for  deviating  from  a  command  of
God?  Yet  his  i)lea  was  utterly  vain.
II.  The  infatuation  of  supposing  that,^
while  disregarding  the  essentials  of
religion,  faith  and  obedience,  he  could

satisfy  God  with  its  fofins

All  external  rites  and  forms  are  only
valuable  as  means  conducive  to  in-
ternal and  practical  piety;  and,  con-
sequently, are  so  far  from  compensating
for  the  want  of  this,  that,  without  it,
they  become  an  unmeaning  and  un-
availing service. — Lindsay.

Ver.  13.  It  may  probably  strike
many  readers  that  foolishness  is  not
exactly  the  term  they  would  have  em-
ployed in  characterising  the  conduct
of  the  king.  They  would  have  thought
of  "  presumption,"  of  "  sell-will,"  of
**  distrust,"  and  other  like  terms,  but
scarcely  of  foolishness.  But  the  pro-
phet's word  is  the  right  one  after  alL
It  goes  to  the  root  of  the  matter.
.  .  ,  .  In  his  view  and  in  that  of
all  sacred  writers,  the  lowest  depths  of
human  foolishness — its  most  astonish-
ing and  incredible  manifestation — was
in  disobedience  to  the  Lord's  com-
mandment. There  are  two  kinds  of
fools  prominently  noticed  in  Scrip-
ture— the  fool  who  denies  that  there
is  any  God — and  the  fool  who  does
not  obey  God,  though  he  does  not


deny  llis  existence And

yet,  if  we  probe  the  matter  closely,  we
shall  find  that  tliere  is  scarcely  more
than  an  impalpable  film  of  real  dif-
ference between  them.  .  .  .  One
may  as  well  believe  there  is  no  God
as  not  obey  Him. — Kitto.

Ver.  14.  The  phrase  "a  man  after
God's  own  heart,"  has  no  reference  to
the  piety  or  virtues  of  private  and
personal  character ;  for  no  mere  man
in  that  respect  has  come  up  to  the
standard  of  the  Divine  law.  It  is
used  solely  with  regard  to  official
fidelity  in  the  service  of  Jehovah
in  Israel  (chap,  ii.35);  and  David  was
certaiidy  entitled  to  be  characterised
as  **  a  man  after  God's  own  heart,"
from  Ills  ardent  zeal  and  undeviating
exertions  for  the  interests  of  the  true
religion,  in  opposition  to  idolatry. —
Jamieson.

1.  A  man  devout,  not  merely  by
fits  and  starts,  but  profoundly  and
habitually.  2.  A  man  not  self-willed,
who  would  rule  according  to  the  com-
mand of  God  through  the  prophets.
3.  A  man  who,  when  he  had  done  wrong,
would  penitently  submit  to  God's
chastenings,  invincibly  trust  in  God's
goodness,  and  faithfully  strive  to
live  more  according  to  God's  will.
(In  these  and  similar  points  Saul  and
David  might  be  contrasted). — Trans-
lator of  Langes  Commmtary,

Ver.  15.  Saul's  sinful  act  in  offering
sacrifice  lest  the  people  should  be
scattered  from  him,  failed  of  its  pur-
pose. Wordly  policy  does  not  attain
even  its  own  temporal  ends  (See  John
xi.  48).  "  If  we  let  this  man  thus
alone,  the  Romans  will  come  and  take
away  both  our  place  and  nation."
They  did  not  let  Jesus  alone  ;  and
therefore  the  Romans  did  come,  and
destroyed  them. —  WordswortK


147


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,  book  I.


CHAPTER  XIV.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes.  Ver.  1.  "  Garrtsou  of  the  Philistines."  The  advanced
post  mentioned  in  chap.  xiii.  23.     For  the  situation  of  the  armies  see  note  on  chap.  xiii.  6.

Ver.  2.  **A  pomegranate  tree,"  etc.,  rather  the  pomegranate,  a  well-known  tree.  "Accord-
ing to  Judges  XX.  45,  a  rock  near  Gibeah  bore  the  name  *Rock  of  the  pomegranate '  (Rlmmon),
and  was  well  adapted  for  a  fortified  position.  It  is  a  natural  supposition  that  the  same  rock  is
meant  here,  named  after  the  well-known  pomegranate."  (Erdmann.)  This  is  the  more  probable
because  a  pomegranate  tree  is  not  sufficiently  high  to  admit  of  the  erection  of  a  tent  beneath  its
branches.  *'  Migron."  A  place  of  this  name  is  mentioned  in  Isa.  x.  28.  Its  exact  site  is  not
known,  but  it  lay  in  this  neighbourhood.  It  may  be,  however,  that  this  spot  is  another  of  tha
same  name,  as  the  word  signifies  a  precipice,  and  the  entire  district  is  rocky  and  precipitous.
*•  Six  hundred  men."  "  His  forces,  then,  had  not  increased  since  he  came  to  Gibeah,  as  might
have  been  expected."  (Wordsworth.)

Ver.  3.  "  Ahlah,  the  son  of  Ahitub."  This  man  was  therefore  a  great-grandson  of  Eli.
He  is  generally  supposed  to  be  the  same  person  as  Ahimehch,  mentioned  in  chap.  xxii.  9,  11.  The
signification  of  Ahijah  (as  it  ought  to  be  written)  is  "Friend  of  Jehovah,"  and  that  of  Abimelech
is  Friend  of  the  King,  viz.,  of  Jehovah.  It  is  quite  possible,  however,  that  Ahiah  may  have
died  without  sons,  and  been  succeeded  by  a  brother  named  Abimelech.  "The  Lord's  priest  in
ShJloh."  "As  Eli  was  so  emphatically  known  and  described  as  God's  priest  in  Shiloh,  and  as
there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  Shiloh  was  no  longer  the  seat  of  the  ark  (see  chap  xxii. ;  1
Chron.  xiii.  3-5),  it  is  far  better  to  refer  these  words  to  Eli.  .  . .  This  fragment  of  genealogy  is  a
very  valuable  help  to  the  chronology.  The  grandson  of  Phinehas,  the  son  of  Eli,  was  now  High
Priest ;  and  Samuel,  who  was  probably  a  few  years  older  than  Ahitub,  was  now  an  old  man.  All
this  indicates  a  period  of  about  fifty  years  or  upward  from  the  taking  of  the  ark  by  the  Philistines,"
{Biblical  Commentary,)

Ver.  4.  **  Between  the  passages,"  etc.  The  ground  is  thus  described  by  Robinson  in  his
Biblical  Researches — "  In  the  gorge  or  valley  are  two  hills  of  a  conical  or  rather  spherical  form,
having  steep  rocky  sides,  with  small  wadies  running  up  behind  each,  so  as  almost  to  isolate  them.
One  is  on  the  side  towards  Geba,  and  the  other  on  the  side  towards  Michmash.  These  would
seem  to  be  the  two  rocks  mentioned  in  Jonathan's  adventure.  They  are  not  indeed  so  sharp  as
the  language  of  Scripture  would  seem  to  imply,  but  they  are  the  only  rocks  of  the  kind  in  the
vicinity."  In  his  Later  Researches  he  says,  "  The  ridges  on  either  side  of  the  valley  exhibit  two
elevated  points  which  project  into  the  great  wady  ;  and  the  easternmost  of  these  bluffs  on  each
Bide  were  probably  the  outposts  of  the  two  garrisons  of  the  Philistines  and  the  Israelites.  The
road  passes  around  the  eastern  side  of  the  southern  hill,  the  post  of  Israel,  and  then  strikes  over
the  western  part  of  the  northern  one,  the  post  of  the  Philistines  and  the  scene  of  Jonathan's
adventure.  These  hills  struck  us  now,  more  than  formerly,  as  of  shai-p  ascent,  and  as  appropriate
to  the  circumstances  of  the  narrative.  They  are  isolated  cliffs  in  the  valley,  except  so  far  as  the
low  ridge,  at  the  end  of  which  they  are  found,  connected  them  back  with  the  higher  ground  on
each  side."

Ver.  6.  These  uncircumcised.  "It  is  remarkable  that  this  epithet,  used  as  a  term  of  reproach,
is  confined  almost  exclusively  to  the  Philistines.  This  is  probably  an  indication  of  the  long
continued  oppression  of  the  Israelites  by  the  Philistines,  and  their  frequent  wars"  (Biblical
Comiuentary.)  "  May  be."  "  This  indicates  not  a  doubt  but  the  humility  which  was  coupled
with  Jonathan's  heroic  spirit."  {Erdmann.)

Ver.  10.  "  This  shall  be  a  sign,"  etc.  "  All  attempts  to  bring  Jonathan's  conduct  within
the  rules  of  ordinary  human  action  are  vain.  Though  it  is  not  expressly  said,  as  in  the  case  of
Gideon  (Judges  vi.  34),  Othniel  (iii.  10),  and  others,  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him,
yet  the  whole  course  of  the  narrative,  especially  verses  13-16,  indicates  an  extraordinary  Divine
interposition  and  tends  to  place  Jonathan  on  the  same  platform  as  the  judges  and  saviours  of
Israel."  {Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  11.  "Behold  the  Hebrews  come  forth.**  "As  it  could  not  occur  to  the  sentries
that  two  men  had  come  with  hostile  designs,  it  was  a  natural  conclusion  that  they  were  Israelite
deserters  ;  and  hence  no  attempt  was  made  to  hinder  their  ascent,  or  stone  them,  as  they  were
scrambling  up  the  ridge."  {Jamieson.)  '*  Come  up  to  us,"  etc.  "  They  hoped  to  have  sport
with  them,  not  supposing  iJiat  they  could  there  climb  the  rock."  {Clericus.)

Ver.  14.  **  Twenty  men  within,  as  it  were,  an  half  acre  of  land."  Rather  a  half  furrow  of
a  yoke  of  land.  "This  indicates  the  position  of  the  fallen,  after  Jonathan,  pressing  impetuously  on,
had  struck  them  down  one  after  another,  and  his  armour-bearer  after  him,  had  kilkd  those  that
were  not  dead.  This  occurred  in  the  space  of  about  half  a  furrow  in  a  piece  of  land  which  one
with  a  yoke  of  oxen    could   plough   in  a    day."    (Erdmann.)      "Their    terror    and    flight

148


CHAP.  XIV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.

are  perfectly  conceivable,  if  we  consider  that  the  outposts  of  the  Philistines  were  so  stationed
upon  tlie  top  of  the  lidLje  of  the  st(;ep  mountain  wall  that  they  could  not  see  how  many  were
following,  and  the  Philistines  could  not  imagine  it  possible  that  two  Hebrews  would  have
ventured  to  climb  the  rock  alone  and  make  an  attack  upon  them.  Sallust  relates  a  similar
occurrence  in  connection  with  the  scaling  of  a  castle  in  the  Numidian  war.  Bell.  Jugurtha.
c.  89,  90."  {Kcil.)

Ver.  15.  "  The  earth  qnakod."  Keil  and  others  think  that  it  merely  trembled  "  with  the
noise  and  tumult  of  the  frightened  foe,"  but  there  can  be  no  reason  why  it  should  not  be  under-
stood to  describe  a  real  e;irth(]^uake— a  supernatural  interposition  of  tiod.  *' Just  as  a  strong
east  wind  "  divided  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea  ;  just  as  the  great  hailstones  smote  theCanaanites
to  death  "at  the  going  down  of  Beilihoron  "  (Josh.  x.  11),  as  "  the  stars  in  their  courses  fought
agaimt  Sisera  ;"  "  as  the  Lord  thundered  with  a  great  thunder  .  .  .  and  discomfited  the
Philistines  at  Ebenezer  (chap.  viii.  10),  .  .  .  so  now  the  earth  quaked  at  the  presence  of
the  Lord  who  fought  for  Jonathan."  (Bcblical  Commentary.)  "A  very  great  trembling''—
"a  trembling  of  God,"  i.e.,  '•  a  supernatural  terror  infused  by  God  into  the  Philistines."  (Kiel.)

Ver.  16.  **  The  vtratchmen  of  Saul  looked."  This  shows  that  the  distance  between  the  two
encampments  was  not  great.  "The  multitude  melted  away."  The  Hebrew  text  is  here  very
obscure.     Multitude  may  be  rendered  tumult.     Many  read   "the  multitude,"  or  " the  tumult,

dispersed  hither  and  thither."

Ver.  18.  "  Bring  hither  the  ark  of  God."  "Many  expositors,  thinking  it  extremely  im-
probable that  the  ark  had  been  removed  from  Kirjath-jearim,  where  it  was  afterwards  found  by
David  (2  Sam.  vi.  2,  3),  regard  the  Hebrew  text  as  here  incorrect,  and  follow  the  Septuagint
rearling  of  ephod.  It  nuist,  however,  be  remembered  that  the  Chaldee,  the  Syriac,  the  Arabic,
and  the  Vulgate  support  the  authorised  version.  It  has  been  remarked  that  if  Saul  had  spoken
of  the  ark  he  would  nut  have  said  '  bring  hither/  but  '  carry  forward,'  nor  would  he  afterwards
have  commanded  the  high  priest  to  'withdraw  his  hand.'"  (2V.  of  Langes  Commentary.)  Dr.
Erdmann,  Wordsworth,  and  others,  see  no  reason  to  doubt  the  correctness  of  the  Hebrew  MSS.

Ver.  19.  "Withdraw  thine  hand."  Saul,  seeing  the  battle  was  growing  hotter,  resolved  to
go  forward  without  delay.

Ver.  21.  "The  Hebrews."  These  might  have  been  prisoners  held  by  the  Philistines.
"They  are  called  Hebrews,  according  to  the  name  which  was  current  among  foreigners."  {Ked.)

Ver  23.  ''Bethaven."  On  the  mountains  of  Benjamin,  lying  east  of  Bethel,  and  between  it
and  Michmash.  "According  to  ver.  31  the  Philistines  fled  westward  from  Michmash  to  Ajalon.
But  if  we  bear  in  mind  that  the  camp  of  the  Philistines  was  on  the  eastern  side  of  Michmash,
before  Bethaven,  according  to  chap.  xiii.  5,  and  that  t^e  Israelites  forced  their  way  into  it  from
the  south,  we  shall  see  that  the  battle  might  easily  have  spread  out  beyond  Bethaven,  and  that
eventually  the  main  body  of  the  enemy  might  have  fled  out  as  far  as  Ajalon,  and  have  been
pursued  to  that  point  by  the  victorious  Israelites."  (Keil.)

Ver.  24.  "Adjured  the  people."    He  made  them  take  an  oath.

Ver.  25.  "Honoy  upon  the  ground."  Eastern  countries  abound  with  wild  bees,  who
deposit  their  combs  in  the  hollows  of  the  trees.  "Large  combs  may  be  seen  hanging  on  the
trees,  as  you  pass  along,  full  of  honey."  (Roberts.)  The  same  thing  may  be  seen  in  some  parts
of  Europe,  especially  in  Spain.

Ver.  27.  "  Jonathan  heard  not,"  and  therefore  was  not  bound  by  his  father's  oath  ;  could
not  be  said  to  have  transgres.sed  it.  "  In  the  eagerness  of  pursuit  he  would  not  stop  to  do  more
than  *put  forth  the  end  of  the  rod.'"  (  Wordsworth.)

Ver.  31.  "Aijalon,  or  Ajalon."  "There  is  no  doubt  that  the  town  has  been  discovered  by  Dr.
Robinson  in  the  modern  Yalo,  a  little  to  the  north  of  the  Jaffa  i-oad,  and  about  fourteen  miles
out  of  Jerusalem.  It  stands  on  the  side  of  a  long  hill  which  forms  the  southern  boundary  of  a
fine  valley  of  cornfields  which  there  seems  no  reason  for  doubting  was  tlie  valley  which
witnessed  the  defeat  of  the  Cauaanites."  {Smith's  Biblical  Dictionary.)  See  also  Keil's  note  on
verse  23.     "Aijalon  would  be  from  fifteen  to  twenty  miles  from  Michmash."  (Bib.  Commentary.)

Ver.  32.  "  With  the  blood,"  "  blood  being  on  the  bodies  because  they  were  on  the  ground.'*

(Erdmanii).

Ver.  33.  "Sin  against  the  Lord."     A  breach  of  the  law.    Lev.  iii.  17,  vii.  26,  xix.  26,  etc

"The  prohibition  was  still  older  than  the  law  of  Moses,"  Genesis  ix.  4,  (Biblical  Commentary.)
*'They  were  painfully  conscientious  in  keeping  the  king's  order,  for  fear  of  the  curse,  but  had
no  scruple  in  transgressing  God's  command."  (Jamieson).  "  Roll  a  great  stone."  "By  laying
the  animal's  head  upon  the  stone,  the  blood  oozed  out  on  the  ground,  and  sufficient  evidence
was  afforded  that  the  ox  or  sheep  was  dead  before  it  was  attempted  to  eat  it."  (Jamieson.)


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,  book  i.


Ver.  34.  "  As  everywhere  btfore,  so  here,  the  people  display  unconditional  obedience  to
Saul."  (Erdmann.)

Ver.  35.  "And  Saul  built  an  altar."  "  lit  began  to  build  it,''''  i.e.,  he  built  this  altar  at  the
beginning,  or  as  the  first  altar.  {Ktil  )  "  It  seems  to  be  implied  that  though  he  had  reigned
three  years,  and  had  been  enabled  by  God  to  gain  many  victories,  yet  he  had  not  made  any
such  acknowledgement  of  gra  itude  to  God  for  his  successes,  and  that  he  had  ascribed  the  credit
of  them  to  himself."  {WordsworLh.)  "He  began  to  build  an  altar  to  the  Lord,  but  did  not
finish  it,  in  his  haste  to  pursue  the  Philistines  that  night,  as  it  follows  in  verse  36."  {Biblical
Commentary.)

Ver.  36.  "Let  us  go  down."  "  Saul  rushes  on  in  his  wild  desire  of  revenge,  perhaps  incited
by  the  consciousness  of  having  committed  a  gross  folly,  and  thereby  hindered  the  victory.  .  .  .
According  to  Jonathan's  statement  (vei-se  30)  the  defeat  was  not  total."  {Erdircami.)  "Then
said  the  priest."  "Ahiah  seems  to  have  been  in  doubt  that  Saul's  hasty  impetuosity  was  not
'working  the  righteousness  of  God,'  and  with  equal  courage  and  faithfulness,  worthy  of  his
otfice  as  thepriest,  when  every  one  else  yielded  to  Saul's  humour,  proposed  that  they  should
draw  near  to  God  to  inquire  of  Him."  {Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  37.  "Asked  counsel."  By  the  Urim  and  Thummim  attached  to  the  ephod  of  the  High
Priest.    (See  Judges  xviii.  5,  1  Chron.  x.  13,  Hosea  iv.  12,  1  Sam.  x.  22.)

Ver.  38.  "  Know  and  see  wherein  this  sin."     Which  Saul  infers  from  God's  silence.

Ver.  39.  "  For,  as  the  Lord  liveth."  "  Saul's  rashness  becomes  more  and  more  apparent."
{Biblical  Commentary.)  *'Not  a  man  answered  him."  "I'he  silence  of  the  people  is  a  sign
of  their  conviction  that  Jonathan  had  dune  nothing  wrong."  {Erdmann.)

Ver.  40.  "Do  what  seemeth  good."  Another  evidence  of  the  people's  submission.  (Seo
verses  34  and  3(5.)

Ver.  41.  "  A  perfect  lot."  Lot  is  not  in  the  original.  It  should  be  rendered  "  Give  perfeot-
ness,  or  truth,"  i.e.,  reveal  Thy  will.  But  it  is  clear  from  the  sequel  that  Saul  did  not  now
inquire  of  the  Lord  by  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  but  appealed  to  the  lot.

Ver.  42.  "Jonathan  was  taken."  "What  Jonathan  had  done  was  not  wrong  in  itself,  but
became  so  simply  on  account  of  the  oath  with  which  Saul  had  forbidden  it.  But  Jonathan  did
not  hear  the  oath,  and  therefore  had  not  even  consciously  transgressed.  Nevertheless  a  curse
lay  upon  Israel,  which  was  to  be  brought  to  light  as  a  warning  to  the  culprit.  Therefore
Jehovah  had  given  no  reply  to  Saul.  But  when  the  lot,  which  had  the  force  of  a  Divine  verdict,
fell  upon  Jonathan,  sentence  of  death  was  not  thereby  pronounced  on  him  by  God,  but  it  was
simply  made  manifest  that  through  his  transgression  of  his  father's  oath,  with  which  he  was  not
acquainted,  guilt  had  been  brought  upon  Israel.  The  breach  of  a  command  issued  with  a  solemn
oath,  even  when  it  took  place  unconsciously,  excited  the  wrath  of  God,  as  being  a  profanation  of
the  Divine  name.  But  such  a  sin  could  only  rest  as  guilt  upon  the  man  who  had  committed,
or  the  man  who  had  occasioned  it.  Now,  where  the  command  in  question  was  one  of  God
Himself,  there  could  be  no  question  that,  even  in  the  case  of  unconscious  transgression,  the  sin
fell  upon  the  transgressor,  and  it  was  necessary  that  it  should  either  be  expiated  by  him,  or
forgiven  him. "  But  where  the  command  of  a  man  had  been  unconsciously  transgressed,  the  guilt
might  also  fall  upon  the  man  who  issued  the  conjniaud,  that  is  to  say,  if  he  did  it  without  being
authorised  or  empowered  by  God.  In  the  present  instance  Saul  had  issued  the  prohibition
without  Divine  authority,  and  had  made  it  obligatory  upon  the  people  by  a  solemn  oath.  The
people  had  conscientiously  obeyed  the  command,  but  Jonathan  had  transgressed  it  without
being  aware  of  it.  For  this  Saul  was  about  to  punish  him  with  death,  but  the  people  opposed  it.
They  not  only  pronounced  Jonathan  innocent,  but  they  also  exclaimed  that  he  had  gained  the
victory  for  Israel  with  God  (ver.  45).  In  this  fact  (Jonathan's  victory)  there  was  a  Divine
verdict.  And  Saul  could  not  fail  to  recognise  now  that  it  was  not  Jonathan,  but  he  himself  who
had  sinned,  and  through  his  arbitrary  and  despotic  command  had  brought  guilt  upon  Israel,  on
account  of  which  God  had  given  him  no  reply."  (  Ked.)

Ver.  45.  "So  the  people  rescued  Jonathan."  "Observe  the  humiliation  to  which  Saul
is  reduced  by  his  disobedience  and  by  the  consequent  withdrawal  of  Divine  grace,  and  by  his
rashness  and  infatuation.  The  son  is  raised  above  the  father,  and  the  people  above  the  king."
{Wordsworth.)

Ver.  46.  "  Then  Sanl  went  up."  "  Saul  desisted  from  further  pursuit  of  the  Philistines,
with  whose  overthrow,  so  far  as  it  could  be  effected  under  the  harmful  consequences  of  his  blind
zeal,  he  had  to  be  contented.  The  Philistines  went  back  to  their  own  land.  In  spite  of  this
serious  defeat  their  strength  was  not  broken  (comp.  ver.  52).  The  fact  that  Saul  desisted  from
pursuit  shows  that  he  understood  the  Lord's  silence  as  a  denial,  and  was  obliged  to  recognise  as
the  cause  of  it,  not  Jonathan's  conduct,  but  his  own  arbitrary  and  rash  procedure."  {Erdmann.)

150


CHAP.  XIV.  IWMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


Ver.  47.     "So  Saul  took  the  kln-^dom."     "As  Sanl  had  first  of  all  scmred  a  recognition

of  hiinsclf  as  king  on  the  part  of  all  the  trilics  of  Israel  by  his  viclories  over  Liie  Amruonites  at
Jabesh  (chap.  xi.  Vl),  so  it  was  tluou-h  the  victory  uhich  he  had  gained  over  the  Philistines,  and
by  which  these  obstinate  foes  of  Israel  were  driven  bick  into  their  own  land,  that  he  rir*t  acquired
the  kingship  over  Israel,  i.e.,  first  really  secured  the  regal  aulhoriry  over  the  Israelites  ....  The
war  against  the  Ammonites  is  described  in  cliap.  xi. ;  but  with  the  Philistines  Saul  had  to  wage
war  ah  the  days  of  his  life  (ver.  52).  The  other  wars  are  none  of  tliem  more  fully  described,
siiu})ly  because  they  were  of  no  imj)ortance  to  the  kingdom  of  (iod."  (Keil.)  Dv.  Erdmann  takes
a  ditferent  view  of  these  words.  He  says  :  "  The  w^)rds  do  not  stand  in  pragm.itical  connection
with  the  preceding  narrati\  e  of  the  battle  against  the  I'hilistines,  as  if  the  intention  was  to  state
that  thus  Saul  gained  royal  authority.  His  accession  to  the  throne  is  mentioned  merely  as
Btarting-point  for  the  historical-statistical  statement  of  the  various  wars  which  he  carried  on  from
the  beginning  of  his  government  ....  What  is  said  of  them  before  and  after  this  is  determin  d
by  the  theocratic  point  of  view,  and  is  designed  to  show  how  Saul,  in  fulfilling  his  royal  calling
(essentially  a  warlike  one),  came  into  principal  coniiict  with  the  theocratic  task  and  significance
of  the  kingdom,  and  therefore  incurred  of  necessity  the  judgment  of  Crod,"  "There  seems  to  be
something  of  disapprobati<m  in  this  expression,  as  if  Saul  took  it  as  his  own,  rather  than  received
it  from  (jrod."  {[Vordsworth.)  "  Zobah."  "This  was  one  of  the  petty  Aramaean  kingdoms
flourisliing  at  this  time  (Psa.  Ix.,  title).  It  seems  to  have  been  situated  between  Haraascus  and
the  Euphiates.  The  details  given  in  2  Sam.  viii.  3-8,  12  :  x.  6-8  ;  2  Chron.  viii.  3,  show  it  to
have  been  a  wealthy  and  powerful  tribe,  and  to  have  asserted  its  independence  in  Solomon's
reign."  {Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  49.    *'  Ishni."     Abinadab  stands  for  this  name  in  chap.  xxxi.  2 ;  1  Chron.  viii.  33 :  ix.  39.

In  the  passages  in  Chronicles  there  is  a  fourth  son  mentioned,  named  Esh-baal,  who  is  doubtless
the  one  called  Ish-bosheth  in  2  Sam.  ii.  8.     It  is  im['Ossible  to  say  why  he  is  not  mentioned  here.

Ver.  51.  This  verse  should  be  read  :  "And  Kish  the  father  of  Saul^  and  Ner  the  father  of
Abner,  were  the  sons  of  Abiel."

Ver.  52.  "  When  Sawl  saw  any  strong  man,"  etc,  "  This  remark  is  probably  made  in
anticipation  of  Havid's  being  taken  into  Saul's  service,  xvi.  18, 19  ;  xviii.  2,  where  the  expressions
are  the  same  as  here."  {Biblical  Commentary.)


MAIN  UOMILETICS  OF  TUE  PA RAORAPE.— Verses  1-16.

Jonathan's  Victory  over  the  Philistines.

Tliis  victory — I.  Heveals  the  character  of  Jonathan.  His  words  and  his
deeds  proclaim  bim  to  have  been  a  man  of  physical  courage,  and  of  bumble
piety.  Tbese  two  elements  united  in  tbe  character  of  one  man  make  bim  as
perfect  a  specimen  of  manhood  as  it  is  possible  to  find.  'J^be  possession  of  eitber
characteristic — and  especially  of  tbe  latter — gives  to  its  possessor  a  claim  on
our  respect.  Courage — an  absence  of  fear  in  tbe  i)resence  of  bodily  danger —
a  willingness  to  ex[)ose  one's  body  to  risk  for  tbe  sake  of  gaining  a  certain  end
— is  a  quality  wbicb  is  not  met  witb  in  every  person,  and  it  deserves  to  be
acknowledged  a!ul  bononred  wherever  it  is  found.  But  tbere  are  many
physically  brave  men  wbo  bave  no  godliness  :  God,  in  whom  they  live  and  move
and  bave  tbeir  being,  is  never  acknowledged  by  them,  and  tbeir  deeds  of  daring
are  undertaken  and  accomplisbed  witbout  any  thongbt  of  seeking  His  help  or
rendering  to  Him  thanksgiving  for  deliverance.  And  it  cannot  be  denied  tbat
tbere  are  godly  men  wbo  are  naturally  timid  in  the  presence  of  bodily  danger —
tbat,  altbougb  goulincss  lias  a  tendency  to  make  a  man  brave  in  every  sense  of
the  word,  it  docs  not  so  change  his  natnral  dis[)osition  as  to  make  one  wbo  is
constitntionally  fearful  bold  and  daring  in  a  reniarkable  degree.  But  wben  a
courageous  man  is  a  man  of  God — wben  his  deeds  of  daring  are  undertaken  in
dependence  upon  God,  and  when  he  acknowledges  Him  in  all  bis  ways,  be  is  a
man  in  tbe  biobest  sense  of  tbe  word,  and  a  consciousness  of  God's  favour
increases  his  natural  courage  and  makes  bim  willing  to  do  and  to  dare  anything
in  the  path  of  duty.  Tbat  Saul  was  a  physically  brave  man  we  have  abundant
proof.     But  he  had  now  been  for  some  time  in  tbe  fieltl,  and  bad  evidently

151


nOMI inr I C  COMMENT AUY:    SAMUEL,  BOOK  I.


done  nothing.  So  far  as  can  be  gatliered  from  the  Scripture  record,  he  had
remained  inactive  since  his  interview  with  Samuel.  We  can  but  contrast  his
present  hesitation  with  his  decision  in  relation  to  the  Ammonite  invasion,  and
see  in  the  change  which  had  come  over  him  how  departure  from  God  may  make
a  naturally  courageous  man  tiuiid  and  hesitating.  Rut  Jonathan  evidently
added  to  his  father's  natural  bravery  a  spirit  of  humble  dependence  \\\)m\  God,
and  reminds  us  of*  Israel's  first  warlike  leader  Joshua,  in  whom  were  also  united
these  two  noble  characteristics.  ''Let  us  go  over  to  the  Philistines'  garrison'*
speaks  for  the  courage  of  the  warrior-prince,  while  '*  It  may  be  that  the  Lord
will  work  for  us"  tells  of  his  godly  character.

II.  Reveals  God's  approval  of  His  servant's  undertaking.  This  vic-
tory of  Jonathan's  is  one  among  the  many  instances  upon  record  in  the
history  of  God's  Church  of  the  special  seal  of  Divine  approval  which  is  always
set  upon  eminent  faith.  Old  Testament  histor}^  gives  many  illustrations  of  the
truth  of  the  Saviour's  words,  ^'All  things  are  possible  to  Him  that  believetk"
(Mark  ix.  23),  and  the  success  which  crowned  this  undertaking  makes  it  a
striking  one.  It  is  instructive  to  notice  the  increasingly  evident  marks  of
Divine  approval  which  were  vouchsafed  to  Jonathan  on  thi ;  occasion.  God  first
condescends  to  give  His  servant  just  enough  encouragement  to  lead  him  to
persevere  in  his  project  by  accei)ting  the  sign  which  he  had  proposed.  Here
was  just  enough  token  of  God's  a])proval  to  lead  him  to  go  on,  but  not  enough
to  do  away  with  the  exercise  of  faith.  A  man  of  less  confidence  in  God  might
have  faltered  here,  and  have  been  tempted  to  regard  the  Philistines'  invitation
as  only  a  remarkable  coincidence.  But  Jonathan's  faith  was  strong  enough  to
see  in  it  a  token  that  "the  Lord  had  delivered  the  enemy  into  the  hand  of
Israel,"  and  the  faith  which  could  discern  the  Divine  approval  in  an  incident
apparently  so  trivial  was  soon  to  receive  an  abundant  reward  in  an  unmistakable
manifestation  of  Jehovah's  presence  in  the  terror-stricken  host,  and  in  the
quaking  earth.  This  is  the  method  of  Divine  working  generally.  God  always
looks  with  approval  upon  undertakings  which  are  born  of  confidence  in  His
power  and  goodness,  but  although  He  may,  during  their  progress,  vouchsafe
sufficient  tokens  of  His  power  and  presence  to  encourage  the  hearts  of  His
servants,  He  may  withhold  His  most  decisive  and  unmistakable  manifestations
until  their  courage  and  faith  have  been  abundantly  tested.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.   6.     Divine    power    of    faith.  It  may  be  a  matter  of  hope  that  He

which  makes  a  man  more  than  men  1  will  work  for  us.     (People  often  say :

The  question  is   not   what   Jonathan  *'  I  have  faith  that  we  shall  succeed

can    do,    but     what    God     can     do,  in  this  enterprise."     That  is  not  pro-

whose  power    is    not   in  the    means,  perly  a  matter  of  faith,  but  only  of

but  in  Himself     0    admirable  faith  hope.     We  believe  that  God  can  give

in  Jonathan,  whom  neither  the  steep-  success  when  it  is  His  will ;    we  are

ness     of     rocks    nor    the    multitude  persuaded     that     our     enterprise    is

of  enemies  can  dissuade  from  such  an  righteous  and    would    have  desirable

assault ! — Bp.  Hall.  results  ;  therefore  we  hope  it  ujay  be

hope,  Jounded  on  faith.     1.  It   is  God's  will  to  give  us  success). — Irans-

certain, — a  niatter  of  faith  —that  the  lator  of  Langes  Commentary.
Lord  can  save  by  many  or  by  few.     2.

152


(JHAP.  xi^.  BOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.

MAIN  IIOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  17—48.

Saul's  Rashness.

The  whole  of  Saul's  conduct  in  relcation  to  Jonathan's  victory  shows  us  a  man
acting  from  passion  rather  than  from  principle.  Such  action  in  any  man  must
end  in  mischief,  but  it  is  far  more  mischievous  when  he  holds  any  position  of
responsibility  and  influence — when  the  destinies  of  others  are  hirgely  in  his  hand.
It  is  a  sight  which  makes  one  sad  to  see  a  noble  vessel  tossing  on  a  stormy  sea
with  no  hand  upon  the  wheel  to  direct  her  course,  and  therefore  at  the  mercy  of
every  wind  and  wave.  Although  she  is  a  lifeless  object  we  seem  almost  to
pity  her  when  we  reflect  that  a  firm  hand  upon  the  rudder  would  give  her  all
she  needs  to  rise  superior  to  the  storm  and  steer  straight  to  her  haven.  But
how  much  sadder  is  the  sight  0^2^  gifted  man — one  upon  whom  God  has  bestowed
many  opportunities  of  usefulness  and  capabilities  of  using  them — throwing  them
all  aside  and  drifting  through  life  like  an  unpiloted  vessel  at  the  mercy  of
every  wave  of  passionate  impulse,  because  he  will  not  make  the  will  of  God  the
guide  of  his  life.  But  if  the  vessel  was  not  only  going  to  destruction  herself  but
was  laden  with  passengers  who  would  in  all  probability  share  her  fate,  the
greatness  of  the  misfortune  would  be  increased  a  thousand  fold.  And  so  it  is
when  a  man  who  does  not  make  his  duty  the  guiding  principle  of  his  life  holds
to  a  great  extent  the  happiness  or  misery  of  his  fellow-creatures  in  his  power.
Such  a  man  not  only  wrecks  his  own  life  but  involves  them  in  distress  and  per-
haps in  ruin.  Saul  here  presents  us  with  a  sad  example  of  such  characters.
Instead  of  riding  victoriously  over  the  difficulties  which  beset  the  nation  at  this
time,  and  possibly  winning  for  himself  and  for  them  a  season  of  rest  from
foreign  oppression,  he  drifts  towards  the  rocks  himself  and  involves  them  in
imminent  danger  because  he  rejects  the  hand  which  would  have  piloted  him  in
safety.     Such  a  man —

I.  Throws  away  God-given  opportunities.  Here  was  an  opportunity  which,
if  rightly  used,  niight  have  entirely  subdued  the  power  of  the  Philistines.  The
Divine  recognition  of  Jonathan's  faith  and  courage  was  shown  by  miraculous
signs,  which  struck  them  with  terror  and  led  to  a  "  very  great  discomfiture."
But  the  victory  could  not  be  followed  up  because  the  people  were  faint  from
want  of  food,  the  consecpience  of  Saul's  unreasonably  exacting  from  them  a  vow
to  fast  until  the  evening — a  vow  which  had  its  origin  in  nothing  higher  than  a
si)irit  of  passionate  revenge.  The  opportunity  thus  lost  never  returned  during
the  life  of  Saul,  for  it  is  recorded  that  "  there  was  sore  war  against  the  Philistines
all  his  days  "  (ver.  52).

II.  Is  always  filled  with  a  sense  of  his  own  importance.  Saul  did  not  come
into  the  field  until  the  rout  of  the  enemy  had  set  in — he  only  had  to  follow  up
the  victory  which  was  the  fruit  of  Jonathan's  faith  and  the  interposition  of  God.
We  should  hardly  expect  to  hear  a  man  under  such  circumstances  speaking
much  about  himself  and  dictating  to  others  as  though  all  the  glory  of  the  day
was  due  to  his  valour.  But  with  Saul  there  is  no  word  of  recoguiticm  of  the
services  of  his  son  nor  ascription  of  praise  to  the  God  of  battles.  The  work  was
his,  and  the  aim  that  he  had  in  view  was  personal  revenge — "  tliat  I  may  be
avenged  on  mine  enemies"  (ver.  24).  A  man  who  does  not  give  to  God  the
glory  due  unto  Him  is  always  prone  to  be  vain- glorious.

III.  Will  refuse  to  acknowledge  himself  in  the  wrong,  even  when  his  own
nature  and  Gcd  Himself  declare  him  to  be  so.  Saul  could  iiardly  have  been
without  some  natural  aileciion  for  his  noble  son,  yet  he  would  have  seen  him
die  rather  than  confess  that  he  had  acted  foolishly  and  sinfully.     If  he  had

153


BOM  I  LET  I C  COMMENTARY  :  SAMUEL.


BOOK  I.


been  in  a  condition  of  spirit  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  God,  lie  mi:;]it  have
discerned  as  plainly  as  his  subjects  did  that  God  had  been  that  day  wiili
Jonathan,  and  tliat  the  sin  whicli  caused  Him  to  vouchsafe  no  answer  to  his
inquiry  was  with  him  and  not  with  his  son.  But  a  man  under  the  dominion  of
his  passions  is  as  deaf  to  the  voice  of  God  as  he  is  to  that  of  his  own  better
nature,  which  is  indeed  itself  a  voice  of  God.

IV.  Must  be  humiliated  in  the  end.  Saul's  vows  and  oaths  were  only  like
straws  in  the  stream  when  the  people's  sense  of  justice  was  aroused.  If  he  was
blind  to  all  his  own  interests,  and  deaf  to  the  voice  of  reason  and  of  Go<i,  they
were  not.  Up  to  this  moment  they  had  yielded  to  him  an  unwavering  obedience,
but  now  they  make  a  firm  stand.  Saul  may  say  to  Jonathan,  *'  Thou  shalt
surely  die  ;"  but  he  is  met  with  the  united  voice  of  the  people,  "  There  shall
not  one  hair  of  his  head  fall  to  the  ground."  How  sad  a  contrast  his  position
here  to  that  which  he  held  after  the  Ammonite  victory  (chap.  xi.  12-14).  He
who  would  not  humble  himself  before  God  is  now  compelled  to  submit  to  the
decision  of  his  subjects.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


Ver.  18.  Saul  is  a  speciemen  of
that  class  of  persons  who  show  a  cer-
tain reverence  and  zeal  for  the  out-
ward forms  of  religion,  and  cherish
even  a  superstitious  reliance  on  them,
but  are  not  careful  to  cherish  the
inner  spirit  of  vital  religion,  without
which  all  outward  forms  and  ordi-
nances, even  though  instituted  by  God
Himself,  are  mere  "sounding  brass
and  a  tinkling  cymbal "  (1  Cor.  xiii.
12). —  Wordsworth.

Hypocrites  in  a  strait  repair  to  God,
not  so  much  to  serve  Him  as  to
serve  themselves  upon  Him  ;  for  at
another  time  they  think  themselves
men  good  enough,  and  act  as  if  they
were  petty  gods  within  tliemselves. —
Traj)p.

Ver.  19.  The  neglect  of  prayer  was
the  beginning  of  Saul's  fall,  as  all  the
Fathers  interpret  that  place  where  it
is  said  that  Saul  commanded  the
priest  to  withdraw  his  hand  from  the
aik.  There  are  some  who  with  Saul
will  call  for  the  ark,  and  will  presently
cry  "Away  with  it!"  that  is,  will
begin  their  prayers,  and  will  break
them  off  in  the  midst  of  any  occa-
sion.— Bp.  Andrews.

Saul  will  consult  the  ark :  liypocrites,

when  they  have  leisure,  will  perhaps

be  holy.     But  when  the  tumult  was

aroused  Saul's  piety  decreased.     The

154


ark  must  give  place  to  arms.  Worldly
minds  regard  holy  duties  no  further
than  they  stand  with  their  own
carnal  purposes.  Saul,  who  would
before  wilfully  sacrifice  ere  he  fought
(chap.  xiii.  9),  will  now,  in  the  other
extreme,  fight  in  a  wilful  indevotion.—
Ly  Ball.

The  courage  of  Jonathan  had  already
achieved  the  victory,  while  Saul  was
talking  about  what  was  to  be  done  ;
so  much  njore  successful  was  the  faith
and  obedience  of  the  son,  than  the
worldly  policy  and  formal  indiflference
of  the  father. —  Wordsworth,

Ver.  39.  Those  who  are  indulgent
to  their  own  sins  are  generally  severe
in  animadverting  on  the  sins  of  others,
and  such  as  most  disregard  God's
authority  are  most  impatient  when
their  own  commands  appear  to  be
slighted. — jScott,

Vers.  24-46.  There  is  here  a  six-
fold testimony  against  Saul.  1.  The
word  of  his  own  mouth:  "Till  1  have
avenged  myself  on  mine  enemies.
2.  The  word  of  his  son:  "My  father
hath  troubled  the  land."  3.  The
fiiihire  of  the  pursuit  of  the  Philistines.
4.  The  Lord's  silence  when  He  was
inquired  of  5.  The  silence  of  the
people  at  his  oath.  6.  The  decision
of  the  people,  by  which  God's  decision


CHAP.  XV.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


was  made  apparent,  and  Saul's  conflict
with  the  Lord  and  himselt  shown  to  bo
a  conflict  also  with  the  people,  who
recognised  God's  hand  and  will  l»etter
than  he.  On  God's  side  there  are  not
lacking  co-working  means  by  which
man,  when  he  detaches  himself  from
God,  may  be  brought  to  consider  him-
selt' and  return  to  God.  And  if  he
do  not  return,  it  is  because  of  the
energy  with  which  the  iiuman  will
persistently  follows  its  own  path,  and
rejects  all  God's  exhortations  and  in-
fluences.— Langes  Commentary,

This  narrative  allows  us  to  draw
some  general  inferences  as  to  the
character  of  Saul's  personal  religion
at  this  time.  1.  It  leads  us  to  per-
ceive how  strangely  partial  his  religion
was  in  its  operation.  Tlie  faint  and
distressed  state  of  the  people  led  them,
as  soon  as  they  had  the  opportunity,
to  eat  the  animals  which  they  had
slain,  **in  their  blood."  And  Saul
immediately  took  steps  to  prevent  the
continuance  of  this  infringement  of
the  ritual.  So  far,  of  course,  he  was
right.  But  the  eagerness  with  which
he  condemned  the  sin  of  the  people
contrasts  strangely  with  the  moral
obtuseness  which  prevented  him  from
seeing  that  his  own  folly  had  been  the

occasion  of  their  sin His

religion  was  of  that  order  which  allows
its  professor  to  be  vastly  more  affected
by  something  outward  anil  formal,
than  by  the  indulgence,  within  him-
self, of  a  wrong  and  impious  state  of
mind.  It  jmts  us  in  mind  of  that
most  thorough  manifestation  of  hypo-
crisy, when  the  betrayers  of  Jesus
shrank  back  with  sanctimonious  step


from  tlic  thrcsliold  of  tlie  judgment-
hall,  and  would  not  set  foot  witnin  it,
*'  lest  they  should  be  defiled  ;  but  that
they  might  eat  the  passover."  And
yet  although  their  consciences  would
not  allow  them  to  do  this,  the  very
s;imo  consciences,  when  Tilate  came
out  to  them  and  declared  that  Jesus
was  innocent,  presented  no  obstacle  to
their  murderous  cry,  "  Crucify  lliin  !  "
....  Oh  !  strange  admixture  of  care
for  external  proprieties  with  downright
inward  guilt!  .  .  .  Nothing  so  blunts
the  moral  sense  .  .  .  .as  the  idea  that
ceremonial  acts  independently  of  holi-
ness of  heart  constitute  real  reli.,n(m  ;
.  .  .  .  high-toned  morality  declines
just  in  proportion  as  mere  ceremonial
religion  assumes  the  sway.  .  .  .  2.  It
does  not  appear  to  have  been  charac-
terised by  the  slightest  self-suspicion.
....  It  never  seems  to  have  entered
his  njind  that  he  could  by  any  possi-
bility have  been  in  the  wrong  ;  but  he
was  most  ready  to  suppose  that  any
one  else  might  be  to  blauie.  .  .  .  One
would  have  thought  that  if  anything
could  have  brought  him  to  a  sense  of
his  error,  it  would  have  been  the  dis-
covery that  his  rash  decree  and  oath
had  im[)licated  his  own  son  in  liability
to  sutl'ering  and  death.  Our  indig-
nation rises  when  we  hear  him  say,
"  God  do  so  and  more  also,"  etc.  and
we  are  ready  to  exclaim,  "  What !
another  oath  ?  Has  not  one  done
mischief  enough  ?  Cannot  you  see  it  ?
Do  you  not  feel  it  ?"  Nothing  can
exceed  the  hardening  influence  of  that
professed  religion  which  leaves  a  man
unsuspicious  and  ignorant  of  himself.
— Miller*


CHAPTER  XV.

CRmCAL  AND  Expository  Notes. — •'  Samuel  also  said  to  Saul."  "  This  verse  !s  not  to
be  connected  chronologically  with  chap,  xii ,  but  coutini;es  the  nanaLive  of  cha])s.  xiii.  aiul  xiv.
The  solemn  reminder  of  baul's  royal  anoiuliiig,  and  of  Samuel's  Divine  mis.siuu  to  that  end,
refers  not  to  xi.  15,  but  to  ix.  15,  x.  1.  It  points  to  the  fact  that  the  following  commission  ia
a  Divine  command  communicated  by  the  appointed  organ,  the  propliet  of  God,  and  that  the
bearer  of  the  royal  office  has  here  to  perform  a  theocratic  mission  with  unconditional  obedience.
The  me  stands  hrst  (such  is  the  order  of  the  Hebrew)  in  order  to  give  prominence  to  the  oiiicial

155


tiOMTLETiC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  BooKt.


authority,  as  bearer  of  which  Samuel  must  have  felt  obliged  by  Saul's  past  conduct  to  assert
himself  over  against  him."  {Erdmann.)  "Several  years  had  been  passed  in  unsuccessful  military
operations  a-ainst  troublesome  neighbours,  and  during  these  years  Saul  had  been  left  to  act  in
a  great  measure  at  his  own  discretion  as  an  independent  prince.  Now  a  new  test  is  proposed  of
his  possessing  the  character  of  a  theocratic  monarch  in  Israel;  and  in  announcing  the  duty
required  of  him,  SamuJ  brought  before  him  his  official  station  as  the  Lord's  vicegerent,  and  the
peculiar  oblig;ition  uuder  which  he  was  laid  to  act  in  that  capacity.  He  had  formerly  done
wrong,  for  which  a  severe  rebuke  and  threatening  were  administered  to  him.  Now  an
opportunity  was  afforded  him  of  retrieving  that  error."  {Jamieson.)

Ver.  2.  " I  remember."  Rather,  "I  have  looked  upon"  {Keil),  or  "I  have  considered,  or
noted."  {Erdmann.)  "  Amalek."  The  Amalekites  were  a  wild,  warlike,  desert-people,  dwelling
south  and  south-west  of  Judea,  in  Arabia  Pe'ciea,  descended  from  the  same  ancestor  as  the
Edomites,  and  took  their  name  from  Esau's  gi^audson  Amalek  (Gen.  xxxvi.  12-16  ;  1  Chron.  i.  36).
God's  command  goes  back  to  their  first  hostilities  (Exod.  xvii.),  which  were  often  afterwards
repeated  in  their  alliance  with  the  Cauaanites  (Numb.  xiv.  40  s  q.),  with  the  Moabites  (Judges
iii.  13),  and  with  the  Midianites  (Judges  vii.  12),  the  Amalekites,  according  to  ver.  33,  having
newly  made  an  inroad,  with  robbery  and  murder,  into  the  Tsraelitish  territory."  {Erdmann.)

Ver.  3.  "Utterly  destroy."  Literally,  "put  everything  under  the  ban."  "The  ban,  of
which  we  have  here  a  notable  instance,  was  an  old  custom,  existing  probably  before  Moses,  but
formulated,  regulated,  and  extended  by  him.     In  its  simplest  form  it  was  the  devotion  to  God

of  any  object,  living  or  dead When  an  Israelite  or  the  whole  congregation  wished  to

devote  to  God  anything — man,  beast,  or  field — whether  for  the  honour  of  God  or  to  get  rid  of  an
injurious  or  accursed  thing,  it  was  brought  and  offered  to  the  priest,  and  could  not  then  be
redeemed  (Lev.  xxvii.  28) ;  if  living,  it  must  be  put  to  death.  A  deep  consciousness  of  man's
sin  and  God's  holiness  underlay  this  law.  The  wicked  thing,  contrary  to  the  spiritual  theocratic
life  of  God's  people,  must  be  removed,  must  be  committed  to  him  who  was  ruler  and  judge  of
God's  people.     And  so  the  custom  had  a  breadth  of  use  as  well  as  of   meaning  which  it  never

had  in  other  ancient  nations To  spare  the  devoted  thing  was  a  grave  offence,  calling

down  the  vengeance  of  God.  In  later  times  the  ban  was,  doubtless  under  prophetic  direction,
softened,  and  in  the  New  Testament  times  the  infliction  of  death  had  quite  ceased."  (Translator
of  Lange's  Commentary.)

Ver.  4.  "Telaim."  Most  likely  the  same  as  Telem  (Josh.  xv.  21,  24),  a  city  lying  on  the
eastern  border  of  Judah,  and  therefore  near  the  territory  of  the  Amalekites.  "Ten  thousand
men  of  Judali."  *' This  implies  that  the  two  hundred  thousand  were  from  the  other  tribes."
(Keil.)  "  Tlie  separate  mention  of  the  men  of  Judah  shows  how  little  union  there  was  between
Judah  and  Ephraim  even  at  this  time  ;  a  circumstance  which  throws  light  upon  the  whole  after
history.  (See  2  Sam.  xi.  11).  The  presence  of  these  men  arose,  no  doubt,  from  their  tribe  being
the  chief  sufi'erers  from  the  inroads  of  the  Amalekites."  {Biblical  Commentary,)

Ver.  6.  "  Kenites."  A  tribe  first  mentioned  in  Gen.  xv.  19.  "  Their  origin  is  hidden  from
us,  but  we  may  fairly  infer  that  they  were  a  branch  of  the  larger  nation  of  Midian,  from  the
fact  tliat  Jethro,  who  in  Exod.  ii.  15,  etc.,  is  represented  as  priest  or  prince  of  Aiidian,  and  is  in
Judges  i.  16  :  iv.  11,  as  distinctly  said  to  have  been  a  Kenite.  .  .  They  were  therefore  descended
immediately  from  Abraham  by  his  w  ife  Keturah,  and  in  this  relationship  and  the  connection  with
Moses  we  find  the  key  to  their  continued  alliance  with  Israel.  The  important  services  rendered
by  the  sheikh  of  the  Kenites  to  Moses  during  a  time  of  great  pressure  and  difficulty,  were
rewarded  by  a  promise  of  firm  friendship  between  the  two  nations  (Numb.  x.  32).  And  this  promise
was  gratefully  remembered  long  after  (1  Sam.  xv.  6).  The  connection  then  commenced  lasted  as
firmly  as  a  connection  could  last  between  a  settled  people  like  Israel  and  one  whose  tendencies
were  so  nomadic  as  the  Kenites.  They  seem  to  have  accompanied  the  Israelites  in  their  wander-
ings (Num.  xxiv.  21,  22,  etc.^  .  .  .  But  these  over,  they  forsook  the  neighbourhood  of  the  towns
and  betook  tiiemselves  to  freer  air — to  '  the  wilderness  of  Judah,  which  is  to  the  south  of  Arad  *
(Judges  i.  16),  where  'they  dwelt  among  the  people  '  of  the  district— the  Amalekites,  who  wan-
dered in  that  dry  region,  and  among  whom  they  were  living  when  Saul  made  his  expedition
there."  {Smith's  Biblical  Dictionary.)

Ver.  7.  "  Havilali— Shur."  "  Havilah,  according  to  Gen.  xxv.  18,  the  boundary  of  the
Ishmaelites,  probably  therefore  in  the  south-east  on  the  border  of  Arabia  Fetrea  and  Arabia

Felix Shur  is  the  present  wilderness    of   Jifar,    the   portion    of  the  Arabian   desert

bordering  on  Egypt,  into  which  the  Israelites  entered  after  the  exodus  (Ex.  xv.  22).  Saul  thus
smote  the  Amalekites  through  their  territory  from  south-east  towards  the  west  and  north-west."
{Erdmann.)

Ver.  8.  "  Agag.  *  "  Evidently  a  reduplicate  variety  of  the  Egyptian  Hak  {ruler).  This  was
the  common  title  of  the  Amalekite  king.  Saul  spared  him  probably  to  enjoy  the  glory  of
displaying  so  distinguished  a  captive.  Josephus  distinctly  as.serts  that  the  beauty  and  tallness
of  his  body  made  so  fine  an  appearance,  and  Saul  admired  it  so  much,  that  he  thought  him

156


CHAP.  IV.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMtrm.


worthy  of  preservation  (cf.  1  Kings  xx.  32-34).**  {Jamienon.)  "All  the  people."  "That  is,
speaking  pfenerally,  some  survived,  of  course  ;  the  Anialukites  ai'[)i-:ir  afterwnj-ls,  xxvii.  8  ;
XXX.  1  ;  2  Samuel  viii.  12.  Their  complete  annihilation  is  mentioned  in  1  Chron.  iv.  43."
{^Erdmann.)

Ver.  9.  "  Fatllngs.**  Literally  of  the  second  sort  Kimchi  and  other<<  nnderstand  the  word  to
denote  animals  of  the  second  birth,  which  were  thought  better  than  others.

Ver.  10.  "It  repenteth  me."  "The  anthropopathic  expression  for  the  change  of  the
Divine  procedure  into  the  opposite  of  what  the  holy  and  righteous  will  of  G()<1  had  determined
under  the  condition  of  holy  and  righteous  conduct  by  men  wlien  on  man's  side  there  has  been
a  change  to  the  opposite  of  this  condition  without  repentance."  {Erdmann.)  See  also  comments
on  this  verse.  "It  grieved  Samuel  and  he  cried  unto  the  Lord,"  etc.  Literally  " /<
burned  (in)  him,**  i.e.,  his  wrath  was  kindled.  "Many  grave  thoughts  seem  to  have  presented
themselves  at  once  to  Samuel  and  disturbed  his  mind,  when  he  reflected  upon  the  dishonour
which  mi^ht  be  heaped  upon  the  name  of  God,  and  the  occasion  which  the  deposition  and
rejection  of  Saul  would  furnish  to  wicked  men  for  blaspheming  God.  For  Saul  had  been
anointed  by  the  ministry  of  Samuel,  and  he  had  been  chosen  by  God  Himself  from  all  the
people,  and  called  by  Him  to  the  throne.  If,  therefore,  he  was  nevertheless  deposed,  it  seemed
likely  that  so  much  would  be  detracted  from  the  authority  of  Samuel  and  the  confidence  of  the
people  in  his  teaching,  and  moreover  that  the  worship  of  God  would  be  overturned,  and  the
greatest  disturbance  ensue  ;  in  fact,  that  universal  confusion  would  break  in  upon  the  nation.
These  were  probably  the  grounds  upcm  which  Samuel's  great  indignation  rested.''  {Calvin.)
"  The  object  of  Saul's  prayer  was  doubtless  not  release  from  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine
command,  but  the  exemption  of  Saul  from  the  sentence  of  rejection  and  the  forgiveness  of  his
disobedience."  {Erdmann).

Ver.  12.  "  When  Samuel  rose.**  "  It  does  not  appear  clearly  where  Samuel  was,  but
probably  at  his  own  home."  {Biblical  Commentary.)  "Carmel."  A  city  south-east  of  Hebron,
on  the  mountains  of  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  65),  now  called  Kurmul.  "A  place."  "Rather,  a
monument  or  trophy.  The  Hebrew  word  yad  means  a  hand,  but  we  have  a  certain  clue  to  the
meaning,  monument  or  trophy,  not  only  in  the  verb  here  used,  '  set  up,'  but  in  2  Sam.  xviii.  18,
where  we  are  told  that  the  marble  pillar  which  Absalom  set  up  was  called  Yad  Absalom.**
{Biblical  Commentary,)

Ver.  13.  "  Samuel  came  to  Saul.**  "  In  the  place  (Gilgal)  where  he  had  solemnly  pledged
Saul  and  the  people  to  unconditional  obedience,  he  now  executes  judgment  for  disobedience  to
the  Divine  will."  [Erdmann,)  "I  have  performed,"  etc.  "Self-will  and  rashness  have
hitherto  been  Saul's  chief  faults.  He  now  seems  to  add  falsehood  and  hypocrisy."  {Biblical
Commentary.)

Ver.  15.  "Tlio  people  spared,"  etc.  "The  falsehood  and  hypocrisy  of  these  words  lay
upon  the  vei-y  surface  ;  for  even  if  the  cattle  spared  were  really  intended  as  sacrifices  to  the  Lord,
not  only  the  people,  but  Saul  also,  would  have  had  their  own  interests  in  view  {vid.  ver.  9),  since
the  flesh  of  thank-offerings  was  appropriated  to  sacrificial  meals."  {Ktil.)  "  Every  word  uttered
by  Saul  seems  to  indicate  the  breaking  down  of  his  moral  character.  There  is  something
thoroughly  mean  in  his  attempt  to  shift  the  responsibility  of  what  was  done  from  his  own  kingly
shoulders  to  those  of  the  i)eoi)le,  One  feels  that  after  the  scene  so  forcibly  described  in  this
cha])ter,  Saul  must  have  forfeited  his  own  self-respect,  and  that  his  downward  career  was  hence-
forth almost  inevitable."  {Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  17.  "When  thou  wast  little."  "The  reference  here  to  Saul's  own  words  (chap.  ix.
21),  is  beyond  doubt.  It  is  the  humiliating  reminler  to  the  haughty  Saul  of  the  low  position
whence  he  had  been  elevated  to  the  headship  of  Israel,  and  of  the  modesty  and  humility  which
he  then  possessed."  {Erdmann.)

Ver.  18.  "Sinners.'*  "As  though  God  would  justify  his  commission  to  destroy  them.  So
it  is  said  of  the  men  of  Sodom,  that  they  were  sinners  before  the  Lord."  {Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  19.     "  Fly  upon."     "  Expressive  of  eagerness,  passionate  craving."  {Erdmann.)

Ver.  21.  "  The  Lord  thy  God."  "As  if  he  had  been  showing  honour  to  Samuel,  as  well  as
to  God,  when  he  was  disobeying  both."  \  Wordsworth.)  "  As  if  he  had  more  zeal  for  the  glory  of
God  than  was  felt  by  Samuel."  {Biblical  Commentary .)

Ver.  22.  "E.th  the  Lord,"  etc.  "This  fundamental  ethical  truth  is  affirmed,  with
unmistakable  reference  to  these  words  of  Samuel,  in  the  classical  passages  Psa.  1.  8-14;
11.18,  19;  Isa.  i.  11  ;  Micah  vi.  6-8;  Hosea  vi.  6;  Jer.  vi.  20."  C Erdmann.)  "There  is  a
poetical  rhythm  in  the  original,  which  gives  it  the  tone  of  a  Divine  oracle  uttered  by  the  Spirit
of  God,  imparting  to  it  an  awful  solemnity,  and  making  it  sink  deep  in  the  memory  of  the
hearers  in  all  generations."  {Wordswoi'th*)

157


nOMILETW  COMMENTARY  :  SA^JUEL.  book  i.


Ver.  23.  Literally,  "  RehtlUon  is  the  sin  of  soothsaying,  and  opposition  is  heathenism  and
idolatry."

Ver.  25.  *'  Pardon  my  sin."  "  He  offers  this  prayer  to  Samuel,  not  to  G'oi."  "  Turn  again
tvith  me."  "  AccorJinfjf  to  ver.  CO,  to  show  him  honour  before  the  elders  of  the  people,  and
before  Israel,  that  his  rejection  might  not  be  known."  {Kell.)

Ver.  29.  "The  strengtfi  of  Israel."  A  phrase  which  occurs  only  here.  It  means  glory,
perpetuity,  trust.  "  The  Hebrew  word,  Netsah,  signifies  what  is  bright  or  shines  continually,
and  therefore  what  may  be  relied  upon — as  the  sun,  or  stars."  ( Wo7'dsivurth.)

Ver.  31.  "  So  Samuel  turned  again,**  "  Not,  of  course,  to  yield  to  his  selfish  opposition
to  God's  honour,  but  to  preserve  unimpaired  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  the  r>osition  of  Saul's
kingdom,  which,  though  theocratically  rejecterl,  yet  still  in  fact  by  God's  will  remained,  and
especially  not  to  be  wanting  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  people."  {Erdmann,)

Ver.  32.  "  And  Agag  came  unto  him  delicately."  The  phrase  is  obscure.  The  last
word  is  derived  from  a  verb,  meaning  to  live  daintiUf,  softly.  Woi'd^?  worth  translates,  *  joyfully.*
Can  it  mean  fawningly,  flatteringly,  with  a  view  of  appeasing  Samuel  ?  "  {Biblical  Commentary.
"Thebitterness  of  death  is  passed."  Some  commentators  see  in  these  words  of  Agag  a  heroic
contempt  of  death,  and  others  an  assumed  courageousness.  Most,  however,  think  that  Agag,
not  having  been  slain  by  Saul,  felt  sure  that  Samuel  would  spare  his  life.

Ver.  33.  "  As  thy  sxvord,"  etc.  **  From  these  words  it  is  very  evident  that  Agag  had
carried  on  his  wars  with  great  cruelty,  and  had  therefore  forfeited  his  life  acconiing  to  the
lex  2'alionis."  (Keil.)  "  Before  the  Lord,"  i.e.,  before  the  altar  of  Jehovah  there  ;  for  the
slaying  of  Agag,  being  the  execution  of  a  ban,  was  an  act  performed  for  the  glory  of  God,"  (Keil.)

Ver.  85.  "  And  Samuel  came  no  more."  "  The  Hebrew  is,  "saw  him  no  more, '  «.«.,  did
not  visit  him,  which  does  not  contradict  chap.  xix.  24.


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.-^Vents  1—3.

The  Sentence  against  Amalek.

I.  National  sins  may  bring  national  retribution  long  after  the  individuals
who  committed  the  sins  have  left  the  world.  Both  history  and  revelation
teach  us  tbat  God  deals  with  nations  as  a  wliole  as  well  as  with  men  individu-
ally, and  that  the  sin  of  one  generation  may  bringpenalty  upon  another.  If  a
man  deals  a  murderous  blow  to  another  and  is  not  brought  to  justice  until
long  after  the  crime  has  been  committed,  the  judge  will  not  overlook  the  crime
because  it  was  not  committed  yesterday,  or  a  few  days  or  weeks  ago — however
long  the  transgressor  may  go  unpunished  the  penalty  of  the  transgression  hangs
over  him  until  he  has  undergone  the  punishment  wln'di  it  deserves.  The  words
of  God  in  this  chapter  show  that  he  proceeds  on  the  same  principle  in  relation
to  nations.  Many  ages  had  passed  away  since  "  Amalek  laid  wait  for  Israel  in
the  way,  when  he  came  up  out  of  Egypt,"  and  the  men  who  were  guilty  of  tlie
deed  had  long  since  left  the  earth.  Yet  the  mention  of  it  here  shows  that  the
sentence  here  passed  upon  the  nation  had  special  reference  to  that  national  sin
which  had  been  committed  so  long  ago.  At  the  same  time  we  must  remember
that  the  Amalekites  of  the  time  of  Saul  were  possessed  by  the  same  spirit  of  hatred
to  Israel  as  their  forefathers  were — although  no  reference  is  here  made  to  their
later  attacks  upon  the  Hebrew  people,  we  know  from  other  passages  (See
critical  Notes)  that  the  Amalekites  now  were  no  less  cruel  and  murderous  in
disposition  than  their  forefathers  in  the  days  of  Moses.  If  a  man  was  brought  to
the  bar  of  a  human  judge  for  a  crime  committed  in  his  youtli,  and  it  was
proven  that  he  has  since  lived  for  years  the  life  of  a  peaceable  citizen,  it  might
seem  hard  to  make  him  now  suffer  for  a  deed  done  so  long  ago,  but  if  during
the  intervening  years  he  had  been  adding  crime  to  crime  he  will  deserve  to  have
all  his  misdeeds  taken  into  account  when  the  day  of  reckoning  conies.  So  it
was  with  Amalek  at  this  time.  The  present  character  of  the  nation  was  such
158


CHAP.  XV.  nOMlLETIC  COM  MEN  TAR  Y :  SA  M  UKL.


tliat  it  fully  deserved  the  sentence  liere  passed  upon  it  even  if  the  ancient  sin
had  not  been  remembered  by  God.  When  our  Lord  pronounced  His  terrible
woe  upon  the  Jewish  nation  of  His  day  (Luke  xi.  47-52),  and  foretold  that  "  the
blood  of  all  the  i)rophets  would  be  required  of  that  generation,"  He  expn^ssly
declares  tliat  this  terrible  retribution  would  fall  upon  them  because  they
"allowed  the  deeds  of  their  fathers,"— in  other  words,  because  they  were
animated  by  the  same  si)irit  and  were  guilty  of  the  same  sins.  It  was  doubtless
the  same  in  the  case  of  the  Amalekites.

IL  The  authority  from  which  all  national  retribution  proceeds.  "  Thus  saith
the  Lord  of  Hosts.  .  .  .  now  go  and  smite  Amalek."  Whoever  or  whatever
may  be  the  instrumental  cause  of  national  judgment  for  national  sin,  God  is
the  original  and  first  cause.  It  is  He  who  sets  his  servants  ''over  the  nations
and  over  the  kingdoms,  to  root  out  and  to  pull  down,  and  to  destroij  and  to
throw  down,  to  build  and  to  plant  (Jer.  i.  10).  The  executioners  of  His  will
may  be  entirely  unconscious  that  they  are  carrying  out  the  designs  of  a  Supreme
Ruler  of  the  universe  in  following  the  devices  of  their  own  hearts,  but  they  are
doi^ng  it  as  really  as  if  they  were  knowingly  obeying?  a  Divine  commaml
''Shall  there  he  evil  in  a  cit  if ,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  itV  (Amos  iii.  6).
When  we  hear  that  a  monarch  or  a  government  has  declared  war  against  a
nation,  we  judge  of  the  righteousness  or  unrighteousness  of  the  act  fi\mi  what
we  know  of  the  character  of  the  man  or  the  number  of  men  who  are  responsible
for  It.  If  we  know  them  to  be  men  who  are  lovers  of  humanity— if  we  know
that  they  are  pre-eminently  just  and  benevolent,  and  incapable  of  being
actuated  by  any  unworthy  motives,  we  sliall  conclude  that  they  have  stron^
and  sufficient  reasons  for  the  step,  and  that  although  it  must  bring  much
sorrow  and  suffering,  they  believe  that  it  will  prevent  more  misery  than  it
occasKms.  In  this  light  we  ought  to  look  at  all  the  wars  which  were  commanded
or  sanctioned  by  Divine  authority  in  the  early  ages  of  the  world.  If  a  human
ni(march  or  human  government  had  given  such  a  command  as  we  here  find
given  to  Saul,  we  should  be  bound  to  look  at  the  command  through  what  we
knew  of  his  character  and  disposition,  and  if  we  knew  him  to  be  a  man  of
integrity  and  benevolence  to  conclude  that  he  had  good  ground  for  taking  such
a  step.  We  cannot  do  less  when  we  read  such  a  sentence  as  that  here  Issued
a,gamst  Amalek.  We  know  that  God  loves  the  creatures  whom  He  has  made—
that  He  is  a  God  of  peace,  and  that  He  desires  "peace  on  earth."     If  the  men

A  ancient  world  could  rest  assured  that  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  would
and  could  do  nothing  but  right  (Gen.  xviii.  25),  he  who  possesses  the  New
I estament  record  ought  not  to  have  the  shadow  of  a  doubt  that  all  His  dealino-s
with  men  have  at  all  times  been  actuated  by  the  purest  love  and  the  highest
wisdom;  and  that  however  stern  and  terrible  some  of  them  seem  to  us,*they
are  m  reality  dispensations  of  mercy.  In  looking  at  the  acts  of  the  most
perfect  of  human  kind,  we  could  not  be  certain  of  the  perfect  purity  and
wisdom  of  them  all ;  but  the  same  inspired  Book  which  records  these  acts
ot  retributive  justice  reveals  to  us  so  much  of  the  Divine  character  as  to  make
it  certain  tnat  tJie  final  verdict  of  all  His  creatures  will  h^^"  Just  and  true
are  Ihxj  ways,  Thou  King  of  saints''  (Rev.  xv.  3).

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

^  There  are  some  particular  precepts  precepts.  But  it  is  easy  to  see  that
inbcripture  given  to  particular  persons,  all  these  are  of  such  a  kind  as  that
requiring  actions  which  would  be  im-  the  precept  changes  the  whole  nature
moral  and  vicious  were  it  not  for  such     of  the  case,  and  of  the  actions,  and

159


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,  book  l.


both  constitutes  and  sliows  that  not  to  which  require  only  the  doinj^  an  ex-
be  unjust  or  immoral  which,  prior  to  ternal  action;  for  instance, takingaway
the  precept,  must  have  appeared  and  the  property  or  life  of  any.  For  men
really  have  been  so  ;  which  may  well  be,  have  no  right  to  either  life  or  property,
since  none  of  these  precepts  are  contrary  but  what  arises  solely  from  the  grant
to  immutable  morality.  If  it  were  of  God;  when  this  grant  is  revoked,
commanded  to  cultivate  the  principles,  they  cease  to  have  any  riglit  at  all  in
and  act  from  the  spirit  of  treachery,  either;  and  when  this  revocation  is
ingratitude,  cruelty,  the  command  made  known,  as  surely  it  is  possible  it
wouldnot  alter  the  nature  of  the  case  or  may  be,  it  must  cease  to  be  unjust  to
of  the  action  in  any  of  these  instances,  deprive  them  of  either. — Bp.  Butler,
But  it  is  quito  otherwise  in  precepts


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Venes  10—12,

Samuel's  Prayer.

I.  There  is  a  strong  conviction  in  the  mind  of  the  best  men  that  prayer
has  an  influence  upon  the  Divine  mind.  This  arises,  first,  from  their  knowledge
of  the  Divine  character  and  the  Divine  command.  They  know  that  God  has
commanded  His  creatures  to  draw  near  to  Him  and  pour  out  their  hearts  before
Him,  and  they  know  also  that  He  is  infinitely  just  and  good.  They  therefore
conchide  that  He  would  not  require  them  to  perform  any  unmeaning  act — •
that  if  He  commands  them  to  })ray  He  is  oi)en  to  influence  from  their  prayers.
Secondly,  their  own  past  experience  and  the  record  of  the  experience  of  other
praying  souls  confirms  this  conviction.  If  a  man  has  waited  upon  God  in  the
past  and  has  received  into  his  life  the  blessings  which  he  has  asked  of  God,  it
will  be  very  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  convince  him  that  there  was  not  a  con-
viction between  his  prayer  and  the  blessing.  And  the  records  of  the  Church
of  God  in  all  ages  are  full  of  the  testimonies  of  God's  servants  that  they  have
cried  unto  the  Lord  and  He  has  heard  them  and  given  them  their  heart's
desire.  Samuel  was  evidently  governed  by  a  conviction  that  pra3er  was  a
power  with  God.  Plis  own  name  was  to  him  a  constant  testimony  of  the  power
of  prayer — his  whole  life  had  been  a  hfe  of  prayer,  and  he  had  in  times  past
received  blessings,  both  for  himself  and  others,  in  answer  to  his  petitions.  In
looking  back,  also,  upon  the  history  of  Israel  in  the  past,  he  could  recall  many
times  when  judgments  had  been  turned  aside  and  blessings  had  descended  in
answer  to  the  prayer  of  the  people  as  a  whole  or  to  the  request  of  one  man  on
behalf  of  the  entire  nation.  He  would  es})ecially  remember  how,  more  than
once,  the  prayer  of  Moses  for  rebellious  and  disobedient  Israel  had  prevailed
with  God,  and  his  whole  soul  was  i)enetrated  by  a  conviction  that  prayer  had
an  influence  upon  the  mind  of  the  Eternal.  When,  therefore,  God  made  known
to  him  the  new  offence  of  which  Saul  had  been  guilty,  and  His  purpose  concern-
ing him,  Samuel  did  not  think  it  useless  to  supplicate  God  long  and  earnestly
to  avert  the  sentence  which  He  had  passed  on  the  offender  or  in  some  degree  to
mitigate  its  severity.  The  best  men  in  all  ages  have  done  the  %me  in  siniilar
circumstances  under  the  influence  of  the  same  strong  conviction  of  the
power  of  prayer.

II.  There  are  characters  for  whom  the  prayers  of  the  best  men  cannot
prevail.  The  man  who  begs  a  physician  to  restore  his  friend  to  health  must
remember  that  all  does  not  rest  with  the  physician.  If  his  prescriptions  were
infallible,  there  must  be  co-operation  on  the  part  of  the  patient  if  they  are  to  be
of  any  avail.  If  he  declines  to  fall  in  with  the  healer's  method  of  cure,  he
makes  his  friend's  prayer  powerless  by  his  own  wilfulness.     God  Himself  implies

160


CHAP.  XV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


that  Sanuiel  and  Moses  were  most  powerful  intercessors  with  Hiin  on  bolialf  of
His  ancient  people  (Jer.  xv.  1),  yet  tliere  were  times  when  even  their  })h'a.liii^s
failed,  not  because  the  Divine  arm  was  shortened  or  the  Divine  ear  deaf  to  their
intercessions,  but  because  the  wilfulnoss  of  those  for  whom  they  prayed  rendered
it  im})0ssible  to  answer  their  supiJications.  God  has  often  broken  through  the
laws  of  His  material  universe  in  answer  to  the  requests  of  His  servants,  but  the
laws  of  His  moral  kingdom  are  unalterable  and  cannot  be  broken  through.  If
Saul  in  his  unrepentant  condition  had  been  permitted  to  go  unpunished,  a  moral
law  would  have  been  broken.  Samuel's  prayers  had  done  much  for  him  in  the
past,  and  if  there  had  been  any  disposition  on  his  part  to  turn  to  God  and  again
submit  to  His  will,  they  might  have  even  now  prevailed  for  him,  but  his  own
persistent  obstinacy  and  self-will  made  even  the  petitions  of  this  mighty  inter-
cessor with  God  powerless  in  his  case.

III.  When  the  servants  of  God  become  convinced  that  their  prayers  cannot
be  answered,  they  ought  to  become  fully  enlisted  on  the  side  of  God's  purpose
although  it  is  not  on  the  side  of  their  desire.  Samuel  earnestly  desired  that
the  purpose  of  God  concerning  Saul  should  not  be  carried  out,  and  he  prayed
fervently  that  his  desire  might  be  granted ;  but  when  he  found  that  it  could  not
be,  although  his  grief  was  long  and  deep  (see  verse  35  and  chap.  xvi.  1),  he  gave
himself  unreservedly  into  the  hand  of  God,  and  prepared  himself  to  carry  to
Saul  the  Divine  message  which  he  delivered  with  the  authority  and  faithfulness
which  befitted  his  prophetic  office.  The  fervent  intercessor  is  changed  into  the
inflexible  judge  when  he  becomes  convinced  that  it  is  not  consistent  with  the
Divine  will  to  grant  him  his  heart's  desire.  It  should  be  so  with  God's  servants
at  all  times  and  under  all  circumstances.  They  are  not  forbidden — they  are
indeed  encouraged — to  make  known  their  requests  unto  God  with  fervour  ;
they  may  plead  with  Him  with  all  their  heart  for  the  person  or  the  plan  that
lies  near  their  heart,  but  when  they  become  convinced  that  their  prayer  can
not  be  answered,  they  ought  to  cheerfully  accept  the  position,  and  be  willing  to
lend  themselves,  heart  and  soul,  to  the  purpose  and  plan  of  God,  although
it  is  directly  opposed  to  their  previous  desires.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  11.   Wilfulness,  the  sin  of  Saul,  miserable    termination    of   a    history

Saul's  temptation  and  fall  consisted  in  which  promised  well  in  the  beginning,

a  certain  perverseness  of  mind,  founded  it  should  be  observed  how  clearly  the

on  some  obscure  feelings  of  self-impor-  failure  of  the  Divine  purpose  is  attri-

tance,  very  commonly  observable   in  butable  to  man No  one  could

human   nature,  and  sometimes  called  be    selected   in  talents   and   conduct

pride — a    perverseness     which    shows  more  suitable  for  maintaining  political

itself    in   a   reluctance  absolutely   to  power   at    home    than    the    reserved,

relinquish    its    own   independence    of  mysterious  monarch   whom  God  gave

action,  in  cases  where  dependence  is  a  to  His  people  ;  none  more  suitable  for

duty,  and  which  interferes  a  little,  and  striking   terror   into  the   surrounding

alters  a  little,  as  if  with  a  view   of  nations  than  a  commander  gifted  with

satisfying    its    own     fancied    dignity,  his  coolness  and  promptness  in  action,

though  it  is  afraid  altogether  to  oppose  But  he  fell  from  his  election  because

itself  to   the   voice   of  God.     Should  of   unbelief — because   he   would   take

this  seem  at  first  sight  to  be  a  trifling  another  part,  and  not  the  very  part

fault,  it  is  more  worth  while  to  trace  which   was  actually  assigned   him    in

its  operation  in   the  history  of  Saul,  the  decrees  of  the  Most  High. — J.   H.

If  a  tree  is  known  by  its  fruit,  it  is  a  Newman.
great  sin,  ,  ,  ,  ,  In  contemplating  the         *'  Samuel  cried  unto   the  Lord  all


no  MI  LET  I C  CO  )t  MENTAR  Y :  SA  MUEL.  book  l


night."  Was  this  warrantable?  It  tiie  season  of  probation  was  over  for
was  a  mistaken,  bub  surely  not  a  that.  But  he  niiglit  mitigate  the  con-
criminal,  urgency  ;  for  might  he  not  sequences  of  the  sin  to  Saul  and  his
with  reason  be  supposed  to  receive  the  people.  The  soul  of  the  king  might
dreadful  announcement  as  a  frowning  be  brought  to  repentance  and  be  saved,
barrier  over  which  faith  had  to  wrestle  ?  though  with  the  loss  of  his  dynasty.
....  He  might  not  arrest  the  evil  of  ...  Who  can  tell  how  much  Saul  was
Saul's  fate  ;  the  erring  monarch  must  indebted  to  that  prayer  of  Samuel  for
himself  be  a  penitent  suppliant  ere  the  mercies  and  escapes  and  successes
tliat  can  be  remedied.  Pie  might  not  of  his  subsequent  career. — ISteel.
keep  the  crown  in  the  family  of  Saul ;

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPHS.— Verses  4-9,  and  13-23.

Saul's  Second  Act  of  Disobedience.

I.  God  will  not  accept  a  partial  obedience  to  any  of  His  commands.  There
is  nothing  strange  or  unreasonable  in  this.  If  a  human  ruler  gives  a  command,
he  will  noc  be  satisfied  if  the  person  to  whom  he  gives  it  obeys  it  just  so  far  as
it  suits  his  convenience  or  agrees  with  his  fancy  and  no  farther.  Anything  less
than  a  whole  obedience  is  no  obedience  in  the  estimation  of  a  fellow-creature.
If  a  soldier  receives  an  order  from  his  general  to  execute  a  certain  military
movement,  he  is  not  expected  to  consult  his  own  wishes  or  his  own  judgm(>nt,
but  he  must  sink  his  own  will  entirely  in  the  will  of  his  superior,  and  fulfil  ids
command  to  the  very  letter.  However  stern  may  be  the  work  to  be  done,
whatever  sacrifice  of  personal  feeling  may  be  involved,  anything  less  than  an
observance  of  the  commandment  in  its  entirety  will  be  counted  as  grave  a  crime
as  the  non-observance  of  the  whole.  If  a  father  directs  his  son  to  perform  a
given  task,  and  the  son  executes  about  half  of  that  which  is  required  of  him,
the  father  will  consider  that  his  command  has  been  disobeyed.  If  this  is  the
case  with  human  superiors,  it  cannot  be  expected  that  the  Holy  and  All-wise
God,  whose  commands-^however  stein  they  may  sometimes  seem — are  always
perfectly  just  and  good,  will  be  satisfied  with  less  than  an  entire  obedience  to
His  commands.  He  is  surrounded  by  ten  thousand  faithful  and  mighty  angelic
servants,  who  render  to  him  a  perfect  and  unquestioning  service,  and  although
imperfect  and  sinful  creatures  cannot  offer  to  Him  a  service  equal  to  theirs,  yet
there  are  Divine  commands  which  men  are  able  to  carry  out  to  the  letter,  and
which  they  must  so  carry  out  if  they  would  not  incur  the  penalty  of  disobedient
servants  of  tlie  Most  High.  Such  a  command  was  that  which  was  here  given
to  Saul — it  was  one  which  he  could  obey — one  for  the  non-observance  of  which
he  could  not  plead  inability — one  which  he  did  not  attempt  to  say  he  was
unable  to  perform.  His  partial  obedience  was  rejected — his  non-observance  of
all  the  details  of  the  Divine  command  was  accounted  as  direct  an  act  of  defiance
of  God's  directions  as  if  he  had  taken  no  action  whatever  against  the  Amalekites.
And  so  God  will  ever  accouiit  compliance  with  His  commands,  which  is  measured
not  by  His  requirements  but  by  man's  inclinations.

II.  Where  the  condition  is  not  fulfilled  which  is  included  in  the  Divine  plan
of  blessing,  God  repents,  not  by  changins^  His  mind,  but  by  changing  His
method  in  relation  to  the  sinner.  It  is  obvious  that  God  cannot  undergo  a
cliange  of  disposition  or  of  motive.  He  is  perfect  in  goodness,  and  therefore,  in
all  His  dealings  with  His  creatures  He  must  always  have  their  welfare  in  view.
He  must  always  be  willing  to  do  for  them  that  which  is  best  for  their  highest
interests.  It  is  not  possible  for  the  Euler  of  the  world  to  act  from  any  of  the
unworthy  motives  which  sometimes  influence  men  in  their  conduct  towards
each  other.     And  being  as  infinite  in  wisdom  as  He  is  in  goodness,  He  can  havQ

162


OHAP.  XV.  HOM I LETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


no  better  plans  than  Ilis  original  plans,  no  second  thoughts  which  are  better
tlian  His  first.  When,  tlierefore,  God  speaks  of  Himself  as  repenting,  He
speaks  of  a  change  of  His  dealings  with  a  man,  which  are  the  result  of  a  change
in  that  man's  attitude  towards  Himself.  Such  a  change  is  quite  compatible
with  an  unchangeable  character  and  disposition,  and  is,  indeed,  the  result  of  it.
To  men  of  the  same  character  God's  attitude  is  the  same  now  as  it  was  ages
ai^o,  and  it  will  be  the  same  to  the  end  of  time,  and  when  a  man's  relations  to
God  are  altered  it  is  in  consequence  of  a  change  in  himself,  and  not  in  the
unchangeable  God.  There  was  no  change  in  God  when,  in  consequence  of  Saul's
non-compliance  with  the  conditions  of  kingship,  God  rejected  him  from  being
king  over  Israel.  He  had  been  anointed  by  "the  Lord  to  be  captain  over  His
inheritance"  (chap.  x.  1) — in  other  wonls  to  be  His  vicegerent  in  Israel,  and
when  he  refused  to  act  in  that  capacity  God  proved  His  own  unchangeableness
by  changing  His  method  of  dealing  with  him.  A  purpose  of  blessing  on  the
part  of  God  towards  men  always  includes  a  condition  to  be  fulfilled  on  their
part,  and  a  purpose  of  judgment  always  includes  a  continuance  on  the  part  of
the  sinner  of  the  conduct  which  has  provoked  the  judgment.  This  is  the  ex-
planation of  the  repentance  of  God  in  relation  to  the  men  of  the  old  world,  and
in  relation  to  the  Ninevites.  In  the  first  case  God  sent  judgment  because  the
offenders  refused  to  repent,  and  in  the  second  instance  He  revoked  His  sentence
of  judgment  because  the  men  of  Nineveh  were  willing  to  forsake  their  sins  and
return  to  Him  for  pardon.     (See  Gen.  vi.  5,  6  ;  Jonah  iii.  10).

III.  Obedience  is  better  than  the  offering  to  God  of  any  other  sacrifice.    1.

Because  it  is  a  sacrifice  of  far  higher  value.  Obedience  is  the  giving  up  of  the
will  to  the  will  of  another — it  is  therefore  the  sacrifice  of  the  whole  man.  When
a  man  has  given  himself  tlius  to  God,  he  has  offered  to  Him  all  that  he  has  to
offer — all  his  powers  of  soul  and  body  as  well  as  all  his  material  possessions.  This
was  the  sacrifice  which  Adam  offered  to  his  Maker  before  he  sinned,  and  this  is
the  ollering  which  has  been  for  ages  offered  to  God  by  His  sons  who  have  never
at  any  time  resisted  His  will.  This  is  far  more  precious,  and  therefore  far  more
acceptable  to  the  Lord,  than  *'  thousands  of  rams,  or  ten  thousand  rivers  oj  oil**
(Micah  vi.  7),  because  it  is  a  spiritual  and  moral  sacrifice.  2.  It  is  a  sacrifice
which  can  he  offered  at  any  time  and  in  any  place.  The  sacrifices  of  the
Levitical  law  were  required  to  be  ottered  in  certain  places.  A  man  who  desired
to  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  could  only  do  so  by  coming  up  to  the  place  appointed,
and  hence  his  offerings  could  only  be  made  at  intervals.  But  obedience  is  a
sacrifice  which  can  always  be  rendered  to  God — an  expression  of  love  to  Him
which  can  be  made  everywhere  and  always.  3.  Jt  is  a  sacrifice  which  every
man  can  offer  for  himself.  Even  in  Israel  there  might  have  been  men  at  times
too  ])oor  to  be  able  to  bring  the  least  costly  material  offering  to  the  altar  of  the
Lord  ;  but  none  is  ever  too  poor  to  offer  his  will  to  God — to  give  himself  up  to
His  guidance  and  submit  to  His  commands.  And  this  is  a  sacrifice  in  which
there  is  no  need  of  the  intervention  of  a  third  person — an  offering  in  which  every
man  can  be  his  own  priest.  4.  It  is  the  sacrifice  which  alone  can  make  any
other  sacrifice  acceptable.  All  other  offerings  without  this  are  "  vain  oblations,"
and  even  "an  abomination"  (Isa.  i.  13)  unto  Him  who  owns  "every  beast  of
the  forest  and  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills  "  (Psalm  1.  10).  To  expect  a
Holy  and  Spiritual  Beinir  to  be  willing  to  accept  anything  less  than  the  offering
of  the  heart,  is  to  expect  Him  to  be  satisfied  with  less  than  wH)uld  often  content
a  fellow-creature.  Many  ;i  man  would  spurn  a  gift  which  was  not  an  outcome  of
inward  feeling,  and  yet  God's  creatures  sometimes  act  as  if  they  thought  their
Maker  could  be  bribed  by  such  an  offering,

163


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,


BOOK  I.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


Ver.  6.  Thus  does  every  good  thing
reward  itself ;  nothing  remains  for-
gotten ;  often  in  hiter  centuries  the
seed  sown  in  an  ohl  ])ast  yet  every-
where comes  upgloriously,  and  children
and  children's  children  derive  advan-
tage from  the  good  done  by  their
fat  h  ers. — Sc  Idler.

He  that  is  not  less  in  mercy  than  in
justice,  as  he  challenged  Amalek's  sin
of  their  succeeding  generations  so  he
derives  the  recompense  of  Jethro's
kindness  unto  his  far  descended  issue.

.  .  .  If  we  sow  good  works,  suc-
cession sliall  reap  them,  and  we  shall
be  ha})py  in  making  them  so.  .  .  .
It  is  the  manner  of  God,  first  to  sepa-
rate before  He  judge,  as  a  good  hus-
bandman weeds  his  corn  ere  it  be  ripe
for  the  sickle,  and  goes  to  the  fan  ere


he  goes  to  the  fire


W


'ly


should  we  not  imitate  God,  and  sepa-
rate ourselves,  that  we  may  not  be
judged  ;  separate  not  one  Kenite  from
another,  but  every  Kenite  from  among
the  Amalekites,  else  if  we  will  needs
live  with  Amalek  we  cannot  think
much  to  die  with  him. — Bp.  Hall.

Ver.  13.  Here  is  a  proof  that  a  man
may  be  blinded  by  his  own  self-will,
and  that  he  may  imagine  that  his  own
way  is  right,  while  it  is  leading  him  to
the  gates  of  death.  —  Wordsworth.

Could  Saul  think  that  Samuel  knew
of  the  asses  that  were  lost,  and  did  not
know  of  the  oxen  and  sheep  that  were
spared  ?  .  .  .  .  Much  less,  when
we  have  to  do  with  God  Himself,  should
dissimulation  presume  either  of  safety
or  of  secresy.  Can  the  God  that  made
the  heart  not  know  it  ?  Can  He  that
comprehends  all  things  be  shut  out  of
our  close  corners  ?  Saul  was  otherwise
crafty  enough,  yet  herein  his  simplicity
is  palpable.  Sin  can  besot  even  the
wisest  man  ;  and  there  was  never  but
folly  in  wickedness  ...  No  man
brags  so  much  of  holiness  as  he  who
wants  it.  True  obedience  is  joined
ever  with  humility  and  fear  of  unknown
errors.  Falsehood  is  bold,  and  can
say,  "  I  have  fulHlled  the  cojumand-
ment  of  the  Lurd." — B^,  Halh
164


Ver.  14.  Let  us  aim  after  such  a
walk  and  conversation  as  that  we  can
be  natural  in  our  demeanour,  and  not
artificial  and  forced ;  such  a  life  as
will  bear  inspection  behind  the  scenes,
and  as  will  not  compel  those  who  watch
for  souls  to  ask,  as  they  look  around,
What  meaneth  this  or  that  ?  ,  ,  .
and  while  asking  the  question  to  feel
the  sad  truth  of  the  matter  to  be,  that
the  thing  which  calls  forth  the  question
is  in  our  own  case,  as  it  was  in  Saul's,
only  so  much  spared  of  that  which
God  has  commanded  us  to  subdue  and
destroy,  so  much  permitted  to  live
which  God  had  required  us  to  conquer
and  to  slay. — Miller.

Ver.  16.  We  must  not  look  to  what
hypocrites  say  of  themselves,  but  to
what  God's  word  says  of  them. — S.
Schmid.

Ver.  17.  Observe  the  contrast  be-
tween Saul  and  Paul.  Saul  of  Gibeah
lost  an  earthly  kingdom  hy  pride,  but
Saul  of  Tarsus  gained  a  heavenly  king-
dom by  humility  (1  Cor.  xv.  10). —
Wordsivorth.

There  is  an  ingratitude  in  every  sin,
and  that  is  to  be  considered.  Good
turns  aggravate  un kindness,  and  our
offences  are  increased  by  our  obliga-
tiims. — Trapp.

Ver.  20.   Men  are  apt  to  cry  out

with  Saul,  "  I  have  obeyed  the  com-
mandment of  the  Lord  ;  but,  alas,
when  it  comes  to  be  examined,  how
have  they  obeyed  Him?  .  .  .  Possibly
they  have,  with  Saul,  destroyed  the
Amalekites  ;  have  constantly  and
o})enly  opposed  the  declared  enemies
of  religion.  Moreover,  perhaps,  what-
ever was  vile  and  refuse  that  they
have  destroyed  utterly.  Whatever
sins  did  not  easily  beset  them,  nor  offer
them  strong  temptations,  these  sins
they  have  both  heartily  avoided  them-
selves, and  severely  condemned  in
other  men.  But  the  best  of  the  sheep
and  of  the  oxen,  the  things  which
were  dear  to  them,  like  a  right  hand
QX  a  right  eye,  these  they  could  not


CHAP.  XV.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL,


spare And  yet,  as  Saul  en-
deavoured to  transfer  the  blame  upon
the  people,  so,  in  the  other  case  also,
it  is  not  tlie  men  themselves,  it  is  not
their  reason  and  judgment,  that
chooses  the  sin,  but  their  inferior  ap-
petites, tlieir  passions  and  affections
choose  it  for  them,  and  drive  them
into  it,  even  perhaps  in  a  manner
asrainst  their  wills. — Dr,  tS.  Clark.

Vers.  22,  23.  It  was  as  much  as  to

say  that  the  sum  and  substance  of
Divine  worship  consisted  in  obei Hence,
with  which  it  should  always  begin,  and
that  sacrihces  were,  so  to  speak,  simple
appendices,  the  force  and  worth  of
which  were  not  so  great  as  obedience
to  the  precepts  of  God. — Calvin.

All  conscious  disobedience  is  actually
idolatry,  because  it  makes  sell-will,  the
human  I,  into  a  God.  So  that  all
manifest  opposition  to  the  word  and
commandments  of  God  is,  like  idolatry,
a  rejection  of  the  true  God. — K^eil.

Tliis  saying  of  Samuel  came  literally
true  in  Saul's  case.  Through  disobe-
dience he  was  forsaken  of  God,  and
became  a  prey  to  the  Evil  Spirit,  and
was  led  on  in  time  to  resort  to  witch-
craft (chap,  xxvii.  7),  and  perhaps  to
consult  seraphim  (see  chap.  xix.  13).
Here  is  a  solemn  warning  for  these
latter  days. —  Wordsworth.

When  the  Lord  expressly  says  "Thou
shalt,"  and  His  rational  creature  dares
to  persist  in  saying"!  will  not,"  whether
the  contest  be  about  an  apple  or  a  king-
dom, it  is  stubbornness  and  rebellion.
— IScott.

May  we  then  take  good  care  that,
even  when  we  mean  to  render  the  Jjord
service  or  obedience,  we  yet  beware  of
our  choice  and  fancy,  and  follow  only
the  traces  of  the  Divine  will.  Obedience
is  the  mother-grace,  the  parent  of  all
virtues.  It  makes  the  eye  see,  the  ear
hear,  the  heart  think,  the  memory  re-
member, the  mouth  speak,  the  foot  go,
the  hand  work,  and  the  whole  man  do
that,  yea  that  alone,  which  is  conformed
to  the  will  of  God.  .  .  It  is  imj)ossible
for  him  who  is  not  obedient  to  God  to
lay  any  command  upon  men.  That  is
what  these  words  ("  The  Lord  hath


rejected  thee,")  and  the  aim  of  God
therein  mean.  The  authorities  must
not  proceed  from  their  own  will  and
notion,  but  in  everything  must  take
God's  word  and  will  for  their  rule.  If
He  does  not  drive  apostate  rulers  from
their  position,  like  as  He  did  Nebu-
chadnezzar, but  leaves  them  ruling,  as
He  also  did  Saul  for  a  while,  yet  they
are  and  remain  rejected  in  His  sight,
and  vainly  write  themselves  "  by  the
grace  of  God,"  when  He  Himself  does
not  so  acknowledge  them. — Berlenber-
ger  Bible.

God  rejects  Saul  from  being  king
over  Israel  who  had  rejected  God  from
being  King  over  Saul. — T.  Adams.

Every  ceremonial  law  is  moral ;  the
outward  act  is  never  enjoined  but  lor
the  sake  of  the  inward  thing,  what  it
pictures — re})resents.  Never  is  there
body  without  spirit.  But  the  fleshly
sense  would  have  none  of  the  spirit,
and  laid  hold  solely  of  the  body,  which,
thus  isolated,  became  a  corpse. — iieng-
stenherg.

It  is  a  holier  and  a  better  thing  to
do  one's  duty,  than  to  make  duties  for
one's  self  and  then  set  about  them. —
l^pargeon.

Why  was  sacrifice  good,  but  because
it  was  commanded  ?  What  difference
was  there  betwixt  slaughter  and  sacri-
fice but  obedience  ? — Bp.  Hall.

Saul  lived  to  give  in  his  own  person
the  i)aiiiful  but  the  clearest  evidence
of  the  identity,  as  far  as  concerns  a
common  origin  and  principle  of  action,
which  may  exist  between  two  very
different  crimes.  .  .  The  same  disposi-
tion which  evinced  itself  in  those  acts
of  rebellion,  which  he  committed  all
the  while  he  was  crying  down  witch-
craft, induced  him  to  do  the  very
thing  which  he  censured  when  occasion
pressed  .  .  .  The  security  against  our
being  guilty  of  any  particular  form  of
transgression  is  not  that  we  conrlemn
it,  but  that  the  evil  principle  within  us
which  excites  to  its  commi.-^sion,  is  sub-
dued and  removed  by  Divine  grace. —
Miller.

Vers.  4-23.  The  fall  of  King  Saul
shows  :  (1)  How  unrepented  and  only

X65


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,  book  i.


whitewashed  sin   at  the   first   severe  nised  and   improved  it    mi^^lit    have

temptation  breaks  out  as  manifest  and  carried  him,  not  oidy  to  greatness,  but

criminal  self-seek ini;.     (2)    How    this  to  goodness.     But  he  proved  faithless

self-seeking  is  so   blinding  as  to  tell  to   the  trust  committed  to  him,  and

itself  and   others  the  lie  that  it  is  a  became  in  the  end  a  worse  man  than

labour  for  the  Lord. — J,  Disselhoff.  he  would  have  been  if  no  such  privi-

We  may  see  in  the  history  of  Saul  le^es  had  been  conferred    upon    him.

how   important   it   is  that  we  should  .  .  .  His  career  is  a  melancholy  illus-

njake  tlie   most   of  the  op])()rtunities  tration  of  the  truth  of  the  Saviour's

which  Cod  sets  before  us.     '1  here  came  words:    "From    him    that   hath    not,

to  the  son   of  Kish  a  tidal    time   of  shall    be   taken    away  even   that    he

favour,  which,  if  he  had   only  recog-  hath." — Dr,  W,  M.  Taylor,

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  24—35,

Saul's  Confession.

I.  Saul's  confession  of  sin  was  satisfactory  as  to  word.  "I  have  sinned,"  is
the  acknowledgement  of  responsibility  and  accountability.  "I  have  transgressed
the  commandment  of  the  Lord,"  is  an  acknowledgment  on  the  part  of  man  that
there  is  a  Being  who  has  a  right  to  lay  down  laws  for  the  guidance  of  His  creatures.
There  are  men  in  the  world  who  deny  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  sin — who  affirm
that  they  are  creatures  of  necessity,  and  are  therefore  undeserving  of  blame  for  any
action.  But  Saul  here  admits  his  personal  responsibility,  and  allows  that  his
negative  sin — his  non-observance  of  a  plain  command — was  a  positive  trans-
gression. True  it  is  that  he  admits  this  with  reluctance,  and  that  he  involves
the  people  in  the  act  of  disobedience.  But  whether  he  speaks  the  truth  or  not
in  relation  to  them,  he  does  not  now  attempt  to  palliate  his  sin  by  laying  the
blame  directly  on  them.  He  acknowledges  his  own  personal  guilt  in  the  same
words  as  David  used  to  express  his  deep  and  heartfelt  repentance,  and  as  the
prodigal  uttered  when  he  came  first  to  himself  and  then  to  his  father's  home.
Eio  far  as  the  language  of  the  confession  goes  it  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired.

II.  It  is  possible  to  use  words  which  express  true  repentance  and  yet  lack
the  spirit  of  it.  A  dead  body  is  complete  so  far  as  the  form  goes,  no  limb  is
wanting,  and  all  the  beauty  of  the  most  perfect  symmetry  of  form  may  be  there.
But  it  is  only  a  corpse  notwithstanding,  and  because  the  living  spirit  is  wanting
even  the  form  will  vanish  after  a  time.  So  a  man  may  use  a  "  form  of  sound
words"  (2  Tim.  i.  13)  which  in  language  may  leave  nothing  to  be  desired.
He  may  acknowledge  that  he  is  a  sinner,  and  that  he  merits  punishment,  and
his  language  may  be  that  of  general  humility,  and  yet  the  si)irit  of  true
repentance  may  be  absent.  But  the  wear  and  tear  of  human  life  will  soon  make
apparent  whether  the  outward  form  isinhabited  by  a  living  soul  or  whether  it  is
only  a  lifeless  body.  If  it  is  a  true  rei)entance  the  actions  proper  to  it  will
follow,  but  if  it  is  not,  the  very  form  will  cease  to  exist,  and  the  man  who  once
liad  the  form  of  repentance  without  the  power  will  cease  even  to  possess  the
form,  and  become  more  and  more  subject  to  the  law  of  sin  and  death.  Even
Pharaoh  said,  "  I  have  sinned  "  (Exod.  ix.  27),  but  in  his  mouth  the  words  were
not  the  outcome  of  a  sense  of  sin,  and  he  soon  became  too  hardened  even  for
such  a  formal  confession.  So  was  it  with  Saul.  We  here  see  him  preserving
some  outward  form  of  godlii^.ess  although  he  was  "denying  the  power  thereof"
(2  Tim.  iii.  5),  and  later  on  in  his  life  he  repeats  this  confession  (chap.  xxvi.  21),
but  as  on  neither  occasions  it  was  dictated  by  the  spirit  of  true  and  godly
sorrow  for  sin,  there  came  a  time  in  liis  lile  when  even  the  formal  confession
vanished  from  his  lips.     The  words  of  repentance  were  not  wanting,  but  there

16a


CHAP.  17.


nOMILETIC  COMMJ-XTAnY:  SAMUEL.


was  no  corrosi)Oiulftnce  between  tlie  langnngo  and  the  (1o(m1<; — it  was  left  to
another  to  carry  into  effect  the  Divine  coinmandnieiit  which  iSaiil  here  confesses
he  had  trans^^ressed,  but  which  it  does  not  ai)j)ear  that  he  now  made  any
attempt  to  obey.  It  was  left  to  Samuel  to  do  the  work  of  Saul,  and  thus  to
prove  that  there  was  one  man  in  Israel  who  would  carry  out  to  the  letter  the
bidding  of  Jehovah.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


Beware  of  a  SauVs  confession.  That
you  may  do  this,  it  is  necessary  to
know  two  things.  1.  What  a  Saul's
confession  is.  2.  What  a  Saul's  con-
fession works. — J.  Dissellioff.

He  confesseth  not  till  the  sin  be
wrung  from  his  mouth  ;  he  seeks  his
peace  out  of  himself,  and  relies  more
upon  another's  virtue  than  upon  his
own  penitence  ;  he  would  cloak  his
guiltiness  with  the  holiness  of  another's
presence ;  he  is  more  tormented  with
the  danger  and  damage  of  the  sin  than
with  the  offence ;  he  cares  to  hold  in
with  men,  in  what  terms  soever  he
stands  with  God. — Bp.  Hall.

Ver.  29.  The  heathen  saw  God  as
a  passionate,  capricious,  changeable
Being,  who  could  be  angered  and  ap-
peased by  men.  The  Jewish  prophets
saw  Him  as  a  God  wliose  ways  were
equal,  who  was  unchangeable,  whose
decrees  were  perpetual,  who  was  not
to  be  bought  off  by  sacrifice,  but  by
righteous  dealing,  and  who  would  re>
move  the  punishment  when  the  causes


which  brought  it  on  were  taken  away.
In  their  own  words,  when  men  re-
pented, God  would  repent A

boat  rows  against  the  stream,  the  cur-
rent punishes   it The  boat

turns  and  goes  with  the  stream,  the
current  assists  it But  the  cur-
rent is  the  same,  it  has  not  changed —
only  the  boat  lias  changed  its  relation-
ship to  the  current.  Neither  does  God
change.  We  change,  and  the  same
law  which  executed  itself  in  punish-
ment now  expresses  itself  in  reward. —
Brooke.

Ver.  30.  If  Saul  had  been  really
penitent,  he  would  have  prayed  to  be
humbled  rather  than  to  be  honoured.
— St.  Gregory.

Many  men  pass  {i.e.,  care)  so  little
for  their  consciences,  yet  stand  so
much  upon  their  credit.  As  Saul,  who
using  no  diligence  to  regain  the  favour
of  Clod,  was  yet  very  solicitous  that
his  honour  might  be  preserved  in  the
opinion  of  the  people. — Bp.  ISanderson.


CHAPTER  XVL

CRmoAt  AND  ExPOSTTORT  NoTES. — Ver.  1.  "  How  long  wilt  thou  monm/*  etc  "These
words  show  that  the  prophet  had  not  yet  been  able  to  reconcile  himself  to  the  hidden  ways  of
the  Lord  ;  that  he  was  still  afraid  that  the  people  and  kini^dom  of  God  would  suffer  from  the
rejection  of  Saul,  and  that  he  continued  to  mourn  for  8aul,  not  merely  from  his  own  pergonal
attachment  to  the  fallen  king,  but  al-o,  and  ])erhap3  still  more,  from  anxiety  for  the  weiiare  of
Israel."  (Keil).  **  Thine  horn."  "A  different  word  from  the  cial  spoken  of  at  chap.  x.  1."
( BUdical  Commentari/. )  "  Horns  were  anciently  used  for  holding  licjuors,  which  were  sometinu-s
drunk  out  of  them.  They  were  hunj^  up  on  the  walls  of  rooms  or  the  poles  of  tents."  {JamiiS'iu.)
•'Jesse  tho  Bethlehemite."  "The  genealogy  of  Jesse  is  traced  to  Boaz  (Kuthiv.  lS-.il).
But  the  ol)ject  was  merely  to  prove  that  he  was  a  link  in  the  Messianic  chain  of  descent,  and  it
is  left  quite  unknown  whether  Jesse  was  the  eldest  of  Obed  and  IJoaz's  family,  or  a  younger
son."  fjamieson.)  ♦'!  have  provided."  "The  language  is  remarkable  and  seems  to  imply  a
difference  between  this  and  the  former  king.  Saul  was  the  people's  choice,  •  •  •  .  the  next  was
to  be  of  Grod'i  uomiuation."  (Jamieaon.J

167


EOMTLETW  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  i.


Ver.  2.  *'  How  can  I  go,"  etc.  "  The  sncred  historinn  does  not  conceal  the  fact  that  Samnel
was  afraid  ....  here  is  an  evidence  of  veracity."  (  Wordsnorth.)  "This  fear  on  the  part  «>f
the  prophet,  who  did  not  generally  show  himself  eicher  hesitating  or  timid,  can  only  be  explained,
as  we  may  see  from  ver.  14,  on  the  supposition  that  Saul  was  already  given  up  to  the  power  of
the  evil  spirit,  so  that  the  very  worst  might  be  dreaded  from  his  madness  if  he  discovered  that
Samuel  had  anointed  another  king.  That  there  was  .^oiiie  foundation  for  Samuel's  anxiety,  we
may  infer  from  the  fact  that  the  Lord  did  not  blame  him  for  his  fear,  but  pointed  out  the  way
by  which  he  might  anoint  David  without  attracting  attention."  {Keii.)  Say,  I  am  come  to
sacrifice,"  etc.  "  There  is  here  an  appearance  of  duplicity  sanctioned  by  Divine  autliority
which  it  is  important  for  us  to  examine.  It  was  the  purpose  of  God  that  David  should  be
anointed  at  this  time  as  Saul's  successor,  and  as  the  ancestor  and  type  of  His  Christ.  It  was
not  the  purpose  of  God  that  Samuel  should  stir  up  a  civil  war  by  setting  up  David  as  Saul's
rival.  Secrecy,  therefore,  was  a  necessary  part  of  the  transaction.  But  secrecy  and  concealment
are  not  the  same  as  duplicity  and  falsehood.  Concealment  of  a  good  purpose  for  a  good  purpose
is  clearly  justifiable,  e.g.  in  war,  in  medical  treatment,  in  State  policy,  and  in  the  ordinary  affairs
of  life.  In  the  providential  government  of  the  world,  and  in  God's  dealings  with  individuals,
concealment  of  His  purpose  till  the  proper  time  for  its  development  is  the  rule  rather  than  the
exception,  and  must  be  so."  (Biblical  Commentary.  J

Ver.  4.  **Tlie  elders  trembled,"  etc.  "  The  anxious  inquiry  of  the  elders  presupposes  that
even  in  the  time  of  Saul  the  prophet  Samuel  was  frequently  in  the  habit  of  cominj;  unexpectedly
to  one  place  and  another,  for  the  purpose  of  reproving  and  punishing  wrong-doing  and  sin."
(Keil.)  *'  They  might  have  been  conscious  of  secret  guilt,  and  supposed  that  Samuel  coming
among  them  as  the  judicial  vicegerent  of  God,  was  about  to  investigate  and  punish  the
commission  of  some  crime.  The  inhabitants  of  this  place  have  long  been  proverbial  for  their
refractory  spirit ;  for  even  in  modern  times  they  have  been  often  at  variance  with  the
reigning  power."     (Hardy's  Notices  of  the  Holy  Land. )

Ver.  5.  "  I  am  come  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord.**  "  It  is  evident  from  this  that  the
prophet  was  accustomed  to  turn  his  visits  to  account  by  offering  sacrifices,  and  so  building  up
the  people  in  fellowship  with  the  Lord."  (Keil.)  "Sanctify  yourselves."  By  the  preparation
prescribed  in  Exod.  xix.  14,  16.  **  He  sanctified  Jesse,"  etc.,  i.e.,  he  took  care  that  they
were  sanctified.

Ver.  7.  "  The  Lord  said.**  "  In  like  manner  the  Lord  in  the  days  of  His  flesh  read  and
answered  men's  thoughts."  Compare  Matt,  xii.  25,  Luke  v.  22,  etc.  (Biblical  Commentary.)
*'  Outward  appearance."  Literally  the  eyes.  "  The  eyes,  as  contrasted  with  the  heart,  are
figuratively  employed  to  denote  the  outward  form."     {Keil),

Ver.  9.  "  Shammah  "  The  name  is  written  Shimeah,  2  Sam.  xiii.  3  ;  and  Shimma,  1  Chron.
ii.  13,  XX.  7.  The  proper  orthography  is  probably  that  in  2  Sam.  xiii.  3.  He  was  the  third  son
of  Jesse,  and  father  of  Jonadab  "  a  very  subtil  man,  Ammon's  friend,"  2  Sam.  xiii.  3,  and  of
Jonathan  who  slew  a  giant  of  Gath,  1  Chron,  xx.  6,  7.     (Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  10.  "  Seven,"  i.e.  including  the  three  who  had  already  passed.  It  appears  from  this,
and  fi-om  chap.  xvii.  12,  that  Jesse  had  eight  sons;  but  in  1  Chron.  ii.  13-15,  only  seven  are
ascribed  to  him."  {Bibical  Commentary).  "Samuel  said  to  Jesse."  "  It  is  not  till  this  verse
that  the  words  *  to  Jesse '  are  added,  expressly  indicating  an  address  of  Samuel  to  him.  It  does
not,  however,  follow  from  these  words,  that  Samuel  made  Jesse  a  sharer  of  the  divine  secret  .  .
That  address  to  Jesse  is  merely  a  negative  declaration  that  the  divine  selection,  with  which
Samuel  was  concerned,  and  which  in  the  absence  of  express  intimation  of  its  nature  might  refer
to  the  prophetic  office,  rested  on  none  of  these  seven  sous."     ( Erdmann).

Ver.  11.  "Sit  down;"  literally,  turn  round,  or  surround,  i.e.,  not  sit  at  the  table.  "The
ancient  Hebrews  sat  round  a  low  table  with  their  legs  crossed,  as  the  modern  Orientals  do,  for
the  luxurious  practice  of  reclining  was  not  introduced  into  Judea  until  a  late  period  of  Old
Testament  history."     (Jamieson.)

Ver.  12.  *•  Ruddy,"  red,  or  auburn -haired.  This  was  regarded  as  a  mark  of  beauty  in  a
country  where  the  hair  was  generally  black.  Josephus  refers  the  expression  to  his  tawziy  com-
plexion.

Ver.  13.  ''Then  Samuel  took  the  horn  of  oil,"  etc.  **  There  is  nothing  recorded  concern-
ing any  words  of  Samuel  to  David  at  the  time  of  the  anointing,  and  in  explanation  of  its
meaning,  as  in  the  case  of  Saul  (chap.  x.  i).  In  all  probability  Samuel  said  nothing  at  the  time,
since,  according  to  ver.  2,  he  had  good  reason  for  keeping  the  matter  secret,  not  only  on  his  own
account,  but  also  for  David's  sake ;  so  that  even  the  brethren  of  David,  who  were  present,  knew
nothing  about  the  meaning  and  object  of  the  anointing,  but  may  have  imagined  that  Samuel
merely  intended  to  consecrate  David  as  a  pupil  of  the  prophet's.  At  the  same  time  we  can
hardly  suppose  that  Samuel  left  Jesse,  and  even  David,  in  uncertainty  as  to  the  object  oi  liia

168


CilAi'.  XVI.  nOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL


mission,  and  of  the  anointing  which  he  had  performed.  He  may  have  communicated  all  this  to
botli  of  tlieni  without  letting  tlie  other  sons  know."  (Kelt.)  "And  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
caiiie  upon  David."  "The  youth  entered  upon  anew  stage  in  the  develo{)ment  of  liis  inner
life  which  was  wholly  consecrated  to  God.  The  rich  talents  wherewith  he  was  endowed  from
his  birth  received  on  all  sides  fresh  unfolding.  The  law,  the  holy  records  of  the  books  of  Moses,
in  which  he  had  been  instructeil  from  his  earliest  years,  opened  themselves  to  his  enlightened
eyes  more  and  more.  The  peaceful  stillness  of  nature  amid  which,  tending  his  father's  flocks,
he  spent  his  days,  and  often,  also,  the  mild,  starry  nights,  favoured  his  penetration  into  the
secrets  of  the  iJivine  revelation.  His  heart,  moved  and  directed  from  above,  already  poured
itself  out  in  sacred  song  and  poem,  which  he  sang  to  the  accom}>animent  of  his  harp,  to  the
praise  of  that  God  before  whom,  from  his  childhood,  he  had  learned  to  bow  the  knee ;  and  it
may  well  be  assumed  that  even  then,  amid  that  rural  loneliness,  psalms  streamed  forth  from  his
heart,  such  as  the  eighth,  which  overflows  with  adoring  wonder  at  the  condescension  and  grace
with  which  the  glorious  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth  has  concerned  Himself  with  frail  man."
(Krammacher.)

Ver.  14.  "An  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord.**  "This  spirit  is,  according  to  the  narrative,  not  the
condition  itself  of  gloomy  melancholy  and  torturing  anj,^uish,  but  an  objective  power  which
produced  it.  It  is  a  wicked  spiritual  power,  which  came  upon  him  as  the  opposite  of  the  good
holy  spirit  which  he  once  possessed,  and  goaded  him  to  rage  and  madness,  finding  its  occasion
in  the  conflict  within  his  soul,  and  in  the  passionateness  of  his  nature,  which,  after  the  spirit  of
the  Lord  left  him,  was  unbridled.  It  came  on  Saul  from  the  Lord;  that  is,  the  Lord  gave  him
over  to  the  power  and  might  of  this  spirit  as  punishment  for  his  disobedience  and  defiant  self-
will."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  18.  "A  mighty  valiant  man,"  etc.  David's  reputation  for  courage,  etc.,  was  already
very  great.  Doubtless  since  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him  his  natural  qualities  and
powers  had  been  greatly  enhanced.  His  feat  of  killing  the  lion  and  the  bear  (chap.  xvii.  34,  36)
had  been  performed,  like  Sampson's  feats  of  strength,  under  the  same  supei'natural  influence,
and  was  probably  more  or  less  known."     {^Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  20.  "  An  Ass,"  etc.  The  Hebrew  is  an  ass  of  bread.  Reland  adduces  a  great  number  of
quotations  from  Greek  writers,  showing  that  the  ancients  used  a  bottle  with  two  long  handles,
which,  from  their  resemblance  to  asses'  ears,  were  called  (ovo/)  asses ;  and  the  Greek  poet
Sosibua,  says  of  one  of  his  heroes,  "  He  ate  three  times  in  the  space  of  a  single  day  three  great
asses  of  bread,  which  Casaubon.  understood  to  signify  the  lading  of  three  asses,  whereas  the  true
meaning  is  the  contents  of  three  vases  or  jars  called  asses."  (Jamieson.)  "  These  presents
show  how  simple  were  the  customs  of  Israel,  and  in  the  court  of  Saul  at  that  time."  {Keil.)

Ver.  21.  **His  Armour-bearer."  "  This  choice,  being  an  expression  of  the  king's  partiality
shows  how  honourable  the  office  was  held  to  be."     {^Jamieson.)

Ver.  23.  *'  Karp."     "  The  Jcuinor,  not  the  large  heavy  instrument  denoted  by  the  word  harp

amongst  us,  but  the  lyre,  a  light,  portable  instrument  resembling  a  bow  in  shape  "  (Jamieson).
"  Saul  was  relreshed,"  etc.  "  Bochard  has  collected  many  passages  from  profane  writers,
which  speak  of  the  medicinal  effects  of  music  on  the  mind  and  body,  especially  as  appeasing
anger,  and  soothing  and  pacifying  a  troubled  spirit,"  [Biblical  Dictionary.)  "  Did  the  music
banish  the  demon  ?  Not  so,  but  the  higher  frame  of  mind  into  which  the  king  was  brought  by
it  sufficed  to  limit  at  least  the  sphere  of  the  operation  of  the  evil  spiiit  within  him  .  .  .  Besides,
the  silent  intercessions  which  David  sent  up  to  heaven  on  the  wings  of  the  music  of  his  harp
must  have  contributed  not  a  little  to  the  results  with  which  his  melodies  were  crowned"
{Krummacher),

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OP  TEE  PARAO RAPE,— Verse*  1—5,

Samuel's  Visit  to  Bethlehem.

I.  God  helps  man  to  a  better  condition  by  the  instrumentality  of  man.  Those
parts  of  tlie  earth  that  are  by  nature  useless  to  man,  may  by  cultivation  be  made
to  minister  to  his  comfort.  Weeds  and  unfruitful  trees  may  be  uprooted,  and
trees  yielding  fruit  and  herbs  for  the  service  of  man  may  take  their  place.  But
man  himself  must  work  the  change.  If  the  desert  is  to  rejoice  and  blossom  as
the  rose,  liuman  instrumentality  must  exert  itself.  And  so  is  it  in  matters
relating  to  man's  spiritual  and  moral  well-being.  If  a  moral  wilderness  is  to  be
transformed  into  a  garden  of  the  Lord,  God  uses  men,  or  a  man,  to  do  the  worlc
Israel  was  now  suffering  from  the  misrule  of  a  king  who  would  not  be  ruled  by
God,  and  God  purposed  to  bring  about  a  change,  to  inaugurate  a  new  and  brighter

169


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  I.


era  for  the  people,  both  materially  and  spiritually.  And  He  chose  a  man  to
indicate  His  rejection  of  the  king  wlio  had  brought  no  blessing  to  the  nation,
and  to  point  out  him  who  was  to  lift  it  to  a  higher  condition  of  prosperity  both
morally  and  commercially.  Samuel,  in  the  hand  of  God,  was  the  man  who
uprooted  the  fruitless  tree  and  planted  in  its  place  one  which  was  to  bear  fruit
for  Israel's  sustenance  and  growth.  So  the  higher  and  more  blessed  rule  of  the
gospel  dispensation  was  proclaimed  to  humanity  by  man.  The  state  of  man  by
nature  is  a  state  of  moral  misrule — of  spiritual  unfruitfulness  ;  and  to  man  was
entrusted  the  work  of  proclaiming  to  the  world  deliverance  from  the  dominion
of  the  powers  of  darkness  and  the  advent  of  a  new  King  of  men,  under  whoso
beneficent  rule  first  the  wilderness  of  individual  hearts,  and  then  by  degrees  all  the
moral  wastes  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  shall  break  forth  into  spiritual  fruitful-
ness  and  beauty.  When  Our  Lord  commissioned  His  Apostles  to  "  Go  into  all
the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature "  (Mark  xvi.  15),  He  com-
manded them  to  proclaim  the  accession  of  a  new  Sovereign,  under  whose
government  all  the  subjects  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  might,  if  they  were
willing,  be  lifted  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God.  He  has
ordained  that  by  human  lips  this  new  era  shall  be  made  known  to  man — that
by  human  instrumentality  men  shall  learn  who  it  is  that  is  God's  Anointed
One.

II.  Those  who  are  instruments  of  good  to  man  sometimes  shrink  from  the
work  which  God  calls  them  to  do.  And  Samuel  said,  "  How  can  I  go  ?  '*
God's  methods  of  making  His  children  instruments  of  good  to  others  are  often
most  perplexing  and  painful  to  them,  and  tasks  are  given  them  to  perform  from
which  they  draw  back  in  fear  and  trembling.  Joseph  was  made  an  instrument
of  great  blessing  both  to  the  nation  of  Egypt  and  to  his  own  family,  but  the  way
in  which  he  became  such  a  benefactor  was  a  very  rough  one,  and  if  he  could
have  seen  it  lying  before  him  without  seeing  the  goal  to  which  it  would  bring
him,  he  would  probably  have  asked  SamueFs  question,  "  How  can  I  go  ? "
When  Moses  was  called  by  (  ol  to  go  and  stand  before  Pharaoh,  he  drew  back
from  the  mission  with  which  G  )d  charged  him  with  such  persistency  that  "  the
anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  him'*  (Exod.  iv.  13.,  although  in  his
case  the  reluctance  apparently  arose  rather  from  a  sense  of  his  own  inability
than  from  fear  of  evil  to  his  own  person.  Yet  in  his  case  as  in  that  of  Samuel
the  cause  of  the  shrinking  back  was  the  same,  viz.,  a  momentary  failure  of  that
full  confidence  in  God  which  was  an  eminent  feature  in  the  characters  of  both
these  good  men.  The  hesitation  in  both  was  but  a  transient  cloud  which  only
dimmed  for  a  very  short  season  the  almost  perfect  obedience  which  each  of  them
rendered  to  their  God.  It  sufficed  to  show  that  both  were  men  of  like  passions
and  infirmities  with  ourselves,  and  links  them  with  God's  honoured  servants  in
all  ages,  all  of  whom  have  their  hours  of  faithlessness  and  consequently  of  fear.

III,  The  true  servants  of  God  in  such  circumstances  tell  out  their  perplexity
and  fear  to  God  Himself.  This  is  a  certain  cure  for  attacks  of  cowardice  arising
from  mistrust  of  God's  power  and  wisdom.  When  Jonah  was  entrusted  with  a
distasteful  and  perilous  task  there  is  no  record  that  he  made  known  to  God  his
weakness  and  fear.  He  took  counsel  with  no  one  but  himself,  and  the  result
was  ignominious  defeat.  But  neither  Moses  nor  Samuel  seek,  like  the  son  of
Amittai,  to  *'  flee  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  "  (Jonah  i.  3),  but  to  the  Lord
Himself  they  make  known  their  fears  and  their  reasons  for  wavering.  And  the
result  in  both  cases  is  the  same — their  faith  rises  to  the  emergency,  and  in  the
protection  and  help  afforded  to  them  in  performing  the  duty  enjoined  upon
them  they  have  a  fresh  proof  that  God  never  sends  His  servants  to  "  warfare  at
their  own  charges,"

170


CHAP.  XVI.  HO  MJJ.  ETIJ  CO  MM  EN  TARY :  SAM  VEL.


IV  Those  who  are  instruments  of  good  to  their  fellow-creatures  are  often
rega  detl  by  them  with  distrust  and  suspicion.  No  man  in  the  land  of  Israel
could  have  had  any  reason  to  re^^ard  Sanmel  in  any  other  light  than  in  that  of
a  true  friend,  yet  the  elders  of  the  town  meet  him  with  the  question,  "Comest
thou  peaceably?"  A  consciousness  of  guilt  is  often  at  the  bottom  of  this  dis-
trust and  dislike.  The  entrance  of  a  faithful  man  of  God  into  some  circles  or
localities  is  unwelconio  because  his  very  presence  arouses  in  the  ungodly  a  setise
of  their  guilt.  The  feeling  may  not  be  very  cleaily  defined  even  to  themselves,
but  it  is  the  cause  which  makes  them  dislike  the  company  of  such  a  man.  The
othcer  of  justice,  whether  he  be  clothed  in  a  policeman's  uniform  or  a  judge's
ermine,  is  regarded  by  an  innocent  man  as  administer  of  God  for  good"
(Rom.  xiii.  4).  But  the  guilty  man  does  not  feel  at  rest  in  his  presence.
Samuel  was  a  man  of  God  whose  very  presence  was  enough  to  arouse  in  guilty
men  a  sense  of  their  deserts,  and  he  was  also  a  judge  in  Israel  whose  visit  to
Bethlehem  might  have  been  regarded  with  fear  by  the  villagers,  because  they
knew  that  they  had  been  guilty  of  outward  acts  of  disobedience  to  the  law  of
God.  Or  their  distrustful  reception  of  Samuel  might  have  arisen  from  a  suspi-
cion that  he  was  to  be  the  instrument  of  a  change  of  rule  in  Israel.  Men  are
often  so  little  alive  to  their  true  interests,  and  so  averse  to  any  change,  that
they  resent  any  disturbance  in  the  existing  order  of  things,  even  although  it
would  bring  much  blessing  to  themselves.  The  Bethlehemites  might  have  been
certain  that  any  change  which  came  to  them  from  God  through  Samuel  would
be  for  good,  and  not  for  evil,  and  yet  fear  of  Saul  and  an  unwillingness  to  be
disturbed  might  have  made  them  prefer  the  rule  of  their  present  unworthy
monarch  to  a  new  order  of  government.  A  fear  of  immediate  unpleasant  conse-
quences and  a  cowardly  and  unworthy  content  with  things  as  they  are  has  often
made  men  regard  with  suspicion  and  with  positive  hatred  those  who  have  desired
to  bring  them  under  a  better  rule — those  who  have  endeavoured  to  free  thein
individually  from  the  tyranny  of  Satan,  or,  nationally  from  bondage  to  Satan's
emissaries.  The  reformers  of  all  ages,  both  in  the  Church  and  in  the  State,
have  been  coldly  welcomed  by  the  majority  of  those  to  whom  God  has  made
them  instruments  of  blessing.  But  this  need  not  be  a  matter  of  either  surprise
or  discouragement  when  we  remember  that  those  whom  the  Son  of  God  came  to
make  "free  indeed"  (John  viii.  36)  cried,  ''Crucify  llim!  crucify  Him!''  and
that  His  great  apostle  whose  heart's  desire  and  prayer  was  for  the  salvation  of
his  fellow-countrymen  (Rom.  x.  1)  received  from  them  this  sentence,  "^^^a^
with  such  a  fellow  from  the  earth,  for  it  is  not  fit  that  lie  should  live  "  (Acts
xxii  22).

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  1.  It  IS  an  unnatural  senseless-  God  hath  cast  away  Saul  from  reigning

ness  not  to  be  affected  with  the  dan-  over  Israel  in  His  just  punishment.    A

gers,  with  the  sins,  of  our  governors,  good  heart  hath  learned  to  rest  itself

God  did  not  blame  this  sorrow,  but  upon  the  justice  of  God's  decree,  and

moderated  it.     It  was  not  the  affection  f)rgets  all  earthly  respects   when  it

He  forbade  but  the  measure.     In  this  looks  up  to  heaven. — Up.  Hall.
is  the  difference  betwixt  good  men  and         The  affairs  of  the  km-dom  of  God

evil  ;    that  evil   men  mourn   not  for  go  their  way  without   break  or  halt

their  own  sins,  good  men  do  so  mourn  according  to  God's  high  thoughts  and

for  the  sins  of  others  that  they  will  decrees,   though   human   sin   and    its

hardly  be  taken  off.     If  Samuel  mourn  attendant  judgment  (as  in  Saul's  case),

because  Saul  hath  cast  away  God  by  his  or  human   weakness   (as  in  Samuel's

Bin  he  must  cease  to  mourn  because  inordinate  grief  for  Saul),  may  seem

m


MOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  Bdok  I.


to  hinder  tlie  plans  of  the  Divine  wis-  It  w^^ild   not  be  reverent  to  quarrel

dom.      Bui    it   is    also    precisely   by  with     Mis    providence :    it   would    be

human   sin   and   foolishness  that  tiie  disobedient  and  impious  ...    2.   There

history  of  God's  kin<;(lom  under  the  is  a  duty  to  your  own  soul.      **  Fill

guidance   of    the  Divine  wisdom  and  thine  horn  with  oil,"  and  go  to  the

providence  receives  new  occasions  and  new  duties  to  which  you  are  called,

impulses  to  wider  and  higher  develop-  that   it  may  be   well   with    yourself,

ment  according  to  the  aims  which  God  3.   There  is  a  duty  to  others.     Samuel

sets    before  Himself — Lange's   Com-  had  something  more  to  live  for  than

mentary.  his  own   interest.      His  grief   was   a

God  demands  in  the  souls  He  sets  public    calamity.      The    sorrow    into

apart  for  Himself  and  for  the  guidance  which    he    was    plunged    might    do

of  others,  such  a  dying  toall  things  that  injury  ....     When  there  are  others

He  does  not  allow  them  to  regard  any  to  care  for,   our  grief  must  not  be

other    interest    than     His,    whatever  immoderate. — Steel.
reason  may  be  alleged. — Berlenberger

Bible.  Ver.  2.  Perhaps  desire  of  full  direc-

liemedies  for  improper  mourning,  tion  drew  from  him  this  question,  but

1.  Submission  to  the  will  of  God  ("  I  not  without  a  mixture  of  diffidence  ;

have  rejected  him  ").     2.  Diligence  in  for  the  manner  of  doing  it  doth  not

present  work  for  God  ("  Fill  thy  horn  so  much  trouble  him  as  the  success,

and   go  ").      3.   Hope  that   God   will  It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  the  most

bring  a  better  future  ("I  have  provided  faithful  hearts  should  be  always  in  an

me  a  king") — Translator  of  Lang es  equal  height  of  resolution:    God  does

Commentary.  not  chide  Samuel,  but  instruct  him. —

In  the  providence  of  God,  there  is  a  Bishop  Tlall.
blessed  arrangement  by  which  the  new

duties  and  cares  which  are  occasioned  Ver.  4.  Hundreds  of  years  after  this,

by  bereavements,  losses,  or  disappoint-  when  the  heavenly  light  was  seen  in

ments  become  the  means  of  alleviating  the  same  place  by  the  shepherds,  they

distress  and  improving  the  soul  ....  too  were  "  sore  afraid  ;"  but  there  was

Persons  in  public  positions  are  sum-  as  little  to  fear  in  the  one  case  as  in

moned    from    their    humiliation    and  the  other ;    for  in  both  there  was  a

melancholy,  induced  by  the  defeat  of  provided    sacrifice,   and   in   both   the

favourite   schemes,    to    endeavour    to  mission   was  one   of   peace  ;    yea,  as

retrieve  their  influence,  and  do  some  Samuel  came  to  anoint  David  to  be

good  before  they  die.      The  sense  of  a  king,  so   the   angel-heralded  Jesus

personal  and  relative  responsibility  is  appeared   "  to    make    us    kings    and

thus  made  by  God  to  rebuke  and  cure  priests  unto  our  Lord  and  His  Father."

a  sorrow  deemed  inconsolable  ....  — Dr.  W.  M,  laylor,
1.  2  here  is  a  duty  to  the  Lord  •  •  .  •


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  TIIE  PARAGRAPH.— Verm  Q—l%

The  Anointing  of  David.

I.  There  is  a  tendency  in  even  the  best  men  to  be  carried  away  by
appearances.  Because  EliaVs  countenance  was  comely  an  ^.  his  stature  imposing,
Samuel  said  at  once,  "  Surely  the  Lord's  anointed  is  before  me."  Yet  he
knew  nothinnr  of  Eliab's  inner  man,  and  he  knew  from  the  sad  example  of  Saul
that  external  beauty  was  no  guarantee  of  internal  worth.  The  estimate  that
men  form  of  human  character  must  always  be  grounded  on  outward  manifesta-
tions, just  as  the  physician  forms  his  estimate  of  the  state  of  a  man's  iieilth
from  the  symptoms  which  present  themselves  to  his  observation.  They  cannot
172


CHAP.  XVI.  nOMlLETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


do  ns  God  can — ])eiiotrato  into  tlie  hidden  recossos  of  both  sonl  and  body,  and
read  there  as  in  a  book  the  exact  condition  of  the  physical  and  moral  natnre.
Man  should  therefore  be  very  careful  in  ])ronouiicini?  a  judgment  or  forminj^
an  opinion  concerning  his  fellow-man,  remembering  the  "Lord  seeth  not  as
man  seeth  ;  he  should  not  be  hasty  to  decide,  but  should  wait  until  the
character  has  had  time  to  develop  itself — until  long  experience  and  observation
have  in  some  measure  qualified  him  to  be  a  judge  in  the  matter.  To  argue
that  because  a  man  possesses  gifts  of  ])erson  or  of  intellect  he  is  also  the
possessor  of  moral  worth,  is  more  foolish  than  to  argue  that  a  man  is  wealthy
because  he  is  dressed  in  gay  clothing,  and  yet  everyone  of  us  is  prone  to  be
influenced  more  than  we  ought  to  be  by  outward  appearance,  and  to  form  our
judgments  of  those  we  meet  upon  very  insufficient  grounds.  Even  this  prophet
of  God  was  not  free  from  this  weakness.

II.  However  men  may  err  in  their  estimate  of  men,  God's  estimate  will
decide  who  is  to  come  uppermost.  No  member  of  Jesse's  household  thought
it  worth  while  to  call  the  shepherd-boy  in  to  partake  of  the  sacrificial  feast,  or
to  bring  him  under  the  notice  of  the  man  of  God  ;  but  the  feast  notwithstanding
had  to  be  delayed  until  his  arrival,  and  it  was  concerning  him  that  Samuel
heard  the  Divine  voice,  saying,  "Arise,  anoint  him,  for  this  is  he."  There  is
always  a  levelling  force  at  work  in  the  universe,  which  only  needs  time  to  place
each  man  where  he  ought  to  be — lifting  up  this  one  and  putting  down  the
other — making  the  last  first  and  the  first  last  according  to  the  moral  worth  of
each.  This  levelling  force  is  the  hand  of  God,  who  will  see  to  it  that  no  true
man  of  worth  shall  lack  position  and  opportunity  to  let  the  light  that  is  in  hira
shine  forth  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  good  of  his  fellow-creatures.  God's
election  and  approval  is  not  always  so  perceptible  to  the  eye  of  man  as  it  was  in
the  case  of  Jesse's  youngest  son,  but  it  is  always  as  real  and  as  certain.  Some
men  do  not  reach  their  destined  throne  among  their  fellows  until  they  have  leit
the  world ;  they  must  pass  away  from  earth  before  men  can  realise  that
a  king  has  been  among  them.  It  may  bo  that  many  who  have  lived  and
died  in  obscurity  are  yet  awaiting  their  coronation  day,  or  they  may
have  been  elected  to  high  and  honourable  service  in  another  world.  How-
ever this  may  be  there  is  a  deeply-rooted  conviction  in  all  who  confide
in  the  righteousness  of  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth,  that  no  moral  king  shall
miss  his  throne.  Appearances  may  be  strongly  against  it,  but  appearances
were  likewise  strongly  against  the  fact  that  the  despised  and  crucified  Nazarene
carpenter  was  He  who  at  the  right  hand  of  God  should  judge  the  world  and
receive  the  homage  of  the  universe.  But  time  has  made  the  one  truth  certain,
and  it  will  establish  the  other.  It  must  be  so — 1.  Because  God  can  never  be
ignorant  of  what  J  J  is  creatures  are  best  Jitted  for.  2.  Because  no  selfish  motive
or  lack  of  power  can  ever  interfere  with  the  justice  of  His  dealings.  3.  Because
the  infinite  goodness  of  God  must  make  Him  ever  in  favour  of  using  any  good
that  lie  finds  in  His  creatures  for  the  benefit  of  the  race.  The  subject  teaches
us— (1.)  That  moral  worth  is  the  true  beauty.  All  the  beauty  of  material  things
is  but  a  shadow  of  a  higher  beauty — of  that  beauty  which  makes  God  the  most
beautiful  Being  in  the  universe.  As  He  is  a  Spirit,  and  cannot  be  apprehended
by  our  senses,  that  which  makes  Him  the  object  of  admiration  and  worship  to
the  best  of  His  creatures  is  that  beauty  of  goodness  which  appeals  to  their
spiritual  nature.  And  the  truest  and  highest  beauty  of  men  or  angels  is  that
beauty  which  is  of  the  same  kind  as  God's.  (II.)  We  should  form  our  standard
of  excellence  upon  God's  standard.  To  honour  and  exalt  a  man  for  any
superiority  of  physical  beauty  or  birth,  is  to  render  him  homage  for  that  for
which  he  is  not  responsible,  and  is  consequently  most  foolish.  Yet  it  is  a
mistake  into  which  men  often  fall.     But  in  this  respect,  as  in  many  others,  God's

173


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,


BOOK  I,


thonghfs  are  not  as  man's  thoughts,  neither  are  His  ways  our  ways.  If  we  are
wise  we  shall,  so  far  as  finite  creatures  can,  make  God's  standard  of  excellejice
ours,  by  looking  not  at  the  outward  a])pearance  nor  regarding  external  circum-
stances, but  by  giving  our  honour  and  contidence  to  thooe  who  possess  the
"  beauty  of  the  Lord  God  "  (Psa.  xc.  17).


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Vers.  6,  12.  Difficult^/  of  selecting
men  for  important  positions.  1.  Causes
(a).  Intrinsic  difficulty  of  properly
estimating  character.  (b).  Slanage-
ment  of  partial  friends.  2.  Lessons
(a).  To  avoid  haste  in  deciding,
(b.)  To  make  diligent  inquiries. —
Translator  of  Langes  Commentary,

Vers.  6,  7.  So  when  godly  men  see
their  neighbours  lovely  in  their  lives,
civil  in  their  practices,  high  in  their
profession,  strict  in  perfoimances,  thev,
accordinir  to  their  duty,  say,  inwardly
at  least,  Surely  the  Lord's  anointed  is
before  Hiui,  these  are  the  Idessed  of
the  Lord,  anointed  to  the  kingdom  of
heaveu  ;  hut  God  may  often  answer
them,  Look  not  on  their  profession  or
their  performances,  for  I  see  their
hearts,  that  they  serve  not  me,  but
themselves  of  me  ...  Observe
at  what  a  high  rate  that  which  is
nothing  worth  is  valued  in  a  time  of
famine.  Truly  so,  there  is  such  a
scarcity  of  true  godliness,  that  godly
men,  who  exceedingly  long  for  the
advancement  of  Christ  and  Christianity
in  men's  hearts  and  houses,  prize  and
encourage  anything  that  cometh  near
it. — Swinnock.

Ver.  7.  Muscularity  is  not  Christi-
anity, and  bodily  beauty  is  not  holiness.
Not  how  you  look,  but  what  you  are,
ought  to  be  the  first  care  of  j^our  lives;
for  if  you  have  a  selfish  disposition,  a
sordid  soul,  or  a  sinful  life,  your  out-
ward beauty  will  be  like  **  a  jewel  in  a
swine's  snout,"  and  your  bodily  vigour
will  only  be  like  the  strength  of  a  safe
in  which  nothing  worth  preserving  is
locked  up. — Dr.  W.  M.  Taylor.

Objectors  to  the  history  of  the  Old
Testament  have  dwelt  much  upon  the
title,  "the  man  after  God's  own  heart/'
174


which  is  continually  given  to  David.
"Is  he  not,"  they  have  said,  "directly
chargeable  with  adultery  and  murder
...  .Is  this  the  man  whom  a  righteous
God  would  declare  to  be  the  object  of
His  special  complacency  ? "  .  .  .
Divines  have  met  these  questions  with
an  answer  of  this  kind  :  "The  epithot
which  you  complain  of  belongs  not  to
David  personally  but  olficially  .  .  .
He  did  the  work  he  was  appointed  to
do.  He  fulfilled  God's  counsel.  So
far  he  was  a  man  after  God's  own
heart."  ...  A  very  little  reflec-
tion upon  the  words  themselves,  still
more  a  slight  study  of  the  history  of
David,  should  surely  have  prevented
any  man  from  employing  this  kind  of
apology.  "  God  trieth  the  reins.'*
That  general  principle  is  here  a])plied
expressly  to  the  case  of  David. —
Maurice.

I.  A  solemn  thought.  He  knows
fully  all  that  characterises  the  inward
and  spiritual  nature  of  man.  II.  How
comforting !  You  may  be  misunder-
stood by  men.  Your  purest  motives
may  be  misinterpreted.  .  .  But  there
is  an  appeal  to  the  Judge  of  all. —
tSteel,

Ver.  11.  One  of  our  greatest  poets
once  remembered  this  question  of
Samuel's  after  he  had  studied  and
mastered  the  writings  of  the  most
prominent  philosophers  and  wise  men
of  this  world,  and  had  found  in  none
of  them  anything  stable  and  satis-
factory. Then  with  scorn  he  wrote
these  lines :

"  Ach  ich  war  auch  in  diesem  Fallel
A  is  ich  die  Weisen  hort'und  las  ;

Da  jeder  diese  Welten  alle

Mit  seiner  Menscheiispaune  masy

Da  fragt  'ich  !     Aber  siud  sie  das
Sind  das  die  Knabeu  alle  t"


OBAP.  XVI.


HOMILETIC  COMMILXTAUY :  SAMUEL.


This  case  was  mine  too  when  at  leisure,

What  all  the  sages  wrote  I  read,
When   with   their  small   wits   they  would
measure

Tlie  wealth  of  worlds  around  us  spread  :
I  tlionght  of  Samuel  then,  when  he

Maiie  Jesse's  sons  in  row  appear,
And  wlien  the  seven  were  counted,  said,

Are  all  thy  children  here  ?

Goethe.

0  til  at  this  prince  of  poets  bad  not
after  all  omitted  to  count  in  One  ! —
Krummacher.

It  was  certainly  not  by  accident  that
tlie  son  on  whom  the  Divine  choice  fell
was  at  the  very  moment  keeping  his
father's  sheep His  early  em-
ployment had  a  direct  and  Divine
bearing  on  the  latter.  ...  1.  As  a
shepherd,  the  sense  of  responsibility  to
another  was  powerfully  called  into  ex-
ercise. The  flock  was  not  his  own.  In
keeping  it  he  was  acting  merely  as  his

father's  servant The  sercant-

feeling  thus  beautifully  called  into
play  was  transferred,  in  full  integrity,
to  the  higher  sphere  of  the  kingdom.
...  2.  The  shepherd-occupation  of
David  led  him,  from  its  very  nature,
to  seek  the  welfare  of  the  flock.  It  de-
manded unceasing  attention  to  its
condition  as  a  whole,  and  to  the  state
of  each  several  animal ;  frequent  ex-
posure to  danger,  and  constant  readi-
ness   to    sacrifice    his    own    ease    or

comfort These  were  the  ideas

of  duty  with  which  David  became
familiar  as  a  shepherd.  And  when  his
charge  was  changed  these  ideas  of  duty
remaining  in  his  heart,  and  influencing
his  public  conduct,  made  him  the  emi-
nent ruler  he  became.  ...  8.  In  his
oflice  as  a  sheplierd  David  had  con-
stantly to  study  the  increase  and
improvement  of  the  flock.  It  was  not
enough  for  the  shepherd  to  keep  the
flock  as  he  got  it.  The  flock  was  not
])roperly  kept  unless  every  season
brought  a  great  increase  to  its  numher.
Thesame  thought  manifestly  influenced
David's  kingly  administration.  He
constantly  consulted  for  the  progres-
sive improvement  and  elevation  of  his
people.  ...  4.  The  shei)lierd  eni[)loy-
ment  of  David,  by  leading  him  to  give
special  attention  to  the  weak,  helpless,


and  distrtssid  of  the  flock,  trained  liiin
{y)V  one  of  the  most  blessed  and  Christ-
like functions  of  a  godly  ruler. — •
Bl<i  ikie.

When  we  look  forward  in  the  light
of  Divine  revelation,  the  early  part  of
David's  ccmsecrated  life  contains  niany
tyi)ical  elements  as  factual  prophec-ies
or  pre-figurations  of  the  future.  His
shepherd  life — continued  after  he  was
anointed,  in  which  on  the  one  hand,
self-consecrated,  he  immerses  himself
in  the  contemplation  of  God's  reve-
lation in  nature  and  in  His  word,  and
on  the  other  hand  must  be  ready  at
any  moment  to  meet  the  greaicst
dangers,  and  exhibit  boldness  and
prowess  (xvii.  34-37) — presents  on
these  two  sides  types  of  his  religious
life  as  king,  the  Spirit  of  God  develoj)ing
on  the  basis  of  this  double  natural
ground  two  sides  of  his  character  which
not  merely  co-exist  but  are  interwoven
with  each  other:  (I)  intensicely  the
innermost  concentration  and  inimersi'iu
of  his  thoughtful  meditative  heart  into
the  depths  of  God's  revelation  of  His
power,  grace,  and  wisdom  in  nature,
word,  history,  and  into  the  depths  of
the  sinful  human  heart,  whence  sprang
in  his  psalms  partly  the  inspired  })r;iise
of  God,  with  furtherance  and  deepening
of  the  knowledge  of  (lod,  partly  ad
vance  in  the  natural  grace,  lacking
condition  of  the  human  heart ;  (2)
extensively  his  admirable  energy  and
heroic  courage  in  the  life  of  conflict
which  he  had  evermore  to  lead.  In
the  hiddenness  of  his  royal  calling  from
the  people,  the  gradual  ripening  of  his
inner  life  for  his  oflice,  and  the  lowli-
ness of  the  sphere  whence  he  was  niised
to  the  throne,  he  is  a  type  of  Christ,
who  sprang  from  him  according  to  the
flesh  ....  passes  His  holy  youth  in
privacy,  and  then  at  the  end  of  this
Divine-human  development  steps  forth
from  the  lowliness  of  a  natural  human
life  as  the  King  of  Israel,  who  com-
pletes in  his  person  and  work  God's
revelations  for  the  establishment  of
His  kingdom  on  earth,  and  thcreiu
enters  on  the  war  of  subjugation
against  the  ungodly  world. — Lange's
Commentary,

175


IIOMILETIC  COMMEyTAPxY:   SAMUEL,  book  i.

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—18.
Saul  and  David.

L  Both  the  Spirit  of  God  and  the  ag-ents  of  Satan  seek  cong^enial  soil  for
their  operations.    When  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  David,  iie  found  a
lieart  pre])ared  to  receive  His  influence  and  to  profit  by  it.     David  had  already-
yielded  himself  up  to  those  ordinary  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  come  to
men  in  general,  and  he  was  therefore  capable  of  receiving  and  being  blest  by  a
special  outpourinL,^  of  that  same  gracious  and  sanctifying  power,  to  tit  him  for  a
sacred  office  and  a  special  work.     Those  who  have  received  into  their  minds  the
elementary  principles  of  a  science,  or  the  rudiments  of  a  language,  possess  a  basis
upon  which  a  teacher  may  lay  other  truths  concerning  the   same   science  or
language  ;  and  so  the  pupil  who  has  diligently  mastered  the  alphabet  of  any
branch  of  knowledge  is  the  one  most  likely  to  be  rewarded  with  further  instruc-
tion.    So  the  man  who  lias  profited  by  the  spiritual  light  which  lias  been  already
afforded  him  is  in  the  way  to  receive  a  further  revelation — he  who  has  opened
his  heart  to  receive  the  teachings  of  Christ  wdiich  have  been  given  him  has  a
basis  upon  which  the  Spirit  of  God  can  operate  to  his  further  enlightenment.
Tlie  ingenuous  confession  of  Nathaniel  (John  i.  40)  showed  that  he  was  fit  to
receive  greater  knowledge,  and  to  be  made  acquainted  with  greater  and  more
glorious  truths  concerning  Christ  and  His  Kingdom  ;   and  hence  the  Saviour's
promise  :  **  Thou  shalt  nee  greater  things  than  the.^e  '*  (ver.  50).     The  confession
of  Peter  in  Ca3sarea  Phili[)pi  (Matt.  xyi.  16)  showed  that  lie  had  mastered  the
first  lesson  in  connection  with  the  Kingship  of  Christ;  and  because  he  thus  gave
proof  of  having  made  good  use  of  the  evidence  concerning  his  Divine  Master
which  had  already  been  given  him,  he  was  permitted  to  receive  more  and  more,
and  at  last  to   be  an  ''eyewitness  of  Bis  Majesty  when  He  received  from  His
Father  honour  and  glory  in  the  holy  mount''  (2  Peter  i.  16,  17).     If  Peter  and
his  brother  A])()stles  had  not  already  yielded  themselves  up  to  the  teachings
which  flowed  from  the  every-day  manifestations  of  their  Lord,  we  may  be  sure
they  would  not  have  been  permitted  to  receive  the  higher  revelation  of  His
transfiguration.     So  was  it  with  David.     The  Spirit  of  (^od  found  in  him  a  basis
npon  which  to  raise  a  sujjerstructure  of  such  a  character  as  would  fit  him  to  be
a  worthy  ruler  of  the  chosen  people,  and  a  type  of  Him  who  should  hereafter
rule  the  whole  Israel  of  God  (Micah  v.  2).     Saul  also  had  been  wrought  upon  by
the  Spirit  of  God,  but  although  he  had  thereby  become  intellectually  stronger
and  more  fit  for  tlie  kindly  office,  the  more  blessed  and  sanctifying  influences  of
that  Holy  Spirit  had  found  no  recej)tive  soil  upon  which  to  operate.      11  is  heart
was  like  the  rocky  ground  of  our  Lord's  parable,  where  the  few  plants  which
s})rung  up  soon  withered  away  because  they  had  no  root  (Matt.  xiii.  6)  ;  and
tlie  powers  of  evil  never  leave  such  a  heart  untenanted.     When  a  man  resists
the  Holy  Ghost  as  Saul  did.  He  ceases  at  length  to  strive  with  him,  and  the  Evil
One,  finding  the  house  empty,  sends  his  agents  to  take  up  their  abode  there,  and
so  '*  the  last  state  of  that  man  is  worse  than  the  first  "  (Luke  xi.  26).

II.  The  powers  of  evil  are  under  Divine  rule,  A  monarch  has  under  his
scei)tre  not  only  those  obedient  subjects  who  find  their  truest  freedom  in
observing  the  statutes  of  the  realm,  but  also  the  lawless  and  disobedient  who
yield  him  no  willing  service.  Yet  this  latter  class  do  serve  by  compulsion — as
criminals  and  prisoners  they  may  be  used  to  do  work  which  the  free  citizen
could  not  do  so  well,  and  so  they  also  may  unwillingly  render  service  to  the
king.  So  the  powers  of  evil  are  subjects  of  the  King  of  kings  as  truly  as  the
angels  of  light ;  and  although  they  are  rebels  against  His  righteous  rule,  they
can  do  nothing  without  His  permission,  and  sometimes  in  following  the  dictate
17^


CHAP.  XVI.  HO  )1 1  LET  10  COMMENTA  RY :  SA  M  UI-L.


of  their  own  evil  natures  they  lUKiesignedly  fiillil  Go  I's  piirp  )Sos.  This  was
remarkahly  the  case  in  the  experience  of  Job.  Satan  couM  only  distress  and
afflict  Job  by  Divine  permission,  and  while  ho  seemed  to  be  only  w. irking  out
his  own  evil  intentions,  he  was  really  fulfilling  a  Divine  pur[)()se  towards  a
godly  man.  And  the  spirits  of  darkness  are  also  made  instruments  of  God's
chastisement,  especially  in  relation  to  men  who  are  in  rebellion  against  Ilitu.
We  can  conceive  that  this  terrible  but  necessary  work  in  a  world  of  sinners
could  not  be  done  by  a  good  angel  as  it  can  be  done  by  a  fallen  and  malignant
spirit;  this  we  know  from  the  teaching  of  Scripture  in  this  passage,  ami  in
others,  that  God  does  so  over-rule  the  malignity  of  evil  spirits  and  evil  men  as
to  make  them  executioners  of  His  judgments  upon  other  sinners.  The  evil
spirit  which  now  troubled  Saul  was  from  the  Lord  in  the  sense  that  it  was
permitted  to  be  an  instrument  of  chastisement  for  his  disobedience.

Ill,  Even  when  God  chastises  for  disobeclienoe,  He  leaves  some  influences
within  reach  of  the  offender  to  modify  the  punishmant.  Saul  was  not  wholly
forsaken  of  God  while  he  was  not  wholly  forsaken  of  m(!n,  for  men  "  are  that  to
us,  amino  more,  than  God  permits  them  to  be"  ( ilniry).  Saul,  a  prey  to
his  own  evil  passions,  and  to  the  malice  of  his  spiritual  adversary,  could  hardly
have  been  at  this  time  a  good  master  or  a  man  calculated  to  attract  friends,  yet
there  were  those  still  around  him  who  were  sorry  for  him  in  his  affliction,  and
who  were  anxious  to  alleviate  his  suffering.  And  so  it  is  generally.  When
men,  by  a  course  of  wilful  transgression  of  Divine  laws  have  brought  upon
themselves  the  penalty  of  mental  or  physical  suffering,  some  kindly  heart  and
hand  is  permitted  by  God  to  be  moved  in  their  behalf,  and  human  sympathy
and  help  lessens  in  some  measure  the  weight  of  the  deserved  chastisement.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  13.  Here  was  the  sign  that  all  intelligible.     In  such  a  time  of  retro-

the  inward  discipline  and  preparation  spection,  when  the  future  is  seen  mir-

of  David  had  an  object,  another  object  rored   in   the  past,  David   may  have

than  merely  to  make  him  a  faithful  found  his  harp  much  more  than  the

keeper  of  sheep,  or  even  a  wise  and  mere  solace  of  lonely  hours,  the  mere

righteous  man.     But  a  Divine  sign  is  response   to   his   inward   sorrows   and

not  a  mere  ceremony.      It  would  be  thanksgivings.     He  may  have   begun

deceitful  and  insincere  if  there  were  to  know  that  he  was  speaking  for  other

not  a  present  blessing  denoted  by  it,  men  as  well  as  for  himself;  that  there

the  communication  of  an  actual  power  were  close  and  intimate  fibres  uniting

to  fit  the  man  for  tasks  to  which  he  men  utterly  unlike  and  separated  by

has  not  hitherto  been  appointed.    From  tracts  of  time  and  space  ;  that  there  is

that  day  forward  there   was  a  power  some  mysterious  source  of  these  sympa-

within  David  stirring  him  to  thoughts  thies,   some  living   centre   who    holds

and  acts  which  connected  him  directly  together  the  different  portions  of  each

with   Israelites,   with    human    beings,  man's  life,   and  in   whom    there   is   a

....  There  is  a  time  in  men's  lives,  general  human  life  of  which  all  may

before    they   enter   upon  some   great  partake.     The   Spirit  of  God,    which

work  to  which  they  have  been  conse-  had   taken  possession   of  David,    may

crated,  a  time  when  they  are  permitted  have  been  teaching  him  these  lessons

to   look   back  upon   the   years    which  and  inspiring  the  song  which  was  the

tiiey  have  already  past,  to  see  them  no  utterance  of  them  before  he  was  pre-

longer  as  fragments,  but  as  linked  to-  pared    to   come   forth   as    the   actual

gether,    as   having   a   Divine   puipose  deliverer.     And  that  Spirit  will  assu-

running   through   them    which   makes  redly  have  been  preparing  him  for  Ins

even  tlieir  incoherences  and  discords  after  conflicts,  by  maldng  him  feel  that

ja  X77


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


BOOR  1.


lie  had,  even  then,  enemies  most  fierce
to  struggle  with,  siihj(3cts  most  turbu-
lent to  suhdue.  The  invisible  God
does  not  make  known  to  man  that  He
is  his  she])herd,  without  making  known
to  him  also  that  there  are  invisible
powers  more  fenrful  than  bears  and
lions,  which  would  tear  his  flock  asun-
der, w^hich  would  bring  each  separate
sheep  into  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of
death. — Maurice,

Ver.  14.  The  Power  of  darkness,
which  is  personal,  and  in  souls  in  the
condition  of  that  in  which  Saul's  now
was,  finds  all  open  for  his  operations,
wrought  in  him  with  greater  energy  to
deepen  yet  more  and  more  that  dread-
ful gulf  which  separated  the  king  from
Jehovah,  eternally  enthroned  in  the
heavens ;  yea,  to  increase  the  estrange-
ment of  the  miserable  man  from  God
yet  more  and  more  till  it  became  a
demoniacal  hatred  of  God. — Krum-
macher.

In  regard  to  the  negative  or  privative
declaration  that  "the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  had  departed  from  Samuel,"  we
may  take  it  to  mean  that  God  with-
drew from  him  all  those  special  aids
which,  in  connection  with  his  anointing
to  the  royal  office,  had  been  conferred
upon  him.  Perhaps,  also,  we  may  in-
clude in  it  the  taking  from  him  of  those
gracious  influences  of  the  Holy  Si)irit,
without  which  a  man  becomes,  in  the
sjuldest  and  solemnest  of  all  senses,
"  abandoned."  This  is  what  Paul  has
described  as  a  "  being  given  over  to  a
reprobate  mind,  to  do  those  things
which  are  not  convenient"  (Rom.  i.  28),
and  what,  in  the  simple  Saxon  of  our
common  speech,  we  call,  "  a  being  left
to  one's  self."  The  Saviour  has  said,
"  From  him  that  hath  not  shall  be
taken  away  even  that  he  hath."  Now,
in  Saul,  we  have  a  deeply  suggestive
instance  of  tlie  execution  of  this  sen-
tence.—Z^r.  W,  M.  Taylor.

Man  is  governed  by  the  Spirit  from
above,  or  by  the  spirit  from  beneath  ;
there  is  no  third  course.  For  he  is  as
little  isolated  in  the  invisible  as  in  the
visible  world  ;  he  must  be  i)art  of  the
organism  of  the  one  or  the  other  of  the
178


invisible  worlds  ;  he  belongs  cither  to
the  kingdom  of  light  or  to  the  kingdom
of  darkness  ;  ho  is  guided  either  by  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  or  by  the  evil  spirit,
according  as  he  decides  for  a  permanent
attitude  of  heart  and  direction  of  will
to  this  side  or  that. — Langes  Com-
mentary.

Wln^ther  any  more  be  meant  by  this
than  that  God,  for  Saul's  hardened  im-
penitence, withdrew  His  restraining
and  guiding  grace,  and  left  him  a  prey
to  his  own  passions,  I  cannot  take
upon  me  to  say.  This  only  I  am  sure
of,  that  no  man  living  needs  a  heavier
chastisement  from  Almighty  God  than
the  letting  his  own  passions  loose  u))on
him.  The  consequence  to  the  mind,  i
apprehend,  would  in  that  case  be
much  the  same  as  it  would  be  to  the
body,  if  the  restraining  ])ow^er  of  the
air  were  removed,  and  all  the  muscles,
vessels,  and  humours  left  to  the  full
freedom  of  their  own  powers  and  ten-
dencies.— Delany.

Vers.  15,  18.   Does  not  the  penetra-
tion o'f  these  people  excite  our  surprise?
Are   we   not  astonished    at   the   far-
reaching    enlightenment   which    they
manifest  of  the  existence  of  a  world  of
fallen  spirits,  whom  Jehovah  is  wont
to  make  use  of,  not  seldom,  for  putting
to  trial  His  own  people,  as  well  as  for
visiting  with  punishment  the  wicked  ?
Must  we  not  conclude  that  they  were
indeed   already  acquainted   with  the
book  of  Job,  and  that  it  was  a  con-
stituent part  of  their  holy  canonical
books  ?     An  Israelite  adhered  to  his
Bible  under  all  circumstances,  even  when
he  was  destitute  of  spiritual  life  and
his  conduct  was  condemned  by  it    .     .
They  recommend  to  him  the  power  of
music  as  a  means  for  relieving  his  mind,
but  with  a  wise  discriminating  judg-
ment regarding  its  character.     .     .     .
'i^ie  servants  knew  well  the  power  of
music   to   produce,   according    to   its
kind  and  qualit)^  not  less  the  most
depraved  than  the  holiest  impressions.
Music  can  unfetter  the  most  destruc-
tive passions  ;  but  it  can  also,  at  least
for   a   time,   tame   and    mitigate  the
wildest  storms  of  the  human  heart .


CHAP.  XVI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL,


The  music  which  the  servants  of  the  at  the  bottom.     The  cure  must  ever

king  thought  of  was  not  that  which  proceed    in  the  same  steps  with  the

pK'ases    the   worhl,   and   which    only  disease,  else  in  vain  we  shall  seem  to

opens  the  door  to  unclean  spirits,  but  heal:  there  is  no  safety  in  the  redress

such  as,  animated  by  a  nobler  inspira-  of  evils  but  to  strike  at  the  root. —

tioD,  might  insensibly  elevate  the  soul  Bp.  Hall.

by  its  harmonious  melody,  as  on  angel's  We    see    here,    distinctly    marked,

wings,  towards  heaven.     Thej^  thought  these  two  things,  the  plan  of  God  and

of  the   harp,   then  the   most  solemn  the  liberty  of  man    ....     David,

instrument  of  music,  and  on  the  niclo-  in  his  devotion  to  his  harp,  had  no

dies  which  were  wont  to  sound  forth  in  thought  of  thereby  rising  to  the  royal

the  sanctuary  at  the  time  of  the  sacred  favour;    the  servant  who   mentioned

festivals  of  Israel. — Krummacher.  his  name  to  Saul  had  no  idea  of  the

If  they  had  said,  *'  Sir,  you  know  fact  that  he  was  already  anointed  to

that  this  evil  comes  from  that  God  be  Saul's  successor ;  yet  each,  in  his

whom    you  have  offended,  there  can  own   way,   and   by   working   out   the

be  no  hope  but  in  reconcilement     .     .  choice  of  liis  own  free  will,  was  helping

labour  your    peace   with    Ilim   by   a  on   the  fulfilment  of  the  purposes  of

serious  humiliation,     make  means  to  God.     So  it  is  still,  the  only  diiference

Samuel   to   further   the    atonement,"  being  that,  in  ordinary  history,  we  are

they  had  been  wise  counsellors,  divine  not  always  thus  permitted  to  see  the

physicians  :  whereas  now,  they  do  but  different  agencies  at  work. — Dr,  W,

skin  over  the  sore,  and  leave  it  rankled  M,  Taylor,

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verm  19-23.

David  at  Court.

We  here  have —

I.  Saul  an  instrument  of  good  to  David.  David  was  one  day  to*sit  upon  the
throne  of  Israel,  and  although  he  already  possessed  many  qualities  of  mind  and
heart  which  litted  him  for  such  a  posiion,  the  transition  from  the  home  at
Bethlehem  to  the  palace  was  a  very  great  one,  and  the  man  who  was  to  experi-
ence it  needed  some  intervening  training.  It  was  expedient  that  he  should
have  some  experience  of  the  life  of  the  court  before  he  became  its  head,  and,  in
the  providence  of  God,  the  man  whom  he  was  to  succeed  was  the  instrument  by
whom  he  gained  that  experience.

IL  David  a  means  of  blessing  to  Saul.  Saul,  miserable  and  God-forsaken
though  he  was,  was  not  yet  beyond  the  soothing  power  of  sacred  music,  and  it
was  ordained  by  God  that  David's  skill  and  piety  should  administer  this  passing
comfort  to  his  spirit.  Music  seems  to  have  been  left  to  us  by  God  to  remind  us —
1.  Of  the  moral  harmony  of  the  heavenly  world.  All  the  inhabitants  of  the
city  of  God  live  in  a  state  of  concord  as  perfect  and  as  morally  beautiful  as  the
most  exquisite  music.  There  creatures  of  various  gifts  and  diverse  dispositions
so  perfectly  agree  with  each  other  that  no  note  of  discord  is  ever  heard,  and  the
diversity  of  each  only  heightens  the  harmony  of  the  whole.  2.  Of  the  harmony
that  once  ruled  in  the  human  soul.  The  soul  of  man  has  not  always  been  ti^in
asunder  by  conflicting  passions,  or  by  the  proniptings  of  good  on  the  one  side  and
of  evil  on  the  other.  Conscience  did  not  always  assume  the  position  of  a
sentinel  and  stand  with  drawn  sword  to  avenge  the  first  transgression  of  the  law
written  upon  the  human  heart.  There  was  a  time  when  conscience  had  only
one  work  to  do — to  approve  of  human  deeds  and  so  add  to  human  happiness
instead  of  being  also  compelled  by  human  sinfulness  to  take  the  attitude  of  a
reprover  and  a  judge,  and  so  increase  the  discord  within  the  human  soul.
Music  reminds  us  of  what  man's  inner  life  was  when  God  iirst  created  him

179


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  i.


morally  in  His  own  image— wlien  every  faculty  and  feeling  and  desire  was  in
perfect  harmony  with  each  other,  and  with  all  tliat  is  beautiful  and  good.  3.
Of  the  harmony  of  the  Divine  nature.  In  proportion  as  the  Christian's  heart
and  life  approaches  perfect  conformity  to  the  will  of  God,  he  finds  a  music
within  the  soul  wliich  passeth  all  understanding.  If  he  could  look  back  upon
all  his  past  life  and  feel  conscious  that  he  had  never  wronged  either  himself,  or
his  neighbour,  or  his  God,  and  if  he  could  feel  confident  that  his  whole  tuture
would  be  as  perfect  as  his  past,  how  blessed  would  be  the  harmony  within  !
This  is  the  experience  of  God — this  makes  Him  ever  and  perfectly  blessed — this
makes  His  whole  being  perfectly  free  from  any  shadow  of  discord,  and  constitutes
music  a  type  of  the  harmonious  blending  of  all  the  glorious  attributes  of  His
character.

III.  Music,  by  shadowing  forth  these  moral  truths,  is  intended  to  comfort
and  to  elevate  mankind.  If,  when  the  soul  is  cast  down  by  sorrow  or  degraded
by  sin,  it  will  yield  itself  to  the  influence  of  this  gift  of  God,  rays  of  light  will
penetrate  the  darkness,  and  a  dew  of  hope  will  fall  upon  the  scoiched  soul.  If
even  Saul  became  for  a  season  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  evil,  when  he
listened  to  the  sweet  sounds  of  David's  harp,  music  must  be  one  agency  to  lift
the  soul  of  man  into  communion  with  the  unseen  world  and  the  unseen  God,
and  so  to  do  something  towards  restoring  it  to  its  original  harmony.  That  it
has  such  a  tendency  we  have  abundant  evidence  from  the  testimony  of
experience.  "  Music,"  says  Luther,  "is  one  of  the  fairest  and  most  glorious
girts  of  God,  to  which  Satan  is  a  bitter  enemy,  for  it  removes  from  the  heart
the  weight  of  sorrow  and  the  fascinations  of  evil  thought.  Music  is  a  kind
and  gentle  sort  of  discipline,  it  refines  the  passion  and  improves  the  under-
standing.'* And  in  most  of  the  revivals  of  spiritual  life  in  the  Church  of  God,
music  has  been  one  of  the  agencies  employed.  It  follows  therefore  that
redeemed  men  ought  to  cultivate  a  knowledge  of  music,  and  render  thanks  unto
God  for  having  left  us  this  reminder  of  heaven  and  of  Himself.

ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  VERSE  23.

This  remarkable  instance  of  the  power  of  Philip  the  Fifth  of  Spain  and  the  musician
music  over  the  mind  is  in  conformity  with  the  FarineHi,  in  the  last  century.  The  king  was
experiments  of  ])liysiciaiis,  and  with  various  seized  with  a  total  dejection  of  sjjirits,  whicli
intimations  which  may  be  found  in  ancient  made  hira  refuse  to  be  shaved,  and  incapable
authors  ...  In  the  Mhnoires  of  the  French  of  appearing  in  council  or  of  attending  to  any
Academy  of  Sciences  for  1707,  are  recorded  affairs.  The  queen,  after  all  other  methods
many  accounts  of  diseases  which,  havirg  had  been  essayed,  thought  of  trying  what
obstinately  resisted  the  remedies  prescribed  might  be  effected  by  the  influence  of  r.nisic,
by  the  most  able  of  the  faculty,  at  length  to  which  the  king  veas  known  to  be  highly
yielded  to  the  powerful  impressions  of  harmony.  susceptible.  We  have  no  doubt  that  this  ex-
One  of  these  is  the  case  of  a  person  who  was  periment  was  suggested  to  her  by  this  case  of
seized  with  fever,  which  soon  threw  him  into  Saul  and  David.  The  celebrated  musician
a  very  violent  delirium,  almost  without  any  Farinelli  was  invited  to  t'^pain,  and  it  was
interval,  accompanied  by  bitter  cries,  by  tears,  contrived  that  there  should  be  a  concert  in  a
by  terrors,  and  by  an  almost  constant  wakeful-  room  adjoining  the  king's  apartment,  in  which
ness.  On  the  third  day,  a  hint  that  fell  from  the  artist  should  perform  one  of  his  captivating
himself  suggested  the  idea  of  trying  the  effect  songs.  The  king  appeared  surprised  at  first,
of  music.  Gradually,  as  the  strain  proceeded,  then  greatly  moved,  and  at  the  end  of  the
his  troubled  visage  relaxed  into  a  most  serene  second  air  he  summoned  the  musician  to  his
expression,  his  restless  eyes  became  tranquil,  apartment  and,  loading  him  with  compliments,
his  convulsions  ceased,  and  the  fever  absolutely  asked  him  how  he  could  reward  such  talents,
left  him.  It  is  true  that  when  the  music  was  Farinelli,  previously  tutored,  answered  that  he
discontinued  his  symptoms  returned  ;  but  by  desired  nothing  but  that  his  majesty  would
frequent  repetitions  of  the  experiment,  during  permit  his  attendant  to  shave  and  dress  him,
Aviiich  the  delirium  always  ceased,  the  power  and  that  he  would  endeavour  to  make  his
of  the  disease  was  broken,  and  the  habits  of  a  a])pearance  in  the  council  as  usual.  The  king
sound  mind  re-established.  Six  days  sufficed  yielded,  and  from  this  time  his  disease  gave
to  accomplish  a  cure  .  .  .  More  remarkable,  way,  and  Farinelli  had  the  honour  of  the  cure.
m  well  as  more  truly  parallel,  is  the  case  of  Kitto,

180


CHAP.  XVI,


UOMILETIC  COMMI'jyTARY:  SAMUEL.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Ver.  19.  While  David  followed  the
sheep  he  had  am])le  time  at  his  disposal,
but  instead  of  letting  it  ^o  by  in  idle-
ness, or  frittering  it  away  in  spasmodic
study,  now  of  this  thin":  now  of  that,
he  s})ccially  concentrated  his  attention
on  the  art  of  music,  until  he  acquired
rare  skill  and  excellence  in  playing
u])on  the  harp,  and  it  was  through  this
self- taught  attainment  that  he  was  first
called  forth  into  public  life.  It  is  of
immense  consequence  that  the  young
l)eople  of  these  days  should  see  the
necessity  of  acting  in  a  similar  manner.
.  .  .  .  It  is  a  preparation  for  future
eminence.  It  is  interesting  to  observe
how  many  have  passed  through  this
very  gate  to  usefulness  and  honour. —
Br.  W.  M.  Taijlor.

Ver.  23.  There  is  a  mystery  and  a
meaning  in  music  we  can  never  either
expound  or  explore  ;  and  it  is  felt  that
those  natures  which  are  the  greatest
bnrden  and  mystery  to  themselves  find
most  the  solace  of  song  in  the  combi-
nations of  all  sweet  sounds ;  we  have
known  this,  it  is  not  always  that  in
joyfulness  of  heart  we  sing.  ...  I
have  known  a  woman,  disappointed
and  forsaken,  flying  to  her  piano  ;  her
fingers  rushing  over  the  keys  have
given  liberation  to  her  spirit,  and  the
chords  opened  the  sealed  well  of  tears,
and  the  rains  descended  and  the  floods
came.  And  something  like  this  is  a
veiy  general  experience.  Hence  we
liave  poetry  for  all  cultured  people
and  hymns  for  holy  peo[)le  ;  aiul  do  we
not  know  what  it  is  to  become  happy
while  we  sing  ? — Hood.

It  was  a  song  without  words  whose
soothing  melody  fell  upon  the  ear  of


the  king.  Words  corresponding  to  the
music  would  have  produced  the  con-
trary result  to  that  which  was  aimed
at,  and  might  even  have  increased  the
ill  temper  of  the  king.  There  are  even
yet  men  enough  of  this  sort — persons
without  faith,  yea,  at  variance  both
with  God  and  the  world  —  whom
solemn  music  is  able  most  powerfully
to  delight,  and  in  whom  it  awakens,  at
least  for  the  time,  dispo.  itions  which
border  on  devotion  and  piety,  while
yet  the  words  which  correspond  to  the
sacred  melody  would  produce  in  them
the  very  opposite  effect.  What  is
manifest  from  this,  but  tliat  in  the
soul  of  such  persons  the  last  point  at
which  they  may  be  touched  by  that
which  is  sacred  has  not  yet  wholly
decayed  away  ? — Krummacher.

It  was  a  mere  foreshadow,  on  a  com-
paratively low  and  earthly  ground,
of  the  wondrous  way  in  which  David,
as  the  Psalmist,  was  afterwards  .  to
provide  the  true  "  oil  of  joy  for  the
mourner,"  and  to  become  a  guide  to
the  downcast  soul  "  from  the  horrible
pit,"  up  to  the  third  heaven  of  joy  and
peace. — Bla  ikie.

The  music  was  more  than  a  mere
palliative.  It  brought  back  for  a  time
the  sense  of  a  true  order,  a  secret,
inward  harmony,  an  assurance  that  it
is  near  to  every  man,  and  that  he  may
enter  into  it.  A  wonderful  message,
no  doubt,  to  a  king  or  a  common  man,
better  than  a  great  multitude  of  words,
a  continual  prophecy  that  there  is  a
deliverer  who  can  take  the  vulture
from  the  heart,  and  unbind  th^  sufferer
from  the  rock ;  but  not  (as  many,  I
suppose,  must  bitterly  kuowj  the  de-
liverer itself. — Maurice.


181


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY  :  SAMUEL,  book  i.


CHAPTER  XVII.

Critttoal  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1.  "The  Philistines  gathered  together  their
armies."  Janiieson  considers  that  tliis  was  twenty-seven  years  after  their  overthrow  at  Mich-
mash.  "  Shochoh,"  now  bhinccikek,  a  village  in  the  hilly  region  between  the  mountains  of
Jiulah  and  the  plain  of  Pliilistia,  about  eleven  miles  south-west  of  Jerusalem  and  of  Bethlehem.
*'  Azekah."  Not  certainly  identified,  but  probably  the  same  as  Zakariyeh,  another  site  of
ancient  ruins,  about  two  miles  distant,  on  the  same  side  of  the  valley.  "  Ephes-dammim,"
now  Damum,  four  miles  north-east  of  Shuweikek.

Ver.  2.  "  Valley  of  Elah,"  or  the  Terebiuth  Valley.  **  A  long,  broad,  depressed  plain,  lying
between  two  parallel  ranges  of  hills.  The  terebiuth,  the  shittimivood  (the  butin  of  the  Arabs)  :
probably  some  remarkable  tree  of  this  species  which  grew  there.  It  is  now  Waclij-es-Sumt,
valley  of  the  acacia  tree,  with  which  at  present  it  al)Ounds.  This  valley,  form*.. I  by  the  junction
of  three  lateral  ones — viz.,  Wady-el-Musurr  from  the  east,  Wady-es-Silr  from  the  soutli,  and
another,  name  unknown,  from  the  north — opens  into  the  great  Wady-Stirir,  anciently  the
Valley  of  Sorek.  It  is  a  fertile  plain  flanked  on  the  north  and  south  by  lowly  hills,  and  abound-
ing with  grain  produce,  except  in  the  spots  covered  by  acacia  thickets  and  olive  plantations,
l^obinson  statos  that  the  largest  terebiuth  he  saw  in  all  the  country  was  in  Wady-es-JSixr,  a  little
above  the  spot  where  it  emerges  into  Wady-es-Sumt."     (Jamieson.J

Ver.  4.  **  Champion."  Literally,  the  man  in  the  midst,  the  middleman — one  who  advances
between  two  armies  to  decide  the  battle  by  single  combat.  Wordsworth  renders  it  "<Ae  mediator.''*
*'  Six  cubits  and  a  span."  The  cubit  is  variously  computed  at  eighteen  or  twenty-one  inches.
The  height  of  Goliath  cannot  therefore  be  certainly  estimated,  but  must  have  been  from  nine  to
ten-and-a-half  feet.  "According  to  the  calculation  made  by  Thetiius,  about  nine  feet  two  inches
Parisian  measure  ;  a  great  height  no  doubt,  though  not  altogether  unparalleled,  and  hai-dly
greater  than  that  of  the  great  uncle  of  Iren,  who  came  to  Berlin  in  the  year  1857.  According
to  Pliny,  the  giant  Pusia  and  the  giant  Secundilla,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  were  ten
feet  three  inches  (Roman)  in  height;  and  a  Jew  is  mentioned  by  Josephus  who  was  seven  cubits
in  height,  i.e.,  ten  Parisian  feet,  or  if  the  cubits  are  Roman,  nine-and-a-half."    (Kiel.)

Ver.  5.  *'  Coat  of  mail."  Literally,  a  scale-corslet.  A  corslet  made  of  metal  plates  over-
lapping each  other  like  the  scale  of  a  fish.  "Five  thousand  shekels."  The  copper  shekel  is
estimated  to  have  weighed  about  an  ounce.  **  According  to  Thenius,  the  cuirass  of  Augustus  the
Strong,  which  has  been  preserved  in  the  historical  museum  at  Dresden,  weighed  fifty-five  pounds."
(KielJ

Ver.  6.  "  Greaves."  **  Boots  for  the  defence  of  the  leg,  rising  to  nearly  the  knee,  and  with-
out feet,  terminating  at  the  ankle  ;  made  of  bull's  hide,  leather,  wood,  or  in  one  plate  of  metal,
but  rounded  to  the  shape  of  the  leg,  and  often  lined  with  felt  or  sponge.  Some  of  the  ancient
greaves,  however,  did  not  come  so  far  up  as  the  knee."  (Jamieson.J  "Target."  Rather  a
lance  or  short  spear.  "Thenius  proposes  to  alter  the  expression  'between  his  shoulders,'  because
it  does  not  appear  applicable  to  a  spear  or  javelin,  which  Goliath  must  have  suspended  by  a  strap,
but  only  to  a  small  shield  slung  over  his  back.  .  .  But  the  difficulty  founded  upon  the  expression
has  been  fully  met  by  Bochart,  in  the  examples  which  he  cites  from  Homer,  Virgil,  etc.,  to  prove
that  the  ancients  carried  their  own  swords  sJung  over  their  shoulders.  And  Josephus  understood
the  expression  in  this  way.  Goliath  had  no  need  of  any  shield  to  cover  his  back,  as  this  was
sufficiently  protected  by  bib  coat  of  mail.  Moreover,  the  allusion  to  the  same  piece  of  armour  in
ver.  45  evidently  points  to  an  offensive  weapon,  and  not  to  a  shield."     (Kiel.)

Ver.  7.     ""Weaver's  beam."     "  Rather  under  five  feet  long."     (Jamieson.)     "One  bearing

a  shield."     Rather,  the  shield.     "  In  consequence  of  their  great  size  and  weight,  the  Oriental
warrior  had  a  trusty  and  skilful  friend,  whose  office  it  was  to  bear  the  large  shield."  (Jamieson. )

Ver.  8.  "  Am  I  not  a  Philistine  ? "  Rather,  the  Philistine.  "  The  meaning  is,  Why
would  you  engage  in  battle  with  us  ?  I  am  the  man  who  represents  the  strength  of  the
Philistines,  and  ye  are  only  servants  of  Saul.  If  ye  have  heroes,  choose  one  out,  that  we  may
decide  the  matter  in  a  single  combat."  (Keil.)

Ver.  10.  "  I  defy  ;**  or,  "I  have  mocked."  (Keil.)  "  Goliath's  scorn  and  contempt  of  Israel
lay  not  merely  in  the  reproach  that  they  were  Saul's  slaves,  and  in  the  tone  of  his  words,  but
in  the  challenge  itself,  because  it  was  not  answered."  ( Erdmann.)

Ver.  12.  **  The  full  account  of  the  person  and  family  of  David  tells  what  we  already  know
from  chap,  xvi.,  and  yet  reads  as  if  nothing  had  been  said  of  his  origin.  This  suggests  that
the  redactor  of  the  book  here  appends  and  works  in  a  narrative  concerning  David,  which  began
with  the  family  history,  and  then  related  the  combat  with  Goliath,  and  its  occasion.  This  view
is  evidently  supported  by  the  'that'  or  'this,'  which  is  evidently  added  to  connect  the  woids
182


CHAP.  xvn.  irOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


with  chap.  xvi.  1.  The  last  words  of  the  verse  relatin?  to  Jesse  the  Ephrathite  (that  is,  of
Eohvdth,  the  old  name  for  Bethlehem,  Gen.  xlviii.  7)  are  difficult.  ...  It  seems  best  with
Grotius,  'I'henius,  after  Sept.,  Vulj,'..  Syr.,  Arab.,  to  substitute  *  in  years,' instead  of  the  text,
and  render  *he  was  advanced  in  years.'  "     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  15  "But  David  went  and  returned."  Rather  he  "was  goinj?  and  returning,"  i.e.,
"  he  went  backwards  and  forward.s  from  Saul  to  feed  hi.s  father's  sheep  in  Bethlehem,  so  that  he
was  not  in  the  permanent  service  of  Saul,  but  at  that  very  time  was  with  his  father."  (Keil.)
"This  he  could  do,  since  Saul  was  not  always  in  the  gloomy  state  which  required  Daviil's  harp.
....  As  totally  unpractised  in  war  (so  chap.  xvi.  supposes  him  to  be)  David,  notwithstanding
his  enrolment  among  the  court-esquires  (arinour-bearers),  could  not  be  needed  by  Saul  in  war,
and  he  needed  not  to  be  taken  along  for  his  music,  because  in  the  midst  of  military  afifairs  Saul's
mind  was  concentrated  on  one  point,  held  by  one  thought."  (  Erdmann.)

Ver.  17.  "Take  now  for  thy  brethren."  "  In  those  days  campaigns  rarely  lasted  above
a  few  days.  The  soldiers  were  volunteers  or  militia,  who  were  supplied  with  provisions  from
time  to  time  by  their  friends  at  home.  The  Arab  women  still  carry  provisions  to  their  husbands
when  out  on  fighting  expeditions."     (Jamieson.)

Ver.  18.  "Ten  Cheeses,"  or  "slices  of  curdled  milk."  "Oriental  cheeses  are  very  small,
resembling  in  shape  and  size  our  penny  loaves,  as  the  cheeses  of  the  ancient  Hebrews  seem
also  to  have  been  (cf.  Job  x.  10  ;  Psalm  Ixxxvi.  1.")),  and  although  they  are  frequently  made  of
so  soft  a  consistence  as  to  resemble  curds,  those  which  David  carried  seem  to  have  been  iiilly
formed,  pressed,  and  sufficiently  dried  to  admit  of  their  being  carried."  {Jamieson.)  *' Take
their  pledge."  "This  was  si  token  which,  though  David  had  seen  them,  would  be  of  especial
value  to  the  father's  heart  as  an  immediate  sign  from  their  own  hands  that  they  were  alive  and
well  (in  place  of  a  letter),"     [Erdmann.)

Ver.  19.  This  should  be  read  as  part  of  Jesse's  address  to  David  substituting  are  for  the
"were"  of  the  English  version.

Ver.  20.  "  Keeper."  "  The  only  instance  in  which  the  hired  shepherd  is  distinguished
from  the  master  or  one  of  the  family."  {Jamieson.)  "Trench."  Or  "waggon-rampart,"
doubtless  a  kind  of  rude  fortification  formed  by  a  line  of  waggons  and  chariots.

Ver.  22.    "  His  carriage,"  i.c.,  his  baggage.

Ver.  25.  "We  must  conclude  that  Saul  actually  made  these  promises  although  nothing  is  after-
wards said  of  their  fulfilment,  especially  as  the  same  thing  is  repeated  in  Ver.  27.  From  Saul's
tendency  to  rash  and  exaggerated  action,  and  from  his  changeableness,  we  can  easily  understand
both  the  promise  and  his  unwillingness  to  perform  it."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  26.  "  "Who  is  this  uncircumcised  Philistine  ?  "  "  These  words  contain  the  ground
of  the  preceding  thought  that  the  insult  offered  to  Israel  must  be  wiped  out.  This  yround  lies
in  the  contrast  between  the  stand-point  of  the  Philistine  as  an  uncircumcised  who  has  no  com-
munity with  the  living  God  and  the  stand-point  of  this  covenant  people  ....  The  Uvinj
God  is  emphasized  over  against  the  dead  idols  of  the  Philistines."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  28.  "  Eliab's  questions  express  the  thought  (1)  Thou  hast  nothing  to  do  here,  indicating
a  haughty,  quick  judging  nature,  and  (2)  reproach  David  with  neglect  of  duty."  {Erdmann.)
**  Thou  art  come  down  that  thou  mlghtest  see  the  battle."  "  Such  an  idea  could  not  have
occurred  to  him  had  not  the  warlike  tastes  of  David  already  been  well  known  to  his  family.  It
is  more  than  probable,  from  this  and  other  circumstances,  that  he  had  already  wished  to  join  in
the  first  instance  with  his  brothers,  but  had  not  been  allowed  by  his  friends  to  do  so.  But  this
is  hardly  sufficient  to  account  for  the  expressions  of  Eliab,  which  must  have  been  founded  on  a
wider  experience  ;  and  to  those  who  have  studied  the  character  of  David  it  will  appear  almost
certain  that  he  had  often  been  led  to  speak  of  his  desire  to  see  Israel  rid  of  the  oppressors  who
had  lai<l  her  honour  in  the  dust,  and  of  his  hope  to  take  some  part  in  the  great  work  of  rending
the  Philistine  yoke  from  her  fair  neck."     {Kitto.)

Ver.  29.  **  Is  there  not  a  cause  ?  "  Rather,  "  Is  there  not  a  word  f  "  "  Is  not  this  word  per-
mitted me  ?     Can  I  not  seek  information  by  such  a  word  1 "     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  34,  "A  lion  and  a  hear."  "At  present  lions  do  not  exist  in  Palestine,  although  they
must  in  ancient  times  have  been  numerous.  The  lion  of  Palestine  was  in  all  probability  the
Asiatic  variety  described  by  Aristotle  and  Pliny,  as  distinguished  by  its  short,  curly  mane.  It
was  less  daring  than  the  longer-maned  species,  but  when  driven  by  hunger  it  not  only  ventured
to  attack  the  flocks  in  the  desert  in  the  presence  of  the  shepherd  (Isa.  xxxi.  4),  but  laid  waste
towns  and  villnges  (2  Kings  xvii.  25,  26).  The  shepherds  sometimes  ventured  to  encounter  the
lion  single-handed,  and   the  vivid  figure  employed  by  Amos   (chap.  iii.    12),  the  herdsman  of

183


nOMILETIG  COMMENT  ART:  SAMUEL.  Book  t.


Tekoa,  was  but  the  transcript  of  a  scene  which  he  must  have  often  witnessed.  The  variety  of
the  Asiatic  bear  which  inhabits  the  Hiinalayas  is  especially  ferocious,  and  it  is  probable  that
the  same  species  among  the  mountains  of  Armenia  is  the  animal  of  Scripture."  (Biblical
Dictionary.)

Ver.  36.  "Thy  servant  slew,"  etc.  "These  useful  feats  of  David  seem  to  have  been  per-
formed with  no  weapon  more  effective  than  the  rude  staves  usually  carried  in  the  hand  of  an
Eastern  shepherd,  particularly  the  iron-headed  club  (Psa.  xxiii.  4).  'I  have  known,'  says  Dr.
"W i\^on  {Lands  of  the  Bible)  'a  shepherd  in  India  encounter  with  it  a  tiger  which  he  found
mangling  one  of  his  goats.  It  is  much  in  use  among  the  i'ellahin  of  Wady  Musa,  and  the  Arabs
in  general.'"     (Jamieson.)

Ver.  38.  **  Saul  armed  David,"  etc  David  must  therefore  have  been  near  the  stature  of
Saul,  or  he  could  not  have  worn  his  armour  j  it  might,  however,  have  been  a  loose  corslet,
or  capable  of  a  change  by  tightening.

Ver.  40.  "H'S  sling."  "The  sling  consisted  of  a  double  rope,  with  a  thong,  probably  of
leather,  to  receive  the  stone.  The  slinger  held  a  second  stone  in  his  left  hand.  Shepherds  in
the  East  carry  a  sling  and  stones  still  for  the  purpose  both  of  driving  away  and  killing  the
enemies  of  the  flock.  It  was  and  is  a  favoiuite  weapon  in  Syria  and  Arabia  "  (Jamieson.)
Some  of  the  Fathers  of  the  Church,  and  a  few  modern  commentators,  see  in  this  encounter  of
David  and  Goliath  a  type  of  our  Lord's  encounter  with  Satan.  Wordsworth  says,  "  So  our
David,  the  Good  Shepherd,  went  forth  to  meet  the  enemy,  not  with  sword  or  spear  but  with  a
pastoral  staff,  nor  did  He  put  forth  His  Divine  power  by  any  miraculous  exercise  of  it  against
the  tempter.  .  .  .  He  chose  five  stones  out  of  the  brook  ;  He  took  the  five  books  of  Moses
out  of  the  flowing  streams  of  Judaism,"  etc.,  etc.

Ver.  43.  "Am  I  a  dog,"  etc.  "The  staff  was  ordinarily  employed  not  against  men  but
beasts.  .  .  .  Similar  are  the  scornful  defiances  which  warriors  of  antiquity  mutually  gave
at  the  beginning  of  a  combat."     ( Erdmann.)

Ver.  45.  "The  Lord  ol  Hosts,"  etc.  Jehovah  Sabaoth  (see  on  chap.  i.  3).  "The  name  of
the  Lord  is  for  David  the  totality  of  all  the  revelations  by  which  the  living  God  has  made  Him-
self known  and  named  among  His  people.  Of  these  elements,  which  form  the  conception  of  the
name  of  God,  he  here — suitably  to  the  situation — adduces  those  ■v^hich  characterise  Him  in
respect  to  His  warlike  and  ruling  power  as  captain  and  conqueror  of  His  people."  (Psa.  xxiv.  10.)
(Erdmann.)

Ver.  49.  **The  stone  sunk."  Wordsworth  thinks  that  here  a  supernatural  power  was
put  forth.

Ver.  52.  "The  valley,"  etc.  As  no  nnrae  is  given  to  this  valley,  and  as  the  Hebrew  word  for
Gathis  very  similar,  both  Keil  and  Erdmann  think  that  Gath  ought  to  stand  here,  as  in  the  follow-
ing verse.  "  This  direction  of  the  flight  resulted  from  the  nature  of  the  countiy.  Tlie  Wady  Sumt,
where  the  conflict  took  place,  passes  northward  from  Socoh,  turns  after  two  or  three  miles  west-
ward by  the  villiage  Sukarieh,  emptying  into  the  Wady  Simchim.  About  a  mile  from  this  is
the  village  of  Aijur,  which  is  held  to  be  ancient  Gath,  and  so  the  Philistines  fled  through  that
valley  that  Kobinson  also  traversed  when  he  journeyed  from  Jerusalem  to  Gath.  Another
portion  of  the  Philistines  remained  in  Wady  Sumt  and  fled  northward,  where  the  Wady  Sumt
takes  the  name  of  Wady  Sura,r,  in  which  lies  the  present  city  Akir."  {SL'dhelin).  (Travellers
are  not  quite  agreed  as  to  the  site  of  Gath).

Ver.  54.  "And  David  took  the  head  of  the  Pbilistire  and  brought  it  to  Jerusalem,'*

etc.  "  The  word  translated  tent  is  an  antiquated  term  for  dwelling  place.  The  refertiice  is  to
David's  house  at  Bethlehem,  to  which  he  returned  with  his  booty  after  the  defeat  of  Goliath.
There  is  no  anachronism  in  these  statements,  for  the  assertion  made  by  some,  that  Jerusalem
was  not  yet  in  the  possession  of  the  Israelites,  rests  upon  a  confusion  between  the  citadel  of
Jebus  upon  Zion,  which  was  still  in  the  hands  of  the  Jebusites,  and  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  in
which  Israelites  liad  dwelt  for  a  long  time.  (See  Josh.  xv.  63  and  Judg.  i.  8).  Nor  is  there  any
contradiction  between  this  statement  and  chap,  xxi.  9,  where  Goliath's  sword  is  said  to  have  been
kept  in  the  tabernacle  at  Nob  :  for  it  is  not  aflarmed  that  David  l-ept  Goliath's  armour  in  his
own  home  but  only  that  he  took  it  thither.  .  .  .  Again,  the  statement  in  chap,  xviii.  2,  to  the
effect  that  after  David's  victory  over  Goliath  Saul  did  not  allow  him  to  return  to  his  father's
house  any  more,  is  by  no  means  at  variance  with  this  explanation  of  the  verse  before  us.  For
the  statement  in  question  must  be  understood  as  signifyinT  that  from  that  time  forward  Saul
did  not  allow  David  to  return  to  his  father's  house  as  he  haa  done  before."  {Keil).

Ver.  55.  "Whose  sen  is  this  youth?"  etc.  Some  critics  regard  these  last  four  verses  as
an  interpolation,  as  well  as  the  paragraph  between  verses  12-31.  Their  opinion  is  founded  upon
apparent  in  discrepancies  in  the  narrative,  most  of  which  have  been  met  in  the  comments.  Keil  and

184


OHAP.xViL  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


other  commentators  see  no  reason  for  donhtirg  their  genuineness.  The  following  are  their  solutions
of  the  apparent  contradiction  in  this  question  of  Snul,  to  the  statement  in  cliap.  xvi.  21-23.  "It
is  only  necessary  to  admit  that  Davids  absence  at  home  had  been  long  (and  there  is  no  exact
chronological  datum);  that  Saul  had  rarely  seen  him  except  in  moments  of  ma/luess  ;  that  Abner
had  been  absent  from  court  when  David  was  there ;  and  that  the  personal  appearance  of  the
latter  had  changed  (suppositions  which,  taken  singly  or  together,  are  not  improbable),  and  Saul's
ignorance  becomes  natural."  {I'randatorof  Lange's  Commentary.)  Wordswortli  likewise  suggests
that  David  now  appeared,  not  as  before  in  the  costume  of  a  courtier  or  warrior,  but  in  the  homely
dress  of  a  shepherd,  and  that  Saul's  question  does  not  necessarily  imply  ignorance  of  David,  as
he  asks  not  his  name,  but  the  name  of  his  father.  *'  He  had  promised  that  whosoever  killed  the
Philistine  should  have  his  own  daughter  in  marriage,  and  he  naturally  wished  to  know  the
parentage  of  his  future  son-in-law."  Dr.  Jamieson  adds  to  these  the  suggestion  that  "the  rumour
of  Samuel's  commission  to  anoint  another  king,  and  his  journey  to  Bethlehem  for  that  object,
together  with  the  fact  that  David  had  come  from  that  village,  and  the  suspicion,  after  the  con-
quest of  Goliath,  which  procured  him  so  much  glory  throughout  the  nation,  that  David  was
destined  for  the  throne,  might  have  so  excited  his  jealousy  that  he  dissembled,  and,  pretending
not  to  know  him,  kept  his  vigilant  eye  upon  him  with  a  view  to  accomplish  the  destiuction  of
this  young  and  formidable  rival."


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPE.^Verses  12—29.

David's  Visit  to  the  Camp.

I.  The  truly  great  will  not  allow  social  advancement  and  natural  gifts  to
interfere  with  the  obedience  which  is  due  t)  parents.  If  a  man  is  lifted  to  a
higher  condition  of  social  life  because  he  is  mentally  or  morally  greater  than
the  rest  of  his  family,  tiiat  very  greatness  will  lead  him  to  render  due  honour  to
his  parents,  and  this  will  be  best  shown  by  his  obedience  to  their  lawful  com-
mands. If  a  man  deems  that  because  he  has  risen  in  social  life,  or  because  he
is  intellectually  superior  to  his  father,  he  is  absolved  from  a  son's  duty,  he  gives
a  convincing  proof  that  he  is  not  a  truly  great  man,  for  he  lacks  that  first
element  of  greatness,  viz.,  goodnr-ss.  In  this  point  Saul  and  David  stand  on  a
level,  for  both  manifested  a  spirit  of  filial  obedience  (see  chap.  ix.  3,  4).  David
must  have  been  conscious  that  he  was  destined  iox  some  great  and  honourable
position  in  the  kingdom,  but  he  was  not  unduly  elated  by  it,  nor  did  he  consider
himself  thereby  freed  from  his  duty  to  his  father.  In  this  he  showed  himself
worthy  to  be  a  type  of  a  far  greater  man — of  that  Divine  Son  of  David  who  for
many  years  of  His  life  was  subject  to  His  human  ])arents  (Luke  ii.  51),  and  in
so  doing  has  left  an  example  to  all  sons  and  daughters,  especially  to  those  who
are  consciously  mentally  or  morally  greater  than  their  parents.

II.  Inferior  spirits  are  always  envious  at  the  elevation  of  their  superiors,
and  the  envy  is  deep  in  proportion  as  the  relationship  is  near.  Eliab  had
seen  Samuel  anoint  David,  and  although  he  might  not  have  understood  the  full
significance  of  the  act,  he  had  never  recovered  the  shock  he  had  then  sustained
at  seeing  his  younger  brother  preferred  before  him.  He  now  gives  full  proof
how  inferior  he  was  to  that  (^'.^spised  and  hated  brother  by  revealing  the  envy
that  ruled  his  own  spirit.  It  was  this  demon  which  prompted  him  so  to  mis-
construe David's  wonls  and  actions.  If  we  look  at  the  most  beautiful  human
face  through  a  coloured  and  distorted  medium  we  do  not  see  it  as  it  is,  for  that
through  which  we  look  imparts  to  it  its  own  hue  and  misrepresents  the  true
outline.  So  it  is  impossible  riglitly  to  estimate  a  character  if  we  look  at  it
under  the  influence  of  envy.  Seen  through  that  distorted  medium,  actions
performed  from  the  purest  motives,  and  words  the  most  blameless,  will  be  mis-
jud;;ed  and  misrepresented.  Thus  it  was  tliat  Eliab  so  misjudged  his  brother.
And  the  devi)  is  not  le>s  maliuiiant,  Imt  rather  more  so,  vvlien  the  objects  of
its  hatred  are  a  man's  own  llesli  and  blood.  A  man  shows  himself  thus  blind  to
his  own  interests,  for  the  elevation  of  one  member  of  a  family  often  leads  to  the

185


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


BOOK  I.


elevation  of  the  rest.  Eliab  might  have  considered  that  the  honour  thns  con-
ferred upon  David  would  reflect  some  honour  upon  his  brethren  also — that  he
was  himself  raised  in  the  elevation  of  his  brother.  But  envy  does  not  allow  a
man  to  reason,  and  the  more  nearly  related  the  person  who  awakens  envy  is  to
the  envious  man  the  more  does  the  latter  seem  to  feel  that  he  has  been  wronged.
It  is  to  David  that  Jesse/s  family  owe  their  place  in  the  Scripture  record  and  iu
the  annals  of  their  nation.  If  it  had  not  been  for  him  we  should  never  have
heard  the  name  of  Jesse  or  his  sons.  Through  him  the  name  of  his  father  is
for  ever  coupled  with  the  name  that  is  above  every  name  (Isa.  xi.  1-9),  and  yet
envy  and  reproach  was  his  portion  among  his  brethren.

III.  Envy  and  insolence  will  be  silenced  by  meekness  and  truth.  David
here  uses  weapons  against  his  brother  which  were  as  effectual  to  silence  him  as
his  sling  was  to  slay  the  giant.  He  has  but  to  appeal  to  the  facts,  first  that  he
has  come  there  in  obedience  to  his  father's  command,  and  secondly  that  the
Philistine  giant  has  been  for  many  days  asking  for  an  Israelite  to  fight  him  and
none  has  answered  his  challenge.  "  Is  there  not  a  cause  ?  "  says  David,  *'  Have
I  come  without  an  errand  ? "  and  **  Is  there  not  a  need  that  some  one  else
should  come  into  the  camp  besides  those  who  are  already  in  it  ? "  To  this
question  of  David,  asked  without  any  upbrading,  Eliab  must  have  found  it
difficult  to  reply — there  was  nothing  in  it  to  provoke  him  to  further  wrath,  but
everything  to  awaken  him  to  reason.  David  here  displays  his  forbearance  and
his  wisdom.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Ver.  28.  Eliab  sought  for  the  splinter
in  his  brotlier's  eye,  and  was  not  aware
of  the  beam  in  his  own.  The  very
things  with  which  he  charged  his
brother — })resuniption  and  wickedness
of  heart — were  most  apparent  in  his
scornful  reproof — Kiel.

While  all  David's  thought  and  feel-
ing is  on  the  great  national  disgrace
and  its  removal,  and  his  mind  is  con-
cerned with  plans  for  saving  the  honour
of  Israel  and  Israel's  God,  Eliab  in  his
low  and  blind  zeal  thinks  only  of  the
flock  of  sheep  and  the  possible  loss  of
them  from  lack  of  oversight ;  the  type
of  a  narrow  soul,  incapable  of  great
thoughts  and  deeds. — Langes  Com-
mentary.

In  times  of  general  formality  and
lukevvarmness,  every  degree  of  zeal
w  Inch  implies  a  readiness  to  go  further
or  venture  more  in  the  cause  of  God
than  others  do  will  be  censured  as  pride
and  ambition,  and  by  none  more  than
near  relations  and  negligent  superiors  ;
and  such  censures  will  seldom  be  un-
mhigled  with  unjust  insinuations,
slanders,  and  attemi)ts  to  blacken  a
man's  character. — i^cott,
186


It  is  quarrel  enough,  amongst  many,
to  a  good  action,  that  it  is  not  theii
own  ;  there  is  no  enemy  so  ready,  or  so
spiteful  as  the  domestical.  The  malice
of  strangers  is  siniple,  but  of  a  brother
it  is  mixt  with  envy.  Tlie  more  un-
natural any  quality  is,  the  more  ex-
treme it  is  ;  a  cold  wind  from  the
south  is  intolerable.  David's  first
victory  is  of  himself,  next  of  his  brother.
He  overcomes  himself  in  a  patient  for-
bearance, he  overcomes  the  malicious
rage  of  his  brother  with  the  mildness
of  his  answer.  If  David  had  wanted
spirit,  he  had  not  been  troubled  with
the  insultation  of  a  Philistine  .  .  .
^rhat  which  would  have  stirred  the
choler  of  another,  allayeth  his.  It
was  a  brother  that  wronged  him,  and
that  his  eldest.  Neither  was  this
time  to  quarrel  with  a  brother,  while
the  Philistines'  swords  were  drawn,
and  Goliath  was  challenging.  0  that
these  two  motives  could  induce  us  to
peace  !  If  we  have  injury  in  our
l)erson,  in  our  cause,  it  is  from  brethren,
and  the  Philistines  look  on,— Bishop
Hall


OHAP.xvn.  BOM ILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SA MITEL,

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—11,  30—58.

Faith  in  the  Seen  and  in  the  Unseen.

This  narrative  furnishes  ns —

I.  With  examples  of  faith  in  the  seen  and  temporal.  Sucli  was  the  fait li —
1.  Of  Goliath.  The  tendency  of  ail  men  is  to  pub  confidjnce  in  that  which
they  can  apprehend  with  their  senses — that  whicli  appeals  to  their  outward  man.
Physical  strength — material  greatness  of  any  kind — anything  that  belongs  to
the  seen  and  temporal — are  the  objects  of  their  trust.  In  their  opinion  tiie
race  is  always  to  the  physically  swift  and  the  battle  to  the  strong  ;  they  believe
with  the  first  Napoleon  that  "  Providence  is  always  on  the  side  of  great  batta-
lions," and  in  their  estimate  of  things  the  unseen  God  goes  for  nothing  because
He  is  unseen.  Tlie  faith  of  the  Philistine  was  not  in  any  unseen  power — not
even  in  the  false  gods  of  his  own  nation — bi>t  in  his  own  arm  of  flesh — in  his
own  extraordinary  size  and  bodily  strength.  In  this  he  is  but  a  type  of  the
great  majority  of  men  in  all  ages  and  in  all  nations — not  only  those  who  possess
no  written  revelation  of  the  unseen  God,  but  of  the  far  greater  proportion  of
those  who  profess  to  believe  in  His  existence.  2.  Of  Saul.  Even  Saul  was
dismayed  when  he  heard  the  words  of  the  Philistine  (ver.  11),  even  he  sought
to  restrain  the  shepherd  youth  from  going  forth  to  meet  the  man  of  war,
although  he  knew  that  the  latter  was  an  **  uncircumcised  Philistine,"  and  that
David's  confidence  was  in  the  living  God.  One  of  the  first  duties  of  a  man  in
Saul's  position  is  to  acquaint  himself  with  the  history  of  the  nation  whom
he  rules,  and  lay  to  heart  the  lessons  to  be  gained  from  it.  And  it  could
not  be  that  he  was  ignorant  of  the  great  heroes  of  Israel  who  had  gone  before
him — of  Abraham,  who  with  God  for  his  shield  had  been  able  with  three
hundred  men  to  put  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens — of  Moses,  who  forsook
Egypt  and  led  Israel  through  the  Red  Sea  because  "  he  endured,  as  seeing  Him
who  is  invisible" — of  Gideon,  of  Barak,  of  Samson,  and  of  Jephthah,  who
**  through  faith  subdued  kingdoms  and  obtained  promises  "  (lleb.  xi.  32,  33).
How  much  was  there  in  God's  dealings  with  his  forefathers  to  inspire  him  with
hope  and  confidence  in  the  unseen  Jehovah,  and  to  remind  him  that  two  are
enough  for  any  conflict  if  one  is  the  Living  God.  If  Saul  had  been  in  any
degree  worthy  of  his  title  and  his  position  he  would  have  been  the  first  to  accept
the  challenge  of  the  heathen,  and  would  have  rejoiced  in  the  opportunity  of
adding  his  own  name  to  the  long  roll  of  Hebrew  heroes  who  had  proved  over
and  over  again  how  much  more  there  is  on  the  side  of  him  who  trusts  in  the
Unseen  and  Eternal  than  on  the  side  of  those  whose  confidence  is  in  the  seen
and  temporal.  But  instead  of  this  he  furnishes  an  example  of  cowardice  which
had  its  root  in  the  unbelief  which  had  been  the  curse  of  almost  all  his  kingly
life,  and  whicli  had  brought  upon  him  his  present  misery.  There  had  been  a
short  bright  spot  in  his  career  when  he,  too,  had  been  conscious  that  it  was  the
"Lord  who  wrought  salvation  in  Israel,"  and  when  he  had  fought  and  conquered
in  that  assurance  (chap.  xi.  11-13).  But  the  clouds  of  unbelief  had  long  since
obscured  his  vision  of  the  unseen  and  the  real,  and  made  him  a  slave  to  the
seen  and  the  seeming.  We  cannot  wonder  that  the  armies  of  Israel  manifested
the  same  disposition.  When  the  head  is  diseased  the  body  will  be  aliected
also,  when  the  well  is  poisoned  the  streams  will  be  im])ure,  and  when  the  head
of  a  community  has  no  fiiith  in  God  the  moral  disease  is  likely  to  run  through
all  ranks  and  conditions  of  men  beneath  him.  Seeing  that  unbelief  in  the
unseen  made  Saul  a  coward,  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  his  army  manifesting
the  same  craven  fear  of  the  giant  of  Gath.     We  have —

II.  An  example  of  faith  in  the  unseen  and  eternal.     I.    This  faith   was
founded  upon  an  experience  oj  Divine  help  in  past  dangers.     If  a  man  has  been

187


&0MILETIO  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL  Sooit  r.


in  great  peril  of  mind,  body,  or  estate,  and  has  in  t\\Q  day  of  liis  extremity  been
delivered  by  a  frifn.lly  and  powerful  arm,  he  carries  about  with  him  ever  after  a
consciousness  of  that  deliverance  and  a  faith  in  the  person  who  saved  him
which  nothing  can  destroy.  If  he  is  ever  brought  ac^aiu  into  like  circumstances
or  even  into  a  more  ])erilous  position  lie  will  natnrally  turn  again  for  help  where
he  found  it  before.  Wlien  a  nation  has  been  delivered  from  the  hand  of  her
enemies  mainly  by  tlic  courage  of  one  heart  and  the  skill  of  one  ruling  mind,
she  will  instinctively  contide  in  the  same  leader  in  her  next  time  of  danger.
The  eye  of  faith  looks  back  upon  past  deliverances  and  sees  in  tliem  the  hand  of
God — this  being  so,  in  tlie  next  day  of  ])eril  and  need  she  appeals  for  help  to
the  same  Almighty  source  and  contidently  exi)ects  to  receive  it.  This  is  a  most
logical  resolution — ''  Because  thou  hast  been  wy  help,  therefore  in  the  shadow
of  Thy  wings  ivill  I  make  my  refuge.''  (Psalm  Ixiii.  7).  If  we  have  present  con-
fidence in  an  arm  of  flesh  because  of  help  afforded  in  the  past,  how  much  more
should  we  have  faith  in  an  unchangeable  God  in  a  present  time  of  need  wlien
we  can  recall  instances  of  His  gracious  interposition  in  past  necessities.  This  is
the  argument  of  David,  and  such  has  ever  been  and  ever  will  be  the  argument
of  faith,  "  The  Lord  that  delivered  me  out  of  the  paw  of  the  lion,  and  out  of  the
paw  of  the  bear.  He  will  deliver  me  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philistine."  But
only  a  man  accustomed  to  discern  an  unseen  hand  in  all  the  events  of  his  life
would  have  seen  God  in  the  deliverance  from  the  lion  and  the  bear,  and  only
such  an  one  therefore  could  have  drawn  hope  and  confidence  from  it  for  the
present  greater  peril.  David's  life  had  been  a  life  of  faith  in  the  unseen,  and
such  a  man  is  ready  for  any  emergency.  All  the  deliverances  of  his  past  life
had  been  referred  to  the  living  God,  and  therefore  he  was  not  now  afraid  to
trust  Him  for  a  greater  and  more  important  victory.  2.  This  faith  adopted
the  means  most  likely  to  lead  to  a  victorious  issue.  The  faith  of  David  was  not
the  faith  of  a  fanatic  nor  of  one  who  interprets  all  God's  promises  without
reference  to  conditions  to  be  observed  by  man.  Pie  took  a  common-sense  view
of  the  matter,  and  used  the  best  weapons  witliin  his  reach  to  bring  God  into
co-operation  with  his  faith  and  his  effort.  The  sling  was  the  only  weapon  wliich
was  at  all  adapted  to  David's  use  under  the  circumstances.  It  would  have  been
madness  and  ])resumption  for  the  shepherd  youth  to  liave  attempted  a  close
encounter  with  Saul's  weapons  or  with  any  weapons  of  that  kind.  But  he  had
been  accustomed  from  his  childhood  to  use  the  sling  which  was  especially
adapted  for  use  at  a  long  range,  and  with  which  an  expert  could  take  a  most
certain  aim  (Judges  xx,  16).  He  had  no  need  to  come  within  reach  of  the
Philistine's  sword  or  measure  himself  with  him  in  a  hand-to-hand  combat.  The
very  distance  at  which  he  stood  would  compensate  for  his  inferior  weight  and
add  to  the  force  of  the  blow,  and  the  stone  could  be  aimed  at  the  only  part  of
the  giant's  body  which  was  unprotected  by  armour,  viz.,  his  forehead.  Although
we  may  see  a  supernatural  hand  in  the  issue  of  the  event,  we  must  remember
that  the  effort  of  David  was  in  harmony  with  natural  laws  and  not  against  them,
and  that  his  confidence  in  God  did  not  lead  him  to  neglect  the  use  of  means,
and  those  the  very  best  at  his  disposal.  The  men  of  the  strongest  faith  are  the
least  given  to  presumption,  but  always  put  forth  well-directed  effort.

III.  Faith  in  the  unseen  and  Eternal  justified.' by  results.  The  expectations
and  desires  of  faith  rest  upon  a  solid  foundation.  The  faith  of  David  rested  upon
the  Divine  promises  looked  at  in  the  light  of  the  Divine  faithfulness,  and  it  was
so  strengthened  by  his  own  experience  that  he  ventured  confidently  to  predict
the  result  before  it  came  to  pass  (ver.  26).  At  this  period  of  his  history  his
desires  were  in  entire  symi)athy  with  God,  and  he  had  therefore  full  ground  for
his  confident  prophecy  that  the  Lord  would  deliver  Israel's  enemy  into  his  hand.
And  the  result  fuUyjustified  his  strong  contidence,  and  showed  that  God  regards
188


CHAP,  xt^il.  IIOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   BAMUEL


such  a  bold  reliance  upon  Hi  in  self  with  especial  favour.  The  faitli  of  God's
cliildren  in  all  ages  rests  upon  the  same  foimdatioii,  and  whenever  the  Church
of  God  is  threatened  by  some  apparently  mi^^lity  foe  they  have  the  same  warrant
as  David  had  for  predicting  beforehand  that  victory  shall  be  on  their  side
because  they  are  on  the  side  of  God.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

That  the  world    hostile    to   God's  liveth,  and  He  will  stdl  give  us  success,

kingdom  can  long  unpunished  visit  its  The    great    danger    that    besets    the

scorn  on  the  truth  of  the  eternal  and  Christian  at  such  times  is  that  of  at-

living  God,  is  commonly  a  result  of  tempting    to   fight    with    the   world's

the  inner  weakness,  disorder,  and  timi-  weapons.     The  worldling   vvill  always

dity  of  the  members  of  the  kingdom  of  overcome  him  when  he  does  so,   be-

God.     When,  therefore,  there  arises  a  cause  the  Christian  in  such  armour  is

man     from    their    midst    who,    with     not  at  home Let  him  go  forth

mighty  word  and  deed,  encounters  and  with  the  cross  of  Christ  in  his  hand,
conquers  the  foe,  t!iis  is  a  direct  inter-  and  by  that  he  will  conquer ;  but  if  he
position  of  God's  hand  in  the  develop-  seek  a  lower  weapon,  and  try  to  fight
ment  of  His  kingdom,  and  such  a  man  with  force  of  law,  or  with  earthly  phi-
is  His  chosen  instrument  for  the  losophy,  or  with  mere  social  expedients,
casting  down  of  the  haughty  worldly  he  will  inevitably  fail  What  David's
powers,  and  for  a  new  gathering  to-  sling  and  stone  were  in  the  valley  of
gether  and  elevation  of  His  people. —  Elah,  that  is  the  cross  of  Clirist  in  the
Langes  Commentarij.  theological    controversies,   and    social

When  we  think  of  the  tribal  inheri-  wranglings,  and  moral  antagonisms  of

tance  of  Judah,  still  in  a  large  degree  our  age. — Dr.  W,  M.  Taylor,
retained  by  the  Philistines,  who  ever

and  anon  arose  to  reclaim  it  all,  and  Ver.  10.  Degenerate  professors  of  re-

sometimes  nearly  succeeded,  we  have  ligion  often  receive  just  rebukes  from

a  striking  analogy  to  the  heart  of  the  most  decided  enemies.  ...  In  human

believer,  wherein  divers  sins  and  lusts  accomplishments  the  opposers  of  the

do  still  contend  for  the  mastery  ;  and  truth  of  God  have  frequently  possessed

sometimes    one    of    them,    attaining  an  undisputed  superiority;    confiding

Goliath-like  proportions,  threatens  to  in  this  they  have  defied,  and  still  do

enslave  him  altogether.      Each  of  us  defy,  the  advocates  of  spiritual  truth

has  his  own  giant  to  fight,  and  here,  to  engage  with  them. — IScott,
too,  it  must  be  single  combat,  with  no

one  to  help  us  but  He  who  went  forth  Ver.  11.  The  time  was  when  Saul

with  the  stripling  David Or,  slew  forty  thousand  Philistines  in  one

yet  again,  in  contending  with  external  day,  ami  perhaps  Goliath  was  in  that

evils,  we  may  sometimes  feel  that  they  disco; ntiture  ;  and  now  one  Philistine

have  assumed  such  magnitude  as  to  is  suffered  by  him  to  brave  all  Israel

a])pal  us.     Thus,  which  of  us  is  not  for  forty  days.     Whence  is  this  diiler-

brought  almost  to  a  standstill  when  he  ence  ?     The  Spirit  of  God,  the  spirit  of

surveys  the  ignorance,  inhdelity,  etc.,  fortitude,  was  now  departed  from  him.

by  which  we  are  surrounded  ?    It  seems  Saul  was  not  more  above  himself  when

to  us  sometimes,  in  moments  of  de})res-  God  was  with  him,  than  he  is  beh)w

siou,  as  if  these   evils  were  stalking  (others  now   that   he  is   left   of  God.

forth   defiantly   before  the  arujies   of  Valour  is  not  merely  of  nature;  nature

the  Jiiving  God,  and  laughing  them,  is   ever  like   itself;    he  that  is  once

Goliath-like,  to  scorn ;  and  our  courage  valiai-t  sliould  never  turn  coward.  But

is  apt  to  cool  as  we  contemplate  this  now  we  see  the  greatest  spirits  incon-

show  of  force.     But  the  God  of  David  stant  ...  He   that  is  the   God  of

189


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


BOOK  I,


Hoste  gives  and  takes  away  man's
hearts  at  His  pleasure.  Neither  is  it
otherwise  in  our  spiritual  combats  .  .  .
We  have  no  strength  but  what  is  given
us  ;  and  if  the  Author  of  all  good  gifts
remit  His  hand  for  our  hwmiliation,
either  we  fight  not,  or  are  foiled. — Bp.
Hall

Ver.  32.  While  base  hearts  are  moved
by  example,  the  want  of  example  is
encouragement  enough  to  an  heroical
mind  ;  therefore  is  David  ready  to  un-
dertake the  quarrel,  because  no  man
else  dare  to  do  it.  .  .  .  Even  so,  0
Saviour,  when  all  the  generations  of
men  run  away  affrighted  from  the
powers  of  death  and  darkness,  Thou
alone  hast  undertaken  and  confounded
them. — Bp.  UalL

Ver.  37.  In  this  recognition  of  God
and  confidence  in  Him,  with  which
David  entered  upon  public  life,  we
have  the  root  of  the  difference  between
him  and  Saul.  .  .  .  The  tendency  of
Saul's  life  was  towards  himself;  any-
thing inconsistent  with  that  in  him,  or
about  him,  was  but  fitful  and  spas-
modic. But  it  was  just  the  reverse
with  David.  The  leaning  of  his  soul
was  toward  God,  and  though  at  times
self  and  sin  sadly  and  terribly  asserted
their  power,  yet  these  things  were  only
occasional,  and  out  of  keeping  with
the  usual  course  and  current  of  his
character.  His  sins,  like  Saul's  im-
pulses towards  good  things,  were  but
occasional  eruptions  of  that  which  it
was  the  habit  of  his  soul  to  repress  ;
his  piety,  like  Saul's  impiety,  was  the
principle  of  his  life. — i>r.  W.M/I aylor.

To  God  he  ascribes,  not  only  his
success  in  life,  but  his  physical  prowess.
.  .  .  And  we  must  pause,  ere  we  call
such  utterances  mere  Eastern  metaphor.
It  is  far  more  probable  they  were  meant
as,  and  were  literal  truths.  David  was
not  likely  to  have  been  a  man  of  brute
gigantic  strength.  So  delicate  a  brain
was  probably  coupled  to  a  delicate  body.
Such  a  nature,  at  the  same  time,  would
be  the  very  one  most  capable  under  the
influence — call  it  boldly  inspiration —
of  a  great  and  patriotic  cause,  of  great
190


dangers  and  great  purposes  ;  capable,  I
say,  at  moments,  of  accesses  of  almost
superhuman  energy,  which  he  ascribed,
and  most  rightly,  to  the  inspiration  of
God . — Kingsley.

^  Ver.  39.  Let  Saul's  coat  be  never  so
rich,  and  his  armour  never  so  strong,
what  is  Davi^  the  better  if  they  fit  him
not  ?  It  is  not  to  be  inquired  how
excellent  anything  is,  but  how  proper.
Those  things  which  are  helps  to  some
may  be  encumbrances  to  others.  An
unmeet  good  may  be  as  inconvenient
as  an  accustomed  evil.  If  we  could
wish  another  man's  honour,  when  we
feel  the  weight  of  his  cares  we  should
be  glad  to  be  in  our  own  coat. — Bp.
Hall.

History  has  presented  many  and
diverse  examples  in  the  sphere  of  the
spiritual  life  similar  to  this  heroic
march  of  David.  Luther,  in  opposi-
tion to  timid  learned  men,  threw  aside
the  heavy  armour  of  scholastic  wisdom,
and  stepping  forward  in  freedom  van-
quished the  giant  of  Rome  with  the
five  heads  of  his  catechism.  And  other
witnesses  and  combatants  of  the  Church
have  with  holy  courage  broken  through
the  restraints  of  homiletic  or  liturgic
forms,  and  in  the  free  effusions  and
creations  of  their  divinely  anointed
spirits,  have  given  the  tone  to  a  new
and  more  animating  style  of  preaching,
and  thereby  have  opened  the  way  to  a
new  quickening  and  elevating  of  the
life  of  the  Church  into  greater  fruit-
fulness. — Krummacher,

Ver.  44.  Was  ever  such  a  proof  given
of  the  sin  and  folly  of  boasting,  as  in
the  case  of  Goliath  ?  And  yet,  as  we
w^ould  say,  how  natural  it  was  in  him  !
We  can  almost  sympathise  with  his
disappointment  when  he  found  that
the  champion  who  w^as  to  meet  him
was  so  little  "worthy  of  his  steel."
We  can  almost  admire  the  chivalrous
spirit  that  scattered  dehance  among  a
host  of  enemies.  But  just  as  it  is  so
natural,  and  because  it  is  so  natural,
is  this  spirit  of  boasting  dangerous.
In  the  spiritual  conflict  it  is  the  sure>t
presage  of  defeat.     It  was  the  Goliatii


CHAP.  XVII.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


spirit  that  pufTed  up  the  apostle  Peter,  Vor.  51.    What  needed  David  lo.id

when  he  said  to  his  Master,  "Lord,!  himself  with  an  unnecessary  weapon?

will   go   with  Tliee  to  prison   and  to  one  sword  can  serve  both  Goliatli  and

death."     It  is  the  same  spirit  ai^^ainst  liim.     If  Goliath  had  a  man  to  bear

which  the  apostle  Panl  gives  his  re-  In's  shiehl,  David  hath  Goliath  to  l»ear

markable    warning,    "Let    him    that  his  sword,  wherewith  that  proud,  blas-

thinketh  he  standeth,  take  heed  lest  pliemous    head   is   severed    from    his

he  fall." — Blaikle.  shoulders.       Nothing    more    honours

God  than  the  turning  of  wicked  men's

Vers.  48-54.   The  defeats  which  are  forces  against  themselves.     There  are

prepared  for  the  world  by  the  kingdom  none  of  His  enemies  but  carry  with

of  God:  1.    Through  what  sort  of  com-  them   their   own    destruction.      Thus

batant.^?    Throngh  such  as  (a),  like  didst    Thou,    0    Son   of   David,    foil

David,  heroically  lead  the  van  of  God's  Satan    with    his    own    weapon  :    that

host  and  decide  the  conflict  (vers.  48),  whereby  he  meant  destruction  to  Tiiee

and  (b)  such  as  bravely  bring  up  the  and  us,  vanquished  him  through  Thy

rear,   perseveringly   pursuing   the   al-  mighty  power,  and  raised  Thee  to  th.it

ready  smitten  foe.     2.   With  what  sort  glorious  triumph  and  super-exaltation

of  weapons?   (a)  With  weapons  which  wherein  Thou  art,  wherein  we  shall  be

they  themselves  have  according  to  their  with  Thee. — Bishop  Hall.
calling  tlirough  God's  grace,  and  wield

in  reliance  on  God's  help  (ver.  49),  and  Ver.  54.  David  brings  the  liead  of
(b)  with  weapons  which  they  take  from  the  Philistine  champion  in  triumph  to
the  foe,  in  order  to  ^ive  him  the  Jerusalem.  Our  David,  Jesus  Christ,
finishing  stroke  with  his  own  weapon  ascended  in  triumph  to  the  h'^avcidy
(vers.  50,  51).  3.  With  what  result?  Jerusalem,  bearing  His  trophies  with
Annihilation  of  his  power  on  his  own  Him,  "  leading  captivity  captive  "
ground  (ver,  52),  anil  in  respect  to  the  (Psa.  Ixviii.  18;  Ephes.  iv.  8.) — Words-
booty,  rich  gains  (vers.  53,  54). —  worth.
Lauges  Commentary.


CHAPTER  XVIIL

Critical  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1.  "The  soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit,"  literally,

"  chained  itself."  {Kiel).  "  In  almost  all  languages  friendship  is  considered  as  a  union  of  souls
bound  together  by  the  band  of  love."  (Olericus).  "Loved  him  as  his  own  soul."  "To  the
conception  of  firmness  is  here  added  the  idea  of  inneimess  of  friendship,  the  complete  identifica-
tion of  essence  of  two  souls."  (Erdmann).

Ver.  2.  "  Would  let  him  go  no  more  home."  See  last  comments  on  ver.  64  of  the  pre-
ceding chapter.

Ver.  3.  "  Made  a  covenant."  "  Such  covenants  of  brotherhood  are  frequent  in  the  East.
They  are  ratified  by  certain  ceremonies,  and  in  presence  of  witnesses,  that  the  persons  covenanting
will  be  sworn  brothers  for  life."  ( Jamieson).

Ver.  4.  "Stripped  himself  of  the  robe,''  etc.  "The  mention  of  several  weapons,  which
together  make  a  complete  war  outfit,  suggests  that  Jonathan  wished  to  honour  David  as  the  military
hero.  .  .  .  His  clothing  David  with  his  own  war-dress  sets  aside  the  barrier  which  his  rank  and
position  would  raise  between  them  in  the  first  instance  on  the  common  ground  of  the  theocratic
chivalry,  as  whose  representatives  they  had  come  to  love  one  another."  (Erdmann).  "  The
gift  of  one's  own  garment,  especially  by  a  prince  to  a  subject,  is  in  the  East  still  the  highest
mark  of  honour."  {PhUippson).     See  Esther  vi.  8.

Ver.  5.  "  David  went  out."  "  'J'hat  this  refers  to  war  and  not  to  general  business  is  plain,
not  only  from  the  following  account,  which  mentions  not  only  military  undertakings  for  Saul,
but  also  from  the  statement  of  the  position  of  general  whicli  he  received  in  consequence  of  hia
success."     (Erdmann).

191


HO M I LETIC  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.  book  i.


Ver.  6.  "  When  David  was  returned."  "  The  as  they  came  refers  to  the  return  of
the  whole  army  from  the  happily-ended  war  (comp.  ch.  xvii.  53)  ;  at  the  same  time  is
mentioned  David's  return,  with  especial  reference  to  this  victory  over  Goliath,  which  had
determined  the  successful  issue  of  the  war,  in  order  to  bring  into  its  proper  historical  connection
che  honour  which  then  accrued  to  him.  This  return  of  David,  therefore  (along  with  the  whole
army),  is  not  synchronous  with  his  return  to  Saul  in  chap.  xvii.  57  immediately  after  the  killing
of  the  giant,  but  occurred  after  the  victory  over  the  whole  Pliilistine  army  was  completed  ....
There  is,  therefore,  no  contradiction  between  the  statement  that  Saul  kept  David  by  him  and
gave  him  a  military  command,  and  the  following  statement  that  in  consequence  of  the  honour
shown  David  he  conceived  a  lasting  hatred  against  hiva"  {Erdinann).  "The  women  came
out."  •'  This  is  a  characteristic  trait  of  Oriental  manners.  On  the  return  of  friends  long
absent,  and  particularly  on  the  return  of  a  victorious  army,  bands  <if  women  and  children  issue
from  the  towns  and  villages  to  form  a  triumphal  procession  to  celebrate  the  victory,  and  as  they
go  along,  gratify  the  soldiers  witli  dancing,  instrumental  music,  and  extempore  songs,  in  honour
of  the  generals  who  have  earned  the  highest  distinction"  [Jam/eson).  "  Tabrets,  or  timbrels.'*
"Musical  instruments  resembling  the  modern  tambourine."  "Joy."  "  This  word,  standing
between  two  instruments  of  music,  must  denote  the  joyful  cry  m  hicli  accompanied  the  beating
of  the  tabrets  "  {Erdmann).     "  Instruments  of  music,"  rather  "  triangle*.'^

Ver.  9.  "Eyed  him."     *' Ljohed  askance  aXhimy     {Kiel.)

Ver.  10.  "  He  prophesied."  Eather,  "  he  raved  "  (so  Keil  and  Erdmann).  "  Saul's  condition
is  neither  that  of  simple  madness  nor  that  of  true  prophecy.  He  is  under  the  control  of  a  power
higher  than  himself,  but  it  is  an  evil  power.  For  the  precise  expression  of  this  supernatiually-
determined  condition  of  mind  and  soul,  in  which  the  whole  spiritual  en:;rgy  of  the  man  moves
freely,  yet  in  a  sphere  into  which  it  is  supern:;  turally  brought,  becoming  for  the  time  one  with
the  spirit,  the  Hel)rew  has  no  other  word  than  nabaf  and  the  English  no  other  word  than  -prO"
"phecy"     (  Translator  of  Lange^s  Commentary.)

Ver.  11.  "  Saul  cast  the  javeliu."  "David's  eluding  him  twice  presupposes  that  Saul  hurled
the  javelin  twice,  that  is  to  say,  he  probably  swung  it  twice  without  letting  it  go  out  of  his  hand — ■
a  supposition  which  is  raised  into  certainty  by  the  fact  that  it  is  not  stated  here  that  the  javelin
entered  the  wall,  as  in  chap.  xix.  10."  (Keil.)  "  If  Saul  actually  threw  the  spear,  we  could  not
understand  David's  twice  retiring.  Saul  held  the  spear  in  his  hand,  and  David  stood  so  near
him  that  he  could  save  himself  only  by  withdrawing."     {Bunsen.)

"Ver.  13.  "  Captain  over  a  thousand."  This  is  a  different  military  position  from  that  men-
tioned in  ver.  5  ;  whether  it  was  a  promotion  cannot  be  determined.

Ver.  19.  "  Adriel  the  Meholathite."    Nothing  is  known  of  this  man.

Ver.  21.  "  In  the  one  of  the  twain.'*  Literally,  in  two.  Some  commentators  therefore
understand  that  Saul  ofifers  his  two  daughters  to  David,  purposing  to  take  Merab  from  Adriel,
and  so  lead  David  to  make  a  double  marriage.  But  the  words  may  be  rendered  "  a  second
time,"  and  Kiel  renders  it  "  In  a  second  way  thou  mayest  become  my  son-in-law."

Ver.  22.  "Saul  commanded  his  servants."  David  evidently  paid  no  attention  to  Saul's
second  proposal,  having  so  recently  proved  his  fickleness  with  regard  to  Merab.  Saul  is  there-
fore obliged  to  employ  some  of  his  courtiers  to  persuade  David.

Ver.  25.  "  Desireth  not  any  dowry."  "  In  Eastern  countries  the  husband  purchases  his
wife  either  by  gifts  or  service.  As  neither  David  nor  his  family  were  in  circumstances  to  give  a
suitable  dowry  for  a  princess,  the  king  intimated  that  he  would  be  graciously  pleased  to  accept
some  gallant  deed  in  the  pul)lic  service."  (Javiieson.)  "Foreskins."  Why  not  heads?
Here  is  a  sign  of  Saul's  suspicious  and  malignant  spirit ;  he,  judging  from  himself,  impiously
suspected  that  David  would  go  forth  and  destroy  some  of  the  Israelites,  Saul's  own  subjects,  as
he  himself  desired  to  destroy  David,  his  own  deliverer ;  and  the  foreskins  were  required  as  a
proof  that  they  who  were  killed  were  not  Israelites.  This  passage,  and  2  Sam.  i.  20,  where  the
Philistines  are  styled  "  the  uncircumcised,"  seems  directly  at  variance  with  a  well-known  state-
ment by  Herodotus  of  the  fact  that  circumcision  was  practised,  not  only  by  the  Egyptiars  and
Ethiopians,  but  by  the  Syrians  of  Palestine  and  the  Phoenicians.  But  the  two  statements,
though  apparently  conflicting,  are  capable  of  becoming  adjusted.  Subsequently  to  the  time  of
Saul  a  great  change  took  place  in  the  population  of  the  Philistine  cities,  and  a  considerable
Egyptian  element  practising  circumcision  had  probably  been  introduced."     ( Jamieson.J

Ver.  26.  "  The  days  were  not  expired ; "  that  is,  "  the  time  to  the  marriage,  or  the  time
Bet  by  Saul  for  the  performance  of  the  warlike  deed."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  30.    "The  princes  of  the  Philistines  went  forth"   " To  battle,  in  order  to  avenge
David's  act,  and  perhaps  supposing  (as  the  Rabbis  suggest)  that  according  to  the  Hebrew  law
be  would  claim  exemption  from  warfare  for  a  year  after  his  marriage."     (  Wordsworth.)
192


CHAP.  xviiL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.

MAIN  UOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—4.

David  and  Jonathan.

I.  The  possession  of  analogous  moral  qualities  will  breed  mntual  love.

There  are  material  .substances  wliicli  liave  a  singular  affinity  for  each  otlier
lecause  there  are  elements  in  each  which  are  mutually  attractive.  The  steel
fi linos  in  the  midst  of  a  ujass  of  other  ujaterial  will  find  their  way  to  the  magnet
it  it  is  placed  anywhere  near  to  them,  and  cleave  to  it  with  persistent  force.
And  there  are  many  bodies  which  possess  elements  which  give  them  so  strong
an  affinity  the  one  for  the  other,  that  when  the  chemist  places  them  together
they  lose  their  separate  identity  and  the  hitherto  distinct  substances  become
but  one.  So  human  characteristics  and  qualities — especially  human  excellences
— form  a  basis  of  mutual  affinity  between  those  who  are  like-minded.  A  bold
and  courageous  man  is  attracted  to  another  who  shows  that  he  is  also  bold  and
courageous,  and  a  man  of  strong  emotions  feels  a  drawing  to  another  of  an
emotional  nature.  Jonathan  and  David  evidently  possessed  some  kindred
excellences  of  character.  If  tlie  shepherd  boy  had  shown  his  courageous  faith
by  meeting  the  giant  single  handed,  the  prince  had  displayed  the  same  trustful
boldness  when  he  scaled  the  rock  and  entered  the  Philistine  garrison,  and  they
were  evidently  both  possessed  by  an  ardent  concern  for  the  welfare  of  their
people,  and  by  that  humility  of  heart  which  is  an  accompaniment  of  all  true
greatness.  When,  therefore,  the  youthful  son  of  Jesse  stood  before  Saul,  and
both  by  his  bearing  and  his  word  revealed  what  motives  had  prompted  his  action,
the  presence  of  kindred  qualities  in  the  breast  of  Jonathan  sent  his  soul  out  to
David,  and  that  friendship  was  formed  which  will  be  renowned  so  long  as  the
world  shall  last.

II.  Love  based  upon  affinity  of  soul  is  strong  and  will  bear  a  great  strain.
Jonathan  loved  David  "as  his  own  soul."  Self-love  is  strong  and  deep  and  is  a
Divinely  commanded  love.  We  are  but  obeying  an  instinct  implanted  within
us  by  God  when  we  manifest  a  due  regar<l  to  our  own  personal  welfare — in  fact
it  is  inconceivable  that  any  being  should  be  a  stranger  to  such  a  feeling.  Our
Lord  Himselt  tells  us  that  our  own  spiritual  well-being  is  to  be  the  first  object
of  our  care  when  lie  asks,  **  What  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul?"
(Matt.  xvi.  27),  and  it  is  natural  and  right  that  our  lower  and  secondary
interests  should  be  dear  to  us  also.  But  there  is  a  love  which  sets  all  these
latter  below  the  interests  and  the  welfare  of  another,  and  such  a  love  was  that
wliich  David  bore  to  Jonathan.  It  affords  an  example  of  the  intensity  to  which
love  often  grows  when  it  is  founded  upon  similarity  of  moral  tastes  and  aspira-
tions. It  is  then  often  equal  to  any  test  which  can  be  brought  to  bear  upon  it,
and  forms  a  tie  stronger  than  mere  blood  relation,  making  a  man  willing  to
forego  all  his  earthly  advantages  for  the  good  of  his  friend.  The  brook  which
is  hut  a  few  inches  deep  will  soon  dry  up  under  the  rays  of  the  summer's  sun,
or  freeze  when  visited  by  the  frosts  of  wunter,  but  the  deep  broad  river  rolls  on
without  being  affected  by  either.  So  there  are  superficial  friendships  which
vanish  altogether  when  circnmstances  change,  but  the  love  born  of  kinship  of
soul  outlives  all  the  heats  of  prosperity  and  tV.e  frosts  of  adversity.  Such  was
the  love  which  Jonathan  bore  to  David — a  love  which  was  as  deep  and  abiding
uhen  his  friend  was  an  ouJ,Jaw  and  a  fugitive  as  when  he  was  the  favourite  of
the  court,  and  a  love  which  tooTc  no  account  of  the  fact  that  David  was  destined
to  occupy  the  place  which  Jonathan  had  once  hoped  to  fill,  and  the  duties  of
which  he  was  fully  competent  to  discharge.  Althongh  he  never  sat  upon  a
throne,  Jonathans  conduct  to  his  rival  ^ives  full  proof  of  his  kingly  natura

0  idd


tlUMJLETIO  COiMMENTAKY:    SaMULL,  book  i.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Vers.   1-4.     Jonatlian,    the  man  of  others,  but  in  liimself ;  sitice  to  him,

generous  soul.      1.    Generous   in   ad-  without  doubt,  there  are  a-wanting,  if

miring,     (a)  Not  jealous,  tiiough  liis  not  every  endeavour  after  tliat  wliich

own  militnry   fame    is   eclipsed,     {b)  i$  noble,  yet  at  least  the  heart-atiract-

Fully  api)ieciating  the  merit  of  a  new  mg  virtues  of  humility,  of  purity,  and

and  obscure  man.     (c)  Admiring  not  love. — Krummacher,
only  a  brilliant  ex])loit,  but  modest.  There  are,  I  fear,  few  such  friendships

grateful,  and  devout  words.     2.  Gene-  between  those  who  are  nearly  equals  in

\owi?,  m  proposing  friendship  where  he  eminence  in  the  same  profession.     The

might     so    naturally    have    indnlged  proverbsays,  that"  two  of  a  trade  never

jealousy  (as  Ids  father  did).     3.  Gene-  agree,"  and  it  takes  high-toned  principle

rous   in   giving    what  was    not  only  to  rejoice  in  the  rise,  to  an  equal  posi-

valuable  and  suitable  to  his  friend's  tion  with  ourselves,  of  one  who  is  in

present  wants,  but  honourable  as  being  the  same  calling  with  us.     Provided

associated  with  himself      Generosity,  there  be  sufficient  distance  between  us,

shown    in   mutual    appreciation    and  either  in  excellence,  or  success,   the

mutual  benefits,  is  the  basis  of  sweet  difficulty  is  not  felt  on   either  side.

and  lasting  friendships,  and  in  general  The  young  statesman,  just  entering  on

is  one  of  the  noblest  traits  of  human  public  life,  has  neither  jealousy   nor

character. — Trans,  of  Lange  sCommen-  envy  of  the  veteran  leader  who  has  by

tary.  genius  and  perseverance  made  his  way

'J^his  was  not  a  worldly  friendship  to  the  front  rank  of  politicians,  and

in  which  one,   in  loving  anotluT,  in  the  leader,  in  his  turn,  feels  it  easy  to

reality  loves  only  himself  and  his  own  be  cordial  and  encouraging  to  the  young

personal  interests,  but  one  of  a  hi<^her  aspirant.     But  let  the  one  see  the  other

nature,  which  formed  the  uniting  bond,  as  nearly  as  possible  on  a  level  with

They  loved  each  other  truly  in  God,  to  himself,  even  in  his  own  chosen  depart-

whose  service  they  had  devoted  them-  ment  of  excellence,  and  feel  that  he

selves  in  the  hours  of  holy  consecration,  must  probably  soon  consent  to  be  second

....    and   friendship    which    thus  to  him,  and  the  case  is  altered.    Then,

grows  up  and  blossoms,  rooting  itself  almost  in  spite  of  themselves,  jealousies

in  a  similarity   of  sanctified   disposi-  and  envyings  will  spring  up  between

tions,  takes  a  first  place  among  our  them  ;  they  will  look  askance  at  each

earthly  blessings  and  possessions.  There  other,  and  though  they  may  not  break

that  communion  of  heart  so  unites  to-  out  into  open  foes,  there  will  be  what

gether    that    one    man     becomes    to  I  may  call  a  sort  of  armed  watchfulness

another  like  a  living  canal,  through  between  them,  and  a  very  little  matter

which  the  inner  life  pours  forth  to  him  will  set  them   in   direct  antagonism.

a  stream  of  enriching  and  never-failing  The  nearer  individuals  come  into  com-

fulness  of  refreshing  consolations  and  petition  with  each  other,  the  greater  is

enjoyments A  Cleojthas  and  their  tendency  to   be  spiteful  toward

his  companion  on  the  way  to  Emmaus  ;  each  other.     It  is  easy  to  be  a  patron,

a  Peter  and  the  discii)le  who  lay  on  and,  stooping  down  from  a  lofty  height,

Jesus*  bosom  ;  a  Paul  and  his  Timothy  to  take  by  the  hand  some  struggling

— how  lovely  are  these  double  stars  of  beginner  ;  it  is  easy,  too,    to   be  an

sacred  history  pouring  forth  their  rays  admiring  pupil  of  one  who  is  acknow-

upon  us  from  heaven Whoever  ledged  to  be  a  great  way  above  us  ;  but

is  the    object    of    such    affectionate  it  is  a  much  harder,  and  therefore  a

friendship,    let    him    esteem    it    as  a  much  nobler  thing,  to  be  the  warm

treasure  of  high  and  i)recious  worth.  ap[)reciative  friend  of  one  who  is   in

Whoever,  on  the  contrary,  complains  the  same  calling  with  ourselves,   and

that  he  enjoys  no  such  friendship,  let  who  is  bidding  fair  to   outshine  and

him  seek  the  cause  of  this,  not  iu  surpass  us.     But  it  was  just  this  hard
194


CHAP.  XVIII.  BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  SAMUEL.


and   noble   thing  that  Jonatli<an  did,  lied  on,  and  that  his  gr(3at  d'^pondence

when  he  took  to  his  heart  the  youthful  must  be  placed,  not  on  the  fellowship

David. — Dr.  W.  31.   Taijlor.  of  mortal  man,  but  of  the  ever-living

Similitudeof  dispositions  and  estates  and  ever-loving   God,    Jonathan    and

ties  the  fastest  knots  of  affection.     A  he   were   doomed,    after   the    briefest

wise  soul  hath  piercing  e3^es,  and  hath  peri(;d  of  companionship,  to  a  life-long

quickly  discerned  the  likeness  of  itself  separation,   and   the  friendship  which

in  another ;  as  we  do  no  sooner  look  had  promised  to  be  a  perpetual  solace

into  the  glass  of  water,  but  face  answers  to   his   trials,    only    aggravated    their

to  face,  and,  where  it  sees  a  perfect  severity  when  Providence  deprived  him

resemblance  of   itself,    cannot   choose  of  its  comforts  ...    In  another  view,

but  love  it  with  the  same  affection  that  David's    intercourse    with     Jonathan

it  reflects  upon  itself.  served   an   important   purpose  in   his

No  man  saw  David  that  day,  which  training.     The  very  sight  he  had  of

had  so  much  cause  to  disaPfect  him ;  Saul's    outrageous   wickedness    might

none  in  Israel  should  be  a  loser  by  have  nursed  a  self-righteous  feeling —

David's  success,  but  Jonathan.     Saul  might   have   encouraged  the  thought

was  sure  enough  settled  for  his  time :  so  natural  to  man,  that  as  Saul  was

only  his  successor  should  forego  all  that  rejected  by  God  for  his  wickedness,  so

which  David  should  gain  ;  so  as  none  David   was   chosen   for   his   goodness,

but  David  stands  in  Jonathan's  light ;  The  remembrance  of  Jonathan's  singu-

and  yet  all  this  cannot  abate  one  jot  lar  virtues  and  graces  was  fitted  to

or  dram   of    his  love.      Where   God  rebuke  this  thought ;  for,  if  regard  to

unite th  hearts,  carnal  respects  are  too  human    goodness   had   decided   God's

weak   to   dissever  them,    since    that,  course    in    the    matter,    why    should

which  breaks  off  affection,  must  needs  Jonathan    not     have    been    chosen  ?

be  stronger  than  that  which  conjoineth  From    the   self-righteous    ground    on

it. — Bishop  Hall.        ^  which  he  might  have  been  tempted  to

In  merciful  adaptation  to  the  infirmi-  stand,   David  would   thus  be  thrown

ties  of  his  human  spirit,  God  opened  back  on  the  providence  of  God,  and

to  David   this   stream   in  the  desert,  in    deepest    humility    constrained    to

and   allowed    him   to   refresh   himself  acknowledge  that  it  was  by  God's  grace

with  its  pleasant  water ;  but  to  show  only  that  he  was  made  to  differ  from

him,   at  the    same    time,    that   such  others. — Blaikie,
supplies  could  not  be  permanently  re-


MAIN  HOMTLETICS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH.—  VerseB  6—30.

David's  Advancement  and  Saul's  Decline.

I.  The  method  of  David's  external  eleva^on.  It  may  be  regarded  as  a  general
social  law,  that  men  \\ho  possess  gifts  which  fit  them  for  prominent  and  powerful
positions  amongst  their  fellow  men,  find  their  way  sooner  or  later  to  those  posi-
tions. And,  although  we  recognise  the  operation  of  an  overruling  and  Divine
Providence  in  this  fact,  in  relation  to  all  men,  yet  it  is  not  accomplished  by  any
special  interposition  of  the  hand  of  God,  but  is  the  outcome  of  a  natural  law.
The  generality  of  men  can  discern,  and  are  willing  to  acknowledge  real  greatness
in  their  fellow  creatures,  and  a  man  who  is  worthy  of  honour  will,  as  a  rule,  be
honoured.  And  if  his  social  position  has  been  an  obscure  one,  he  will  soon  be
called  to  fill  one  which  is  more  prominent.  But  the  first  step  in  his  elevation
will  be  in  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  his  fellow  men,  and  the  other  will  follow  as  a
necessary  consequence.  David's  exaltation  in  the  estimation  of  the  people  must
have  begun  immediately  after  his  victory  over  Goliath,  and  therefore,  before
Saul  conferred  any  distinction  upon  him.    He  was  elevated  by  the  homaire  of  his

195


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  I.


fellow-subjects  before  be  was  set  over  them  by  the  kinc^,  and  it  is  not  unlikely
the  known  sentiment  of  the  nation  liad  some  influence  upon  Saul's  treatment  of
him.  For  at  this  period  the  external  honours  bestowed  by  the  monarcli  seem
to  have  kept  pace  with  the  growing  esteem  of  the  people,  and  to  have  been  tlie
seal  of  tlieir  regard.  Even  the  courtiers,  who  were  the  most  likely  to  be  displeased
with  this  new  favourite  of  tlie  king  and  people,  "  accepted  "  the  youtliful  shep-
herd boy,  and  veteran  warriors  yielded  to  him  their  willing  obedience.  The
whole  narrative  is  a  lesson  on  the  only  effectual  means  of  obtaining  elevation  in
life,  namely,  to  seek  to  deserve  it.

II.  The  method  of  Saul's  internal  downfall.  Although  this  chapter  leaves
Saul  where  it  finds  him  as  to  external  position,  yet  it  gives  in  detail  some  of  the
steps  by  which  he  descended  from  one  moral  platform  of  character  to  others
lower  and  lower  still.  As  David  grew  more  and  more  fitted  for  the  position  he
was  to  fill,  so  Saul,  by  the  deterioration  of  his  character,  became  more  and  more
disqualified  to  be  king  of  Israel.  He  reveals  himself  first  as  d^  jealous  man.  It
i)ecame  more  and  more  apparent  to  him  that  David's  popularity  was  increasing,
and  the  inevitable  consequence  of  allowing  his  mind  to  dwell  upon  this  fact  was
the  awakening  within  him  of,  perhaps,  the  most  tormenting  passion  that  can
dwell  in  a  human  soul.  It  is  not  an  easy  thing  for  a  man  to  feel  no  bitterness
of  spirit  when  he  finds  that  another  is  gradually  displacing  him  from  a  p(^sition
of  influence  and  honour  which  was  once  exclusively  his  own,  and  that  the  esteem
and  love  which  have  hitherto  been  accorded  to  him  are  now  being  transferred
to  a  successor.  It  requires  great  self-abnegation,  and  much  unselfish  love,
to  enable  anyone  in  such  circumstances  to  say  without  a  pang,  "  He
must  increase,  but  I  must  decrense,"  and  the  task  is  difficult  in  proportion
as  the  man  who  is  being  sup])Linted  feels  that  he  deserves  to  be  so.
Saul  must  have  felt  that  it  was  his  own  lack  of  faith  and  obedience  that
had  alienated  the  confidence  of  Israel,  but  he  was  only  mortified,  not  humbled,
by  the  consciousness.  In  such  a  state  of  mind  he  could  not  see  David's  rise
without  that  painful  sense  of  his  own  loss  which  constitutes  jenlousy.  The  step
from  jealousy  to  envy  is  soon  taken.  When  impatience  of  rivalry  developes  into
hatred  of  the  rival  the  more  deadly  demon  of  envy  has  taken  hold  of  the  man,
and  when  he  yields  iiimself  to  its  sway  no  crime  is  too  great  for  him  to  commit.
A  man  may  invite  into  his  home  a  visitor  of  questionahle  character,  and  offer
him  a  seat  at  his  board  and  at  his  fireside,  and  feel  confident  that  no  harm  will
come  of  it.  But  he  may  one  day  find  that  he  has  been  entertaining  his  mur-
derer. It  behoves  us  to  beware  whom  we  admit  into  our  house,  but  it  is  far
more  important  that  we  should  beware  what  feelings  we  harbour  in  our  minds,
and  many  a  man  who  lias  at  first  only  admitted  jealousy  as  a  j)assing  guest  has
found  to  his  cost  that  he  has  by  so  doing  given  place  to  a  devil  that  has  mur-
dered his  happiness,  and  perhaps  ruined  his  character  entirely.  It  was  so  with
Saul.  He  had  alreadj'-  taken  more  than  one  downward  step,  and  now,  by
yielding  to  jealousy  and  envy,  he  descends  lower  still.  For  envy  soon  transforms
him  into  a  murderer  in  intention,  though  not  in  action,  and  henceforward  gives
him  no  rest,  but  hurries  him  on  from  one  desperate  act  to  another,  until  he
becomes  his  own  murderer  on  the  mountains  of  Gilboa.  Probahly  no  human
life  whose  history  has  been  recorded  reads  to  us  so  plainly  as  Saul's  the  terribly
fatal  consequences  that  may  be  involved  in  the  first  departure  from  the  path  of
right.  The  man  who,  in  his  early  public  life,  revealed  a  noble  indifference  to
personal  wrongs  fchaps.  x.  27,  xi.  13),  became  in  after  years  a  miserable  slave  to
envy,  and  allowed  this  passion  so  to  rule  him  that  the  one  aim  of  his  life  became
the  murder  of  an  innocent  man  and  of  one  whom  he  knew  was  especially
honoured  and  ap[  roved  by  God.

X9e


CHAP.  XVIII.


UOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


OUTLINES  AND  SUOQESTIVE  COMMENTS,


In  the  character-pictures  which  it
represents  to  us  (as  is  clear  in  the  his-
tory of  Saul  and  David),  Holy  Scrip-
ture never  exliibits  a  })auso  in  reIi,L;ions-
moral  lite,  but  alwnys  holds  u[)  the
mighty  "Either."  ....  "  Or,"  which
man  has  to  decide, — either  forward  ou
the  way  in  which  man  walks  at  the
hand  of  God  with  giving  up  of  his  own
will  and  humble  obedience  to  the  will
of  God,  or  backwards  with  uncheckablo
step,  when  man  puts  God's  guidance
from  him,  and,  following  his  own  will,
suffers  not  God's  will  to  be  accomplished
in,  on,  and  through  himself. — Langes
Commentary.

We  can  scarcely  conceive  of  a  single
trying  situation  in  life  in  which  David,
at  some  period  of  his  earthly  course,
did  not  find  himself  placed.     Even  for
his  own  sake,  that  he  might  not  be  too
much  elevated  by  the  abundant  favours
that  were  heaped  upon  him,  he  stood
in  need  of  being  continually  reminded
of  his  dependence  on  Him  who  dwells
in  the  high  and  holy  place,  and  with
those  who  are  of  broken  and  contrite
spirit.     Besides  this,  however,  David
was   to  become,    even    for   thousands
of  years,   a   beloved    and   comforting
companion     to    the     oppressed     and
the    miserable    of    every    kind,    and
therefore  from    him   must  no  cup  of
affliction  pass  un  tasted.    Through  what
depths  of  affliction  might  not  his  way
have  led  him  ?  But  into  every  darkness
which  cast  its  shadow  around  iiim  the
light  of  the  openetl  heavens  penetrated ;
and  after  every  storm    which   raged
against  him  there  followed  the  gentle
breathings  of  Divine  consolation,  that
all  his  followers  on  their  pathway  of
sorrow  might  thereby  be  encouraged.
Thus  is  he  qualified  for  being  the  harper
for  all  afilicted   and  oi)pressed  souls,
just  as  he  once  was  for  the  king  of
Israel ;  and  to  this  day  it  is  true,  that
wherever   the   melody   of   his   psalms
sounds  and  echoes  in  the  heart,  iheie
the  shadows  of  sorrow  and  sadness  are
scattered,  and  courage,  and  peace,  and
joy  return  and  take  possession  of  the
soul. — Krummadien


We  may  gatiier  u})  some  lessons  for
our  modern  life  from  this  ancient
chapter  of  sacred  history.

In  the  first  pLice  we  may  see  the
evil  of  centring  our  thoughts  and  plans
entirely  on  ourselves.  This  was  the
root  of  Saul's  misery.  He  was  one  of
the  most  ardent  seljists  i\\i\t  ever  lived.
He  had  made  self  his  god.  He  looked
only  and  always  at  his  own  interests.
*'  How  will  this  affect  me  ? "  was  his
constant  question  as  each  new  event
transpired  ;  and  whensoever  he  ima-
gined that  he  was  to  be  injured  by  any
other  man's  elevation  or  advancement,
he  was  stirred  up  to  seek  his  ruin.
Thus  he  was  ever  moody  and  unhappy.
He  hugged  himself  to  his  heart,  and
as  a  punishment  God  left  him  to  him-
self, and  no  companionship  could  have
been  more  miserable.

We  may  see  here,  in  the  second
place,  that  the  servant  of  God  may
expect  to  encounter  adversity  in  an
early  stage  of  his  career.  David  was
not  to  be  cradled  for  his  future  work
in  the  lap  of  luxury.  He  was  *'  to
learn  in  suffering  what  he  taught  iu
song."  He  was  not  to  be  like  *'  a  bird
on  a  bough,  singing  forth  free  and  off-
hand, never  knowing  the  tronbles  of
other  men  ; "  but,  led  throngh  trials
of  his  own,  he  was  stimulated  and
inspired  to  sing  of  them  in  strains
which,  because  they  came  "  from  the
heart  of  man,  speak  to  all  men's
hearts."

Lastly,  we  may  learn  here  that  the
wisest  conrse  in  time  of  danger  is  to
do  faithfully  our  daily  duty,  and  leave
our  case  with  God.  David  went  about
his  Work,  behaved  himself  wisely,  and
let  God  take  care  of  him.  On  other
occasions,  as  we  shall  see,  he  had  some-
times recourse  to  questionable  expe-
dients and  sinful  practices,  for  self-
protection  ;  but  in  the  present  instance
he  walked  steadily  on  in  the  right
path.— i>/-.  W.  M.  laijlor,

Ver.  6.  A  patriotic  celebration  of
the  victory  in  Israel  was  certainly  now
in  every  respect  appropriate  ;  but  it

197


HOMILETTC  COMMENT  A  R  Y:   SA  M  UEL.  book  i.


ought  to  have  been  of  aiiotlier  alto-  wisdom  and  propriety  in  tlie  most  diffi"
gether  different  and  more  worthy  sort  cult  circumstances  ;  they  make  way  for
than  that  now  celebrated  by  the  people,  increasing  experience  of  the  Lord's
The  songs  of  praise  ought  to  have  as-  faithfulness, in  restrainingtheirenemies,
cended  before  all  to  the  Lord,  who,  for  raising  them  up  friends,  and  affording
this  end,  made  use  of  the  humble,  them  His  gracious  protection. — Scott.
unarmed  shepherd  boy  as  his  instru-
ment, that  he  might  so  much  the  more  Ver.  10.  "Saul,"  says  the  history,
make  it  distinctly  appear  that  it  was  "betook  himself  to  prophesying;  i.e.,
his  arm  of  almighty  power  which  had  there  appeared  in  him  tiie  dark  image
saved  Israel.  The  pe()})le  mistDok  this,  of  that  agitation  under  which  the  pro-
and  they  idolised  tlie  instrument.  But  phets  poured  forth  their  discourses  and
is  not  this  very  error,  which  lament-  sayings  when  overpowered  by  the  might
ably  proves  a  deep  estrangement  from  of  the  //ol?/  Spirit,  which  for  the  mo-
God,  a  conspicuous  feature  of  the  i)re-  ment  raised  them,  it  not  above  their
sent  generation,  which  has  invented  own  consciousness,  at  least  above  their
the  expression,  **  hero-w^orship,"  and  understanding.  Saul  wandered  and
among  whom  we  not  seldom  see  this  raged  about  his  palace  like  one
dt;ification  of  men  rise  up  even  to  bereft  of  reason,  and  saw  in  his  un-
niadness?  Well  and  good:  let  men  believing  imagination,  full  of  suspicions,
celebrate  their  heroes,  immortalise  their  visions  which  at  one  time  made  him
meniory  in  monuments,  weave  laurel  tremble  and  shudder,  and  at  another
crowns  for  all  who  have  made  them-  hurried  him  on  to  madness  and  wild
selves  serviceable  to  the  common  weal,  outbreaks  of  passion.
or  who  have  extended  the  empire  of  Were  it  granted  us,  in  our  own  im-
elevating  and  salutory  ideas  by  the  mediatecirclesof  society,  to  look  every-
power  of  their  creative  mental  endow-  where  behind  the  curtain,  how  often
ments, — only  let  them  not  forget  first  would  such-like  scenes  meet  our  view —
to  give  praise  to  the  Father  of  Spirits  scenesof  wild  overflowings  of  a  wounded
for  all  that  is  great  and  noble  and  rich  sense  of  honour,  or  of  unbridled  anger
in  blessing,  which  the  children  of  men  because  of  some  loss  sustained,  or  of
accomplish;  for  from  him  cometh  down  burning  and  heart-consuming  envy,  so
every  good  and  every  perfect  gift ;  and,  that  we  could  not  forbear  to  use  the
above  all  others,  let  them  render  to  expression  *'  demoniacal "  as  fittingly
him,  in  prostrate  humility,  the  homage  designating  such  paroxysms. — Krum-
whicli  is  his  due ;  let  them  keep  in  macher,
moderation  the  rendering  of  praise  to

mortal  men. — Krummacher,  Ver.  12.     One  would  have  thought

rather,  that  David  should  have  been

Ver  9.  For  every  great  and   good  afraid  of  Saul,  because  the  devil  was  so

work  a  man  must  expect  to  be  envied  strong  with  him,  than  that  Saul  should

by  his  neighbour;    no  distinction  or  be  afraid  of  David,  because  the  Lord  was

pre-eminence  can  be  so  unexceptionally  with  him;  yet  we  find  all  the  fear  in

obtained,  but  it  will  expose  the  possessor  Saul  of  David,  none  in  David  of  Saul,

to  slander  or  malice,  and  perhaps  to  the  Hatred   and   fear   are   ordinary   com-

most   fatal   consequences.      But   such  panions.     David  had  wisdom  and  fail h

trials  are  very  useful  to  those  who  love  to  dispel  his  fears  ;  Saul  had  nothing

God  ;  they  serve  as  a  counterpoise  to  but  inlidelity,  and  dejected,  self-con-

the  honour  put  upon  them,  and  check  denined,  distenipered  thoughts,  which

tiie  growth  of  pride  and  attachment  to  must  needs   nourish  them;   yet  Saul

the  world;  they  exercise  them  to  faith,  could  not  fear  any  hurt  from  David,

patience,   meekness,   and    communion  whom  he  found  so  loyal  and  serviceable ;

with  God ;  they  give  tliem  a  fair  oppor-  he  fears  only  too  much  good  unto  David;

tunity  of  exemplifying  the  aujiaijJe  na-  and  the  envious  fear  is  much  more  than

ture  of  true  godliness,  by  acting  with  the  distrustful. — B;p.  Hall,


CHAP.  XIX.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY'.    SAMXT^L.


CHAPTER  XIX.

Critioal  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  I.  "  And  Saul  spake  •  •  •  •  tliat  they  should
kill  David."     Rather,  "  that  he  intended  to  kill  David  "

Ver.  2.  **  Until  the  morning."     Rather,  ^' in  the  morning ."

Ver.  3.  "In  the  field."  "  David  was  to  conceal  himself  in  the  field,  near  to  where  Jonathan
would  converse  with  his  father  about  him  ;  not  tliat  he  might  hear  the  conversation  in  his
hiding-place,  but  that  Jonathan  might  imme<liately  report  to  him  the  result  of  his  conversation,
without  there  being  any  necessity  for  his  going  far  away  from  his  father,  so  as  to  excite  suspicion
that  he  was  in  league  with  David."     (Ktil.j

Ver.  5.  "  He  did  put  his  life  In  his  hand."  "  The  Hebrew  word  means  the  palm  or
hollow  of  the  hand— the  hand  as  receptacle,  not  as  instrument.  Perhaps  alluding  to  David's
hand  which  swung  the  sling  against  the  giant,  upon  the  firmness  and  certainty  of  which  his  life
depended."     ( Lanjiiii  Commentary.)

Ver.  9.  "The  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord  (Jehovah).'*  "While  this  evil  spirit  is  in  ch.
xvi.  15  and  ch.  xviii.  10  referred  to  Elohim,  the  Deity  in  general  Jehovah  is  here  affirmed  to
be  its  sender,  because  Saul's  condition,  which  was  there  only  ascribed  in  general  to  a  higher
Divine  causality  in  respect  to  his  person,  is  here  regarded  as  a  judgment  of  the  Covenant-God  of
Israel  on  the  reprobate  king  who  hardens  his  heart  against  God."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  11.  **To  slay  him  in  the  morning."  "  We  may  guess  that  only  the  fear  of  alarming
the  town,  and  of  rousing  the  populace  to  resciie  their  favourite  hero,  prevented  Saul  from
dii'ecting  them  to  break  into  the  house  and  slay  David  there."     ( Kitto.)

Ver.  13.  "Image."  Literally,  the  teraphim  as  in  Gen.  xxxv.  2,  evidently  household  gods
which  were  still  in  use  to  some  extent  among  the  Israelites.  See  Judges  xvii.  5  ;  xviii.  14,  etc,
"The  plural  here  rfpresents  a  feingle  image  which  it  .'^eems  must  have  had  the  human  form,  at
least  as  to  head  and  face,  though  the  size  may  have  varied  since  Rachel  concealed  it  under  the
camel-saddle."  (Erdmann.)  "Pill  >w."  The  word  so  rendered  occurs  only  here,  and  is  derived
from  the  Hebrew  verb  Cabar,  to  plait  or  braid.  IJence  it  meaiis  something  bound  together  or
woven,  evidently  a  portion  of  the  bed-furniture,  which  Miohal  so  arranged  as  to  make  her
deception  more  complete.

Ver  17.  Michal  evidently  here  pretends  that  her  own  life  would  have  been  in  danger  from
her  husband  if  she  had  not  allowed  him  to  escape.

Ver.  18.  "  Naioth."  "  This  word  signifies  divelUnqs,  but  it  is  here  in  a  certain  sense  a  proper
name  applied  to  the  coenolium  of  the  pupils  of  the  pro})hets  who  had  assembled  round  Samuel
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ramah.  The  plural  form  points  to  the  fact  that  this  coenobium  con-
sisted of  a  considerable  number  of  dwelling-places  or  houses,  connected  together  by  a  hedge  or
waU."     (Kid.)

Ver.  20.  "  Prophets."  "  It  is  to  be  noted  that  we  have  here  prophets  who  in  inspired  dis-
course give  forth  their  inner  life,  tilled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  not  sons  of  the  prophets  as  in
2  Kings  iv.  38,  etc.,  who  as  scholars  and  learners  sit  at  the  feet  of  their  master  and  teacher.
The  prophetic  community  here,  therefore,  under  Samuel  as  head,  is  not  yet  a  prophetic  school  to
educate  young  men  for  the  prophetic  calling,  but  is  a  prophetic  seminary  in  which,  under
Samuel's  guiilance,  in  an  externally  strictly  ordered,  yet  internally  free  association,  the  pro-
phetic powers  are  practised  and  strengthened,  mutually  incite,  nourish,  and  farther  one  another,
and  the  prophetic  charisma  finds  ever  new  nourisliment  and  new  growth  by  this  common  holy
discipline."  (Erdmann.)  See  also  notes  on  ('hap.  X.  "They  also  p i ophesied."  "The
condition  of  Saul's  messengers  is  that  of  ecstatic  ravishment,  into  wiiich  they  were  brought  by
the  overpowering  might  of  the  inspired  song,  or  word  of  the  prophets."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  22.  "  A  great  well,"  etc  Rather,  "  The  great  cistern^'*  some  well-known  spot  in  a
locality  now  unknown.

Ver.  23.  "  Prophesied  until  he  came,"  etc.  "  The  difference  between  Saul  and  his  messen-
gers was  simply  that  the  inspiration  came  on  him  as  he  was  approaching  the  residence  of  the
prophet,  and  that  it  attained  a  higher  grade,  and  lasted  longer,  completely  suppressing  his  self-
consciousness."     (Erdmann. )

Ver.  24.  "Lay  naked,"  i.e.,  divested  of  his  robe  or  upper  garment.  " The  throwing  oflF  of
the  clothing  was  the  effect  of  the  heat  of  the  body  produced  by  internal  excitement."
(MrdaiMnn.)

199


ROiriLT^TIC  COMMENT  ART:    SAMUEL,  book  I


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—7,

Jonathan's  Intercession  for  David.

I.  The  man  who  is  related  both  to  the  offended  person  and  to  the  offender
is  specially  qualified  to  be  a  mediator  between  them.  If  a  man  would  be  a
successful  intercessor  he  must  be  acquainted  with  the  nature  and  disposition  of
hira  with  wliom  he  intercedes,  and  he  must  have  sympathy  with  the  person  for
whom  he  intercedes.  If  he  is  linked  by  the  ties  of  blood  or  friendship  to  one  or
both  parties,  he  will  know  much  better  than  a  strani;er  how  to  frame  his  peti-
tion— he  will  be  acquainted  with  the  arguments  which  will  be  most  influential
with  the  one  on  behalf  of  the  other,  and  his  own  relationship  to  both  and  his
consequent  interest  in  both  will  of  itself  form  a  reason  why  his  suit  should  be
regarded.  David  was  fortunate  in  having  for  his  intercessor  the  man  who,
above  all  others  in  Israel,  was  most  fitted  to  mediate  between  him  and  Saul.
His  love  for  David  had  broui^ht  him  into  such  near  fellowship  with  him  that  he
was  qualified  to  be  a  judge  of  the  aims  and  motives  which  actuated  him  and  to
pronounce  him  innocent  or  guilty,  and  he  was  so  near  akin  to  Saul  that  he
could  approach  him  with  freedom  and  without  fear  of  being  suspected  of  having
any  motive  prejudicial  to  his  father's  honour  and  welfare.  Hence  his  appeal
was  listened  to,  and  David  was,  at  least  for  a  time,  restored  to  favour.  The
relation  of  Christ  to  men  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  HLs  Divine  Father  on  the
other,  constitutes  His  special  and  peculiar  qualification  to  be  the  Mediator
between  God  and  man.  Having  been  made  like  unto  His  brethren.  He  can
sympathise  with  human  frailties  and  understand  human  needs,  and  as  the  only-
begotten  of  the  Father  he  can  have  access  to  Him  as  no  finite  creature  can.

II.  Those  who  truly  love  will  find  that  in  human  life  occasions  of  proving
their  love  will  not  be  wanting.  So  many  and  so  great  are  human  needs,  and  so
varied  the  experiences  through  which  most  men  are  called  to  pass,  that  those
who  love  us  will  often  find  opportunity  of  showing  their  unselfish  regard,  and  of
proving  that  they  are  friends  indeed  by  being  friends  in  need.  And  if  the  love
is  a  reality  it  will  be  equal  to  the  demand  made  upon  it,  and  will  rejoice  in  being
able,  by  self-denial,  to  help  its  object  in  the  day  of  adversity.  Jonathan  had
made  a  covenant  with  David  in  the  day  when  the  young  shepherd  was  the  hero
of  the  hour,  and  when  Saul  himself  looked  favourably  upon  him  ;  but  now  the
clouds  are  beginning  to  gather  around  him,  and  Jonathan  finds  an  occasion  to
show  his  love  in  a  manner  which  involves  much  more  self-denial  than  the
giving  of  ''his  garments  even  to  his  sword  and  his  bow."  It  needed  much
courage  for  even  a  son  to  face  a  man  like  Saul  and  to  assert  tiie  innocence
of  him  who  had  now  begun  to  be  an  object  of  suspicion  and  jealousy.  When
men  are  so  entirely  governed  by  their  passions  and  moods  it  is  a  dangerous  thing
to  tell  them  that  they  are  in  the  wrong,  especially  if  they  are  in  the  possession
of  so  much  irresponsible  power  as  an  Eastern  monarch  is.  Yet  this
Jonathan  dared  to  do  not  only  on  this  occasion  but  on  others  when  his  father's
temper  was  more  implacable  than  even  now,  and  he  thereby  proved  that  his  love
for  his  friend  was  real  and  very  strong.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

How  good  it  is  to  hear  such  words  their  noble  purpose  breathe  already

as  these  spoken  by  Jonathan,  which,  something  of  the  spirit  of  New  Testa-

in   their  peaceful,   gentle  tone,  their  ment  times.     And  yet,  as  John  at  a

reverential  utterance,  contradicting  in  later  period   testifies   in   his    Gospel,

nothing  the  duty  of  a  child,  and  in  *'  The  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  given/
200


OHap.  XiX.  MOMILETIC  COMMESfAnY:    SAMUEL


— a  truth  whicli  we  onglit  ])arfcicularly  tlje  contrary,  the  lioHest  souls  <;ive  \v;iy

to  keep  in  uiiiid  in  all  the  o})inions  and  somefimns   to  tlve  su^^cvstion.s  of  evil,

estimates  we  form  of  the  morals  of  the  The  iiaslies  of  lightning  may  be  dis-

men  of  Old  Testament  times.  The  here-  cerned  in  the  darkest  prisons.     But  if

ditary  nature  of  man,  fallen  in  Adam,  good  thoughts  look  into  a  wicked  heart,

had  then  allowed  to  it  a  much  wider  they  stay  not  there  ;  as  those  that  like

scope  than  in  the  post-pent ecostal  days  not  their  lodging,  they  are  soon  gone  :

of  the  New  Covenant.     The   natural  liardly  anything  distinguishes  betwixt

affections  and  passions  shot  forth,  when  good  and  evil,  but  continuance.     The

once  they  broke  through  the  barriers  light  that  shines  into  a  holy  heart  is

of    the   JDivine    commandments,    into  constant,  like  that  of  ttie  sun,  which

monstrous,  gigantic  manifestations  and  keeps  due   times,  and  varies  not  his

wild  forms,  which  may  be  compared  to  course    for    any    of   these    sublunary

the  luxurious  growth  of  the  primeval  occasions. — Bishop  Hall.

forests.    Saul,  with  his  colossal  hatred,  Draw  from  this  the  extreme  danger

and  his  jeah)usy  breathing  forth  fire  of  trifling  with  the  name  and  attributes

and  flames,  may  be  regarded  as  a  wit-  of    God — of   using   imprecations   and

ness  of  this  fact.  .  .  .  Yet  it  is  un-  oaths,  as  mere  ex[)Ietives  in  ordinary

doubtedly  true  that,  even  during  the  conversation,  without  either  reverence

Mosaic  economy,  individual  personages  or  moaning  .  ,  .  An  irreverent  fami-

appeared  like  shining  meteors,  lovely  liarity  with   sacred   things,  as  in  all

and  rich  in  promise,  who  present  them-  other  instances,  is  but  one  step  removed

selves  before  us  as  prophetic  types  of  from  contempt.     Such,  unhappily,  was

believers   of    a  future   age.     To   this  the  case  with  Saul.      "As  the  Lord

class  belonged  Abraham,  Moses,  Joshua,  liveth,"  was  an  expression  so  frequently

and  certainly  now  also  our  Jonathan,  on  his  lips,  that,  it  may  be  feared,  its

The  example  of  disinterested  friend-  solemn  import  was  soon  but  little  felt

ship,   rooting  itself    in   love  to  God,  or  understood.      Hence,  we  perceive

which  the  latter  presents  to  us,  remains  in  the  chapter  before  us  with   what

at  least  as  a  fitting  model  for  Christian  facility  he  disregarded  the  obligation

times,  wherein  even  its  equal  is  not  of  his  oath,  when  exposed  to  tempta-

frequently  to  be  found. — Krammacher,  tion  ....    He  who  is  not  afraid  thus

solemnly  to  trifle  with  his  Maker,  will

Ver.  6.    How   could   Saul  say,    he  not  fear  to  violate  the  most  sacred

should  die,  whom  he  could  accuse  of  obligations  towards  his  neighbour  .  .  .

nothing  but  faithfulness?    Why  should  Beware,  then,  of  destroying,  or  weaken-

he   design   him  to  death,  which  had  ing  in  any  degree,  your  reverence  for

given    life    to   all    Israel?      Ofttimes  God,   which  is  the  foundation  of  all

wicked  men's  judgments  are  forced  to  religion  and  all  morality.     Be  assured,

yield  unto  that  truth  against  which  there  is  no  more  certain  way  of  effecting

their  affections  maintain  a  rebellion,  this,  than  a  profane  and  inconsiderate

Even  the  foi    jst  hearts  do  sometimes  use  of  His  holy  name. — Lindsay,
entertain  good  motions :    like  as,  on


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Versta^-n,

David's  First  Flight.

I.  Human  transgressors  are  surrounded  by  divinely  raised  barriers  intended
to  prevent  their  departure  from  the  right  way.  A  soldier  weary  of  the  hard-
ships of  the  camp  forms  a  plan  to  desert  his  regiment,  and  thus  to  expose
himself  to  dishonour  and  to  punishment.  But  all  around  him  are  stationed
sentinels  who  stand  to  prevent  him  from  doing  what  would  ruin  all  his  prospects
for  life.     It  is  well  for  him  if  the  thought  of  the  cold  steel  which  encompasses

201


BOMILETIC  COMMENTAR  Y :   SA3I VEL,  Bu ,  k  ^

him  leads  him  to  dismiss  the  idea  from  his  mind — if  the  opposition  which  he
knows  he  should  meet  with  makes  him  pause  and  allow  the  purpose  to  die.
But  should  he  persist  he  will  not  succeed  in  makino^  good  his  escape  without
encountering  many  a  bayonet  and  bullet,  each  of  which  is  a  witness  against  him
bearing  testimony  that  he  is  a  transgressor  against  martial  law.  In  likemannerGod
puts  sentinels  in  the  path  of  men  which  are  intended  to  keep  them  from  breaking
through  moral  laws,  and  by  the  opposition  vviiich  they  offer  to  transgression  to
fl^nvince  them  of  the  self-destroying  nature  of  sin.  First  and  foremost  stands
the  voice  of  conscience,  and  then,  it  may  be,  the  pleadings  of  family  affection,
the  arguments  of  reason  and  even  the  warnings  of  self-interest.  Saul  was  sur-
rounded by  such  divinely  raised  harriers,  which  he  broke  down  one  after  another.
His  conscience  and  his  reason  echoing  the  remonstrance  of  Jonathan,  had  but
lately  stood  across  his  path,  and  for  a  time  had  turned  him  from  his  purpose.
But  he  had  silenced  them  again,  and  now  the  opposition  of  his  daughter,  like
another  sentinel,  rises  up  before  him,  and  hinders  him  from  staining  his  hands
with  innocent  blood.  Michal's  interposition  surely  reminded  him  that  the  man
whose  life  he  sought  was  not  an  obscure  subject  and  a  stranger  but  one  whom
his  own  act  had  made  the  husband  of  his  daughter  and  a  member  of  the  royal
household,  and  therefore  one  who,  from  family  and  political  interests,  had  a
claim  upon  him  even  if  he  was  not  ojjen  to  influence  from  higher  motives.  Each
admonition  and  hindrance  which  Saul  encountered  was  a  witness  against  him,
and  warned  him  that  he  was  pursuing  a  path  of  self-destruction.

II.  Those  who  are  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake  may  serve  God  better
by  fleeing  than  by  fighting.  It  costs  a  courageous  man  much  more  to  flee
than  to  fight,  and  yet  there  are  times  and  circumstances  when  the  voice
of  duty  commands  the  former  rather  than  the  latter.  The  commander
may  feel  a  strong  desire  to  encounter  the  enemy,  and  yet  he  may  feel
that  a  retreat  for  the  present  may  ensure  a  victory  with  less  loss  of  life
in  the  future.  Or  he  may  long  to  attack  a  certain  stronghold  and  yet
he  may  feel  assured  that  if  he  delay,  it  will  shortly  be  surrendered  without
bloodshed.  In  both  cases  he  will  be  acting  wrongly  if  he  allows  his
physical  courage  and  martial  ardour  to  get  the  better  of  his  humanity.  It  will
be  better  to  expose  himself  to  the  charge  of  cowardice  than  to  do  that  which
will  be  least  for  the  honour  of  his  God  and  his  country.  Up  to  this  period  of
his  life  David  had  never  turned  his  back  upon  an  enemy,  or  retreated  when
exposed  to  personal  danger,  excepting  so  far  as  to  avoid  the  javelin  of  Sauk
It  must  have  been  harder  for  him  to  flee  with  the  help  of  a  woman  than  it
would  have  been  to  remain  and  face  the  messengers  of  the  king.  But  he
doubtless  felt  that  the  course  which  was  least  in  accordance  with  his  feelings
was  most  in  accordance  with  his  duty.  If  he  had  come  forward  in  open  opposi-
tion to  Saul  he  could  scarcely  have  failed  to  rally  many  friends  to  his  side,  but
a  civil  war  might  have  been  the  result.  He  therefore  chose  the  course  which,
thous^h  more  apparently  humiliating  to  himself,  was  most  conducive  to  the
welfare  of  his  country,  and  therefore  most  pleasing  to  God.  In  all  cases  of  a  similar
nature — whenever  a  servant  of  God  finds  himself  the  subject  of  unjust  treatment —
it  becomes  him  to  consider  not  his  own  personal  feelings  first,  nor  even  his
personal  and  present  reputation  merely,  but  the  welfare  of  his  country  and  the
honour  of  his  God.

III.  Even  good  men  are  sometimes  under  obligations  to  unscmpulous  and
godless  persons.  Michal  was  destitute  of  the  pure  and  lofty  motives  which
governed  David,  yet  at  this  time  she  was  the  instrument  of  his  deliverance.  In
bringing  about  the  end  she  desired  she  did  not  hesitate  to  endeavour  to  clear
herself  at  the  expense  of  her  husband,  and  thus  to  deprive  herself  of  all  claim

202


CHAP.  XIX.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


to  our  admiration  and  sympathy.  Yet,  as  David  was  tlien  situated,  he  was
compelled  to  be  indebted  to  her  exertions,  and  to  let  her  misrepresentation  of
his  character  go  iincliallen<;ed.  There  is  more  than  one  way  ot  testifying  our
regaixl  for  a  friend  in  a  position  simihir  to  that  in  which  David  was  then  placed.
We  may  be  bold  enough  openly  to  avow  our  affection  for  them,  and  take  the
consequences  of  so  doing.  Or  we  may  prefer  to  show  our  love  by  sharing  their
niisforiunes — by  casting  in  our  lot  with  theirs,  and  being  willing  to  fare  as  they
fare.  Or  we  may  only  have  so  low  a  regard  for  them  as  to  be  willing  to  serve
them  only  so  far  as  we  can  do  it  without  involving  ourselves  in  trouble  for  their
sakes.  'i^liis  last  kind  of  regard  was  all  apparently  that  Michal  had  for  David.
Jonathan  did  not  scruple  openly  to  seek  to  save  his  friend's  life,  and  to  risk  his
fatlier's  disi)leasure  in  so  doing.  Michal  was  willing  to  save  his  life  if  she  could
do  it  without  exposing  herself  to  Saul's  anger ;  she  loved  him  enough  to  aid  his
escape,  but  not  enough  to  take  the  blame  upon  herself.  She  did  not  even  love
him  enough  to  share  his  exile,  although  she  probably  knew  that  he  was  the
anointed  king  of  Israel ;  she  had  some  regard  for  his  life,  but  none  for  iiis
honour,  or  she  would  not  have  charged  the  absent  hero  with  threatening  to  be-
come her  murderer  (ver.  17),  and  so  have  shielded  herself  under  his  blackened
reputation.  It  mattered  not  to  her  that  she  was  thus  giving  Saul  some  pretext
for  seeking  his  life — that  she  was  thus  wounding  her  husband  in  a  ujore  deadly
manner  than  her  father's  sword  would  have  done.  The  meanness  of  the  act
shows  us  to  what  a  contemptible  instrument  a  noble  man  may  sometimes  be  in-
debted for  a  service.  Michal's  conduct,  in  contrast  with  that  of  her  brother,
gave  David  just  ground  to  say  in  after  days,  **  Ihy  love  to  me  was  wonderful,
passing  the  love  of  women  "  (2  Sam.  i.  26).


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

As  the  crystal  vessel,  though  cast  promote  was  the  spirit  of  calm  self*
into  its  proper  and  permanent  form,  is  government  under  circumstances  the
unfit  for  use  until  it  has  been  recom-  most  trying  and  agitating.  The  germ
mitted  to  the  furnace,  and,  by  the  pro-  of  this  grace  (as  of  the  former)  was
cess  oi annealing,  adapted  for  the  rough  exhibited  in  the  combat  with  Goliath  ;
process  of  ordinary  usage,  so  the  cha-  but  it  too  required  to  be  strengthened
racter  of  David,  elevated  and  beautiful  into  a  steady,  constant  habit,  ere  he  Wiis
although  it  had  already  appeared,  was  qualified  to  hold  the  reins  of  govern-
as  yet  too  soft  for  the  strain  and  pres-  ment.  ...  3.  The  close  and  painful
sure  of  a  ro,  al  position  ;  years  had  to  contact  into  which  he  was  brougiit  in
be  spent  in  annealing  it.  .  .  .  The  these  early  trials  with  his  predecessor,
great  purpose  of  God,  in  David's  early  Saul,  was  obviously  designed  to  serve
trials,  seenis  to  have  been  to  develop  a  very  important  purpose.  The  same
and  mature  those  gifts  and  graces  that  trials  endured  at  the  hand  of  another
were  to  fit  him  for  a  royal  position,  man  would  not  have  had  the  same
.  .  .  1.  In  this  view,  first  of  all  it  effect.  ...  If  anything  could  have
was  most  necessary  that  the  spirit  of  made  him  shudder  at  the  thought  of  a
trust  in  God,  and  all  the  graces  de-  ruler  abandoned  by  God,  and  driving
pending  on  it  and  derived  from  it,  at  nothing  but  the  gratitication  of  his
should  be  exercised  and  nurtured  to  own  base  passions,  it  was  being  himself
the  highest  measure  of  strengtii  and  the  victim  of  those  passions,  receiving

endurance and  no  discipline  in  his  own  person  the  blows  aimed  by

could   have   been    better   fitted   than  Saul's  ungovernable  fury. — Blaikie.
David's  for  impressing  this  lesson.    .    .

2.    Another    important    grace    which  Ver.  16.    The  falsehood  of  Michal,

David's  early  trials  seem  designed  to  by  which  she  deceived  her  father  Saul,

203


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


fiooK  1.


was  a  retribution  on  him  ;  it  was  tlie
fruit  of  his  own  evil  example,  teacliing
her  to  practise  deceit  by  his  own  acts  :
see  chap,  xviii.  17,  19,  20,  21.  His
falsehood  and  treachery  recoiled  on  him-
self, as  Laban's  falsehood  and  treachery
against  Jacob  recoiled  on  Laban  him-
self by  the  conduct  of  his  daughters
to  him  (Gen.  xxxi.  14-20,  35).  Saul
had  cheated  David  of  his  wife,  as
Laban  had  cheated  Jacob  of  liis  wife.
The  daughters  of  Laban  and  Saul
practised  against  their  fathers  the
lessons  of  deceit  which  thev  had
learned  at  their  own  homes. —  Words-
worth.

Ver.  17.  But  how  shall  Michal
answer  this  mockage  unto  her  furious
father  ?  Hitherto  she  hath  done  like
David's  wife ;  now  she  begins  to  be
Saul's  daughter :  **  He  said  to  me,
Let  me  go,  or  else  I  will  kill  thee."
She,  whose  wit  had  delivered  her
husband  from  the  sword  of  her  father,
now  turns  the  edge  of  her  father's


wrath  from  herself  to  her  liush.md.
His  absence  made  her  presume  (jf  ids
safety.  If  Michal  had  not  been  of
Saul's  plot,  he  had  never  expostulated
with  her  in  those  terms  :  "  Why  hast
thou  let  mine  enemy  escape?"  Neither
had  she  framed  that  answer,  "  He  said,
Let  me  go  "  ....  As  she  loved  her
husband  better  than  her  father,  so  she
loved  herself  better  than  her  husband:
she  saved  her  husband  by  a  wile  ;  and
now  she  saves  herself  by  a  lie,  and
loses  half  the  thank  of  her  dehverance
by  an  officious  slander.  Her  act  was
good,  but  she  wants  courage  to  main-
tain it,  and  therefore  seeks  to  the  weak
shelter  of  untruth.  Those  that  do
good  offices,  not  out  of  conscience,  but
good  nature  or  civility,  if  they  meet
an  affront  of  danger,  seldom  come  off
cleanly,  but  are  ready  to  catch  at  all
excuses,  though  base,  though  injurious;
because  their  grounds  are  not  strong
enough  to  bear  them  out  in  suffering
for  that  which  they  have  well  done. —
Bishop  Hall.


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  VEUSES  18  and  19.

David's  Visit  to  Ramah.

I.  The  godly  naturally  seek  the  society  of  the  godly  in  times  of  trouble.     A
desire  to  conform  to  the  will  of  God  is  the  basis  of  all  true  godliness,  and  those
who  are  ruled  by  this  desire  are  bound  together  by  a  common  bond  and  are
often  involved  in  a  common  persecution.     Under  such  circumstances  it  is  natural
and  wise  for  them  to  seek  each  other's  society  that  they  may  strengthen  each
other  by  mutual  sympathy  and  help,  and  es])ecially  that  those  who  have  had
much  experience  may  encourage  and  advise  those  who  have  but  lately  entered
upon  life,     i^^ailors  who  in  tempestuous  weather  put  into  harbour  are  likely  to
find  sympathy  and  help  from  veteran  seamen  who  once  themselves  ploughed  the
ocean — while  they  listen  to  the  tale  of  their  experience  they  gain  fresh  courage
to  nieet  new  storms  and  perhaps  valuable  hints  as  to  the  best  means  of  steering
their  vessel  in  dangerous  waters.     The  common  desire  to  serve  their  common
God  had  created  a  strong  tie  between  the  aged  prophet  Samuel  and  the  youthful
warrior  David,  and  when  the  latter  found  himself  compelled  by  Saul's  envy  to  flee
from  home,  it  was  natural  he  should  seek  the  abode  of  one  who  had  been  driven
into  retirement  by  the  same  godless  man.     We  can  imagine  what  help  David
would  gain  from  his  aged  friend  at  this  time — how  Samuel  would  strengthen
his   faith   and   animate  his   courage  by  reminding  him  of  the  word    of  the
Lord  which  had  come  to  him  as  God's  prophet  in  past  days   (chap.  xvi.  1),
and    how    he  would    likewise,  out  of  the    experience    of  a   long  public  life,
give  David  much  valuable   counsel    concerning   not    only  the   future  imme-
niately   before    him,  but  touching   that    more    distant   day  when    he    should
do  longer  be  an  outcast  fleeing  for  his  life  but  the  ruler  of  Israel.     During  his
thort  stay  at  Ramah  he  was  strengthened  for  the  long  sojourn  in  the  wilderness
shat  came  after,   and  he  doubtless  fully  realised  the  truth  that,  "as  iron
204


CHAP.  XIX.  ITOMLLETW  COMMESTAUY:   SAMUEL,


slinrpcneth  iron,  so  a  man  sharpenetli  the  countenance  of  his  friend."  And  in
such  times  of  comniunioii  the  gain  is  never  on  one  side  only.  If  the  younger
are  helped  and  instructed  by  the  ehler,  the  elder  are  cheered  and  comforted
by  the  younger.  The  veteran  servants  of  God  are  ghxddened  by  the  energy
and  fervour  of  the  younu^er  men,  and  rejoice  when  they  see  others  rising
up  to  fill  the  places  which  they  once  occupied.  We  may  be  sure  that  Samuel
gladly  welcomod  his  young  friend  even  although  the  visit  was  brought  about  by
j)ainful  circumstances.  In  his  retirement  he  doubtless  often  still  grieved  over
the  failure  of  his  hopes  concerning  Saul,  but  when  he  saw  David  he  would  be
cheered  by  the  certainty  that  here  was  one  who  would  not  disappoint  his
expectations  but  would  prove  himself  a  faithful  ruler  of  Israel.

II.  When  the  godly  find  each  other  thus  mutually  helpful  one  great  end  of
the  existence  of  the  Visible  church  is  attained.  One  great  aim  of  every  wise
human  father  is  to  make  his  children  mutually  helpful  to  each  other.  Indeed
one  great  reason  for  the  existence  of  the  family  seems  to  be  the  formation  of
such  strong  and  tender  ties  between  the  brothers  and  sisters,  as  shall  enable
them  by  the  love  which  they  bear  to  each  other  to  lighten  each  other's  burdens
as  they  journey  through  life.  Those  who  are  the  objects  of  such  love  know  well
how  often  it  has  cheered  them  in  the  day  of  adversity  and  nerved  them  to  face
fresh  trials  and  peri)lexities.  And  the  children  of  God  ought  to  look  upon
themselves  as  part  of  the  one  great  "  family  in  heaven  and  earth,"  and  to  count
it  their  duty  to  extend  their  sympathy  and  counsel  to  every  afflicted  member  of
that  family.  For  this  is  indeed  one  of  the  great  reasons  why  God's  children  8re
required  to  form  themselves  into  a  community,  and  are  required  to  make  public
profession  of  their  faith  in  him.  By  so  doing  they  become  known  to  each  other
and  are  enabled  to  animate  each  other's  love  and  stimulate  each  other  to  per-
severe in  the  ways  of  godliness.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Besides  this  intercourse  with  Samuel,  least,  may  have  particular  reference  to

the  pursuits  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets,  the  dangers  out  of  which  he  had  so

alike  in   their  practice  of  music  and  recently  escaped,  and  by  which  he  was

poetry,  and  in  the  study  of  the  Word  still   threatened.     Such,  for  example,

of  God,  were  just  such  as  David  would  are  the  following:  "Princes  also  did

most  thoroughly  enjoy,  and  as  would  sit  and  sjjcak  against  me  ;  but  thy  ser-

most  materially   tend   to   soothe    his  vant   did  meditate   in  thy  statutes."

spirit  after  the  trials  through  which  he  "The  [)roud  have  had  me  in  derision,

had  just  passed,  and  brace  it  for  the  yet  have  I  not  declined  from  thy  law."

difficulties   which  lay  before  him.     I  *' Trouble  and  anguish  have  taken  hold

do  not  presume  to  fix  either  the  date  on  me  ;    yet  thy  commandments  are

or  the  authorship  of  all   the  produc-  my  delights."     Then,  in  regard  to  his

tions  which  have  been  brought  together  present  enjoynient,  we  may  quote  these

into  the  one  book  of  the  Psalms,  but  if  lines  :  "  0  how  love  I  thy  law  !  it  is

the  11 9Lh  Psalm  came  frou)  the  pen  of  my   meditation  all    the  day."     "The

David,  as  multitudes  believe,  then  I  law  of  thy  mouth  is  better  unto  me

do  not  wonder  that  many  have  con-  than    thousands   of   gold    or    silver ;"

nected  its  composition  with  his  resi-  and  in  reference  to  God's  dealings  with

dimce  in  the  school  of  the  pn^phets  at  him,   he  says,   **  I  know,  0  Lord,  that

Naioth.     The  calm  in  which  he  then  thy  judgments  are  right,  and  that  thou

found  himself,  and  the  studies  which  in  faithfulness  hast  afflicted  me."    "It

he  then  prosecuted,  might  well  have  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflic-

led  his  musings  in  the  direction  of  that  ted  ;  that  I  might  learn  thy  statutes."

alpnabetic  ode,  while  there  are  in  it  Dr.  W.  M,  Taylor,
not  a  few  expressions  which,  to  say  the

205


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,  book  i.

MAIN  UOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  20-24.

Saul  among  the  Prophets.

I.  Institutions  for  the  study  of  the  oracles  of  God  are  the  outcome  of  human

need.  Each  individual  man  is  a  creature  of  manifold  needs.  Being  a  conjpound
of  matter  and  mind,  possessinsf  a  material  and  a  spiritual  nature,  he  has  many
wants — bodily  wants,  intellectual  wants,  and  moral  wants.  There  is  a  wide  field
0])en,  therefore,  to  those  who  devote  their  lives  to  ministering  to  his  wants.
They  may  make  it  their  business  to  feed  or  clothe  his  body,  and  in  doing  so
their  special  object  is  to  supply  that  material  which  shall  be  best  adapted  for
the  purpose  ;  or  they  may  make  bodily  health  the  object  of  their  aim,  and  spend
their  lives  in  studying  how  to  promote  or  restore  it.  Others  study  man's  intel-
lectual needs,  and  endeavour  to  find  out  how  best  to  develop  his  mental  powers,
or  to  satisfy  his  mental  appetites.  But  man  is  more  than  body  and  intellect,
he  is  also  conscience,  and  unless  he  finds  satisfaction  for  tliis  moral  part  of  his
being,  he  goes  through  life  with  his  deepest  iieed  unsatisfied.  It  is  only  natural
therefore  that  some  men  should  feel  called  upon  to  devote  their  lives  and  energies
to  endeavouring  to  show  their  fellow  creatures  how  this  di^epest  and  most  pressing
of  all  their  many  needs  can  be  met.  And  as  there  are  institutions  whose  object  it
is  to  fit  men  to  be  useful  to  others  in  respect  of  their  bodily  and  intellectual  wants,
it  seems  fit  and  proper  that  there  should  be  similar  institutions  calculated  to
render  men  more  fit  to  deal  with  the  moral  wants  of  their  fellows.  If  there  are
schools  for  the  training  of  bodily  healers,  and  for  those  who  are  to  educate  the
intellectual  part  of  man,  there  ought  surely  to  be  schools  for  those  who  d<  sire
to  be  instrumental  in  healing  and  in  training  his  nioral  nature.  Such  institu-
tions seem  to  be  the  natural  outcome  of  human  need.  The  one  object  of  study
in  such  communities  is,  of  course,  the  only  book  which  can  meet  man's  spiritual
wants — that  b*ok  which  contains  a  revelation  of  the  Divine  will  and  purpose
concerning  him.  Other  things  are  studied,  but  all  tending  to  the  one  end,  that
of  throwing  light  upon  the  Divine  oracles.  As  the  schools  of  the  prophets  found
in  Israel  were  born  of  the  human  needs  of  that  earlier  day,  so  our  modern  reli-
gious training  institutions  are  the  outcome  of  a  felt  present  need.  Aiid
although  they  differ  greatly  in  many  respects  they  agree  in  having  for  their  aim
the  study  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  diffusion  of  its  truths  among  mankind,
so  that  the  needs  of  each  soul  may  be  met.

II.  Such  institutions  ought  to  be  places  in  which  the  operation  of  the  Spirit
of  God  is  very  manifest.  Men  who  have  to  deal  with  this  greatest  need  of  fallen
humanity  have  to  encounter  obstacles  which  are  not  met  with  by  those  who
seek  to  su]^ply  tlie  needs  of  man's  lower  nature.  Men  are  willing  and  eager  to
satisfy  their  bodily  appetites,  and  to  be  healed  of  their  bodily  diseases,  and  many
are  glad  to  obtain  food  and  training  for  their  minds,  but  the  majority  of  men
are  indifferent  as  to  their  spiritual  needs  and  turn  with  aversion  from  any  effort
made  to  heal  their  moral  diseases.  Hence  those  who  essay  to  labour  for  this  end
must  be  aided  by  a  power  which  is  more  than  human,  even  by  that  power  of
the  spirit  of  God  which  is  mighty  in  convincing  of  sin  and  in  healing  the  sinner.
Every  prophet  of  God,  in  whatever  age  he  lives,  must  be  able,  in  some  degree,
to  adopt  the  words  of  the  greatest  and  the  Divine  Prophet  when  He  said,  "  The
Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me  because  He  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  gospel
to  the  poor,  He  hath  sent  me  to  heal  the  broken-hearted,  to  preach  deliverance  to
the  captives,  and  recovering  of  sight  to  the  blind,  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are
bruised,  to  preach  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord"  (Luke  iv.  18,  19).  Without
this  mighty  reinforcement  he  will  not  prevail  against  the  natural  opposition  of
the  human  heart  to  God  and  goodness.     This  mighty  spirit  evidently  rested  in

206


CHAP.  XIX.  UOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


a  special  and  retnarliable  manner  npon  the  school  of  the  prophets  over  which
Sainuol  ])rosi(led,  it  worked  in  and  throni^h  the  first  New  Testament  prophets
in  a  similar  manner,  and  witliout  the  influence  of  that  same  Divine  Person  no
man,  however  richly  lie  may  be  endowed  in  otiier  respects,  can  be  instrumental
in  communicating  si)iritual  life  to  others.  While,  therefore,  all  godly  men  in  all
ages  need  and  possess  the  help  of  the  spirit  of  God,  the  sons  of  the  prophets  need
His  help  in  a  special  manner,  and  there  is  every  reason  for  them  to  expect  to
receive  it  if  the  conditions  for  its  reception  be  fulfilled.

III.  Men  may  be  wrought  upon  by  the  Spirit  of  God  without  becoming^
morally  better.  This  was  not  the  first  time  that  Saul  had  been  found  among
the  prophets,  and  had  been  the  subject  of  that  supernatural  influence  whicli
was  present  with  them.  On  the  first  occasion  it  seems  likely  that  he  was  a
willing  subject  of  this  Divine  influence,  and  that  he  gladly  yielded  himself  to  its
power.  That  first  endowment  was  proba})ly  an  earnest  of  what  might  have  been
bestowed  on  him  had  he  continued  willing  to  be  guided  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  lie
would  then  have  been  from  time  to  time  favoured  with  these  special  mani^es^aiions
of  the  Divine  presence  in  such  a  way  as  would  have  enlightened  his  spiritual
understanding,  and  altogether  exalted  his  moral  nature  and  made  him  more  and
more  fit  to  be  the  representative  of  God  to  the  people  of  Israel.  Bat  such  had
not  been  the  case,  and  this  last  exercise  of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  him  seems
to  have  been  at  least  without  the  consent  of  his  will  and  possibly  against  it.  It
has  rather  the  aspect  of  a  visitation  of  Divine  judgment  than  of  Divine  favour,
and  is  a  solemn  illustration  of  the  truth  that  even  this  great  gift  of  the  Father
of  Lights  may  be  bestowed  in  a  certain  form  and  degree,  without  its  receiver
becoming  a  renewed  man.  *'  Many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day,  Lord,  Lord,
have  we  not  proj^hesied  in  Thy  nar)ie?  and  in  Thy  name  cast  out  devils  ?  and  in
Thy  name  done  many  wonderful  works'^  And  then  will  1  profess  unto  them^
I  never  knew  you:  depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity''  (Matt.  vii.  22,  23).

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Vers.  20,  21.   By  these  "prophesy-  children  of  this  world,  abandoned  by

ings"   we  are  not  to  understand,   as  the  Spirit,  and  unable  to  rise  above

we  are  already  aware,  a  foretelling  of  the   earth,   in    so   unmistakable    and

future  things,  but  a  pouring  forth  of  overpowering  a  manner,  that  in  view

the  heart  under  the  impulse  of  the  of  it  even  the  most  blinded  among  the

Holy  Spirit,  in  lively  songs  of  praise  of  people  might  gain  some  apprehension

God,  and  of  His  wonderful  works.  With  of  the  de,.tli  to  which  they  had  fallen

anointed  lips,  and  with  an  animated  from    the    elevated    height    of  their

oratory,  they  praised  the  mighty  deeds  former  calling.    At  the  same  time,  from

through  which  Jehovah  had  from  of  these   inspired  ones  there  went   forth

old   made    Himself    glorious    to    His  among  the  people  a  light  to  show  in

people.      In    responsive   chorus    they  what  sense  the  Lord,  by  the  coming

sang— with  the  harmonious  accompani-  of  the  Messiah — for  whom  they  were

ment   of  harps,   flutes,   cymbals,  and  then   waiting— would  create  a  '' neio

trumpets — sacred  songs  to  the  honour  thing  in   the  earth,"   and    what   was

of  God,  and  called  down  in  earnest  meant  by  the  regeneration  and  puri-

prayers  upon  themselves  and  all  the  fying     of    the    world,    which    would

people  the  blessings  of  the  Almighty,  be  brought  about   by  the  advent  of

and  the  fire-streams    of    His   Spirit,  the  Messiah.  ....  Even  among  the

From  time  to  time  it  pleased  God,  in  roughest  and  wildest  spirits  in  Israel,

the  days  of  the  Old  Covenant,  to  bring  the  religious  feeling  was  in  only  a  few

into  prominence   the   exalted    life   of  instances  so  completely  dead  that  it

His  own  children  in  contrast  with  the  could  not  be  kindled  up  out  of  its

207


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SA'JUEL.


BOOR  I.


ashes,  although  only  temporarily,  when
touched  by  the  ri«^ht  spark.  There
are  even  at  tlie  present  day,  in  our
own  fatherland,  districts  of  the  Church
wliere  almost  a  similar  tiling  may  be
said  of  those  wl)o  belong  to  it.  In
times  of  great  spiritual  awakening,  or
even  of  only  solemn  Church  festivals,
one  sees  persons  who,  on  account  of
their  spiritual  dulness  and  their  tho-
rough worldliness  of  character,  were
believed  to  be  incapable  of  being  lifted
up  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  su<ldenly
glow  with  devotion  and  with  zeal  for
the  service  of  God  when  brought  into
fellowship  with  believers.  This  sudden
religious  elevation  to  which  they  are
thus  drawn  along  with  them,  shows
itself,  as  a  rule,  to  be  by  no  means
steadfast  and  enduring.  But  they  also
**  })r«>phesy  "  awhile  with  the  congre-
gation of  the  saints,  and  perhaps  even
rise  higher  than  many  of  them,  in  the
heat  and  enthusiasm  of  their  religious
profession.  It  not  seldom  happens
even  that  they  who  are  only  passing
travellers,  when  they  breathe  the  air
of  such  a  district,  feel  themselves,  be-
fore they  are  aware  of  it,  deeply  inte-
rested in  religious  and  ecclesiastical
matters.  Moreover,  the  reh'gious  ele-
vation of  mind  on  the  pait  of  tlie  royal
njossengers  at  Naioth  may  be  attributed
]\'iiily  to  the  appearance  of  the  aged
Samuel,  the  man  of  God,  known  and
highly  venerated  thronghout  the  whole
land.  It  is  enough  that  at  that  time
they  could  not  venture  on  any  account
to  rush  with  violence  into  the  midst  of
of  the  solemn  scenes  to  which  they  had
come.  How  could  they  by  any  possi-
bility lay  hands  on  him  whom  Saul
hated  in  so  unrighteous  a  manner,  and
who  was  so  visibly  nmler  the  protecting
care  of  God, — the  young  hero  by  the
bide  of  Samuel  ? — Krummacher,

Ver.  24.  Mark  here,  how  men  who
are  themselves  godless  observe  and
criticise  the  characters  of  those  who
join  themselves  with  the  people  of  God.
"  Is  Saul  also  among  the  prophets  ?  "
said  the  wits  of  Israel,  when  they  heard
of  what  occurred  at  Naioth.  Now
this  might  have  been  as  honourable  to
208


Saul,  as  it  came  to  be  dishonourable
to  him,  if  only  he  had  in  his  after
history  proved  himself  sincerely  re-
solved to  do  the  will  of  God.  Thus,
when  we  say  of  another  Saul,  **Is  Paul
also  among  the  apostles  ? "  we  mean
no  reproach  to  the  man  of  Tarsus,  but
only  desire  thereby  to  magnify  the
riches  of  divine  grace,  which  trans-
formed liim  from  a  persecutor  of  the
Church  into  a  preacher  of  the  Gospel ;
and  had  this  occasion  been  the  turning-
point  in  the  history  of  the  King  of
Israel,  as  the  prostration  at  Damascus
was  the  crisis  in  the  life  of  the  Christian
apostle,  the  proverb  before  us  would
have  been  one  of  honour,  and  not  of
disgrace.  Unhapi)ily,  however,  by  his
after  conduct  Saul  gave  occasion  to
men  to  speak  of  his  insincerity  and
wickedness,  and  so,  "  Saul  among  the
prophets"  is,  even  yet,  jeeringly  said
by  us,  when  we  mean  to  indicate  that
a  godless,  Christless  man  has  found  his
way  into  the  membership  or  ministry
of  tlie  Chnrch.  Now  this  proverb,
thns  understood,  is  two-edged.  It
speaks  to  those  who  are  as  yet  outside
of  the  Church,  and  says  to  them,  "If
you  are  not  really  and  truly  Christ's  ;
if  you  do  not  love  the  Lord  and  desire
to  serve  him,  then  do  not  seek  to  enter
the  Church."  But  it  speaks  also  to
those  who  are  within,  and  says  to  them,
"  If  in  your  hearts  you  are  conscious
that  you  are  none  of  Christ's,  and  if  in
your  condnct  you  are  dishonouring
his  name,  then  go  out  from  the  Church.
It  is  not  for  such  as  you  ;  and  your
continuance  in  it  will  only  make  men
say,  *  Is  Saul  among  the  projjhets?'
They  who  have  named  the  name  of
Christ  should  dc])art  from  inicpiity." —
Dr.  W.  M.  Taylor.

In  reviewing  the  narrative  over
which  we  have  come,  we  are  im-
pressed with  the  proof,  which  is  here
fiirjiished,  of  the  diversified  resources
which  Jehovah  has  at  command  for
the  protection  of  His  people.  Again
and  again  Saul  attempts  to  take
David's  life,  but  always  without
success ;  and  each  time  the  means
by  which  David  was  delivered  are
different.    At  first  he  is  defended  by


CHAP.  XTX.  110  MILE  TIC  COMMENT  A  RY:  SA  MUEL,


God's    blessini]^    on    his    own    valour  That  hour,  that  moment,  was  the  hour,

against   the   Philistines  ;    then    he   is  the   moment   of   thy   life,    friend   and

indebted  for  his  safety  to  tlie  mediation  brother.      To   that   God   would   raise,

of  Jonathan  ;    then  to   tlie  ai^ency  of  assimilate  tlie  wliole  of  it.     Oh!  do  not

Michal  ;  and  finally  to  the  miraculous  let  the  slui^^gish  turbid  current  of  your

work  of  God's  own   Holy  S[)irit.     In  ordinary  days  seem  to  you  that  which

the  sub^^equent  portion  of  the  history,  truly  represent  to  3^ou  what  you  are,

we  shall  find  that  the  same  principle     what  you  are  able  to  be but  if

holds,  and  that  in  each  new  peril  he  is  you  should  have  succeeded  in  quenchinjij

preserved  by  some  now  instrumentality.  that  voice  of  love  which  you  once  heard

When  God  purposes  to  protect  a  man,  speaking  in  your  heart,  and  now  can

He   is   at   no   loss   for   the   means  of  hear  nothing  but  hoarse  and  dissonant

carrying  out  His  design.     He  may  find  voices  of  evil  omen, — oh  yet  be  sure

them  in  what  seems  to  us  mortals  the  that  the  spirit  of  God  does  not  desert

most  unexpected  places,  and  they  may  the  work  of  His  own  hands,  that  He  is

work  in  what  appears  to  us  to  be  a  still  hovering  about  the  habitation  in

very  strange — it  may  be,  also,  a  very  which  He  desires   to  dwell.      And  if,

sinful    maimer  ;    yet    the   purpose   is  when  you  meet  with  old  friends  from

accomplished,  while  yet  the  li'tertv  of  whom  you  have  been  long  estranged,

the  different  agents  is  not  infringed. —  there  should  come  back  something  of

Dr.  W.  M.  Taylor.  the  youthful  impulse,  some  of   those

heart  yearnings  and  songs  of  hope  you

Ver.  24.  In  connection  with  chap  x.  poured  forth  then,  though  mixed  with

11.    There  has  been  some  moment,  some  turbulence  and  confusion,  and  hardly

one  fleeting  moment,  in   the   life   of  to  be  distinguished  from  madness,  yet

every  man,  even  the  most  thoughtless,  the  question  may  be  asked  again,  '*  Is

whenhehashaddreamsof  better  things,  he  too  among   the  prophets?"     and

when  he  has  heard  the  voices  of  the  it  is  a  God  will  answer  the  question  as

prophets  coming  with  their  harp  and  it  was  not  answered  before,  if  you  desire

their  tabret  down    the  hill,  when   he  not  the  power  of  the   prophets,    but

has  joined  their  company  and  caught  their  obedience,    not   that    you    may

their  strains.     There  may  have  been  a  speak    inspired   words,  but   that   you

time  when  it  has  been  said  of   him,  may  have  the   humble   and    contrite

"What!  is  he  too  among  the  prophets?"  heart  which   He  does  not  despise. —

Has  he  found  that  life  is  real Maurice,


CHAPTER  XX

#

Critioal  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1 .  •*  And  David  fled,"  while  Saul  was  still  under
the  power  of  the  prophetic  influence.  "Nothing  could  be  a  better^evulence  of  his  innocence  than
ills  thus  patting  himself  in  Jonathan's  power.  Perhaps  something  passed  between  Samuel  and
Saul  on  the  subject,  since  it  appears  from  verses  5,  25,  27,  that  Saul  expected  David  at  the  feast
of  the  new  moon."     f  Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  2.  *•  Why  should  my  father  hide  this  th  ng  from  me  ?  "  This  remark  supposes  that
the  intimate  relation  between  Jonathan  and  David  had  been  concealed,  as  far  as  possible,  from
Saul."  (  Erdmann.)  "Jonathan,  it  would  seem,  clung  to  a  hope  that  the  extraordinary  scene
at  Naioth  might  have  wrought  a  sane  ihed  improvement  on  Saul's  temper  and  feelings."
(Jamitson.)  Or,  "  lie  might  regard  the  late  attempt  on  David  as  the  result  of  a  new  but
temporary  access  of  rage,  and  remenibei  ing  his  distinct  oath  in  his  lucid  intervals,  might  suppose
that  he  would  not  in  a  quiet  state  of  mind  resolve  on  and  execute  such  a  murder,    ( Erdinann. )

Ver.  8.  "  Moreover  :*•  rather  "  again."

P  209


nOMILETIC  C03IMENTART:  SAMUEL.  book  i.


Ver.  5.  "To-morrow  is  the  new  moon,"  etc.  "  This  request  implies  that  Saul  gave  a  feast
at  the  new  moon,  and  therefore  that  the  new  moon  was  not  merely  a  religious  festival,  according
to  the  law  in  Nnmb.  x.  10,  xxviii.  11,  15,  but  that  it  was  kept  as  a  civil  festival  also,  and  in  the
latter  character  for  two  days  ;  as  we  may  infer  both  from  the  fact  that  David  reckoned  to  the
third  evening:,  i.e  ,  the  evening  of  the  third  day  from  the  day  then  present  ....  it  does  not
follow,  that  because  Saul  supposed  that  David  might  have  absented  himself  the  first  day  on
account  of  Levitical  uncleanness,  therefore  the  royal  feast  was  a  sacrificial  meal.  It  was  evidently
contrary  to  social  propriety  to  take  part  in  a  public  feast  in  a  slate  of  Levitical  uncleanness,  even
though  it  is  not  expressly  forbidden  in  the  law."     ( Keil.)

Ver.  6.  **A  yearly  sacrifice."  "In  the  then  disorganised  condition  of  public  worship,  to
which  David  himself  first  gave  regular  form,  family  usages  of  this  sort,  after  the  manner  of  other
nations,  had  establislied  themselves,  which  were  contrary  to  the  prescriptions  concerning  the  unity
of  Divine  worship."     (  Von  Gerlach. )

Ver.  8.  "Covenant  of  the  Lor-I."  "  Because  it  was  not  only  made  vi^ith  invocation  of  the
Lord's  name,  but  also  had  its  deepest  ground  and  origin  in  God,  and  its  consecration  in  their
life-like  communion  with  God."     (  Erdmann.)

Ver.  11.  "Come,  let  us  go  out,"  etc  "The  scene  of  this  memorable  conference  was,"  as
Porter  describes  it  (Handbook,  p.  324),  "a  shallow  valley  between  Gibeah  (Tell  el  Flilil)  and
Nob,  breaking  down  on  the  east  in  rocky  declivities  into  Wady  Suleim.  Behind  some  of  the
rocks  in  it  David  could  easily  lie  hid,  and  yet  see  Jonathan  descending  from  the  city  above."
(  Jamieson. )

Ver.  12.  "  O  Lord  God  of  Israel."  This  is  not  a  prayer,  but  an  invocation — a  calling  upon
God  to  witness  to  his  sincerity.

Vers.  14,  15.  "  Of  the  various  explanations  of  this  difficult  passage  only  the  two  following
are  worthy  of  consideration.  The  one  understands  a,  question  to  the  end  of  ver.  14,  'And  wilt
thou  not,  if  I  yet  live,  wilt  thou  not  show  me  the  kindness  of  the  Lord,  that  I  die  not  ?  *
Ver.  15  cannot,  then,  be  a  part  of  the  question,  but  must  be  taken  as  the  subjoined  expression
of  confident  expectation  :  *  And  thou  wilt  not  cut  off  thy  kindness,*  etc.  But  this  sudden,
abrupt  transition  to  a  question,  and  then,  again,  to  direct  discourse,  is  strange,  even  if  these
vacillations  and  diversities  of  discourse  are  referred  to  Jonathan's  excited  feeling.  The  second
explanation,  which  is  the  preferable  one,  introduces  a  wish  by  a  slight  change  in  the  pointing  of
the  Hebrew.  Jonathan,  having  invoked  a  blessing  on  David,  thus  expresses  his  wish  for  himself:
And  wouldst  thou,  if  I  still  live,  wouldst  thou  show  me  the  kindness  of  God,  and  not,  if  I  die,
not  cut  off  thy  love  from  my  house  for  ever  ? '  So  Syr.,  Arab.,  Maur.,  Then.,  Ew.,  KeiL"
{Erdmann.)    Jonathan's  request  was  fulfilled.     See  2  Sam.,  chap.  ix.

Ver.  16.  **  So  Jonathan  made  a  covenant,"  etc.,  "  namely,  by  bringing  David  to  promise
kindness  to  his  family  for  ever."  (Keil.)  The  second  clause  is  generally  understood  to  be  a
continuation  of  the  historian's  words,  and  is  rendered,  "  And  Jehovah  required  it  at  the  hand
of  David's  enemies,"  i.e.,  Jonathan's  words  were  fulfilled.     So  Keil  and  others.

Ver.  17.  This  verse  is  generally  understood  to  mean  that  Jonathan  made  his  love  to  David
the  grormd  of  his  request,  or  ( Trans,  of  Lance's  Commentary)  "his  love  to  David  made  him
anxious  to  maintain  friendly  relations  between  their  houses."

Ver.  19.  "  When  t^  ou  hast  stayed  three  days*  "  Either  with  your  family  in  Bethlehem,
or  wherever  you  find  it  convenient."  (Jamieson.)  "Come  down  quickly."  The  Hebrew
here  is  literally  "  Come  down  very,"  but  our  authorised  rendering  seems  to  accord  better  with  the
sense  than  any  other.  Erdmann  remarks  that  it  might  be  necessary  to  insist  on  a  quick  descent
to  the  place  of  meeting  on  account  of  the  danger  of  being  observed.  "  "When  the  business,"
etc.  Literally  "  on  the  day  of  the  decd.^*  Gesenius  refers  it  to  the  attempt  of  Saul  to  kill  David,
narrated  in  chap,  xix  2,  and  Jonathan's  effort  to  save  his  friend  on  that  occasion.  Erdmann
coincides  in  this  view.  "  Ezel."  The  stone  of  departure.  (Gesenius.)  "So  called,  probably,
from  its  being  the  spot  whence  David  separated  from  his  friend."    (Jamieson.)

Ver.  23.  "  The  matter."  Rather,  "  the  xvord.''''  "  This  refers  not  merely  to  the  sign  agreed
upon,  but  to  the  whole  matter,  including  the  renewal  of  the  bond  of  friendship."  (KeiL)
•'  Behold,  the  Lord  is  between,"  etc.     See  Gen.  xxxi.  49.

Ver.  24.     **  So  David  hid  himself,"  etc.     Some  expositors  think  that  David  went  first  to
Bethlehem,  others  that  the  visit  to  his  father's  house  was  entirely  a  fabrication,     *•  Meat,"  i.e.,
ood  of  any  kind.

Ver.  25.     "  A  seat  by  the  wall."     "  The  left-hand  corner  at  the  upper  end  of  a  room  was,
and  still  is,  in  the  East,  the  most  honourable  place.     The  person  seated  there  has  his  left  arm
210


CHAP.  XX.  ffOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   SAMTTEL.


confined  by  the  wall  but  his  rij^'ht  hand  is  at  full  lil)erty.  From  Abner's  position  next  the  king,
and  David  s  seat  being  left  empty,  it  would  seem  that  a  state  eti(|uette  was  observed  at  the
royal  table,  each  of  the  courtiers  and  ministers  having'  ])laces  assigned  to  them  according  to  their
respective  gradations  of  rank."  (JamiexonJ.  "Jonathan  arose."  Kiel  understands  here  that
when  Abner  entered  Jonathan  rose  from  his  seat  by  the  side  of  Saul  and  gave  up  his  place  to
Abner,  others  that  he  aros )  and  seated  Abner  on  the  other  side  of  Saul  in  David's  vacant  place
in  order  that  the  latter  might  not  be  missed.  This  latter  suggestion  seems,  however,  to  be
contradicted  by  the  last  clause  of  the  verse  which  states  that  David's  place  was  empty.

Ver.  27.  "  The  son  of  Jesse."  "  Saul  seems  to  hate  the  name  of  David  and  in  contempt
he  calls  him  the  son  of  Jesse."     {Wordsworth}.

Ver.  30.  "  Thou  son  of  the  perverse  rebellious  woman."  "  This  is  a  striking  oriental
form  of  abuse,  the  counterpart  of  that  ancient  benediction  (Luke  xi.  27).  Saul  was  not  angry
with  his  wife  ;  it  was  the  son  only  upon  whom  he  meant  by  this  style  of  address  to  discharge
his  resentment ;  and  the  principle  upon  which  it  is  founded  seems  to  be  that  of  a  genuine  filial
instinct ;  it  is  a  more  inexpiable  offence  to  hear  the  name  and  character  of  a  parent  traduced
than  any  personal  reproach.  In  every  Eastern  family  the  great  object  of  devotion  and  respect
is  the  mother.  There  are  familiar  expressions  which  show  this  very  strongly.  'Pull  my  father's
beard,  but  do  not  speak  ill  of  my  mother,'  'Strike  me,  but  do  not  curse  my  mother."*  {Jamieson).

Ver.  31.  "  He  shall  surely  die."     Literally,  "he  is  a  son  of  death."

Ver.  34.  "  He  was  grieved  for  David."  "  The  generosity  of  Jonathan's  character  is  very
apparent.  He  did  not  resent  the  injury  and  insult  offered  to  himself  so  much  as  the  wrong  done
to  his  friend."     {Biblical  Commentary).

Ver.  38.  "  While  in  vers.  20-22,  this  procedure  is  summarily  described  of  three  arrows,  the
account  here  is  of  one.  .  .  .  We  must  suppose  that  Jonathan  did  so  with  each  of  the  three
arrows."     (Erdmann),

Ver.  40.  "Artillery,"  i.e.,  his  bows  and  arrows.  "The  French  word  artillerie  signifies
archery,  and  the  term  is  still  used  in  England,  in  the  designation  of  the  "  artillery  company  of
London,"  the  association  of  archers,  though  they  have  long  disused  bows  and  arrows."
(Ja7nieson).

Ver.  41.  "  A  place  toward  the  south."  "  An  unintelligible  description  ;  one  expects  a
repetition  of  the  description  of  David's  hiding-place  in  verse  19.  The  word  rendered  toward  is
the  same  as  that  lendered  »ear  iji  ver.  19,  but  instead  of  the  stone  Ezel  following,  there  comes
the  inexplicable  "  the  south,"  {negeb)  a  word  with  which  the  adverb  near  is  never  joined,  as  it
never  is  either  with  any  other  denoting  a  quarter  of  the  heavens.  The  Sept.  in  both  places
read  aryab  or  eryab,  a  word  meaning  a  heap  of  stones.  If  this  is  the  true  reading,  David's
hiding-place  was  either  a  natural  cavernous  rock  which  was  called  aryab,  or  some  ruin  of  an
ancient  building,  equally  suited  for  a  hiding  place."     {Biblical  Commentary),


main  homilettcs  of  the  chapter,

Saul's   Displeasure   against   Jonathan.

Here  we  have —

I.  A  strengthening  of  friendship  between  David  and  Jonathan.    Two  things
contributed  to  this.     1.  An  act  of  confidence  on  the  part  of  David.     It  shows
how  entire  was  the  trust  that  David  had  in   his  friend's  fidelity,  tliat  in  his
extremity  at  this  time  he  sought  his  presence  and  help.     That  he  was  to  dis-
place Jonathan  on  the  throne  of  Israel  was  probably  a  fact  which  both  of  them
now  recognised,  and  in  a  friendship  less  perfect  it  would  have  had  the  effect  of
making  David  somewhat  doubtful  of  the  continuance  of  Jonathan's  regard.  But
he  shows  that  he  has  fully  gauged   the  exceeding  love  which  left  no  room  in
Jonathan's  heart  for  any  feeling  of  rivalry,  and  the  very  fact  that  he  contided
so  entirely  in  his  friend  formed  a  new  link  in  the  already  strong  chain  which
bound  them  together.     Where  there  is  a  sincere  and  unselfish  love  at  the  foun-
dation of  friendship,  acts  of  mutual   confidence  increase  and  strengthen   it.
2.  A  new  act  of  self-denial  on  the  part  of  Jonathan.     Jonathan  had  before
ventured  to  plead  with  his  father  on  l)ehalf  of  David.     He  had  done  more — he
had  fearlessly  asserted  his  innocence,  and  now,  although  his  method  of  procedure

211


nOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  i.


was  different,  it  was  evidently  regarded  by  Saul  as  a  declaration  of  friendship
for  David.  And  in  proportion  as  Saul's  wratli  grew  more  fixed,  so  was  the
danger  proportionately  increased  of  those  who  showed  him  any  favour.  How
dangerous  it  now  was  for  Jonathan  to  defend  him  was  apparent  when  his  father's
anger  went  so  far  as  an  attempt  to  slay  him.  But  this  new  exposure  to  danger
for  his  friend's  sake  would  only  cement  the  friendship  on  both  sides.  It  is
almost  certain  that  David  came  to  hear  of  Jonathan's  narrow  escape  from  Saul's
javelin,  and  the  thought  that  the  risk  had  been  run  on  his  account  must  have
deepened  his  grateful  love.  But  the  same  risk  and  danger  would  have  had  a
deepening  influence  also  on  Jonathan's  love  for  David,  for  every  act  of  self-
denial  for  another  gives  us  a  new  interest  in  him,  and  makes  our  affection  for
him  stronger  than  before.  It  is  like  new  wood  placed  upon  a  fire — it  gives  new
life  to  that  which  is  already  burning,  and  increases  the  volume  of  the  whole.

II.  A  widening  of  the  distance  between  Saul  and  his  son.  Jonathan's  filial
respect  for  his  father  is  as  bright  a  feature  in  his  character  as  his  devotion  to  his
friend.  It  manifests  itself  in  his  temperate  remonstrance  with  his  father  when
himself  condemned  to  death  by  his  unreasoning  rashness  (see  chap.  xiv.  43),  and
when  the  same  blind  passion  was  prompting  Saul  to  seek  the  life  of  David.  In
this  chapter  also  it  is  displayed  in  his  unwillingness  to  believe  David's  assertion
that  Saul  still  sought  his  life.  But  the  infatuation  which  had  made  a  breach
between  the  monarch  and  probably  his  most  courageous  and  faithful  subject,
now  creates  one  between  the  father  and  his  most  noble  and  dutiful  son.  It  may
well  be  supposed  that  the  relations  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  were  never,  after  the
occurrence  here  related,  what  they  were  before,  and  Saul's  conduct  is  a  striking
illustration  of  the  infatuation  of  wilful  sin,  which  leads  a  man  to  cut  off  from
his  life  one  by  one  his  truest  sources  of  blessing  and  happiness.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Friendship  among  the  se7'va7its  of  God.  know    it.      If,    notwithstanding,    the

Three  questions :  1.  Wherein  is  friend-  thought   that   there   is   "but   a  step

ship    among     the     servants    of    God  between   us  and  death "  fills  us  also

grounded  ? — It  is  a  covenant   in  the  with  horror,  as  too  frequently  ha})pens,

Lord.      2.  What  perils  threaten  even  how  shall    we  venture   to    blame  the

friendship  among  the  servants  of  God?  man  living  under  the  Old  Testament

— Thatone friend, overlookinganother's  economy,  if  we  hear  him,  in  his  trying

sin,  may  do  for  his  sake  what  is  not  situation,    express   the    wish    that   he

riglit  in  tlie  sight  of  God.     3.  What  might   escape   at   least   that  form   of

blessing  rests  u])on  friendship  among  death  which  was  intended  for  him  ?  —

the  servants  of  God? — It  teaches  un-  Krummacher.
envying  joy  with  them  that  rejoice,

and  faithful  mourning  and  forbearing         Ver.  4.  Here  friendship  goes  too  far.

with  them  that  mourn. — J.  Disselhoff.  It  is  wrong  to  promise  unconditional

compliance  with  the  wishes  of  another.

Ver.  3.    It  must  not   be   forgotten  He  may  err  in  judgment  and  ask  what

that,    to    believers    under     the    Old  is  unwise,  or  may  be  misled  by  interest

Covenant   especially.   Death   was   not  and  ask  what  is  wrong.     And,  besides,

yet  the  angel  with  the  palm-branch  of  every  man  is  solemnly  bound  to  exer-

peace,  as  we  to  whom  ''  life  and  im-  else  his  own  judgment  and  conscience

mortality  are  brought  to  light  by  the  in  the  direction  of  his  own  conduct.

Gospel "  know  it,  or  at  least  ought  to  Jonathan  was  led  by  thfe  promise  to
212


CHAP.  XX.


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


tell  a  fjilscl)oo(l  wliicli  liis  fiitlior  de-
tected, and  was  thereby  the  more  en-
raged.— I  vans,  of  Langes  Coinmen-
tari).

Ver.  8.  So  long  as  one  sees  before
him  ordinary  ways  and  means  of  es-
caping from  danger,  he  should  make
use  of  them,  and  not  look  for  extraor-
dinary help  from  God,  that  he  may
not  tempt  God. — Starke.

Ver.  17.  True  love  delights  in  re-
ceiving and  giving  repeated  and  strong
assurances.  This  is  very  different  from
the  repeated  assurance  which  distrust


demands. — Trans,
mentary.


of    Langes   Com-


Ver.  41.  Strong  men  weeping.  1.
Great  occasion  for  it  here.  {a).  Per-
sonal separation,  {b).  Mad  injustice
of  tiieir  father,  (c).  Prospect  of  a
bitter  conflict.  2.  Not  unbecoming
when  on  sufficient  occasion.  Com-
patible {a).  With  manly  courage  and
spirit.  David  and  Jonathan  were  cer-
tainly brave.  (6).  With  great  self-
control  (ch.  xvii.  29  ;  xviii.  14  ;  xx.
32).  {c).  With  living  trust  in  Provi-
dence (ver.  22). — Trans,  of  Langes
Commentarg,


CHAPTER  XXI.


CRrriCAL  AND  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1.  The  position  of  Nob  cannot  now  be  determined,
only  from  Isa.  x.  28-33,  we  gather  that  it  was  on  the  road  northward  between  Jerusalem  and
Anathotli.  Porter  identihes  its  site  with  "  a  low  peaked  dell  a  little  to  the  right  of  the  northern
road  and  opposite  to  Shdjat.  He  found  there  several  cisterns  hewn  in  the  rock,  large  building
stones,  and  various  other  imlications  of  an  ancient  town."  ( Sniitlis  Biblical  Dictionary).  Others
place  it  at  the  modern  village  of  El-Isawiyeli,  about  a  mile  north-west  of  Jerusalem,  but  the
objection  to  tliis  spot  is  that  the  words  of  Isaiah  imply  that  it  was  nearer  the  city  of  Jerusalem.
"  Ahimelech."  Most  likely  the  same  as  the  Ahiah  mentioned  in  chap.  xiv.  3  (see  notes  on
that  chapter).  In  Mark  ii.  26  Abiathar  the  son  of  Ahimelech  (see  chap.  xxii.  20)  is  said  to  be
the  person  who  was  iiigh-priest  at  the  time  when  David  ate  the  shew-bread.  Professor  Hackett
in  the  Biblical  Dictionary  shews  that  in  2  Sam.  viii,  17,  and  in  1  Chron.  xxiv.  3,  6,  31,
the  two  names  are  confused  with  each  other,  and  the  same  is  probably  the  case  in  Mark.
It  is  possible  that  father  and  son  might  have  borne  both  names,  or,  as  Hackett  suggests,
"  Abiathar  might  have  been  the  person  who  persuaded  his  father  to  allow  him  to  have  the  shew-
bread,  and  it  is  probable  the  loaves  were  Abiatliar's  (Lev.  xxiv.  9),  and  given  by  him  with  his
own  hand  to  David,"  "  Why  art  thou  alone  ?  "  As  the  son-in-law  of  the  king  it  would  be
unusual  for  David  to  travel  unattended.  *'  We  must  presiime  that  Ahimelech  knew  of  Saul's
hatred  to  David  but  not  of  the  most  recent  occurrences."  [Erdmann).

Ver.  2.  '*  I  have  appointed  my  servants."  "  This  was  probably  true.  It  is  scarcely
credible  that  a  person  of  David's  rauk  and  consideration  should  not  have  secured  some  atten-
dants and  followers Moreover,  our  Lord  (Mark  ii.  26)  distinctly  asserts  that  the  priest

gave  the  shew-bread  to  Daviil,  and  '  them  that  were  with  him.'  "     ( Bcblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  4.  *'  There  is  no  common  bread."     "  Common  as  opposed  to  holy.     Thus  the  English

word  is  also  used  in  Acts  x.  14,  15,  28 It  gives  an  idea  of  the  depressed  condition  of  tiie

priesthood  at  this  time  that  Ahimelech  should  have  had  no  bread  at  luind  except  the  shew-bread."
{Biblical  Comvicritary.)  "If  the  young  men,"  etc.  "Thereby  the  principle  of  the  legal  pre-
scription of  Levitical  pm-ity  was  satis^ed,  inasmuch  as  the  circumstances — the  lack  of  ordinary
bread,  the  haste  which  the  alleged  important  commission  of  the  king  required,  the  duty  of  aiding
in  the  execution  as  much  as  possible,  and  the  ]>ious  behaviour  of  David  in  inquiring  the  Lord's
will  at  the  holy  jilace — seemed  to  justify  a  deviation  from  the  rule  concerning  the  eating  of  the
shew-bread."     ( Enlmanu.)

Ver.  6.  "The  vessels  of  the  young  men  are  holy,"  etc.     This  phrase  to  the  end  of  tha

verse  is  very  obscure,  ami  has  bem  variously  rendereil  and  understood.  Some  understand  the
Word  vessel  in  the  New  Testament  sense  of  body,  ttthers  of  the  clothes  of  the  men,  or  other
articles  connected  with  their  peri-on.  It  is  generally  admitted  that  the  word  translated  in  a
manner  should  be  rendered  way.    The  principal  rtuderings  of  the  clause  are  as  follows  : — "  When

213


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  SA MVEL.  book  i.


/  came  out  the  young  men's  things  were  holy  (Levitically  clean)  ;  and  if  it  is  an  unholy  way,  it
becomes  even  holy  through  the  instrument,  i.e.,  on  the  supposition  of  the  important  royal  mission,
upon  which  David  pretended  to  be  sent ;  the  way  is  sanctified  before  God.  when  he,  his  chosen
servant,  is  the  instrument."  This  is  Keil's  rendering.  Erdrnann's  reading  is  similar,  under-
standing the  uiihoJy  way,  however,  to  refer  not  to  David's  enterprise,  but  to  the  act  of  ceremonial
illegality  of  eating  the  shew-bread,  and  the  word  translated  vessel  at  the  end  of  the  verse  to  refer
t.>  Ahimelech.  '^  And  though  this  is  the  manner  of  common  bread  [i.e.,  thow^h.  it  is  treating  it
like  common  bread  to  give  it  to  me),  yet  surely  to-day  the  bread  in  the  vessel  is  holy,  {i.e.,  there  is
fresh  shew-bread  baked  and  put  on  the  table  iu  place  of  what  you  give  us  ;  the  day  being  Friday,
as  is  indicated  in  the  verse  following/'     {Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  6.  *'  That  was  taken  from  before  the  Lord,"  etc.  "  It  seems  to  be  mentioned  as  an
alleviating  fact,  that  the  bread  had  already  been  taken  away  from  before  the  Lord,  having
remained  on  the  table  in  the  holy  place  seven  days  according  to  the  law."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  7.  "Detained  before  the  Lord,"  i.e.,  at  the  tabernacle,  either  for  the  purpose  of
purification,  or  as  a  proselyte  received  by  circumcision,  or  in  the  fulfilment  of  a  vow,  or  for
suspected  leprosy.  "  It  is  not  impossible  that  Doeg  may  have  been  in  custody  or  in  sanctuary
for  some  crime,"  ( Bi'ilical  Dictionary,  j  "  Edomlts,  the  chiefest  of  the  herdsmen."  "  He
had  probably  come  over  with  Saul  in  his  wars  with  Edom."  ( Ewald.)  "  On  account  of  the
importance  which  still  attached  in  Saul's  time  to  the  possession  of  herds  as  a  family  power,
Doeg's  position  must  have  been  an  important  one."     (Erdmann. )

Ver.  8.  "  I  have  neither  brought  my  sword."  That  in  such  pressing  danger  David
fled  without  arms,  is  to  be  explained  on  the  ground  that  "  he  feared  he  would  be  recognised,  or
as  an  armed  man  concealing  himself  be  suspected  (Clericus),  or  that  he  fled  in  great  haste."
(Erdmann. )

Ver.  9.  '*  In  a  cloth  behind  the  ephod."  *'  A  sign  of  the  great  value  attached  to  this
dedicatory  offering."  (Keil.J  "There  is  none  like  that."  "Not  only  for  its  size  and
superior  temper,  but  for  its  being  a  pledge  of  the  Divine  favour  to  him,  and  a  constant  stimulus
to  his  faith."     (Jamieson.)

Ver.  10.  **  Fled  that  day."  "  He  only  stayed  in  Nob  long  enough  to  get  arms  and  food  .  ,
We  do  not  know  whether  he  had  already  determined  to  go  into  Philistia,  or  now  first  suddenly
resolved  upon  it,  possi))ly  in  consequence  of  Doeg's  unexpected  appearance."  ( Eramann.)
Achish,  or  Abimelech.  (See  Psa.  xxxiv.)  This  last  was  the  standing  title  of  the  Philistian  princes
of  Gath.  (See  Gen.  xxvi,  1.)  "As  some  years  had  passed  since  the  defeat  of  Goliath,  and  the
conqueror  of  Goliath  was  probably  n^t  known  personally  to  many  of  the  Philistines,  he  might
hope  that  he  should  not  be  recognised  in  Gath,  and  that  he  might  receive  a  welcome  there  as  a
fugitive  who  had  been  driven  away  by  Saul,  the  leading  foe  of  the  Philistines."     (KieL)

Ver.  11.     "  The  King,"  i.e.,  the  hero.     They  could  not  have  known  of  his  Divine  election.

Ver.  15.  "Shall  this  fellow  come?"  etc.  "Whether  Achish  had  David  taken  over  the
border,  or  at  any  rate  out  of  the  town  ;  or  whether  David  went  away  of  his  own  accord;  or
whether  he  was  taken  away  by  his  servants,  is  not  mentioned,  as  being  of  no  importance  to  the
narrative."  (Keil.J  Note — "From  this  naiTative  it  a}>pears  that  David  and  the  Philistines
understood  one  another's  language,  as  on  other  grotmds  it  is  probable  that  the  Hebrew  and
Philistine  dialects  were  nearly  identical."     (Tr.  oj  Lanye's  Commentary.)


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  CHAPTER.

David's  Flight  to  Gath.

I.  Men  who  have  courageously  encountered  a  formidable  enemy  may  be
found  fleeing  before  a  meaner  foe.  In  military  history  we  have  records  of
panics  wliicii  have  overtaken  armies  which  had  hitherto  been  renowned  for
bravery,  and  for  these  temporary  failures  of  courage  no  adequate  reason  can  be
assigned.  The  fact  is  there,  but  it  does  not  admit  of  full  explanation.  And  it
is  the  same  sometimes  with  men  individually,  whether  they  are  fighting  against
foes  of  flesh  and  Wood  or  against  less  tangible  but  not  less  real  opponents.  The
heart  of  the  bravest  man  may  sometimes  give  way,  and  give  way  when  there
does  not  seem  so  much  real  danger  as  at  a  former  ])eriod  when  he  showed  no
sign  of  quailing.  In  the  case  both  of  the  many  and  the  one  the  panic  may  be
214


CHAP.  XXL  EOMILETIC  COM  ME  NT  A  R  Y :     SA  Ml! EL.


partly  attributable  to  an  overwronoht  state  of  the  iniaLan.ilioii,  winch  mngiiifies
the  present  peril  and  adds  to  the  real  toes  "  an  army  (d  phantoms,  vast  and°waii."
Or  It  may  arise  from  the  struggle  having  last>jd  long,  and  then  the  spirit  which
could  rise  to  a  high   pitch  of  enthusiasm  for  a  single   encounter  hnds  itself
une(pia|  to  the  task  of  sustaining  itself  at  so  high  a  level  of  heroism.     These
suggestions  apply  to  cases  in  which  the  courage  disi>layed  appears  to  have  a
purely  human  origin,  and  to  those  when  the  great  deeds  of  valour  have  been
performed  by  the  inspiration  of  strong  faith  in  an  unseen  God.     And  they  are
quite  as  applicable  to  the  warfare  of  every-day  life  as  they  are  to  that  which  is
"  with  confused  noise  and  garments  rolled  in  blood."     For  the  world  is  full  of
men  and  women  fighting  every  day  of  their  lives  against  adverse  circumstances
outside  of  them  or  against  sin  within  them,  with  a  tortitude  that  gives  them  full
title  to  be  ranked  among  the  heroes  of  their  age.    But  whoever  are  the  warriors,
and  in  whatever  kind  of  warfare  they  may  be  engaged,  they  do  sometimes  flee
from  a  lesser  foe  after  having  con(piered  a  greater.     It  was  so  with  David  now.
The  sword  of  Saul  was  more  terrible  to  him  than  the  sword  of  Goliath  had  been*.
He  had  fearlessly  looked  in  the  face  of  the  giant,  but  though  he  had  been  helped
to  slay  this  most  formidable  foe,  and  all  the  trust  that  he  then  placed  in  the
arm  of  Jehovah  had  been  fully  justitie.l,  he  is  now  seen  fleeing  before  the  man
who  had  quailed  before  the  Philistiue,  and  faith  seems  now  to  have  no  abode  in
his  soul,  not  so  much  as  a  re.sting-place  for  the  sole  of  her  foot.    Without  doubt
he  permitted   his  mind  to  dwell  upon   Saul's  malignity,  and  upon   the  many
agents  whom  he  could  employ  against  him,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  signal  token
ot  Divine  help  which  had  been  afforded  him  \\\  the  valley  of  Elah,  and  the
assurance  of  Divine  protection  of  which  the  anointing  oil   had  been 'a  pledge.
And  thus  ne.L;lecting  by  meditation   upon   God's  past  goodness  to  stay  liimself
upon  the  Divine  arm  in  the  present,  he   becomes  a  prey  to  his  over-wrought
imagination,  and  presents  himself  before  us  in  his  full  manhood  in  a  much  Fess
admirable  li-ht  than  in  the  days  of  his  youth.     We  must  not  forget,  however,
that  stronger  faith  in  God  is  required  to  sustain  a  man  in  a  lo'iig- con  tinned
trial  or  in  a  succession  of  trials  than  to  carry  him  victoriously  tlirough  one
which,  although  it  makes  a  great  rtemand  upon  him  for  the  moment,  fs  soon
over.     And  this  helps  us  to  understand  David's  failure  at  this  time,  and  to
sympathise  with  his  frailty  though  we  may  not  excuse  his  sin.

IL  The  fear  of  losing  a  lesser  life  may  lead  men  to  imperil  a  life  which  is
greater.     There  is  a  life  of  the  body  and  there  is  a  condition  of  character  which
IS  moral  life,  and  though  it  is  natural  and  right  for  men  to  be  careful  in  a
measure  of  the  former,  yet  a  desire  to  preserve  it  should  never  lead  to  the
sacrifice  of  the  latter.     The  sword  of  the  most  bitter  enemy  is  less  to  be  dreaded
tha^)  the  sword  of  ccmscience.     The  most  terrible  bodily  death   is  infinitely
preferable  to  wounding  the  moral  sense  and  perhaps  doing  permanent  injury  to
the  character.    The  retaining  of  bodily  life  is  by  no  means  necessary  to  a  blessed
existence,  hut  existence  can  nowhere  be  blessed  if  there  is  not  integrity  of  soul.
Hence  our  Lord  warns  His  disciples  not  to  be  over-solicitous  concerning  the  life
otthe   body,  lest  bv  so  doing  they  endanger  a  higher  and  more  precTous  life.
J^orivhosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it ;  bat  ivhosoever  ivill  lose  his  life
/or  my  sake,  the  same  shall  save  it:'  (Luke  ix.  '24).      Here  loss  is  gain  and  gain
IS  loss.     Nevertheless,  so  strong  is  the  love  of  bodily  life,  and  so  instinctively  do
men  shrink  from  a  violent  death,  that  even  good  and  true  men  have  not  seldcun
yielded  lor  a  time  to  the  temptation  to  endanger  the  most  i)recious  for  that
which  is  coin])aralively  w(u-thless.     David  did  so  when  he  lied  to  Ahimelech  in
order  to  obtain    from   him  the  succour  that  he  needed,  and  when   he  feigned
madness  in  the  presence  of  the  Philistine  nobles.     In  both  cases  he  inflicted
upon  himself  far  more  grievous  and  real  injury  than  any  that  Saul  could  have

215


ffOM I LETTO  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,  fiooK  f.


dealt  out  to  him.  His  enemy's  sword  could  only  have  lulled  his  body,  but  bis
sm  damaged  bis  soul.  No  weapon  forged  by  man  can  take  away  peace  of  mind,
but  willul  transgression  must  fill  a  man  with  remorse  if  his  conscience  is  at  all
awake,  and  a  man  like  David  could  iiardly  fail  to  reproach  himself  afterwards
for  having  thus  wandered  from  the  patb  of  rectitude.  But  even  if  be  did  not
do  so,  tbe  luirm  done  to  bis  moral  nature  was  the  same  and  even  greater,  inas-
much as  unrepented  sin  deadens  the  conscience  and  makes  furtber  tran-ression
more  easy.  Wben  a  man  is  suffering  acute  pain  from  a  dangerous  wound  bis
life  may  be  in  great  danger,  but  if  wbile  ibe  wound  is  unbealrd  there  is  no  pain,
tbe  surgeon  has  good  reason  to  fear  tbat  mortification  lias  set  in  and  tbat  all
hope  of  life  is  past.  So  in  the  moral  nature  that  wound  wbicb  is  followed  by
no  pain  is  tbe  most  fatal.

III.  A  Divine  law  which  is  limited  and  temporary  must  yield  to  one  which
is  universal  and  permanei  t.  Our  Lord  Himself  justifies  tbe  action  of  David
and  Abimelecb  in  tbe  matter  of  the  sliew-bread  (Mark  ii.  25),  on  tbe  principle
tbat  the  happiness  and  well-being  of  m.^n  is  the  end  of  all  God's  laws  concerning
them,  and  that  therefore  if  a  merely  ceremonial  law  interferes  witb  that  it
must  be  for  the  time  set  aside.  Possil»ly  David's  words  in  verse  5  may  also  have
some  such  meaning.  (See  Critical  Notes.)  All  tbe  ceremonial  laws  given  to
Israel  by  God  had  for  their  end  tbe  elevation  of  a  nation  of  idolatrous  slaves  to
a  higber  moral  level  by  creating  witbin  tbem  a  sense  of  tbeir  own  sinfulness
and  of  God's  infinite  majesty  and  purity,  and  their  own  bigbest  interests  were
bound  up  in  tbe  strict  observance  of  tbem.  But  just  because  tbe  end  of  all
was  man's  good,  so  it  followed  that  if  in  a  particular  case  tbat  good  was  only  to
be  obtained  by  a  temporary  violation  of  the  ceremonial  observance,  that
violation  was  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God.  Abimelecb  showed  that  he
understood  tbe  real  intention  of  tbe  law  of  the  sbew-bread  when  he  broke  it
to  satisfy  the  needs  of  hungry  men,  for  he  acted  on  tbe  principle  tbat  the
ceremonial  laws  were  made  for  man  and  not  man  for  the  ceremonial  laws,  and
thus  in  a  measure  anticipated  Our  Saviour's  exposition  of  them.  Although  all
ti.e  details  connected  with  the  Jewish  worship  were  symbols  of  unchangeable
truths  and  of  immutable  moral  laws,  they  were  symbols  only,  and  therefore  tbe
laws  of  their  observance  were  at  all  times  subordinate  to  those  universal  and
changeless  moral  laws  which  never  clash  witb  each  other,  and  the  violation  of
which  no  exigency  can  ever  justify.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Mingling  of  good  and  evil  in  David's         Ver.  2.  Who  can  look  to  pass  this

character.      (1)  'riiough  a  brave  and  pi]<;rimage   without   infirmities,   when

devout   man,    be   falls   into    grievous  David  dissembleth  to  Abimelecb  ?     A

falsehood    and    degrading    deception,  weak  man's  rules  may  be  better  than

through   cowardly    fear   and    lack    of  tbe   best  man's  actions.     God  lets  us

trust   in    God.       A    warning    to    us.  see  some  blemishes  in  His  holiest  ser-

Compare  Neb.  xiii.  26;  1  Cor.  x.  i2.  vants,    that   we   may  neither   be   too

(2)  Though    so    weak   and   erring,  he  highly  conceited  of  flesh  and  blood,  nor

remembers  God's  help  in  tbe  past  (ver.  too  much  dejected  wben  we  have  been

9),  cries  to  Him  now  (Psa.  xxxiv.  6),  miscarried   into   sin.      Hitherto   hath

rejoices  in  Him  anew  {ibid,  ver.    1),  David  gone  upright ;  now  be  begins  to

and  resolves  henceforth  to  speak  truth  halt  with  the  priest  of  God,  and  under

and  to  do  good  {ibid,  vers.  13,  14)  ;  pretence  of  Saul's  employment,  draws

compare  Psa.  Ivi.  13.     An  encourage-  that    favour    from   Ahimelech  which

ment  to  us  ;  compare  1  John  ii.  1.  shall  afterwards  cost  him  his  head.
216


CHAP.  XXI.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


What  could  Aliimelech  have  tliono^lit
too  dear  for  God's  anointed,  God's
cliampion  ?  It  is  not  like  but  that,  if
David  had  sincerely  oi)ened  himself  to
the  priest  as  he  had  done  to  the  pro-
phet, Ahimelech  would  have  seconded
Samuel  in  some  secret  and  safe  succour
of  so  unjust  a  distress,  whereas  he  is
now,  by  a  false  colour,  led  to  that
kindness  which  shall  be  prejudicial  to
his  life.  Extremities  of  evil  are  com-
monly inconsiderate  ;  either  for  that
we  have  not  leisure  to  our  thoughts,  or
perhaps  (so  we  may  be  perj)lexed)  not
thounlits  to  our  leisure.  What  would
David  have  given  afterwards  to  have
redeemed  this  oversight  l—Bp.  IJall.

There  is  nothing  will  keep  a  man
from  sin  more  surely  than  confidence
in  God  ;  but  despair  is  the  most
dangerous  condition  into  which  one
can  fall.^  While  faith  and  hope  last,
there  will  be  energy,  and  watchfulness,
and  purity  ;  but  with  despair  come
recklessness  and  folly.  We  are  saved
by  hope  ;  but  when  we  despair  of  God's
help,  we  run  into  extrenjes  of  wicked-
ness. When  a  merchant  is  in  difficulties,
there  is  no  great  danger  so  long  as  he
believes  that  he  can  retrieve  himself,
and  hopes  that  he  will  come  out  all
right.  But  when  he  falls  into  despair,
he  becomes  regardless  alike  of  God  or
man,  and  runs  headlong  into  practices
of  which  in  other  circumstances  he
would  never  have  thought,  tliereby
destroying  alike  his  character  and
future.— i;r.  W.  M,  Taylor.

Vers.  10-15.  David  had  lost  his  faith
in  Jehovah,  and  put  his  confidence  in
Achish,  and  nothing  more  salutary
could  have  happened  to  him  than
such  a  reception  as  that  which  w^as
given  to  him  at  Gath.  When  a  youth
is  going  on  a  wrong  course  the  best
thing  that  can  befall  him  is  failure  and
disgrace,  and  the  worst  thing  that  can
come  to  him  is  what  the  world  calls
success.  If  he  succeed  tlie  probabihty
is  that  he  will  go  farther  astray  than
ever;  but  if  he  fail  there  is  h()i)e  that
he  will  return  to  the  ri^ht  path,  and
seek  alliance  with  Jehovah.  This  last
was  the  case  with  David  in  the  instance


before  us,  if  at  least  we  may  judge  of
the  effect  which  his  experience  produced
upon   him,  from   the  songs  which   he
wrote  with  special  reference  to  the  in-
cidents at  which  we  have  been  looking.
The  titles  of  the  84th  and  56th  Psalms
connect  these  odes  with  David's  resi-
dence in  Gath  ;  and  though  there  are
few  acknowledgments  of  sin  in  them,
yet  they  indicate  that,  as  the  result
and  outcome  of  his  trials,  he  was  led  to
look  away  from  all  eartldy  helpers  to
the   Lord    alone.      "This    poor   man
cried,  and  the  Lord   heard  him  and
saved  him   out   of  all   his  troubles."
Perhaps,  too,  there  may  be  an  iujplied
condemnation  of  the  course  which  he
had  been  pursuing,  and  a  virtual  reso-
lution to  abstain  from  it  in  the  future,
when  he  says,  "  What  man  is  he  that
desireth  life,   and  loveth  many  days,
that   he   may  see  good?     Keep   thy
tongue  from   evil,   and   thy  lips  from
speaking  guile.     Depart  from  evil,  and
do  good )  seek  peace,  and  pursue  it."
And  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  doubt
that,  from  his  own  penitence  for  the
sins  of  which  he  had  just  been  guilty,
and  his  own  experience  of  God's  favour
when  he  returned  to  him,  he  was  led
to  sing,  "  The  L(U'd  is  nigh  unto  them
that  are  of  a  broken  heart ;  and  saveth
such  as  be  of  a  contrite  spirit.     Many
are  the   afflictions   of  the  righteous  :
but  the  Lord   delivereth  him  out  of
them  all."

It  may  appear  strange  that  all  this
should    have    happened    immediately
after  his  pleasant  and  profitable  sojourn
with  Samuel  at  the  school  of  the  pro-
phets.    But  perhaps  the  very  contrast
between  his  lia[)piness  at  Naioth  and
his  continual  suspense  at  Gibeah,  where
he  felt  himself  to  be  like  one  standing
on  the  very  edge  of  an  active  volcano,
may  help  to  account  for  his  depression.
In  any  case  it  is  by  no  means  an  un-
common experience  that  times  of  great
spiritual  elevati(m  are  f  »ll()wed  by  pe-
riods of  deep  dejection.     Every  height
has  its  hoUow;  and  as  Peter  went  from
the  first  Jjord's  iSn})per  to  his  denial  of
the  Master,  David   went  from  iXaioth
to  ]\ob,  and  from  Nob  to  Gath.     It  is
a  suggestive  incident,   bidding  us  be

211


IIOMILETTO  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,


BOOK  I.


always  on  our  guard  against  tempta-
tion, and  then,  most  of  all,  when  we
have  been  enjoying  the  most  exalted
privileges. — Dr.  W.  M.  Taylor.

It  is  always  a  dangerous  course  wlien
believers  betake  themselves  in  their
necessities  to  the  children  of  tJtis  world
for  protection  and  help.  Without
taking  into  account  that  too  easily  in
the  circle  of  such  benefactors  and
deliverers  do  they  lose  their  balance,
and,  making  court  to  them  for  their
favour,  yield  to  the  temptation  to
disown  their  faith,  and  in  word  and
conduct  to  place  themselves  on  an
equality  with  the  world,  such  a  step
gives  to  the  latter  occasion  secretly  to
triumph,  and  they  who  are  so  willing
to  be  called  "  the  chosen,"  when  dis-
tress comes  upon  them  know  not  how


to  be  contented  with  their  God  and
his  help  alone,  but  gladly  permit  them-
selves to  seek  for  aid  from  those  to
whom  they  do  not  even  concede  the
name  of  brethren.  Never  will  they
succeed  in  truly  reconciling  the  enemies
of  their  faith  by  means  of  affected  ac-
commodation to  them  and  their  forms
of  life  ;  for,  according  to  the  well-
known  testimony  of  God,  the  enmity
between  those  who  are  "after  the
flesh,"  and  those  who  are  **  after  the
spirit,"  is  a /^^6?  principle,  and  though
covered  with  many  a  fair  garland  of
courtesy  and  politeness,  yet,  even  when
universal  love  bears  the  sceptre  in  the
heart  of  God's  children,  that  enmity
cannot  be  abolished  till  regenerating
grace  has  made  of  the  "  twai?i  one,'' —
Krummacher.


CHAPTER  XXII.


Critical  and  Expository  Notes.—  Ver.  1.  "  AduHam."     "  The  site  of  Adullam  (mentioned

m  Josh.  XV.  35,  etc)  has  not  yet  been  identified,  but  from  the  mention  of  it  in  the  above  and
other  passages  in  proximity  \\  ith  other  known  towns,  it  i.^  likely  that  it  was  near  Deir  I'ubban,
five  or  six  miles  north  of  EleutlieropoUs.  .  .  The  limestone  cliffs  of  the  whole  of  that  locality
are  pierced  with  extensive  excavations  (llobinson  ii.  2'4,  f>l-53),  some  one  of  which  was  possibly
the  refuge  of  David."  (Abridged  from  Smith's  Biblical  Dictionary).  The  general  opinion  of
commentators  and  travellers  agree  with  this,  but  Thomson  supports  the  ancient  view  that  it  was
near  the  village  Khureitein,  five  miles  south-east  of  liethleliem,  and  thus  describes  his  visit  to
that  spot  :  "  Leaving  our  horse  in  charge  of  wild  Arabs,  and  taking  one  for  a  guide,  we  started
for  the  cave,  having  a  fearful  gorge  below,  gigantic  cliffs  above,  and  a  path  winding  along  a
shelf  of  the  rock,  narrow  enough  to  make  the  nervous  among  us  shudder.  At  length  from  a
great  rock  hanging  on  the  edge  of  thie  shelf,  we  sprang  by  a  long  leap  into  a  low  window  wliich
opened  into  the  perpendicular  face  of  the  cliff.  We  were  then  within  the  hold  of  David,  and
creeping  half  doubled  through  a  narrow  crevice  for  a  few  rods,  we  stood  beneath  the  dark  vault
of  the  first  grand  chamber  of  this  mysterious  and  o]>pressive  cavern.  Our  whole  collection  of
lights  did  little  more  than  make  the  damp  darkness  visible.  After  groping  about  as  long  as  we
had  time  to  spare,  we  returned  to  the  light  of  day,  fully  convinced  that,  with  David  and  hia
lion-hearted  followers  inside,  all  the  strength  of  Israel  under  Saul  could  not  have  forced  an
entrance — would  not  even  have  attempted  it."

Ver.  2.  "  Everyone  that  was  discontented,"  etc.  Literally,  bitter  in  soul,  as  in  chap.  i.  10
**  The  comparison  of  this  body  with  Catiline's  followers  (Clericus,  Thenius)  supposes  that  David's
retinue  was  of  a  similar  character  with  Catiline's,  a  riotous,  adventure-seeking  rabble.  But
there  is  nothing  in  the  narrative  to  support  such  a  supposition,  and  David's  position  as  to  them,

and  to  Saul,  is  decidedly  against  it Hengsteiibetg  (on  Psa.  vii.  10)  rightly  remarks

David's  war  with  Saul  was  one  not  of  individuals,  but  of  parties  ;  the  wicked  espoused  Saul's
side,  the  righteous  David's  ;  compare  the  much  misunderstood  passage  1  Sam.  xxii.  2.  The
distressed  persons  were  those  who  were  persecuted  under  Saul's  government  on  account  of  their
love  for  David.  The  debtors  were  such  as,  under  Saul's  arbitrary  misrule,  were  oj^pressed  by
their  creditors,  and  received  from  the  government  no  protection  against  the  violation  of  the  law
of  loan  and  interest  (Exod.  xxii.  25,  Lev.  xxv.  36,  Dent,  xxiii.  19).  They  were  '  bitter  of  soui,'
not  as  '  desirous  of  new  things,'  not  as  merely  dissatisfied  with  their  present  condition  (Clericus),
but  *  as  those  whose  anxiety  of  soul  over  the  ever  worsening  condition  of  the  kingdom  under
Saul,  drove  them  to  a  leader  from  whom  for  the  future  they  might  hope  for  better  things.*

218


CHAP.  XXII.  IIOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  SAMTTEL.


(Ew.)  Coinp.  Jeplithah's  faf,dtive  life  and  retinue  of  "poor  empty  persons."  {Erdmann.)
*'  Four  hundred  men."  *' A  list  of  the  piincipal  among  them  is  given  in  1  Chron.  xii.  8-18  ;
and  some  of  their  acts  are  described  in  2  Sam.  xxiii.  13-22."     (  Wordsworth.)

Ver.  3.  "  Mizpeh  of  Moab."  "  Mizpeh  ;  literally  a  watch-tower  or  mountain  height  com-
manding a  vtry  extensive  prospect.  Here  it  is  probably  a  proper  name  belonging  to  a  mountain
fastness  on  the  high  land  which  bounded  the  Arboth  Moab  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Dead  Sea,
most  likely  on  the  mountains  of  Abariui  or  Pisgah  (Deut.  xxxiv.  1),  and  wliich  could  easily  be
reached  from  the  country  round  Bethlehem  by  crossing  the  Jordan  near  the  point  where  it
entered  the  Dead  Sea  "  {Kell.)  "Perhaps  he  resorted  to  Moab  for  refuge  because  his  ances-
tress Ruth  was  from  that  country."     (  Wordsworth.)

Ver.  4.  "  The  hold."  This  fastness  could  not  have  been  the  cave  of  Adullam,  because  in
the  next  verse  we  read  that  David  was  commanded  to  return  to  Judah,  but  it  was  probably  the
same  refuge  to  which  David  had  taken  his  parents.

Ver.  5.  "Gad."  It  must  remain  a  matter  for  conjecture  whether  Gad  had  gone  with  David
to  Adullam,  or  whether  he  now  comes  to  him  for  the  first  time  with  a  special  Divine  message.
**  Get  thee  into  the  laud  of  Judah."  Keil  thinks  that  "David  was  not  to  seek  for  refuge
outside  the  land  ;  not  only  that  he  might  not  be  estranged  from  his  fatherland  and  the  people
of  Israel,  which  would  have  been  opposed  to  his  calling  to  be  King  of  Israel,  but  also  that  he
might  learn  to  trust  entirely  in  the  Lord  as  his  only  refuge  and  fortress."  But  Erdmann  set  s
the  reason  for  this  direction  in  the  fact  that  "  the  Philistines  were  now  making  plundering
incursions  into  the  south  of  Judah,  help  and  protection  against  them  was  needed,  and  this  David
and  his  valiant  band  could  give,  and  thus  fulfil  part  of  the  theocratic  calling  in  respect  of  wliich
the  distracted,  arbitrary  rule  of  Saul  was  now  impotent."  "  Forest  of  Hareth."  An  unknown
region.  Josephus  calls  it  the  city  of  Hareth.  It  was  probably  a  woody  district  in  the  mountains
of  Judah.

Ver.  6.  "  Abode  under  a  tree,"  etc.  Rather,  was  sitting  under  a  tamarisk  tree  upon  the
hei(/ht.  (For  Ramah  see  Notes  on  chap,  i,  1.)  "Oriental  princes  frequently  sit  with  tlieir  court
under  some  shady  canopy  in  the  open  air.  A  spear  was  the  early  sceptre,  as  we  are  informed  by
Ju  tin  .  .  .  Saul's  spear  might  be  distinguished  from  common  spears  by  its  length  as  well  as  its
decorations  ;  and  that  this  was  likely  to  be  the  case  may  be  inferred  from  the  relics  of  Egypt  and
Assyria."  {Jamieson.)  "  All  his  servants."  "  It  was  therefore  a  full  assembly  of  the
personnel  of  the  cwurt."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  7.  "  Ye  Benjamites."  "  Showing  how  isolated  the  tribes  still  were,  and  how,  for  the
most  part,  Saul  was  surrounded  by  his  own  tribesmen  only."  (Biblical  Comvie7it'iry.)  "  In
Saul's  words  there  is  the  latent  sense  :  Will  he,  of  another  tribe,  reward  you,  as  I  have  done  to
you,  my  fellow  tribesmen  ?  Will  he  not  ratner  favour  his  tribesmen,  the  men  of  Judah  ?  Will
it  not  be  to  your  interest  to  stand  on  my  side  ? "     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  9.  "  Which  was  set  over  the  servants,"  etc.  As  this  does  not  agree  with  the  position
assigned  to  Doeg  in  the  former  chapter,  some  render  the  clause  "And  he  stood  with  the  servants,"
etc.     Keil  thinks  that  Doeg  had  been  invested  with  the  office  of  marshal  of  the  court.

Ver.  10.     *'He  inquired  of  the  Lord,"  etc.     Some  think  this  was  untrue,  but  the  words  of

Ahimelech  in  verse  15  seem  to  admit  the  fact.

Ver.  14.  "  Faithful,"  rather  proved,  tried.  "  Goeth  at  thy  bidding."  Probably  this  should
be  read,  *'  Has  access  to  thy  private  audience."  The  Hebrew  word  is  so  rendered  elsewhere.
(See  2  Sam.  xxiii.  23,  and  1  Chron.  xi.  25.)

Ver.  15.  "  Did  I  then  begin,"  etc.  The  most  obvious  meaning  of  these  words  is,  "Was  it
the  first  time  that  I  had  inquired  of  the  Lord  for  David  concerning  enterprises  with  which  the
king  had  entrusted  him  ?"  So  Keil,  Erdmann,  and  others.  Some  however  {Blh.  ConDfteutary,  etc.)
understand  Ahimelech  to  deny  having  done  such  a  thing  on  the  ground  that  this  was  a  duty
which  he  owed  to  the  king  only.

Ver.  17.  "Footmen,"  i.e.,  runners,  halberdiers,

Ver.  18.  "A  linen  ephod."  "The  allusion  to  the  priestly  clothing,  like  the  repetition  of
the  expression,  '  priests  of  Jehovah^  serves  to  bring  out  into  its  true  light  the  crime  of  the  blood-
thirsty Saul  and  his  executioner  Doeg."     {Keil.)

Ver.  20.  "Ablathar."  How  he  esca  ed  can  only  be  conjectured.  Bishop  Patrick  stiggesta
that  he  was  left  in  charge  of  the  sanctuary  when  the  other  priests  obeyed  Saul's  summons.

Note. — "During  tin's  first  period  of  David's  life  as  outlaw,  several  incidents
occurred  which  are  Dot  mentioned  in  this  narrative.     We  learn  from  2  Sam.

219


nOMlLETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMtlEL  book  1.


xxiii.  13  tliat  three  of  his  chief  heroes  came  to  him  in  the  cave  of  Adullam,  one
of  whom  was  his  nephew  Abishai,  afterwards  a  famous  general.  A  little  after
(1  Chron.  xi.  15-19;  occurred  that  noble  act  of  h)ving  daring,  wlien  the  "  three
mightiest"  broke  tliiou^h  the  Philistine  army  and  brought  their  leader  water
from  the  well  of  Bethlehem,  for  which  he  longed.  This  was  while  he  was  in
the  *'  hold,"  and  at  this  time  apparently  came  to  him  the  stout  band  of  lion-
faced,  gazelle-footed  Gadites,  who  swam  the  Jordan  when  its  banks  overflowed,
and  scattered  all  enemies  before  them  (1  Chron.  xii.  8-15),  and  an  enthusiastic
body  of  men  of  Judah  and  Benjamit),  for  whose  friendship  Aniasai  answered
in  a  passionate  speech  (1  Chron.  xii.  ^-l^).— (Trans,  of  Lang es  Commentary).

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAQRAPH.—  Verm  1—4.
The  Cave  of  Adullam.

I.  Oppressive  rule  transforms  good  subjects  into  outlaws.  When  those  who
are  in  authority  disregard  those  universal  laws  of  righteousness  and  benehcence
which  are  equally  binding  upon  every  man,  they  must  not  expect  obedience  from
those  under  their  rule  ;  their  injustice  will  create  a  lawlessness  in  the  governed
classes  which,  although  it  is  rebellion  against  them,  may  be  obedience  to  a  higher
and  juster  rule.  David  had  been  a  loyal  servant  to  King  Saul,  and  had  given
full  proof  of  true  patriotism,  but  the  o[)pression  which  he  had  undergone,  and
the  danger  to  which  he  was  exposed  through  Saul's  injustice  compelled  him  to
take  up  the  position  of  an  outlaw.  He  had  once  and  again  gone  forth  at  the
peril  of  his  own  life  to  defend  the  throne  of  the  king,  but  justice  to  himself  now
demanded  that  he  should  take  up  arms  in  self-defence.  It  is  most  probable
also  that  those  who  joined  him  were  men  who  had  likewise  been  transformed  by
oppression  from  obedient  subjects  into  rebels.  Before  we  condemn  men  for
resistance  to  authority  we  must  know  what  is  the  nature  of  the  authority  they
resist.

II.  Common  suffering  is  a  strong  bond  of  union.  There  are  many  influences
which  tend  to  bridge  over  the  differences  which  divide  men — differences  of  birth,
of  education,  of  character  and  disposition — but  perhaps  there  is  nothing  which
does  this  so  effectually  as  a  common  calamity,  if  a  vessel  is  in  danger  of
sinking,  the  passengers  who  have  hitherto  been  separated  by  distinctions  of  rank
recognise  their  common  brotheihood  and  forget  all  minor  differences  in  their
common  danger.  W  hen  a  city  is  besieged  the  noble  in  the  palace  and  the
artisan  in  the  workshop  exchange  words  and  looks  of  sympathy  as  they  recognise
their  common  peril,  in  the  band  which  gathered  to  David  in  the  cave  of
Adullam  there  were  doubtless  men  who  would  have  never  united  in  any  common
action  if  they  had  not  been  suffering  from  a  con)mon  calamity — the  misrule  of
Saul.  Separated  from  each  other  and  from  David  by  every  variety  of  circum-
stance and  dispositiv)n,  they  were  one  with  him  and  with  each  other  in
indignation  against  oppression,  and  in  determination  to  defend  their  lives  and
liberties.  Times  of  prosperity  are  not  favourable  to  the  promotion  of  union
among  men,  but  times  of  adversity  often  bring  them  very  near  together.

III.  Relationship  to  great  men  has  its  penalties  as  well  as  its  advantages.  It

was  doubtless  a  proud  day  for  Jesse  when  he  became  aware  that  he  was  to  be  the
head  of  a  royal  house,  but  the  immediate  consequences  were  not  pleasant.  If  he
had  not  been  related  to  the  chosen  king  of  Israel,  he  would  doubtless  have  been
permitted  to  remain  unmolested  in  his  quiet  village  home,  but  because  he  was
the  father  of  David  he  was  obliged  to  flee  from  his  native  land.  When  the
storm  is  n broad,  the  highest  trees  are  most  exjJosed  to  its  "violence,  and  if  they
220


OftAl*.  xxit.  SOMI  lETIC  COMMENTARY:  ^AMtJEt.


fiill  tliey  brinsj  down  with  them  those  which  stand  near.  So,  in  times  of  national
disquiitude,  the  most  prominent  men  are  most  in  datv-;er,  and  those  who  are
related  to  them  are  endangered  by  their  rehitionship.  There  are,  therefore,
drawbacks  as  well  as  advantages  in  belonging  to  tlie  fandly  of  a  great  man.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

If  it  henoved  a  ruler  to  know  the  and  insignificant,  and  for  the  most  part

heart   of    his   subjects — their   sorrow,  contemptible  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,

their   wrongs,   their   criuies — to  know  and,inore()ver, reviled  by  bitter  enemies.

them   and  to  sympathise  with  them,  .  .  .  The  dwelling-place  of  the  exalted

this  was  surely  as  precious  a  part  of  Son  of  David  upon  earth  is  meanwhile

his  schooling  as   the   solitude  of  his  as  unlike  to  a  splendid  roval  palace  as

boyhood,  or  as  any  intercourse  he  had  was   David's   cave   of  Adullam   to    a

with  easy  men   who  had  never  faced  proud     lordly    mansion.       The     true

the  misery  of  the  world,  and  had  never  Church   is  as  yet  concealed  under  a

had  any  motive  to   quarrel  with   its  dark  covering,  yea,  as  with  a  widow's

laws.     He  was  now  among  the  lowest  veil.     Her  Lord  is  not  yet  present  to

of  those  whom   he  would  afterwards  the  sight.     Her  people  walk  by  faith

have  to  govern — not  hearing  at  a  dis-  and  not  by  sight,  and  know  that  they

tance  of  their  doings  and  sufferings,  are  surrounded  by  the  powers  of  dark-

but  partaking  in  them  livingly,  realis-  ness,  against  whom    their  weapons  of

ing  the  influences  which  were  disposing  war  are  to  be  laid  aside  neither  by  day

them  to  evil.     And  here  he  was  ac-  nor  by  night.     A  world  stands  in  arms

quiring  more  real  reverence   for   law  against  the  decided  followers   of  the

and  order,  more  understanding  of  their  crucified  King  of  Glory,  and  they  are

nature,  than  those  can  ever  arrive  at  dealt  with   as  very  outlaws,  on  v/hom

who  have  never  known   the  need   of  anyone  may  lay  his  hands.     But  even

them  from  the  want  of  them.     He  was  to  them  also  the  time  comes  when,  as

bringing   his   wild   followers   under   a  our  fugitive  must  exchange  the  cave

loving  discipline  and  government  which  of  Adullam  for  the  gorgeims  palace  on

they  had  never  experienced  ;   he  was  Mount  Zion,  even  so  for  those  who  are

teaching  them  to  confess  a  law  which  not  offended  at  the  "form  of  a  servant"

no   tyrant   had   created,   no    anarchy  assumed  by  the  Divine  Son  of  David,

could  set  aside. — Maurice.  and  at  the  lowly  aspect  of  His  kingdom

Who  can  fail  to  recognise  in  David,  upon   earth,  the    simple   dwelling    in

as  he  here  appears,  a  remarkable  type  which  the  Church  now  gathers  together

of  the  Divine  Prince  of  Peace,  who  at  a  shall  become  transformed  into  a  glorious

future  age  would  go   forth  from    his  buildifig,irradiated  with  heavenlysplen-

house.     As  David  then  stood,  so  Christ,  dour,  whose  dojne  shall  tower  upward

his  illustrious  descendant,  "according  into   the   ever-opened  heavens,  wdiose

to  the  flesh,"  now  stands  almost  every-  pillars  shall  encompass  the  whole  earth,

where,   misapprehended  by  the  world  and  whose  inhabitants,  after  they  have

where  not  hated  and  persecuted,  and  waited  ])atiently  with  their  Head  here

only  surrounded  by  a  little  band  of  below,  shall  reign  with  Him  for  ever. —

devoted  followers,  comparatively  small  Krummacher,

MAIN  HOMtLETICS  OF  VERSE  5.

The  Prophet  Gad.

I.  God  does  not  leave  His  servants  in  their  times  of  danger  and  perplexity
without  help  and  guidance.  "  Unto  the  iq)ri(jht  there  ariseth  light  in  the
darkness"  (Psa.  cxii.  4),  and  light  often  comes  to  men  as  it  now  came  to  David

221


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  i.


by  means  of  a  man  of  God.  For  the  very  presence  of  sucli  a  man  is  lii^lit  in
the  cloudy  and  dark  day.  It  will  enconra.i^e  the  dejected  sonl  to  hold  fast
its  confidence  in  God,  and  will  exercise  a  restraining  influence  when  we  are
exposed  to  the  temptntion  to  turn  aside  from  the  path  of  rii^dit  which  ^reat  trial
sometimes  brings.  David  had  yielded  to  such  a  temptation  once,  but  Gad's
companionship  would  be  likely  to  prevent  another  such  fall.  The  presence  of
a  prophet  of  God  in  the  hold  was  a  token  of  God's  good  will,  and  as  such  was  a
light  in  the  darkness.  And  the  counsel  of  sucli  a  man  at  such  a  time  is  a  light
which  not  only  cheers,  but  guides.  God  can  guide  His  servants,  as  He  can  ieod
them,  in  many  different  ways.  As  He  has  fed  them  direct  from  heaven,  so  He
has  guided  them  by  a  voice  direct  from  the  invisible  world.  He  has  fed  men
by  the  instrumentality  of  angels,  and  He  has  guided  them  by  such  an  instru-
mentalicy.  But  He  more  generally  helps  man  by  man,  and  this  was  the  method
He  employed  here.

II.  When  God's  children  have  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  ligrht  that  thus
ariseth  is  a  light  from  heaven,  it  is  wise  to  follow  its  guidance  implicitly.  It  is
the  first  duty  of  a  benighted  traveller  to  make  sure  whether  the  light  upon  his
path  is  an  ignis-fatuus  luring  him  to  destruction,  or  the  lamp  of  a  friend  point-
ing to  the  highway  of  safety.  When  he  has  made  sure  that  it  is  the  latter,  lie
will  only  reveal  his  foolishness  if  he  neglects  to  walk  in  the  way  which  it  reveals
as  the  right  one.  Gad  was  doubtless  well  known  to  David  ;  he  was  in  all
probability  one  of  that  company  at  Ramali  who  had  grown  up  around  Samuel,
and  upon  whom  the  prophetic  spirit  had  descended  in  such  a  manner  as  to
qualify  him  to  give  counsel  and  guidance  to  the  elect  king  of  Israel,  and  David,
in  his  unhesitating  obedience  to  his  word,  acts  with  true  humility  and  wisdom.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

It  is  to  be  noted  here  as  an  interest-  to  ask  counsel  of  the  Lord,  the  inquiry

ing  fact,  that  in  the  liold  of  Adullam  was  made  through  the  priest,  and  the,

and  in  the  wilderness  of  Judali  we  have,  answer  was   given   by  the  IJrim   and

side   by  side,   representatives   of    the  Thummim.     But  now  the  prophet,  as

oracular  and  the  prophetical  methods  a  standing  official  personage,  comes  into

of  the  communication  of  the  will  of  prominence,  and  the  mind  of  God  begins

God  to  men  ;  and  that,  in  the  life  of  to  be  made  known  through  his  human

David,  as  a  whole,  we  have  the  era  of  individuality,   and   not   through   any

the  transition  from  the  one  to  the  other,  such  visible  media  as  those  which  were

Up  to  this  time  the  priest  had  been  the  connected  with  the  priestly  breastplate,
most  important  personage  in  the  nation,  In  the  hold  and  in  the  wilderness,

and  the  onlyrecognised channel  through  Davidreceiveddivinedirectionsthrough

which  God   indicated   his  will  to  the  both  channels,  but  gradually,  even  in

people.     True,  there   had   been  great  his  life,  the  breastplate  oracle  disappears

outstanding  prophets,  like  Moses  and  or  falls  into  desuetude  ;  and  from  the

Samuel ;  but  the  former  was  an  exception  reign  of  Solomon  downward  we  have  no

to  all  rules  as  being  the  leader  of  the  mention  made  of  its  employment  in  the

Exodus;  and  the  latter,  from  his  train-  Jewish  annals.     In   the  same  gradual

ing  under  Eli,  was  as  much  a  priest  as  manner   the  prophet  waxes   into  pre-

he  was  a  prophet.     True,  again,  in  the  eminence.  Gad  and  Nathan  preparing

time  of  the  Judges  there  was  Deborah,  the  w  y  for  Elijah  and  Elisha,  and  these,

the  prophetess ;  but  she  was  raised  up  in  their   turn,  giving   place  to  Isaiah

in  connection  with  a  particular  crisis  in  and  Jeremiah,  who  were  succeeded,  in

the  history  of  her  people.     The  general  the  days  of  the  exile,  by  Ezekiel  and

system,  however,  was,  that  when  the  Daniel ;  and  in  the  era  of  the  Restora-

head  of  the  nation,  whether  judge  or  tion  byPIaggai,Zechariah,and  Malachi.
king,  wished,  at  any  special  emergency,         Now,  if  we  think  out  this  subject  a
222


OHAr.ixn.  nOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


el,  e  of  Davi.i  a  a,..t,Mct  forward  «tep     people  fn.n,  the  cl.ildhoo     of  walk  n^
was   taken   m   t  le  e(  ucation   of    the      hv  si..|,f-    tn  n.„  ,.i    ■        r.     ™'"'^"'K
people  of  God.  fro,n  the  first  r.dilnent:     t^^' ^J^ZtT]^^^:^
of  external  sy.nUolisu,,  on  toward  that     iiiaidiood  which  ^Ik,  co  tin,?     ,  K
system   of   spiritual   simplicity  under     faith.-/;r     IK  J/   yLXr  ^  ^

which  we  now  live  in  the  Gospel  dis-         The  Lord' wiilneverMrnLnv^v;,
pensation.         .  The  call  for  faith  was     who  is  heartily  disposed  to  1^^^
.ncrease.1  when  tlie  Urim  and  Thmn-     affairs  of  his  fiove~t  in  I  i    nt
.nil,  ceased    and  the  prophets   came     to  be  at  anyCe  X"e  1^    wi  hout

Z^'T^f"'^  s"a.ne,s.vins«radually  some  such  Gad  amongfis  'oilier    or

fewer  and  fewer  specific  directions  as  to  officers  around  liim-some  man  wlm

particular  matters,  and  more  and  more  because  he  seeks  not  his  own  nnUeSe

proclaimino;  sreat  spiritual  principles,  most    incorruptible    fideiitv   iWth    1  !

And  now  there  is    more  than  ever,  a  allegiance,   a.fd   by  who  e  m^n      Z

demaud  for  faith,  when  under  the  New  Lord,  as  often  as  the  o  t  of"     ti

aestament  economy,  the  way  into  the  is  like  to  slip,  will  by  his  vvar    m  s  3

holiest  IS  made  mandest  to  every  be-  his  counsel  s^  ow  to  him  the  Tift  n  d

l.ever,_and  the  answers  to  the  soul's  safe  way.     Woe  to  theTand  on  tielrp' ,

inquiries  are  given  not  by  any  objective  of  whose  throne  there  is  not  found  ?n

oracle  but  by  the  Christia  n's  study  of  the  circle  of  dignilierofficers  surround

GodsWord,asthatisintoriireled  bvthe  in.^  the  rnjpr    „t  iL 'f         surround-

providences  that  are  with.lit  hin,,'ail^'  be^rs  not  ,  i}'  if  h  s  prof^^'orbula?

wandering^  in  the  wilderne^  Ld  see^  ^^t     me '    '  ^J^^  ^Z  f(  t

he  priest  Ahjnthar  on  his  right  hand,  divine  word   and   comS£t   i ii  o

feel  th  ^  P«'i'''«^G=^;'  o"  Ii^s  left,  we  the  balance-scales  of  the  goverlent^

feel  that  we  are  standing  on  ,Hie  of  the  Krummacher.  government !

great  iauding-places  of  that  stairway

MAIN  UOMILETWS  OP  TUB  PAJtAOJtAPM.-rerse,  6-23.

The  Slaughter  of  the  Priests.

into  foes  ^""rf  ''  f  "^^i""  through  which  the  best  friends  are  transformed
into  foes.     It  matters  n,)t  how  beautifnl  the  human  face-if  looked  at  through

.  ,^^:  -J^^  J'^T\  purposes  will  not  fail  for  lack  of  instruments.    Jealousy  is


223


nOMJLETW  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


BOOK  I.


III.  The  noble  and  ignoble  deeds  of  men  unite  to  fulfil  the  Divi  le  purposes.
The  use  man  makes  of  bis  freedom  of  action  seals  him  as  a  saint  or  a  sinner  ;
but  whetiier  his  acts  be  godlike  or  devilish,  they  are  used  by  God  to  carry  out
His  pnrposes.  Often  God's  creatures  are  the  conscious  executors  of  His  will,
and  knowingly  and  intentionally  carry  out  His  desii]jns,  but  sometimes  even
His  own  servants  are  unconscious  instruments  of  His  plans.  The  terrible
incident  with  which  this  chapter  closes  was  a  fulhlinent  of  the  sentence  long
ago  passed  upon  the  house  of  Eli  (chap.  ii.  31),  but  the  Divine  sentence  was
fulfilled  by  the  united  action  of  men  whose  lives  were  governed  by  very  different
natives,  and  whose  deeds  r<inged  from  the  lowest  depth  of  moral  depravity  to
high  moral  heroism.  The  inhumanity  and  devilishness  of  Doeg  and  Saul,  the
lying  of  David,  and  the  courageous  boldness  of  Ahimelech,  united  all  un-
consciously to  themselves  to  fulfil  the  purpose  of  God.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Pirtures  of  human  nature. — 1.  A
man  in  authority,  whose  misfortunes,
though  due  to  his  own  fault,  make
him  suspicious  and  cruelly  unjust
(ver.  8-16).  2.  A  basely  ambitious
man,  who  seeks  to  build  himself  up  by
ruining  others  (ver.  9,  10,  18,  comp.
Psa.  lii.).  3.  An  innocent  man  ac-
cused, who  defends  himself  both  with
forcible  argument  (ver,  14)  and  with
dignified  denial  (ver.  15).  4.  A  good,
but  erring  man,  who  mournfully  sees
that  his  sin  has  brought  destruction  on
his  friends. — Transr.  of  Langes  Com-
mentary.

Vers.  18,  19.  Behold  in  this  history
how  impossible  it  is  to  arrest  the  con-
sequences of  our  evil  actions.  David
lied  to  Ahimelech,  probably  thinking
lot  only  to  secure  his  own  safety  there-
by, but  also  to  keep  the  priest  from
being  involved  with  him  in  the  dis-
pleasure of  Saul.  But  mark  wliat
ensued.  Eighty-five  priests,  together
with  all  the  inhabitants  of  Nob,  "  both
men  and  women,  children  and  suck-
lings," were  put  to  death  for  this  sin
of  which  he,  and  not  they,  had  been
guilty.  I  have  no  doubt  that  when
David  heard  of  all  this  he  would
willingly  have  given  all  that  he  had,  ay,
even  his  hopes  of  one  day  sitting  on  the
throne  of  Israel,  if  he  could  have  re-
called the  evil  which  he  had  spoken,
and  undone  its  dismal  co!isequences.
But  it  was  impossible.  The  lie  had
gone  forth  from  him  ;  and  having  done
224


so,  it  was  no  longer  under  his  control,
but  would  go  on  producing  its  diabolical
fruits.  And  so  it  is  yet.  We  cannot
arrest  the  consequences  of  the  evil
which  we  do.  Whether  we  will  or  not,
it  will  continue  to  work  on.  We  may,
indeed,  repent  of  our  sin ;  we  may  even,
through  the  grace  of  God  for  Christ's
sake,  have  the  assurance  that  we  are
forgiven  for  it;  but  the  sin  itself  will
go  on  working  its  deadly  results.  You
may  as  soon  think  of  staying  an  ava-
lanche midway  in  its  descent  from  the
Alpine  ridge,  and  so  saving  the  village
in  the  valley  from  destruction,  or  of
sto})ping  the  bullet  midway  in  its  flight
from  the  musket  to  the  heart  of  him
who  will  be  destroyed  by  it,  as  think  of
arresting  the  consequences  of  the  evil
which  you  once  have  done. — Dr.  W.
M.   Tai/lor.

0  the  wise  and  deep  judgments  of
the  Almighty  !  God  owed  a  revenge
to  the  house  of  Eli,  and  now,  by  the
delation  of  Doeg,  He  takes  occasion  to
pay  it.  It  was  just  in  God,  which  in
Doeg  was  most  unjust.  Saul's  cruelty,
and  the  treachery  of  Doeg,  do  not  lose
one  dram  of  their  guilt  by  the  counsel
of  God  ;  neither  doth  the  holy  counsel
of  God  gather  any  blemish  by  their
wickedness.  If  it  had  pleased  God  to
inflict  death  upon  them  sooner,  without
any  pretence  of  occasion,  His  justire
had  been  clear  from  all  imputations;
now,  if  Saul  and  Doeg  be  instead  of  a
pestilence  or  fever,  who  can  cavil? — •
Bp.  IlalL


CHAP.  XKiil.  UOMILETW  COM  MEN  TAR  Y :  SA  .1/  UEL.


CIIArTER  XXIII.

Crtttcal  akd  Exroc^TTouY  NoTKS, — Ver,  1.  "Keil'h."  A  city  of  Jndah,  mentioned  in
Josh.  XV.  44,  and  iiL utiHed  by  Lieut.  Vati  de  VeMe  with  a  site  containing  ruins,  and  now  called
Kila,  a  few  miles  irom  lle'.n-on.     (See  iSuiith's  Biblical  Dictionary.)

Ver.  2.  *'  Inquired  of  tlie  Lord."  (See  verse  6.)  "  Save  Keilah."  These  words  are  a
promise  of  victory.

Ver.  3.  "We  be  P'fraid,"  etc.  "As  persecuted  fugitives,  we  are  always  in  danger  from
Saul,  and  now  shall  we  march  a-ainst  the  riiiiistine  ranks  ?  "     ( Erdmann.)

Ver.  6.  "This  verse  is  a  supplementary  historical  explanation  relative  to  the  possilDilifcy  of  the
inquiry  of  th;^-  Lord  in  ver^e'^  2  ;iud  3,  which  was  not  possible  without  the  lii-li  i)riestly  cape  or
e]>hod.  to  which  was  attacln^d  the  ITrini  and  Thnmmim."  (  Enim mn. )  '"I'he  words  are  not  to
be  understood  as  siornifyin^-  that  Abiatliar  did  not  come  to  Uavid  ii  1  he  was  in  Xeilah,  but  that,
when  he  fled  after  Lavid  (chap.  xxii.  20),  he  met  with  him  as  he  wis  already  preparing  for  the
march  to  Keilah,  and  immediately  proceeded  with  hira  thither."     (  Keil.)

Vei's.  9-12.  "It  is  evident  from  these  verses  that  when  the  will  of  God  was  sought  through
the  Urim  and  Tlmnuniui,  llio  person  making  tlie  inquiry  placed  the  matter  before  God  in  prayer,
and  received  an  answer—  but  always  to  one  ]>articular  question.  For  when  David  had  asked  the
two  questions  i^iven  in  verse  11,  he  received  the  answer  to  the  second  question  only,  and  had  to
ask  the  first  again."     (Kcil.)

Ver.  13.   "They  went  whithersoever,"   etc.     Lit.   "They  wandered  about  where  they

wandered  about,  i.e.,  wherever  they  could  go  without  danger."     (Keil.)

Ver.  14.  "Wlldernes'  of  Ziph."  "A  mountainous  and  sequestered  region  was  generally
called  a  wilderness,  and  took  its  name  from  some  large  town  in  the  district.  Two  miles  south-
east of  Hebron,  and  in  the  midst  of  a  level  plain,  is  Tell  Ziph,  an  isolated  and  conical  hillock,
about  one  hundred  feet  high,  proliably  the  acropulis  (  Vayi  de  Vclde),  or  the  ruins  (Robinson)  of
the  ancient  city  of  Ziph,  from  which  the  sui rounding  wilderness  was  c.dled.  It  seems,  anciently,
to  have  byen  covered  by  an  extensive  wood."  fJamieaou.)  "Every  day."  "  Either  as  long
as  he  lived  "  (Keil J,  or  "continually."    (Erdmann. J

Ver.  16.  " Strengt^jiened  his  hand,"  etc.  "By  the  recollection  of  the  Divine  promises,
and  of  their  mutual  covenant."     (Jamieson.)

Ver.  17.  "Saul,  my  father,  knowcth."  "The  assurance  of  this  must  have  forced  itself
involuntarily  upon  the  mind  of  Saul,  both  from  his  own  rejection,  as  foretold  by  Samuel,  and
also  from  the  marvellous  success  of  David  in  all  his  undertakings."     (Keil.)

Ver.  19.  "Then  came  up  the  Ziphites."  "  There  is  no  spot  from  which  you  can  obtain  a
better  view  of  David's  wandering  backwards  and  forwards  in  tlie  desert  than  from  the  hill  of
Ziph,  which  affords  a  true  panorania.  'J'he  Ziphites  could  see  David  atul  his  men  movint^  to  and
fro  in  the  mountains  of  the  desert  of  Ziph,  and  could  also  perceive  how  he  showed  himself  in
the  distance  upon  the  hill  Hachilah,  on  the  south  side  of  Ziph  (which  lies  to  the  right  by  the
desert),  whereupon  they  sent  as  quickly  as  possible  to  Saul,  and  betrayed  to  him  the  hiding-
place  of  his  enemy."     (  Van  de  Velde.)

Ver.  24.  "  Desert  of  Maon,  in  the  plain,  on  the  south  of  Jeshimon."     Rather,  "  On

the  south  or  rig] it  hand  of  the  desert.  This  lay  farther  south.  The  name  still  exists  -Main,
tight  miles  south  east  of  Hebron."  (Erdmann.)  "The  mountain  plateau  seems  here  to  end.
It  is  true  the  summit  ridge  of  the  southern  hills  runs  out  a  loug  way  farther  towards  the  south-
west, but  towards  the  south-east  the  ground  sinks  more  and  m 're  down  to  a  table-land  of  a
lower  level,  wldch  is  called  the  plain  to  the  right  hand  of  the  wilderness."  (  Van  de  Velde.)
"On  descendiug  the  hills,  south-east  of  Maon,  a  wide  prospect  opened  up  before  us  over  the
country  towards  the  Dead  Sea,  and  on  the  south.  The  extensive  tract  we  now  overlooked  had
much  of  the  general  character  of  that  around  Beersheba,  with  which,  indeed,  it  is  connected,
stretching  off  in  that  direction  arouiul  the  south-western  termination  of  the  long  ridge  which  we
were  now  crossiug.  This  tr;ict  has  apparently  a  lower  level  than  the  enclosed  plain  behind  us
around  Carmel."     (Dr.  Robinson.)

Ver.  25.  "  Into  a  rock."  Eather  "  He  descended  the  rock."  "  Probably  the  conical  moun-
tain of  Main,  or  Maon,  the  top  of  which  is  now  surrounded  with  ruins."  (Robinson. )  It  is
evidently  the  same  as  that  mentioned  in  the  next  verse,  along  which  David  was  escaping  on  one
side,  while  Saul  was  seeking  him  on  'he  oihvr.


IIOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,  book  l


V«r.  28.  "  Selah-hammalslokoth."  Keil,  Gesenins,  and  otliers  explain  this  name  to  signify
"rock  of  smoothness" — from  chalak,  to  be  smooth,  and  hence  to  slip  au-ay,  to  escape.  But  the
word  also  means  to  divide,  and  many  exposit"rs  attach  this  meaning  to  it  here  because  it
separated  Saul  and  David  from  each  other.

Ver.  29.  ''E-ger'i."  The  present  Ainjiddy,  or  goat- fountain,  from  the  numb<^r  of  chamoia
which  are  found  in  the  district  It  is  on  the  western  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea,  about  thirteen  n)iles
north-west  of  Maon.  "The  steep  mountains  are  intersected  by  wadys  running  down  in  deep
ravines  to  the  sea."  (Keil.)  "On  all  sides"  says  Robinson,  "the  country  is  full  of  caverns,
which  now  serve  as  lurking-places  for  outlaws."

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  l-«,

David  Delivers  Keilah.

I.  The  indnlg^ence  of  enmity  towards  one  makes  men  neglect  their  duty  to
the  many.  It  is  very  daiio-erons  for  the  pnsseii.uers  in  a  vessel  if  those  in  com-
mand are  at  enmity  with  eacli  other,  or  if  tiie  captain  is  filled  with  envy  of  those
who  divide  with  him  the  responsihility  of  directing  the  ship.  When  such  is  the
case,  he  is  likely  to  be  layinoj  plans  to  injuie  tlui  man  whom  he  hates  when  he
ought  to  be  concerning  himself  about  the  safety  of  those  committed  to  his  care,
and  a  storm,  which  ought  to  have  found  him  well  prepared,  descends  upon  him
unexpectedly,  and  places  all  the  lives  on  board  in  jeopardy.  His  lawless  hatred
to  one  individual  makes  him  forget  what  he  owes  to  niany.  The  warrior  king
of  Israel  at  this  time  was  so  possessed  by  his  enmity  to  David  that  he  permitted
one  of  his  frontier  towns  to  be  threatened  and  the  lives  of  its  inhabitants  to  be
endangered  without  making  an  effort  on  their  behalf  How  is  it  that  his  conduct
on  this  occasion  differs  so  widely  from  his  prompt  and  brave  action  on  behalf  of
Ramoth  Gilead  (chap,  xi.j  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  and  why  was  the  appeal
for  help  at  this  time  made  to  David  and  not  to  him  ?  Was  it  not  because  the  demon
of  envy  had  stifled  his  sense  of  duty  and  every  generous  and  patriotic  emotion  ?
So  long  as  he  could  satisfy  his  feelings  of  revenge  against  David  he  cared  not  if
half  his  kingdoin  became  a  prey  to  the  Philistines.  His  personal  enmity  to  one
man  left  no  room  for  any  concern  about  the  welfare  of  the  nation  committed  to
his  charge.  This  thing  repeats  itself  from  age  to  age.  Men  charged  with  heavy
responsiljilities  in  relation  to  their  fellow-creatures  allow  a  personal  enmity  to
eiigross  the  energies  which  ought  to  be  em])loyed  on  their  behalf,  and  myriads
suffer  on  acc(mnt  of  a  quarrel  between  two  individual  men  ;  or,  as  in  the  case
before  us,  because  one  only  is  filled  with  a  deadly  hatred  towards  a  supposed
rival.  And  this  devil  of  envy  is  not  active  merely  among  men  who  make  no
pretensions  to  godliness,  or  even  to  those  who  are  mere  pretenders.  Envy  at
the  promotion  of  a  better  man,  and  a  desire,  unconsciously  indulged  it  may  be,
to  lessen  or  extinguish  his  influence,  has  often  led  a  shejjherd  of  the  flock  of  God
to  leave  the  sheep  open  to  the  attacks  of  their  foes  while  he  has  been  engaged
in  some  private  and  personal  quarrel.

II.  In  critical  periods  the  want  of  faith  on  the  part  of  the  many  gives  an
occasion  for  the  display  of  faith  on  the  part  of  one.  The  fearfulness  and
distrust  of  David's  followers  at  the  time  bring  into  fuller  relief  the  courage  and
faith  of  David  himself,  and  it  often  happens  in  critical  })eriods  of  human  history
that  this  is  the  case.  When  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  is  witnessed  by  men  who  are
quite  unacquainted  with  the  laws  of  nature  by  which  it  is  caused,  it  often  fills
them  with  distrust  and  fear,  but  such  a  phenomenon  gives  rise  to  no  terror  or
doubt  in  the  mind  of  one  who  is  acquainted  with  natural  laws.  His  superior
knowledge  keeps  his  faith  in  them  unshaken  during  the  crisis;  he  feels  quite
sure  that  the  sun  is  still  shining  in  all  its  glory,  although  it  is  hidden  from
human  sight  at  the  present  moment.  And  the  ignorant  terror  of  the  many
make  the  enli«ihtened  confidence  of  the  one  the  more  striking.     Something  like

226


CHAP.  XXIII.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


this  often  takes  ])lace  in  tlie  region  of  God's  providential  workings.  A  dark
dispensation  overriliadows  a  coinmnnity,  and  men  who  are  ignorant  of  tho
character  of  God  and  of  the  unchangeable  nature  of  His  moral  laws  are  fil^  \
with  fear,  while  those  who  have  made  themselves  acquainted  with  the  method
and  reasons  of  His  dealings  stay  themselves  upon  His  faithfulness,  and  are  certain
that  His  wisdom  and  love  are  as  active  in  the  cloudy  day  of  adversity  as  when
all  looks  bright  and  jn'osperoiis.  And  their  faith  shines  all  the  more  bricrbtly
because  of  the  ignorance  and  unbelief  all  around  them.  So  did  the  faiUi  of
JJavid  at  this  time  in  contrast  with  the  distrust  of  his  men.  A  common  sense  of
wrong  l.ad  drawn  them  to  throw  in  their  lot  with  him,  but  although  they  pro-
bably ad  in  ired  his  courage  they  did  not  share  it  because  they  lacked  the  faith
m  God  which  he  jmssessed,  Tiiey  looked  only  at  the  difficulties  and  dangers
which  surrounded  them,  and  he  looked  through  these  difficulties  and  dangers  to
tiie  God  whom  he  knew  and  whom  he  therefore  trusted.

Ill  The  faith  and  obedience  of  one  good  man  in  times  of  trial  make  him  the
refuge  ana  the  deliverer  of  many.  When  we  are  saddened  and  perplexed  by  looking
at  the  misery  which  may  come  to  many  by  the  unfaithfulness  of  one  man  we
must  remember  also  how  much  good  also  comes  to  many  by  the  faithfuUess  of
one.  Although  no  man  can  transgress  the  laws  of  God  without  involving
others  in  the  consequences  of  his  wrong-doing,  no  man  can  obey  the  Divine
cimimands  without  being  a  blessing  to  many.  If  the  people  of  Keilah  were
brought  into  danger  by  the  sin  of  one  man  they  owed  their  deliverance  to  the
taith  and  obedience  of  one  man,  for  no  Israelitish  army  would  have  gone  up
against  the  t'hilistines  at  this  time  if  the  son  of  Jesse  had  not  rallied  his  forces
to  the  attack.  1  his  dependence  of  the  destinies  of  the  many  upon  the  character
ot  one  has  its  bright,  therefore,  as  well  as  its  dark  side.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.  2.    Had  David  been  governed  were  at  an  end  when  God's  will  was
by  personal   considerations,  he  would  made  known  to  him.     He  was  not  act-
have  sullered  the  Plnhstines  to  take  ing  alone— he  had  four  hundred  men
their  course.  It  was  occupation  enough  with  him,  most  of  them  probably  ani-
to  defend  himself,-io  preserve  his  own  mated  by  a  very  different  spirit  from
life  from  the  relentless  malice  that  pur-  his.     A  leader  of  other  men  often  finds
sued  him.     Besides,  the  defence  of  the  his  greatest  difficulty  not  in  deciding
k.ngdcm  did  not  properly^  devolve  on  what  should  be  done,  but  in  prevailing
lam,  but  on  Saul,  whom  it  might  be  upon  them  to  do  it.     Especially  is  this
policy  to  embarrass  as  much  as  possible  the  case  if  he  be  a  spiritual  man,  and
in  order  to  draw  off  his  attention  from  they  carnal  men  ;  he  bent  on  following
the  object  of  his   bitter   persecution.  the  will  of  God,  they  the  inclinations
1  he  more  the  country  was  left  exposed  of  their  hearts.     It  is  sad  when  such  a
to  such  attacks  the  more  odious  would  division  exists  in  families  ...  and  we
baul   be  rendered  in  the  eyes  of  the  know  of  no   course  which   the  godly
people    and   the  more  popular  might  head  of  a  house,  opposed  by  an  un-
David  become.     But  he  was  a  stranger  willing  family,  could  take  with  more
to  all  such  unworthy  views.     He  saw  advantage   than    that   now   taken    by
Ins  count^-y  invaded,  and  he  thought  David.     Let  all  be  made  to  understand
iiomoreof  his^ownwnmgs:  hesawitdis-  that  the  will  of  God   is  the  rule  by
tressed,  and  he  determined  it  possible  which  he  is  resolved  to  act.     Let  him
to  relieve   it,   although    he  was   thus  solemnly  apjjenl  to  them,  whether  they
strengthening  the   hands  of  his  most  are  prei>ared  to  set  up  another;   let
vii^lent^enemy.-XjW^^^^^^^^^  him  use  the  best  means  for  ascertaining

Ver  3.    David  s  dilhculties  were  not  God's  will,  and  then  let  him  fearlessly

over,   though   his    pei^onal    anxieties  go  iorw3ivd.—BlaiMe.

227


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  i.

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. ^Verses  7-12.

Saul  Marches  Against  Keilah  to  Seize  David.

I.  Men  often  put  a  false  interpretation  upon  circumstances.  Saul  never
made  a  greater  mistake  tlian  when  he  said  of  David  in  Keilah,  "  God  hath
delivered  him  into  mine  hand."  If  tliis  was  indeed  his  belief,  it  shows  us  how
very  greatly  men  may  err  in  their  interpretation  of  the  events  of  Providence,
and  how  far  they  may  be  from  a  right  conception  of  the  light  in  which  God
regards  both  their  character  and  their  actions.  It  seems  impossible  that  Saul
could  either  have  misunderstood  or  forgotten  the  word  of  the  Lord  delivered
to  him  by  Samuel ;  and  yet  he  here  speaks  as  though  his  pursuit  of  David  was
undertaken  with  the  Divine  approval,  and  puts  an  entirely  false  meaning  upon
his  present  position.  When  men  misinterpret  human  language,  they  do  so
either  through  ignorance  or  wilfulness.  A  man  who  is  but  imperfectly
acquainted  with  a  language  may  put  a  ffxlse  construction  on  words  spoken  or
written,  and  so  come  to  a  false  conclusion  as  to  the  intention  of  the  speaker
or  writer.  So  sometimes  men,  through  ignorance,  misread  God's  providential
dealings.  Job's  friends  entirely  misinterpreted  the  circumstances  in  which  ihey
found  the  patriarch,  concluding  that  his  afflictions  were  to  punish  his  sin  when
they  were  to  develop  and  stren^^then  his  godliness;  and  other  men,  who  have
had  no  revelation  from  God,  have  often  doubtless  erred  in  like  manner.  But
by  far  the  most  destructive  and  the  greater  number  of  such  misinterpretations
arise  not  from  ignorance  but  from  wilfulness,  as  was  certainly  the  case  with  Saul
at  this  time.  Such  a  wilful  mistake  was  made  by  the  Egyptian  host  at  the  Red
Sea,  when  they  said  of  Israel  ''  They  are  entangled  in  the  land,  the  wilderness
hath  shut  them  in."  The  miracles  of  judgment  which  had  just  been  wrought
in  the  land  of  Egypt  S})oke  concerning  the  character  and  purposes  of  the  Lord
God  of  the  Hebrews  in  language  which  cou.ld  oidy  be  wilfully  misinterpreted,  and
hence  they  had  only  themselves  to  blame  for  their  destruction.  But  such  mis-
readings  of  God's  providential  dealings  have  not  been  confined  to  Old  Testament
times.  We  need  not  wonder  that  they  have  been  abundant  in  the  history  of
the  Christian  Church,  when  we  remember  how  men  misinteipreted  the  death  of
Him  who  founded  it,  and  concluded,  when  they  saw  Him  hanging  upon  the  cross,
that  "  Himself  He  could  not  save!'

II.  For  a  good  man  in  such  circumstances  there  is  always  a  final  court
of  appeal.  A  child  when  misjudged  or  perplexed  goes  to  his  father  for  a  verdict
or  an  explanation  concerning  tiiat  which  troubles  him.  To  his  young  mind  the
wisdom  and  the  goodness  resident  in  his  parent  constitute  him  the  judge  in  all
disputes,  and  the  one  who  can  solve  all  difficulties.  Every  good  man  thus
instinctively  turns  to  God  when  a  wrong  interpretation  is  put  either  upon  his
character  or  his  circumstance,  or  upon  both.  Conscious  of  his  own  sincerity,  and
fully  persuaded,  even  in  the  niidst  of  his  perplexities,  of  the  wisdom  and
righteousness  of  his  Heaveidy  Father,  he  looks  heavenward  for  help  and  guidance
when  every  human  su])port  fails  him.  Even  Job,  amid  the  terrible  storm  of
{afflictions  which  drew  from  him  many  expressions  of  impatience,  and  some  which
seem  to  impugn  the  justice  of  the  Most  High,  ever  and  anon  turns  from  the
charges  and  expostulations  of  his  mistaken  human  friends  to  Him  whom  he  feels
in  his  inmost  soul  is  the  final  court  of  api»eal,  and  the  only  Judge  to  whom  he
can  safely  commit  his  cause.  So  David  here,  perplexed  no  doubt  by  the  provi-
dence which  seemed  to  grow  darker  at  every  ste(),  and  pained  at  the  ingratitude
of  the  men  upon  whose  gratitude  and  friendship  he  must  surely  have  counted,
turns  again  and  again  to  his  Father  in  heaven,  and  bj  his  appeals  and  incjuiriefii

223


OHAP.  XXIII.


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.


sliows  that,  althoiigli  the  waves  and  the  billows  of  adversity  are  all  around  him,
his  faith  lias  not  lost  lier  hold,  and  tliab  lie  can  still  hear  the  ''  voice  of  the  Lord
U20011  the  waters,''  and  see  Him  "  sitting  on  thejlood  "  (rsahn  xxix).


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


The  men   of  Keilah   were  iieitlier
chivalrous  nor  grnteful.    They  regarded
their  own  interests  as  supreme.     Like
many  in  our  own  day,  they  might  pro-
fess to  aim  after  tlie  greatest  hap[M'iiess
of  the  greatest  number,  but  when  you
came  to  analyse  their  views,  you  would
find  that  with  them,  to  use  the  words
of  Joseph  Hume,  **  the  greatest  number
was  number  one  !  "   It  was  not  for  their
advantage  to  serve  David,   and  they
did  not  serve  hitn  ;  and  I  am  free  to
say  that  all  my  observation  and  expe-
rience convince  me  that  a  large  pro-
portion of  the  present  genera!  ion  would
nave  done  as  they  were  willing  to  do.
Of  course  that  does  not  excuse  them,
but  it  should  make  us  cautious  as  to
what  we  say  in  their  condemnation,
lest,  haply,  we  may  some  day  be  judged
out  of  our  own  mouths.     Gratitude,
chivalry,  enthusiasm  for  the  cause  of
the  wronged — what  are  these  words  in
the  mouths  of  many  to-day  but  words  ?
they  sound  well,  and  they  are  very  line
Belong  as  they  cost  nothing;  but  let
adherence  to  them  put  pro[)erty  or  life
in  peril,  and  too  many  would  cling  to
the  property  and  the  life,  and  let  the
others  go.     Ye  who  condemn  the  in-
habitants of  Keilah  because  they  were
willing  to  betray  David,  how  long  would
you  show  gratitude  at  the  risk  of  the
loss  of  all  things?     It  was  a  disgrace
to  them  that  they  would  not  stand  by
him  who  had  delivered  them  ;  but  is
it  anything  less  to  us,  when  we  allow
our  worldly  interests  to  blind  us  to  the
obligations  under  which  we  lie  to  those
who  beiriended  us  in  our  time  of  need  ?
Is  it  anything  less  to  us  when,  lor  the
sake  of  tashion,  or  fortune,  or  lame,  we
turn  our  backs  upon  the  Christ,  wlio
has  borne  the  agony  of  Gethseinane
and  Calvary  on  our  behalf?     Idolatry
of  self  is  as  hideous  now  as  it  was  in
David's  time.    Let  those  who  are  guilty
of  it,  theretore,  look  here,  and,  in  the


pitiful  poltroonery  of  the  men  of  Keilah
they  will  see  how  mean  and  contemp-
tible they  look. — JJr.  W.  M.  lay  lor.

Ver.  12.  Here  is  a  second  inquiry.
God  loveth  to  be  often  sought  unto  by
His  praying  people  (Luke  xviii.  1),
and  therefore  answereth  them  by  de-
grees, that  He  may  frequently  hear
from  them.  Thus  the  cloud  empties
not  itself  at  a  sudden  burst,  but  dis-
solveth  upon  the  earth  drop  after  drop.
Trap  p.

Whereas  the  Lord  answereth,  that
Saul  would  come  down  to  Keilah,  and
that  the  men  of  Keilah  would  deliver
David  into  Saul's  hands,  and  yet
neither  of  these  came  to  pass ;  hence
it  cannot  be  inferred  that  the  predic-
tions of  the  Lord  are  uncertain,  for
the  Lord's  answer  is  here  to  be  under-
stood conditionally.  ...  A  difference
is  here  to  be  made  between  the  pre-
science of  God  and  the  predestination  :
for  the  Lord  as  well  seeth  what  shall
be  done  as  what  is  likely  to  be  done
in  respect  of  the  second  causes ;  but
His  decree  of  predestination  is  only  of
those  things  which  shall  most  certainly
be  effected. —  Willet.

The  origin  of  the  thirty-first  Psalm
is  to  be  traced  to  this  period  of
wandering,  although  there  is  nothing
contained  in  the  title  of  it  which
authorises  this  su[)position.  We  meet,
however,  with  many  passages  in  the
psalm  wliich  quite  correspond  with  the
circumstances  m  which  David  was  then
placed.  The  singer  begins  with  the
hun)l)le  but  confiding  prayer  that  God
would  never  let  him  be  put  to  shame
(he  was  so  at  that  time,  when  the
citizens  of  Keilah  would  no  longer
suiter  him  to  dwell  amongst  them)  ;  but
that  he  would  deliver  him  (the  guiltless
outlaw)  in  his  righteousness.  He  prays
that  the  L<»rd  would  bow  down  ili.s  ear
to  him,  and  deliver  him  speedily,  and

22^


nOMlLETIC  COMMENT AHY:    SAMUEL.  book  i.


beastrongrock  to  him,  and  a  protecting  to   the   greatest  part   of   tlie   people,

fortress.     The  imagery  here  is  plainly  because  he  was  the  object  of  the  king's

suggested  by  the  wild  scenes  of  nature  displeasure.    Yet  he  is  far  from  speaking

wliich    surrounded    the    singer.      He  of  himself  as  free  from  all  guilt.     He

])rays  that,  for  his  name's  sake,   the  feels  hiniself  as  a  poor  sinner  before

Lord  would  lead  him  and  graciously  God,  and,  with   a  sigh,  gives  utterance

be    near    him    in    the    pathless    and  to  the  prayer,  "Have  mercy  upon  me,  0

inhospitable    wilderness,   and   that   he  Lord."     Nevertheless  lie  trusted  in  Hia

would  guard  his  feet  from  the  net  which  mercy  whom  he  conlidently  called  his

they  had  laid  on  all  sides  to  catch  him.  (u)d  ;  and,  after  giving  ])raise  to  the

"into   thine   hand,"  he  continues,  "I  Jjord  for  all  the  wonderful  goodness  and

commit  my  spirit  :  thou  hast  redeemeil  the  help  which  he  had  hitherto  vouch-

me,    0  Lord  God  of  truth,"   namely,  safed    to    him    **  in    his    flight,"    he

from  the  violence  to  which  they  would  concludes  with  this  call  to  his  brethren

surrender  me.    Moreover,  David  speaks  in  the  faith  ;  "  0  h)ve  the  Lord,  all  ye

of  himself  as  one  who  was  forsaken  by  his  saints  :  for  the  Lord  preserveth  the

all  the  world,  and  was  covered  with  faithful,  and  plcMitifuUy  rewardeth  the

unmerited    reproaches    and    slanders,  proud  doer.     Be  of  good  courage,  and

He   was  even  guilty  of  high  treason,  He  shall  strengthen  your  heart,  all  ye

and  had  placed  himself  in  opposition  that  hope  in  the  Lord." — Krummacher,

MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  13-18.

Jonathan's  Visit  to  David  in  the  Wilderness  of  Ziph,

We  have  here —

I.  A  man  in  the  sorest  need  of  human  friendship.  It  is  scarcely  possible
to  exaggerate  the  need  in  which  David  stood  at  this  time  of  human
sympathy.  It  has  been  often  said  that  nothing  gives  a  human  spirit  so
much  pain  as  ingratitude,  and  David  was  now  proving  how  ungrateful  men  can
be  when  prompted  by  motives  of  self-interest.  He  had  just  saved  the  in-
habitants of  Keilah  from  a  ^re^t  calamity,  and  if  he  looked  for  some  active  proof
of  their  good  will  on  his  behalf,  it  was  certainly  not  expecting  very  much.
He  might  have  reasonably  counted  on  their  help  when  his  hour  of  need  came  ;
and  when  he  became  aware  that  this  would  not  be  given  he  would  have  hardly
thought  it  possible  for  them  to  go  beyond  a  cowardly  neutrality.  But  the
Divine  oracle  had  assured  him  that  these  base  specimens  of  humanity  were
prepared  to  deliver  him  up  into  the  hands  of  the  kirig  at  his  command.  Such
an  experience  as  this  tests  to  the  utmost  a  man's  faith  in  humanity,  and  mora
than  anything  else  tends  to  harden  the  heart  and  emhitter  the  spirit.  And
when  it  has  this  effect,  it  does  not  bring  the  soul  nearer  to  God.  A  true  and
tender  human  friend  at  such  a  time  will  often  make  it  easier  for  a  man  to  helieve
in  Divine  faithfulness  and  compassion,  and  form  the  link  lietween  a  broken  spirit
and  the  Great  Healer.     David  evidently  needed  such  a  friend  at  this  moment.

II.  A  friend  fully  equal  to  the  needs  of  friendship.  If  the  treacliery  of  the
men  of  Keilah  was  sufficient  almost  to  destroy  David's  faith  in  his  fellow-men,
the  stedfastness  of  Jonathan  was  a  more  weighty  influence  on  the  other  side.
A  feebler  friendship  might  have  satisfied  itself  with  the  remembrance  of  having
given  proofs  of  love  in  the  past,  or  at  least  with  sending  to  David  an  assurance
of  present  sympathy  ;  but  Jonathan's  self-sacrificing  love  embraced  every
occasion  of  serving  his  iriend  to  the  utnmst  of  his  power,  and  hence  he  is  found
in  person  in  the  wilderness  with  the  outlaw  whom  his  father  seeks,  and  cheers
David  by  putting  him  in  mind  of  the  declared  purpose  of  (Jod  cunccrning  him,
although  it  included  his  own  lobis  of  worldly  power  and  influence.     When  David

230


CHAP.  XXIII.


IIOMILETW  COMMEXTARY:   SAMUEL.


received  this  new  assurance  of  liis  friend's  unsc^liisli  and  undyin;^  rc.;.*ird,  it  must
surely  have  driven  away  all  the  mistrust  in  God  .which  was  niakiiiL^  him  fear  ;
for  if  a  man  of  like  passions  with  himself  would  be  thus  true  to  his  plighted
word,  he  would  not  dare  to  harbour  the  thought  that  Jonathan's  God  and  iiis
own  God  would  fail  him.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Ver.  16.  The  distinguishing  power
of  a  true  man.  What  is  the  distinguish-
ing power  which  a  true  man  has?  To
destroy  life  ?  Brutes  can  do  this.  To
weaken  faith,  and  shake  confidence  ?
A  child  can  do  this.  What  then  ?  To
strengthen  a  brother  s  heart  in  God !
.  .  .  But  how  can  a  true  man  strengthen
a  depressed  brother  thus  ?  First  :  J^y
a  truthful  eccposition  of  God's  method
of  governing  the  J  alien  in  this  world.
The  gospel  unfolds  that  method  ;  shows
that  it  is  to  the  true  corrective,  not
penal  ;  remedial,  not  destructive  ;  in-
troductory, not  final.  .  .  Secondly :
By  a  practical  expression  of  genuine
sympathy.  Nothing  in  the  world  is
more  strengthening  to  a  tried  soul  than
the  practical  manifestation  of  true
sympathy.  One  breath  of  it  infuses
new  life  to  thesoul — energizes  the  heart.
Thirdly  ;  By  a  devout  intercession  with
heaven.  Paulpraj^ed  that  the  Ephesians
might  be  "  strengthened  with  all  might
in  the  inner  man."  The  highest  func-
tion of  a  true  friend.  It  is  one  thing  to
have  the  power  to  strengthen,  and
another  thing  to  use  it  when  and  where
required.  He  who  uses  it  is  the  truest
friend.  Jonathan  proved  his  friendship
to  David  by  tracking  him  out  in  the
lonely  wood,  and  there,  in  the  depths


of  solitude,  in  the  sanctuary  of  wild,
majestic  nature,  in-breathing  invigora-
ting thoughts  about  God.  Let  us,  in
imagination,  go  into  this  wood  and  see
Jonathan  acting  the  friend.  He  meets
David,  with  a  heavy  gloom  upon  his
brow,  only  able  to  speak  in  sighs  and
tears.  First,  perhaps,  Jonathan  makes  a
few  consolatory  remarks  about  the  great
providence  of  God.  Then,  secondly,
perhaps  he  refers  him  to  the  trials  of
good  men  who  have  passed  away —
Abraham  and  Jacob,  Moses  and  Samuel.
'JMien,  thirdly,  })erhaps  he  reminds  him
of  the  past  kindness  of  God  to  him  as

an  individual And  then

perhaps  he  kneels  down  under  the
shadow  of  some  old  tree  and  prays  with
him  and  for  him.  This  is  the  way  to
strengthen  souls,  and  he  is  the  true  man
who  acts  thus. — Dr.  David  Thomas.

Ver.  17.  It  was  doubtless  well
ordered  by  God's  good  providence  that
Jonathan's  noble  sentiments  were  not
subjected  to  the  unnatural  strain  of
such  a  situation,  but  that  he  died  a
soldier's  death,  hghting  gallantly  for  his
country,  before  anything  had  happened
to  disturb  the  perfect  beauty  of  his
friendship  for  David. — Biblical  Com-
mentary.


MAIN  IIOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19—29.
The  Treachery  of  the  Ziphites.

I,  The  calamity  of  one  man  an  occasion  of  revealing  the  baseness  of  others.

There  is  much  latent  baseness  in  the  world  which  only  Jacks  a  favourable  oppor-
tunity to  manifest  itself.  Fear  of  punishment  or  defeat  is  at  the  root  of  the
outwardly  virtuous  conduct  of  many  men,  and  they  only  need  to  have  these
restraints  removed  to  show  what  they  really  are.  Occasion  is  to  men  what  the
barometer  is  to  the  weather.  This  instrument  only  registers  the  state  of  the
atmosphere,  but  has  no  part  in  generating  either  the  calm  or  the  storm — they
"Would  be  the  same  if  the  indicator  had  no  existence.  These  men  of  Ziph  were  not
worise  men  when  they  betrayed  David  than  they  had  been  before,  but  his  defence-

231


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  i.


less  and  straitened  condition  was  tlie  occasion  whidi  testod  their  character  and
revealed  their  baseness,  if  he  hail  sinij)ly  come  to  tliem  as  a  man  in  distress
through  no  fault  of  liis  own  it  would  have  been  a  jjitifnl  meanness  on  tbeir  part
to  betray  bim.  But  they  could  not  be  ignorant  of  the  debt  of  gratitude  they,
in  common  with  the  rest  of  their  countrymen,  owed  to  him.  Since  the  day
when  he  slew  the  Philistine  whose  name  s})reHd  terror  through  all  the  hosts  of
Israel,  he  had  again  and  again  defeated  their  much-dreaded  foes,  and  at  this
moment  had  just  returned  from  delivering  Keihih.  His  life  since  his  early  youth
had  been  spent  in  the  service  of  his  country,  and  if  the  Zi})hites  had  possessed
a  spark  of  gratitude  they  would  have  striven  to  lighten  his  hardships.  But,  far
from  doing  this,  they  went  out  of  their  way  to  betray,  not  only  an  innocent
man,  but  one  to  whom  they  were  deei)]y  indebted.  This  one  act  is  an  infallible
and  a  sufficient  revelation  of  their  character  as  a  community.

II.  The  evil  purposes  of  evil  men  defeated  by  others  of  a  like  character.

Doubtless  the  Ziphites  thought  the  success  of  their  plan  was  certain  ;  and  Saul
must  have  felt  assured  that  this  time  his  prey  wouhl  not  esca})e.  And  as  his
enemies  closed  around  him,  David  himself  must  have  well  nigh  given  up  all
hope  of  escape.  But  at  this  critical  moment  his  deliverance  was  wrought  by
men  who  had  every  reason  to  desire  his  downfall,  and  who  would  have  gladly
taken  his  life  if  they  had  found  an  opportunity  to  do  so.  The  Philistines
certaiidy  hated  David  as  much  as  the  Ziphites  did,  but  at  this  moment  they
unconsciously  delivered  him  from  the  danger  to  which  the  treachery  of  the
latter  had  exposed  him.  The  incident  affords  an  exam})le  of  the  way  in  which
bad  men  often  unconsciously  fulfil  the  purposes  of  God,  and  frustrate  the  plans
of  those  who  are  one  with  them  in  their  opposition  to  righteousness.  Saul
suddenly  found  himself  in  the  hands  of  circumstances  which  compelled  him  to
forego  for  this  time  the  satisfaction  of  his  private  jealousy,  and  thus  this  bad
monarch,  and  his  equally  bad  subjects,  were  prevented  from  taking  the  blood  of
an  innocent  man  by  other  men  as  bad  as  themselves.  But  behind  all  these
human  wills  and  purposes  a  Divine  will  and  a  Divine  purpose  were  in  operation,
and  God  was  using  His  enemies  to  save  His  servant.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

At  the  time  when  David  received  the  Lord  would  be  his  helper  and  would

tidings  that  the  Zipldtes  had  betrayed  uphold  his  soul,  and  that  the  wicked-

him,  his  soul  poured  itself  forth  in  the  ness  of  his  enemies  would  recoil  upon

fifty-fourth    Psalm.       Here    he    first  themselves.      "  Cut  them   off  in  Thy

directs  his  eye  from  the  earth,  where  truth,"  he  cries  out;  adding,  "I  will

faithlessness  and  wickedness  so  much  freely  sacrifice  unto  Tliee  ;  I  will  praise

surrounded  him,  upwards   to   heaven,  Thy  name,  0  Lord,  for  it  is  good;"

and  prays  to  God  that  He  would  save  and  concludes  with  the  words  of  joyful

and  judge  him  {i.e.  justify  him),  since  confidence, ''  For  He  hath  delivered  me

the  people  of  his  own  tribe  had  risen  out  of  all  trouble ;  and  mine  eye  hath

up  against  him  as  enemies,  yea,  like  seen  His  desire  upon  mine  enemies." —

the  heathen.      But  not  less  does  he  Kiummacher,
give  utterance  to  his  confidence,  that


232


Cu.\P.x::-nr.  lIOMILETtC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUeL


CHAPTER  XXIV.

Crtttcal  and  ExrosiTORT  NoTKS. — Ver.  2  "Rocks  of  the  wild  goats,"  or  ibex-rocTcs.
Probably  not  a  name  fur  any  particular  rock,  but  a  general  term  applied  to  the  locality  on
account  of  the  number  of  ibexes,  or  wild  goats,  found  there.

Ver.  3.  "  Slieepcotes."  These  are  still  to  be  seen  at  the  month  of  the  caves  in  this  region,
and  are  made  by  pilinj;  up  stones  in  a  cir -Li  and  covering  them  with  thorns.  "  To  cover  his
feet,"  i.e.,  to  obey  a  call  of  nature,  when  Orienta's  usually  cover  their  ft^et.  {KeU,  Erdmann.,
and  others.)  There  are  man}'  caves  in  this  district  wJK.Te  men  might  easily  remain  concealed
from  the  view  of  a  person  entering.  "The  largest  cave,"  says  Jiieut.  fiynch  (American  Explo-
ration of  the  Dead  Sea),  "that  we  entered  at  Engedi  could  contain  thirty  men,  and  has  a  long
low  and  narrow  gallery  running  from  one  side,  which  would  be  invisible  when  the  sun  does  not
shine  through  the  entrance."

Ver.  4.  "Behold  the  day,**  etc.  "This  can  here  be  understood  only  in  the  general  sense  of
the  Divine  ordering  of  a  favovu-able  opportunity.  A  reference  to  a  detinite  Divine  declaration  is
not  in  the  words  themselves.  Some  cite  1  Sam.  xvi.  28  ;  xvi.  1-12  ;  and  also  xx.  15  ;  xxiii.  17  ;
but  it  is  not  probable  that  David's  men  would  know  this.  Of  any  other  promise  we  have  no
mention."  {Lange's  Commentary.)  "Saui's  robe."  His  long  outer  mantle  [vieit),  probably
laid  aside  by  Saul  when  he  entered  the  cave.

Ver.  6.  "  The  Lord  forbid."  J  itcrally,  "  far  be  it  from  me  from  Jehovah,"  i.e.,  on  Jehovah's
account.     "It  is  a  religious  ground  which  restrains  David."     {Erdmann.)

"Ver.  8.  The  closeness  of  the  precipitous  rocks  and  the  depth  of  the  ravines  or  wadies  between
them,  together  with  the  remarkal)le  purity  of  the  air,  made  it  quite  easy  for  David  thus  to  con-
verse with  Saul  at  a  distance  sufficient  to  ensure  his  own  safety.  "My  lord  the  King."
"This  address  indicates  the  double  point  of  view  whence  David,  in  what  follows,  declares  by
deed  and  by  word  his  relation  and  attitude  to  Saul.  Jle  recognises  and  honours  Saul  as  his  lord
to  whom  he  is  bound  to  be  subject ;  in  calling  him  lord  he  declares  himself  guiltless  of  insur-
rection against  him.  In  the  king  he  sees  the  anointed  of  the  Lord,  the  bearer  of  the  holy
theocratic  office,  in  which  character  he  was  inviolable."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  13.  "As  s  dth  the  proverb,"  etc.  "The  meaning  is,  only  a  wicked  man  would  wish
to  avenge  himself,  I  do  not."  {Keil.)  "  A  prophetic  speech.  Thy  death  will  not  be  from  me,
who  have  no  such  thoughts,  but  from  the  wicked.  And  so  it  was.  Saul  perished  by  his  own
wicked  hand."     {Wordsworth.)

Ver.  14.  "A  flea."  Literally,  a  single  flea.  "By  these  similes  David  meant  to  describe
himself  as  a  perfectly  harmless  and  insignificant  man,  of  whom  Saul  had  no  occasion  to  be
afraid,  and  whom  it  was  beneath  his  dignity  to  pursue."     {Keil.)

Ver.  16.  "And  Saul  lifted  up  his  voice."  "  There  is  no  hypocrisy  or  pretence  here.  Saul,
tossed  powerless  hither  and  thither  by  fierce  passions  and  without  harmony  of  soul-life,  is  here
laid  hold  of  in  a  hidden  corner  of  his  heart,  where  he  was  still  accessible  to  the  power  of  truth,
and  involuntarily  yields  to  this  nobler  arousing  of  his  soul,  though  it  is  not  destined  to  be  per-
manent."    {Erdmann.)

Ver.  20.  "  How  did  Saul  come  to  this  knowledge  which  he  here  expi-esses,  and  which  Jonathan
had  already  affirmed  that  his  father  had?  (xxiii.  17.)  Not  through  direct  Divine  revelation,  but
by  the  observation  that  all  his  undertakings  against  David  wore  unsuccessful,  and  that  David,
in  respect  to  his  persecutions,  was  under  t^pecial  Divine  protection,  coupled  with  the  recollection
of  what  Samuel  had  once  said  to  him  in  the  name  of  God  respecting  his  rejection  for  disobe-
dience."    {Erdmann.)

Ver.  21.  "My  name,"  etc.  "A  name  is  exterminated  when  the  whole  of  the  descendants  are
destroyed  — a  thing  of  frequent  occurrence  in  tlie  East  in  connection  with  a  change  of  dynasties,
and  one  which  occurred  again  and  again  even  in  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes.  See  1  Kings
XV.  28  sqq.  ;  xvi.  11  sqq.  ;  2  Kings  X."     {Keil.)

Ver.  2l'.  "Tiie  hold."  "  The  word  here  so  translated  is  used  to  denote  the  mountainous  part
of  the  desert  of  Judah.     It  is  different  in  chap.  xxii.  5."     {Keil.)

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH.—  Verses  1-7.

David  spares  Saul  in  the  Cave.

I.    Here  is  an  example  of  the  power  of  hatred  to  sustain  the  zeal  of  the  wicked.

We  often  speak  of  the  power  of  rigliteous  convictions  and  emotions  to  sustain
men  in  a  course  of  righteous  action  in  the  face  of  nuicli  opposition  and  many

233


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY  :  SAMUEL,  book  I.


defeats,  and  we  rejoice  to  think  that  liistory  furnishes  us  with  many  bright
illustrations  of  this  truth.  But  we  cannot  deny  that  wicked  men  have  also
shown  much  courage  and  patience  in  the  pursuit  of  their  evil  designs,  impelled
by  the  power  of  evil  passions  and  principles.  And  of  all  these  passions,  perhaps
hatred,  and  esjiecially  hatred  of  those  whom  the  hater  has  wronged,  is  the  most
potent.  This  is  the  motive  power  that  keeps  alive  the  zealous  activity  of  the
great  adversary  of  the  lunnan  race.  Satan  tirst  wronged  man  by  tempting  him
to  sin,  and  throughout  all  the  ages  since  has  been  unceasing  in  his  hatred  to  the
creatures  whom  he  has  wronged  and  untiring  in  his  efforts  to  compass  their  ruin.
Such  a  passion  possessed  Saul  at  this  time.  His  hatred  of  David  was  not
appeased  by  the  wrong  which  he  had  done  him  in  the  past,  but  seemed  to  gather
strength  with  every  fresh  crime  committed  against  him,  and  sustained  him  in
his  pur})Ose  to  take  his  life  if  i)ossil)le,  notwithstanding  all  the  checks  and
hindrances  hitherto  received.  Since  the  day  when  he  mistrusted  David's  motive
of  action  in  the  defeat  of  Goliath,  he  had  found  in  his  malice  inspiration  sufficient
to  keep  him  ever  eager  to  compass  his  destruction,  and  he  could  not  have  set
about  this  new  pursuit  with  more  determination  and  energy  if  God,  instead  of
having  constantly  checkmated  him  in  the  past,  had  given  him  a  Divine  com-
mission to  seek  and  to  destroy  the  son  of  Jesse.  The  untiring  zeal  of  such  a
man  under  the  influence  of  such  a  motive,  ought  to  read  a  lesson  to  all  who,
professing  to  be  animated  by  love  to  men  and  zeal  for  righteousness,  often  be-
come weary  and  faint-hearted  if  they  meet  with  repeated  disappointments.

II.  An  example  of  the  power  of  faith  in  God  to  abide  God's  time  of  vindication.
To  a  man  who  harboured  a  spirit  of  revenge  such  an  opportunity  as  now  presented
itself  to  David  to  take  the  life  of  his  adversary  could  hardly  have  been  resisted.
But  revenge  and  retaliation  are  more  frequently  found  in  alliance  with  guilt  than
with  innocence.  The  man  who  is  wrongfully  accused  is  generally  more  ready  to
forgive  his  accuser  than  the  man  who  is  guilty  of  the  crime  laid  to  his  charge,
because  the  latter  is,  as  a  rule,  more  likely  to  be  governed  by  passion,  and  the
former  to  be  ruled  by  conscience.  But  the  temptation  here  jiresented  to  David
by  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  case,  and  seconded  by  the  persuasions  of  his
followers,  did  not  take  the  form  of  an  act  of  private  revenge.  We  do  not  know
what  took  place  in  David's  spirit  when  he  found  Saul  so  completely  in  his  power,
but  if  there  arose  within  him  any  sudden  impulse  to  take  action  against  his
persecutor,  we  may  safely  conclude  that  it  sought  to  justify  itself  on  the  same
ground  as  that  urged  by  his  men,  viz.,  that  in  so  doing  he  would  be  only  taking  a
lawful  advantage  of  a  remarkable  providence.  And  it  was  this  which  formed  the
strength  of  the  temi)tation.  As  we  saw  in  the  preceding  chapter  (see  on  verses
7  to  12)  men  are  at  all  times  prone  to  interpret  circumstances  in  accordance  with
their  own  inclinations,  rather  than  by  the  light  of  Divine  laws,  and  nothing  but
a  strong  faith  i-n  God  could  have  saved  David  at  this  time  from  falling  into  this
snare.  The  man  who  was  now  at  his  mercy  was  avowedly  seeking  his  life,  and
might  it  not  therefore  be  lawful  to  slay  him  in  self-defence,  nay,  might  he  not
have  been  given  into  his  hand  for  this  very  purpose  ?  This  was  not  the  argument
of  one  man  only,  but  of  many,  and  numbers  strengthen  the  weight  of  argument.
Then  David  knew,  what  his  men  did  not  know,  that  he  was  also  the  anointed  of
the  Lord,  and  was  destined  by  Jehovah  to  succeed  Saul  as  king  of  Israel.  Was
not  the  time  now  come  when  by  Saul's  death  peace  might  be  restored  to  the
kingdom  which  he  neglected  to  gratify  his  private  enmity  ?  And  would  not
David  bring  a  blessing  to  the  entire  nation  by  executing  the  sentence  which  had
long  since  been  pronounced  against  the  man  who  had  proved  so  faithless  to  the
great  trust  committed  to  him  ?  Such  questions  and  arguments  from  within  and
without  came  up  for  solution  in  the  short  S})ace  of  time  given  to  David  for  decision,
but  a  man  who,  like  David,  lives  a  life  of  dependence  upon  God  and  of  conddenco
234


CHAP.  XXIV.  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


in  TTim,  does  not  find  it  ^o  difficult  after  all  to  find  out  what  he  oui^lit  to  do  and

to  do  It.  'J'he  key  to  David "s  condiu't  in  these  circumstances  is  found  in  his  firm
persuasion  that  his  cause  was  in  the  iiands  ot  the  J>ivineand  liigliteous  liulerof

ad  men,  who  would  not  suffer  wrong  to  prevail  over  right  in  the  end.  "  'J he
J.ord  judge  between  me  and  thee,  and  see  and  jdead  my  cause."  This  was  the
shield  of  faith  upon  which  David  turned  aside  the  darts  of  temptation  which  now
assailed  him.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.  3.  If  Saul  had  known  his  own  .  Ver.  5.  His  conscience,  which  keeps
op[)ortuinties,  how  David  and  his  men  court  in  every  faculty  of  the  soul,
had  interred  themselves,  he  had  saved  checked  him,  such  was  his  tenderness
a  treble  labour  of  chase,  of  execution,  then.  Bee-masters  tell  us  that  those
and  burial ;  for  had  he  but  sto{)ped  the  are  the  best  hives  that  make  the
mouth  of  that  cave,  his  enemies  had  greatest  noise  ;  so  is  that  the  best  con-
laid  themselves  down  in  their  own  science  that  checketh  for  the  smallest
graves.  The  wisdom  of  God  thiid<s  fit  sins.  Good  men  are  afraid  of  the  least
to  hide  from  evil  men  and  spirits  those  show  of  sin,  being  jealous  over  them-
means  and  seasons  which  might  be,  if  selves  with  a  godly  jealousy. — Trapp.
they  had  been  .taken,  most  prejudicial

to  his  own.     We  had  been  oft  foiled  if  Ver.  7.     Revenge  is  unquestionably

Satan  could  but  have  known  our  hearts,  one  of  the  strongest  and  most  impe-

Sometimes  we  lie  open   to  evils,  and  tuous,  as  it  is  plainly  one  of  the  darkest

happy  it  is  for  us  that  He  only  knows  passions  in  the  heart  of  man.     Of  all

it  who  pities  instead  of  tempting  us.  the  tragedies  of  which  this  earth  has

Bp.  Hall.  been  the  scene,  the  wildest  have  sprung

Ver.  4.     Providential  purpose,  ap-  from  the  exercise  of  revenge  ;  of  all  the

parent  and  real.     1.    What  was  here  crimes  that  have  disgraced  humanity,

the  apparent  purpose   of    God  ?     To  the  darkest  have  had  this  foul  passion

give  an  injured  man  the  opportunity  for   their   mother  ;    and   perhaps  the

of  delivering  and  avenging  himself.  .  .  bitterest    remorse   with   which    man's

2.  How  did  he  know  that  such  could  bosom  has  ever  been  torn,  is  that
not  be  the  purpose  of  Providence?  which  has  followed  the  deeds  of  re-
Because  it  would  involve  his  doing  venge.  Dark  and  dreadful,  too,  though
what  would  be  wrong  in  itself.  An  this  passion  be,  nothing  comes  less
enlightened  and  tender  conscience  must  welcome  than  the  call  to  check  it ;  and
check  our  interpretationsof  Providence,  once  it  is  fairly  roused,  life  itself  would

3.  What  was  the  real  Providential  pur-  often  be  parted  with  more  readily  than
pose  ?  As  usual,  it  was  manifold  :  we  the  savage  gratification  which  it  craves,
can  see  the  following  points  ;  {a).  'Vo  JNowh(3re  have  its  frightful  fruits  been
make  him  more  conscientious  by  obey-  more  clearly  shown  than  in  that  beau-
ing  conscience  under  sore  temptation  tiful  island  of  the  Mediterranean  cele-
(vers.  5  and  6).  {h).  To  present  a  brated  as  the  birth})lace  of  the  first
noble  example  to  his  rude  followers  and  Napoleon.  For  hundreds  of  years
the  people  at  large  (vers.  6,  10).  (c).  Corsica  has  sustained  a  lofty  reputation
To  furnish  a  most  convincing  proof  that  for  its  patriotism  and  dauntless  valour;
he  was  wrongly  accused  (vers.  9-11).  age  after  age  has  produced  fresh  crops
{d).  To  give  him  ground  fora  confident  of  heroes,  worthy  of  being  ranked  with
appeal  to  Providence  in  future  (ver.  12  those  of  any  land  ;  but  in  spite  of  the
sq.  ;  comp.  chap.  xxvi.  23-24).  {e).  richness  of  its  soil,  the  beauty  of  its
To  heighten  his  reputation  for  loyalty  climate,  and  the  fearless  spirit  of  its
and  magnanimity,  and  smooth  the  way  people,  the  country  is  most  miserable  ;
to  his  finally  becoming  king. — Langes  its  plains  are  uncultivated,  its  inha-
Commentary,  bitants  are  kept  in  constant  misery  by

235


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL  Book  t


family  fends  tliat  never  heal,  and  that  had  won  the  victory,  witliout  havini^

are  constantly  breakinu^  out  with  fresh  shed  hlood  he  had  erected  the  tropliy.

vehemence,   through  the  influence  of  He  came  forth,  therefore,  not  carrying

an  organised  system  of  revenge,  that  tlie  head  of  a  Philistine,  but  a  mortified

under  the  name  of  the  vendttta   lias  heart,  a  conquered  anger  ;    and  it  was

become  one  of  the  institutions  of  tlie  not  to  Jerusalem  that  he  consecrated

country.     .     .     .     It  is  only  when  we  his  spoils,  but  to  heaven,  to  the  city

think  of  such  awful  fruits  of  the  s])irifc  on  high.     We  see  no  women  coming

of  revenge  that  we  become  truly  alive  forth  to  meet  him  with  songs  of  praise,

to  the  singular  excellence  of  the  8})irit  but  the  an^ols  applauded  his  deed  and

of  forbearance  which  David  remarkably  admired   his   wisdom   and  piety.     For

displayed.     We  see  the  striking  con-  he  returned  after  having  given  many

trast  between  nature  and  grace — be-  wounds  to  his  adversary  ;   not  to  Saul,

tween  the   heart  of  man    as  sin  has  whom  he  had  saved,  but  to  his  real

made  it,  and  the  heart  of  man  as  grace  enemy,  the  devil,  whom  he  had  pierced

renews  it.    .     .     .    Yet  while  we  freely  through  with  many  thrusts.      For  as

award  the  tribute  of  admiration,  let  us  our  anger  and  lust  and  our  mutual

not  forget  that  the  field  is  one  upon  collisions  rejoice   the  devil,  so   peace

which  similar  victories  are  always  to  and  concord  and  victory  over  passion

be  won. — Blackie.  grieve    and   conquer  him   who  hates

peace  and  is   the  father  of  jealousy.

Ver.  8.   David  follows  Saul  from  the  David   comes   forth,   tlien,    from    the

cave  more  joyous  now  than  after  the  cavern  with  a  crown  upon  his  head  .  .

conquest  of  Goliath.     Indeed,  this  last  it  is  not  the  diadem  of  Saul,  but  the

victory   was  the  more  glorious  one —  crown  of  justice  which  adorns  him — it

the   spoils   were   more    precious,    the  is  not  the  royal  })urple  which  enwraps

trophies  more   honourable,     'i'hen,  he  him,  but  a  wisdom  more  than  human,

had  needed  a  sling,  stones,  and  battle  before  which  the  most  gorgeous  robe

array  ;  this  time  his  reason  had  been  becomes  pale. — Chrysostom,
a  sutiicieut  weapon — without  arms  he


MAJN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PABAGRAPH.— Verses  B-15,
David's  Vindication  of  Himself  to  Saul.

I.  This  vindication  of  Pavid  reveals  that  he  still  considered  himself  a
subject  of  the  king  of  Israel.  The  best  and  wisest  men  are  always  the  least
ready  to  rebel  against  those  in  authority,  and  their  obedience  will  si  and  a  much
more  severe  test  than  that  of  men  who  are  their  inferiors  in  character  and
ability.  A  son  who  is  far  above  his  father  in  excellence  and  wisdom  will  be  far
more  loyal  to  his  weak  and  erring  parent  than  one  who  is  like  him  in  character,
and  a  subject  who  is  morally  and  intellectually  superior  to  his  ruler  will  bear
more  before  lie  renounces  his  allegiance  than  one  who  is  less  intelligent  and
godly.  Noble  and  good  men  in  all  ages  have  been  tried  both  in  their  public
and  private  relationships  by  the  incapacity  and  wickedness  of  those  in  authority
over  them,  and  it  has  sometimes  become  their  duty  to  disown  such  authority
and  renounce  their  allegiance  to  such  rule,  but  this  is  a  step  that  is  taken  with
the  most  reluctance  by  the  men  who  seem  to  have  the  most  right  to  take  it.  It
seems  to  us,  when  we  read  this  history,  that  of  all  the  men  in  Israel  at  this
time,  David  was  the  least  bound  to  acknowledge  Saul  as  his  lord  and  king.  No
man  in  the  kingdom  had  deserved  Saul's  gratitude  so  much  and  none  had
received  such  ingratitude  and  cruelty  at  his  h.and.  Yet  David's  mode  of  address
here  shows  him  still  acknowledging  himself  Saul's  subject,  and  reveals  that  he
bad  only  taken  arms  in  self-defence,  and  not  in  defiance.  The  spirit  of  this
236


CHAP.  XXIV.  IIOMILETIO  COM  ME  NT  A  R  Y :  SA  M  UEL,


Old  Tesfamont  servant  of  Cod  was  the  same  as  tliat  wliicli  animated  the  apostles
and  martyrs  of  tlie  Christian  Clmrcli  (Rom.  xiii.  1  ;  Titus  iii.  1),  and  had  its
root  in  the  same  rccOL^niiion  of  God  as  the  Sui)reme  Ruler  and  Jud<;e  of  all  men.

II.  His  conduct  shows  that  he  considered  Saul's  position  worthy  of  outward
tokens  of  respect.  When  it  is  impossible  to  respect  a  man  for  what  he  is,  we
may  sometimes  feel  bound  to  honour  him  for  what  he  has  been,  or  for  what  he
now  rejtresonts.  A  heap  of  ruined  stones  may  have  nothing  in  their  present
appearance  to  awaken  intrre-t,  but  if  they  are  tlje  remains  of  a  city  once  famous
for  its  beauty,  thinking  men  cannot  h)ok  at  them  without  emotion.  Or  a  building
which  has  never  had  any  pretensions  to  architectural  beauty  may  awaken  a
feelini,'  ahnost  of  reverence  because  it  rcpresfHits  something  of  far  more  value
and  dignity  than  it>elf.  So  wlien  David  bowed  himself  before  Saul  it  could
hardly  have  been  in  token  of  respect  for  any  moral  excellence  now  found  in  him,
but  must  have  rather  been  in  honour  of  what  he  once  was  and  of  what  he  even
now  represented.  He  was  still  the  Lord's  anointed — the  man  whom  God  had
Himself  appointed  to  rule  over  His  people  Israel,  and  there  had  been  a  time
when  he  had  seemed  not  unworthy  of  the  honour  thus  put  upon  him.  And
David,  like  every  other  godly  man,  was  ever  ready  to  render  honour  wherever  it
was  due,  whether  to  place  or  person,  whether  to  individual  excellence  or  to
"powers  ordained  of  God"  (Rom.  xiii.  1.)

III.  Yet  David's  vindication  contains  an  appeal  to  Saul's  reason  and  to
God's  justice.  Reverence  for  Saul  as  a  king,  and  a  sense  of  his  own  duty  as  a
subject,  did  not  degenerate  into  that  servility  which  seems  to  ignore  the  fact
that  the  higher  the  position  tlie  greater  the  obligation,  and  to  forget  that  there
is  a  Judge  before  whose  bar  all  human  distinctions  fade  away.  David  did  not
think  it  incompatible  with  his  acknowledgment  of  Saul  as  his  lord  to  remon-
strate with  him  on  his  foolishness,  and  to  remind  him  that  there  was  a  King  to
whom  both  the  persecutor  and  the  persecuted  would  have  to  render  an  account,
and  whose  judgment  would  certainly  be  according  to  truth.  The  most  genuine
loyalty  is  always  found  associated  with  self-respect  and  with  faith  in  God,  and
they  are  the  most  faithful  servants  of  kings  who  do  not  fear  to  show  them
wherein  they  err,  and  who  can  with  confidence  commit  their  cause  to  Him  who
will  one  day  certainly  render  every  man  according  to  his  works.  For  neither  of
the  two  causes,  one  or  the  other  of  which  sometimes  operates  in  the  decisions  of
a  human  judge  and  leads  him  to  pronounce  an  unjust  sentence,  can  ever  have
any  place  in  the  Divine  administration.  A  man  may  condemn  the  innocent  or
justify  the  guilty  through  ignorance,  or  from  wickedness.  He  may  not  be
acquainted  with  all  the  facts  of  the  case,  or  some  seKish  or  other  evil  motive
may  lead  him  to  pronounce  a  false  verdict.  But  it  is  the  joy  of  every  lover  of
truth  and  righteousness  to  know  that  this  can  never  be  the  case  with  God.  He
who  searches  and  knows  everyone  of  His  creatures  can  never  be  mistaken  in  His
judgment,  and  He  who  is  infinitely  above  them,  both  in  nature  and  in  character,
can  have  no  motive  or  desire  to  wrong  anyone  of  them  in  the  smallest  degree.
Hence  the  assurance  with  which  men  in  all  ages  have  turned  to  Him  when  they
have  been  wronged  by  their  fellow-creatures,  and  have  said,  with  David,  "  Ihe
Lord^  therejore,  be  judge,  and  see,  and  plead  my  cause  J*


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  10.  It  by  no  means  follows  anointing.  God  does  not  stand  in  the
that  all  kings  are  God's  lieutenants  in  same  special  relation  to  other  nations
the  sense  in  which  Saul  was,  or  lie  under  as  he  did  to  the  Jews.  Magistracy  is
the    same    sacred    charm    of    divine     still  the  ordinance  of  God,  but  it  is  left

237


IIOMILETTCCOMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.


BOOK  1.


to  commniiitiosto  choose  both  tlie  form
of  goveniineiit  and  the  individuals
wlm  are  to  exercise  it.  Nations  have
power  to  choose  tlieir  governors,  aiul,
unless  there  be  a  special  arrangemont
to  the  contrary,  they  have  power  to
discontinue  them.  .  .  .  Thus  viewed,
tlie  consideration  thatinfluenctMl  r)avid
resolves  itself  into  a  principle  of  wider


application.  It  was  the  fruit  of  that
profound  reverence  for  God's  will,  and
that  thorough  confidence  in  God's
providential  government,  and  in  the
holy  i>rinciples  on  which  it  is  conducted,
that  characterised  David  in  all  his
better  periods  and  that  will  ever
characterise  the  humble  and  consistent
Christian. — Blaikie.


MAIN  HO  MI  LET  I CS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.^Verses  16—22.

The  Effect  of  David's  CoNDUcr  upon  Saul.

I.  Here  is  a  ris^hteous  emotion  and  a  sincere  confession  of  sin  produced  by
g-odlike  conduct.  The  ice  up(m  the  lake  may  be  very  strong  and  thick,  but
there  is  a  strength  of  sunlight  tliat  will  dissolve  it ;  and  the  iion  may  be  very
hard  and  cold,  but  there  is  an  intensity  of  heat  that  will  uiaKe  it  glow  and  even
melt  it.  So  the  conscience  may  he  as  it  were  frozen  over  by  indulgence  in  some
evil  passion,  and  all  the  soul  hardened  hy  a  long  course  of'  sin  ;  but  there  are
manifestations  of  goodness  that  will  melt  the  stubl)orn  will,  and  awaken  into  life
tlie  better  part  of  the  man  although  it  may  be  only  for  a  season.  Circumstances
sometimes  ]»ring  such  a  man  into  such  contact  with  a  godly  character  that  he
cannot  avoid  seeing  the  contrast  between  what  he  is  and  what  he  might  and
ouglit  to  be  ;  and  the  effect  of  the  vision  is  to  awaken  a  feeling  of  contrition,
and  it  may  be  to  extort  from  him  a  confession  of  his  guilt.  Such  a  time  now
came  to  Saul.  The  feeling  of  jealousy  against  David  had  gained  such  an
ascendancy  in  his  soul  as  to  stifle  all  his  better  feelings,  and  even  the  voices  of
reason  and  conscience  ;  but  this  meeting,  and  David's  godlike  behaviour,  caused
him  for  a  moment  to  see  himself  in  a  true  light,  and  to  discern  how  great  a  gulf
of  character  there  was  between  him  aiid  the  man  whom  he  was  hating  even  unto
blood.  For  a  short  season  the  magnanimity  of  David  asserted  its  power  over  his
pitiless  foe,  and  melted  him  into  contrition  and  confession.

II.  But  this  righteous  emotion  and  sincere  confession  failed  to  produce  true
repentance*  Where  there  is  beautiful  blossom  we  uiay  hope  in  due  time  to  see
the  fruit,  and  whenever  we  rejoice  over  the  ri})ened  fruit  we  know  it  began  with
the  blossom,  but  the  blossom  is  not  the  fruit,  and  we  know  that,  alas,  many  a  fair
blossom  fails  to  bring  forth  that  which  it  seems  to  proniise.  So  is  it  with  con-
trition for  sin  and  sincere  repentance,  the  one  must  precede  the  other,  and  when
we  see  the  first  we  hope  it  may  prove  to  be  that  godl]/  sorroiv  which  worketh
repentance  (2  Cor.  vii.  10).  But  we  know  that  it  is  not  always  so,  and  Saul's
conduct  here  and  on  a  subsequent  occasion  shows  how  even  strong  and  sincere
emotion  may  be  felt  and  yet  not  pass  into  life  and  action,  and  so  fail  to  benefit
the  character  and  even  make  repentance  more  difficult.  Every  conviction
of  sin  which  leaves  the  man  no  better  than  before  does  not  leave  him  as  it  found
him,  but  in  a  worse  condition,  even  as  the  bar  of  iron  which  has  been  in  the
furnace  is  harder  than  one  which  has  never  yet  been  heated.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  16.     What  change  is  this  that  David's    name   (chap,   xxii,    7) — who

takes  place  all  at  once  ?     lie  who  but  hated  even  his  nanie — makes  him  one

latelycould  not  bring  himself  to  mention  of  his  family  by  calling  him  his  son  J
238


CHAP.  XXIV.


JIOMILETIO  COMiMLWTA R  Y:    SAM  UEL,


Wliat  more  liappy  fortune  tlian  that
wliich  now  betel  David,  who  transforms
lii.s  would-be  murderer  into  his  father,
who  clian^es  the  wolf  into  the  lamb,
who  is  able  to  extinguish  this  anLiry
confln.i;Tation,  to  make  a  calm  succeed
tiie  temj)est,  and  to  heal  this  fever  of
l»assion  in  the  soul  ?  David's  words
had  brought  about  this  revolution.
Saul  says  not,  "  It  is  thou  who
speakest,  my  son  David,"  but  ''It  is
tluj  voice,  my  son  David,"  for  the  m^re
sound  of  his  voice  was  enough  to  soften
him.  Atid  as  a  father,  wlio,  after  a
long  absence,  hears  the  voice  of  his
child,  needs  not  to  see  him  to  be
awakened  to  emotion,  so  Saul,  after
the  words  of  David  penetrating  his
heart,  chased  away  his  hatred,  recog-
nised in  David  the  man  of  God,  and,
cured  of  his  evil  passion,  felt  himself
possessed  by  another  emotion  ;  his
malice  had  disappeared,  and  joy  and
affection  had  taken  its  [)lace.  Just  as
in  the  darkness  of  night  we  do  not
perceive  the  presence  of  our  friend,
but  when  the  daylight  comes  we  recog-
nise him  even  afar  off,  so  while  we  are
evilly  disposed  towards  each  other,  we
listen  to  each  other's  words,  and  look
upon  one  anotlier  in  the  spii-it  of  pre-
judice, but  when  we  are  cured  of  cmr
malice,  the  voice  which  before  sounded


harsh  and  angry  becomes  soft  and
pleasant  to  our  ears,  and  the  counte-
nance which  seemed  repulsive  and  un-
welcome is  now  lovely  and  attractive.
—  Abridged  from  Chri/sostom.

Ver.  17.  He  should  have  said,  Thoa
art  righteous,  but  I  am  wicked  ;  but
the  utmost  he  will  own  is  this,  1  Jioit
art  more  righteous  than  1.  Bad  men
will  commonly  go  no  further  than  this
in  their  confessions  ;  they  will  own  they
are  not  so  good  as  some  others  are  ;
tliere  are  those  that  are  better  than
they  and  more  righteous. — Henry.

Ver.  18.  Saul  for  the  present  spake
as  he  thought.  But  good  thoughts
make  but  a  thoroughfare  of  wicked
hearts  :  they  stay  not  there,  as  those
that  like  not  their  lodging. — Trapp.

Saul's  sense  of  David's  generosity
must  be  very  strong  when  he  beseeches
God  to  reward  it.  Indeed,  Saul  had
no  equivalent  to  give  David  for  the
kindness  shown  him,  and  therefore  he
refers  him  to  God  for  retribution.  For
if,  after  this,  he  should  even  save
David's  life,  yet  still  he  could  only  save
the  life  of  his  best  benefactor,  whereas
David  both  spared  and  saved  the  life
of  his  most  mortal  enemy. — JJelany,


CHAPTER  XXV.


Critical  and  Expository  Notks. — Ver.  1.  "And  Samuel  died."  Josephus  says  that
"  Samuel  governed  and  presided  over  the  people  alone,  after  the  death  of  Eli,  twelve  years,  and
eighteen  years  in  conjunction  with  Saul,  the  king."  He  likewise  adds,  "  They  wept  for  him  a
very  great  number  of  days,  not  looking  on  it  as  a  sorrow  for  the  death  of  another  man,  but  aa
that  in  which  they  were  everyone  of  themselves  concerned.  He  was  a  righteous  man,  and
gentle  in  his  n:iture,  and  on  that  account  he  was  very  dear  to  God."  *'  In  his  house,"  i.e.,  in
a  court  or  garden  attached  to  his  house.  "  Every  respectable  family  in  the  East  still  has  its  own
house  of  tlie  dead,  and  often  this  is  ir  a  little  detached  garden,  consisting  of  a  small  stone
Imilding,  wliere  there  is  no  rock,  resembling  a  Innise.  It  has  neither  door  nor  window.
(Cf.  1  Kinu's  ii.  34  ;  Job  xxx.  23.)  (Jamieson.)  "David  arose,"  etc.  It  might  be  that  David
felt  himself  in  more  danger  now  that  the  restraint  which  Sanmel  might  have  exercised  over  Saul
was  removed,  or,  as  Kcil  suggests,  the  wilderness  of  Jud;ih  might  no  longer  afford  sustenance  to
him  and  his  large  body  of  bix  hun<tred  men.  Tlie  wilderness  of  Paran  seems  to  have  been  a
somewhat  undefined  tract  of  country  extending  from  the  southern  border  of  Canaan  to  the
Sinaitic  desert  on  the  south,  the  wihlerness  of  Slnu-  on  the  west,  and  the  territory  of  Edom  on
the  east.  The  examination  of  the  various  Scripture  references  to  this  region  seems  to  show  that
the  term  was  sometimes  used  for  the  entire  wilderness  tract  of  this  district.  {^See  Smitli't
BMiccd  Dictionary.)

239


UOMIIETW  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  I.


Ver.  2.  "Maon."  A  city  of  Jiiclah  (Josh.  xv.  55),  situated  on  a  hill  now  called  Tell  Main,
ahout  seven  or  eight  miks  smith  of  Hehi-nn.  Jt  is  now  in  j-nins.  "  Carivul."  This  word
literally  means  a  fertile  region,  and  is  apph'ed  also  to  the  promontory  on  the  north-east  of
]*alestine,  famous  in  the  history  of  Elijsh.  Tlie  place  here  so  named  is  the  present  Kiirmut  and
its  neighbourhood,  about  a  mile  north-west  of  Maou.  David  had  before  taken  shelter  near
Maon,     (See  the  notes  on  chapter  xxiii.  24.)

Ver.  3.  *'Nabal,"  i.e.,  fool.  (See  ver.  25.)  Keil  thinlcs  it  could  hardly  have  been  this  man's
proper  name,  but  was  a  popular  desigiialion  on  account  of  his  folly.  "Of  the  houso  of
Caleb."  Literally  he  was  a  Calebite  [Wordsworth),  and  as  t^o  word  means  "a  dog  man,'"
and  Josephus,  among  others,  understand  it  to  n)ean  "  a  doggish,  cynical  man.  But  Caleb's  pos-
t<ession  lay  in  this  region,  and,  as  Erdmann  remarks,  the  two  former  statements  sufficiently
characterise  his  disposition,  and  a  third  would  be  out  of  keeping  with  the  simplicity  of  the
description.  Moreover,  "  the  statement  of  his  origin  accords  with  this  importance,  as  a  man
'great'  by  his  riches,  and  it  is  intr<xluced  as  something  new  by  the  words  'and  he,'  whicli
would  not  suit  the  continu;<tion  of  his  moral  jiortraiture."  We  may  therefore  conclude  that
Nabal  was  descended  from  the  ancient  hero  of  Israel,  and  he  was,  then,  of  the  same  tribe  as
David.

Ver.  5.  "Go  to  Nabal  and  greet  37i'n,*' etc.  "In  all  these  particulars,  when  we  were  at
Kermul  and  were  in  the  midst  of  scenes  memorable  for  the  adventures  of  I'nvid,  we  were  d'-eply
struck  with  the  truth  and  strength  of  the  biblical  description  of  manners  and  customs,  almost
identically  the  same  as  those  that  exist  at  the  present  n.-iy.  On  such  a  festive  occasion  as  a
shfepshearing  near  a  town  or  village,  an  Arab  Sheikh  of  the  neigh'  ouring  desert  would  hardly
fail  to  put  in  a  word  either  in  person  or  by  message,  and  his  message  would  be  a  transcript  of
that  of  David  to  Nabal."     (X>r.  Robinson.)

Ver.  6.  "To  him  that  liveth."  The  words  in  'prosperity  it  will  be  seen  are  supplied  by  our
translators.  The  Hebrew  i)hrase  is  obscure  and  has  been  very  variously  rendered,  but  the  most
satisfactory  exphmation  seems  to  be  that  in  which  the  word  translated  liveth  is  taken  as  a
substantive,  and  the  whole  understood  as  a  salutation.     So  Keil,  Luther,  etc.

Ver.  7.  "Neither  was  there  aught  missing,"  etc.  "Those  words  may  refer  to  the  pro-
tection afforded  the  hei'dsmen  by  David's  people  against  the  predatory  desert  tribes  ;  for  such
protection  against  thieving  attacks  (which  came  expressly  from  the  south)  is  expressly  affirmed
in  verses  1  n,  21  {Erdmann.)  "Thus,  even  in  his  outlawry,  David  showed  himself  the  protector
of  his  people."     (Keil.)

Ver.  8.  A  good  day,  i.e.,  a  festive  day.  Sheepshearing  was  conducted  as  a  festival  (comp.
(;!en.  xxxviii.  12  ;  2  Sam.  xiii.  23),  when  strangers  and  the  poor  were  feasted.

Ver.  9.  "  Ceased,"  rather,  rested  or  sat  doivn,  to  await  the  fulfilment  of  their  request.

Ver.  11.  "My  bread  rnd  my  water,"  etc.  "The  mention  of  water  indicates  a  country
where  water  was  scarce.  Compare  the  earnestness  with  which  Caleb's  daughter  in  this  very
country  begged  of  her  father  the  springs  of  water."    Josh.  xv.  19.     {Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  18.  "Bottles,"  i.e.,  goatskins,  capable  of  holding  a  large  quantity.  "Clusters  of
raisins,"  rather,  raisin  cakes.     "  F.g  cakes,"  "pressed  figs  joined  together."     {Keil.)

Ver.  20.  "By  the  cove  t."  "Probably  a  hollow  between  two  peaks  of  a  mountain.  This
\'.  ould  explain  the  use  of  the  word  to  come  down,  with  reference  both  to  Abigail,  who  approached
ou  one  side,  and  David,  who  came  on  tlie  other."     {Keil.)

Ver.  22.  "  This  oath,  in  which  the  punishment  of  God  is  not  called  down  upon  the  swearer
liimself  (God  do  so  to  me),  as  it  generally  is,  but  upon  the  enemies  of  David,  is  analogous  to  that
in  chap.  iii.  17,  where  punishment  is  threatened  upon  the  person  addressed,  who  is  there  made
to  swear ;  except  ihut  here,  as  the  oath  could  not  be  uttered  in  tlie  ears  of  the  person  addressed,
upon  whom  it  was  to  fall,  the  enemies  generally  are  mentioned  instead  of  to  thee.  There  is  no
doubt,  therefore,  as  to  the  correctness  of  the  text."     {Keil.)

Ver.  26.  "Let  thine  enemies,"  etc.  "That  is,  thou  standest  under  God's  protection  and
guidance,  so  that  all  who  as  ihine  enemies  will,  like  Nabal,  do  thee  evil,  shall,  like  him,  become
fools  and  fall  under  God's  punishment."  {Erdmann.)  "She  reminds  David  of  the  promise  of
God.  Not  that  she  piophesies,  but  that  she  has  gathered  it  from  the  general  promises  of  the
word  of  God.  The  promise  referred  to  is  that  whoever  does  good  to  his  enemies  and  takes  no
vengeance  upon  them,  God  Himself  will  avenge  him  upon  his  enemies,  according  to  the  saying,
Vengeance  is  mine,  I  will  repay."     (Seb.  Schmidt.)

2i:0


OHAP.  XXV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


Yet.  28.  **Evil  hath  not  been  found,"  i.e.,  misfortune,  not  wickedness;  that  thought  is
not  expressed  until  verse  31.

Ver.  29,  '^  Bundle  of  life,"  rather,  the  bundle  of  the  living.  "  The  metaphor  is  taken  from
the  custom  of  binding  up  vahiable  things  in  a  bundle  to  prevent  their  bein<,'  injured."  ( Kcit.)
"The  m  VUe  of  the  sling,"  liteially,  the  cup  of  the  sling,  the  cavity  in  which  the  stone  was
placed.  'Jliis  fiijure  is  adopted  in  Jer.  x.  18,  "I  will  sling  out  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  at
this  once."     (Wordsworth.)

Ver.  30.  "  When  the  Lord  shall  have  done."  "  From  these  words  it  appears  to  follow
that  Abigail  had  received  certain  information  of  the  anointing  of  David,  and  his  designation  to
be  the  future  king,  prob.ildy  t1irou,<,'h  Samuel  or  one  of  the  pupils  of  the  propliets.  There  is
nothing  to  preclude  this  .!ssnnij)ti()n,  even  if  it  cannot  be  hlstoricaily  sustained.  Abigail  manifests
such  an  advance  and  maturity  in  the  life  of  faith  as  could  only  have  been  derived  from  intercourse
with  the  prophets  It  is  expressly  stated  with  regard  to  Elijah  and  Elisha,  that  at  certain  times
the  pious  assembled  together  around  the  prophets.  What  prevents  us  from  assuming  the  same
with  regard  to  Pamuel  ?  The  absetice  of  any  distinct  testimony  to  that  effect  is  amply
compensated  for  by  the  brief,  and  for  the  most  part  casual  notices  that  are  given  of  the  influence
which  Samuel  exerted  upon  all  Israel."     (Keil.)

Ver.  31.  "  That  this  shall  be  no  grief  unto  thee."  "  Like  a  wise  woman,  she  reserves
her  strongest  arguments  till  the  last."     (  Wordsworth.)

Ver.  36.     "  Merry  with  him,"  literally,  therewith,  i.e.,  on  account  of  the  feast,

Ver.  37.  "  A  stone."  Anger,  or  fear,  or  both  combined  wi*-.h  the  excesses  of  the  debauch,
probably  brought  on  a  stroke  of  apoplexy,  although  his  subsequent  death  is  said  to  have  been
by  the  hand  of  the  Lord  (ver.  38).

Ver.  39.  "  Pleaded  the  cause,"  etc.  "  The  figure  is  of  a  case  in  law,  which  is  settled  by  the
judicial  decision.  The  '  laiv- cause  of  my  reproach,''  that  is,  the  reproach  offered  to  me,  on
account  of  which  the  Lord  had  to  appear  against  Nabal  as  Judge  and  Avenger,  Connect  'from
the  hand '  with  '  pleaded,'  not  with  *  my  reproach,*  and  render  pregnantly  *  he  has  conducted
my  cnu^e  to  a  conclusion  out  of  the  hand,'  that  is,  he  has  collected  the  costs  from  the  condemned
person,  and  has  settled  the  matter  by  the  infliction  of  the  proper  punishment."  (Erdniann.)
"  And  David  sent,"  etc.  "  This  unceremonious  proceeding  was  quite  in  the  style  of  Eastern
monarchs,  who  no  sooner  take  a  fancy  for  a  lady  than  they  despatch  a  messenger  to  intimate
their  royal  wishes  that  she  should  henceforth  reside  in  the  palace,  and  her  duty  is  implicitly  to
obey.  David's  conduct  shows  that  the  manner  of  the  Eastern  nations  were  already  imitated  by
the  great  men  in  Israel,  and  that  the  morality  of  the  times,  which  God  permitted,  gave  its
sanction  to  the  practice  of  polygamy.  .  .  .  The  fact  of  a  woman  in  her  wealthy  circumstances  so
willingly  forming  a  matrimonial  alliance  with  David,  shows  that  the  position  he  occupied,  while
expatiiated  in  the  wilderness,  was  far  more  elevated  and  comfortable  than  is  generally  imagined."
{Jamieson )

Ver.  43.  "  David  took."  rather,  had  taken.  "  Tlie  expression  also  points  to  David's  marriage
with  Michal,  the  daughter  of  Saul."  {Keil.)  "  Jezroel  "  Not  Jezreel  in  the  tribe  of  Issachar
(Josh.  xix.  18),  but  the  one  mentioned  in  Josh.  xv.  5d,  not  far  from  Maon.

Ver.  44.  "Phalti."  Called  Phaltiel  in  2  Sam.  iii.  15.  But  Michal  returned  to  David  after
Saul's  death.     "  Gallim."     A  place  between  Gibeah  of  Saul  and  Jerusalem  (Isa.  x.  30).

Note, — Delany  draws  an  analogy  between  the  character  and  history  of  David  at  this  time  and
the  legend  of  Orpheus  in  Thrace.  He  says:  "  I  beg  only  to  premise  and  to  submit  to  the  reader's
consideration  whether,  if  he  saw  two  historical  pictures  (the  only  two  of  the  kind  extant  in  the
world),  all  whose  outlines,  parts,  proportiims,  piincipal  fi^^aires,  actions,  and  attitudes,  were
exactly  the  same,  but  the  colouring  and  other  circumtantials  different,  and  one  of  these  con-
fessedly ancient  and  a  true  original,  and  the  other  demonstrably  later,  but  the  date  and  the
author  uncertain — whether  he  would  not  conclude  the  later  to  be  in  truth  no  other  than  a  copy
of  the  ori,i,dnal."  He  quotes  ancient  writers  to  prove  that  Orpheus  was  not  a  Thracian,  and
instances  his  traditional  beauty,  his  skill  in  music  and  song,  his  success  in  softening  the  infernal
king,  etc.,  as  so  many  points  of  agreement  between  the  two.  Referring  Psalm  cxx.  to  David's
sojourn  at  this  time  in  or  near  the  country  of  the  Edomites,  he  quotes  the  Arab  tradition  that
stones  and  birds  were  obedient  to  him,  though  he  could  not  reclaim  the  wild  men  of  the  desert
(Psa.  cxx.),  and  th-  legend  concerning  Orpheus,  which  pictures  the  rocks,  beasts,  and  birds  as
oliedient  to  him,  although  he  could  not  civilise  the  Thracians.  For  the  full  argument  in  fivoui
oi  this  view  see  Delany's  "  Life  of  David."

ft  241


B0MILE7JC  CO.)/3IEi\7ARY:   SAMUEL.  book  T.

MAIN  nOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPIf.-^Verseh

The  Death  of  Samuel.

I  The  death  of  the  righteous  often  seems  unseasonable  in  relation  to  the
living".  Ifc  is  often  so  in  family  and  social  life.  Cliildren  especially  need  a  kind
and  strono-  hand  to  guide  and  train  tliem,  and  when  their  father's  or  their
mother's  hand  is  snch  an  one,  their  removal  by  death  seems  most  inoj)portune
and  an  unmitigated  calamity.  We  think  how  much  better  it  would  have  been
for  the  family  if  the  parent's  life  had  been  prolonged  for  a  little  season,  until
the  children's  characters  were  more  established,  and  they  were  altogether  more
fitted  to  face  the  world  alone.  And  the  same  thing  often  takes  place  in  national
life.  A  great  and  good  man  is  removed  when  it  seems  as  if  the  country  in  which
he  has  been  so  great  a  power  for  good  must  suffer  irreparable  loss  by  his  removal,
and  that  the  time  of  his  departure  is  the  time  when  the  nation  most  needs  him.
Samuel's  death  at  this  time  seemed  a  most  unseasonable  event  so  far  as  the  wel-
fare of  Israel  was  concerned.  Although  he  had  retired  from  public  life,  he  could
hardly  fail  still  to  exert  some  power  for  good  over  Saul,  and  the  universal
lamentation  at  his  death  shows  that  the  respect  of  the  people  was  undiminished,
and,  therefore,  his  influence  upon  them  was  still  great  and  salutary.  Looking
from  a  human  stand-point,  it  seemed  especially  desirable  that  his  life  should  be
prolonged  until  David  had  succeeded  to  the  throne,  and  peace  and  order  had
taken  the  place  of  the  present  misrule  and  anarchy.

II.  But  the  value  of  the  life  of  the  righteous  often  becomes  more  manifest  at
his  death,  and  so  the  lessons  of  his  life  more  influential.  The  sun  rises  upon
the  earth  morning  by  morning,  and  its  coming  is  so  regular  and  certain  that
men  take  its  appearance  and  all  the  light  and  heat  that  it  brings  as  a  matter
of  course,  and  do  not  realise  how  many  and  how  inestimable  are  the  blessings
that  it  bestows,  or  how  indispensable  it  is  to  our  well-being.  But  if  there  came
a  morning  when  the  sun  did  not  rise,  and  if  it  were  known  that  it  would  shine
upon  the  world  no  more,  how  the  value  of  sunlight  would  come  home  to  every
man,  and  how  universal  would  be  the  lamentation  over  its  absence.  So  it  is
often  with  a  good  man's  influence.  It  is  so  constant,  so  unobtrusive,  and  yet  so
fraught  with  blessing,  that  none  realise  what  he  is  and  what  he  does  until  he  is
gone,  and  then  they  know  his  value  by  his  loss.  But  the  awakening  to  a  sense
of  his  worth  gives  force  to  the  lessons  of  his  life — both  to  those  of  deed  and
word — and  so  he  being  dead  still  speaks,  and  often  to  more  attentive  and
obedient  ears  than  when  living.  This  is  doubtless  the  key  to  what  often  seems
at  first  sight  so  mysterious  and  dark  a  providence,  the  death  of  the  righteous
when  their  life  seems  so  much  needed.  It  is  quite  possible  it  was  so  in  Samuel's
case.  It  is  certain  that  the  people  who  had  disregarded  his  advice  were  the
same  who  now  lamented  him,  and  it  may  be  that  their  sense  of  loss  brought
liome  more  powerfully  to  their  hearts  and  consciences  the  truths  which  he  had
taught  them  in  the  days  which  were  past.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

The  aged  man   is   laid  aside,  and  one's  death  will  be  truly  mourned  by  a

sinks  out  of  the  popular  view;    and  whole    people.      The   old,   who   sadly

when,  at  length,   he  dies,  people  are  think  themselves  forgotten,  may  find

Startled  as  they  recall  how  great  a  man  solace,  not  only  in  reviewing  the  past,

he  was  in  his  prime,  how  great  a  work  but  also   in   the  persuasion    that  yet

he  did.    It  is  sometliiug  to  live  so  that  once  again  they  will  be  vividly  rcmem-
242


CHAP.  XXV.


UOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


bered,  while  the  younger  should  strive  the  monarchy  from  the  first  to  the  last

to  anticipate  that  coiiiinir  time,   and  king.     .     .     .     And,  uidike  Moses  or

show   respect   and   affection    while   it  Deborah,   or   any    previous    saint    or

can  be  fully  enjoyed. — Translator  of  teacher  of  the  Jewish  Church,  he  grew

Langes  Commentary.  up  for  this  office  from  his  earliest  years.

_        _^               _                  „           ,  .     .     .     His  work  and  his  life  are  the

The  General  Effect  OF  Samuel  s  counterparts  of   each   other,    .     .    .

Whole  Career.  3^^,^!  j^jg  mission  is  an  example  of  the

Observe  what  his  position  was,  and  special  mission  which  such  characters

how  he  filled  it.    He  was  not  a  founder  are  called  upon  to  fulfil.     In  propor-

of  a  new  state  of  things,  like  Moses,  tion  as  the  different  stages  of  life  have

nor  a  champion  of  the  existing  order,  sprung    naturally    and   spontaneously

like   Elijah   or  Jeremiah.     He  stood,  out  of  each  other,  without  any  abrupt

literally,    between    the   two — between  revulsion,  each  serves  as  a  foundation

the  living  and  the  dead,  between  the  upon  which  the  other  may  stand — each

past  and  future,  the  old  and  the  new,  makes   the   foundation    of    the   other

with  that  sympathy  for  each  which,  at  more  sure  and  stable.     In  proportion

such  a  period,  is  the  best  hope  for  any  as  our  own  foundation  is  thus  stable,

permanent  solution    of  the  questions  and  as  our  own  minds  and  hearts  have

which     torment    it.       He    had    been  grown  up  thus  gradually  and  firmly,

brought  up  and  nurtured  in  tlie  old  without    any   violent    disturbance   or

system.    .     .     .    His  early  dedication  wrench  to  one  side  or  to  the  other  ;  in

to  the  sanctuary  belonged  to  that  age  that  proportion  is  it  the  more  possible

of  vows  of  which  we  saw  the  excess  in  to  view  with  calmness  and  moderation

the  rash  vows  of  Jephthah,  of  Saul,  the  difficulties  and  differences  of  others

and  the  assembly  at  Mizpeh  :  in  the  — to  avail  ourselves  of  the  new  methods

more  regular,   but   still  peculiar  and  and  new  characters  that  the  advance

eccentric  devotion  of  Samson  to  the  of  time  throws  in  our  way,     .     .     .

life  of  a  Nazarite.     .     .     .     He  was  to  preserve  and  to  communicate  the

also  the  last  of  the  Judges,  of  that  long  childlike  faith — changed,  doubtless,  in

succession  who  had  been  raised  up  from  form,  but  the  same  in  spirit — in  which

Othniel   downwards  to   effect  special  we  first  knelt  in  humble   prayer  for

deliverances.    (1  Sam.  vii.  12.)    .    .    .  ourselves  and  others,  and  drank  in  the

But  he  must  be  regarded  as  the  first  first  impressions  of  God  and  heaven,

representative  of  the  new  epoch  which  The   call   may  come  to  us   in   many

was  dawning  on  the  country.     He  is  ways  ;  it  may  tell  us  of  the  change  of

explicitly    described    as    Samuel,    the  the  priesthood,  of  the  fall  of  the  earthly

Frophet.      (Acts    iii.    24,    xiii.    20.)  sanctuary,     of    the    rise    of    strange

.    .    .    By  the  ancient  name  of  seer —  thoughts,  of  the  beginning  of  a  new

older  than   any   other  designation  of  epoch.     Happy  are  they  who  are  able

the  prophetic  office — he  was  known  in  to  perceive  the  signs  of  the  times,  and

his  own  and  after  times,   .     .     .     and  to  answer  without  fear  or  trembling,

he  is  the  beginning  of  that  prophetical  **  Speak,  Lord,  for  Thy  servant  heareth,"

dispensation  which   ran  parallel  with  — Dean  IStanley,

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAORAPH  — Versa  2—43.

Nabal,  David,  and  Abigail.

In  this  narrative  we  have —

I.  Selfishness  refusing  to  acknowledge  the  rights  of  others.  As  in  the
human  body  no  member  or  organ  exists  for  itseff  but;  each  for  the  good  of  the
other  and  to  contriijute  its  part  to  the  vvellbeing  of  the  whole,  so  in  the
Divine  ideal  of  the  human  family  each  member  is  intended  to  live,  not  to

243


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  I.


minister  to  liis  personal  gratification,  but  to  do  bis  or  ber  part  in  promoting  tbe
welfare  of  tbe  entire  race.  And  as  tbe  iiealtb  and  consequent  comfort  of  each
bodily  member  is  tbe  reward  of  tbis  rigbtful  discbarge  of  relative  functions,  so
every  man  and  woman  wiio  recognises  and  strives  to  discbarge  bis  or  ber  relative
duties  will  reap  tbe  recompense  in  individual  comfort  and  peace  of  soul.
Differences  and  inequalities  of  gifts  and  varieties  of  providential  dealings  make
such  a  mutual  ministry  absolutely  necessarv,  and  doubtless  bave  tbis  end  in
view  among  otbers,  to  bind  men  more  closely  to  eacb  otber  by  compelling  a
mutual  dependence  and  obligation.  But  Nabal  bere  stands  before  us  as  tbe
impersonation  of  tbat  large  majority  of  mankind  wlio  deny  such  obligations,
and  refuse  to  recognise  their  position  as  that  of  stewards  of  tbe  gifts  with
wbich  God  has  entrusted  them.  Naital  bere  looks  upon  bis  abundance  as
bis  own  peculiar  and  rigbtful  possession  ;  "  he  says,"  remarks  Wordsworth,
*' my  bread,  my  meat,  my  water,  my  sbearers,  as  if  anytbing  were  really
bis  own  and  not  lent  him  by  God  ; "  and  men  generally  forget  that  each
human  creature  bas  some  right  to  tbe  produce  of  tbat  earth  wbich  was  given
by  God  to  tbe  children  of  men  (Psa.  cxv.  16)  for  tbeir  sustenance  and  enjoyment.
This  cburlisb  sbeepmaster  was  really  indebted  to  David  and  bis  men  for  services
actually  rendered  ;  if  they  bad  not  been  *' a  wall"  unto  Nabal's  men  **  nigbt
and  day,  while  they  were  keeping  the  sheep,'*  (ver.  16)  he  would  bave  bad  a
smaller  flock  to  shear  and  perhaps  tbe  loss  of  useful  servants  to  deplore,  but  be
was  not  at  a  loss  for  an  excuse  for  refusing  to  consider  tbese  services.  He  makes
the  very  condition  of  need  whicb  strengtbened  David's  claim  an  excuse  for  re-
fusing to  satisfy  it,  and  insinuating  tbat  David's  present  untoward  circumstances
are  tbe  fruit  of  misconduct,  disclaims  all  knowledge  of  him,  and  implies  that
this  in  itself  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  letting  him  and  his  followers  suffer.  Tbese
have  always  been  favourite  arguments  in  tbe  mouth  of  selfisbness  against  helping
those  in  need.  If  a  man  is  poor,  it  is  convenient  to  assume  tbat  it  is  the  con-
sequence of  crime,  and  even  if  tbat  fact  cannot  be  proved,  ignorance  of  who  he
is  or  wbence  be  came  is  held  to  be  sufficient  to  absolve  from  all  obligations  in
relation  to  him.  But  God  will  not  admit  such  pleas.  He  bas  both  in  word  and
deed  declared  them  null  and  void.  In  tbe  laws  given  for  tbe  government  of  tbe
Hebrew  commonwealtb,  special  arrangements  were  made  to  ensure  to  each  and
all  a  due  proportion  of  material  good.  The  enactments  connected  with  the  year
of  jubilee  were  doubtless  intended  to  secure  this  end  and  to  prevent  families
from  sinking  into  a  condition  of  permanent  and  hopeless  povert3^  And  although
misfortune  and  trials  are  inseparable  from  the  conditions  of  tbe  present  life,  and
were  the  lot  of  some  of  God's  chosen  people  as  well  as  of  others,  be  who  had
waxen  poor  was  still  to  be  regarded  as  a  brother  and  treated  as  such  (Lev.  xxv.
25),  and  tbe  stranger,  tbe  fatherless,  and  tbe  widow  were  to  be  provided  for  at
tbe  penalty  of  forfeiting  tbe  Divine  blessing  (Deut.  xxiv.  19-21).  In  the
instance  before  us,  God,  by  a  special  visitation  of  judgment,  made  it  manifest
that  His  commands  cannot  be  set  at  nought  with  impunity.

II.  Righteous  indignation  at  wrong  degenerating  into  an  unrighteous
spirit  of  retaliation.  It  has  been  well  said  tbat  tbere  are  no  errors  so  miscbievous
as  those  which  are  the  perversions  of  truth,  and  it  is  also  true  that  no  sinful
emotions  are  so  dangerous  as  those  wbich  have  tbeir  origin  in  feelings  wbich  are
natural  and  right.  Affecticm,  for  instance,  is  a  God-implanted  instinct  of  the
soul,  but  it  may  run  into  idolatry  of  the  beloved  object.  And  careful  provision
for  one's  own  house  is  enjoined  by  Paul  (1  Tim.  v.  8),  but  it  may  degenerate
into  worldliness  and  covetousness,  and  it  is  often  difficult  for  erring  human
creatures  to  hold  tbe  balance  between  tbe  rigbtand  the  wrong  in  tbese  and  other
cases.  David  found  it  so  at  tbis  time.  Indignation  at  Nabal's  injustice  was
lawful,  but  he  did  not  stop  tbere.  No  doubt  the  suddenness  of  the  provocatiou
244


CHAP.  XXV.  UOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,


had  sometlnng  to  do  with  liis  liasty  and  sinful  resolve.  The  vessel  that  is  struck
in  a  vsuddeii  squall  is  in  greater  danger  than  one  in  wliich  the  captain  has  foreseen
the  storm  and  has  therefore  prepared  for  it.  After  all,  Nabal  had  not  wronged
David  so  much  as  Saul  liad,  and  yet  there  is  more  of  vindictive  feeling  in  this
utterance  against  the  foolish  sheepmaster  than  he  ever  manifested  against  his
royal  father-in-law.  But  then  he  knew  wliat  to  expect  from  Saul,  whereas  he
probably  expected  quite  different  treatment  from  Nabal.  Apart  from  the  fact
that  slieepshearing  was  the  customary  season  of  large  and  generous  entertainment
of  all  comers,  it  is  plain  that  Nabal  was  indebted  to  David  and  his  men,  and  it
seems  impossible,  too,  seeing  that  his  wife  was  evidently  well  acquainted  with
David's  history  and  character,  that  he  could  have  been  so  ignorant  of  them  as
he  pretended  to  be.  Therefore  David  had  good  reason  to  look  for  a  different
reception  of  his  message,  and  was  fully  justitied  in  feeling  himself  wronged.  But
he  was  not  justified  in  giving  way  to  a  spirit  of  revenge  and  still  less  in  purposing
to  make  many  innocent  people  suffer  for  the  guilt  of  one  person.  In  this,  as  in
other  seasons  of  trial,  the  man  after  God's  own  heart  shows  himself  to  be  of  'Tike
passions  as  we  are'*  (James  v.  17),  and  apt  to  allow  lawful  desire  and  virtuous
emotion  to  drift  into  very  positive  and  even  great  transgression.

III.   Godly  prudence  averting  the  consequences  of  selfishness.    Prudence  has

been  defined  as  "right  knowledge  in  special  cases — the  practical  realisation  of  the
higher  principle  of  knowledge  found  in  wisdom."     When  wisdom  decrees  that  a
certain  thing  is  to  be  done,  or  a  certain  word  spoken,  prudence  decides  upon  the
best  time  and  place  and  manner  of  doing  the  deed  or  speaking  the  word.     If  we
apply  this  definition  to  Abigail's  action  at  this  time  we  shall  find  it  is  characterised
by  a  rare  prudence  as  to  choice  of  time  and  place.    Many  a  one  can  see  what  ought
to  have  been  done  when  the  time  is  past  for  doing  it.     Many  can  act  wisely  and
well  after  time  for  mature  deliberation,  but  there  are  emergencies  which  admit
of  no  delay  for  maturing  plans.     Abigail  was  in  such  an  emergency  now.     There
could  be  no  delay  if  her  household  were  to  be  saved  from  slaughter,  and  David
from  the  commission  of  a  great  crime.     She  had  to  '*  make  haste"  in  all  her
preparations,  and  to  decide  upon  her  line  of  argument  with  David  while  on  her
way  to  meet  him,  and  she  doubtless  desired  to  encounter  him  on  ground  where  he
was  in  possession  rather  than  on  her  own  domain.     She  w^ould  thus  come  before
him  in  the  character  of  a  sui)pliant,  throwiiigherself  more  entirely  on  his  generosity
than  if  she  had  awaited  his  arrival  nearer  home,  and  it  would  be  less  humiliating
to  him  and  to  his  men  to  yield  to  her  demands  in  such  circumstances  than  if  they
had  turncid  back  when  already  at  her  gate.     Many  a  good  intention  has  failed  of
success,  and  many  a  wise  word  has  fxllen  unheeded  to  the  ground,  because  there
has  not  been  a  due  regard  to  \\\q  place  as  well  as  the  time  of  executing  the  one
or  uttering  the  other.     But  Abigail  did  not  err  in  this  respect.     Her  prudence
was  most  conspicuous,  however,  in  the  arguments  she  used  to  turn  David  from
his  purpose.     There  is  no  surer  way  of  winning  over  an  enemy  than  to  recognise
and  acknowledge  that  he  has  good  ground  of  displeasure.     When  he  sees  that
we  can  to  some  extent  excuse,  and  even  justify  him,  he  feels  that  he  has  a  fair
foe  to  deal  with,  and  a  great  part  of  the  gulf  that  separated  us  is  bridged  over
at  once.     Abigail  begins  her  address  to  David  by  freely  admitting  that  he  had
been  very  badly  treated  by  her  husband,  and  that  he  had  just  cause  of  displeasure.
This  must  have  had  a  powerful  influence  upon  him,  and  he  must  have  quickly
discerned  that  she  was  of  a  spirit  quite  different  from  that  of  her  foolish  husband.
She  then  appeals  to  the  deepest  emotions  and  strongest  motives  of  her  adversary.
She  was  happy  in  having  to  contend  with  a  man  who,  although  liable  to  err  in
word  and  action,  was,  like  herself,  a  true  servant  of  Jehovah,  who  would  not
deliberately  be  guilty  of  transgressing  the  Divine  law.     When  a  godly  person
has  such  a  one  to  deal  with,  they  know  from  their  own  experience  what  argu-

245


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


BOOK  1.


ments  will  be  of  most  weight.  They  know  that  such  a  man  or  woman  is  in  the
habit  of  committing  his  or  her  cause  to  God,  and  that  in  tlieir  inmost  soul  they
nre  assured  that  it  is  safe  with  Ilim.  They  know  how  bitter  to  such  are  the
upbraidings  of  conscience  after  wrong  done,  and  how  one  such  act  of  a  good  man,
nlr hough  repented  of  and  forgiven,  will  sometimes  sadden  all  his  future  life.
Aliigail,  by  reminding  David  of  all  these  things,  recalled  his  better  self,  and  enabled
his  reason  and  conscience  and  faith  to  re-assume  their  mastery  over  him.  He
would  have  been  a  hardened  man  who  could  have  resisted  such  an  appeal — with
a  man  of  David's  devout  spirit  it  was  impossible.  His  words  of  gratitude  to  this
good  woman  and  to  the  God  whose  messenger  she  was,  shows  how  complete  was
the  conquest.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


I


Ver.  3.  Even  the  line  of  faithful
Caleb  will  afford  an  ill-conditioned
Nabal.  Virtue  is  not,  like  unto  lands,
inheritable. — Bp   Hall.

Ver.  11.  Our  Lord  describing  the
Nabal  (or  fool)  of  the  gospel ;  who
had  said  **  1  have  no  room  where  to
bestow  7ny  fruits  ;  I  will  pull  down  my
barns,  etc.,  adds  that  God  said  unto
him,  **  Thou  fool  (thou  second  Aabal),
this  night  shall  thy  soul  be  required  of
thee,  and  then  whose  shall  those  things
be  wiiich  thou  hast  provided  "  (Luke
xii.  17-20. —  Wordsworth.

Ver.  12.  Some  understand  this  verse,
that  all  the  righteous  are  bound  to-
gether as  in  a  bundle,  being  of  the
same  faith,  religion,  affection  ;  whereas
the  wicked  do  fall  off  from  one  another,
are  never  soundly  conjoined  and
coupled  together.  2.  Some  refer  it
unto  the  next  life,  that  David  should
be  bound  up  with  the  Lord  among  His
saints.  3.  Some,  that  he  should  have
a  sure  house  to  him  and  his  posterity,
who  should  be  as  fast  bound  to  con-
tinue as  a  bundle  surely  tied  together.
4.  But  it  is  rather  to  be  understood  of
David's  preservation,  even  in  this  life,
as  the  words  show  both  going  before
and  followiui/ ;  for  before  Abigail  spake
of  Saul's  rising  against  David,  and  after
she  saith  that  (jod  shall  cast  out  his
enemies.  .  .  .  Yet  the  words  have  also
a  fit  relation  unto  eternal  life. —  Willet.

Ver.  31.  There  was  no  need  that  Abi-
gail should  add  to  her  words  the  prayer,
246


"  llemember  thine  handmaid."  The
impression  which  her  address  produced
in  the  soul  of  David  was  powerful  and
decisive.  Like  one  walking  in  a  dream,
who  wakens  up  at  the  sound  of  his  name,
and  suddenly,  with  horror,  sees  himself
on  the  briidc  of  a  giddy  precipice,  and
overflowing  with  thanks  towards  his
deliverer,  retraces  his  steps, — such  was
now  the  state  of  David's  mind.  Besides,
he  had  learned  to  his  humiliation,  as
well  as  also  to  his  safety,  to  know  one
side  of  his  temperament,  which  till
now  he  had  not  been  so  clearly  con-
scious of.  As  long  as  life  lasts  he  will
not  forget  this  march  towards  Carniel.
And  we,  perhaps,  do  not  err  if  we
suppose  that  what  he  once  experienced
at  L'armel  hovered  before  his  soul,  as
often  as  in  his  psalms,  particularly  in
the  seventeenth,  the  eighteenth,  the
thirty-seventh,  and  the  sixty-sixth,  he
raised  his  cry  to  the  Lord  as  a  God
who  *'  holdeth  our  soul  in  life,  and
suffer eth  not  our  feet  to  he  moved!' —
Krummacher.

Ver.  38.  Let  us  note  the  suggestive
contrast  which  is  here  presented  in  the
deaths  of  Samuel  and  Nabal.  On  the
one  hand,  we  have  a  good  man,  taken
to  his  reward  after  a  long  life  spent  in
the  service  of  his  God,  and  a  whole
nation  gathers  to  weep  around  his  tomb.
On  the  other,  we  have  a  surly,  selfish,
sottish  man  called  to  his  account,  and
no  tear  is  shed  over  his  grave  ;  but
instead,  a  feeling  of  relief  is  experienced
by  all  who  were  connected  with  him,
for  they  are  all  conscious  that  they  will


OHAl'.  XXV,


BOMILETW  OOMMENTAJiY:  SAMUEL.


be  the  happier  for  his  ahsefice.  In  the
one  case,  tlie  lite  on  earth  was  but  the
prehide  to  a  hii;her,  holier,  and  more
useful  existence  in  the  lieavenly  world  ;
in  the  other,  the  earthly  character  was
but  the  germ  out  of  wliich  would
spring,  in  the  state  beyond,  a  dee[)er,
darker,  and  more  repulsive  wickedness
even  than  that  vvhicli  he  had  manifested
here.  I  do  not  think  that  David  wrote
the  37th  Psalm  at  this  particular  date,
since,  from  one  expression  which  it
contains,  he  seems  to  have  penned  that
ode  in  his  old  age  ;  but,  wiiensoever  it
was  written,  it  is  hard  for  me  to  believe
th.it  he  had  not  before  his  mind  at  the
time  the  contrast  between  Nabal  and
Samuel  which  this  history  so  vividly
presents.  What  could  be  more  appro-
priate to  Nabal  than  these  words  :  "  1
have  seen  the  wicked  in  great  })ower,
and  spreading  himself  like  a  green  bay
tree.  Yet  he  passed  away,  and  lo,  he
was  not  :  yea,  I  sought  him,  but  he
could  not  be  found."  And  surely  David
thought  of  Samuel  when  he  wrote  this
verse  :  *'  Mark  the  perfect  man,  and
behold  the  ui)right  :  for  the  end  of  that
man  is  peace."

Now,  the  practical  question  for  us  is,
To  which  of  these  two  classes  do  we
belong  ?  Alas,  there  are  many  in  these
days  whose  lives  are  inflicting  a
constant  martyrdom  on  all  who  have
the  misfortune  to  he  nearly  related  to
them,  and  whose  deaths,  while  full  of
sadness  to  theniselves,  would  yet  be  a
blessing  and  a  relief  to  their  friends  as
ridding  them  of  a  constant  and  fearful
misery.  "  A  living  cross  is  heavier
than  a  dead  one  ;"  and  tiiere  are  few
who  have  to  carry  a  weightier  or
shari)er  cross  th.in  the  wives  and
families  of  these  NabaJs,  whose  intem-
})eraiice  has  brutified  them  into  harsh,
unfeeling  cruelty. — Dr.  W.M.  Taylor.

Ver.  32.  A  good  heart  is  easily
stayed  from  sinning,  and  is  glad  when
it  finds  occasion  to  be  crossed  in  ill
purposes.  Those  secret  checks,  which
are  raised  within  itself,  do  readily
consi)ire  with  all  outward  retentives  :
it  never  yielded  to  a  wicked  motion
without  much  reluctation  ;  and  when


it  is  overcome  it  is  but  with  half  a
consent  :  whereas  perverse  and  obdu-
rate sinners,  by  reason  they  take  full
delight  in  evil,  and  have  already  in
their  conceit  swallowed  the  pleasure  of
sin,  abide  not  to  be  resisted,  running
on  headily  in  those  wicked  courses  they
have  propounded,  in  spite  of  opposition ;
and,  if  they  be  forcibly  stopped  in  their
way,  they  grow  sullen  and  mutinous.
David  had  not  only  vowed,  but  deeply
sworn,  the  death  of  Nabal,  and  all  his
family,  to  the  very  dog  that  lay  at  his
door  ;  yet  now  he  praiseth  God,  that
hath  given  the  occasion  and  grace  to
violate  it.  Wicked  vows  are  ill  made,
but  worse  kept.  Our  tongue  cannot
tie  us  to  cc>mmitsin.  Good  men  think
themselves  liappy,  that  since  they  had
not  the  grace  to  deny  sin,  yet  they  had
not  the  opportunity  to  accomplish
it.— /y^j*.  liail.

Observe  the  contrast  between  David
and  Herod.  David  is  deterred  by  the
expostulations  of  Abigail,  a  prudent
and  fair  woman,  from  keeping  his  oath
and  putting  to  death  an  evil  man,
Nabal,  and  he  blesses  God  for  it,
Herod  is  urged  by  Herodias  and  her
mother,  two  fair  women  in  countenance
but  foul  in  heart,  to  keep  his  rash  oath,
and  to  put  to  death  a  holy  man,  John
the  Baptist ;  and  he  suffered  remorse
for  doing  so,  and  afterwards  fell  into  a
greater  sin,  and  mocked  the  Divine
David  {LnkQ  xxiii.  11),  and  came  to
a  miserable  end. —  Wordsworth.

Verses  2-40.  The  history  of  David's
collision  with  Nabal — not  a  very  flat-
tering chapter  in  the  history  of  his  life
— is  inserted  between  the  history  of
his  two  great  victories  over  the  spirit
of  revenge  and  impatience  ;  and  by
the  guidance  of  the  Divine  Spirit  the
historian  seems  so  to  have  arranged
the  narrative,  for  the  purposeof  showing
us  how  the  servant  of  God  may  conquer
in  a  great  light  and  yet  be  overcome  in
a  small.  The  history  of  all  warfare  is
full  of  such  cases.  In  the  presence  of
a  great  enemy  the  utmost  vigilance  is
maintained  ;  every  effort  is  strained,
every  stimulus  is  applied.  In  the
presence  of  a  small  foe  the  spirit  of

247


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  i.


confidence   and  security  leaves  every  sinner's  power     .     .     .     fortius  is  the

position   unguarded,  and  often  paves  sinner's  liard  lot,  that  the  same  thin^r

the    way   for   signal   defeat.      In    the  that  makes  him  need  repentance  makes

spiritual  warfare  nothing  can  be  more  him  also  in  danger  of  not  obtaining  it.

common. — Blaikie.  4.    The  greatness  of  this   preventing

mercy  is  eminently  proved  from  those

Verses  32,  33.     Prevention  of  sin  is  a<l vantages  accruing  to  the  soul  from

one  of  the  greatest  mercies  that  God  the  prevention  of  sin  above  what  can

can  vouchsafe  a  man  in  this  ivorld.  be  had  from   the  bare   pardon   of  it.

1.    From  the  deplorable  condition  of  First:  Of  the  clearing  of  a  man's  con-

the  sinner,  before  that  mercy  prevents  dition  ;    and  secondly  :    Of  the  satis-

him.     He  is  in  the  direct  way  of  death  factionof  his  mind.     .     .     .     So  much

and  destruction,  and  wholly  unable  to  of  prevention,  so  much  of  innocence,

help  himself.     ...     A  man  under  .     ,     .     Sometimes  God  may  suffer  the

the  drift  of  any  passion  will  still  follow  soul  but  just  to  begin  the  sinful  pro-

the  impulse  of  it  until  something  inter-  dnction     by    reflecting    upon     a    sin

pose,  and  by  a  stronger  impulse  turn  suggested    with    sonje    complacency  ;

him  another  way  ;  but  in  this  case  we  which  is  to  conceive  sin,  and  then  He

can  find  no  principle  within  him  strong  may   extinguish    it.     .     .     .     Or   He

enough     ...     for  if  it  be  any,  it  may  permit  it  to  pass  into  purpose  and

must  be  either  (1)  the  judgment  of  his  then  make  it  prove  abortive  by  stifling

reason,  or  (2)  the  free  choice  of  his  it.  .  .  .  Or  lie  may  let  it  come  even

will,  and  while  a  man  is  engaged  in  to   the   birth,  by  strong  endeavour  to

any  sinful  purpose,  through  the  pre-  commit  it,  and  yet  then  deny  it  s^r^Tz^^/i

valence  of  passion,  he  fully  approves  to  bring  forth.     Or  God  may  suffer  it

of  whatsoever  he  is  carried  on  to  do  in  to  be  born,  and  pass  from  endeav<mr

the  full  strength  of  it.     While  David's  into  commission  ;  and  this  is  the  last

heart  was  full  of  his  revengeful  design,  step  but  one,  and  that  is,  the  frequent

it  had  blinded  and  perverted  his  reason  repetition  which  settles  into  a  habit  of

so  far  that  it  told  him  that  the  bloody  sin.     .     .     .     But  wherever  God  may

purpose  he  was  going  to  execute  was  turn  the  fatal  stream  it  is  a  vast  mercy,

just  and  becoming.     ...     2.  It  is  ...     Now,  when  grace  keeps  a  man

perfectly    free    grace     ...     for   if  from  sin  he  certainly  knows  that  it  is

things  concur,  and  providence  cuts  not  so     .     .     .     but  grace  may  seal   the

off  the  opportunity,  the  act  of  sin  must  sinner's  pardon  and  yet  have  left  no

needs  follow.     .     .     .     Because  every  transcript  of  that  pardon  in  his  breast.

commission  of  sin  introduces  into  the  The  handwriting  may  be  cancelled  in

soul  a  certain  degree  of  hardness,  and  the  court  of  heaven,  and  yet  the  indict-

an  aptness  to   continue  in  it.     It  is  ment  run  on  in  the  court  of  conscience

much  more  difficult  to  throw  out  than  ...     so  that  though  the  pardoned

not  to  let  in.     .     .     .     Sin  taken  into  and  the  innocent  may  be  equally  safe,

the  soul  is  like  liquor  poured  into  a  they  cannot,  without  rare  privilege,  be

vessel  ;  so  much  of  it  as  it  fills,  it  also      equally  cheerful Here  is

seasons.      The  touch  and  tincture  go  an  unfailing  criterion  by  which  every

together.     So  that  although  the  body  man  may  discover  the  disposition  of

of  the  liquor  should    be  poured   out  his  own  heart.     .     .     .     David  over-

again,    yet   still   it    leaves   that   tang  looks  the  rich  and  seasonable  present

behind  it  which  makes  the  vessel  fitter  of  Abigail,  though  pressed  with  hunger

for  that,  than  for  any  other.     .     .     .  and  travel  ;  but  her  advice,  which  dis-

And  every  commission  imprints  upon  armed  his  rage  and  calmed  his  revenge,

the  soul  a  further  proneness  to  sin  as  draws   forth    his  high  gratulations. —

drinking   both   quenches   the    present  iSonth.

thirst  and  provokes  it  for  the  future.  This  is  one  of  the  earliest  cases  re-

3.   The  only  thing  that  can  entitle  to  corded    in    the    Bible    in    which    the

pardon — repentance — is    not    in    the  interests  of  the  employer  and  the  em-
248


CRAP.tXV.  BOMILETIC  COMMEXriRY:   SAMUEL.


ployed — the  man  of  wealtli  and  tlie  man  just  to  Nahal  to  rejircseiit  tin's  as  an  act
of  work— stood,  or  seemed  to  stand,  in  of  wilful  oppression.  David's  demand
antagonism  to  each  other.  It  was  a  a])])eared  an  invasion  of  his  ri<^hts — a
period  in  which  an  old  system  of  things  dictation  with  respect  to  that  which  was
was  breaking  up  ;  and  the  new  one  was  his  own.  There  was  something  to  be
not  yet  established,  but  a  kind  of  right  said  for  him.  It  was  the  view  of  his  class,
li ad  grown  up,  irregular  enough,  but  had  descended  to  him  from  his  parents,
suflicient  to  establish  a  claim  on  Nabal  and  it  is  hard  to  see  through  the  false-
for  remuneration — a  new  claim,  not  hood  of  any  systeni  by  which  we  profit
admitted  by  him,  reckoned  by  him  an  and  which  is  upheld  by  general  consent,
exaction,  which  could  be  enforced  by  especially  when  good  men,  too,  uphold
no  law,  only  by  that  law  which  is  above  it.  On  the  other  hand,  David  and  his
all  statute  law,  deciding  according  to  men  were  not  slow  to  perceive  that  they
emergencies,  an  undefinable  instinctive  had  their  rights  over  that  property  of
senseof  fairness  and  justice.  In  modern  Nabal's.  The  harvest  was  in  part
language  the  rights  of  labour  were  in  David's  harvest,  for  without  David  it
conflict  with  the  rights  of  property,  never  could  have  been  reaped.  The
Observe  the  fearful  hopeless  character  sheep  were  in  part  David's  sheep,  for
of  the  struggle.  The  question  had  come  w^ithont  David  not  a  sheep  would  have
to  this:  Whether  David,  with  his  fero-      been  s])ared  by  the  marauders  of  the

cioussix  hundred  mountaineers,  united  hill.     The  right  which  the  soldier  has
by  the  sense  of  wrong,  or  Nabal  with      by  law  to  his  pay  was  the  right  which

his  well  fed  and  trained  hirelings,  bound  David  had  by  unwritten  law,  a  right

by  interest,  not  love,  to  his  cause,  were  resting  on    the  fact  that   his  services

stronger?    Which  was  the  more  power-  were  indispensable.   Now  when  it  comes

ful,  want  whetted  by  insult,  or  selfish-  to  this,  rights  against  rights,  there  is

ness   pampered   by    indulgence  :   they  no  determination  of  the  question  but

who  wished  to  keep  by  force  or  they  by  overwhelming  numbers,  or   blood,

who  wished  to  take  ?     An  awful  and  and  it  is  difficult  to  say  to  which  side

uncertain  spectacle,  but  the  spectacle  in  such  a  quarrel  we  should  wish  well,

which   is  exhibited  in   every   country  If  the  rich  man  succeeds  he  will  bind

where  rights  are  keenly  felt  and  duties  the  chain    more   severely   and  surely

lightly.  upon  the  crushed  serf,  and  the  victory

I.    The  causes  of  this   false  social  of  the  lawless  with  the  memory  of  past

state.    1.  False  basis  upon  which  social  wrongs   to    avenge    is    almost     more

superiority    was     sup})osed     to     rest,  sanguinary  than  the  victory  of  those

Throui^hout  Nabal's  conduct  was  built  who  have  had  power  long  and  whose

upon  an  assumption  of  his  own  superi-  power  has  been  defied,
ority.    He  was  a  man  of  wealth.    David         II.   The  message  of  the  Church  to

was   dependent   upon   his    own    daily  the  man  of  wealth.    It  contains  those

efforts.       Was    not    this   enough    to  principles  which,  carried  out,  realise  the

settle  the  question  of  inferiority  and  Divine  Order  of  Society — not  creating

superiority?     Tiie  evils  of  poverty  are  the  facts    of    our    L'  imanity — simply

comparative — they  depend  on  climate  making   them   knowi..     And    i)ecause

— they  depend  on  contrast.    Where  all  these  principles  are  externally  true  we

suffer  equally,  men  bear  hardship  with  find  in  Abigail's  conduct  towanls  David

cheerfulness  ;  but  where  the  luxury  of  the  very  principles  which  the  Church

enjoyment   is   out   of    all    proportion  of  Christ  has  given  to  the  world.   1.  The

monopolised  by  the  few,  when  wealth  spiritual    dignity    of    man    as    man.

or  rank  assumes  an  insulting  domineer-  David  was  the  poor  man,  but  the  high-

ing  character,    then    the  falsehood  of  born  lady  admits  his  worth.     Here  is  a

superiority  can  be  tolerated  no  longer,  truth  revealed.    Worth  does  not  mean

It  was  this  which  here  brought  matters  what  a  man  is  worth — you  must  find

to   a   crisis.       2.    A  false   conception  some  better  definition.   This  is  the  very

concerning  rights.     It  would   be   un-  truth    revealed    in    the    Incarnation.

249


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,


BOOK  I.


Christ,  tlie  King  of  humanity, is  the  poor
woman's  son.  2.  The  law  of  sacrifice.
Abigail  did  not  heal  the  grievance  with
smooth  words.  You  might  have  said
half  of  her  provision  would  have  been
enough.  But  liberality  is  a  m(^st  real
economy.  We  wrong  Abigail,  however,
if  we  call  tliis  economy  or  calculation  ;
it  would  have  failed  on  this  principle.
Ten  times  this  sum  from  Nabal  would
not  have  arrested  the  revenge,  but
David  felt  that  these  were  not  the  gifts
of  a  sordid  calculation,  but  of  a  gene-
rous heart.  This  is  the  attractive
power  of  that  great  law  whose  highest
ex])ression  is  the  cross.  3.  The  matter
of  rightful  influence.  Very  remarkable
is  David's  (iemeanour  towards  Nabal  as
contrasted  with  his  demeanour  towards
Abigail.  It  was  not,  therefore,  against
the  wealthy  class,  but  against  indivi-
duals of  the  class,  that  the  wrath  of
these  men  burned.  There  is  reverence
for  superiors,  if  only  it  can  be  shown
that  they  are  superiors.  It  is  deeply
rooted  in  the  heart  of  humanity — you
cannot  tear  it  out.  Civilisation,  science,
})rogress,  only  change  its  direction  :
they  do  not  weaken  its  force.  Emanci-
})ation  from  false  k)rds  only  sets  the
heart  free  to  honour  true  ones.  The
free-born  David  will  not  do  honour  to
Nabal.  But  behold,  he  has  found  a
something  nobler  than  himself,  and  in
gratitude  and  profound  respect  he  bows
to  that.  To  conclude.  Doubtless  David
was  wrong,  and  yet  for  one  text  in  the
Bible  which  requires  submission  and
patience  from  the  poor,  you  will  find  a
hundred  which  denounce  the  vices  of
the  rich,  and  woe  to  us  if  we  have  for-
gotten that  David's,  not  Nabal's,  is  the
cause  of  God. — Abridged  from  F.  W,
Robertsons  Sermons^    VoL  /.

Ver.  40-44.  Abigail's  meeting  with
David  under  the  covert  of  the  hill ;  .
.  .  and  David's  chivalrous  answer  to
lier  chivalrous  appeal — all  the  scene,
which  painters  have  so  often  delighted
to  draw,  is  a  forefeeling,  a  i)rophecy,  as
it  were,  of  the  Christian  chivalry  of
after  ages.     The  scene  is  most  human


and  niostdivine;  and  we  are  not  shocked
to  hear  that  after  Nabal's  death  the
fair  and  rich  lady  joins  her  fortune  to
that  of  the  wild  outlaw,  and  becomes
his  wife,  to  wander  by  wood  and  wold.
But,  amid  all  the  simple  and  sacred
beauty  of  that  scene,  we  cannot  forget,
we  must  not  forget,  that  Abigail  is  but
one  wife  of  many,  that  there  is  an
element  of  pure,  single,  all-absorbing
love  absent,  at  least  in  David's  heart,
which  was  present  in  the  hearts  of  our
forefathers  in  many  a  like  case,  and
which  they  have  handed  down  to  us  as
a  heirloom,  as  precious  as  that  of  our
laws  and  liberties.  And  all  this  was
sin  unto  David,  and,  like  all  sin,  brought
with  it  its  own  punishment.  I  do  not
mean  to  assign  his  exact  amount  of
moral  responsibility.  Our  Lord  forbids
us  to  do  tiiat,  and  least  of  all,  to  a  man
who  only  acted  according  to  his  light,
and  the  fashion  of  his  race  and  age.
But  we  must  tix  it  very  clearly  in  our
minds,  that  sins  may  be  punished  in
this  life,  even  though  he  who  commits
them  is  not  aware  that  they  are  sins.
If  you  are  ignorant  that  fire  burns,
your  ignorance  will  not  prevent  your
liand  from  suffering  if  you  put  it  into
the  fire.  .  .  Sin,  dfidpTta^  means
first,  it  seems  to  me,  a  missing  of  the
mark,  end,  or  aim  of  our  existence  ;  a
falling  short  of  the  law,  the  ideal,  the
good  works  which  God  has  prepared
beforehand  for  us  to  walk  in,  and  every
such  sin, conscious  or  unconscious,  must
avenge  itself  by  the  Divine  laws  of  the
universe.  .  .  .  No  miracle  is  needed.
.  .  .  God's  laws  are  far  too  well
made  for  Him  to  need  to  break  them
a  second  time  because  a  sinner  has
broken  them  already.  They  avenge
themselves.  And  so  does  pol;;ganiy.
It  did  in  the  case  of  David.  Look  at
what  he  might  have  been  .  .  .  living
together  with  a  helpmate  worthy  of
him  in  godly  love  to  his  life's  end  .  .  .
and  what  was  the  fact?  The  indulgence
of  his  passions — seemingly  harmless  at
first — becomes  most  harmful  and  he
commits  a  complication  of  crimes. —
Kingsley,


«50


CHAP.  XX vt.  nOMTLETTC  CO MMENTA  R  Y:    SA  M UEL.


CHAPTER  XXVI.

Critical  and  ExroaiTORY  Notes. — The  fact  that  the  iiicidents  related  in  this  chapter  a<,Tee
in  some  points  with  those  narrated  in  chapters  xxiii.  xxiv.  has  led  Ewald,  Thenius,  and  otlu;rs
to  conclude  that  the  historian  has  given  two  accounts  of  the  same  event.  But  a  writer  who
could  v'aus  repeat  himself  in  the  general,  while  professing  to  give  an  account  of  events  in  their
proper  order,  and  at  the  same  time  could  vary  so  mucli  in  detail,  would  l>e  quite  unworthy  of
contidence.  An<l,  as  Keil  shows,  tl)e  details,  after  all,  differ  greatly.  "  When  David  was  be-
trayed the  first  time,  he  drew  back  into  the  desert  of  Maon  before  the  advance  of  Saul,  and,
being  completely  surrounded  upon  one  of  the  mountains  there,  was  only  saved  from  being  taken
prisoner  by  the  advance  of  the  Philistines.  (Chap,  xxiii.  25-28.)  But  on  the  second  occasion
Saul  encamped  upon  the  hill  of  Hachilah,  whilst  David  had  secretly  drawn  back  into  the  ad-
joining desert,  from  which  he  crept  secretly  into  Saul's  encampment.  .  .  .  On  the  first
occasion  Saul  entered  a  cave  in  the  desert  of  Engedi,  whilst  David  and  his  men  were  concealed
in  the  interior.  .  .  .  The  second  time  David  went  with  Abishai  into  the  et;campment  of
Saul,  upon  the  hill  of  Hachilah.  .  .  .  It  is  true  that  on  both  occasions  David's  men  told
him  that  God  had  given  his  enemy  into  his  hand  j  but  the  first  time  they  added,  *  Do  to  him
what  seeraeth  good  in  thy  sight ; '  and  David  cut  off  the  lappel  of  Saul's  coat,  whereupon  his
conscience  smote  him.  ...  In  the  second  instance,  on  the  contrary,  David  called  two  of  his
heroes  to  go  with  him  into  the  camp  of  his  sleeping  foe,  and  then  went  thither  with  Abishai,
who  thereupon  said,  '  God  hath  delivered  thine  enemy  into  thine  hand  ;  let  me  alone,  that  I
may  pierce  him  with  the  spear.'  But  David  rejected  this  proposal,  and  merely  took  away  the
spear  and  water-bowl  that  were  at  Saul's  head.  And,  notwithstanding  that  the  words  of  David
and  the  replies  of  Saul  agree  in  certain  general  thoughts,  yet  they  differ  entirely  in  the  main.
On  the  first  occasion  David  showed  the  king  that  his  life  had  been  in  his  power,  and  yet  he  had
spared  him,  to  dispel  the  illusion  that  he  was  seeking  his  life.  On  the  second  he  asked  the  king
why  he  was  pursuing  him,  and  called  upon  him  to  desist.  But  Saul  was  so  affected  the  first
time  that  he  wept  aloud,  and  openly  declared  that  David  would  obtain  the  kingdom,  and  asked
him  to  promise  on  oath  that  when  he  did  he  would  not  destroy  his  family.  The  second  time  he
only  declared  that  he  had  sinned  and  acted  foolishly,  and  would  do  David  no  more  harm,  and
that  David  would  undertake  and  prevail,  but  he  neither  shed  tears,  nor  brought  himself  to  speak
of  David's  ascending  the  throne,  so  that  he  was  evidently  much  more  hardened  than  before."
As  to  the  moral  unlikelihood  that  Saul  would  have  made  a  second  attempt  upon  David's  life
after  being  treated  so  generously  by  him,  such  conduct  on  his  part  seems  quite  in  keeping  with
his  vacillating  character  on  other  occasions.  On  this  subject  ^iUgelsbach  remarks,  "  That  Saul
marched  against  David  a  second  time  is  easily  explained,  even  although  he  was  no  moral
monster  (as  Thenius  affirms  he  must  have  been  in  such  a  case).  His  hatred  to  David  was  so
deeply  rooted  that  it  could  be  only  temporarily  suppressed  by  that  magnanimous  deed,  not  ex-
tinguished." It  is  indeed  plain,  from  David's  conduct  after  the  first  remonstrance  with  Saul,
that  he  placed  little  or  no  reliance  upon  his  professions  of  repentance.

Ver.  1.  "Hill  of  Hachilah."  See  on  chap,  xxiii.  19.  Jamieson  suggests  that  one  reason
for  David's  returning  to  this  locality  might  have  been  to  be  near  Abigairs  possessions.  "Before
Jeshimon."  Jeshimon  literally  signifies  "  the  waste  or  wilderness  ;"  before  should  be  "in  the
face  of,"  or  "  south  of."

Ver.  2.  "  Thi  ee  thousand  chosen  men."  "  The  permanent  guard  whose  formation  is
mentioned  in  chap.  xiii.  2."  {Evdmann.)  "Went  down."  "'I hough  Gibeah,  as  its  name
imports,  stood  on  an  elevatf^d  position,  and  the  desert  of  Ziph  may  have  been  higher  than  Gibeah,
it  was  still  necessary  to  descend  in  leaving  the  latter  place  ;  hence  Saul  '  went  down  '  into  the
wilderness  of  Ziph  "     {Jamitson.)

Vbt.  3.  "  David  abode  in  the  wilderness."  "  That  is,  he  had  withdrawn  from  the  hill
Hachilah  (where  the  Ziphites  reported  him  as  being,  and  Saul  sought  first  to  attack  him)  farther
into  the  wilderness,  and  was  then  on  the  highland  (compare  ver.  6,  'who  will  go  down  with  me  V),
while  Saul  was  encamped  on  the  road  to  the  plain  "  (ver.  3,  "  by  the  way.")  {Erdmann.)  "  He
■aw."     Rather,  he  learned,  or  perceived  by  the  report  of  his  spies.

Ver.  5.  "  r  bner."  "  The  Hebrew  Ab  signifies  father  ;  but  the  captain  of  Saul's  host
may  have  been  so  called  in  honour  of  some  ancestor,  without  any  reference  to  the  meaning
of  the  word.  Another  explanation  has  been  suggested.  *  In  Abner  there  are  two  pure
Gonieric  roots,  and  ab  is  the  contrary  of  father,  for  it  is  expressly  stated — Abner,  son  of
Aer,  etc.  The  ab  is  of  course  the  ub  or  up  of  the  Appii  of  Italy  and  of  the  Cymry  of
Britain — son;  Abner,  son  of  strength;  or  in  Latin,  Api>ius  Kiro;  and  as  we  know  that
the  Appii  Claudii  Nerones  were  a  pure  Unibrian  family,  we  have  in  the  centre  of  Pales-
tine, B.C.  1000,  and  in  the  centre  of  Italy,  B  c.  at  least  7oO,  two  Gomeric  families  of  precisely
the  same  name  derived  from  their  common  family  language  (Japhetic)  in  the  most  natural
way  conceivable.      It  is  utterly  impossible  that  the  Jewish  writer,  whoever  he  w»»,  could

251


nOMlLETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  t.


have  devised  such  a  coincidence,  or  imagined  its  ethnological  sicrnificance.  He  wrote  down  th«
simple  fact.  We  know  how  to  explain  it,  but  this  very  knowl^lge  is  a  confirmation  of  the  pro-
phetic utterance  of  Noah.'  "  ((jlen.  ix.  27.)  ("  Vindication  of  the  Mosaic  Ethnok)gy  of  Europe.")
(Jamieson.)     "  Trench."     Literally  "  the  place  of  wagons."     (See  on  chap.  xvii.  20.)

Ver.  6.  "  Ahlmelech  the  Hittite."  This  man  is  only  mentioned  here.  "  The  Hittites,  a
C'anaanitish  people,  aheatly  settled  around  Hebron  in  Abraham's  time  (Gen.  xv.  23),  dwelt,  after
the  return  of  the  Israelites  from  Kgypt,  in  the  hill  country  of  Judah  with  the  Amorites,  reaching
as  far  north  as  towards  Bethel  (Judges  ii.  26),  subdued  but  not  exterminated  by  the  Israelites.
A  portion  of  them  had  maintairitd  a  certain  independence"  (1  Kings  ix.  20,  x.  29  ;  2  Kings
vii.  6).  {Erdmann.)  Uriah  was  also  a  Hittite.  "  Ahishai."  The  nephew  of  David  (see
1  Chron.  ii.  16;,  and  afterwards  one  of  his  famous  generals  (2  Sam.  xviii.  2,  etc.)

Ver.  8.  "I  will  not  smite  him  a  second  time."  Altishai  could  have  easily  pinned  David
to  the  ground  with  one  thrust  of  his  sword,  and  no  second  blow  would  have  been  needed.

Ver.  10.  "The  Lord  shall  smite  him,"  etc.  Eather,  unless  the  Lord  shall  smite,  etc.  So
Keil,  Thenius,  and  others.

Ver.  11.  "The  spear  that  is  at  his  ^  olster  rnd  the  cruse  of  water."  "I  noticed  at
all  the  encampments  which  we  passed  that  the  sheik's  tent  was  distinguished  from  the  rest  by  a
tall  spear  stuck  upright  in  the  front  of  it  ;  and  it  is  the  custom,  when  a  pai'ty  is  out  on  an
excursion  for  robbery  or  for  war,  that  when  they  halt  to  rest,  the  spot  where  the  chief  reclines
or  rests  is  thus  designated.  The  whole  of  the  scene  in  1  Sam.  xxvi.  7,  is  perfectly  natural,  even
to  the  deep  sleep  into  which  all  had  fallen,  so  that  David  and  Abishai  could  walk  among  them  in
safety.  The  Arabs  .sleep  heavily,  especially  when  fatigued.  Often,  when  travelling,  my  mule-
teers and  servants  have  agreed  to  watch  together  in  places  thought  to  be  dangerous  ;  but  in
every  instance  I  soon  found  them  to  be  fast  asleep,  and  generally  their  slumbers  were  so  profound
that  I  could  not  only  walk  among  them  without  their  waking,  but  might  have  taken  the  very
aha  with  which  they  were  covered.  Then  the  cruse  of  water  at  Saul's  head  is  in  exact  accordance
with  the  customs  of  the  people  at  this  day.  No  one  ventures  to  travel  over  these  deserts  without
their  cruse  of  water,  and  it  is  very  common  to  place  it  at  the  bolster,  so  that  the  owner  can  reach
it  during  the  night.  The  Arabs  eat  their  dinner  in  the  evening,  and  it  is  generally  of  such  a
nature  as  to  create  thirst  ;  and  the  quantity  of  water  which  they  drink  is  enormous.  {Thomson's
Land  and  the  Book.)

Verses  13,  14.  "And  David  stood,"  etc.  The  purity  of  the  air  of  Palestine  would  render
this  quite  easy.  Dr.  Thomson  says,  "  There  are  thousands  of  ravines  where  the  whole  scene
could  be  enacted,  every  word  be  heard,  and  yet  the  speaker  be  quite  beyond  the  reach  of  his
enemies."  "David  had,  no  doubt,  reconnoitered  the  camp  from  the  opposite  hill,  and  then  gone
down  to  it  (ver.  6),  and  returned  after  the  deed  was  accomplished.  The  statement  that  this
mountain  was  afar  off,  so  that  there  was  a  great  space  between  David  and  Saul,  not  only  favours
the  accuracy  of  the  historical  tradition,  but  shows  that  David  reckoned  far  less  novv  upon  any
change  in  the  state  of  Saul's  mind  than  he  had  done  before  when  he  followed  Saul  from  the
cave  without  hesitation,  and  called  after  him  ;  and  that  in  fact  he  rather  feared  that  Saul  should
endeavour  to  get  him  into  his  power  as  soon  as  he  woke  from  his  sleep."     {Keil.)

Ver.  15.  "Art  thou  not  a  man?"  i.e.,  a  warrior.  "This  incidental  reference  to  Abner's
eminence  as  a  warrior  is  borne  out  by  his  whole  history.  At  the  same  time,  David's  bantering
tone,  coupled  with  verse  19,  makes  it  probable  that  he  considered  Abner  his  enemy  ;  the  latter's
great  influ':;nce  with  Saul  might  have  prevented  the  persecution  of  David.  Abner  may  have
feared  David  as  a  rival  ;  his  opposition  to  him  is  shown  after  Saul's  death."  (Biblical  Com-
mentary.) *'  For  there  came  one  of  the  people,"  etc.  "  These  reproaches  cast  at  Abner
were  intended  to  show  to  Saul,  who  might,  at  anyrate,  possibly  hear,  and  who,  in  fcict,  did  hear,
that  David  was  a  more  faithful  defender  of  his  life  than  his  closest  and  most  zealous  servants."
{Keil.)

Ver.  16.  "Worthy  to  die."     lAteraXiy,  sons  of  death.

Ver.  19.  "  If  the  Lord  have  stirred  thee  up,"  etc.  "David's  word  is  based  on  the  concep-
tion that  God  sometimes  incites  moi,  to  evil.  (Comp.  2  Sam.  xvi.  10  and  2  Sam.  xxiv.  1.)  The
idea  that  evil  is,  from  one  point  of  view,  to  be  referred  to  God  as  its  cause,  is  not  a  product  of
later  times,  but  is  early  found  in  connection  with  the  idea  of  the  Divine  ordering  of  the  world,  iu
which  evil  must  serve  God  in  order  to  bring  about  His  saving  help  (Gen.  i.  20,  comp.  with  xiv.
7,  8),  and  reveal  His  judicial  glory  (Exod.  ix.  16).  David  therefore  supposed  the  case  that  Saul's
hatred  towards  him  rests  on  the  Divine  causality  (comp.  ch.  xviii.  10,  xix.  9),  where  the  evil  spirit
from  the  Lord  which  has  come  upon  Saul  is  said  to  be  the  cause  of  his  hate  to  David.  The
Divine  incitement  to  evil  consists,  according  to  David's  view,  in  the  fact  that  Saul,  sunk  deep
in  sin  by  his  (iwn  fault,  is  further  given  over  by  God  to  evil  in  that  opportunity  is  given  him  to
develop  in  deeds  the  evil  of  his  heart."     (Erdmann.)     Keil's  remarks  on  tl  is  phrase  are  sub-

252


CHAP.  XXVI.  nOMlLETW  COMMENTAR  Y:   SA  MUEL,


implicit^  at  least,  that  he  hi.ii.elf  is  a  sinner  wh.^H      I       j  f^"''  '"'"'  ^'^  acknowle.l<,^e.s,

without  le,s.enin.'  Saul's  ^Z^^^^^^^^ZJ^^  m.ay  he  u.teu.lin,  t-,  punish,  th.u.h'
Literally,  let  him  ,mdl  an  oirerijg  cf  G^n  viiT  '>1  ^Ph.  r^  *  •''*^-  ^?°=^*  *°  ofifering."
wrath  of  God  by  the  preseutaiion  of  kteptThir  ac^fiies  Wh?t  "'"n.  '"'  \^'  ^^^^^'  ''^^'^'""^^  '^'^
God  is  shown  in  Psa.k  18,  19,  and  it  is  L.l^nly  not  by  .  lidtL  n"re W  t  / J  f f  H"'  ^'^'^^
woid  miiichak,  the  technical  exme^sion  i-i  th^  Uvi  f  .  fi  , ,  'Vf"^  meiely  fchat  Oarid  uaea  tbd
sanctification  'of  life  in   "od    wo  K  ''     (TeuT   '  Tl  "^^^  "''  '"'"""'   ^^^^^-  «^^^  ^'^^th  the

the  ten.ptation  from  thee^"  ^b!:^.)  'ct^sed  t%r;' "eL  "^'^  ^l^  ''^^  "^  ^^^^
wish,  but  states  a  fact,  he  does  not  pray  that  they  may  l>ocu^;ed  but  h^\"  t' n  "?'  .""^'  ^
incm-nng  a  curse  from  God."     nVunbworth  i     ''qlvL.!^  '  '^^^'"'"^^   that  they  are

implied  is,  that  Jehovah  could  only  b: Tor  i/ipped TSanfan  Tlh/*'^''.  ^"^'•"  "  '^^^'^^^-
Hun   because  it  was  only  there  ixL  He  mani&  ^1^.^^  ^  His^^^^^^^^^  '^

not  to  understand  that  David's  enemies  were  accustomr>d  iri.T'lX^  [Keil.)        We  are

thinking  of  deeds  rather  than  v^ovd^'    \calvin)  '  ^""^  ^^^^^  ^^^

Ver.  20.     ''As  when  one  doth  hunt  a  partrid«^e "     «  Mp  ioniof^^i  f        r>.    -i.
from  all  association,  a  fugitive  by  thy  machinrtionso  u  the  mom^tCin  hef^^^

costs  to  destroy,  as  one  hunts  a  sin/e  fueritive  uartrXe  on  tZ^  !^  '  ^^""^  '^^^^'*=  ^*  ^^^
costs,  while  otherwise  from  its  insicmificanceTt  ^^u Id  „  ^/  ?.  >  "^?"?^*^^"«  ^^^J  to  kill  it  at  all
the  fields  in  flocks."     ( ErdmanTf   TeoX in  tC^^^^  hunted  since  partridges  are  found  in

birds,  pursue  them  til  ol>servir.*4em  findm^ln  ^^id  J' ]"f  r'^  *^?  P^.f^^^^^"  ^"^  «^^^^  g^«^«
up  two  or  three  times,  they  rush^prthe  Mr^^^  k    ''TA  ^^''J'  '^^^^  ^^^"^  '^^^°  P^<^

{Shaw's  Travels.)    It  was  exactly  i^this  mann7rfw  ^     i  '^  ^^'"'  '^^'^''"  ^^*^^  bludgeons,

from  time  to  time  from  hi?  hill^^  ^f  •  P^^'^-'^tiug  David  ;  he  drov^e  him

opportunity  of  accomplishing  htlestucM^^^^^^^  '^"  "^^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^  -  obtain  an

«el7'''-ri;     '"^^  f''^''^  "^•"     K^ila^d  Erdmann  translate  «o  ^^c  7nan-z  .    to  Dav.'^  it-
self.    ♦*  Jhese  words  are  not  a  soundincr  of  his  own  nrai^P^   hnf  ,v.^    i  ^?     .V        -^^avid  him-
conscience  in  the  presence  of  an  enemy!"     [KeiL)  ^^         testimony  of  a  good

Ver.  24.     " Let  my  Ufe."     Keil  and  Erdmann  read  "so  will  my  life."

Ver.  25.    "  Thou  wilt  both  undertake  "  etc      RprP  <^a„i  Ar.^.      *.
position,  love  instead  of  the  old   enmitv  but  fhlft.yu^?    does  not  express  a  changed  dis-
had  induced,  and  which  com^  Ld  So  ^ffi.^^^^^^^^^  feeling  which   David's  conduct

the  Lord's  help  out  of  all  the  straits  "fhis^^Secut  on      ^^^^^^^^^^^  forth  victorious  through

words  in  chap.  xxiv.  16-22,  are  ve.y  aifferen^^7^W..)' "  DavW^^^^^  t  ^^"'^

no  worth  to  Saul's  acknowledgment  of  wrong.  ''Saul  returned  t?hirD?ace»  T^'  ^^^''^^^""2
make  a  contrast  between  this  expression  and  that  in  chau  xxi v  09  iu\^?\  f?"^^  expositors
,one  kome  after  his  interview  wit'h  David,  and  understan'd  thal-tl ts  me  "he  dM  n^t^f  '^  '^^^
for  a  season  from  Lis  pursuit.  ""*  °°''  desist  even

IfAIN  nOMILETICS  OP  THE  CHAPTER,

David's  Visit  to  Saul's  Camp.

ch  I'^^r  "  *  tendency  in  good  to  repeat  itself  in  the  soul  of  a  good  man
Good  deeds  are  not  a  sure  indication  of  a  good  cl>aracter,  for  a  wicked  nan  mw
.erform  such  from  motives  which  are  not  good.     Nor  does  one  good  deed  even
If  done  from  a  worti,y  motive,  make  a  go-.Ml  character.     But  one  such  actio

anouXand'an^oU  ''''"V''  '^1  ''"'^'  '"  •*''°  ^'^''^  "^  ^'"l  ■•''>■«  *''«  found  I  ion  f
a  d  Wl  .  r  J  •  '  ^°1  ?'i'''  ^  '^petition  establishes  tl,at  right  liabit  of  tliinkim-
and  feel  ng  and  doing  which  constitute  a  godhke  and  lioly  diaracter  And  it  1
a  s  rengthcning  reflect.on  for  all  who  are  engaged  in  the  struggle  a-^ninst  tie
evil  withn.  then,  that  every  temptation  met  a„d  conquere.!  mlkes^the  next
victory  more  easy  and  every  godlike  and  divine  impulse  obeyed  gives  an  'crease
to  the  power  and  don.nuon  of  good  in  the  soul.   David's  conduct^here  is  a  witness

davrJ'-    '""^  ifr^  ^  '^^'^':^  '*^'^'^-    Since  Saul  wa,  last  in  his  power  every
day  had  increased  the  provocation  whicli  he  had  sulfered  at  the  hand  of  h?s

253


BOM  I LETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMVEh.  book  i.

persecutor,  who  bad  now  added  to  In's  other  crimes  that  of  jnirsuini^  tlie  man
who  had  so  lately  spared  his  life.  If  David's  former  act  of  forbearance  had  not
been  dictated  by  ri<;ht  principle — if  his  entire  attitude  to  Saul  from  the  beginning
of  his  persecution  had  not  been  the  outcome  of  a  spirit  under  the  influeiice  of
the  Spirit  of  God,  he  would  have  broken  down  under  the  long  continuance  of
the  demand  upon  his  forbearance,  and  this  last  proof  of  Saul's  ingratitude  and
inextinguishable  enmity  wouhi  have  been  too  much  for  him  to  forgive,  but  as
David  was  a  godly  man,  it  was  as  easy  for  him  to  spare  Saul's  life  in  the
camp  as  it  had  been  in  the  cave,  and  possibly  this  time  the  temptation  was  more
easily  overcome  than  on  the  former  occasion.

II.    There  is  a  tendency  in  evil  to  repeat  itself  in  the  soul  of  a  wicked  man.

If  the  good  within  becomes  stronger  by  repetition,  it  is  no  less  certain  that  the
.St  length  of  sin  increases  in  proportion  as  it  is  indulged  in,  and  a  sinful  tendency
or  habit  which  once  only  bound  a  man  as  by  a  silken  thread  may  come  to  fetter
him  as  with  an  iron  chain.  Tl»e  first  few  snowflakes  that  fall  u|)on  the  earth  are
not  noticed  much,  and  can  be  easily  swei)t  away,  even  by  a  child,  but  continuing
to  fall  hour  after  hour  they  will  form  a  barrier  wliich  it  may  be  well-nigh  im-
possible to  penetrate.  So  the  first  seeds  of  any  sinful  passion  may  enter  into  a
human  soul  without  producing  any  niarked  effect  upon  the  life,  and  almost  with-
out the  consciousness  of  the  soul  itself  ;  but  one  sinful  thought  or  feeling,  if  un-
checked and  harboured,  will  be  quickly  followed  by  another  and  another  of  the
same  character,  until  the  man  in  whose  spirit  they  have  found  a  resting  place
becomes,  before  he  is  aware,  a  moral  slave.  Saul  ap})ears  to  afford  a  melancholy
instance  of  such  a  process.  Permitting  jealous  feelings  towards  David  to  find  a
lodging  in  his  spirit,  and  listening  to  the  evil  suggestions  of  the  worst  part  of
his  nature  within  and  of  the  devil  without,  he  came  to  be  that  slave  of  a  sinful
])assion  which  he  here  appears.  We  cannot  suppose,  wlien  he  gave  a  place  to
the  first  emotions  of  envy  of  David,  that  he  had  any  idea  of  the  crimes  to
which  they  would  one  day  lead  him.  But  they  had  been  permitted  to  remain
undisturbed,  and  had  so  grown  and  strengthened  by  indulgence  that  all  noble
emotions  had  been  buried  alive  beneath  them  and  their  victim  stands  before  us
in  this  picture  not  altogether  unconscious  of  his  degrading  bondage,  and  yet
making  no  effort  to  free  himself.  For  although  he  here  confesses  his  moral
foolishness,  and  we  read  of  no  more  active  measures  against  David,  his  after
history  gives  no  reason  to  suppose  that  any  radical  change  took  place  in  his  feelings
towards  him.  If  he  had  followed  up  his  former  conviction  and  confession  of
sin  by  struggle  against  it  he  would  have  found  repentance  then  less  difficult
than  now,  and  would  not  have  added  this  darkest  blot  to  the  character  he  had
already  dimmed  by  many  transgressions.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.   12.     Behold   now,  once  more,  Saul's  sceptre,  and  here  we  see  before

our  David,  as  he  goes  away  with  Saul's  us  a  dim  pre-intimation  of  that  fact. —

spear,    the   emblem   of    his   sovereign  Krummacher.

power.     At  that  moment  he  presents  a         Ver.    19.      It   was    part   of    Saul's

symbolically    significant     appearance,  punishment  that  he  was  constrained  to

Unconsciously  he  prophesied  of  his  own  persecute  David,  and  in  so  doing  he

future,   while  he  stands  before  us  as  sullered  more  than  David — consuming

the  projected  shadow  of  that  foru)  in  hatred,  fear,  the  perpetual  conscious-

which  we  must  one  day  behold  him.  ness    of    the   fruitlessness   of    all   his

In  the  counsel  of  the  Invisible  Watcher,  measures — all  this  was  perfect  torture

it  was,  indeed,  irrevocably  concluded  to  him.     Doubtless  he  would  willingly

that  the  Bethlehemite  should  inherit  have  been  freed  from  it,  but  there  was
25A


OBAP.  xxvr.


UOMILETW  COMMENTA RY :  SA MUEL.


only  one  way  in  wliich  lie  could  obtain
this  freedom,  viz.,  by  true  rei)entance  ;
and  this  way  lie  refused  to  take.  Be-
cause he  uoiild  not  desist  from  sin  in
general,  he  could  not  become  free  from
this  special  jorm  of  sin.  This  was  his
fate.  David's  piety  is  seen  in  tlie  fact
that  he  characterises  it  as  the  greatest
sorrow  inflicted  on  liini  by  l»is  enemies
that  they  obli-ed  him  to  leave  the
land  of  tlie  Lord  and  go  out  into  the
heathen  world,  depriving  him  of  the
blessedness  of  religious  communion. —
IJengstenherg.

Verse  21.  How  wonderful  is  the
effect  of  a  single  flash  of  lightning,  when
previously  the  heavens  had  been  veiled
in  deepest  gloom,  and  the  darksome
night  had  thrown  over  all  nature  its
dreariest  mantle.  How  completely,  for
a  moment,  it  lifts  that  mantle.
Houses,  trees,  streets — they  burst  upon
you  ;  you  seem  never  to  have  seen  them
so  distinctly  before.  .  .  .  And  yet
it  is  but  for  a  moment ;  while  you  look
the  flash  is  gone.  ...  It  lasted
long  enough  to  make  you  feel  its  effect
and  then  departed.  .  .  .  **  1  have
])layed  the  fool  and  erred  exceedingly  ;"
tells  of  such  a  sudden  gleam.  To  our
view,  it  lays  open  in  a  moment  the
whole  features  of  Saul's  histor}^,  as  he
saw  them  himself.  .  .  .  Nothing
escapes  him  ;  each  avenue  opens  up  its
concealment,  each  pathway  reveals  the
footsteps  iujprinted  upon  it  .  .  and
then  the  gloom  returned.  ...  It
was  not  the  dawn  of  true  repentance,
gradually  unfolding  reason  for  encour-
agement, and  losing  itself  in  brighter
hopes  and  lasting  joy,  but  it  w.is  the
sudden  flash  which  conscience,  excited,
will  send  through  a  soul,  preliminary
only  to  a  deeper  despair — to  hopeless
ruin.  ...  I.  i>aul's  historij  justi-
fies this  expression  inasmuch  as  his
public  life  was  marked  bi)  a  continued
attempt  at  thorough  independence  of
God.  .  .  .  This  was  folly — /?rs^,  be-
cause itwassubversive  of  all  tiiat  reason
and  wisdom  suggested.  For  the  very
being  of  a  God  is  of  itself  sulhciently
indicative  of  the  place  which  the  crea-
tures of  that  God  should  occupy.  .  ,  .


The  laws  of  nature,  in  regard  to  matter,
allow  \w  interferiMice  with  them  which
would  subvert  the  relative  conditions
of  strength  and  weakness,  independence
and  dependence,  without  such  results
as  would  exi)Ose  the  folly  of  the  at-
tem])t.  .  .  .  And  on  the  same  principle
must  there  be  read  out  the  condemna-
tion of  downright  folly  when  man  so
acts  as  to  take  upon  himself  the  right
to  dictate  for  his  own  guidance.  .  .  .
What  is  this  but  an  attempt  to  subvert
what  is  fixed  irrevocably?  .  .  .  Besides,
secondly,  it  is  not  less  against  our  own
interests  to  put  our  own  will  in  the
])lace  of  God's.  .  .  .  Did  Saul  get  on
as  well  without  God  as  with  Him  ?
And  did  ever  the  history  of  a  single
individual  justify  the  supposition  that
this  was  possible  ?  .  .  .  II.  There  was
one  particular  course  of  action  which
was  at  this  moment  more  especially
present  to  Saul's  view.  ...  In  many
respects  he  had  erred  ;  in  one  respect
most  especially  so.  ...  1.  His  foliy
and  error  consisted  in  treating  a  man
as  his  enemy  who  was,  in  reality,  his
best  friend.  .  .  How  often  is  this  mis-
take committed.  Hovv  often  do  we  see
men  making  the  least  welcome  those
who  have  the  highest  title  to  their  con-
fidence, because  they  would  do  them
real  good ;  and  treating  as  most  wel-
come those  whose  influence  on  them
is  plainly  prejudicial.  The  man  who
would  not  allow  David  in  his  sight,
promoted  Doeg  the  Edomite.  ...  2.
Saul's  folly  also  consisted  in  attempting
by  this  conduct  towards  David  to  fly  in
the  face  of  those  Divine  arrangements
to  which,  however  humiliating  in  their
character,  he  was  bound  in  meekness
to  submit.  .  .  .  Never  does  a  man
commit  himself  to  a  harder,  and  at  the
same  time  more  fruitless,  enterprise
than  when  he  fights  against  God's  provi-
dential arrangements — when,  for  in-
stance, God  is  evidently  calling  on  him
to  give  up  some  scheme  for  his  own
exaltation  or  his  family's  aggrandise
ment,  and  requiring  him  to  take  a
humbler  '  1,  and  he  will  grasp  tight'y
and  hold  te  laciously  the  position  which
everytliing  coinbines  to  tell  him  is  for
another.     No  hing   too,    is   a   greater

255


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


BOOK  1.


temptation  to  a  man  to  do  unprincipled
tilings  than  such  an  attempt.  .  .  .  But
it  is  a  fruitless  work,  however  long
m  ai  n  tai  ned. — Miller.

Ver.  25.  Saul  is  here  also  "  among
the  prophets,"  and  foretells  David's
exaltation  and  victory,  "  Vicisti  ;  Naz-
arene  !  "  was  the  exclamation  of  Julian.
—  Wordsworth.

Before  we  pass  away  from  Saul's
persecution  of  David,  an  interesting
inquiry  presents  itself,  which  may  be
answered  by  the  help  of  one  of  the
Psalms.  How  came  it,  one  is  tempted
to  ask,  that  Saul  was  thus  at  one  time
so  friendly  to  David,  and  at  another
filled  with  such  bitter  enmity  against
him  ?  Much  of  tins  was  owing,  doubt-
less, to  the  impulsive,  wayward,  and
capricious  disposition  which,  as  we  have
seen,  grew  upon  him  after  his  rejection
by  Samuel.

But  this  will  not  explain  it  all.     An
impulse  will  go  on  in  a  man  until  it
exhausts  itself;  but  it  will  then  leave
him,  at  least,  indifferent,  and  something
else  will  be  required  to  account  for  the
rapid  reversal  of  his  feelings,  when  we
see  him  change  in  a  short  time  from
grateful  appreciation  to  tierce  antago-
nism.    Where,  then,  shall  we  find  tliat
something  in  the  case  of  Saul?     The
answer  seems  to  me  to  be  furnished  by
the  inscription  to  the  7th  Psalm,  which,
from  its  similarity  to  David's  utterances
to     Saul     on     the     occasions     which
have    been    before    us,    has    been    by
most  expositors  connected  with  these
events.      It  is  entitled  "  Shiggaion  of
David,  which  he  sang  unto  the  Lord,
concerning    the    words   of    Cush    the
Benjamite."     That  is  "a  dithyrambic
ode  of  David  concerning  the  words  of
Cush."    Now  if  we  adopt  the  conjecture
that  Cush  was  one  of  Saul's  confidential
adherents,  and  that  he  had  set  himself
deliberately  and  malignantly  to  poison
his  master's  mind  in  reference  to  David,
by  inventing  all  manner  of  false  asser-
tions, and  indulging  in  every  variety  of
significant  innuendoes  concerning  him,
we  have  an  explanation  atonce,  of  many
statements   in   the    narrative,   of  the
vacillations  in  the  disposition  of  Saul,
256


and  of    the  character    of   the   Psalm

to  which  the  title  belongs

When  the  king  was  alone,  away  from
the  influence  of  this  black-hearted
sycophant,  David's  noble  and  frank
ingenuousness  })roduced  its  appropriate
impression  on  his  heart  ;  but  when
David  disapi)eared,  and  this  Cush
resumed  his  insinuating  supremacy,
then  Saul's  heart  was  again  estranged,
and  he  vowed  venge.mce  on  the  son  of
Jesse.  Of  course,  if  Saul  had  not  been
weak,  this  effect  would  not  have  been
produced  upon  him  ;  but,  in  the
circumstances,  we  can  see  how  the
larger  measure  of  the  guilt  belonged  to
Cush,  and  can  understand  why,  while
David  spared  the  king,  his  heart  was
full  of  abhorrence  of  the  part  which
was  played  by  the  false-hearted  Ben-
jamite.—  Dr.    W.  31.    1  ay  lor.

A  few  words  may  suitai)ly  be  added
in  connection   with   these  signal   vic-
tories   of  David   over    the    spirit    of
revenge,   res})ecting    what   have    been
called   his   vindictive   or   imprecatory
Psalms.  .  .  .    When    loud   complaints
are  made  of  the  vindictive  character
of  some  of  the  Psalms  of  David,  and
when  all  the  more  favourable  explana-
tions  of  some   of   thase   Psalms    are
rejected  with  contempt,  objectors  may
be  fairly  challenged  to  show  how  they
can  reconcile  the  view  taken  by  them
of    these    Psalms    with   the  elevated
generosity  and  forbearance  that  were
so    conspicuous    in     David's    general
character.      Saul    was    not   the   only
enemy  of  David's,  or   of  God's,   that
experienced  his  forbearance.    Absalom,
Shemei,  and  other  bitter  opponents  of
himself  and  of  the  cause  of  truth,  shared
the  same  generous  treatment.     It  may
surely  be  held  as  established  that,  so
far  as  David  was  concerned,  no  feeling  of
personal  revenge  could  have  led  him  to
use  the  language  or  breathe  the  spirit
of  the    iujprecatory   Psalms.      It  can
easily    be   proved    that   many,   where
individuals   seem    at   first    to    be    the
objects  of  denunciation,  in  point  of  fact
either  do  not  contemplate  the  case  of
individuals  at  all,  or  make  use  of  them
chiefly  as  signs  or  types  of  principles.
.  ,  .    The   fifth   Psalm,   for  example.


OHAP.  XXVI.  HOM I LETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


a])pears  to  be  a  denunciation  of  the  may    be    arrested,    overthrown,    and

r.sahiiist's  personal  enemies.      But  in  punished,    in   their  impious  and   per-

Kom.  iii.  13  the  words  are  quoted  as  uicious   career.      In   some   cases,   the

part  of  a  proof  of  the  universal  cor-  mode  of  punishment  is  that  of  the  well-

ruption  of  mankind.     Tlie  proof  wouhl  Vnowu  lex-talionis.     .     .     .     Our  ears

be  palpably  irrelevant  if  the  languai^e  tingle  at  the  mention  of  them  ;  we  can

of  the  Psalmist  applied  only   to    his  hardly  read  the  137th  Psalm  without

}iersonal  and  public  enemies.    But  it  is  a  shudder,  but  the  sense  of  the  perfect

not  irrelevant  if  these  enemies  were  justice  of  the  law  was  so  deeply  im-

viewed    as    types   or    signs    of  those  pressed  on  the  minds  of  pious  Jews,

principles  and    habits    of  sin    which  that  no  such  feelin<j^  of  horror  appears

infest   the  world.     .     .     .     Still,    we  to  have  been  awakened  in  them.     The

freely  admit   that  among  the  impre-  judicial    as])ect    prevailed    over    tlie

catory  Psalms  there  are  several  where  personal. —  Blaikie.

living  persons  are  the  objects  of  the  Af^*.     t^        ^    •      ^.u-      •          r  -rw    ^j

, ®   ^          ,     .                ^-              -nil          •  i\we.— It  was  during  this  soioum  of  David

most    earnest    imprecations.       What    is  in  the  wilderness  that  the  Gadites,  mentioned

to  be  said  of  these  ?      The  least  strained  in  l  Chron.  xii.  8-14,  enlisted  themselves  in

seemsalsOthebest  eX])lanation  ofthem.  ^is    service,    and    probably    in    the   interval

They  are  the  expression  of   holy  indig-  between   the    event   recorded  in  this  chapter

,.•          ,    ,1               •   1      1                  1            °  and  that  which  opens    the   next,    that   there

nation  at   tllOSe    wicked   men  who  were  came  to  him  some  belonging  to  his  own  tribe

opposing    every    good    work,    and    en-  of    Judah,    and    also    some    of    the    tribe    of

Couraging,  for  their  own  vile   ends,  all  Benjamin  to  which  Saul  belonged  (1  Chron.

that  was  wicked  and  destructive  ;  they  f"-  1^>-18).     These   occurrences  show   that

,1                     ,     1     .          1  •   1             "^  Saul  was  gradually  losing  his  hold  upon  the

convey  the   earnest  desire  which  every  people,  and  that  their  confidence  in  David  was

good  man  must  have,  that  such  persons  increasing.


CHAPTER  XXVII.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1.  **Saul  shall  despair,"  or  "desist  from  me.**
"The  idea  of  the  word  is,  to  give  a  thing  up  as  impossible  or  useless."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  2.  "  Achish,  son  of  Maoch."  The  particular  description  of  the  family  of  Achish  have
led  some  to  sup[)ose  that  lie  is  not  the  person  mentioned  in  chap.  xxi.  10,  but  that  Achish  was
a  common  name  for  the  Philistine  kings.  If  he  is  identical  with  the  monarch  mentioned  in
1  Kings  ii.  39  as  the  son  of  Maachah,  he  must  have  reigned  more  than  fifty  years,  which,  of
course,  is  not  impossible.  "  Gath  had  been  before  conquered  by  the  Israelites  (1  Sam.  vii.  14),
but  a])pear8  here,  and  at  xxi,  10  sq.,  as  the  residence  of  an  independent  kiuij  hostile  to  Saul.
See  1  Chron.  xviii.  1,  which  states  that  David  afterwards  conquered  it,"     (Erdmann, J

Ver.  3.  "  Every  man  with  his  household."  This  expression  forcibly  marks  the
difi^erence  in  David's  circumstances  now  and  on  his  former  visit  to  Gath.  Then  he  was  alone
and  feared  for  his  safety,  now  he  is  the  leader  of  a  large  retinue  who  bring  their  families  and
settle  iown  in  the  country.  "  Perhaps  at  this  time  he  formed  the  friendship  with  Ittai  the  Gittit j
which  appears  in  2  Sam.  xv.  19."     {B ibllcal  Commentary .)

Ver.  5.  "Give  me  a  place,"  etc.  "David  asked  such  a  city  as  property ;  in  ver.  6  it  is
expres-sly  stated  that  Achish  gave  it  to  him  for  a  possession.  David's  alleged  reason  for  the
request  is  tliat  it  was  not  suitable  for  him,  Achish's  servant  and  subject,  to  remain  in  the  capital
city  with  his  large  retinue."  (Erdmann.)  "David  subtly  suggests  the  expensivene>s  of  his
resi'  ence  in  Gath  ;  his  real  motive  was  to  be  out  of  the  way  of  observation,  so  as  to  play  the
part  of  Saul's  enemy  without  acting  against  him."     [Biblical  Commentiry.)

Ver.  6,  "  Ziklag."  This  city  was  in  the  territory  originally  assigned  to  Judah,  but  after-
wards taken  from  them  and  allotted  to  Simeon  (see  Joshua  xix.  5-9),  but  it  is  uncertain  whether
it  had  ever  been  really  possessed  by  the  people  of  Israel.  It  must  have  been  in  the  south,  and
chap.  XXX.  1  seems  to  favour  the  opinion  that  it  was  close  to  the  Amalekite  border.  But  it  is
difficult  to  reconcile  this  with  the  fact  which  JMr.  (Jr  )ve  remarks  follow?)  froa  vertses  9,  10  and

6  207


no  Ml  LET IC  CO  MM  EN  TAR  Y :   SA  M  UEL.  book  i.


21  in  chap.  xxx.  that  it  was  north  of  the  brook  Besor,  and  travellers  and  biblical  scholars  are
divided  in  their  conclusions  respecting  its  site.  Some  have  suggested  that  there  were  two  places
of  the  same  name.

Ver.  7.  "  The  country  of  the  Philistines."  "  The  word  rendered  country  is  peculiar.  It
is  not  kas-Skefdah,  as  it  must  have  been  had  Ziklag  stood  on  the  ordinary  lowland  of  Philistia,
but  lias-i^adth^  which  Dean  Stanley  renders  the  field.  The  only  conclusion  seems  to  be  that
Ziklag  was  in  the  south  or  N<-geb  country,  with  a  portion  of  which  the  Philistines  had  a  con-
nection which  may  have  lasted  from  the  times  of  their  residence  there  in  the  days  of  Abraham
and  Isaac."     (Smith's  Bib.  iJictionary.  j

Ver.  7.  *•  A  full  year,"  etc.  Or  a  year  of  days.  Although  this  word  is  sometimes
rendered  "  a  considerable  time,  it  signifies,"  says  Keil,  "  strictly  speaking,  a  term  of  days  which
amounted  to  a  full  year  (as  in  Lev.  xxv.  29  ;  see  also  1  Sam.  i.  3,  20  ;  ii.  19).

Ver.  8.  *•  The  Geshurites/'  etc.  "  The  district  of  the  Geshurites  (to  be  distinguished  from
the  little  Aramaean  kingdom  of  Geshur,  2  Sam.  xv.  8,  etc. ;  and  from  the  northern  Geshurites,
near  Hermon  on  the  border  of  Bashan,  Deut.  iii.  14,  etc.)  lay  south  of  Philistia  near  the  district
of  the  Amalekites."  (Erdmann.)  The  Gerzites  cannot  be  identified,  and  are  not  the  same  as
the  inhabitants  of  Gerzer  (Josh.  x.  3o)  who  dwelt  in  the  west  of  Ephraim.  **  As  thou  goest
to  Shur,''  literally,  ojhtre  from  old  thy  coming  is  to  Shur.  "  Shur  is  the  desert  of  Jifar,  which
i.i  situated  in  front  of  Eyypt."  (Keil. J  The  clause  is  very  difficult  to  render,  and  Erdmann
reads,  "  David  invaded  the  Amalekites  (for  these  were  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  who  inhabited
of  old)  as  far  as  bhur  and  Egypt."  *'  The  object  of  this  attack  is  not  mentioned,  as  being  a
matter  of  indifference  to  the  chief  object  of  the  history  ;  but  it  is  no  doubt  to  be  sought  for  in
plundering  incursions  made  by  these  tribes  into  the  land  of  Israel.  For  David  would  hardly
have  entered  upon  a  war  in  the  situation  in  which  he  was  placed  at  that  time  without  some
such  occasion,  seeing  that  it  would  be  almost  sure  to  bring  him  into  suspicion  with  Achish  and
endanger  his  safety."     (Keil.)

Ver.  9.  **  And  came  to  Achish."  Probably,  "  to  deliver  him  a  portion  of  the  spoil "
(Erdmann),  and  "  to  deceive  him  as  to  the  true  character  of  the  enterprise."    (Keil.)

Ver.  10.  "  The  verb  said,  like  the  *  went  up '  in  Verse  8,  here  expresses  customary,  repeated
acting.  The  meaning  is,  Achish  used  to  say  :  Against  whom  have  ye  made  an  incursion  this  time  ?  "
(Erdmann.)  "  David  said,  against  the  south  of  Judah,"  etc.  "  All  the  tribes  mentioned
here,  and  in  verse  8,  dwelt  near  one  another  in  the  district  bordering  on  the  Negeb  (south
country)  of  Judah,  and  stretching  between  tlie  hill  country  of  Judah  and  the  Arabian  desert.
(See  Josh.  xv.  21.)  David's  expeditions  were  really  against  the  tribes  named  in  verse  8,  who
extended  close  into  the  south  of  Judah.  It  was  his  interest,  however,  to  make  Achish  believe
that  he  had  made  an  expedition  against  Saul,  and  consequently  against  the  men  of  Judah.
.  .  .  .  This  deception  was  made  possible  only  by  the  fact  that  those  tribes  dwelt  so  near
together."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  11.  **So  did  David."  These  words  conclude  the  sentence,  and  ought  to  be  entirely
separated  from  what  follows — the  next  clause  not  being  a  part  of  the  preceding  speech,  but  the
.words  of  the  historian.     **  So  will  be,"  rather  "  So  {was)  his  manner."


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  CHAPTER,

The  Consequences  of  Distrust.

I.  Present  .circumstances  of  trial  may  lead  men  entirely  to  ignore  past
tokens  of  Divine  favour.  The  conduct  of  David  at  this  time  is  a  remarkable
illustration  that  this  is  true  not  only  of  men  of  ordinary  faith  and  courage,  but
of  tlio.se  also  who  generally  rise  far  above  the  level.  We  can  but  regard  David,
with  all  his  faults,  as  a  man  of  eminent  faith  in  the  character  and  word  of  God,
and  yet  we  find  him  here  for  the  second  time  (see  chap,  xxi.)  as  full  of  distrust,
not  to  say  despair,  as  the  weakest  servant  of  God  could  ever  be.  Looking  at
all  the  deliverances  of  the  past,  and  remembering  all  the  signal  tokens  of
the  Divine  favour  which  had  been  granted  to  him,  we  should  have  expected
to  hear  him  exclaim,  ^'Because  thou  hast  been  my  help,  therejore  in  the
shadow  of  thy  wings  will  I  make  m.y  refuge,  until  these  calamities  be  overpast  **
(Fsa.  Ixiii.  7  ;  Ivii.  1).  But  when  we  consider  how  strong  is  the  influence  of
258


CHAP.  XXVII.  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


tlie  present  and  tlie  seen  n])oii  tlie  Immau  s])irit — how  much  more  real  seems
the  danger  of  to-day  than  the  word  spoken  perhaps  loiif^  ago — we  do  not  wonder
so  much  to  hoar  him  say,  "  I  shall  now  perish  one  day  hy  the  liand  of  Saul."
Tlie  remedy  for  such  an  error  is  to  be  found  in  reflet^tion.  By  the  use  of  memory
we  can  recall  the  ))ast,  and  assure  ourselves  that  it  is  as  nnich  a  part  of  our  lives
as  the  present,  and  by  reason  we  can  become  convinced  that  any  promise  of  God
is  as  worthy  of  confidence  now  as  when  it  was  uttered.  If  David  had  considered
who  it  was  that  had  elected  hin)  from  the  midst  of  his  brethren  and  caused  him
to  be  anointed  by  Samuel,  and  how  signal  had  been  the  deliverances  which  he
had  since  experienced,  he  would  have  brought  his  memory  and  his  reason  to  the
aid  of  his  faith,  and  so  have  saved  himself  from  the  moral  failure  recorded  in
this  chapter.

II.  Faith  in  the  heart  is  closely  connected  with  integ^rity  in  the  life.
It  is  doubtless  true  that  there  are  men  in  the  world  who  have  no  hold  upon  the
invisible  God  and  are  yet  honest  and  honourable  in  their  dealings  with  their
fellow  men.  But  however  much  a  man  may  love  goodness  for  its  own  sake,  and
however  keen  may  be  his  ])erception  between  right  and  wrong,  he  will  have
special  seasons  in  his  life  in  which  he  will  find  it  very  hard  to  discern  the  right
and  to  hold  fast  to  it  if  he  have  no  power  stronger  than  his  own  to  rely  upon.
There  are  times  in  the  history  of  every  life  when  nothing  but  a  confidence  that
One  stronger  than  ourselves  is  on  our  side  will  keep  us  from  giving  up  the
struggle  to  do  right  as  hopeless  and  worthless,  and  make  us  proof  against  the
suggestion  of  the  tempter  that  we  can  gain  something  by  taking  our  cause  into
our  own  hands.  As  soon  as  David  lost  his  conviction  that  God  had  him  in  His
care  and  keeping,  he  naturally  ceased  to  seek  direction  from  Him,  and  becoming
a  law  to  himself,  entered  upon  a  course  of  cruelty  and  deception.  (On  this
subject  see  also  on  chap.  xxi.  page  214).

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Asa  punishment  for  histransgression,  heard  from  his  lips  perhaps  only  such

he,  who  had  hitherto  been  an  object  of  mocking  words  as  these  :  "The  deserter

fear  and  hatred  to  King  Saul,  must  now  assigned  to  himself  once  the  right  name

be  the   object   only  of  his   contempt,  when  he  designated  himself  as  only  a

Briefly   but   significantly   the   history  flea  before  me,  and  as  a  timid  partridge

records,  "  And  it  was  told  Saul  that  on  the  mountains."     0,  the  disgrace

David  was  fled  to  Gath  ;  and  he  sought  which  fastened  itself  to  the  heels  of  our

no  more  again  for  him.^'     It  is  plainly  friend  in  this  course  now  pursued  by

indicated   by   these  words   that   Saul  him  !     Perhaps  he  was  many  a   time

believed  he  had  henceforth  to  regard  ashamed  of  himself,  when  it  came  into

\\\Q  coward i\^  in  noway  an  objectof  fear  his  consciousness  how  he,  when  he  was

to  him.   Moreover,  David  appeared  now  only  the  terrified  prey  in  the  wilderness,

as  a   friend  of    the   Philistines,    and,  against  which  horse  and  horseman  were

consequently,  asa  traitor  to  his  country  ;  sent  out,  was  yet  an  altogether  difl'erent

and  without  doubt  Saul  flattered  him-  man  from  what  he   was    now   in    his

self  with  the  hope  that  he  would  be  supposed  hiding-place  among  the  Philis-

acknowledged  as  such  by  the  whole  of  tines.    Some  such  stratagem,  however,

Israel,  and  would  be  forced  to  renounce  isalmostalways  practised  when  believers

for  ever  the  prospect  of  the  throne  of  become  suitors  for  the  favour  and  help

Israel.     "Saul  sought  no  more  again  of  the  children  of  this  world.      That

for  him^'  but  yet  he  thought  about  him  they  should,  when  distress  comes,  make

with  scornful  contempt.     Hitherto  his  ''flesh  their  arm  "at all,  will  give  their

satellites  had  seen  him  vomiting  forth  enemies  cause  to  triumph.     And  too

fire  and  flame  against  David  ;  now  they  frequently,  indeed,  do  the  malevolent

2o9


nOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  i.


find  occasion  for  rejoicing   over  such  promise    to   come    forth    innocent. —

condnct.  Quickly  do  they  discern  that,  Bishop  Hall.

in  ordertogaintlieirfavonr, the  "pious"  From  this  section  of  the  history  we

change  their  language  in  tlieir  presence,  are  also  taught  liow  the  very  highest

that  they   carefully  ahstain  from  the  attainments  of  believers  are  no  security

mode  of  speech  in  common  use  among  against   a  speedy   fall.      Seldom   has

the  "  brotherhood,"  and  that  they  even  grace  been  more  triumphant  than  when

accommodate  themselves  to  many  of  the  David  refrained  from  lifting  his  hand

views  of  tiieir  opponents,  which  directly  against  Saul — yet   his   declension    at

contradict  the  Word  of  God  ;  and  take  Gath  is   the  very  next   incident  that

refuge  in  ambiguous  phraseology  and  the  Spirit  has  recorded. — Blaikie.

so-called  mental  reservation,  that  they  We  cannot  blame  David  because  he

might  not  be  guilty  of  an  open  and  made  expeditions  against  Canaanitish

complete  rejection  of  the   faith.      0,  races  and  Amalekites,  neither  are  we

the     contemptible     treachery     which  justified  in  at  once  accusing  him  of

Christians,  by  such  condnct,  are  guilty  cruelty  towards   the  conquered.     The

of  towards  the  Gospel  ! — Krummacher.  accusation  would  have  had  somefounda-

If  Achish  were  a  Philistine,  yet  he  tion  if  he  had  been  actuated  merely  by

was  David's  friend,  yea,  his  patron  ;  the  prudential  motives  given  in  chap,

and  if  he  had  been  neither,  it  had  not  xxvii.   11.     But  this  was  certainly  not

become  David  to  be  false.     The  infir-  the   case.      The    principal    reason   is

mities  of  God's  children  never  appear  rather  to  be  sought  in  the  Mosaic  law,

but   in  their  extremities.     It  is  hard  which  declares  these  races  to  be  under

for  the  best  man  to  say  how  far  he  will  the   curse.      But  it   is   impossible   to

be  tempted.     If  a  man  will  put  him-  justify  his  e(iuivocation.-iy^w^5^^?2^^r^.


self    among    Philistines,    he    cannot


CHAPTER  XXVIII.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes.— Ver.  1.  "Know  thou  assnredly."  Some  expositors
regard  these  words  of  Achish  as  designed  to  try  David  :  others  think  they  express  the  entire
confidence  which  the  king  placed  in  him.

Ver.  2.  "Surely  thou  shalt  know,"  or  Assuredly,  or  There/ort  thou  shalt  know.  Evidently
David  found  himself  in  a  dilemma  and  gives  an  ambiguous  answer.  *•  Keeper  of  mine  head,"
i.e.,  "captain  of  my  body-guard — an  office  of  great  trust  and  high  honour."  (Jamieson.)  The
narrative  here  breaks  off  and  is  continued  in  chapter  xxix.,  the  historian  meanwhile  turning  aside
to  relate  the  effect  which  this  Philistine  invasion  had  upon  Saul.

Ver.  3.  **  Saul  had  put  away,"  i.e.,  long  before  the  event  about  to  be  recorded.  He  had
expelled  them  from  his  kingdom,  but  the  Levitical  law  was,  "  Thou  shalt  not  suffer  a  witch  to
live."  (Exod.  xxii.  18  ;  Lev.  xx.  27.)  The  strong  denunciations  uttered  by  God  against  these
people  seem  to  afford  a  strong  proof  that  they  were  not  simply  deceivers  of  the  people,  but  were
really  in  direct  and  close  communication  with  the  spirits  of  evil.

Ver.  4.  "  Shunem."  Now  called  Solum  or  Sulera,  a  village  situated  on  the  southern  declivity
of  the  so-called  Little  Hermon,  which  forms  the  northern  boundary  of  the  valley  of  Jezreel.
**  Giltoa,"  a  mountain  range  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  valley.  "  The  Philistines  clung  as
usual  to  the  plain,  which  was  most  suitable  for  those  war  chariots  of  which  their  military
armament  principally  consisted,  and  they  took  up  an  advantageous  position  for  the  free  and
effective  use  of  that  force  in  action.  That  of  the  Hebrews  was  badly  selected."  {Jamieson.)
"  The  ground  slopes  down  gradually  from  Shunem  to  the  very  base  of  Gilboa  at  the  fountain,
while  the  hillside  rises  steeply  from  the  plain.  The  Philistine  had  all  the  advantage  of  the
gentle  descent  in  their  attack  —both  front  and  flank  of  the  Israelites  were  exposed  to  their  onset,
«,nd  the  prospect  of  flight  almost  completely  cut  off  by  the  steep  hill  behind."     {Porter.)

260


CHAP.xxviir.  nOMlLETIO  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,


Ver.  6.  "Neither  by  dreams,  nor  by  Urim,  nor  by  prooheta  "    "  Tn  f).A  /^».^^„  ^*
ments  of   tlHse  three  vehicles  of  revelation  the  e  is  a  L  'essfon  fVom  tL  les^lfh  T"

e.U.e.,  and  -.^  cll^dt^vl^:"^^^^^^^^^^^^  *»«

believe  that  an  evil  spirit  was  uermkte.n.v Tl]  t  ??      ^'  ''"'"y  "l  I'^^ed,  while  many

aoceptthe  latter  view*-.  butTul.'ill.'-tlLtXnttSrfLtrTt^^^Xr^  'h7)t    f'

says  :      The  more  thoroughly  I  considerit,  the  more  th„rou"hIy  I  am  convinced  thff  V  '°'"

no  app-arance  of  any  kind  of  spirit,  or  phantom  at  all  nnHt^X  «  «<»ivinced  that  there  was
gave  any  answers  .  .  .  indeed  there  are  «oT,'nt  ""•?"''*'''  Samuel  was  not  consulted  nor
observed  throughout  the  entire  relation    as  th^t  7  ^^  of  imposture  and  deceit,  that  may  ba

entirely  carried  on  by  Saul  I'tj  thlokl  wit^h  JiH  t  I"."  ''""''"'Ut  that  this  conference  was
This  affair  was  transited  by  ntht  the  t^e.;^^!  ""!  ^"'^  °'  ^^^  'P'"'  whatever.  .  .  .

when  persons  are  mosrillle  to  be  inmre^^^dl^f  '"'"I;'!'  '°  '"r"«*  deceptions  of  this  kind-
.  .  .  Also,  even  Samuehimsdf  doth  not  ^1^^  IV^  '/"P"""'  °"  ''^  '^"'^  "»'''  imaginations

from  the  dead,  for  hlsaitl  no  hin"  about  it  h,  t"'  ''"T",  f  "^"""^  "^  ^""^'^  ""'"'"^  ''™

and    bringing    him    up       """"">=•  f""'  "  •  •  •  but  expressly  blames  Saul  for  disturbin|  Wm

would  no't  lave  co^^daine'd  of^be  ^J'disa'ieM  t'  s?.",  '^^  "'■-="'  l-i-  "P.  '-
as  well  as  Saul,  that 'consulting  thrdead  w^  aLluilv^  1  f  ,"''  "^  ^-"T"^  '"'^»''
prophet  to  reprove  Mm  for  doi„°  it    ,„,?»„  i  *  .  .'"'""'"^"'y  .unlawful,  surely   it  became  the

notV  virtue '<,fher,ft.tttth:^„antf^at^;rr'S'lI^^^^^

ac,,u.u-n.ed  with  San  uellaTea^^aLeXX^  S      "  """m""'  r"^"  ^'"^  '"'  ^™'^'  '«<=■>

her  visitor  was  before  she  cEted  to  e  nnf  ,1  ?  • '  t  ."■''*'"""  "f '  ''"=  ■""^'  •'»™  ^uown  who
herknowle,lgeforrtin,riroXrtlit,roi  L  ''';'f'""'''  ^"''  *'""  ^''«  "'"^'y  concealed

there  wa.  n^othing  t  herrepTv  o  S™  ?,a  Tif"  "  ''"™  «"""';'  'I'"""  S^.-uel ;  also,  that
suggested.  NotwI'thstanchnHL  an"  Itl  fob  ecZnVm:nvn:''l ''"""''  """'''  "'"  '•"™
Jewish  commentators,  and  with  Orioen    A mbr  se    a    r^ti       ^-  "  «xi'"s;tors  .agree  with

really  .ajmear  to  Saul      "  This  v  Iw  '  L^^  Amb ose,  and  others,  m  supjiosiiij;  that  Samuel  did

Tor  fl )  \L  author  ^ays  in  verseTi  ha  Saul  i'""'"'"^''"''^;  'I '"  "'  1'''""'"^  ^"*''  ">«  ■'"'■»«ve.
wnrH«   wVmVK    ..  » '  -1     ff        '        '  '"'"'  perceued,  not  fane  ec  ,  it  «-.a3  Samuel      (2  1    Th«

Lute»ess  could  have  f1reLen'^A;-ch?[s\uJ^^^^  "T  ^"''^^"^^-^  '^'"^'^  ^"^"^'^  no  human

the  appearance  of  sLueTr answer    otcOia^ItTv'"^  ""7?'/"  ^^"i'^'"^'  '^"^  ^^^^^'  ^^-^i^i'-'r


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,  book  i.


prophet  to  enquire  of  him  concerning  Me,  I  the  Lord  will  an.noer  him  hy  Myself.'^  (Ezek.  xiv.  7.)
But  notwithstanding  the  considerations  which  seem  to  favour  this  view,  we  agree  with  Luther,
Cirotius,  and  other  theologians  of  the  lleformation,  in  believing  that  it  was  Satan  himself,  or  one
of  his  agents,  who  appeared  to  the  woman  and  spoke  to  Saul.  For,  as  Dr,  Erdmann  remarks
(though  in  support  of  a  different  opinion),  "  it  is  exp-essly  said  in  ver.  6  that  God  answered  Saul
no  more,  and  that  for  this  reason,  he  turned  froni  God  to  a  sorceress.  An  inimediate  Divine
miracle  is  assumed,  which  is  to  be  brought  into  union  with  the  anti-godly  attempt  of  the
sorceress  and  an  open  act  of  godlessness  or  God-forgetfidness  on  the  part  of  Saul.  Support  would
thus  be  given  to  the  superstitious  opiuion  that  departed  spiiits  may  be  summoned,  while  the
fundamental  view  of  the  Old  Testament  everywhere  is  that  a  return  of  the  dead  to  the  land  of
the  living  is  not  possible."  He  further  remarks  that  such  an  appearance — if  God  had  really
been  willing  to  permit  it — could  no  longer  have  had  any  rell'/ious  ethical  end,  seeing  that  the
means  for  rousing  Saul  to  repentance  were  exhausted,  nor  any  theocratic  end,  seeing  that  Saul's
rejection  as  king  had  already  V)een  repeatedly  ann-iunced.  On  the  other  hand  there  can  i-e  no
doubt  of  the  intimate  connection  between  witchcraft  or  sorcery  and  the  spirits  of  evil.  The
stern  denunciations  of  God  against  it  prove  that  it  was  not  a  fancy  but  a  fact.  The  damsel  who
brought  her  masters  much  gain  by  soothsaying,  mentioned  in  Acts  xvi.  16,  is  said  to  have  been
possessed  by  an  evil  spirit,  and  miraculous  deeds  of  a  certain  kind  are,  in  the  Bible,  attributed  to
such  servants  of  Satan,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Egyptians  (Exod.  vii.  11-22.  In  the  New  Testa-
ment it  is  said  that  ''Satan  fashioneth  himself  into  an  angel  of  Ivjht^^  (2  Cor.  xi.  14),  and  his
working  is  declared  to  be  '' with  all  fower  and  signs  and  lying  wonders*'  (2  Thess.  ii.  9).  The
reproof  given  to  Saul  is  no  argument  against  the  speaker  being  an  evil  spirit ;  we  know  the
Devil  can  quote  the  Word  of  God  to  serve  his  purpose  (Matt.  iv.  6),  and  he  only  did  to  Saul
what  many  a  wicked  man  has  done  to  a  fellow-creature  whom  he  has  tempted  and  brought
to  ruin — taunted  him  with  the  fruit  of  his  evil  deeds.  Neither  to  our  mind  does  the  fact  that
the  Scripture  narrative  says  Samuel  spoke  affect  the  argument,  as  Old  Testament  writers  often
simply  describe  things  as  they  appear  to  be.

Ver.  23.  **  The  bed."  Rather  the  divan — a  cushioned  bench,  extending  along  the  wall  of  the
room  still  found  in  the  East.

Ver.  24.  **  She  hasted,"  etc.  "  The  cookery  was  performed  with  singular  despatch.  .  .  .
But  this  was  not  uncommon  (see  Gen.  xviii.  7-8  ;  Judges  xiii.  1  ;  Luke  xv.  27-29),  and  is  still
practised  in  the  tents  of  the  Bedouins.  A  sheep  or  calf  is  brought  and  killed  in  the  presence  of
the  guests,  and  then,  having  been  thrust  into  a  large  cauldron  swung  over  the  fire,  the  contents
are  taken  out  and  placed  on  an  immense  tray,  and  served  up  amid  a  mass  of  roasted  corn,  boiled
rice,  and  curdled  or  sour  milk."     (Jamieson.J

Verses  1  and  2  will  be  considered  with  the  next  chaper.

MAJN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3-25.

Saul  and  the  Woman  of  Endor.

I.  The  day  of  grace  has  its  limits.  It  is  a  day.  Our  Lord  spoke  to  the
people  of  Jerusalem  of  a  day,  or  a  season,  of  God-given  opportunity,  which  when
He  addressed  them  was  jjone  to  return  no  more  (Luke  xix.  42).  When  tlie  rich
man  ''Lifted  up  his  eyes  .  .  .  and  said,  Father  A  braham,  have  mercy  upon  me"
the  answer  that  came  back  to  him  was  :  "  Between  us  and  you^  there  is  a  great
gulf  fixed''  (Luke  xvi.  22-26).  And  some  men  by  constant  rejection  of  Divine
coujniands  and  invitations  create  such  a  gulf  on  tliis  side  of  death — a  gulf  only
to  be  filled  up  by  true  repentance,  for  which,  alas !  they  have  no  inclination.

"  Try  what  repentance  can  ;  what  can  it  not  ?
Yet  what  can  it  when  one  cannot  repent  T  "

Saul  was  a  man  to  whom  God  had  given  a  grand  opportunity  to  lead  a  noble  and
blessed  life,  by  raising  him  to  a  high  social  position  and  endowing  him  with
special  gifts  to  discharge  its  duties  ;  but  he  had  now  outlived  the  day  of  G(>d
gracious  favour,  and  is  an  illustiatiou  of  that  most  terrible  of  Divine  threaten-
ings  :  ''Because  I  have  called  and  ye  refused;  I  have  stretched  out  my  hand,  and
no  man  regarded  ;  hut  ye  have  set  at  nought  my  counsel,  nnd  would  none  oj  my
reproof;  J  also  will  laugh  at  your  calamity;  J  will  mock  when  your  fear
coineth  "  etc.  (Proverbs  i.  24-28).
26g


cflAi.  xxvin.  BOMILETIC  COMMEyTARY:  SAMUEL.


U.  If  men  refuse  the  light  of  God's  truth  they  will  be  given  over  to  the
darkness  of  spiritual  delusion.  The  word  of  God  and  liuma.i  history  unite  in
declariHir  that  he  who  does  not  become  God's  free  servant  will,  in  some  form,  be
enslaveil  by  Satan.  Saul  had  lono^  a-o,  by  disobedience  to  God,  laid  hiniself
open  to  such  a  dominion  of  the  evil  one  as  showed  itself  in  liis  malice  towards
David,  and  now,  in  inspired  languai-e,  his  ''deceived  heart  hath  so  turned  him
aside  that  he  cannot  deliver  his  soul  nor  sajj.  Is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand"
(Isa.  xliv.  20),  and  he  seeks  counsel  and  comfort  throui^h  the  instrumentality  of
a  witch.  Those  who  rejected  the  Incarnate  Son  of  God,  and  the  truth  taught
by  His  apostles,  became  an  easy  prey  to  the  false  messi.ilis  and  prophets  wlio
followed  (x\Iatt.  xxiv.  24  ;  I  John  iv.  1),  and  Paul  tells  us  that  God  would  send
to  tl.()Ke  vyho  believed  not  the  truth  "  strong  delusion,  that  they  should  believe  a
lie  (2  Ihess.  ii.  11).  This  has  been  the  porticm  of  the  rejectors  of  God's
revealed  will,  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times.    If  Saul  had  taken  heed  to  the

Word  of  the  Lord  spoken  by  SanmeV'  when  the  prophet  was  alive,  he  would
not  have  desired  or  tlumght  it  possible  to  speak  to  him  now  by  means  which
God  had  declared  to  be  **  an  abomination^'  (Deut.  xviii.  10-12)  and  those  who
m  modern  times  are  willing  to  walk  by  the  li^ht  of  the  same  word  spoken  in

these  last  days  by  the  ^on  of  God''  (Heb.  i.  1.)  do  not  feel  any  wish  or  need
to  receive  instruction  or  consolation  by  means  of  spirit-rapping,  and  so  become
the  dupes^  either  of  false  men  or  lying  spirits.  To  all  such  the  message
ot  God  IS  '  Behold  all  ye  that  kindle  afire,  that  compass  yourselves  about  with
sparks;  walk  in  the  light  of  your  fire  and  in  the  sparks  that  ye  have  kindled.
I  his  shall  ye  have  of  mine  hand;  ye  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow,    (Isa.  L  11.)

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  3-5.  Even  the  worst  men  may  witch  of  Endor  on  the  part  of  Israers
sometimes  make  head  against  some  anointed  king  was  probably  as  nearly
sins.  Saul  hath  expelled  the  sorcerers  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  as  it
out  of  the  land  of  Israel,  and  hath  for-  was  possible  for  one  under  the  old
bidden  magic  upon  pain  of  death.  He  covenant,  and  before  the  Day  of  Pen-
that  had  no  care  to  expel  Satan  out  of  tecost,  to  commit.— 7 re?ich.
his  own  heart,  yet  will  seem  to  drive

him  out  of  his  kingdom.     That  we  see         Ver.  14.     A7id  he  stooped  with  his

wicked  men  oppose  themselves  to  some  Jace  to  the  ground.     This  is  what  the
sins,  there  is  neither  marvel  nor  com-     devil  aimed  at ;  and  it  is  well  observed

tort  in  It      JNo  doubt  Satan  made  sport  that  every  one  that  consulteth   with

at  this  edict  of  Saul:    what  cares  he  Satan  worshippeth  him,  though  he  bow

to  be  banished  m  sorcery,  while  he  is  not.     A^either    doth   that   evil    spirit

entertained  in  malice?     He  knew  and  desire  any  other  reverence  than  to  be

tound  Saul  his,  while  he  resisted  ;  and  sought  unto.— Trapp.
smiled  to  yield  thus  far  unto  his  vassal.

If  we  quit  not  all  sins,  he  will  be  con-         Ver.  16-19.     I  could  wonder  to  hear

tent  we  should  either  abandon  or  per-  Satan  preach  thus  prophetically  if  I

secute  some.      ^  did  not  know  that  as  he  was  once  a

W  here  there  is  no  place  for  holy  fear,  good  angel,  so  he  can  still  act  what  he

there  will  be  place  for  the  servile.    The  was.     While  Saul  was  in  consultation

graceless  heart  of  Saul  was  astonished  of  sparing  Agag,  we  shall  never  hud

at  the  Philistines,  yet  was  never  moved  that  Satan  would  lay  any  block  in  his

at  the  frowns  of  that  God  whose  anger  way— yea,  then  he  was  a  prompt  orator

sent  them,  nor  of  those  sins  of  his  which  to  induce  him  into  that  sin  ;  now  that

procured  them.— ^^.  JJall.  it  is  past  and  gone  he  can  lade  Saul

--  with   fearful    denunciations   of   judg-

Ver.  7.     Ihis  consulting  with  the  ment.     Till  we  have  sinned,  Satan  i*  »

263


HO  MI  LET W  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.


BOOK  I.


parasite  ;  when  we  liave  sinned,  he  is
a  tyrant.  What  cares  he  to  flatter
any  more  when  he  hath  what  lie  woukl?
Now,  his  only  work  is  to  terrify  and
confound,  that  he  may  enjoy  what  he
hath  won.  How  mucli  better  it  is
serving  that  Master,  who,  wlien  we  are
most  dejected  with  the  conscience  of
evil,  lieartens  us  with  inward  comfort,
and  speaks  peace  to  the  soul  in  the
midst  of  tumult  ! — Bp.  Hall.

l>hall  thou  and  thy  sons  he  with  me  ;
i.e.  in  the  state  of  the  dead.  Hereby
also  this  old  deceiver  would  persuade
Saul  that  the  souls  of  all  men,  as  well
good  as  bad,  go  to  the  same  place  ;
seeking  thereby  to  blot  out  of  him  all
knowledge  and  apprehension  of  eternal
life. —  Irapp.

It  is  a  grievous  miscalculation  which
men  make,  when,  conscious  that  life  is
passing  on  iu  the  neglect  of  God  and
duty,  they  reckon  within  themselves  a
certain  power  which  they  imagine  the
approach  of  death  will  have  to  awaken
their  attention  to  religious  duties,  and
to  bring  with  it  a  disposition  to  attend
to  religious  duties.  .  .  .  There  is
in  such  immediate  prospects  no  neces-
sary power  to  move  the  heart.  .  .  .
Did  Saul's  approaching  end  awaken  his
conscience  or  soften  his  heart? — Miller.

Ver.  7-20.  All  human  art  has
failed  to  portray,  all  human  history
has  failed  to  record,  a  despair  deeper
and  more  tragic  than  his,  who,  having
forsaken  God  and  being  of  God  for-
saken, is  now  seeking  to  move  hell  since
heaven  is  inexorable  to  him  ;  and  in-
finitely guilty  as  he  is,  assuredly  there
is  sometliing  unutterably  pathetic  in
that  yearning  of  the  disanointed  king,
now  in  his  utter  desolation,  to  change
words  once  more  with  the  friend  and
counsellor  of  his  youth,  and,  if  he
must  hear  his  doom,  to  hear  it  from
no  other  lips  but  his.  ...  I  know
not  whether  the  world  has  anything  to
show  at  all  so  mournful  as  the  spectacle
which  we  have  here  :  namely,  the
gradual  breaking  down  under  the  wear
and  tear  of  the  world,  under  the  in-
fluence of  unresisted  temptations,  of  a
lofty  soul.  .  .  Yet  as  many  among
264


us  as  are  old  enough  to  have  been  ab'e
to  watch  the  development  of  lives,  cari
hardly  have  failed  to  note  on  the  one
side  some  who,  giving  little  prouiise  at
the  commencement  of  their  career,
have  yet  afterwards  risen  into  clearness
of  purpose  and  dignity  of  aim.  .
while  others  of  much  rarer  and  ampler
gifts  ,  .  .  have  contracted  their
aims  and  lowered  their  standard.  .  .
What  is  the  explanation  ...  of
the  Jacobs,  who,  with  many  and  most
serious  faults,  are  yet  elevated  and
exalted  into  Israel  princes  with  God;
and  of  the  Esaus,  who,  not  without  a
certain  native  generosity,  separate
themselves  off  in  the  end  from  all  which
is  highest,  and  truest,  and  best  ?  Tlie
explanation  is  not  far  to  seek.  .  ,  .
Jacob,  with  all  his  faults  .  .  .  had
yet  a  side  on  which  he  was  turned
towards  God  .  .  .  which  was  exactly
what  Esau  had  not.  Dwell  a  little,  I
beseech  you  on  that  word.  ...  a
profane  person ....  (Heb.  xii.
16) — one  that  is,  without  a  fane,  with-
out a  sanctuary  in  his  soul ;  for  whom
all  things  were  common,  common  as
the  outer  court  of  some  temple,  which,
unfenced  and  unguarded,  is  trodden
and  trampled  on  by  the  careless  foot  of
every  passer  by.  .  .  .  Take,  I  be-
seech you,  the  lesson  which  the  Sauls
and  Esaus  have  bequeathed  us.  Build
on  no  good  thing  which  you  find  in
yourselves.  .  .  .  There  is  only  one
pled<^e  for  the  permanence  of  any  good
thing  that  is  in  you — namely,  that  you
bring  it  to  God,  and  that  you  receive
it  back  from  God,  with  that  higher
consecration  that  He  can  give  it  :  not
now  any  more  a  virtue  of  this  world,
but  a  grace  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.
Trench.

Ver.  21-25.  Even  in  a  sorceress,
with  all  her  deceptions  and  delusions,
her  wild  and  dreadful  life,  the  true
woman  comes  out  at  the  mute  appeal
of  misery.  How  kindly  persuasive  her
words;  how  prompt  her  hospitable
labours.  We  take  leave  of  her,  as  she
took  leave  of  the  ruined  king,  with  a
pitying  heart. — Translator  oj  Lange$
Commentary,


CHAP.  XXIX.  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


CHAPTER  XXIX.

^  Crittcal  and  Expository  Notes.- -"Aphek."  This  place  must  either  have  been  situated
in  the  plain  of  Jezreel  or  Esdraelon,  or  on  the  road  thither,  and  therefore  must  not  be  confounded
with  the  cities  mentioned  in  Josh.  xii.  18,  xix.  30,  and  1  Kings  xx  26.  It  is  i,'euerally  considered
that  it^was  neither  identical  with  the  Apliek  mentioned  in  chap.  iv.  of  this  book,  but  Mr.  Grove
{Smithy  Bib.  Diet.)  thinks  it  may  have  bt^en  the  same  place,  and  that  the  Philistines  were  then
on  their  march  to  Jezreel  by  the  road  which  still  exists.  "A  fountain  in  Jezreel,"  rather
"«Ag  fountain."  '^ow  "  Ain  Jafut.;'  the  fountain  of  Uoliah  (probably  so  called  because  it  was
the  reputed  scene  of  the  defeat  of  G..liah),  a  large  and  copious  spring,  which,  from  under  a
cavern  in  the  conglomerate  rock  which  there  forms  the  base  of  Gilboa,  forms  a  beautiful  and
hmpid  pool  of  more  than  forty  feet  in  diameter.  "  There  is  every  reason,"  says  Robinson,  "  to
reg^ard  this  as  the  ancient  fountain  of  Jezreel,  where,  too,  in  the  days  of  the  crusades,  Saladia
and  the  Christians  successively  encamped."

Ver.  3.  "Then  said  the  princes,"  i.e.,  the  princes  of  the  other  cities  of  Philistia,  not  the
courtiers  of  Achish.  "  As  it  is  said  in  ver.  11  that  David  returned  to  the  land  of  the  Philistines
and  according  to  chap.  xxx.  1  they  reached  Ziklag  after*a  three  days'  march,  the  objection  must
have  been  made  on  Israelitish  soil,  or  near  the  Palestinian  border."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  3.  "  These  days,  or  these  years."     An  indefinite  statement  of  time.

Ver.  4.  **  Let  him  not  go  down."  ♦'  Go  down  is  a  reijular  technical  military  expression,
derived  from  the  necessity  in  that  military  country  of  going  into  the  plain  to  fight."  {Erdmann.)
_  Ver.  6.  «  As  the  Lord  liveth."  This  oath  is  to  be  explained  not  by  the  fact  that  a  Hebrew
IS  here  the  narrator,  or  that  Achish  had  learned  to  know  and  honour  the  God  of  Israel,  but  by
his  desire  to  attest  more  strongly  the  truth  of  his  words."     {Erdmann.)

«  \^»  ^'.H^^  lord,"  etc.  "These  words  might  be  understood  as  meaning  either  Achish  or
Saul."     (Keil.)

Ver.  10.  "Thy  masters  servants,"  i.e.,  the  subjects  of  SauL

^  iVy««.— We  learn  from  1  Chron.  xii.  19-22  thac  when  David  was  leaving  Aphek  he  received
into  his  band  a  large  number  of  fresh  adherents  from  the  tribe  of  Manasseh,  seven  of  whom
were  afterwards  captains  in  the  army  of  Israel.  It  is  uncertain  whether  these  men  joined  David
before  or  after  the  battle  of  Gilboa;  some  have  conjectured  that  they  were  fugitives  from  that
fatal  field.

MAIN  EOMILETICS   OP   CHAPTER  XXVIII,    1  and   2,    and    CHAPTER   XXIX,

The  Pkovidence  of  God  and  Man.

I.  The  short-sig^htedness  of  the  providence  of  man.  Even  godly  men  are
sometimes  so  unlike  tlieir  better  selves  as  to  take  the  responsibility  of  their  lives
out  of  God's  hand  into  their  own,  and  by  ordering  tlieir  actions  without  any
reference  to  His  will,  to  become,  as  it  were,  tlieir  own  providence.  Saul,  in
common  with  all  who  have  never  exercised  a  real  faith  in  God,  had  done  this
throui;hout  the  greater  part  of  his  public  life;  and  his  endeavour  to  be  independent
of  his  God  had  resulted,  as  it  always  must,  in  being  enslaved  by  the  devil.  David
at  this  time  gives  up  trust  in  God  and  seeking  Ilis  guidance,  and  trusts  in  his
own  sagacity  to  guide  him  and  secure  him  from  evil.  But  in  providing  for  the
safety  of  his  body  he  did  great  damage  to  his  character,  and  found  that  the  act
of  deception  with  which  he  began  this  method  of  preservation,  must  even  be
followed  by  another  and  another  sin  so  long  as  he  was  unwilling  to  return  to
God's  way.  _  We  can  well  believe  that  when  he  first  began  to  shape  his  own
course,  he  did  notexi)ect  to  find  himself  one  day  marching  against  his  countrymen
with  the  enemies  of  Israel  and  God.  But  when  a  man  tlius  takes  his  life  into  his
own  keeping,  he  knows  not  what  a  net  of  spiritual  danger  he  begins  to  weave  for
himself.

II.  The  forbearance  and  the  omnipotence  of  the  providence  of  God.    It  13

but  just  to  David  to  suppose  that  he  was  at  least  ill  at  ease,  perhaps  very  unhappy

26o


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  i.


when  he  found  himself  in  the  position  described  in  tliis  chapter — a  position  so
entirely  unworthy  of  him,  and  so  dishonouring  to  God,  and  one  from  wliicii  he
could  not  have  set  himself  free  without  incurring  disgrace  and  danger.  But  tlie
God  who  had  taken  him  from  thesheepfohl  to  feed  His  people,  here  displays  His
forbearance  no  less  than  His  power.  'J'he  men  who  have  the  most  moral  strength
have  the  most  pity  for  human  weakness,  and  are  the  most  ready  to  help  a
wandering  soul  to  return  to  the  right  path,  and  if  we  reason  upwards  we  know
that  the  best  of  all  beings  must  be  more  pitiful  and  more  ready.  And  as  His
omnipotence  is  as  great  as  His  power,  it  is  always  possible  for  Him  to  make  a
way  of  esca])e  for  His  children,  and  this  He  will  do  even  when  their  sin  has
brought  them  into  perplexity  and  disgrace,  if  He  sees  that  they  are  in  a  condition
of  soul  to  profit  by  such  a  deliverance.  That  He  delivered  David  on  this  occasion
is  not  less  a  proof  of  His  pity  than  of  His  wisdom.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

•

Let  us  here  learn  that  the  too  great  occasion  is  given  for  it ;    and  if  one

favour  of  great  rulers,  in  so  far  as  they  indeed  finds  it  advisable  to  hold  back

are  not  richer  in  the  fear  of  God  than  a  part  of  it,  let  him  at  least  say  nothing

Achish,  toward  a  man  who  desires  to  contrary  to  it  ;    otherwise   sooner   or

walk  in  the  footsteps  of  the  faith  of  later    he    brings    himself    into  great

Abraham,  is  especially  dangerous.  They  danger.

exact  altogether  too  great  a  tax  for  What  wholesome  effects  are  produced
tiie  favour  which  they  bestow.  If  they  under  God's  guidance  by  that  inter-
are  kind,  one  must  be  in  all  things  course  which  in  the  world  is  indispen-
accommodating  to  them — the  tender  sably  necessary  between  those  who  haoe
conscience  may  say  to  that  what  it  will,  part  in  God's  kingdom  and  those  who
In  the  bonds  of  their  favour  one  walks  stand  aloof  from  it.  I.  For  those
as  a  prisoner.  The  mistrust  of  the  who  stand  aloof  from  the  kingdom  of
Philistine  princes  helped  David  out  of  God  :  (1)  That  they  involuntarily  give
the  difficulty  into  which  he  had  hurried  honour  to  the  living  God  ;  (2)  That
himself  through  the  favour  of  Achish.  they  recognise  in  those  wdio  belong  to
So  the  favour  of  godless  nobles,  when  His  kingdom  the  power  of  a  higher
it  is  blended  with  somewhat  oi  fear,  is  divine  character,  and  are  compelled  to
more  advantageous  than  their  favour  bow  before  that  power  (ver.  9) ;  (3)
alone.  The  godless  nobleman,  who  is  That  in  themselves  the  remains  of  a
an  enemy  of  God,  must  know  that  he  divine  image  again  come  forward,  and
has  as  a  servant  a  friend  of  God,  a  ser-  they  find  pleasure  in  that  which  is
vant  of  Jesus  Christ,  an  upright  and  ethically  good  and  beautiful.  H.  For
believing  son  of  Abraham,  to  whom  he  those  who  have  part  in  God's  kingdom
dare  impute  no  folly  and  wickedness,  themselves  :  (1)  The  consoling  con-
Consequently  this  servant  must  not  ception  that  even  they  who  stand  aloof
dissemble  as  David  did  with  Achish,  from  God's  kingdom  have  to  serve  as
but  profess  his  faith,  trusting  in  God  instruments  for  the  fulfilment  of  the
at  all  times.  Achish,  who  was  formerly  Divine  purposes  (Prov.  xvi.-7).  (2)  The
a  worshipper  of  idols,  solemnly  assured  wonderful  confirmation  of  the  truth
David  by  Jehovah  that  he  pleased  him,  that  all  things  must  work  together  for
and  said  to  him  that  he  regarded  him  good  to  them  that  love  God.  (3)
as  upright ;  yea,  that  he  was  pleasing  Humbling  self-knowledge  in  respect  to
in  his  sight  as  an  angel  of  God.  But  their  own  sins  and  faults,  in  view  of
he  held  him  as  an  enemy  of  Israel,  and  the  morally  noble  behaviour  of  those
this  David  indeed  was  not.  But  that  who  stai'd  aloof  from  the  kingdom  of
David  was  held  as  one  was  the  result  God,  whi.e  they  themselves  are  wanting
of  his  own  culpable  hypocrisy.  Let  therein.  —  Trans,  of  Langes  Com"
the  whole  truth  be  confessed  where  mentary,
266


OH*p.  XXX.  /rOMTLETIO  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


CHAPTER  XXX.

tl  J^utL™  ^rt  oYpt^rutTa^  *^'*'  ""  '""'•'  '=°™"^'  '»  -»«<'  l-y  ""«  I--"'-  »  being
tl.Ir/or'sUve?^''  '"'''  "''*  *'"'•"    ^'"  ''■''°'  ""'"''^'  0'  """"^-'ity.  I'"'  b-oause  they  reserved

a  I've."'     "  '"'  ^^P"^"    Taken  by  the  Amalekitea  from  h«  own  country  and  retained  a.
Ver.  11.    "  Bread,"  rather /»od,  the  kind  being  afterwards  specified.

"cTlcb'-'  -^^f  *"!"*^';'l,.  ^xr"''"u^''  *  Philistine  tribe  (see  Ezek.  xxv.  16:   Zeph    ii    5)

ing  expedition  extended  over  the  whole  south"ountry.»     (£djun:)         "  "''  "'^'  "'^  f'""''^^-

Ver.  16.    ••  God."     EloMm,  not  as  in  the  oaae  of  Achish,  by  Jekovak.
nn«Uhif;ilowT'T„e*V,7u'^"'"  ""•      ^'"  "^derstands  this  to  mean  from  one  evening

reckoning  began  in  the  evening. '  (s7e  ErZann)  "'  """^'^'"^  *°  ^^^'""^

is  ilrword  J'llTtht  ori^af  'tIT'  ''  "t"  ™  *''!  ""g'""!.  "'""ected  with  the  first,  neither
recovered  his  :::'<^Z^tJ^ZT.: ^TZ^^'  '^^^^^r'"  ""'  ""'

be7w:enl.epi^r;t;otw,^^!:;;:^^^^^^^^

shoTv?k!„ltito'J:vM^tirhif:'a^d1r;r?n  tt'^d'"^  ^"rr"r*f^  ^^''  -■*•"""  *"""
but  probabiy  i.e.A„e.  (1  Chroiiv.VoroTSri^\hftSTsi±,^''(Xr^T'''  """"^

if^/iV  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.

David  Avenges  the  Plunder  and  Burning  of  Ziklao.

o.h.f^T''  \^}^  P^*^  ''^  ^""^y  ^'^^  ^°*  ^^s^^e  deliverance  from  all  the
consequences  of  transgression.     We  may  well  take  for  granted  that  David  had

267


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  i.


seen  tlie  f»)lly  and  sin  of  taking  his  own  counsel  and  ordering  his  own  path,
instead  of  seeking  for  Divine  guidance  and  resting  in  the  Divine  promise  ;  and
that  he  left  the  camp  of  Achish,  feeling  that  his  ''soul  had  escaped  as  a  bird
out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowler ;  "  that  *'  the  snare  was  broken,''  and  that  his
"  help  was  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  who  made  heaven  and  earth''  (Psa.  cxxiv.
7,  8).  But  when  he  found  what  a  calamity  had  befallen  his  family  and  his
followers  during  his  absence,  and  when  he  was  upbraided  as  the  cause  of  the
misfortune,  he  learned  a  lesson  which  was  repeated  with  a  terrible  em[)hasis  in
Ids  later  life,  that  the  effects  of  sin  often  long  outlive  repentance  and  pardon.

II.  But  return  to  God  in  the  way  of  duty  will  deliver  from  the  worst  conse-
quences of  transgression.  Herein  lies  the  all-important  ditference  between
Saul  and  David  at  this  time.  They  had  both  been  found  in  places  entirely
inconsistent  with  their  calling,  and  unworthy  of  the  honour  which  God  had  put
upon  them,  and  in  both  lack  of  faith  in  God  was  the  cause  of  their  fall.  And
chastisement  had  come  to  both  in  consequence — not  only  had  Saul  been  brought
into  great  straits,  but  David  also  had  found  himself  in  a  position  which  to  him
must  have  been  one  of  most  painful  perplexity.  But  here  the  analogy  between
them  ceases,  and  the  contrast  begins.  The  retribution  which  came  upon  Saul
drove  him  to  yet  more  daring  disobedience  to  God,  even  to  an  act  of  the  most
open  defiance  of  His  authority;  but  the  retribution  which  fell  upon  David
brought  him  back  to  the  path  of  obedience,  and  when  he  was  again  in  it  the
wall  of  separation  which  his  sin  had  built  up  between  God  and  his  soul  was
broken  down,  and  he  could  again  look  up  to  Jehovah  for  direction  in  his
difficulties.  Although  he  had  not  yet  paid  all  the  penalty  of  his  wandering,  the
worst  effect  of  it  was  done  away  with  when  he  could  in  confidence  inquire  of  the
Lord  in  His  appointed  way.  Henry  says,  "  'J'he  only  way  to  flee  from  God  is  to
flee  to  Him,"  and  David,  in  common  with  all  who  have  known  both  the  bitter-
ness of  sin  and  the  sweetness  of  pardon,  proved  this  now  and  on  many  other
occasions.

III.  A  sudden  transition  from  adversity  to  prosperity  is  a  revelation  of
character.  The  sunlight  not  only  causes  the  flowers  to  spring  out  of  the
ground,  but  it  also  draws  forth  many  creeping  things  which  the  frost  held
hidden  beneath  the  surface.  And  prosperity  has  the  same  twofold  effect  upon
human  souls.  While  it  enlarges  the  heart  of  the  truly  great  man,  and  causes
him  to  remember  with  gratitude  the  friends  who  have  helped  him  in  the  time
of  need,  it  often  narrows  the  ignoble  soul,  and  makes  a  selfish  man  more  selfish
than  he  was  before.  For  men  are  not  covetous  because  they  are  poor,  nor
liberal  because  they  have  abundance  ;  that  which  a  man  has  does  not  make  him
what  he  is,  or  wealth  and  a  bountiful  disposition  would  always  go  together.
The  sudden  good  fortune  which  came  at  this  time  to  David  and  his  followers
revealed  the  difference  in  their  disposition  ;  for  while  he  desired  that  as  many  as
possible  shouhl  share  in  it,  they  would  have  withholden  a  portion  from  those  of
their  own  company  who  had  been  unable  to  go  with  them  to  the  battle.  But
the  root  of  this  difierence  is  to  be  found  in  this  case,  as  in  all  similar  cases,  in
the  opposite  view  which  men  take  of  the  wealth  which  they  possess.  In  David's
estimation  it  was  "  that  which  the  Lord  hath  given  us"  (verse  23) ;  in  the  eyes
of  his  men  it  was  '*  the  spoil  which  we  have  recovered"  (verse  22).  It  is  only
when  men  receive  all  from  God  that  they  use  it  for  God,  and  in  so  doing  make
their  abundance  a  blessing  and  not  a  curse  to  themselves.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  6.     The  holy  man  here  liveth      winter  retreateth  to  the  root,  and  there
when  his  heart  dieth.    As  the  sap  in     is  preserved,  so  the   saint  in  crosses
2G8


CHAP.  XXX.


no  MI  LET JC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


rfttireth  to  God,  the  foinit.iiii  of  his
life  ;  and  so  is  comforted.  When
David's  table  of  earthly  comforts,
which  for  a  long  time  at  best  had  been
but  indifferently  spread  for  him,  was
quite  empty,  he  fetcheth  sweetmeats
out  of  his  heavenly  closet.  .  .  .
The  saint  in  the  sharpest  winter  sits
at  a  good  fire.  When  abused  by
strangers  he  can  complain  to  and  com-
fort himself  in  his  Father. — Swinnock,

Ver.  8.  If  it  was  a  duty  under  the
Old  Testament,  in  an  enterprise  per-
taining to  war,  thus  to  turn  first  to
God  before  resolving  on  anything,  that
yet  the  spirit  of  the  Old  Testament
carried  along  with  it,  and  did  not  abso-
lutely forbid,  how  much  more  among
Christians  under  the  New  Testament
should  nothing  of  the  sort  be  done
without  the  Divine  consent. — Berlen-
herger  Bible.

Ver.  13.  Here  is  a  warning  to
Christian  nations,  who  have,  what  the
Amalekites  had  not,  a  clear  revelation
of  God's  will  in  the  Gospel  with  regard
to  slavery.  It  may  be  expected  that
he  will  visit  them  with  retribution  in
mysterious  ways  of  His  Providence,
when  they  least  anticipate  it,  for  acts
of  cruelty  to  slaves. —  Wordsworth.

Ver.  24.  This  decree,  that  they
who  for  good  reasons  (see  ver.  21)  tarry
with  the  stuff  shall  share  alike  with
those  who  go  down  to  the  battle,  is  not
without  its  meaning.

In  the  heavenly  Church  of  God,

" His  state

Is  kingly  ;  thousands  at  his  bidding  speed,
And  post  o'er  land  and  ocean  without  rest :
They  also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait."

— Milton.

Moses,  praying  on  the  hill,  contri-
buted to  the  victory  even  more  than
Joshua  fighting  on  the  plain.  And  in
the  Christian  Church  provision  ought


to  be  made  for  prayer  and  meditation,
and  for  patient  study  of  God's  word,
as  well  as  for  the  more  active  exercise
of  pastoral  duties  (see  1  Tim.  iv.  13,
2  Tim.  iv.  13). —  Wordsworth.

Those  that  represent  God  upon  earth,
should  resemble  him  in  their  proceed-
ings. It  is  the  just  mercy  of  our  God
to  measure  us  by  our  wills,  not  by  our
abilities  ;  to  recompense  us  graciously,
according  to  the  truth  of  our  desires
and  endeavours  ;  and  to  account  that
performed  by  us,  which  He  only  letteth
us  from  performing.  It  were  wide  with
us,  if  sometimes  purpose  did  not  supply
actions.  While  our  heart  faulteth  not,
we  that,  through  spiritual  sickness,  are
fain  to  bide  by  tlie  stuff,  shall  share  both
in  grace  and  glory  with  the  victors. —
Bishop  Hall.

Verses  1-26.  Two  Pictures.  I.  The
sorrowful  return.  1.  He  had  left  home
without  seeking  the  Lord's  guidance —
apparently  to  fight  at^ainst  the  Lord's
people — uncertain  and  unhappy.  2.  He
had  returned,  because  distrusted,  and
sent  away  in  dishonour.  3.  He  found
his  home  in  ashes  and  his  family  carried
away  captive.  4.  His  personal  wretch-
edness was  enhanced  by  the  natural
wrath  of  his  friends.  II.  The  subse-
quent joyful  return.  I.  He  leaves  with
explicit  Divine  direction  and  promise
— to  fight  national  as  well  as  private
enemies — hopeful  and  happy.  2.  He
returns  victorious  and  honoured.  3.  He
has  regained  greater  wealth  tlian  he  had
lost.  4.  His  personal  joy  is  increased
by  the  privilege  of  sending  gifts  to  his
friends.  And  what  unites  the  two
pictures  ?  His  sorrowful  return  led
him  to  deep  penitence,  revived  faith,
and  humble  prayer,  and  from  these
resulted  the  joyful  return.  Sore  afflic-
tions, when  rightly  borne,  often  open
the  way  to  life's  sweetest  joy. — TranS"
lator  of  Lunges  Commentary.


269


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  BooK /.


CHAPTER  XXXI.

Ver.  1.  **  In  Monnt  Gilboa."  Most  likely  the  actual  battle  took  place  on  the  plain,  and  the
Israelites  Bought  refuge  on  the  mountain.

Ver.  3.  •*  Sore  wounded."  Hebrew  scholars  generally  translate  here  sore  afraid,  or  he  was
alarmed  or  trembled  greatly.

Ver.  3.  "  He  was  sore  afraid."  The  armourbearer  was  responsible  for  the  king's  life.
Jewish  traditions  say  that  this  man  was  Doeg.

Ver.  6.  "  All  bis  men."  In  1  Chron.  x.  6  it  is  "  all  his  house.'^  "  Certainly  Abner,  who
was  no  doubt  in  the  battle,  had  not  fallen,  but  that  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  statement,  since
he,  as  Saul's  ereneral,  belonged  strictly  speaking  neither  to  the  houae  nor  to  the  men,  by  which
term  we  must  understand  the  soldiers  who  were  near  the  king's  person,  his  body-guard,  as  it
were."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  7.  "The  men  of  Israel  on  the  other  side,"  etc.  "  The  plain  is  the  lowland  between
Mount  Gilboa  and  Little  Hermon,  the  continuation  of  the  plain  <>f  Jezreel,  into  which  the  battle
passed.  .  .  .  The  Jordan  with  its  west  bank  terrain  foinied  the  bonier.  1'hose  who  from  the
station  of  the  narrator  (which  we  must  take  with  Kiel  to  be  the  battlefield)  dwelt  beyond,  that
is,  opposite  him  on  the  mountain  terrain  beside  the  plain  and  in  the  Jordan  flats  "  {Erdmann)
were  those  who  fled.  **  Came  and  dwelt,"  Not  immediately  ;  but  this  district  eventually
fell  into  their  hands.

Ver.  9.  "And  sent."  Hebrew  scholars  here  read  sent  them,  i.e.,  the  weapons  and  the  head
of  Saul  and  probably  those  of  his  sons.

Ver.  1 0.  "  Ashtaroth."  The  ])lura1  form  of  Ashtoreth,  the  principal  female  divinity  of  the
Phoenicians,  as  Baal  was  the  principal  male  divinity,  identical  with  the  Asiarte  of  the  Greeks  and
Romans,  who  was  by  many  ancient  writers  identiiied  with  the  goddess  Venus,  as  well  as  also
with  the  planet  of  that  name,  (See  Smitlc's  Bib.  Diet.)  '*  Beth-Shan."  The  present  Beisan,  in
the  Jordan  valley,  twelve  miles  south  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee  and  four  miles  west  of  the  Jordan.
The  royal  heads,  we  learn  from  1  Chron.  x.  10,  were  fixed  in  the  temple  of  Dagon.  "Thus  the
trophies  of  their  great  victory  were  divided  among  their  several  deities."     (Jamieson.)

Ver.  11.    **  Jabesh-Gilead."    See  on  chap.  xi.  1.

Vtr.  12.  "Went  all  night."  "Considering  that  Bethshan  is  about  three  hours  distance,
and  by  a  narrow  upland  passage  to  the  west  of  the  Jordan,  the  whole  being  a  journey  of  about
twelve  miles,  they  must  have  made  all  expedition  to  travel  thither,  to  carry  off  the  headless
bodies  and  return  to  their  own  side  of  the  Jordan  in  the  course  of  a  single  night."  (Jamieson.)
"  Burnt  them."  This  was  not  a  Hebrew  custom,  and  was  either  resorted  to  to  prevent  any
further  insult  from  the  Philistines  or,  more  likely,  seeing  that  only  the  flesh  was  burned,  becanse
of  the  mangled  and  decomposed  condition  of  the  corpses.

Ver.  13.  **  A  tree,"  rather  the  tamarisk:,  the  article  indicating  that  the  site  was  well-known.
David  afterwards  caused  the  bones  to  be  removed  to  Saul's  family  burial  place  (2  Sam.  xxi.  11-14).


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Versa  1-7.

The  Defeat  at  Gilboa.

I.  The  cnlminatin^  calamity  of  many  resulting  from  the  answering  of  a
self-willed  prayer.  The  unanswered  request  of  a  child  by  his  parent  is  often
the  ^Teatest  act  of  kindness  that  parent  can  bestow  ;  unhappy,  indeed,  would
that  child  be  who  had  all  he  asked  for,  and  no  parent  who  lias  any  r  'gard  for
only  the  bodily  life  of  his  offspring  ever  thinks  of  granting  all  their  requests.
And  with  parents  whose  concern  for  tlieir  children  extends  to  their  intellectual
and  moral  well-being  it  is  ofteu  needful  to  deny  more  petitions  than  they  grant.
It  is  exactly  so  with  men  and  God ;  if  men  had  at  all  times  received  from  Him
all  that  their  ignorance  and  wickedness  desired  the  human  race  would  before
now  have  become  extinct  through  its  own  sin  and  consequent  misery.  But  as
270


CHAP.  XXXI.  IIOMILETIC  COMVEXTARY:    SAMUEL.


tbe  father  of  tlie  prodiii^al  did  not  refuse  the  request  of  his  wayward  son,  but  let
hiu)  taste  the  fruit  of  having  what  he  demanded,  so  God  sometimes  answers  the
self-willed  i)ra3'(M-,s  both  of  individuals  and  of  nations,  that  they  may  know  from
experience  wliether  they  or  God  know  best.  As  the  swine-herding  in  the  far
connrry  was  the  outcome  of  the  answer  to  ''Give  me  the  poi'tion  of  goods  that
falUth  to  me,'*  so  was  this  fatal  day  on  Gilboa  the  outcome  of  the  answer  to
"  :\ay,  but  we  will  have  a  king."  "  /  gave  thee  a  king  in  mine  anger,  and  took
him  away  in  mi/  wrath.''  (Hosea  xiii.  11.)  So  must  it  always  be  with  thoso
who  will  have  wliat  God  would  rather  not  give.

II.  A  calamity  involving  both  the  innocent  and  the  guilty.  One  man,  at
least,  who  fell  at  (Jilboa  was  innocent  of  boHi  the  national  and  individual  sin
which  brought  tlie  judgment.  The  kii\g  of  Israel  luid  forsaken  God,  and  there-
fore the  once  brave  man  trembled  and  fled  before  those  whom — with  the  con-
sciousness of  God  on  his  side — he  would  have  faced  and  defied,  and  so  the
heathen  foe  triun)i)!ied  over  God's  anointed.  And  whatever  may  have  been  the
character  of  the  others  who  lell,  Jonathan's  fate  was  not  the  result  of  his  personal
transgression  but  of  his  father's  sin,  and  says  to  us  in  plain  languaire  that  no
sinner  harms  only  himself,  and  that  the  good  often  in  this  world  suffer  because
of  the  bad.  All  relationships  of  life  have  some  influence  upon  our  earthly
destiny,  but  none  is  so  potent  for  good  or  ill  as  that  which  the  })arent  holds  to
liis  child.  But  if  Jonathan  is  a  sad  illustration  of  this  truth,  he  is  also  a  cheering
proof  that  if  a  son  must  suffer  for  his  father's  character  he  need  not  walk  in
that  father's  footsteps,

III    A  calamity  which  failed  to  change  the  heart  of  the  greatest  sufferer

in  it.  The  last  act  of  Saul  is  in  keeping  with  the  one  in  which  he  flrst  openly
departed  from  God.  His  disobedience  in  the  early  part  of  his  reign  prt)claimed
a  man  who  would  choose  his  own  method  of  life  rather  than  the  Divine  purpose
concendng  him,  and  even  this  last  and  crushing  judgment  failed  to  break  his
self-will,  and  he  who  would  not  leave  the  ordering  of  his  life  to  God  would
neither  let  Him  ordain  the  manner  of  his  death.  So  also  as  the  prominent
thought  in  the  matter  of  the  Amalekites  was  not  the  sin  against  God  but  the
disgrace  before  men,  now  it  is  not  the  retribution  which  awaited  his  spirit,  but
the  dishonour  which  might  come  to  his  body.  It  is  the  same  man  who  fears
now  nothing  so  much  as  the  sword  of  the  uncircumcised,  as  formerly  dreaded
most  the  loss  of  position  among  his  subjects  (chap.  xv.  30).


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  2.     1.  God  would  hereby  com-  be  made  in  the  other  world,  not  in  this.

plete  the  vexation  of  Saul  in  his  dying  — Uenry.
moments  and  the  judgment  that  wag

to  be  executed  upon  his  house.     If  the         Ver.  4.     In  this  way  did  Saul  shrink

family  must  fall,  Jonathan   must  fall  from  adversity  ;  he  went  ft)rth  glorying

with  it.     2.   He  would   hereby   make  in    his   majesty,  the   anointed   of  the

David's  way  to  the  crown  more  clear  Lord,  king  over  the  chosen  people  of

and  open.     For  though  Jonathan  him-  God  ;  the  battle  turns  against  him,  he

self  would  have  cheerfully  resigned  all  is   sore-wounded  of    the   archers    and

his  title  and  interest  to  him,  yet  it  is  ...  seeks  in  death  a   cure  for  the

very  probable  that  many  of  the  peo})!e  anguish  of  wounds  and  the  shame  of

would  have  made  use  of  his  name  for  defeat.    .    .    .     What  would  the  world

the  sup))Ort  of  the  hous3  of  Saul.    .     .  now  have  been  if  it  had  always  been

3.  (lod  Would  hereby  >how  us  that  the  said,   "  because  the  archers  smite  me

difference  between  good  and  bad  is  to  sore,  and  the  battle  goes  against  me,  I

27X


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  BOOK  I.


will  die?"  Alas!  man  has  gained  all  plnn^^ing  him  ever  into  a  greater
his  joy  by  his  pains ;  misery,  hunger,  miscliief,  to  avoid  tlie  less!  He
and  nakedness  have  been  his  teachers,  mi^ht  have  been  a  patient  in  another's
and  goaded  him  on  to  the  glories  of  violence,  and  faultless  ;  now,  while  he
civilised  life;  take  from  him  his  un-  will  needs  act  tlie  Philistine's  part  upon
yielding  spirit,  and  if  he  had  lived  at  himself,  he  lived  and  died  a  murderer  :
all,  lie  would  have  lived  the  most  suffer-  the  case  is  deadly,  when  the  prisoner
iiig  creature  of  the  forest. — Sydney  breaks  the  jail,  and  will  not  stay  for
tSmitk.  his  delivery  ;  and  thongh  we  may  not
The  evil  spirit  had  said,  the  evening  pass  sentence  upon  such  a  soul,  yet  upon
before,  "  To  morrow  thou  shalt  be  with  the  fact  we  may  :  the  soul  may  possibly
me  ; "  and  now  Saul  hasteth  to  make  repent  in  the  parting  ;  the  act  is
the  devil  no  liar;  rather  than  fail,  he  heinous,  and  such  as,  without  repent-
gives  himself  his  own  mittimus.  0  the  ance,  kills  the  soul. — Bp.  Hall.
woful  extremities  of  a  dt's]);Liring  soul.


MAIN  IIOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH  — Verses  8—13.

The  Gratitude  of  the  Men  of  Jabesh  Gilead.

I.  The  courageous  impulses  of  grateful  hearts.  Gratitude  may  be  almost
regarded  as  an  instinct  of  human  nature,  for  it  springs  up  spontaneously  in  the
breast  of  man  in  answer  to  benefits  received.  He  who  does  not  experience  this
emotion  must  be  hardened  below  the  brute,  for  even  -some  of  the  lower  animals
will  remember  benefits  conferred,  and  love  him  who  has  done  them  a  service
But  the  strength  and  length  of  the  gratitude  will  depend  much  on  the  disposition
and  character.  All  men  are  prone  to  forget  benefits  conferred  long  ago,  and
only  true  and  loyal  hearts  keep  their  memory  green,  and  are  found  willing  to
recognise  them  at  their  own  risk.  Many  years  had  passed  since  Saul  earned
the  gratitude  of  the  men  of  Jabesh  Gilead,  and  his  later  life  had  tended  rather
to  efface  than  to  perpetuate  the  recollection  of  that  act  of  bravery.  And  very
considerable  must  have  been  the  danger  which  they  now  encountered  in  rendering
him  this  last  service — the  only  one  which  could  now  be  rendered  to  one  who  had
put  himself  beyond  any  other.  But  their  gratitude  and  courage  were  equal  to
the  occasion,  and  shed  the  only  ray  of  light  that  brightens  this  dark  picture.

II.  The  lasting  influence  of  a  good  deed.  The  life  that  had  begun  in  so
much  promise  had  ended  in  gloom,  and  it  seems  almost  impossible  to  recognise
in  this  fearful  and  despairing  man  the  brave  soldier-king  by  whom,  at  Jabesh,
"the  Lord  had  wrought  salvation  in  Israel"  (chap.  xi.  13).  But  in  this  day  of
liis  shame,  and  when  he  is  justly  reaping  the  reward  of  his  evil  deeds,  this  good
one  is  not  to  be  forgotten  but  receives  its  reward.     Truly,

"  The  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them,**

but  SO  also,  happily,  does  the  good.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

This  book  began  with  the  birth  of  pretends  to   have  the   disposal  of. —

Samuel,  but  now  it  ends  with  the  death  Henry.

of  Saul,  the  comparing  of  which  two  In  the  greatness  and  tlie  reverse  of

together  will  teach  us  to  prefer  the  the  house  of  Saul  is  the  culmination

honour  that  comes  from   God  before  andcatastropheofthetribeof Benjamin,

any  of  the  honours  which  this  world  The  Christian  fathers  used  to  dwell  o»
272


CHAP.  ixxi.  II OM I L  Eric  CO  MM  ENTA  RY :  SA  M  UEL


the  old  prediction  vvhicli  describes  tlie  S;iul,  at  least  claiming  to  be  of  tlie
character  of  that  tribe,  *' Benjamin  same  tribe,  and  reckonini^  among  the
shall  ravin  as  a  wolf :  in  the  morning  list  of  their  ancestors  the  same  re-
he  shall  devonr  the  prey,  and  in  the  nowned  names.  And  is  it  a  mere  fancy
evening  he  shall  devonr  the  spoil."  to  trace  with  those  same  Christian
These  words  well  sum  up  tlie  strange  writers  the  last  faint  likeness  of  this
union  of  fierceness  and  of  gentleness,  mixed  history,  when,  after  a  lapse  of
of  sudden  resolves  for  good  or  evil,  many  centuries,  the  tribe  once  more
which  run,  as  hereditary  qualities  do  for  a  moment  rises  to  our  view;  in  the
often  run,  through  the  whole  history  second  Saul,  also  of  the  tribe  of  Ben-
of  that  frontier  clan.  Such  were  its  jamin  ?  Saul  of  Tarsus,  who,  like  the
wild  adventures  in  the  times  of  the  first,  was  at  one  time  moved  by  a  zeal
Judges  ;  such  was  Saul,  its  first  king  ;  bordering  almost  upon  frenzy,  and  who,
such  was  Shemei,  of  the  house  of  Saul,  like  the  first,  startled  all  his  contem-
in  his  bitterness  and  his  repentance;  poraries  by  appearing  among  the
such  was  the  divided  allegiance  of  the  Prophets  the  herald  of  the  faith  which
tribe  to  the  rival  houses  of  Judah  and  once  he  destroyed  ;  but,  unlike  the
Ephraim  ;  such  was  the  union  of  ten-  first,  persevered  in  that  faith  to  the
derness  and  vindictiveness  in  the  end  the  likeness  inthe  Christian  Church,
character  of  Mordecai  and  Esther,  if  not  of  what  Saul  was,  but  of  what  he
not  actual  descendniit.s  of  Shemei  and  might  have  been. — iStanley^
Kiah,  as  they  appear  in  the  history  of


973


HOMILETIC  COMMii\'TARY:   SAMUEL.  mookvl


BOOK     II.
CHAPTER  I.

Crtttcal  and  Exposttoet  Notes. — Ver.  6.     "The  chariots  and  horseincn.**    It  has  been

remarked  that  it  is  extremely  unlikely  that  chariots  and  horsemen  pursued  the  Israelites
on  to  the  mountains,  and  this  statement  has  been  generally  rejj^anled  as  a  part  of  the  falsehood
of  the  ^vhole  story,  which  is  throughout  at  variance  with  the  account  in  the  last  chapter.

Ver.  7.  "Heie  am  I,"  etc.  This  statement  also,  as  Kiel  remarks,  has  about  it  the  air  of
untruth,  for  it  is  extremely  improbable  that  Saul  would  have  no  Israelite  by  his  side  to  whom  to
address  his  request.

Ver.  9.  "Anguish."  From  a  verb  meaning  to  interwave,  or  worJc  together;  hence  some
translate  "  My  cuirass  hindereth  me."  etc.,  but  Keil,  Erdmann,  Kunchi,  and  others  cramp.
Gesenius  reads,  giddiness,  vertig*..

Ver.  10.  "Crown,"  rather  diadem.  "A  small  metallic  cap  or  wreath,  which  encircled  the
temples,  serving  the  purpose  of  a  helmet,  with  a  very  small  horn  projecting  in  front,  as  the
emblem  of  power."  "  Bracelet,"  i.e.,  "  the  armlet  worn  above  the  elbow,  an  ancient  mark  o^
royal  dignity."     {Jamieson.)

Ver.  12.  "  The  people  of  Jehovah  "  and  the  House  of  Israel  are  distinguished  from  one
another,  according  to  the  twofold  attitude  of  Israel,  which  furnished  a  double  ground  foi
mourning.  Those  who  had  fallen  were  first  of  all  members  of  the  people  of  Jehovah,  and
secondly,  fellow-countrymen.  [Ked.)  "  They  were,  therefore,  associated  with  them  both  according
to  the  flesh  and  according  to  the  spirit,  and  for  that  reason  they  mourned  the  more."     [Schmidt.)

Ver.  13.  "A  Stranger,"  etc,t.e.  "An  Amalekite  who  had  emigrated  to  Israel."  (Keil).
Although  most  Bible  students  regard  the  Amalekite's  story  as  untrue,  yet  Josephus  adopts  it.
Wordsworth  thinks  it  may  be  supplementary  to  the  fornitr  account,  and  that  though  Saul  was
the  author  of  his  own  death,  inasmuch  as  he  did  what  he  could  to  destroy  himself,  yet  he  was
despatched  at  last  by  the  Amalekite,  and  remarks,  "  If  the  story  be  true,  it  is  worthy  of  rernark
that  Saul  owed  his  death  to  one  of  that  nation  of  Amalek,  which  he  had  been  commanded  by
God  to  destroy."

Ver.  15-16.  Although  some  commentators  think  that  this  action  of  David  was  a  political  one,
most  believe  that  he  was  moved  by  a  higher  motive,  and  that  according  to  Erdmann  "  he  acted
theocratically  with  perfect  justice  in  slaying  with  holy  anger  the  murderer  of  the  Lord's  anointed."

Ver.  17.  "  Lamented — Lamentation."  These  words  must  be  understood  in  a  technical  sense.
.  .  .  This  lamentation  has  a  peculiar  interest  as  being  the  only  specimen  preserved  to  us  of
David's  secular  poetry.     ( Bih.  Commentary.)

Ver,  18.  "The  bow."  This  is  the  name  given  to  the  dirge  probably  on  account  of  its  war-
like character.  "  The  use  of."  These  words  are  improperly  inserted  in  the  English  version.
"The  Book  of  Jasher."  Or,  the  book  of  the  righteous  or  the  "  upnghi  ones."  "It  was  in
existence  before  the  Books  of  Joshua  and  Samuel  (Josh.  x.  13),  and  contained  (judging  from  the
extracts)  a  collection  of  songs  on  specially  remarkable  events  of  the  Tsraelitish  history,  together
with  a  celebration  of  the  prominently  pious  men  whose  names  were  connected  with  these  events."
(hrdmann.)  Other  conjectures  have  been  formed  about  this  book,  but  they  appear  unworthy  of
attention.

Ver.  19.  "The  ode"  (which  here  begins)  "is  arranged  in  three  strophes,  which  gradually
diminish  in  force  and  sweep  (viz.,  verses  19—24,  25-26,  27),  and  in  which  the  vehemence  of
sorrow  is  gradually  modified,  and  finally  dies  away.  Each  strophe  opens  with  the  exclamation.
How  are  the  mighty  fallen  I  The  first  contains  all  that  had  to  be  said  in  praise  of  the  fallen
heroes  ;  the  deepest  mourning  for  their  death,  etc.  The  second  conimem- urates  the  friendship
between  David  and  Jonathan.  The  tlurd  simply  utters  the  last  sigh,  with  which  the  elegy
becomes  silent."     [Kiel.)

Ver.  19.  Some  read  the  first  stanza,  "  Thy  glory,  0  Israel,  upon  tl>y  heights  (is)  slain.**
De  Wette,  Kitto,  Stanley,  and  other.«i,  for  glory  read  gazelle,  and  Ewald  refers  it  to  Jonathan.
"  But  this,"  says  Erdmann,  "  in  the  absence  in  the  song  of  any  comparison  with  the  gazelle,  or
any  allusion  to  its  swiftness  and  aiiility,  is  untenable,  because  the  song  speaks  throughout  not  of
out  heio  but  of  two.  As  the  composition  has  the  ring  of  a  hero  song  in  lionour  of  these  two,
who  were   in  fact,  the  hero  glory  of  Israel,  we  must  render  the  word  ylory,  ornament."

274


CHAP.  L  nOM I LETIU  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


Ver.  20.  "  Gath,  Askelon."  "Thuse  two  Pliilistine  cities  as  the  most  prominent,  are  named
for  the  whole  land,  wlii -h  tli<'y  rei)resent  (Gath  very  near,  Askelon  at  a  distance  on  the  sea.")
(ErdiiKinn.)  "  Lest  the  daughters,"  etc.  lleferr  n<,'  to  the  Oriental  custom  of  the  celebration
of  victories  by  the  women  of  the  nation.    (1  Sara,  xviii.  6,  etc.)

Ver.  21.  "Fields  of  offerings,"  or  of  first -fruits,  i.e.,  fields  from  which  were  taken  the
first-fruits,  which  were,  of  course,  the  most  fruitful.  The  last  clause  of  this  verse  should  be  read
without  the  italics  in  the  authorised  version — "  The  shield  of  Saul  not  anointed  with  oUy  It  was
customary  to  clean  and  polish  the  shield  with  oil  (see  Isa.  xxi.  5),  and  this  expression  denotes  its
defilement  and  unBtness  for  war  conse(iuent  upon  the  defeat  of  its  owner.

Ver.  24.  "With  delights,"  "  or  with  lovelinesses  ;  i.e.,  in  a  lovely  manner."  (Keil.)  All
the  adornments  here  enumerated  were  probably  the  spoils  of  war.

Ver.  25.  "  O  Jonathan."  "  David's  union  of  heart  with  his  friend  differences  this  lament
sharply  from  the  foregoing  over  him  and  Saul  as  heroes.''^     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  27.  "  Weapons  of  war."     Not  the  materials  of  warfare  but  the  heroes  themselves.


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAORAPff.— Verses  1-16.

The  Deceiver  Deceived.

I.  Those  who  plan  to  deceive  others  are  often  deceived  by  means  of  their
own  plan.  This  is  a  principle  of  Divine  working  which  is  continually  mani-
festing itself.  When  the  sons  of  Jacob  laid  a  plot  to  rid  themselves  of  their
brother,  and  to  prevent  the  fulfilment  of  his  dreams,  the  deception  which  they
thus  practised  on  their  father  was  the  first  step  by  which  Joseph  ascended  to
the  rulership  of  E^y])t.  In  the  case  before  us  we  have  a  man  who,  having  con-
ceived a  plan  of  deception,  brought  it  forth  in  falsehood,  hoping  thereby  to  gain
a  great  reward.  But  this  scheme  of  his,  instead  of  bringing  him  the  praise  and
the  preferment  for  which  it  had  been  planned,  brought  him  the  condemnation
and  death  which  his  deception  merited  as  much  as  the  deed  for  which  David
judged  and  punished  him.

•  II.  Bad  men  judg^e  others  by  their  own  moral  standard.  The  untoward
issue  of  this  plan  of  the  Amalekite  arose  from  his  mismeasurement  of  the  man
with  whom  he  had  to  deal.  He  knew  what  his  own  feelings  would  be  if  he  were
in  David's  case,  and  had  no  other  rule  by  which  to  judge  actions  except  the*
amount  of  fancied  good  or  ill  they  brought  to  himself.  So  is  it  with  all  bad
men.  Their  own  supposed  interest  is  the  measure  of  all  things — self  is  first,
and  often  last,  and  if  righteousness  and  mercy  mingle  at  all  with  their  plana
and  purposes,  it  is  only  when  they  do  not  hinder  the  main  object  of  their
existence.  Hence  they  cannot  understand  a  man  who  sorrows  over  anything
that  is  not  a  personal  and  material  loss,  and  still  more  are  they  puzzled  to  com-
])rehend  him  who  is  displeased  at  a  deed  which  brings  him  gain,  or  who  grieves
over  the  fall  of  others  when  ti.at  fall  is  a  stepping-stone  to  his  own  elevation.
This  heathen  of  the  olden  time  was  not  farther  removed  from  David's  stand-
point of  action  than  men  of  the  world  now  are  from  that  of  the  spiritual  man.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

David's  course  in   this  matter  was  reverence  for  the  Lord's  anointed  of

the  best  policy  for  him  ;  but  we  have  which  he  here  speaks.     The  fact  that

no   right   to  conclude  from  that  fact  "  honesty  is  the  best  policy  "  will  not

that  he  was  led  to  it  by  considerations  of  itself  alone  make  a  man  honest ;

of  policy.     He  had  himself  shov/n,  on  but   neither  does  it  prevent  a  man's

an  occasion  of  great  temptation,  that  being   honest,  or  give  us  a  right  to

21o


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  it


suspect  a  good  man's  motives. — Transr.  as  to  have  been  supposed  capable  of

of  Langes  Commentary.  finding    gratification    in    acting    out

David  had  been  long  waiting  for  the  principles  which  rule  minds  of  another

crown,  and  now  it  is  brought  him  by  order,   and  of  sympathising  with  the

an  Amalekite.    See  how  God  can  serve  courses  to  which  these  principles  con-

his   own   purpose  of  kindness  to   his  duct.     There  is  scarcely  a  trial  which

people,   even   by  designing  men  who  is   more   hard   to    endure,    or    which

aim   at  nothing  but  to  set  up  them-  pierces  the  heart  with  so  deep  a  pang,

selves. — Henry.  than  thus  to  find  one's  self  standing

There  is  something   very  humilia-  in   the   estimation    of  a   man   whose

ting — something  peculiarly  distressing,  feelings  and  princi])les  are  low,  on  that

because  felt  to  be  deeply  degrading,  same  low   platform  which  marks   his

in  this  very  circumstance  of  having  own  m«)ral  position,  and  side  by  side

been  so  misunderstood  and  misjudged  with  himself. — Miller.

MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Versa  17-27.

David's  Lament  over  Saul  and  Jonathan.

I.  The  truly  great  can  separate  the  man  and  the  enemy.  We  cannot  do
David  the  injustice  to  suppose  that  any  of  the  language  which  he  here  uses  is
anything  but  the  expression  of  the  feelings  of  his  heart — that  any  word  of  praise
which  occurs  here  is  used  merely  for  effect,  or  is  an  exaggeration  of  what  he  felt
to  be  truth.  How,  then,  was  it  possible  for  him  so  to  regard  the  man  who  had
now  for  so  many  years  made  him  an  exile — who  had  made  his  youth  and  early
manhood  a  season  of  unceasing  anxiety  and  danger?  To  be  able  honestly  to
render  such  a  tribute  to  Saul's  memory,  David  must  have  been  able  to  look  at
the  man  quite  apart  from  the  treatment  which  he  had  received  from  him — to
put  entirely  aside  the  hatred  with  which  he  knew  Saul  regarded  him,  and  to
look  at  him  not  only  without  prejudice  but  with  pity,  and  thus  sincerely  to
mourn  over  his  sins  and  his  sorrows.

II.  The  truly  great  think  their  own  advancement  as  nothing  compared
with  God's  honour.  The  first  and  ruling  emotion  in  the  breasts  of  most  men
in  David's  place  would  have  been — if  not  gratification  at  the  downfall  of  an
enemy,  yet  of  exultation  at  being  delivered  from  his  persecution  and  being  once
more  free  to  return  in  safety  to  his  native  land.  And  with  the  remembrance  of
the  anointing  oil  upon  his  head,  no  one  in  whom  all  thoughts  of  a  personal
nature  were  not  swallowed  up  in  anxiety  for  the  public  good  could  have
avoided  looking  forward  with  anticipation  to  the  issue  of  this  great  event.  But
such  a  man  as  David  found  more  matter  of  mourning  in  the  triumph  of  the
uncircumcised  than  of  rejoicing  in  his  own  altered  prospects.  It  was  more  to
him  that  the  God  of  Israel  had  been  dishonoured  in  the  eyes  of  the  heathen
than  that  the  heavy  cloud  was  lifted  from  his  own  future.  In  all  his  conduct
at  this  time  he  showed  that  true  nobility  which  is  only  possible  to  him  who
makes  God,  and  not  himself,  the  centre  of  the  universe.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

I  believe  it  is  not  dangerous  but  lowed  moments  of  lives  that  have  been

snfe,  not  a  homage  to  falsehood  but  to  darkened  by  many  shadows,  polluted

truth,  in  our  judgments  of  those  who  by  many  sins  ;  these  moments  may  be

are  departed,  to  follow  David's  example,  welcomed  as  revelations  to  us  of  what

We  may  dwell  upon  bright  and  hal-  God  intended  His  creature  to  be ;  we
276


CHAP.  I.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL,


may  feel  that  there  has  been  a  loveliness
in  them  which  God  gave  them,  and
which  tlieir  own  evil  could  not  take
away.  We  may  think  of  this  loveliness
as  if  it  expressed  the  inner  purpose  of
their  existence  ;  the  rest  may  be  for  us
as  though  it  were  not.  As  Nature,  with
her  old  mosses  and  her  new  spring
foliage,  hides  the  ruins  which  man  has
made,  and  gives  to  the  fallen  tower
and  broken  cloister  a  beauty  scarcely
less  than  that  which  belonged  to  them
ill  their  prime,  so  human  love  may  be
at  work  too/* softening  and  concealing,
and  busy  with  her  hand  in  healing"
the  rents  that  have  been  made  in  God's
ii<)l)ler  temple,  the  habitation  of  His
own  Spirit. — Maurice.

Verse  12.  The  only  deep  mourning
for  Saul,  with  the  exception  of  that  of
the  Jabeshites,  proceeded  from  the
man  whom  he  had  hated  and  perse-
cuted for  so  many  years  even  to  the
time  of  his  death  ;  just  as  David's
successor  wept  over  the  fall  of  Jerusa-
lem, even  when  it  was  about  to  destroy
himself. —  Von  Gerlach,

Ver.  26.  Passing  the  love  of  woman  ?
How  can  that  be  ?  we  of  these  days
shall  say.  What  love  can  pass  that,
saving  the  boundless  love  of  Him  who
stooped  from  heaven  to  earth  that  He
might  die  on  the  cross  for  us  ?  No.
David,  when  he  sang  these  words,  knew
not  the  depth  of  a  woman's  love.  And
we  shall  have  a  right  so  to  speak.  The
indefeasible  and  divine  right  which  is
bestowed  by  fact.  As  a  fact  we  do  not
find  among  the  ancient  Jews  that  ex-
alting and  purifying  ideal  of  the  rela-
tions between  man  and  woman  which
is  to  be  found,  thank  God,  in  these
days,  in  almost  every  British  work  of
fiction  or  fancy.  It  is  enunciated,  re-
member always,  in  the  oldest  Hebrew
document.  On  the  very  threshold  of
the  Bible  it  is  enunciated  in  its  most
ideal  purity  and  perfection.  But  in
practice  it  was  never  fulfilled.  .  .  .
Abraham  had  Sarah  his  princess  wife.
But  he  has  others.  .  .  .  And  so  has
David  in  like  wise,  to  the  grief  and  harm
both  of  him  and  Abraham. — Kingsley.


If  ever  to  the  human  heart  of  David
the  throne  had  seemed  desirable  as  the
height  of  worldly  grandeur,  detestable
in  the  last  degree  would  such  a  feeling
now  appear,  when  the  same  act  that
opened  it  up  to  him  deprived  him  of
his  dearest  friend — his  sweetest  source
of  earthly  joy.  The  only  way  in  which
it  was  possible  for  David  to  enjoy  his
new  position  was  by  losing  sight  of  self;
by  identifying  himself  more  closely  than
ever  with  his  people  ;  by  regarding  the
throne  only  as  a  position  for  more  self-
denying  labours  for  the  good  of  others.
And  in  this  song  there  is  evidence  of
the  great  strength  and  activity  of  this
feeling.  .  .  .  Thus  both  by  the
afflictions  that  saddened  his  heart  and
by  the  stroke  of  prosperity  that  raised
him  to  the  throne,  David  was  impelled
to  that  course  of  action  which  is  the
best  safeguard  under  God  against  the
baneful  influences  both  of  adversity
and  prosper!  ty. — Blaikie.

These  words  of  the  song, —

"  Tell  it  not  in  Gath,  publish  it  not  in  the
streets  of  Askelon,"

have,  since  that  time,  in  the  circles  of
the  faithful,  become  a  proverb.     It  is
frequently  heard   when   one   of  tlieir
community  has  failed  to  take  heed  to
his  ways,  and  therefore  has  given  rise
to  a  scandal.     Would  that  that  call
were  more  faithfully  observed  than  is
for  the  most  part  the  case !     Would
that  the  honour  of  the  spiritual  Zion
lay  always  as  near  to  the  heart  of  the
children  of  the  kingdom  as  did  that  of
the  earthly  to  the  heart  Of  David  !   But
how  often  does  it  happen   that  they
even  strive  to  disclose  before  the  world
the  weaknesses  of  their  brethren,  and
thus,  by  a  repetition  of  the  wickedness
of  Ham,  become  traitors  to  the  Church
which  Christ  has  purchased  with  His
own  blood.     Thus  they  make  them-
selves guilty  of  bringing  dishonour  upon
the  Gospel,  while  they  open  the  gates
to  such  dishonour  through  their  per-
haps altogether  malicious  tale-bearing,
and  to  their  own  great  prejudice  dis-
own the  charity  which  "  believeth  all
things,  and   hopeth    all  things,"  and
also  "  covereth  a  multitude  of  sins." —
Krummacher,

277


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  SAMUEL.  book  ii.


CHAPTER  II.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes.— Ver.  1.  "Hebron."  "A  city  of  Judah,  sitwated  among
the  mountains  (Josh.  xx.  7),  twenty  Konian  miles  south  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  same  distance
north  of  Beersheba.  Helirnn  is  one  of  the  Uiost  ancient  cities  of  ihe  world  still  existing,  and
in  this  respect  it  was  the  rival  of  Damascus.  ...  It  was  a  well-known  city  when  Abraham
entered  Canaan  3,780  years  ago  (Gen.  xiii.  18).  .  .  .  Sarah  died  here,  and  here  is  the  famous
Cave  of  Machpelah,  the  burjing-place  of  the  patriarchs.  .  .  .  At  the  <livisiou  of  Canaan  it
was  given  to  Caleb  (Josh  x.  36),  and  was  assigned  to  the  Levites  and  made  a  city  of  refuge.  .  .
Its  modern  name  is  el-KhulU,  i.e.,  the  Jrienci,  the  same  designation  as  is  given  to  Abraham  by  the
Mohammedans.  ...  It  now  contains  abdut  5,000  inhabitants,  of  whom  some  fifty  families
are  Jews.  It  is  picturesquely  situated  in  a  narrow  valley  surrounded  by  hills,  whose  sides  are
still  clothed  with  luxurious  vineyards."  {^mitJis  Bible  Dictionary.)  "  Tltis  city  must  now  have
had  for  David  a  veiy  s})ec-ial  imjiortance,  which  ap})e;ired  all  the  clearer  from  the  Divine  decision,
a'  d  in  respect  to  his  future  life  became  indubitable  ;  here  now  was  to  be  fulfilled  the  old
patriarchal  promise  (Gen.  xlix.  8.  s.q.)  the  establishment  of  the  theocratic  kingdom  in  the  tribe
of  Judah."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  3.     "  Cities  of  Hebron."     "  The  places  belonging  to  the  territory  of  Hebron."

Ver.  4.  "And  the  men  of  Judah  came,"  etc.  As  the  throne  was  now  vacant  by  Saul's
death — the  crown  never  entailed  upon  his  descendants,  and  his  whole  family  rejected  by  (,iod,
who  first  advanced  him  to  the  kingdom — David,  without  injuring  the  rights  of  any  person  what-
soever, might  have  taken  anj'  just  and  honourable  measures  to  have  gained  over  the  tribes  to  his
interest  and  secured  the  succession,  as  the  election  of  a  new  king  now  devolved  upon  the  nation,
even  if  he  had  not  previously  been  designed  by  God  the  supreme  governor  of  Israel.  .  .  But  as
this  circumstance  of  the  consecration  was  known  throughout  the  whole  nation,  it  was  natural  for
the  tribe  of  Judah  to  seize  the  opportuinty  of  Saiil's  death,  and  acknowledge  him  whom  God  had
pointed  out  as  their  king.  ...  It  is  also  probable  that  they  were  further  indiiced  because  of  the
ancient  prophecy  (Gen.  xlix.  10).  .  .  .  This  tribe  was  also  the  most  powerful  and  respectable
of  all  the  twelve,  and  as  they  had  a  right  to  choose  their  own  prince  they  might  reasonably  have
expected  that  the  other  tribes  would  follow  their  example.     (Chandler.)

Ver.  6.  "  Kindness,"  ov  favour,  "  in  general  the  gracious  love  that  God  shows  His  people  on
the  ground  of  His  covenant  with  them.  Truth  is  the  trustworthiness  and  attestation  of  all  His
promises."  (Erdmann. )  As  this  expression  of  thanks  involved  the  solemn  recognition  of  the
departed  king — by  which  David  divested  himself  of  even  the  apjiearance  of  a  rebellion — the
announcement  of  the  anointing  he  had  received  contained  an  indirect  summons  to  the  Jabeshites
to  recognise  him  as  their  king  now."  ( Keil. )  "I  also  will,"  etc.  It  is  incorrect  to  render
this  in  the  future.  It  may  be  rendered  "  /  greet  you  with  blessing/'  viz.,  the  prayer  already
uttered.

Ver.  7.  **  Be  ye  valiant."  Literally,  be  ye  sons  of  force  or  strength.  "  The  opposite  are
*men  of  Belial,'  that  is,  of  no  force  of  character."  (Biblical  Commentary.)  "His  exhortation
to  valour  and  courage  is  intelligible  only  on  the  supposition  that  he  gives  them  to  understand
that  for  them  also  he  has  taken  Saul's  place  as  king,  and  th;t,t  they  must  valiantly  espouse  his
cause  against  his  enemies.  .  .  .  It  is  not  clear  whether  Ishbosheth  had  at  this  time  been  set
up  as  king  by  Abner.  But  from  verse  9  (which  states  that  Gilead  was  one  of  the  districts  gained
by  Abner  for  Ishbosheth)  it  is  evident  that  David,  seeing  Abner's  movement  thither  (comp.
1  Sam.  xxvi.  7),  must  have  been  concerned  to  secure  to  himself  the  capital  city  (Jabesh)  of  this
province.     Whether  he  succeeded  iu  this  is  questionable."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  8.  " Took  Ishbosheth."  Eather  had  talen.  "  Ishbosheth  had  probably  been  in  the
battle  of  Gilboa,  and  fled  with  Abner  across  the  Jordan  after  the  battle  had  been  lost."  (Keil.)
"  Mahanaim."  On  the  eastern  side  of  the  Jordan,  north  of  the  brook  Jabbok  (Gen.  xxxii.  2,  3).
Ishbosheth  or  "  Esh-baal ''  (see  1  Chron.  viii.  33).  Litevally  son  of  Baal.  "  It  seems  probable
that  the  name  Baal  (lord)  wfis  in  early  times  L-iven  to  the  God  of  Israel,  and  proper  names  were
formed  from  it  afterwards.  When  the  worship  of  the  false  Baal  was  introduced  into  Israel  the
change  into  Bosheth,  or  shame,  was  made.  Fossil  ly  this  change  was  njade  by  later  editors  and
scribes,  and  the  original  foi*m  was  retained  in  the  Book  of  Chron  cles  because  this  book  was  less
read  than  the  prophetic  historical  books."     [IVansr.  of  Lanyes  Commentary.)

Ver.  9.  "Over,"  rather  for,  etc  The  use  of  this  preposition  seems  to  indicate  that  the
title  was  assumed  before  the  places  named  really  became  subject  to  Ishbosheth.  "Gilead,"
the  whole  of  trans- Jordanic  Israelitish  territory.  "  Ashurites."  This  name  cannot  be  identified,
and  commentators  vary  greatly  in  the  opinions  ccuicerning  the  people  here  referred  to,
"  Jezreel."  I'he  plain  as  well  as  the  city,  so-calhd,  which  had  just  been  occupied  by  the
Philistines,  and  therefore  must  have  needed  to  be  re-conquered  by  Abner.  "All  Israel,"  i.«.,
all  the  rest  excepting  Judah.
S78


CHAP.  IL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


Ver.  10.  ^*Two  years."  It  is  not  quite  clear  how  these  words  are  to  be  understood,  inas-
much as  it  Sct-ms  certain  that  Isliboslieth  was  proclaimed  king  iirimediately  after  S-iul's  death,
and  we  know  that  he  reigued  until  the  time  (seven  and  a  half  years  later)  when  David  became  king
over  all  Israel.  He  rtvjned  tivo  years,  may  be  understood  to  mean  that  five  years  and  a  half
were  occupied  in  re-conquering  the  territory  from  the  riiilistines,  so  that  Ishbo^heth  was  only  a
nominal  king  during  that  period.  Or  the  last  clause  of  verse  lU  and  verse  11  may  be  regarded
as  a  parenthesis,  and  the  two  years  taken  as  referring  to  the  time  which  elapsed  before  the
event  recorded  in  the  following  paragraph.  Each  of  these  interpretations  has  been  adopted  by
eminent  Biblical  scholars,  but  the  latter  seems  most  in  keeping  with  the  movement  of  Abner
which  is  now  recorded,

Ver.  12.  To  "  Gibe  en."  Now  "  ^Z-/i6  "  in  the  western  part  of  Benjamin,  about  six  milea
north  of  Jerusalem.  He  came  here,  doubtless,  with  the  view  of  subduing  Judah  also  to  the
rule  of  Ishbosheth,  and  it  is  remarked  by  Erdmann  that  he  would  not  have  taken  this
step  if  he  had  not  already  subdued  the  Philistines.

Ver.  13.  "  Joab,  the  son.  of  Zeruiah."  This  man  here  for  the  first  time  comes  forward
in  the  history  of  David.  "  He  had  no  doubt  already,  as  his  brother  Abishai,  had  a
military  training  with  his  uncle,  and  had  taken  a  prominent  position  among  his  warriors,  else
he  wouid  not  now  appear  as  the  chief  leader  of  David's  forces.  In  the  roll  of  heroes,  in
chap,  xxiii.  8,  his  name  is  not  given,  probably  because  his  name  already  stood  above  tlieui  all  as
general,  as  we  may  conjecture  from  chap,  xxiii.  18,  24."  (Erdmann.)  Zeruiah  was  David's
sister,  and  is  most  likely  named,  instead  of  her  husband,  to  show  Joab's  relation  to  David.
"  The  pool  of  Gibeon."  A  spring  still  "  issues  in  a  cave  excavated  in  the  limestone  rock,  so
as  to  form  a  large  reservoir.  In  the  trees  farther  down  are  the  remains  of  a  pool  or  tank  of
considerable  size,  probably,  says  Dr.  lloijinson,  120  feet  by  100."  (Biblical  Dictionary.)  This
is  the  "  great  water  "  mentioned  by  Jeremiah  (chap.  xli.  12).

Ver.  14.     "  Play."     Here  used  to  denote  the  war-play  of  single  combat.     {Keil.)

Ver.  15.  **  Went  over."  They  probably  met  at  some  intermediate  place.  (Transr.  of  Lanye*s
Commentary.)

Ver.  16.  "  Helkath-hazzurim,"  i.e.,  The  Jield  of  knives,  or  sharp  edges.  Everyone  must
recall  to  mind  the  similar  combat  of  the  Horatii  and  the  Curatii  of  Roman  history  (Livy  i.  25).
*'  These  single  combats  still  occur  among  the  Arabs."     (Trans,  of  Lanye's  Commentary.)

Ver.  17.     "A  sore  battle."     Consequent  upon  the  undecisive  nature  of  the  single  combat.

Ver  21.  "And  Abner  said,"  etc.  Abner's  speaking  supposes  that  Asahel  had  already
overtaken  him.     "  Take  his  armour,"  i.e.,  after  slaying  him.

Ver.  22.  "  How,  then,  should  I,"  etc.  "  Abner  did  not  want  to  put  the  young  hero  to
death,  out  of  regard  for  Joab  and  their  former  friendship."    (Keil.)

Ver.  23.  "The  hinder  end  of  the  spear."  He  used  the  hinder  end  from  his  desire  to  spare
Asahel's  life.  But  owing  to  his  great  strength  and  prowess,  the  wooden  end  which  was  more  or
less  pointed  to  enable  the  owner  to  stick  it  into  the  ground  (1  Sam.  xxvii,  7),  ran  into  his  body."
(Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  24.  "  Ammah."     ..."  Giah."     Nothing  further  is  known  about  these  places.

Ver.  27.  **If  thou,"  etc.  "If  thou  hadst  not  by  that  challenge  given  the  signal  for  the
battle,  then  early  in  the  morning  one  side  would  have  retreated  before  the  other,  and  the  battle
would  not  have  occurred.  ...  In  Joab's  address  and  bearing  it  may  be  seen  that  he  would
not  have  made  the  attack,  but  that  his  march  against  Abner  was  simply  to  protect  the  territory
of  Judah."  (Erdmann.)  Keil,  Lightfoot,  Patrick,  Wordsworth,  and  others  agree  with
Erdmann's  interpretation,  but  others  understand  Joab  to  say,  "  Even  if  thou  hadst  not  spoken,
the  pursuit  would  have  ceased  to-morrow  morning."

Ver.  29.  "The  plain,"  or  the  " Arabah,"  the  deep  gorge  of  the  Jordan.  "Having  marched
first  fiom  t)ie  battle-field  directly  east  towards  Jericho.''  (Erdmann.)  "All  Bithron,"  rather
"All  the  Bithron."  As  the  word  signihes  a  cutting,  it  was  probably  a  name  given  to  some
ravine  between  Jordan  and  Mahanaim.

Ver.  31.  "Three  hundred  and  threescore."  "  This  striking  disproportion  in  the  numbers
may  be  accounted  for  from  the  fact  that  in  Joab's  army  there  were  none  but  brave  and  well-tried
men,  who  had  gatlured  round  David  a  long  time  before  ;  whereas  in  Abner's  army  there  were
only  the  remnants  of  those  who  had  been  beaten  upon  Gilboa,  and  who  had  been  still  further
weakened  and  depressed  by  their  attempts  to  recover  the  land  which  was  occupied  by  the
Philistines."    (Keil.)

Ver.  32.  "They  buried  him."  Bethlehem  lay  only  a  little  to  the  left  of  the  road  between
Gibeon  and  Hebron,  and  about  fifteen  miles  from  the  latter  place.

279


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  Book  iL

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Veisa  1—1,

Waiting  for  Orders.

In  David's  conduct  here  we  have  : —

I.  A  recog^nition  that  God  knows  the  best  time  to  fulfil  His  promises.    Many

[)romises  are  ^nve^i  both  by  human  fathers  and  by  the  Divine  Father  to  their
children  without  any  specihcation  of  the  time  when  they  will  be  fulfilled,  and
this  for  a  good  reason.  For  sucli  a  reservation  on  the  part  of  the  human  parents
or  of  God  serves  to  test  faith  in  a  superi.'>r  wisdom,  and  to  work  submission  to  a
liigher  will,  and  so  to  foster  and  increase  a  truly  filial  spirit.  And  so  the  cliild
or  the  man  is  by  the  uncertainty  beini^  fitted  and  prepared  to  receive  the
promised  blessing  in  a  right  spirit — a  s[)irit  of  grateful  dependence  which  brings
him  nearer  to  the  giver.  David  had  h)ng  before  iiecn  promised  the  throne  of
Israel — the  anointing  of  Samuel  had  been  such  a  promise,  and  both  Saul  and
Jonathan  had  declared  that  such  was  the  intention  of  God.  iVt  times  he  had
seemed  to  doubt  it,  and  but  lately  his  want  of  faith  had  led  him  into  sin,  but
he  had  doubtless  upon  the  whole  reuaided  it  as  certain  that  the  time  would  come
when  he  should  be  king.  And  now  thai  time  seemed  to  have  arrived,  but  the
discipline  of  the  past  had  borne  the  fi  uit  for  which  it  was  given,  and  David's
confidence  in  God,  and  dependence  upon  Him,  were  not  now  marred  by  any
intrusion  of  his  own  desires  or  ojunions.  By  this  inquiry  of  the  Lord,  he  said
most  emphatically,  "  My  times  are  in  thy  lianil  "  (Psa.  xxxi.  15),  and  recognised
by  his  conduct  that  it  was  not  fi)r  him  to  judge  when  God  should  fulfil  His  word.
We  cannot  do  justice  to  tlie  completeness  of  David's  self-surrender  at  this  time,
unless  we  contemplate  the  irkvsomeness  of  his  present  position,  the  strength  of
the  desire  he  must  have  had  to  return  to  his  own  country,  and  the  opportunity
which  Saul's  death  seemed  to  open  up  to  him.  Most  men  would  have  been
unable  to  control  their  impatience,  and  wonld  have  counted  every  delay — even
such  a  delay  as  this  of  David — as  so  much  gain  to  the  opposite  party,  but  David
had  learned  that  time  spent  in  waiting  upon  God  is  only  such  a  delay  as  that
which  the  traveller  in  the  desert  makes  when  he  stands  still  to  take  his  bearings
by  the  stars — a  delay  which  is  the  truest  way  to  speed  him  on  his  journey.

II.  That  when  that  time  has  come,  the  fulfilment  will  only  be  accomplished
by  man's  active  and  obedient  co-operation.  Although  the  time  and  the
method  of  working  are  to  be  left  to  God,  all  the  working  is  not  to  be  left  to
Him.  Faith  in  God  makes  a  man  willing  to  wait  when  it  is  God's  will,  but  it
makes  him  equally  willing  to  be  up  and  doing  when  the  time  for  action  has
come.  When  God  gave  Canaan  to  the  Israelites  at  first,  although  it  was  in
fulfilment  of  a  promise  made  long  before,  yet  they  were  obliged  to  go  up  and
fight  for  the  land  before  they  could  possess  it,  and  to  light  according  to  the
directions  given  them  by  God.  David  here  shows  that  he  does  not  expect  God
to  fulfil  His  word  to  him  except  by  means  of  his  own  active  and  unconditional
obedience.  Although  the  sovereignty  of  Israel  was  secure  to  him,  he  knew  that
he  must  use  means  to  secure  it,  and  that  the  means  must  be  those  which  God
appointed  and  no  other.  By  his  questions  he  doubly  binds  himself  to  do  what-
ever God  commands  and  to  go  wherever  He  directs  ;  for  if  when  we  know  the
will  of  God  we  are  bound  to  do  it,  we  are  surely  under  a  double  obligation
when  we  ask  for  guidance.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  1.  The  form  in  which  he  made  Judah  was  to  his  own  mind  ;  probably
the  inquiry  shows  how  clear  the  expedi-  it  was  also  the  earnest  advice  of  his
ency  of  going  u[)  to  one  of  the  cities  of     followers  ;    there  seemed  no  doubt  or


CHAP.  II.


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


difficulty  as  to  its  being  the  ])roper
course;  but  all  the  more  on  that  account
does  his  devout  and  pious  spirit  shine
out,  in  his  asking  direction  from  God.
Prayer,  on  this  occasion,  was  not  the
resort  of  one  whom  all  other  refuge
failed,  but  the  first  resort  of  one  by
whom  the  guidance  of  God  was  regarded
as  all-important. — Blaikie.

The  time  now  came  when  David's
faith  in  the  existetice  of  a  righteous
kingdom,  which  had  its  ground  in  the
unseen  world,  and  which  might  exhibit
itself  really,  though  not  perfectly  in
this,  was  to  be  brought  to  the  severest

of  all  trials The  new  mode  of

government  for  which  the  people  craved
so  earnestly  had  been  tried — they  had
become  like  the  countries  round  about
— these  countries  were  now  their
masters.  They  had  gained  such  a  king
as  they  had  imagined  —a  leader  of  their
hosts.  They  had  lost  Liw,  discipline,
and  fellowship  ;  now  their  hosts  had
perished.  Could  there  come  order  out
of  this  chaos  ?  Whence  was  it  to  come  ?
From  a  band  of  freebooters  ?  That  was
to  be  seen.  If  the  chief  of  this  band
thought  of  setting  up  a  dominion  for
himself,  of  making  his  followers  posses-
sors of  the  lands  from  which  they  had
been  driven  out,  of  putting  down  his
private  enemies,  of  rising,  by  the  arms
of  his  soldiers  and  the  choice  of  a
faction,  to  be  a  tyrant,  his  life  would  be
merely  a  vulgar  tale  such  as  age  after
age  has  to  record.  .  .  .  But  if
David  took  this  miserable  country  of
his  fathers  into  his  hands,  not  as  a  prize
which  he  had  won  but  as  a  heavy  and
awful  trust  committed  to  him.  .  .  .
then,  however  hopeless  the  materials
with  which  he  had  to  work,  and  which
he  had  to  mould,  he  might  believe
confidently  that  he  should  he  in  his
own  day  the  restorer  of  Israel,  and  the
witness  and  prophet  of  the  complete
restoration  of  it  and  mankind.  This
was  the  man  after  God's  own  heart —
the  man  who  thoroughly  believed  in
God  as  a  living  and  righteous  Being  ;
who  in  all  changes  clung  to  that  con-
viction ;  wlio  could  act  upon  it,  live
upon  it  ;  who  could  give  himself  up  to
be  used  as  he  pleased     .     ,     .     who


could  walk  on  in  darkness  secure  of
nothing  but  this,  that  truth  must  pre-
vail at  last,  and  that  he  was  sent  into
the  worhl  to  live  and  die  that  it  might
prevail. — Maurice.

God  sends  him  to  Hebron,  a  city  of
Judali ;  neither  will  David  go  up  thither
alone,  but  he  takes  with  him  all  his
men,  with  their  whole,  households  :
they  shall  take  such  part  as  himself;
as  they  had  shared  with  him  in  his
misery,  so  they  shall  now  in  his
prosperity  :  neither  doth  he  take  ad-
vantage of  their  late  mutiny,  which
was  yet  fresh  and  green,  to  cashier  those
unthankful  and  ungracious  followers  ;
but,  pardoning  their  secret  rebellions,
he  makes  them  partakers  of  his  good
success.  Thus  doth  our  heaveidy  leader,
whom  David  prefigured,  take  us  to
reign  with  Him,  who  have  suffered  with
Him.  Passing  by  our  manifold  in-
firmities, as  if  they  had  not  been.  He
removeth  us  from  the  land  of  our
banishment,  and  the  ashes  of  our  for-
lorn Ziklag,  to  the  Hebron  of  our  peace
and  glory  :  the  expectation  of  this  day
must,  as  it  did  with  David's  soldiers,
digest  all  our  sorrows. — Bp.  Hall.

We  can  see  that  Hebron  is  a  fit
place.  The  city  of  Abraham,  Caleb,
and  the  Levites — a  city  of  refuge  —
the  principal  town  in  David's  tribe,
and  somewhat  remote  from  Saul's  tribe
— and  David  had  taken  pains  to  con-
ciliate its  inhabitants  (1  Sam.  xxx.  31).
Divine  directions  are  seen  to  coincide
with  true  human  wisdom  wherever  we
sufficiently  understand  the  facts. —
Transr.  of  Laiiges  Commentary.

In  that  orderly  he  begins  at  God,
we  see  that  it  is  not  sufficient  to  have
good  causes  public  or  private,  but  in
like  manner  it  is  requisite  to  prosecute
them  aright,  otherwise  a  good  cause  in
the  matter  may  become  evil  in  the
preposterous  (inverted  in  order)  form,
albeit  the  reciprocant  be  never  true,
that  a  good  form  may  make  an  evil
cause  good  in  substance. — Guild.

Psalm  xxvii.  is  traditionally  referred
to  this  part  of  David's  life.  (The
Ixx.  gives  as  the  title,  "  Before  the
anointing,")  and  the  courageous  and
hopeful  spirit  which   it  broMthes,   the

281


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  n.


confident    expectation    that   a   better  that   conduct  of  David,  the   decided

day  was  at  hand,  wliilst  it  lends  itself  impression   was   produced  among   the

to  the  manifold  applications  of  our  own  people   that  they   might  expect  from

later  days,  well  serves  as  an  introdac-  him  a  humane  government,  whilst  he

tion  to  the  new  crisis  in  the  history  of  would  also    honour   the   lowliest   and

David  and   the  Jewish  Church  which  most  insignificant  praiseworthy  actions

is  now  at  hand. — Stanley.  which  might  be  anywhere  done  in  the

In  that  Judah  apart  from  all  Israel  land,  with  a  thankful  recognition  of
anointed  David  their  king,  being  war-  their  worth. — Krummacher.
ranted  herein  by  the  promises  of  God  Grace  and  truth  (ver.  6)  are  the
concerning  the  pre-eminence  of  that  fundamental  attributes  of  God  which
tribe,  and  by  the  manifest  declaration  set  forth  His  relation  to  the  people  of
of  God's  will  concerning  David,  there-  Israel  as  the  covenant  people.  Grace
fore  having  and  following  the  warrant  is  the  sj^ecial  exhibition  of  His  love  by
of  God's  will  and  word  herein,  they  are  which  He  (1)  chooses  the  people,  (2)
not  the  division  or  schism  makers,  but  establishes  the  covenant  with  then),
Israel  wanting  the  same  though  the  and  (3)  in  this  covenant  relation  im-
greater  multitude  by  far.  It  is  not  parts  favour  and  salvation.  Truth  is
they,  then,  who  separate  themselves  God's  love  unchanging  and  continuing
from  the  company  or  persons  of  men,  over  against  the  people's  sin — love  that
but  who  separate  themselves  from  the  (1)  does  not  suffer  the  choice  of  free-
truth,  and  God's  word  (which  is  the  grace  to  fail,  (2) maintains  the  covenant,
touchstone  thereof)  that  are  schisma-  and  (3)  fulfils  uncurtailed  the  promises
tical  or  rent-makers  in  the  C'hurch,  that  correspond  to  the  covenant  rela-
and  all  those  who  follow  the  direction  tion.  Compare  Exod.  xxxii.  6;  Psalm
of  it  (as  Judah  doth  here)  assuredly  xxv.  10. — Langes  Commentary.
shall  go  aright,  where  such  as  contemn  Kvery  human  work  well-pleasing  to
the  same,  and  with  Israel  glory  in  God,  wrought  out  of  genuine  love  and
multitude,  shall  go  astray. — Guild.  truth,  is  a  reflection  of  God's  love  and

truth,    of  which    the   heart    has    had

Verses  5-7.     People  were  persuaded  experience,  av  offering  brought  to  the

by  it  that  this  man,  uninfluenced  by  Lord,  the  impulsion  of  which  has  come

the  low  spirit  of  revenge  and  malice,  from   this  inwardly   experienced   love

knew  how  to  forgive  and  to  forget,  and  and  truth,  an  object  oj  God's  love  and

that  all  the  wrongs  and  injuries  which  truth  which  repays  with  blessing  and

he  had  experienced  had  not  the  power  salvation,    and    oj    mens    honouring

to   obscure   to   him    the   dignity   and  recognition   in    respect   to   its  ethical

sacredness  of  his  predecessor,  as  the  value. — Langes  Commentary,
anointed  of  the  Lord.     Moreover,  by

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verset  8-32.

Abner's  Opposition  to  David.

I.  Self-will  is  a  sin  that  dies  hard.  We  should  have  thought  before  ex-
perience that  the  humiliating  disaster  at  Gilboa  would  have  been  sufficient  to
bring  Abner  and  the  men  of  Israel  into  grateful  ftubmission  to  God's  will  concerning
the  person  who  was  to  be  their  ruler.  Having  but  barely  escaped  with  their
own  lives,  and  having  to  mourn  the  best  and  bravest  of  their  kindred,  it  might
have  been  expected  they  would  gladly  welcome  one  under  whose  rule  they  might
look  for  God's  protection  and  their  own  consequent  security  and  comfort.  But
their  own  way  was  yet  so  much  dearer  to  them  than  God's  way  that  to  have  it
they  were  willing  to  enter  upon  all  the  miseries  of  a  civil  war.  Abner,  as  he
himself  afterwards  confesses  (chap.  iii.  9),  knew  that  the  Lord  had  sworn  unto
David  to  translate  the  kingdom  from  the  house  of  Saul,  yet  he  is  here  found  the
282


CHAP.  II.  HO  MI  LET IC  COM.]/  ENTA  RY :   SAM  UEL.


most  prominent  person  concerned  in  the  elevation  of  Isliboslieth  to  the  kingship.
If  his  followers  coiihl  })lea(l  ignorance  of  tlie  Divine  will  in  the  matter,  their
leader  coidd  not,  and  his  act  must  be  regarded  as  a  declaration  that,  whatever
God  jiad  said,  he  would  do  as  he  pleased.  He  was  not,  hovvever,  we  may  well
believe,  so  honest  a  man  as  to  permit  himself  thus  to  inter[)ret  his  own  conduct,
but  probably  sheltered  himself  behind  some  plea  of  necessity  or  policy.  The  sin
of  Ahner  and  his  followers  is  the  sin  of  all  men  who,  when  the  will  of  God  is
plainly  revealed  either  by  His  word  or  providence,  set  up  their  own  in  opposition
to  it — who,  when  the  finger-post  of  duty  points  in  one  direction,  choose  another
because  they  are  so  deluded  as  to  fancy  there  is  something  to  be  gained  by  it.

II.  The  sin  of  one  often  affects  the  destiny  of  many.  All  the  bloodshed
by  the  pool  of  Gibeon  on  this  day  must  be  laid  to  the  account  of  one  man.
Joab  spoke  truly  when  he  said  (ver.  27)  that  Abner's  word  was  the  spark  that
lighted  the  fire  of  battle  which  afterwards  raged  so  fiercely,  and  with  such
special  fatality  among  his  own  men.  Although  each  man  had  to  some  extent
the  power  of  individual  choice  when  he  followed  his  general  into  the  field,  yet
position  and  ability  give  some  so  great  an  influence  over  others  that  the  few
who  possess  them  have  the  many  in  a  large  measure  in  their  hands,  and  are  the
makers  of  their  weal  or  woe,  so  far  at  least  as  this  life  is  concerned.  If  such
a  man  as  Abner  had  not  put  forth  a  rival  to  David,  we  may  conclude  with
certainty  that  there  would  have  been  no  organised  opposition  to  him,  and  this
murderous  affray  and  the  civil  strife  of  the  following  years  would  have  been
avoided.  The  same  may  be  said  of  most  of  the  wars  that  have  cursed  the
world.  They  have  almost  all  been  to  gratify  the  ambition  of  one  or  two,  and
thousands  have  been  the  sufferers.  This  dependence  of  the  many  upon  the  few
is  one  of  the  facts  of  human  life,  and  often  one  of  its  mysteries.  If  not  an
ordination  of  God,  it  is  certainly  a  Divine  permission  ;  and  unless  society  were
all  upon  a  dead  level  it  is  hard  to  see  how  it  could  be  otherwise.  And  although
this  incident  shows  its  dark  side,  we  know  it  has  a  bright  one — a  side  which  will
eftace  the  darkness  when  all  leaders  and  rulers  of  men  have  learnt  of  Him  who
rules  to  save  and  to  redeem  souls  from  deceit  and  violence,  and  in  whose  sight
the  blood  of  His  followers  is  precious.     (Psa.  Ixxii.  13, 14.)


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Even  the  Amalekite  could  carry  the  because   he   cast    all   this   care  upon

crown  to  him  as  the  true  owner  :  yet  Divine  Providence.     He  thus  shames

there  wants  not  an  Abner  to  resist  him,  the  behaviour  of  those  spiritual  men,

and  the  title  of  an  Ishbosheth  to  colour  who,   when    they   recognise   that  God

his  resistance.     If  any  of  Saul's  house  wishes  to  do  something  through  them,

could    have    made    challenge    to    the  are  constantly  making  attempts  and

crown,   it  should   have   been    Mephi-  all  sorts  of  beginnings  to  see  whether

bosheth,  the  son  of  Jonathan,  who,  it  they  may,  perhaps,  achieve  the  work,

seems,   had  too  much   of  his  father's  and  are  never  willing  in  patience  and

blood  to  be  a  competitor  with  David  :  self-forgetfulness  to  wait  on  God,  until

the  question  is,  not  who  may  claim  the  God  Himself  performs  His  will.     The

most  right,  but  who  may  best  serve  hour  must  come  itself,  and  so  it  must

the   faction  :    neither   was  Ishbosheth  simply   be  waited    for. —  Berleiiherger

anyother  than  Abner's  stale. — Bp.  Hall.  Bible,

Ver.   10.    When    David   came   into  Ver.  13.  A  righteous  war  is  a  royal

possession  of  his  kingdom,  even  yet  he  duty,  from  which  no  prince  can  venture

remained  quiet  awhile,  without  con-  to  withdraw,  even  if  it  were  fraternal

sidering    how   he   might    increase   it,  war.    It  may  have  come  hard  to  David

283


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SA M UEL.


Book  ti.


to  take  up  war  against  his  brotliers,
and  yet  be  could  not  do  otherwise.
God  the  Lord  had  Himself  given  the
arms  into  his  hand. — ISchlier.

Ver.  23.  See  here  (1).  How  often
death  comes  upon  us  by  ways  that  we
least  suspect.  Who  would  fear  the
hand  of  a  flying  enemy,  or  the  butt-
end  of  a  spear  ?  (2).  How  we  are
often  betrayed  by  the  acconiplislunents
we  are  proud  of.  Asahel's  swiftness,
which  he  presumed  so  much  upon,  did
him  no  kindness,  but  forwarded  his
fate. — Henry.

Verses  18-23.  (A  Sunday-scJiool
address.)  The  rash  young  prince.
1.  He  had  a  shining  gift  (ver.  18).
In  ancient  warfare  more  were  often
slain  in  the  pursuit  than  in  the  battle;
and  so  swiftness  of  foot  was  important
in  a  warrior.  2.  He  was  ambitious —
pursuing  the  distinguished  general  of
the  enemy.  3.  He  had  decision  and
perseverance — turning  not  to  the  right


or  left,  and  yielding  to  no  persuasion.
4.  He  fancied  himself  superior  to  an
old  man — a  common  and  natural,  but
grave  fault  in  the  young.  5.  He  w^as
slain  as  the  penalty  of  self-confidence
and  rashness — besettim^  sins  of  many
gifted  youths. — Translator  of  Langes
Commentary.

Ver.  26.  This  may  have  been  a  mere
stroke  of  }){)licy,  or  it  may  have  been  the
promptings  of  conscience  bringing  home
the  guilt  of  the  slaughter  to  himself.
What  he  probably  meant  was,  that
matters  might  remain  as  they  were,
Ishbosheth  reigning  over  the  ten  tribes,
and  David  over  Judah.  ...  He  wlio
had  been  so  keen  for  war  in  the  morn-
ing, was  still  more  keen  for  peace  in
the  evening,  for  it  is  not  easy  for  a  man
with  even  a  shred  of  conscience  to  think
of  nearly  four  hundred  of  his  own
brethren  lying  dead  on  the  field  of
battle,  and  to  remember  that  the  re-
sponsibility of  the  terrific  slaughter
lies  at  his  own  door. — Blaikie.


CHAPTER  III.


Crittcal  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1,  "  The  war.**  "  Not  continual  fighting,  but  the
state  of  hostility  in  which  they  continued  to  stand  towards  one  another."     ( Ked.)

Ver.  3.  "  Chiliab."  Called  Daniel  in  1  Chron.  iii.  1.  "  Probably  had  two  names."  (KcU.)
**  Geshur."     A  small  independent  kingdom  in  Syria.

Ver.  4.  Nothing  is  known  of  the  origin  of  these  wives  of  David,  nor  of  the  one  mentioned
in  the  following  verse.

Ver.  5.  **  David's  •wJfe."  This  appendage  to  Eglah  has  led  some  to  conjecture  that  Michal
is  here  intended  ;  but  Keil  and  others  think  it  merely  serves  as  a  fitting  conclusion  to  the  list.

Ver.  6.  "  That  Abner,"  etc.  Keil  here  reads  and  Abner,  making  verses  6  and  7  into  one
sentence,  expanded  by  the  introduction  of  circumstantial  clauses  ;  the  conjunction  before  said
{i.e.  Ishbosheth  said),  must  then  be  translated  tliat.  "  Wheiefore  hast  thou."  As  the  harem
of  an  Oriental  king  becomes  the  property  of  his  successoi",  such  an  act  on  the  part  of  Abner
would  be  an  act  of  political  treason.

Ver.  8.  "  Then  was  Abner  very  wroth,"  etc.  He  neither  admits  nor  denies  the  charge,
and  most  expositors  regard  him  as  guilty  of  the  act  ;  but  as  Eidmann  remarks,  it  "  seems  rather
the  outflow  of  passionate  self-will  and  presumptuous  contempt  towards  Ishbosheth  "  than  an
attempt  to  secure  the  throne.  His  subsequent  conduct  towards  David  seems  to  contradict  the
idea  that  he  had  such  an  intention.

Ver.  9.     "  As  the  Lord  hath  sworn."     We  have  no  record  of  any  formal  Divine  oath  such
as  Abner  here  speaks  of.     "But  the  promise  of  God  is  equivalent  to  an  oath,  as  God  is  the  true
God,  who  can  neither  lie  nor  deceive  "  (1  Sam.  xv.  ^9,  etc.).
284


CnAP.ut.  JIOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    SAMtlEl.


Ver  10.    "From  Dan  even  to  Beersheba,"  i.e.,  throughout  the  entire  land,  from  north

to  south.     (Judges  xx.  1,  etc.)  *

Ver.  11.  "And  he  could  not  answer,"  etc.  "This  characterises  Ishboseth  sufficient! v
for  the  whole  situation.  Having  with  an  effort  pluclced  up  courage  to  ask  that  repn.acl.ful
question,  he  here  shows  the  greatest  feebleness,  cowardice,  and  timidity  towards  Abner  'J'his
aJso  contributes  to  the  explanation  of  what  is  said  in  ver.  1  concerning  the  house  of' Saul  "
\trdmann.)  ®  --""i.

Ver.  12.  "On  his  behalf."  Two  general  renderings  of  this  phrase  are  found  in  the  ancient
versions  VIZ,  tn  his  place,  equivalent  to  the  English  version,  and  ''immediately''  or '' 07i  the
spot.  ^  Ked  adopts  tlie  first,  but  Erdntann  the  latter,  remarking  that  it  accords  well  with
Abner  s  passionate  excitement  in  ver.  9,  and  that  the  former  translati(m  makes  a  superfluous
phrase.  Whose  is  the  laud?"  Some  expositors  [Schmidt,  Ked,  Ewald,  etc)  understand
Abner  to  declare  by  this  question  that  the  land  belonged  to  David  by  virtue  of  his  anointing  •
but  others  {Erdmann,  Thmms,  etc.)  think  that  the  following  words  indicate  that  Abner  con-
sidered the  land  was  virtually  in  his  hand.  "This,"  says  Erdmann,  "is  quite  in  keepin-  with
his  proud  haughty  nature,  as  hitherto  manifested  in  his  words  and  conduct,  and  also  with  the
facts  of  the  case  since,  in  fact,  the  whole  land,  except  Judah,  was  still  subject  to  Saul's  house
that  IS,  to  him  (Abner)  as  dictator."  '

K  ^^'''  \^r'-  v?^®^*?*""^  I  require."  "This  condition  was  imposed  by  David,  not  only
because  Michal  had  been  unjustly  taken  away  by  Saul,  .  .  .  «o  that  he  could  demand  her
back  again  with  perfect  justice,  .  .  .  but  probably  on  political  grounds  also,  namely  be-
cause  the  renewal  of  his  marriage  to  the  king's  daughter  would  show  to  all  Israel  that  he
cherished  no  hatred  in  his  heart  towards  the  fallen  king."  ( Kttl.)  "  He  was  led  to  a  re-union
partly  by  love  (  she  loved  him,  1  Sam.  xviii.  27  ;  xix.  11  sq.),  and  .  .  .  as  king  he  could  not
in  the  presence  of  the  people,  leave  Michal  in  a  relation  into  which  she  had  been  forced  aaainst
her  will."     {Erdmann.)  o«*"i«»i.

Ver.  15.  "Phaltiel."    (See  1  Sam.  xxv.  44.)

r.f^-'  ^^'  'a  nM^"",""!^'!  ^-  Vl^"""^  "^^^"^  .Terusalem,  north  east,  on  the  road  between  the  Mount
of  Olives  and  Gilgal.     Phaltiel  followed  his  wife  to  the  border  of  David's  kingdom.

f}.P'\^N  'JT^TP^i*'**''  f"*;*^  ^  *^*^^^  P^^*-"  "^  «*^i^i°^  testimony  to  the  fact
that  outside  of  Judah  also  there  had  been  a  favourable  sentiment  towards  David,  against  which
Abner  had  energetically  established  and  hitherto  maintained  Ishbosheth's  authority  "  (Erd-
mann.) (See  1  Chron.  xii )  ''  The  Lord  had  spoken."  "Abner  either  had  some  expression
used  by  one  of  the  prophets  (Samuel  or  Gad)  in  his  mind  .  .  .  or  he  regarded  the  anointing
of  David  by  Samuel  by  command  of  the  Lord,  and  the  marvellous  success  of  all  that  David  had
attempted,  as  a  practical  declaration  on  the  part  of  God."     (Keil.)

Ver.  19      "The  ears  of  Benjamin."     Because  the  family  of  Saul  belonged  to  this  tribe
and  they  had  enjoyed  many  advantages  in  consequence.    See  1  Sam.  xxii  7.     "Also  ^iso  "

1  hese  denote  77»v^,Kt/n..s,  and  point  out  the  close  connection  and  relation  between  the  negotiation
^flTtr  T.  ^/"J^;""^  =^«  ^he  tribe  most  nnportant  for  David,  and  the  earnest  conversation
that  Abner  therefore  had  with  David  (in  the  ears  of  David).

Ver.  20.  "Twenty  men."  "As  representatives  of  all  Israel."  (Keil)  "A  feast '»  "Not
merely  an  entertainment,  but  of  the  nature  of  a  league."     {Patrick.)

Ver  21.  "  I  will  arise,"  etc.  The  gradation  in  these  words  is  characteristic  of  the  rapidity
excitedness,  and  energy  that  we  everywhere  find  in  Abner."  {E.dmann.)  "A  league  "  "This
was  not  to  consist  in  the  estal,lishmeut  of  a  constitution  after  the  nature  (,f  a  constitutional
monarchy,  which  is  wholly  foreign  to  the  theocratic  kingdom;  but  they  are  to  vow  to  obey
David  83  the  king  given  them  by  the  Lord,  he  promising  to  govern  them  as  the  theocratic
king.  {t.dmmnn)  "  Tuine  heart  desireth."  David  had  indicated  the  desire  of  his  heart
in  his  message  to  the  Jabeshites.     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  22.  "  Joab  came  from  pursuing,"  etc.  "Whither,  it  is  not  said,  but  probably  out-
side the  Israehtish  territory  near  tne  tribe  of  Judah.  In  the  incomplete  organisation  of  1  )avid'8
court  such  expeditions  were  necessary  for  the  support  of  the  large  army.  .  .  .  Probably  Abner

(Erdm7nn)  ""  ^^"^^  ^^^"^  ^""^^  ^'^^^'  ^^^^  *'"°'^  ^^^  ^^^^'^^  ^"^  "^^'^^  "^^  ^'^  P^*"'"

Vers.  24  and  25.  Joab  may  have  spoken  what  he  believed  to  be  the  truth  concerning  Abner
or  he  was  prompted  by  a  fear  that  the  older  and  more  renowned  general  would  take  his  place  at
the  head  of  David  s  army.  ^  i/i»v^o  ab

mi^i  from  nlbron  ^^^^  **'  Slrah."    According  to  Josephus,  only  about  two  and  a  half  English

285


nOMTLETW  COM  ME  X  Tar  Y:   SA  M  UEL  book  it


Ver,  27.  ""When  Abner  was  returned."  Joab  probably  used  David's  name  to  recall
him.  "  Abner's  conduct  bespeaks  his  entire  reliance  upon  David's  good  faith."  {^Biblical
Commentary.)

Ver.  27.  "  In  the  gate."  Literally  "  to  the  middle  of  the  gate."  It  was  no  doubt  roofed*
and  "Joab  drew  Abner  to  the  middle  of  the  inner  s^^ate  space  because  it  was  not  so  light  there,
and  one  could  better  escape  the  notice  of  the  passers-by."  [Erdmunn.)  "For  the  blood  of
Asahel."  This  was  no  doubt  the  plea  which  Joab  used  ;  but  Abner  had  slain  Asahel  in  battle
and  in  self-defence,  and  Joseplius  and  most  commentators  ascribe  the  murder  to  jealousy.

Ver.  29.  "  Let  it  rest."  Literally,  turn,  or  be  hurled.  "  This  strong*  expression,  instead  of
the  ordinary  '  let  it  come,' answers  to  the  enormity  <>f  the  crime  and  the  energy  of  David's
ri^liteous  anger."  [Erdmann.)  ''Hath  an  issue."  "One  that  pines  awny  miserably  with
seminal  or  mucous  flow.  Compare  Lev.  xv.  2."  (Erdmann.)  "That  leaneth  on  a  staff."
'I'his  last  word  means  a  distaff,  and  many  schnlars  take  this  phrase  to  (iesignate  an  effeminate  or
Wfiikly  person.  "  The  Greeks  also  liad  their  '  Hercules  with  the  distatf  '  as  a  ty[»e  of  uumardy
ft  tbleiiess,  and  for  a  warrior  like  Joab  there  could  be  no  worse  wish  than  that  there  might  be  a
dislaff-holder  among  his  descendants."  (Bottcher.)  In  favour  of  this  reading,  Enlmanu  remarks
that  one  that  holds  a  staff  [?,  not  necessarily  a  cripple,  since  the  staff  was  held  by  rulers,  by  old
nien,  by  travellers,  and  liy  shepherds  (Judges  v.  li  ;  Nuu*b.  xxi.  18  ;  Zech.  viii.  4  ;  Luke  vi.  3  ;
!Micah  vii.  14,  etc  ),  and  that  where  a  cripple  is  described  with  a  staff  the  expression  is  different
(Kxod.  xxi.  19.)  However,  Gresenius,  Kwald,  Phillippson,  Keil,  and  others  render  the  word
crutch  or  staff.     Ancient  Jewish  writers  regard  this  imprecation  of  David's  as  sinful.

Ver.  31.  "  Before  Abner,"  In  the  presence  of  his  corpse.  They  were  to  take  part  in  the
funeral  procession.

Ver.  33.     "  A  fool."    A  nahal,  or  worthless  man.

Ver.  34.  "Thy  hands  were  not  bound."  This  means,  either  "Thou  hadst  not  made
thyself  guilty  of  any  crime,  so  as  to  die  like  a  malefactor,  in  chains  and  bonds  "  f  Keil  J,  or,
"  with  free  hands,  with  which  he  might  have  defended  himself  ;  with  free  feet,  with  which  he
might  have  escaped  from  overpowering  force.  Without  suspecting  evil,  he  was  attacked  and
murdered  as  a  defenceless  man."     (Erdmann. J

Ver.  35.  "  To  cat  meat. "  "  It  is  uncertain  whether  David  was  to  eat  with  the  people
(cf.  chap.  xii.  17),  i.e.,  to  take  part  in  the  funeral  meal  that  was  held  after  the  burial,  or  whether
the  pe(»ple  simply  urged  him  to  take  some  food  for  the  purpose  of  soothing  his  own  sorrow."
(Keil.)

Ver.  38.     **  A  prince,"  etc.     A  prince  by  reason  of  his  position — a  great  man  because  of  his

intellectual  endowments.

Ver.  39.  "Weak,  though  anointed."  Most  commentators  understand  David  to  mean
that  he  was  too  weak — too  lately  come  into  power — to  be  able  to  visit  upon  Joab  and  his  brother
the  just  reward  of  their  crime,  but  Erdmann  objects  to  this  view— (1).  Because  it  would  have
been  very  unwise  to  acknowledge  his  fear  before  such  men  ;  and  (2).  Because  it  would  have  been
untrue,  for  he  who  had  conquered  Abner,  and  who  had  the  people  on  his  side,  must  have
possessed  the  power  to  punish  Jo.ib.  He  understands  the  first  adjective  to  signify  soft,  and  hard
to  apply,  not  to  the  contrast  between  himself  and  the  sons  of  Zeruiah  as  to  political  situation
but  as  to  disposition.  While  he,  though  a  king,  is  absorbed  in  grief,  they  are  unmoved  and
indiflferent,

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAQRAPH.— Versa  1—21.
Abneh's  Revolt  to  David.

I.  When  the  will  of  God  and  the  will  of  men  are  contending,  however  longf
the  strug'gle,  the  issue  is  not  doubtful.  In  the  precedinLj  cliapter  we  have  tlio
history  of  a  contest  in  which  the  combatants  were  so  equally  matched  tluit  neither
could  conquer  the  other,  but  death  claimed  victory  over  both.  This  is  not  so
very  uncommon  a  case  where  there  is  an  equality  of  resolution  and  resource  and
patience,  and  where  neither  side  has  any  right  to  call  in  reinforcements  from  tlie
God  of  right.  But  that  episode  in  the  warfare  between  Judah  and  Israel  was
not  a  type  of  the  final  issue  of  the  struggle.  It  was  the  will  of  God  that  that
struggle  should  be  protracted  for  years,  both  to  perfect  the  patience  and  faith  of
2S6


CHAP,  III.  nOMlLETlC  COMMhWTARY:    SAMUEL.


David,  and  to  show  tlie  men  of  Israel  where  tlieir  true  interest  lay.  But  even
Jiad  the  men  of  Judali  been  as  inferior  to  their  opponents  in  bravery  and  skill  as
they  probably  were  m  nnmbers-if  every  one  of  Ishbosheth's  snp]K)rters  had  been
an  Abnerand  their  number  multiplied  a  thousandfold— it  could  have  availed

r  i''"V.'-  "?  '^"'  ^^''  ^^'^l  ''^'^  ^-^**^'^-  ^^^"^-^^^  the  ])Mrpo8e  and  plan  of

bod  Ihis  must  be  the  rssue  of  every  contest  of  a  like  character.  It  may  be
good  for  the  servants  of  God  that  the  strug-le  be  lenrrthened  from  years  into
centuries,  but  victory  on  the  side  of  those  who  are  on  the  side  of  God  is  onlv  a
question  of  time.  ^

II.  Men  who  consult  God's  will  in  some  acts  of  their  life  are  sometimp*;
stranjely  forgetful  to  do  it  in  others.  We  take  it  as  certain  that  SZ-
suited  only  his  own  desires  or  his  own  idea  of  what  would  conduce  to  his  honour
and  prosperity  when  he  multiplied  the  number  of  his  wives,  and  even  took  one
at  least  from  outside  his  pwn  nation.  Although  we  have  no  reason  to  supnose
he  broke  any  express  Divine  command  in  so  doing,  yet  it  was  evidently 'a
violation  of  Gods  original  intention,  and  an  imitation  of  the  customs  of  the
heathen  monarchs,  and  such  an  alliance  with  them  was  in  direct  opposition  to
that  separation  from  them  and  their  ways  which  is  commanded  by  the  law  of
Moses.  If  he  had  been  as  careful  to  inquire  of  the  Lord  concerning  this  matter
as  iie  was  m  others,  how  much  domestic  misery  might  he  have  escaped  But  all
good  men  omit  sometimes  to  obey  the  command,  ^In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge
Him,  and,  follovving  their  own  inclination  instead  of  hearkening  to  the  voice  of
God,  sow  seeds  of  evil  which  afterwards  yield  them  very  bitter  fruit.  (On  this
subject  see  also  on  chap.  i.  2.)  ^

III.  A  good  deed  done  from  a  wrong  motive  is  of  no  value  to  the  doer.     Bv

their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them  (Matt.  vii.  16)  is  the  word  of  Divine  wisdom,  and
yet  It  IS  quite  true,  as  F.  W.  Robertson  remarks,  that  we  must  not  always  judge
a  man  by  his  deeds  but  the  deeds  by  the  man.  The  repentance  which  follows
when  a  good  man  does  wrong  must  be  taken  into  account,  and  the  motive  that
goes  before  when  a  bad  man  does  right  must  be  considered,  before  passing  iudo--
ment.^  When  Abner  came  over  to  David's  side  he  was  performiiig  an  act  of
tardy  justice,  but  it  was  not  the  fruit  of  repentance.  It  was  prompted  by  no
dasire  to  repair  the  wrong  of  the  past,  but  by  a  determination  to  avenge  an
offence  in  the  present  The  same  motive  moved  him  to  make  friends  with
David  as  induced  him  to  set  Ishbosheth  upon  the  throne,  and,  therefore,  no  more
moral  value  can  be  attached  to  the  one  action  than  to  the  other.  The  declara-
tion, the  Lord  hath  sworn  to  David  "  did  not  come  from  the  lips  of  oi^who
consulted  he  Divine  wil  ,  but  f\-om  one  who  made  his  own  ambition  his  inllof
1  •  ^fi  f^^"e[.9"ly  confesses  his  guilt  when  he  utters  it,  because  he  makes  it
plain  that  he  did  not  sin  through  ignorance.

IV.  Those  who  receive  from  others  what  they  have  no  right  to  bestow  will
find  punishment  m  being  compelled  to  relinquish  it.  Two  men  in  this  chaDter
are  m  this  case.  Ishbosheth  received  his  crown,  and  Phaltiel  his  wife  from  men
who  were  wronging  others  when  they  bestowed  them,  and  the  issue  in  both  is
what  It  must  ever  be  under  such  circumstances.  Every  gift  given  by  man  which
IS  not  at  the  same  time  given  by  God  is  not  bestowed  upon  itsrighful  owner,  and
WMll  sooner  or  later  be  taken  from  the  unlawful  possessor  to  become  the  property
of  him  to  whom  it  belongs  However  far  and  with  whatever  force  a  stone  is
thrown  into  the  air  we  teel  that  its  return  to  the  earth  is  certain.  Whatever
may  be  .he  height  to  which  it  ascends,  we  know  there  will  come  a  moment  when

ts  return  journey  will  begin,  and  its  fall  will  be  more  rapid  than  its  rise      So
however  great  may  be  the  power  and  strength  which  is  behind  unjust  promotion'
and  however  long  we  may  hold  a  gift  which  belongs  to  another,  there  is  a  law

287


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL,  book  n.


above  all  oti.ers  wliicli  can  only  belield  at  abeyance  for  a  limited  time,  and  when
that  limit  has  been  reached  tlie  law  will  assert  its  dominion,  and  the  work  of
restitution  will  often  be  as  snddcn  as  it  is  painful.  Plialtiel  must  have  known
he  was  wronging  David  to  take  his  wife,  and  Ishbosheth  knew  also  that  he  had
no  right  to  tlie  throne,  but  the  one  thought  himself  secure  in  the  power  of  Saul,
and  the  other  trusted  to  the  ability  of  Abner.  The  day  of  reckoning  came  for
both,  and  they  had  hotk  cause  to  bitterly  regret  they  had  accepted  favours  from
men  who  had  no  right  to  bestow  them.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  1.     What  grievous  tales  of  dis-  Ver.   13,     In  David's  yielding  and

tress  are  folded  up  in  these  brief  words.  acceptation    of  Abner's   offer    we  see

Probably  it   was   only  irregular   war,  that,  albeit  he  hath  a  good  cause,  yet

without  much   bloodshed  ;  the  war  of  he  neglects  no  occasion   of  secondary

skirmish  and  surprises,  not  of  pitched  means  offered,  which  is  an  example  of

battles  or  protracted  sieges,  or  desperate  imitation,  for  as  men  are  said  to  con -

assaults  ;   but  many  a  pillaged  town  temn   God  who   rely  altogether  upon

and  many  a  homestead   laid  in  ashes,  seconds,  so  are  they  to  be  thought  to

and  many  a  heart  crushed  in  des})air  tempt  God,  who  altogether  reject  the

or  maddened  to  fury,  and  many  a  deep  use  of  lawful  seconds. — Guild,
and  deadly  curse  and  fearful  vow  of

vengeance  would  everywhere  follow  the         Ver.   16.     From  this  occurrence   it

track  of  war.     And  it  was  war  of  the  is  clear  that,  among  the  wild  briars  of

most  distressing  and  demoralising  kind.  unsettled  family  rehitionships  by  which

— not  foreign,  but  civil.    Great  national  Israel   was   then  overgrown,  here  and

wars  are    usually    attended    by    one  there  also  the  flowers  of  a  true  genuine

counteracting  benefit — they  soften  the  love  and  fidelity  were  to  be  met  with,

keenness  of  private  quarrels.    But  when  They  bloomed,  indeed,  in  the  house  of

parties  in  the  same  nation  are  fighting  David,  but  their  growth  was  not  un-

with  each  other,   private  quarrels,  in-  hindered,  and  he  did  not  remain  un-

stead  of  being  healed,  are  only  exas-  touched  by  the  curse  which  the  Lord

perated  in  greater  bitterness.     In  the  had  attached  to  the  crime  of  polygamy

painful  war,  therefore,  in  which  David  in  Israel. — Krummacher.
was  engaged,   he  was  deprived  of  the

comfort  of  reflecting   that    whatever  Ver.  18.     Abner  wins  the  heart  of

ravages  it  was  producing  abroad,  it  was  Israel,  by  showing  God's   charter   for

drawing  men's   hearts  closer  to  each  him    whom   he  had  so  long   opposed,

other   at   home,   and   sweetening   the  Hypocrites  make  use  of  God  for  their

breath  of  domestic  society. — Blaikie.  own  purposes,  and  care  oidy  to  make

Divine  authority  a  colour  for  their  own

Ver.  8.     In  the  variance  of  these  designs.      No  man  ever  heard   Abner

two,  we  see  there  is  no  solid  and  con-  godly  till  now  ;    neitiier  had  he  been

Btant  friendship  among  the  wicked,  for  so  at  this  time,  if  he  had  not  intended

that  which  is  in  God  is  only  like  unto  a  revengeful  departure  froni  Ishbosheth.

Him,  immutable  and  sure,  and  worthy  Nothing  is  m(»re  odious  than  to  make

of  the  name  ef  amity,  the  other  being  religion   a  stalking-horse  to  policy. —

more  properly  conspiracies. — Guild.  Bishop  Hall.

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  22—39.

The  Murder  of  Ab:ner.

I.  Unprincipled  men  judge  others  by  themselves.    A  man  looking  in  a  glass
sees  a  reflection  of  hiniself — not  perliaps  of  the  man  he  ought  to  be  or  might
Lave  been,  but  exactly  what  he  is.    So  a  bad  man  is  apt  to  think,  when  he  looks
288


i


CHAP.  III.  IIOMILETIC  COM\TENTARY:    SAMUEL,


upon  his  brother,  tliat  lie  is  hut  a  reflection  of  liiniself  in  chnract(;r,  that  his
motives,  and  ho[)es,  ;uul  intentions  are  the  same  as  iiis  own.  Not  being  accus-
tomed himself  to  act  from  principle,  but  in  all  things  to  put  his  own  supposed
interest  in  the  foremost  place,  he  thinks  every  other  man  must  do  the  same.
Til  is  was  the  way  in  which  Joab  regarded  Ahner  and  his  conduct.  He  knew
that  if  he  were  in  Abner's  place  he  should  not  hesitate  to  do  what  he  now
charged  him  with  doing  if  he  thought  he  should  gain  by  it,  and  was,  or  pre-
tended to  be,  far  more  suspicious  of  his  hor.esty  tlian  David  was.  Or  if  he
reaJly  believed  that  Abner  was  in  earnest  in  his  professions  of  loyalty  to  David,
still  judging  him  by  his  own  standard,  he  looked  forward  to  what  would  happen
in  the  future.  He  knew  that  in  the  same  circumstances  he  shoidd  endeavour
to  supplant  all  David's  old  servants,  and  never  rest  till  he  attained  to  the
highest  honour  the  king  could  bestow.  That  would  involve  a  decrease  of  his
power — a  prospect  his  ambitious  spirit  could  not  brook.  Hence  his  anger  and
his  revenge.

II.  In  God's  government  of  the  world,  one  bad  man  is  often  the  means
of  removing  another.  Neither  God  nor  godlilce  creatures  delight  in  destructive
work — they  love  to  build  up  rather  than  to  destroy — to  dispense  reward  rather
than  retribution.  But  as  in  the  natural  world  the  ground  must  be  cleared  of
weeds  if  the  corn  is  to  have  space  to  grow,  so  the  power  of  evil  men  must
be  limited,  and  they  sometimes  removed  from  the  earth,  that  the  good
may  live  and  multiply.  And  this  work  of  removal  is  often  done  by  their  own
kind,  and  it  is  the  only  work  for  God  that  they  can  do.  Wicked  men  cannot
bring  any  positive  blessing  upon  the  world,  but  they  can  be  used  in  this  negative
way  to  lessen  the  evil  a!id  make  room  for  the  work  of  the  good.  When  the
fire  burns  up  the  weeds  and  clears  the  ground  for  the  sower,  one  destructive
force  in  nature  is  used  to  destroy  another,  and  when  one  bad  man,  in  his  self-
seeking  and  passion,  ends  the  career  of  another,  lie  is  the  unconscious  instru-
ment in  the  hands  of  God  of  clearing  the  ground  for  the  work  of  godly  men.  So
was  it  with  Joab  in  relation  to  Abner — both  were  gull  ess,  and  conseipiently
hindrances  to  the  ])rogress  and  happiness  of  the  kingdom  of  God  in  Israel,  and
when  one  was  permitted  to  fall  by  the  sword  of  the  other,  one  moral  destroyer
was  used  for  the  destrnction  of  another  that  God's  servant  might  find  the  place
and  do  the  work  aUotted  to  him.

III.  Although  one  man  is  thus  the  retribution  of  God  to  another,  the
responsibility  of  the  deed  rests  upon  himself.  Every  human  action  must  be
judged,  not  by  its  consequences,  but  by  its  character.  Men  have  sometimes
munh'red  one  whom  they  rightly  judged  to  be  an  enemy  of  tlieir  country  ;  but
even  if  the  belief  was  correct,  neither  it  nor  the  good  consequences  arising  from
the  deed  affected  its  morality.  The  belief  may  be  right  and  the  consequences
may  be  according  to  the  belief,  but  the  end  can  never  justify  the  use  of  means
which  are  contrary  to  the  command  of  God.  Still  less  can  the  results  of  such
an  act  as  that  of  Joab's  justify  the  doer  or  lessen  his  guilt  in  the  smallest
degree.  Joab  was  a  murderer,  although  he  was  a  sword  of  retribution  in  the
hand  of  God.  If  he  had  slain  Abner  because  he  believed  him  to  be  a  traitor  to
David  and  an  enemy  to  God,  the  motives  which  actuated  him  could  not  have
absolved  him  from  blood-guiltiness.  Still  less  can  the  fact  of  Abner's  guilt
justify  a  deed  done  })urely  from  motives  of  revenge  and  jealousy,  although
that  deed  brought  just  i)nM;.s:iinent  to  a  bad  man.  The  fact  that  God  overrule*
men's  sin  to  further  11 16  purposes,  does  not  do  away  with  the  sinfuluesa.
(See  also  chapter  iv.)


233


IIOM I LETIG  COMA'  ENTAR Y :    SA  M UEL.


BOOK  II


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE   COMMENTS,


Verses  28,  29.  .  These  words  have
often  been  ret^arded  as  an  expi-e.^sion  of
exaggerated  passion  .  .  .  but  David
here  wishes  nothing  more  than  what
tlie  law  predicts,  and  it  can  never  be
siufnl  to  vvi.sh  God  to  do  what,  in
nccordance  with  His  will,  He  mnst  do.
The  extension  of  the  curse  to  the
descendants  clearly  refers  to  the  threat-
en ings  of  the  law  ;  and  in  both  cases
the  offensive  character  disappears,  if
we  01  dy  remember  that  whoever  by
true  repentance  freed  himself  from
connection  with  the  guilt  was  also
exempted  from  participation  in  the
punishment. — Hengstenherg.

Ver.  38.  This  verse  has  been  made
the  text  of  many  sermons  on  the  death
of  great  men.  We  subjoin  the  outline
of  one.  I.  A  man  has  fallen.  I  do
not  mean  a  mere  male  human  indi-
vidual, one  whom  the  tailor  rather
than  the  mantua  maker  clothes, — a
walking  thing  that  wears  a  hat.  I
s])eak  of  that  which  God  meant  when
He  said,  "  Let  us  make  man  in  our
imnge,  after  our  likeness."  Marred
sadly  now  by  the  concussion  of
that  fearful  fall,  but  capable  of  restora-
tion through  the  cross,  and  justifying
well,  in  the  renewal  of  its  fair  propor-
tions and  its  countenance  erect,  the
sacn^l  record,  *'  God  has  made  man
u})riglit " — a  man  that  has  a  mind  and
uses  it — a  man  that  has  a  heart  and
yiehls  to  it — a  man  that  shapes  his
circumstances — a  man  that  cares  not
for  himself  ...  a  man  to  make
occasions  — a  man  to  meet  emergencies
—a  man  to  dare  not  only  but  to  bear.
.  .  .  11.  A  great  man  has  fallen.
A  great  man  first  must  be  a  man,  and
then  must  find  or  make  the  occasion  to
be  great.  In  every  man  that  is  a  man
there    is,    potentially,   a  great    man.

.  .  HI.  A  prince  has  fallen.  A
prince  in  place.  Tlie  head,  as  the
word  simply  means,  of  twenty  millions
of  free  people,  so  constituted  and  de-
clared by  their  own  choice  and  act.  A
prince  in  rank  ...  a  prince  in
power  ...  a  prince  in  quiet
290


diirnity  -a  prince  in  calm  indomitable
resohition  —  a  prince  in  utter  disregard
of  consequences,  when  the  right  is  seen
and  done.  ..."  Know  ye  not "
— who  does  not  know,  who  does  not
feel,  who  does  not  own  that  it  is  so? —
Bishop  Doane  on  the  Death  of  Presi-
dent Taylor  of  the  United  JStates.  1850.

Ver.  39.  David  was  weak,  not  so
much  because  Joab  was  strong,  as  be-
cause he  himself  shrank  from  doing
what  he  knew  to  be  right  in  the  case.
Had  he  put  Joab  to  death,  public
opinion  would  have  sustained  him  in
the  execution  of  justice  ;  and  even  if
it  had  not,  he  would  have  had  the  in-
ward witness  that  he  was  doing  his  duty
to  the  State.  For  a  magistrate  to  be
weak,  is  to  be  wicked.  He  is  set  to
administer  and  execute  the  law  without
fear  or  favour ;  and  whensoever  he
swerves  from  justice  from  either  cause,
he  is  a  traitor  at  once  to  God  and  to
the  commonwealth.  "  Weak  !  "  this  is
not  to  speak  like  a  man,  not  to  say  a
king. — Taylor,

It  seems  surprising  that  David,  who
was  then  in  the  flo\ver  of  his  age,  and
who  had  long  been  distinguished  for
his  courage  and  skill  as  a  ndlitary
leader,  should  now  decline  into  a  subor-
dinate position  as  a  warrior,  and  that
Joab  should  occupy  the  principal  place
in  the  wars  of  Israel  and  should  exercise
a  dominant  influence  over  David,  so
that  the  king  was  constrained  to  say
this.  ,  .  .  Was  this  unhappy  con-
dition a  consequence  of  his  polygamy  ?
Was  this  multiplication  of  wives,  con-
trary to  God's  command,  a  cause  of
effeminacy  and  softness  ?  Did  it  dis-
qualify him  for  the  hardness  of  the  field,
and  afford  an  opportunity  for  such  bold,
ambitious,and  insidious  persons  as  Joab,
who  profited  by  his  weakness  and
favoured  it,  to  gain  a  mastery  over  him  ?
.  .  ,  If  David  had  done  what  his
conscience  told  him  was  right,  and  what
he  did  to  the  murderers  of  Ishbosheth  ;
if  he  had  fully  trusted  God,  and  done
justice  with  courage,  according  to  God's
law    (Geu.    ix.   6) ;   relying  ou  God,


CHAP.  III.  IIOMJIJ/nt  i^OMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


andnotlool<iiigt()tliocan)al  a(lvantai;es  giving  on  liis  deathbed  the  warrant  of

he  derived  from   the  military  skill  of  execution  against  Joab  to  be  put   in

Joab  and  Abisliai,  he  would  probably  effect  by  Solomon.   "Impunity  invites

have  prevented  other  murders,  such  as  to  greater  crimes."     *'lle  is  cruel  to

that  of  Ishbosheth  andAmasa  ;  and  he  the  innocent  who  spares  the  guilty." —

would  have  been  spared  the  sorrow  of  Wordsworth.


CHAPTER  IV.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes.— Ver.  1.  "  His  hands  were  feeble,"  literally  "his  hands
slackened,"  i.e.,  *' he  lost  the  power  and  courage  to  act  as  a  king."  {Keil.)  "Troubled,"  or
"  confounded."

Ver.  2.  "Saul's  son."  "Noteworthy  is  this  designation  for  Ishbosheth."  [Erdmann.)
"Captains,'' etc.  "The  part  that  these  two  men  plav,  as  well  as  Abner's  conduct,  suirgests
the  supposition  that  the  firm  military  organisation  that  Saul  had  called  into  being  had  relaxed,
and  a  disintegration  of  the  army  into  sejiarate  bodies  under  adventurers  and  partisans  was  im-
minent, if  it  had  not  already  occurred."  {Erdmann.)  "Beeroth."  Prol)ably  the  present  vill.tge
of  Bireh  (Josh.  ix.  17),  about  seven  miles  north  of  Jerusalem,  and  close  to  the  western  frontier
of  Benjamin.

Ver.  3.  **  Fled  to  Gittain."  Where  this  place  was  or  why  the  Benjamites  fled  there  is  not
known  ;  some  have  suggested  that  the  flight  took  place  at  the  time  of  the  Philistine  invasion
mentioned  in  1  Sam.  xxxi.  7.  In  Neh.  xi.  33,  a  Gittaim  is  mentioned  as  being  inhabited  by
Benjamites  after  the  exile,  but  it  may  not  be  the  same  place.

Ver.  4.  "  Mephibosheth,"  or  Merihaal  (Baal's  fighter)  ;  see  1  Chron.  viii.  34.  His  name  was
chani;ed  doubtless  ft)r  ihe  same  reason  as  Eshb;.al  was  changed  to  Ishbosheth  (see  on  chap.  ii.  8).
This  fact  is  here  introduced  to  show  that  Ishbosheth  was  the  last  of  Saul's  family  who  could  make
any  pretensions  to  the  throne,  as,  according  to  Oiiental  notions,  the  physical  infirmity  of  Mephi-
bosheth unfitted  him  for  the  duties  of  so\  ereignty.

Ver.  5.  "On  a  bed,"  etc.,  literally  on  the  mid-day  bed,  in  a  quiet,  cool,  retired  part  of  the
house,  both  the  hour  anii  the  place  favouring  their  deed  of  bloodshed.

Ver.  6.  '*  Fetclied  wheat."  The  grain  for  the  supply  of  their  soldiers  was  evidently  kept
in  the  house  of  the  king.  *' It  is  still  a  custom  in  the  East  to  allow  the  soldiers  a  certain
quantity  of  corn,  together  with  some  pay."     {Jamieson.)

Ver.  7.  "  As  the  thread  of  the  narrative  was  broken  by  the  explanatory  remarks  in  ver.  6,  it
is  resumed  here  by  the  repetition  of  some  of  the  words.  When  Thenius,  therefore,  attempts  to
prove  the  '  evident  corruption  of  the  Masoretic  text'  by  appealing  to  the  nonsense  of  relating
the  murder  of  Ishbosheth,  etc.,  twice  over,  he  is  altoi^ether  wrong,  and  has  jueasured  the  pecu
liarities  of  Hebrew  historians  by  the  standard  adopted  by  our  own.  J.  P.  F.  K  uiigsfeldc  has
given  the  true  explanation  when  he  says: — 'The  Hebrews  often  repeat  in  this  way  for  the
purpose  of  relating  something  fresh,  as  for  examjde  in  this  instance,  their  carrying  off  the  head.'
Compare  with  this  chap.  iii.  22,  23,  where  the  arrival  of  Joab  is  mentioned  twice  in  two
successive  verses  ;  or  chap.  v.  1-3,  and  many  other  passages."  {Kiel.)  "  The  plain,"  i.e.,  the
Arabah,  or  Valley  of  the  Jordan,  as  in  chap.  ii.  29.

Ver.  8.  "The  king.''  Notice  that  David  is  always  here  so  termed,  while  in  respect  to
Ishbosheth  the  title  is  always  avoided."  {Erdmann.)  "Thine  enemy,  which  sought,"  etc.
These  words  may  refer  to  Ishbosheth,  but  are  generally  understood  in  reference  to  Saul.
Nothing  is  said  in  the  history  of  any  attempt  of  Ishbosheth  to  slay  David.    (See  also  on  ver.  11.)

Ver.  11.  "How  much  more,"  etc.  "The  form  of  the  thought  is  a  progression  from  the
less  to  the  greater.  If  I  executed  in  Ziklag  him  who  avowed  having  killed  at  his  own  request
on  the  battlefield  mine  enemy  Saul,  under  whose  i)ersecutions  the  Lord  delivered  me  from  all
adversity,  how  much  more  must  I  demand  at  your  hands  the  blood  of  this  righteovs  man  whom
ye  murderously  slew  in  his  house  on  his  ftetZ."  {Erdmann.)  "  Righteous  person."  "  The
assumption  of  the  regal  power  which  Ahner  had  forced  upon  Ishbosluth  was  not  a  capital
crime  in  the  existing  state  of  things."  {Kiel.)  "Require  his  blood."  "On  this  phrase  see
Gen.  ix.  5,  according  to  which  God  is  Himself  the  avenger  of  blood.  (Comp.  Psa.  ix.  13.)
David  recognises  himself  as  king  in  God's  service,  and  as  His  instrument."     {Erdmann.)

291


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  bocs  ii.


Ver  12  "Cut  oflf,*'  etc.  Because  the  hands  and  feet  were  the  offending  members.  Such
n.iislnnent  is  si  ill  common  in  Eastern  countries.  "The  pool,"  etc.  "Outside  the  town  of
Hebron  is  a  pool  of  good  water,  which,  being  below  the  level  of  the  adjoining  ground,  is
accessible  by  fii-d>ts  of  steps  at  each  corner  ;  and  there  is  another  reservoir  at  a  little  distance,
bnth  of  which  'are  very  ancient.  One  or  other  of  these  must  certainly  be  the  pool  referred  to.
The  exposure  of  the  mutilated  relics  at  the  pool  was  owing  to  its  being  a  place  of  public
resort."    {Jamieson.)

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  CHAPTER.

The  Murder  of  Ishbosheth.

This  chapter  further  illustrates  the  teaching  of  the  preceding  one,  inasmuch
as  it —

I.  Gives  two  examples  of  the  unconscious  co-operation  of  human  actions  and
Divine  purpose.  The  nurse  of  Mepliibosheth  obeyed  a  Divine  instinct  when
she  sought  to  save  her  charge  from  the  danger  which  surrounded  hiu).  ^  And  she
probably  did  save  him  from  death  at  the  liand  of  the  Philistines,  being  so  far
permitted  by  God  to  succeed  in  her  praiseworthy  endeavour.  Mepliibosheth
was  spared  to  receive  from  David  the  tribute  of  gratitude  which  he  deserved  for
his  father's  sake,  but  an  apparent  accident  prevented  the  execution  of  the  full
intention.  The  child  was  saved,  but  saved  to  be  a  hopeless  cripple  for  tlie  rest
of  his  days,  and  we  can  well  imagine  that  his  nurse  felt  long  and  dee))  grief  in
consequence.  But  most  likely  her  fall  was  the  means  of  preventing  the  son  of
Jonathan  from  coming  into  collision  with  his  father's  friend,  and  so  bringing
upon  himself  the  fate  which  befel  his  uncle.  To  the  miscarriage  of  the  plans  of
man  concerning  him  he  probably  owed  the  blessing  of  living  a  peaceful  and
honoured  life  instead  of  one  of  turmoil  and  disappointment.  The  event  which
to  his  friends  seemed  so  untoward  was  an  intervention  of  his  father's  God  on  his
behalf,  and  a  meeting  and  co-operation  of  the  Divine  and  the  human  in  a
purpose  of  mercy  towards  him  and  towards  the  nation.  For  the  lameness  of
Mepliibosheth,  as  well  as  the  death  of  Ishbosheth,  was  the  removal  of  a  hindrance
to  David's  peaceful  accession.  The  thoughts  suggested  by  this  latter  event  are
the  same  as  those  upon  the  murder  of  Abner  in  the  preceding  chapter.

II.  It  shows  the  true  standard  by  which  to  judge  human  actions.  David,
like  the  true  man  he  was,  looked  at  the  deed  of  violence  done  to  Ishbosheth  not
in  the  light  of  the  relation  in  which  it  stood  to  himself,  but  in  its  relation  to
the  eternal  principles  of  right  and  wrong.  As  in  the  case  of  Saul  (see  page  276)
he  could  separate  the  man  from  the  opponent,  and,  as  in  the  murder  of  Abner,
he  allowed  no  plausible  excuse  or  plea  to  blind  him  to  the  real  nature  of  the
crime.     On  this  subject  see  also  page  289.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.  1.      Cursed  is  the  man  that         The  contrast  is  striking  between  the

trusteth  in  men,  and  makoth  flesh  his  conduct  of  Khbosheth  under  difficulty

arm.     1.  Because  of  i\\Q  frailty  of  all  and  that  of  David.     In  the  history  of

human  supports,  with  which  fall  the  David  we  have  repeatedly  found  his

ho])esba.seil  on  then).   2.  Becauseofthe  faith  faltering,  and  we  have  seen  him

faithlessness  of  men,   in  whom  blind  overcome  for  the  time  by  the  spirit  of

confidence  is  placed  instead  of  putting  distrust.    But  these  occasions  occurred

confidence  in  the  faithfulness  of  the  in  the  midst  of  protracted  and  terrible

Lord.  3.  Becaui^e  oHhe  danger  a,x\d  rn in  struggles  ;  they  were  exceptions  to  his

of  body  and  soul  to  which  one  thereby  usual  bearing;  faith  commonly  bore  him

exposes  huwaelf.-Lanye's  Coriinientary.  up  in  his  darkest  trials.    Ishbosheth,  on


CHAP.  IV.


lIOMILEriC  COMMENTARY'.    SAMUEL.


fclie  other  hand,  had  do  resource — no
sustaining  power  whatever  under  visible
reverses.  David's  slips  were  like  the
teniporaryretirin^  of  the  gallant  soldier,
when,  fagged  and  weary,  he  is  driven
back  for  a  few  moments  by  superior
numbers ;  but  as  soon  as  he  has
recovered  his  breath,  dashes  on  un-
daunted to  the  conflict.  Ishbosheth's
failure  was  like  the  conduct  of  the
soldier  who  lays  down  his  arms  and
rushes  from  the  field  as  soon  as  he  has
begun  to  taste  the  bitter  storm  and
cruel  reverses  of  the  war.  With  all
his  sli[)s  and  failures,  there  was  some-
tliiiig  in  the  demeanour  of  David  that
showed  him  to  be  cast  in  another  mould
from  that  of  other  men.  He  was
habitually  aiming  at  a  higher  standard,
and  upheld  by  the  consciousness  of  a
higher  strength. — Blaikie.


Ver.  8.  How  evil  seeks  deceitfully  to
clothe  itself  with  the  appearance  of  good.
1.  By  falsehood,  in  alleging  something
evil  in  others  as  a  pretext  to  make
itself  appear  right  and  good.  2.  ]^y
hypocrisy,  in  representing  itself  as  in
haruiony  with  God's  word  and  will.
3.  By  \\\Q  pretence  Qi\\2,V\\\g  promoted
the  interests  of  another. — Langes
Commentary.

How  important  it  is  that  our  con-
duct should  be  regulated  by  general
laws,  clearly  and  strictly  defined — not
dependent  on  the  capricious  judgment
of  each  individual  in  his  particular  case,
or  loosely  accommodated  to  particular
circumstances.  'JMiere  seems  to  be  no
crime  so  flagrant  but  that  some  are
found  not  only  to  commit  it,  under  the
influence  of  tem])tation,  but  to  commit
it  without  scruple  or  compunction,  by
contriving  to  persuade  the  conscience
that  theirs  is  a  particular  case. —
Lindsay.


Ver.  11.  Charity  teaches  us  to  make
the  best,  not  only  of  our  friends,  but  of
our  enemies,  and  to  think  those  may
be  righteous  persons  who  yet  in  some
instances  do  us  wrong. — Henry.

Ver.  12.  These  rapid  instantaneous
executions   by   order   of    David    have
raised  a  painful  feeling  in  pious  hearts.
Granting  that  the  retribution  was  justly
deserved,  and  granting    that  a  rapid
execution  was  necessary  to  make  a  due
impression  on  the  people,  it  may  be
asked — How  could  David,  as  a  pious
man,  hurry  sinners  into  the  presence  of
their  Judge  without  leaving  them  a
moment  to  ask  mercy,  or  giving  them
one    affectionate    exhortation    to   re-
pentance ?      The   question   is   one   of
very   great   difficulty,   and    with    our
present   light   it   hardly  admits   of  a
satisfactory    answer.       The    difficulty
arises  from  our  ignorance  of  the  precise
views  which  prevailed  in  Old  Testament
times  in  regard  to  the  future  world.  It
is  certain  that  David  and  other  pious
men  believed  in  a  future  life,  and  must
often  have  thought  about  it ;  but  how
far   they    were   ordinarily   under    the
power  of  the  world  to  come — how  far,
for  example,  the  future  life  was  present
to  their  thoughts  in  comiection  with
such  men  as  Baanah  and  E,echab — is  a
problem  which  we  have  not  materials
to   solve.      The  abrupt   procedure   of
David   on    this  and   similar  occasions
favours  the  supposition   that  in  their
ordinary    frames  of   mind,    when    not
specially    exercised    in    spiritual    con-
templation   to  the    utmost  stretch   of
their   powers,    they  had  a  much  less
vivid  impression  of  the  future  than  we
have   now.  .  .  .   The    Old   Testament
did  not  hide  life  and  immortality  from
the  view  of  faith,  but  it  was  the  New
Testament  that  brought  them  clearly
to-  liiiht. — BlaiJde,


293


nOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  7?  1';    SA  M  UL'L.  book  n.


CHAPTER  V.

Critical  and  Expositort  Notes.— Ver.  1.  "Then,  etc.  "The  tenor  of  the  history  leads
IIS  to  hold  with  Ewald  that  the  recognition  of  D.-ivid  as  king  over  all  Israel  occurred  immediately
after  Ishhoslieth's  death,  against  Sta,helin,  wlio  thinks  that  there  was  an  interval  <»f  several  years
;.fter  his  death,  during  which  all  the  tribes  ^^radually  came  over  to  David."  {Erdmann.)  "  Ihy
bone,"  etc.,  i.e.,  thy  blood  relations  descended  from  one  common  ancestor.  "  The  alliance  of
David  with  the  Philistines  had  raised  so  painful  a  suspicion  respecting  his  patriotic  attachment
lo  Israel,  and  his  protracted  residence  withi"  the  Philistine  territory  had  led  to  so  widespread  a
belief  that  he  had  become  a  naturalised  Philistine,  as  to  have  created  powerful  obstacles  to  the
universal  recognition  of  his  claims  to  the  throne.  The  people  of  Israel  had,  to  a  large  extent,
taken  up  this  imjiression,  ami  acted  in  opposition  to  him  as  a  supposed  alien.  But  time,  as  well
as  the  tenor  of  l)avid's  administration  in  Judah,  had  dispelled  their  doubts  and  proved  him  to
tlieir  satisfaction  to  be  in  heart  and  soul  an  Israelite."     (janveson.)

Ver.  2.  "  Leddest  out,"  etc.  Most  expositor.s  refer  this  to  David's  military  leadership
''  The  Lord  said  "  (see  on  chap.  iii.  17)  '*  feed,"  or,  shepherd^  i.e.,  rule  them.  "  This  is  the
first  time  we  find  a  governor  described  in  Scripture  as  pador  of  the  people  ;  afterwards  the
name  is  much  used  by  the  prophets,  particularly  Ezek.  xxxiv.  23,  and  in  many  other  places."
(Patrick.)  The  desi^'nation  is  also  used  in  Homer.  "Captain,"  rather  leader,  prince.  "  1"he
first  and  third  grounds  answer  exactly  to  the  precept  in  Deut.  xvii.  15,  'Thou  shalt  make  him
king  over  thee  w/iom.  the  Lord  thy  God  sliall  choose  ; '  out  of  the  mid^t  of  thy  brethren  shalt  thou
make  a  king  over  thee."  {Erdmann.)  "  A  league,"  etc.  "  The  relation  of  both  parties  to  the
Lord  is  indicated  by  the  phrase  '  he/ore  the  Lord.'  "  {Erdmann.)  "  There  was  probably  gradually
established  among  king  and  people  some  recognition  of  mutual  rights  and  duties — an  unwritten,
or,  possibly  in  part,  a  written  law.  This  would  not  be  out  of  harmony  with  the  theocratic  con-
ception of  the  government.  Philippson  points  out  some  apparent  indications  (as  1  Kings  xii.)
of  such  a  law."  {IVansr.  of  Lanye's  Commentary.)  See  also  notes  on  1  Sam.  x.  25.  "They
anointed  David."  "To  which  the  chronicler  adds  (1  Chr.  xi.  3)  '  according  to  the  word  of  the
Lord  by  Samuel,'  an  explanatory  addition  referring  to  the  Lord's  command  to  Samuel  to  anoint
David  king  over  Israel.  David's  anointing  by  Samuel  is  now  confirmed  by  the  anointing  of  the
]>eople,  they  having  expressly  and  solemnly  recognised  his  Divine  call  to  be  king  over  Israel."
(Erdmann.)

Ver.  4.  *'  Thirty  years  old."  "  The  age  of  David  shows  that  the  events  related  from
1  Sara.  xiii.  to  the  end  of  the  book  did  not  occupy  above  ten  years — four  years  in  Saul's  service,
four  years  of  wandering,  one  year  and  four  months  among  the  Philistines,  and  a  few  months
after  Saul's  death."     (Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  6.  "  Went  to  Jerusalem."  *'  That  this  took  place  immediately  after  the  anointing  of
David  as  king  of  Israel  is  apparent  not  only  from  the  fact  that  the  account  follows  directly
afterwards,  but  also  from  the  circiimstance  that,  according  to  verse  5,  David  reigned  in  Jerusalem
just  as  many  years  as  he  was  king  over  ali  Israel."  (Keil.)  "  Whether  David  was  directed  by
the  special  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  whether  he  was  left  solely  to  his  owu  judgment
regarding  it,  we  cannot  but  admire  the  wisdom  of  the  arrangement  he  made  in  the  choice  of
Jerusalem  in  contrast  to  the  shortsighted  policy  of  Saul  in  reference  to  the  same  matter.  The
son  of  Kish  set  up  his  court  in  his  native  town  of  Gibeah — a  place  of  no  intrinsic  importance —
and  bearing  reproach  among  the  people  as  having  been  the  scene  of  one  of  the  foulest  outrages
ever  committed  in  the  land.  Moreover,  it  was  within  the  territory  of  his  own  tribe  of  Benjamin,
and  his  preference  for  it  was  apt  to  provoke  the  jealousy  of  the  others.  David,  however,  pro-
ceeded upon  other  and  more  statesmanlike  principles.  He  would  not  continue  in  Hebron.  No
doubt  that  city  was  equally  sacred  to  all  the  people,  from  its  connection  with  their  common
father  Abraham,  but  it  had  been  recognised  as  the  special  capital  of  Judah  ;  and  if  David  had
remained  in  it,  some  overzealous  partisan  of  Judah  ndght  have  said  that  the  other  tribes  had
becM  merely  annexed  to  or  absorbed  in  the  little  kingdom  which  for  seven  years  and  a  half  had
its  seat  of  government  there.  Hence,  just  as  in  our  own  times  Victor  Emanuel,  when  he  was
called  to  the  throne  of  a  united  Italy,  lemoved  his  capital  first  from  Turin  to  Florence,  and
afterward  from  Florence  to  Home,  feeling  that  it  was  due  to  the  other  portions  of  his  people
that  he  should  be  no  longer  a  mere  Sardinian  or  Tuscan  prince,  so  David  wisely  considered  that
a  regard  to  the  feelings  of  the  other  tribes  demanded  that  some  other  city  than  Hebron  should
be  chosen  as  the  metropolis.  But  in  determining  what  place  should  be  selected,  many  difficulties
would  present  themselves.  Bethlehem,  though  dearer  to  him  than  all  other  cities,  could  not  be
thought  of ;  and  if  he  had  gone  into  the  territory  of  any  other  tribe  than  his  own  he  might  have
been  liable  to  the  imputation  of  partiality,  and  might  have  provoked  jealousy  throughout  eleven-
twelfths  of  his  dominions.  In  these  circumstances  the  easiest  solution  of  the  difficulty  would  be
t .  get  hold  of  some  place  of  requisite  strength  and  importance  not  presently  identified  with  any
of  the  tribes,  and  in  the  acquirement  of  which  all  of  them  might  have  a  share.  Such  a  place
was  the  fortress  of  Zion,  held  by  the  tribe  of  the  Jebusites,  whom,  up  to  this  time,  no  army
294


on  AP.  V.  EOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  RY :  SA  M  UEL


had  1>pen  able  to  dislodge.  It  was  situated  at  tlie  extreme  v«!rge  of  the  territory  of  Jndah,
where  it  abutted  on  that  of  F^)enjainiii,  aud  belonj^ed,  jiroj/erly  speakiiii,',  tw  neither.  (Taylor.)
"The  Jebusites/*  "These  belonged  to  the  great  Canaanitish  race  (Gen.  x.  6)  who  dwelt,
when  the  Israelites  took  possession  of  Palestine,  in  the  mountain  distriet  of  Judah.  (Comp.
Numb.  xiii.  30,  Josh.  xi.  3.)  Neither  Josliua  who  conquered  th^m  in  a  battle  (Josh.  xi.  3  sq.),
nor  the  children  of  Judah,  who  only  got  possession  of  the  lower  city  (Judges  i.  8 ;  comp.
Josephus  Ant.  V.  2.  2),  nor  the  Benjamites,  to  whom  the  city  had  been  assigned  (Josh,  xviii.  28)
could  com juer  the  strong  citadel  of  Jebus  on  Mount  Zion  "  {Krdmaiin.)  "The  blind  and
the  lame/'  It  is  impossible  to  decide  with  certainty  to  wli;it  or  to  wliom  this  expression  refers.
Some,  including  several  Jewish  expositors,  and  Luther,  regard  it  as  dt^scribing  the  idols  of  the
Jebusites,  which  they  had  placed  upon  their  battlements,  and  upon  which  they  relied  for
defence,  and  whom  they  knew  the  Israelites  regarded  with  scorn,  (See  Psa.  cxv.  4  sq.)  The
most  probable  interpretation  seems  to  be  that  the  Jebusites  felt  so  secure  in  their  citadel,  shut  in
as  it  was  by  deep  valleys  on  three  sides,  that  they  taunted  the  men  of  Israel  with  the  assurance
that  blind  and  lame  men  would  suffice  to  keep  them  out.  Keil  and  most  modern  scholars  thu3
interpret  it.  Wordsworth,  however,  objects  to  it  on  the  ground  that  if  the  reference  was  to  such
persons  they  would  have  heQnpititd^  and  not  hatexl  (see  ver.  8)  by  David.

Ver.  7.  "The  stronghold  of  Zion."  There  is  great  difference  of  opinion  as  to  which
height  was  originally  known  as  Mount  Zion.  It  is  certain  that  from  the  time  of  Constantine
the  name  has  been  given  to  the  western  hill,  on  which  has  always  stood  the  city  of  Jerusalem,
but  Mr.  Fergusson,  in  his  article  on  Jerusalem  in  the  Biblical  Dictionary,  produces  a  mass  of
evidence  in  favour  of  identifying  the  ancient  Mount  Zion  with  the  eastern  hill  (now  called
Mount  Moriah),  upon  which  the  Temple  was  built,  and  to  which  he  says  it  is  certain  the  name
was  exclusively  applied  up  to  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  the  city  by  Titus.  He  adduces  in
proof  the  words  of  Psa.  xxviii.  2,  and  other  passages,  in  which  Zion  is  spoken  of  as  a  holy  place
in  such  terms  as  are  never  applied  to  Jerusalem  (Psa.  ii.  6,  cxxxii.  13,  Joel  iii.  27,  etc.),  and
others  in  which  he  thinks  Zion  is  spoken  of  as  a  separate  city  from  Jerusalem.  (Psa.  li.  18,
Zech.  i.  17,  etc.)  "  The  Kabbis,"  he  adds,  "with  one  accord  place  the  Temple  on  Mount  Zion,"
and  contends  that  the  transference  of  the  name  Zion  from  the  western  to  the  eastern  hill  solves
all  the  difficulties  which  have  hitherto  surrounded  the  identification  of  many  sites  mentioned  in
Sacred  History.

Ver.  8.  **  The  gutter."  The  cataract  or  waterfall,  {^o  Keil  a.nd  Erdmann.)  Some  under-
stand simply  a  declivity  ;  but  the  first  rendering  agrees  with  the  meaning  which  must  be  given
to  the  Hebrew  word  in  Psalm  xliii.  8,  which  is  the  only  other  place  in  which  it  occurs.
**  Hated,"  etc.  This  clause  may  be  rendered  who  hate,  but  the  other  rendering  is  the  more
probable.  Erdmann  remarks,  ''  Both  these  admissible  renderings  point  to  the  fact  that  the
Israelites  had  to  maintain  a  furious,  embittered  combat  with  the  enemy."  But  the  entire
passage  is  very  obscure,  and  has  received  various  interpretations.  *•  Wherefore  they  said  "
is  generally  taken  to  mean  that  these  classes  were  excluded  from  the  Temple,  but  for  that
assertion  we  have  no  proof,  and  it  is  hard  to  see  what  this  proverb  could  have  to  do  with  the
Temple,  which  was  not  at  that  time  in  existence.  The  true  explanation  seems  to  be,  "  The
blind  and  the  lame  are  there — let  him  enter  the  place  if  he  can  :  "  a  proverb  which  came  to  be
current  with  regard  to  any  fortress  that  was  reputed  to  be  impregnable.     (Taylor. J

Ver.  9.  **  So  David  dwelt,"  literally,  sat  down.  Whichever  eminence  is  here  referred  to,
this  was  the  foundation  of  that  city  which  was  to  become  the  most  memorable  in  the  history  of
the  world.  "  Those  only,"  says  ]3eau  Staidey,  **  who  reflect  on  what  Jerusalem  has  since
been  to  the  world  can  appreciate  the  grandeur  of  the  moment  when  it  passed  from  the
hands  of  the  Jebusites,  and  became  'the  city  of  David.'"  Its  situation  is  in  keeping  with
its  history,  and  is  thus  described  by  Dean  Stanley.  *'  The  situation  of  Jerusalem  is  in  several
respects  singular  among  the  cities  of  Palestine.  Its  elevation  is  remarkable,  not  from  its
being  on  the  summit  of  one  of  the  numerous  hills  of  Judea,  like  most  of   the  towns   and

villages,  but  because  it  is  on  the  edge  of  one  of  the  highest  table-lands  of  the  country

From  the  south,  the  approach  is  by  a  slight  descent  (Hebron  being  higher  still),  but  from
every  other  side  the  ascent  is  perpetual ;  and,  to  the  traveller  approaching  Jerusalem  from  the
west  or  east,  it  must  always  have  presented  the  ai)pearance  .  .  .  beyond  any  important
city  that  has  ever  existed  on  the  earth,  of  a  mountiiin  city  ;  breathing,  as  compared  with  the
sultry  plains  of  the  Jordan  or  of  the  coast,  a  mountain  air  ;  enthroned,  as  compared  with  Jericho
or  Damascus,  Gaza  or  Tyre,  on  a  mountain  fastness.  In  this  respect  it  concentrated  in  itself  the
character  of  the  whole  country  of  which  it  was  to  be  the  capital — the  "mountain  throne  " — the
**  mountain  sanctuary  "  of  God.  .  .  .  Again,  Jerusalem  was  on  the  ridge,  the  broadest  and
most  strongly  marked  ridge  of  the  backbone  of  the  complicated  hills  which  extend  through  the
whole  country  from  the  desert  to  the  plain  of  Esdrnelon.  Every  Wanderer,  every  conqueror,  every
traveller  who  has  trod  the  central  route  of  Palestine  from  north  to  south  must  have  passed  through
the  table-land  of  Jerusalem.  .  .  .  Abraham,  as  he  journeyed  from  Bethel  to  Hebron —
Jacob,  as  he  wandered  on  his  lonely  exile  from  Beersheba  to  Bethel  ;  .  .  .  Joshua,  as  he
forced  his  way  from  Jericho,  and  met  the  kings  in  battle  at  Gibeon  ;  the  Philistines,  ai  they

295


nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.  book  IL


came  up  from  tlie  maritime  plain  and  pitclied  in  Michmash  ;  no  less  than  Pompey,  when  in  later
times  lie  came  up  from  the  valley  of  the  J-.rdan,  or  the  Crusaders  when  they  came  from  Tyre
with  the  exi)ress  purpose  of  attnckiiig  Jerusalem — must  all  have  crossed  the  territory  of  Jelms."
Ancient  writt  rs  thought  Jerusalem  to  be  so  much  in  the  midst  of  the  then  known  world  that
they  called  it  literally  "  the  navel  of  the  earth."  "  In  reference,"  says  iJr.  Jamieson,  "  to  the
actual  circumstances  and  after  history  of  the  Jews,  Jerusalem  was,  of  all  sites  in  the  country,
the  best  that  could  be  chosen  ;  and  yet  on  its  mountain  hei<;ht,  far  away  from  the  roads  between
the  great  empires,  and  accessible  only  by  steep  and  winding  passes,  it  was  secluded,  so  that  it  was
freed,  as  it  now  is,  from  any  necessary  implication  in  tlie  great  movements  of  the  world.  So  secluded,
and  yet  so  central,  it  was  marvellous'ly  fitted  as  the  scene  of  ihe  events  that  were  to  be  transacted  in
it.  "Millo,"  or  "  the  filling."  "At  any  rate  some  kind  of  fortification,  probably  a  large  tower  or
castle.  The  name  probably  originated  in  the  fact  that  through  this  tower  or  castle  the  fortifica-
tion of  the  city,  or  the  surrounding  wall,  wa,8  filled  or  completed.  It  was  probably  a  well-known
fortress  erected  by  the  Jebusites."     (Keil.)

Ver.  11.  *•  Hiram."  From  2  Chron.  ii.  2,  and  1  Kings  v.  15,  it  seems  clear  that  this  is  the
same  man  who  was  afterwards  Solomon's  ally.  Hence  some  have  supposed  that  this  embassy
was  not  sent  until  a  long  time  after  the  conquest  of  Zion,  and  that  the  arrangement  of  the  events
in  this  chapter  is  "topical  rather  than  strictly  chronoh  gi>;al  "  {Ktil.)  As  Hiram  was  still
reigning  twenty  years  after  the  erection  of  tne  temple  (1  Kings  ix.  10),  Keil  jilaces  this  embassy
from  six  to  ten  years  after  David's  accession  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  entire  kingdom.  "  Cedar
trees."  The  eastern  part  of  Lebanon  (Antilibanus),  which  belonged  to  Israel,  did  not  produce
cedar  trees  ;  but  the  north-western  range,  belonging  to  Phenicia,  was  then  covered  with  cedar
forests.

Ver.  13.  "Out  o^"  etc.     In  Jerusalem,  as  in  1  Chron.  xiv.

Ver.  14.  "  Shammuah,"  etc.  These  are  the  sons  of  Bathsheba,  although  there  is  a  slight
difference  in  the  termination  of  two  of  the  names  in  1  Chron.  iii.  5.

Vers.  15  and  16.  There  are  seven  names  here  and  nine  in  1  Chron.  iii.  Keil  suggests  that
the  two  first-named,  Eliphat  and  Nogah,  died  in  infancy,  and  that  two  younger  children  received
the  same  names.

Ver.  17.  "To  the  hold."  Keil  and  others  understand  this  to  refer  to  some  mountain
fortress  outside  the  citadel  of  Zion,  and  Keil  further  contends  that  this  event  must  have  there-
fore taken  place  before  the  Jebusites  were  driven  out,  as  it  is  most  unlikely  David  would  have
quitted  the  fortification  to  attack  the  enemy.  Erdmann  considers  that  it  refers  to  the  citadel
itself,  and  thinks  the  expression  ^' went  down^'  is  not  against  this  view,  for,  "thou-h  the  citadel
was  so  high  than  one  ascended  from  it  on  all  sides,  ytt  its  jilateau  was  by  no  means  a  hoiizontal
plain,  but  was  made  up  of  higher  and  lower  parts,  and  David  of  course  made  his  residence  upon
the  highest  and  safest  part,  the  most  favourable  position  for  a  military  outlook,  while  the  fortifi-
cations must  have  ntcessarily  lain  upon  the  relatively  lower  north-western  side,  and  with  this  agrees
the  fact  that  the  Philistines  advanced  to  the  attack  from  the  west.'^  Maurer  remarks,  "David
was  not  yet  certain  whether  to  defend  himself  at  the  walls,  or  to  advance  to  meet  the  enemy."

Ver.  18.  "Valley  of  Rephaim."  Many  writers  identify  this  locality  with  a  fruitful  plain
nearly  three  miles  long  by  two  wide,  lying  to  tiie  south-west  of  Jerusalem,  and  only  separated  from
the  valley  of  Hinnom  by  a  narrow  ridge  of  land.  But  Mr.  <-iiove  (Bih.  Livtimary)  contends
that  it  does  not  answer  to  the  description  of  the  Hebrew  word,  which  always  designates  an
enclosed  valley.  It  was  the  scene  ot  some  of  David's  most  remarkable  adventures.  It  doubtless
derived  its  name  from  the  ancient  Rephaim,  ov  giants.     (Josh.  xv.  8,  etc.)

Ver.  20.  " Baal-perazim."  Tha -^l^ce  oi  hreaches,  or  hursts .  (See  ver.  20.)  "There  may
have  been  previously  a  sanctuary  of  Baal  on  this  spot."     {^Bib.  Diet.)

Ver.  21.  "  Images."  Probably  small  tutelary  deities  which  they  brought  with  them  into
the  field  for  protection.

Ver.  23.  '•  Mulberry  trees."  "  Baca-shrubs."  From  baca,  to  weep.  Hence  either  some
drooping  tree  like  the  weeping  willow,  or  one  which  sheds  gum  like  the  balsam.  'I'he  Arabs
now  give  the  name  to  a  tree  of  the  latter  kind,  from  which,  if  a  leaf  is  broken  off,  there  flows
sap  like  a  white  tear.

Ver  24.  "The  sound  of  a  going."  As  if  an  army  was  advancing.  "The  word  signifies
a  majestic  stately  tread  or  stepping,  often  used  of  God.  (Psa.  ixviii.  7.)  {Tr.  of  Lange's
Commentai*y. )

Ver.  25.  "Geba."  Probably  Gibeah  of  Saul  or  of  Benjamin,  a  city  to  the  north  of
Benjamin,  the  present  /«6a.  "Gazer,"  or  Gezer,  at  the  extreme  north  of  the  Philistine
country.

296


OiiAP.  V.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.

MAIN  IIOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH.—  Verses  1-5.

David  chosen  King  over  all  Israel.

T.  Those  who  prove  their  r-ght  to  rule  by  their  conduct  will  in  due  time
find  subjects  to  maintain  their  sovereignty.  The  divine  right  of  kings  must
1)0  sought  and  found  in  what  men  are  and  in  what  they  have  done  or  can  do.
Those  who  claim  to  be  leaders  and  rulers  of  men  claim  to  be  God's  vicegerents,
and  as  such  must  produce  their  credentials — proofs  of  intellectual  and  moral
worth.  If  no  man  can  represent  a  human  monarch  without  credentials,  much
more  are  they  to  be  deuianded  when  a  man  assumes  the  headship  of  a  nation  or
a  community  and  claims  authority  over  it  in  the  name  of  the  King  of  kings.
And  those  of  character  and  ability  are  the  only  ones  that  will  be  accepted  in  the
long  run,  and  none  but  these  will  command  an  allegiance  worth  having.  David
had  to  wait  long  before  the  whole  nation  recognised  his  right  to  reign,  but  in  all
these  years  of  waiting  he  was  adding  to  his  credentials,  and  by  a  series  of  brave
and  righteous  deeds  was  increasing  the  strength  of  his  claim  to  the  throne  until
it  became  irresistible,  and  the  whole  nation  was  forced  to  acknowledge  that  he
whom  God  had  chosen  to  shepherd  it  was  fully  worthy  of  the  high  honour  to
which  he  was  called.  So  it  has  ever  been  and  will  be.  Although  no  prophet  is
sent  to  anoint  the  head  of  him  whom  God  now  calls  to  similar  service,  yet  every
divinely  ai)pointed  king  of  men,  possessing  as  he  does  these  qualifications  to
rule,  will  in  due  time  be  placed  upon  a  throne  by  willing  subjects.

II.  The  special  qualifications  demanded  by  God  in  a  king  or  ruler.     God

expresses  His  idea  of  the  relationship  of  a  king  to  His  people  by  the  use  of  the
word  she})herd,  and  thus  entirely  removes  the  office  from  that  of  the  despot  who
uses  his  people  for  his  own  selHsh  ends  instead  of  using  his  life  for  their  welfare.
We  learn  from  the  words  of  Jacob,  in  Gen.  xl.  34  sq.,  what  were  the  duties  of
an  Eastern  shepherd,  and  how  stern  was  the  life  he  led — how  far  removed  his
h)t  was  from  one  of  indolence  and  self-indulgence.  This  is  the  symbol  which
the  Divine  King  uses  when  speaking  of  David,  and  repeats  constantly  in  the
Old  Testament  writings  to  show  what  He  demands  from  those  whom  He  calls  to
rule.  Such  a  call  does  not  mean  exemption  from  care  and  toil,  but  a  large
incroase  of  such  bunions.  In  His  eyes  the  honour  is  not  in  being  served,  but  in
rendcrini;-  .service,  and  the  larger  sj)liere  and  the  more  elevated  position  involve
heavier  duties  and  larger  qualifications.  Shepherds  of  men  are  expected  to  be
willing  to  follow  the  example  of  the  Great  Sliopherd,  who  proved  Himself  the
true  King  of  men  by  giving  Himself  for  the  flock.  And  for  this  work  a
special  knowledge  is  also  needed.  As  a  man  must  be  posse.ssed  of  some  special
knowledge  to  be  a  successful  shepherd,  so  a  ruler  of  men  must  be  possessed  of
special  knowledge.  Christ  is  the  pre-eminent  ruler  of  men  because  He  knows
them — because  He  needs  not  that  any  should  "  testify  of  any  man"  whom  He
is  shepherding.  (John  ii.  25,  x.  14).  And  it  behoves  him  who  is  called  by  God
to  be  an  under-shepherd  to  make  men  in  general — and  especially  tho.se  under
his  care — the  objects  of  his  thoughtful  study,  that  he  may  become  acquainted
with  their  dis[)0.sitions  and  needs.  To  do  this  he  must  have  also  a  loving
sympathy  with  theni.  We  are  none  of  usstrangers  to  the  feeling  of  regard  which
often  springs  up  in  men  towards  animals  dependent  on  them,  and  therefore  we
can  imagine  that  a  faithful  shepherd  has  some  affection  for  his  sheep.  This  is
indispensable  in  human  sheiJierds,  for  to  love  men  is  to  understand  them,  and  to
love  them  is  to  be  willing  to  suffer  for  them,  and  will  beget  love  in  return  in  any
men  worthy  of  the  name.  The  Groat  Shepherd  had  as  much  love  for  men  as
He  had  knowledge  of  them,  and  therefore  ''all  kings  shall  fall  down  befors
Ilim,  all  nations  shall  serve  Him.''  (Psa.  Ixxii.  II).  Every  elevation  in  life
brings  with  the  honour  a  due  proportion  of  iticreased  duties  and  responsibilities,
and  such  an  exaltation  as  that  wliich  David  experienced  was  heavdy  weighted
with  them.

297


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


BOOK  11.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Ver.  5.  During  all  this  time  he  was
sedulously  engaged  in  completing  the
disciphne  of  the  rough  men  who  liad
shared  his  desert  fortunes,  and  preparing
them  for  the  higher  service  on  which
they  were  afterwards  to  enter.  Can
we  imagine  a  position  hetter  adapted
for  this  purpose  ?    For  was  it  not  the


divine  hand.  But  it  is  not  different
yet.  Success  is  not  usually  a  sudden
thing,  or,  if  it  be  so,  it  is  not  a  whole-
some thini,^  Generally  speaking,  it  is
a  matter  of  time,  and  trial,  and  dili-
gence, and  study.  The  lieat  of  the
conservatory,  which  brings  the  flower
rapidly  to  maturity,  does  also  nurse  it


most  sacred  place  in  the  whole  country  ?      into  weakness,  so  that  its  beauty  is  only


Was  it  not  on  that  very  ground  .  .  .
that  for  more  than  two  centuries  their
ancestors  had  guarded  their  high
deposit,  maintained  the  divine  testi-
mony, and  manifested  the  divine  order
of  human  life  ?     Did  not  the  treasured


short-lived  ;  but  the  plant  that  grows
in  the  open  air  is  strengthened  while  it
grows,  and  is  able  to  withstand  even
the  bitinc^  winter's  cold.  Resistance  is
necessary  to  the  development  of  power  ;
and  the  greatest  misfortune  that  can


sepulchre  there,  upon  that  hill,  which  befall  a  youth  is  to  have  no  difficulties

was  already  ancient  and  worn,  with  the  whatever  with  which  to  contend.    It  is

passing   of  eleven   centuries   over   its  by  overmastering  obstacles  that  a  man's

covered  surface,  contain  their   dust  ?  character  is  mainly  made.     Hence,  let

— Drew.  no  one  be  discouraged  who  is  called  in

Not  all  at  once  did  David  pass  from  early  life  to  struggle  with   adversity.

the  shepherd  life  of  Bethlehem  to  the  He  is  thereby  only  making  himself  for

throne  of  Jerusalem.    There  was  a  long,  his  future  life-work.     Not  in  a  day,  nor

and   weary,    and    trying    road   to   be  in  a  year,  nor  in  many  years,  do  we

traversed  by  him  after  his  anointing  by  reach   the   throne   of  our   individual

Samuel,  before  he  reached  the  lofty  power,  the  sphere  of  our  personal  and

elevation  for  which  he  was  designated  peculiar  labour.    We  graduate  up  to  it

and  consecrated  by  the  prophet's  oil.  through  trial,  and  each  new  difficulty

He  was  not   cradled   in   luxury,   nor  surmounted  is  not  only  a  new  step  in

dandled  in  affluence,  but  his  character  the   ladder  upward,   but  also   a  new

was  hardened  by  trial,  and  his  judg-  qualification    for    the    work    that    ia

ment  was  matured  by  frequently  recur-  before   us

ring  emergency.  From  the  very  first,  Nor  does  this  principle  hold  merely
indeed,  he  was  "prudent  in  matters,"  of  the  early  part  of  our  earthly  life  as
but  such  a  history  as  his  could  not  but  related  to  the  later.  It  will  be  illus-
stimulate  and  sharpen  his  natural  trated  also  in  our  earthly  life  as  con-
abilities.  His  military  genius,  which  nected  with  a  heavenly.  If  we  be
was  destined  yet  to  show  itself  on  many  Clirist's,  it  is  no  doubt  true  that  He  is
a  glorious  field  as  he  extended  his  preparing  a  place  for  each  of  us  ;  but
dominion  "  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  it  is  just  as  true  that,  through  the  dis-
the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  land,"  had  cipline  of  our  daily  difficulties,  he  is
been  quickened  and  developed  by  his  preparing  each  of  us  for  our  own  par-
experiences  in  the  long  war  with  the  ticular  place  ;  and  the  characters  we
house  of  Saul  ;  and  his  knowledge  of  are  forming  here  will  find  their  appro-
human  nature,  an  acquirement  so  need-  priate  employment  and  development  in
lul  for  one  who  was  to  be  a  ruler  of  men,  the  work  which  in  heaven  will  be
had  been  increased  by  his  dealing  with  assigned  to  us.  .  .  .  Thus  by  the
his  followers  in  the  hold,  and  with  his  leverage  of  this  principle  we  lift  our
enemies  in  diplomacy ;  while,  best  of  earthly  lives  up  to  the  very  level  of
all,  his  confidence  in  God  had  been  heaven  itself ;  and  every  exi)erience  we
strengthened  by  his  manifold  trials,  in  are  ])assing  through  now  becomes  a
and  through  which  he  had  been  sus-  ])reparation  for  our  eternal  royalty  at
tained  by  the  divine  grace,  and  out  of  Christ's  right  hand. — laijlor^
which  he  had  been  delivered  by  the
293


CflAP.V.  nOMlLETIC  COM.IfBNTARY:  SAMUEL.

MAJN  IWMILETICS  OF  TUE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  6-25.

The  Conqui;st  of  Jerusalem  and  the  Defeat  of  the  Philistine.

I.  Man's  trre  security  and  strength  lies  not  in  his  possession  of  the  seen,
but  in  his  relation  to  the  unseen.  When  David  and  his  men  advanced  upon
the  fortified  city  of  Jerusalem,  all  appearances  were  against  tliein  and  for
the  Jebusites.  To  the  eye  of  sense  it  seemed  imi)ossil'le  tiiat  this  hitherto
impregnable  fort  shonhl  yield  to  the  attack  of  any  army.  When  we  remember
what  it  cost  the  legions  of  Rome  to  reduce  it  by  siege,  we  can  form  some  idea
how  altogether  unlikely  it  ai)peared  that  such  a  force  as  that  which  David  led
could  carry  it  by  assault.  If  tiiere  had  been  no  agencies  at  work  beyond  those
which  ap[)ealed  to  the  eye  of  sense,  we  can  well  believe  that  the  boast  of  the
Jebusites  would  have  been  justified  by  the  result.  But  a  power  was  with  the
men  of  Israel  of  which  the  dwellers  in  Jerusalem  took  no  account.  The  God
of  battles  was  on  the  side  of  the  former,  and  He  had  decreed  that  for  purposes
of  mercy  to  the  world  at  large,  the  stronghold  of  Zion  should  become  the  city
of  David.  It  was  not  gained  by  him  by  strength  of  arm  or  skill  in  warfare,
but  given  to  him  as  a  servant  of  the  Lord  God  of  Hosts.  And  when  he  was
established  there  he  dwelt  securely,  not  by  reason  of  the  towers  and  walls  which
he  built  round  about,  but  because  the  same  God  established  and  exalted  him
for  His  people's  sake.  But  though  we  read  that  David  perceived  this  truth
(verse  12),  is  there  not  reason  to  fear  that  his  trust  in  the  unseen  and  real  was
far  from  perfect  and  undivided  ?  In  the  multiplication  of  wives  and  concubines,
after  the  manner  of  the  heathen  nations,  there  seems  to  be  a  reaching  out  after
some  apparent  but  unreal  sources  of  strength,  which  afterwards  proved  them-
selves to  be  indeed  elements  of  insecurity  and  weakness.  Assuming  that  his
action  in  this  matter  must  have  been  prompted  in  great  measure  by  political
motives,  and  remembering  the  disastrous  consequences  which  followed,  we  learn
how  fatal  is  any  attempt  to  look  for  success  and  security  anywhere  but  in  the
service  of  God.

II.  The  enemies  of  God's  kingdom  on  the  earth  are  undaunted  and  persevering
in  the  face  of  continued  defeats.  The  conquest  of  the  Jebusites,  although  so
striking  and  complete,  did  not  prevent  the  Philistine  host  from  seeking  David,
and  the  entire  rout  of  their  army  at  Baal-perazim  did  not  discourarge  them
from  coming  up  yet  again.  In  the  struggle  that  is  ever  waging  between  the
Church  of  God  and  her  foes,  the  servants  of  God  have  ever  found  their
enemies  as  undaunted  by  reverses  as  were  these  people  by  the  previous  successes
of  David.  It  might  have  been  thought  that  his  name,  associated  as  it  had  so
often  been  with  such  signal  disaster  to  this  nation,  wouM  have  ensured  to  him
exemption  from  their  attacks,  but  this  was  so  far  from  being  the  case  that  they
hesitated  not  to  attack  him  even  now  when  his  position  was  stronger  and  his
followers  more  numerous  than  ever.  The  courage  and  pertinacity  of  these
Philistines  were  worthy  of  a  better  cause,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  many  a
host  since  which  has  arrayed  itself  against  the  Lord  and  against  His  anointed.
The  history  of  the  world  plainly  teaches  us  that  it  is  not  only  those  who  fight
for  God  and  right  who  can  persevere  in  the  face  of  defeats,  for  their  opponents
have  often  proved  to  be  equal  to  them  in  this  respect.  It  behoves  them  to  see
to  it  that  they  never  surpass  them.

III.  Those  who  follow  God's  commands  will  have  Him  go  before  with
needful  help.  In  both  the  instances  before  us,  David,  as  was  his  custom,  asked
guidance  from  above.  By  this  act  he  acknowledged  that  he  did  not  trust  in  his
boWj  and  that  he  knew  his  sword  could  not  save  him  (Psa.  xl.  6),  and  that  he
went  forth  now,  as  in  the  days  of  his  youth  (1  Sam.  xvii.  45),  only  as  the  servant

299


■OMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


BOOK  II.


of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel.  And  tlie  result  of  tliis  reverent  waiting  upon  God
for  direction  was  what  it  always  was  and  ever  will  he.  God  never  commands
His  people  to  go  where  He  will  not  go  before  them,  and  never  sends  them  to
battle  for  Him  at  their  own  chnrges.  But  while  they  see  to  it  that  they  keep
close  to  the  Divine  directions  and  patiently  fulfil  the  conditions  ini])o.sed  by
Divine  wisdom,  they  must  be  energetic  in  doing  their  part,  and  "bestir"
(ver.  24)  themselves  to  make  use  of  the  intervention  of  God  on  their  behalf.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


Ver.  9.  The  establishment  of  David's
capital  .  .  .  illustrates  the  principles
upon  which  his  kingdom  stood,  and
shows  wherein  it  differed  from  the
great  Asiatic  empires  which  were  con-
tem[)orary  with  it.  The  first  sign  of
the  unity  of  these  monarchies  was  the
building  of  some  great  city  .  .  .  the
inhabitants  felt  they  were  a  people
because  they  were  encompassed  with
walls  .  .  .  The  commonwealth  of
Israel  began  in  open  plains  and  pas-
tures. A  single  man,  who  had  not  a
foot  of  earth  for  his  possession,  was  its
founder.  .  .  Only  after  centuries  of
conflicts,  discomfitures,  humiliations,
they  acquired  a  king,  and  a  city  which
he  could  make  the  centre  of  their  tribes
....  Here  are  the  two  kinds  of
civilisation  ;  the  civic  life  is  in  one  the
beginning,  in  the  other  the  result  of  a
long  process.  But  in  the  first  you
have  a  despotism  which  becomes  more
expansive  and  oppressive  from  day  to
day  ...  in  the  other  sometimes  a
weary  struggle,  but  it  is  the  struggle
of  spirits,  a  struggle  for  life.  And  God
Himself  is  helping  that  struggle  .  .  .
and  bringing  out  of  confusion  a  real,  at
last  even  something  of  a  visible  and
outward  unity. — Maurice.

Ver.  12.  This  language,  some  may
think,  would  have  been  more  suitable
and  pious  if  an  extraordinary,  evidently
miraculous,  event  had  raised  David  to
the  throne  of  Israel.  Such  an  event
might  have  enabled  him  to  perceive
that  he  was  divinely  elected  to  reign  ;
he  might  have  continued  to  reign  with
the  same  comfortable  assurance.  But
he  appears  to  have  risen  quite  as  slowly
— under  the  same  course  of  accidents —
as  other  leaders.  .  ,  .  What  man
300


who  has  not  taken  some  very  outra-
geous method  of  establishing  his  power,
might   not    say    that   the    Lord   had
bestowed  his  dominion    upon  him,   if
that  phrase   became   the   lips   of  the
shepherd  sovereign  ?   This  is  a  question
which  I  am  not  able  to  answer.     I  do
not  know  what  king  might  not  safely
adopt  these  words  and  ought  not  to
adopt  them.     The  danger,  I  fancy,  is
in  the  idle  use  of  them  when  no  definite
meaning  is  attached  to  them.     So  far
from  admitting  that  David  would  have
had  more  right  to  think  and  speak  as
he  did,  if  some  angel  suddenly  appear-
ing had  placed   the   crown   upon  his
head,  I  apprehend  that  the   strength
and  liveliness  of  his  conviction  arose
from     .     .     .     the  successiveness,  the
continuity,  of  the  steps  in  his  history,
which   assured   him  that  God's  hand
had  been  directing  the  whole.      One
startling  event  .  .  .  he  might  have  re-
ferred to  chance,  or  to  the  rare  irregular
interference  of  an  omnipotent  Being.
Only  such  a  Being  as  the  Lord  God  of
Abraham     .     .     .     could  have  woven
the  web  of  his  destinies.    .     .     .    The
two  clauses   of  the  sentence  are  in-
separably connected.      A  government
which  a  man  wins  for  himself  he  uses
for  himself.     That  which  he  inwardly
and  practically  acknowledges  as  con-
ferred upon  him  by  a  righteous  Being
cannot  be  intended  for  himself.    .    .    .
The  deepest  lesson  which  David  had
learnt  was  that  he  himself  was  under
government  ;    that  in   his  heart   and
will   was   the   inmost    circle   of    that
authority   which   the  winds   and   the
sea,  the  moon  and  the  stars,  obeyed.
.     To  understand  that  the  em-
pire over  wills  and  hearts  is  the  highest
which  man  can  exercise,  because  it  is


CHAP.  V.  nOMILETlC  00}f^fEXTARY:    SAMUEL.


the  highest  whicli  God  exercises  ;  to  bulwark  of  science    falsely    so   called

understand  tliat  liis  empire  cannot  be  withstands  this. — Krummacher.
one  of  rough  compulsion,  because  God's

is  not   of  that  kind  ;    to  understand         Verses  22-25.      We  cannot  but  be

that  the  necessity  for  stern,  quick,  in-  struck,  in  thisnarratiye,  with  the  humble

evitable  punishment,   arises  from   the  piety  of  David  in  asking  guidance  from

unwillingness  of  men  to  abide  under  a  the  Lord,  and  with  his  willingness  im-

yoke  of  grace  and  gentleness;  to  un-  plicitly  to  obey  the  commands  which

derstand   that  the  law  looks  terrible  he  received.  Nor  can  we  fail  to  observe

and  overwheluiing  to  the  wrong-doer,  the  clear  and   explicit   nature  of  the

just  because  he  has  shaken  off  his  rela-  answers  which  he  received  from  theUrim

tion   to  the   Person    from   whom   law  and  Thummim.    The  ancient  heathens

issues,  in  whom  dwells  all  humanity  had  their  oracles  in  connection  with  the

and  sympathy,  all  forgiveness  and  re-  temples  in  which  they  worshipped  their

claiming  mercy — this  was  the  highest  divinities  ;  but  the  responses  given  at

privilege  of  a  Jewish  king,  that  upon  these  places   to  those  who  consulted

which  the  rightful  exercise  of  all  his  them  were  generally  expressed  so  am-

functions  depended. — Maurice.  biguously  that  no  great  guidance  was

given  by  them,  and  they  could  not  be

Vers.   23,  24.     The  rustling  of  the  falsified  by  any  event But

Lord's  approaching  help  in  the  tops  of  here,  in  the  replies  given  by  the  sacred

the  trees.     1.  Dost  thou  wait  for  it  at  breastplate,    there     is    no    obscurity.

His  bidding  ?     2.    Dost  thou   hear  it  Everything  is  definite  and  clear,  and

with  the  right  heed?     3.  Dost  thou  David  could  have  no  hesitation  as  to

understand  it  in  the  right  sense  ?    4.  his  duty  in  each  case.  Of  course,  there

Dost  thou  follow  it  without  delay? —  is  not  now  any  such  means  of  obtaining

Langes  Commentary.  the  unerring  guidance  of  God  as  David

These  words  are   important  for  us  then  enjoyed,  in  so  far  as  the  contin-

also,  in  a  figurative  sense,  in  our  war-  gencies  of  our  daily  lives  are  concerned;

fare  with  the  children  of  unbelief  in  but  still,  in  answer  to  prayer,  God  will

this  world.     They  teach  us  that  in  our  lead  us  in  the  right  way,  provided  only

own   strength,   and   merely   with    the  we  unfeignedly   commit   ourselves   to

human  weapons  of  reason  and  science,  Him,  and  willingly  accept  His  direction

we  are  not  to  make  war  against  the  step  by  step.     Here  is  the  warrant  on

adversary.     Success  can  only  be  calcu-  which  every  one  of  us  is  entitled   to

lated  upon  when  the  conflict  is  under-  proceed  :  **  If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,

taken  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  let  him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  all

Spirit  of  God,  breathed  forth  and  in  men  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not,  and

the   immediate  blessed  experience  of  and  it  shall  be  given  him."     Let  us,

the  izracious  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  therefore,  use  the  Bible  and  the  throne

of  the  truth  of  his  Word.     Then  there  of  grace  as  David  employed  the  Urim

breaks  forth  from  our  hearts  that  which  and  Thummim,  and  we  may  depend

we   call  "  testimony  ;  "  —  a   speaking  upon  it  that,  even  as  "the  sound  of  a

from  the  present  enjoyment  of  salva-  going  in  the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees'*

tion  ;  a  speaking  arising  from  a  com-  indicated  to  him  when  he  was  to  ad-

prehensive,  vital,  powerful  conception  vance,  there  will  be  something,  either

of  the  infallibility  of  that  for  which  the  within  ourselves  or  in  the  arrangement

nndi!rtn,king  has  been  begun  ;  a  speak-  of    God's  providence   external   to  us,

i>)g  of  the  whole  animated  personality.  which  will  guide  us. — Taylor^
This  breaks  through  the  enemy.     No


801


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  ii.


CHAPTER  VI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes. — Verse  1.  "Chosen  Men."  Keil  understands  this
assembly  to  have  been  composed  of  ie])reseiitatives  of  tbe  iitii-e  nation,  but  the  use  of  the  word
cyain  seems  to  point  to  a  military  gathering.  Thenius  remarks  that  we  learn  from  this  "that
David  already  in  a  certain  sense  maintained  a  standing  army."

Ver.  2.  "  All  the  people,''  etc.  "  These  are  not  the  above-named  thirty  thousand  warriors,
but  besides  them,  the  representatives  of  the  whole  nation  gathered  to  the  festival  as  described
in  1  Chron.  xiii.  1-16,  where  nothing  is  said  of  a  military  Ixxly  ;  while  here  in  our  passage  the
preliminary  conference  with  the  heads  of  families  is  passed  over,  and  only  a  summary  statement
m;ide  as  to  the  accompaniment  of  the  ark  by  the  people."  ( Erdmann. )  "  Baale  of  Judah."
From  1  Chron.  xiii.  6,  we  know  that  this  was  Kirjuth  jt  arim  where  the  ark  was  carried  before
the  death  of  Samuel.  It  still  retained  its  ancient  Oanaanitish  name  (Josh.  xv.  9,  60)  in  con-
junction with  the  one  given  by  the  Israelites.  "  It  lay  on  the  border  between  Judah  and
IWnjamin,  westward  on  the  border  of  the  latter  tribe  and  about  eight  miles  west  of  Jerusalem."
(Erdmann.)  ""Whose  name,"  etc.  The  rendering  of  this  phrase  is  difficxilt  ;  it  is  probably
"orer  which,  or  upon  which,  the  Name  is  called  (or  invoiced)  the  Name  of  Jehovah,  etc.  '*  The
name  of  God  denotes  all  the  operations  of  God  through  which  Tie  attests  His  personal  presence
in  that  relation  into  which  he  has  entered  to  man,  i.e.,  the  wh(.]e  of  His  divine  self-manifestation,
or  of  that  side  of  the  divine  nature  which  is  turned  towards  men." — {Ilerzoj.)

Ver.  3.  **  A  new  cart."  This  mode  of  conveyance  was  in  dii-ect  opposition  to  the  Divine
requirement  (Numb.  vii.  9),  and  was  probably  borrowed  from  a  custom  of  the  Philistines  and
others,  who  are  supposed  to  have  had  sacred  caits  on  which  to  cany  about  their  gods.
•*  A binadab."  The  ark  had  been  standing  in  the  bouse  <.f  Abinadab  from  the  time  when  the
Philistines  sent  it  back  into  the  land  of  Israel,  i.e.,  about  seventy  years,  viz.,  twenty  to  the
victory  of  Ebejiezer  (1  Sam.  vii ),  forty  j'ears  under  Samuel  and  Saul,  and  about  ten  years  under
David.  Till  fuitlnr  statement  that  Uzzah  and  Ahio,  sons  of  Abinadab,  drove  the  cart  may
easily  be  rec(<iiciied  with  this.  These  two  sons  were  either  born  about  the  time  when  the  ark
was  taktn  to  Abinadab's  hiiuse,  «  r  at  a  subsequt  nt  period  ;  or  else  the  term  sons  is  used,  as  is
frequently  the  case,  in  the  sense  of  grandsons.     {Keil  and  others.)     *'  Gibeah,"  rather,  the  hill.

Ver.  4.  "Accompanying  the  ark."  Literally,  with  the  ark.  This  sentence  not  fitting
the  sense,  most  critics  suppose  a  copyist's  error,  and  omit  either  the  whole  of  ver.  4,  or  the  first
clause  of  it.

Ver.  5.  "Played."  Literally,  were  sporting,  i.e.,  dancing  to  vocal  and  instrumental  music.
"All  manner  of  instruments,"  ttc.  Literally,  with  all  manner  of  cypress-woods,  which
makes  no  sense,  hence  many  critics  adopt  the  reading  of  the  Septuagint,  "wiih  might  and  with
som/s,"  as  in  1  Chtoii.  xiii.  8.  "Harps"  {h'nnor).  A  stringed  instrument,  which  apparently
more  resembled  11  >■  {guitar  than  our  modern  harp,  since  it  was  played  on  in  walking.
"Psalteries"  {nil, el).  (See  1  Sam.  x.  5.)  "Timbrel"  {foph).  A  species  of  hand-drum  or
tambourine.  "Cornet"  {menana).  An  instrument  which  consisted  of  two  rods  fastened
together  at  one  end,  upon  which  rings  were  hung  which  made  a  tinkling  sound  when  shaken.

Ver.  6.  "  Nachon's  threshing  floor."  Nachon  is  not  a  proper  name.  Erdmann  translates
"  a  fixed  threshing  floor,"  i.e.,  "  one  which  did  not  change  its  place  like  a  summer  floor  (Dan.  ii.
35),  and  therefore  probably  had  a  roof."  Keil  and  otliers  read  "the  threshng  floor  of  smitiii'f,  or
of  the  stroke,  conjecturiner  that  it  was  so  called  from  the  incident  which  took  place  there.
"  Shook  it."  rather.  Humbled,  thereby  making  it  likely  that  the  cart  would  be  overturned.

Ver.  7.  "  Error."  "  None  could  so  much  as  look  at  the  ark,  much  less  touch  it  (Numb.  iv.
15,  16,  20),  without  peril  of  life."

Ver.  8.  "  Displeased."  "  The  word  denotes  angry  excitement."  (Erdmann.)  On  further
reflection,  David  could  not  fail  to  discover  where  the  cause  of  Uzzah's  offence,  which  he  had
atoned  for  with  his  life,  really  had  lain,  and  that  it  had  ;ic;ually  arisen  from  the  fact  that  he,
(David)  and  those  about  him  had  decided  to  disregard  the  distinct  instructions  of  tjie  law  with
regard  to  the  handling  of  the  ark."  (Keil.)  "  Perez-uzzah,"  or  the  rent  or  bi-each  of  Uzzah.
The  situation  of  this  place  is  unknown,  but  Josephus  says  that  it  retained  its  name  in  his  day.

Ver.  9.  "  Afraid."  "  David's  excitement  at  what  had  occurred  was  soon  changed  into  fear  of
the  Lord."  (Keil.  J  "  Obedcdom  the  Gittite."  A  Levite  of  the  family  of  the  Korahites,  who
descended  from  Kohath  (comp.  Exod.  vi.  16,  18,  21,  with  1  Chron.  xxvi.  4);  he  was  therefore
one  of  the  family  whose  special  duty  it  was  to  bear  the  ark.  He  is  generally  supposed  to  have
been  called  the  Oittite  from  his  birthplace,  the  Levitical  city  of  Gathrimmon,  in  the  tribe  of  Dan
(Josh.  xix.  45).  The  name  of  this  man  is  liteially  serving,  or  servant  of,  Edam.  "  It  may  be
Burmised  that  he,  or  some  ancestor  of  his,  had  once  been  in  servitude  to  the  Edomites."  (Transr,
of  Lanc/e's  Commentary.)

302


cuAV.  vr.


no  MIL  ETIC  CO  MM  EN  TA  R  Y :  SA  M  UEL


VcT.  13.  "  They  that  bare."  This  shows  that.  tti<'  Divine  rcfiuicempnts  were  now  strictly
complied  witli.  (See  1  Cliroii.  xv.  11-15.)  '*  Six  paces."  This  ;s  sotnetiines  understood  to
nieim  th:it  a  fresh  siicrilicc  was  ofTered  at  every  t-ix  llaee^.  but  there  is  notliinu'  in  the  text  to
favour  such  an  assumption— the  plaiik  statement  is  tliat  as  soon  as  the  bearers  had  advanced  the
tirst  six  paces,  the olferiui^s  took  place.     (So  Keil,  Erdmann,  and  others.)

Ver,  14.  "David  d'Hiced."  "As  emotions  of  joy  or  sorrow  exj^ress  themselves  in  move-
ments or  gestures  of  the  b<>dy,  efforts  have  been  made  among  all  n.'tions,  but  especially
among  those  of  the  south  and  east,  in  proportion  as  they  seem  more  d- moustrative,  to  reduce  to
measure  and  to  strengthen  by  unison  the  more  pleasurable — those  of  joy.  The  dance  is  spoken
of  in  holy  Scripture  universally  as  symbolical  of  rejoicing  .  .  .  and  in  the  earlier
period  is  found  combined  with  some  song  or  refrain  (I'^xod.  xv.  20,  etc.)  .  .  .  more
especially  in  those  outbursts  of  popular  fee'ing  which  cannot  find  vent  in  voice  or  gesture
singly.  Nor  is  there  any  more  strongly  popular  element  traceable  in  the  religion  of  the  ancient
Jews  than  the  t)pi)ortunity  so  given  to  a  prophet  or  prophetess  to  enkiuille  enthusiasm  .  .  ,
more  especially  among  the  women,  themselves  most  easily  stirred  and  mo.^t  callable  of  exciting
others.  The  dance  was  regarded  even  by  the  Romans  as  the  wor.-hi}^  of  the  body  .  .  .  and
Plato  cei'tainly  reckons  dancing  as  part  of  gymnastics.  So  far  was  the  feeling  of  the  purest
period  of  antiquity  from  attaching  the  notion  of  effeminacy  to  dancing  that  the  ideas  of  this
and  of  warlike  exercises  are  mutually  interwoven."  (Smith's  Bihlical  I)/< tionary.)  "A  liuen
ephod."  "  The  white  ephod  was,  strictly  speaking,  a  priestly  costume,  although  in  the  law  it  is
not  prescribed  as  the  dress  to  be  worn  by  them  when  performing  their  official  duties,  but  rather
as  the  dress  which  denoted  the  priestly  character  of  the  wearer  (see  at  1  Sam.  xxii.  18)  ;  and
for  this  reason  it  was  worn  by  David  in  connection  with  these  festivities  as  the  head  of  the
priestly  nation  of  Israel."     (Keil.)

Ver.  16.  "Michal,"  etc.  As  has  be<^n  remarked  on  verse  14,  the  women  of  the  Jewish
nation,  and  especially  those  nearly  related  to  the  heroes  of  the  occasion,  were  accustomed  to  take
the  most  prominent  part  in  the  demonstration  (Kxod.  xv.  20,  Judges  xi.  34),  lience  Michal  .should
herself  have  led  the  female  choir  and  have  come  out  to  meet  David  and  the  ark,  and  her  absence
shows,  in  a  very  marked  manner,  her  want  of  r.-ligious  sympathy.  Keil  remarks  that  '*  in
David  she  only  loved  the  brave  hero  and  exalted  king,"  not  the  servant  of  God,

Ver.  17.  "In  his  place,"  etc.  "That  is,  in  the  space  marked  ofiF  according  to  the
tabernacle  which  still  stood  in  Gibeon,  in  the  Holy  of  Holies.^'  (Erdmann.)  "  Wliy  did  not
David  remove  the  mosaic  tabernacle  to  Mount  Zion  at  the  same  time  as  the  ark  of  the  covenant,
and  so  restore  the  divinely-established  sanctuary  in  its  integrity  ?  This  question  can  only  be
answered  by  conjectures.  One  of  the  principal  motives  for  allowing  the  existing  separation  of
the  ark  from  the  tabernacle  to  continue  may  have  been  that,  during  the  time  the  two  sanctuaries
had  been  separated  two  high  priests  had  arisen,  one  of  whom  officiated  at  the  tabernacle  of
Gibeon,  whilst  the  other  (Abiathar)  had  been  the  channel  of  all  Divine  communicati(ms  to  David
during  his  persecution,  and  had  also  officiated  as  high  priest  in  his  camp  ;  so  that  he  could  no
more  think  of  deposing  him  from  the  office  which  he  had  hitherto  filled,  in  conse(iuence  of  the
reorganisation  of  the  legal  worship,  than  he  could  of  deposing  Zadok,  of  the  line  of  Eleazar,  the
officiating  high  priest  at  Gibeon.  Moreover,  David  may  from  the  very  first  have  regarded
the  Service  which  he  instituted  at  Zion  as  merely  a  [)rovisional. arrangement."  (Keil.)  "David
offered."     "  Of  course  nut  in  his  own  person,  but  through  the  priests."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  18.  "  He  blessed,"  etc.  "  Not  the  Aaronic  blessing  (Numb.  vi.  22),  which  pertained
only  to  the  high  priest,  but,  like  Solomon's  (1  Kings  viii.  55),  a  concluding  benedictory  address
to  the  whole  people."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  19.  **A  piece,"  etc.  The  words  of  flesh  have  no  counterpart  in  the  Hebrew  ;  most
translators  read  a  measure  or  cup,  and  may  signify  anything  (probably  here  a  portion  of  the
sacrifice)  measured  out.  A  flagon  of  wine  is  not  in  the  original,  which  ought  to  have  been
rendered  a  grape  or  raisin  cake,  i.e.,  dried  grapes  pressed  into  a  cake.

Ver,  20.  "  Uncovered  himself  in  the  eyes  of  the  hand-maids."  This  means  simply
that  David  exchanged  his  royal  robes  forthesimpleandcomparatively  short  priestly  dress  and  led
the  female  choir  which  Michal  should  have  led  herself.  Some  have  suggested  that  in  the  word
handmaids  Michal  refers  to  the  other  wives  of  David,  of  whom  she  was  probably  jealous.  There
is  no  equivalent  in  Hebrew  to  the  word  skamelessfi/^  and  the  words  naked  and  uncovered  are  often
used  by  sacred  and  other  ancient  writers  in  a  comparative  and  limited  sense.

Ver.  21.  *'  Before  the  Lord."  "  This  expression  denotes  the  holiest  and  highest  point  of
view  whence  David's  procedure  in  this  festival  is  to  be  judged  and  estimated."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  22.  "  I  will  yet  be  more  vile,"  etc.  "  David,  having  opposed  to  Michal's  *  in  the
eyes  of  the  maids '  his  *  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,'  places  himself  before  the  Lord  on  the  same
level  with  the  maids,  expressing  by  the  repeated  witk  (tiauslated  o/ in  Eng.  vers.)  his  fellowship

SOS


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL,  book  ii.

and  eqTiality  with  these  humble  folk  and  pointing  to  the  honour  which  he  with  thera  would  have
before  the  Lord."  {Erdma)in.)  So  also  in  substance  Keil,  though  some  scholars  contend  that
the  Hebrew  proposition  may  be  rendered  of  or  be/ore,  and  explain  that  David  refers  to  the
honour  which  he  received  and  valued  from  those  whom  Michal  despised.

Ver.  23.  "No  child."  As  is  well  known,  the  greatest  humiliation  which  could  befal  any
oriental  woman,  and  especially  one  who  might  have  hoped  to  be  the  mother  of  the  heir  to  the
throne.     Some  have,  however,  supposed  that  she  had  children  before  this  event.

Note. — ^Psalms  xiv.,  xv,,  xxiii.,  and  xxiv.  are  referred  by  Hengstenberg  to  this  occasion
Dean  Stanley  says,  "  No  less  than  seven  Psalms,  either  in  Iheir  traditional  titles,  or  in  the
irresistible  evidence  of  their  contents,  hear  traces  of  this  festival.  The  29th  (by  its  tide  in
the  Sept.)  is  said  to  be  on  the  'going  forth  of  the  tabernacle.'  As  the  tabernacle  was  never
moved  from  Gibeon  in  David's  time,  the  ark  is  probably  meant.  The  others  are  the  15th,  24th,
30th,  68th,  13"ind,  141st."  (See  also  his  remarks  in  the  Suggestive  Comments.)  The  manner
in  which  Psalm  xxiv.  was  probably  sung  is  thus  described  by  Dr.  Kitto  : — "  The  chief  musician,
who  seems  to  have  been  the  king  hinif^elf,  a.pp'iais  to  have  begun  the  sacred  lay  with  a  solemn
and  sonorous  recital  of  tlesesenten.es  'The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof;  the
world,  and  they  that,  dwell  tliei-ein.  *  F«>r  He  hath  founded  it  upon  tlie  seas,  a  id  established  it
upon  the  floods.'  The  chorus  of  vocal  uiusie  appears  then  to  have  t  iken  u|i  the  sonu',  and  sung
the  same  words  in  a  more  tuneful  and  eUiborate  manner;  and  the  instruments  fell  in  with
them,  raising  the  mighty  declaration  to  lieaven.  We  may  presume  that  the  chorus  then
divided,  each  singing  in  their  turns,  and  both  joining  at  the  close,  '  For  He  hath  founded  it
upon  the  seas,  and  established  it  upon  the  fioods.''  This  part  of  the  music  may  be  supposed  to
have  lasted  until  the  procession  reached  the  foot  of  Zion,  or  came  in  sight  of  it,  which,  from  the
nature  of  the  inclosed  site,  cannot  be  till  one  comes  quite  near  to  it.  Then  the  king  nmst  be
supposed  to  have  stepped  forth  and  begun  again,  in  a  solenjn  and  earnest  tone,  '  Who  shall
ascend  into  ihe  hill  of  the  Lord?  or  who  shall  shall  stan.!  in  His  holy  place!'  to  which  the
first  chorus  responds,  '  He  that  hath  clean  hands,  and  a  pure  heart  ;  who  hath  not  lifted  up  his
soul  unto  vanity,  not  sworn  deceitftdly.'  And  then  the  second  chorus  yives  its  reply,  '  He  shall
receive  the  bltssing  from  the  Lord,  and  righteousness  from  the  God  of  his  salvation.'  This  ]>art
of  the  song  may,  in  like  manner,  be  suj>posed  to  have  lasted  till  they  reached  the  gate  of  the
city,  when  the  king  be;-an  again  in  this  grand  and  exalted  sti-ain,  '  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye
gjites  ;  and  be  ye  lifted  up  ye  everlasting  doors  ;  and  the  King  of  glory  shall  come  in  ; '  which
would  be  repeated  then,  in  the  same  way  as  before,  by  the  general  chorus.  The  persons  having
charge  of  the  gates  ask,  '  Who  is  this  King  of  glory  ?'  to  which  the  first  chorus  answers,  '  It  is
Jehovah,  strong  and  mighty  :  Jehovah,  mighty  in  battle  ;  '  which  the  second  chorus  then
repeats  in  like  manner  as  before,  closing  with  the  grand  refrain,  '  He  is  the  king  of  glory  :  He  is
the  King  of  glory.'  We  must  now  suppose  the  iustrumeuts  to  take  up  the  same  notes,  and
continue  sounding  them  to  the  entrance  of  the  tabernacle  (or  tent)  which  David  had  prepared.
There  the  king  again  begins  :  '  Ijift  up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates  ;  and  be  ye  lifted  up,  ye  ever-
lasting doors  ;  and  the  King  of  glory  shall  come  in,'  This  is  followed  and  answered  as  before —
Jill  closing  by  the  iustrumeuts  sounding,  and  the  people  shouting,  *  He  is  the  King  of  glory,' "

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  CHAPTER,

The  Removal  of  the  Ark  to  Zion.

In  this  chapter  we  have —

I.  Extraordinary  religious  emotions  overflowing  into  extraordinary  modes
cf  expression.  When  a  river  lias  been  long  pent  up  and  impeded  in  its  flow,
ilie  reoioval  of  the  dam  at  last  is  the  signal  for  an  extraordinary  ru.sh  of  the
waters — such  a  rush  as  will  make  it  impossible  to  contine  them  within  the
ordinary  and  appointed  channels,  but  muat  for  a  time  cause  them  to  overflow
the  river  banks.  David's  soul  had  long  been  filled  with  deep  gratitude  to  God
for  the  extraordinary  blessings  which  had  been  bestowed  upon  him,  and  this
gratitude  had  kindled  within  him  lofty  and  holy  aspirations  and  desires  which
until  now  he  had  been  unable  fully  to  express.  But  now  that  the  obstacles  are
removed  and  he  finds  himself  established  over  Israel,  elected  alike  by  God  and
man  to  shepherd  the  chosen  peo})le,  his  deep  emotion  breaks  through  all
conventionalities,  and  his  gratitude  for  the  past  and  hope  for  the  future  are  too
deep  and  strong  to  keep  within  the  limits  of  ordinary  expression,  and  the


CHAP.  VI.  IIOMILETW  COMMENT  A  R  Y :   SA  M  UEL.


overflow  of  fueling  imi.st  for  a  time  have  a  wider  cliaiincl.  Tliore  are  ever
and  anon  such  souls  as  that  of  David  rising  above  the  dead  level  of  ordinary
religious  experience,  wlio  are  at  times  the  subjects  of  such  deep  religious
enthusiasm  as  to  demand  extraordinary  and  special  modes  of  expressing  it.

II.  Extraordinary  religious  emotion  expressing"  itself  by  a  deed  of  permanent
and  beneficent  influence.  The  gold  in  the  molten  state  is  gold,  and  has  a
certain  value  ;  but  if  it  is  to  he  useful  to  mankind  the  glowing  liquid  metal
must  pass  into  solid  coin.  So  feeling  is  good,  and  its  outward  and  personal
manifestation  is  lawful  and  right.  But  if  it  begin  and  end  there,  it  is  like
gold  which  is  always  in  the  crucible,  and  never  makes  the  world  the  richer  by
its  existence.  David's  deep  emotion  did  not  expend  itself  in  singing  and  dancing
before  the  L<  rd.  These  were  but  the  accompaniments  to  a  deed  by  which  he
gave  a  permanent  expression  to  his  feelings,  and  brought  down  blessing  upon
all  under  his  influence.  The  removal  of  the  ark  to  Zi(ni  at  the  earliest
opportunity  after  the  settlement  of  the  kingdom  was  not  only  a  testimony  to
David's  own  faith  in  Jehovah,  but  a  call  to  all  Israel  to  restore  the  God  of  their
fathers  to  His  rightful  place  in  their  midst,  and  so  to  build  their  national  unity
upon  a  secure  foundation.  If  we  had  no  other  guarantee  for  the  reality  and
purity  of  David's  religious  fervour,  this  great  national  act  would  be  sufficient  to
show  its  genuineness  and  worth.  Thus  far  we  have  looked  only  at  the  bright
points  of  the  picture  ;  we  must  also  regard  the  shadows  in  it.  The  circumstances
surrounding  the  death  of  Uzz.ih  teach  us —

III.  That  under  the  influence  of  strong  emotion  we  are  in  dangler  of  being
betrayed  into  irreverence.  Tliough  we  allow  the  pent-up  river  some  extension
of  its  ordinary  bounds,  it  must  be  prevented  if  possible  from  exceeding  all  lindts
and  so  becoming  a  means  of  destruction  instead  of  blessing.  But  here  is  the
dithculty  and  the  danger.  So  is  it  with  us  all  when  our  emotional  nature  has
full  sway  over  us  in  matters  connected  with  the  service  and  worship  of  God.
When  we  are  wholly  occupied  in  contem})lating  His  infinite  love  and  condescen-
sion, we  are  apt  to  lose  sight  of  His  awful  holiness  and  majesty,  and  our  joy
betrays  us  into  irreverence  and  neglect  of  some  plain  command.  It  muse  have
been  such  a  transport  of  feeling  which  tended  to  make  David  at  this  time  so
strangely  neglectful  of  God's  express  command  respecting  the  ark.  We  must
not  forget  that  the  general  confusion  of  the  country,  and  the  long  banishment
of  the  ark  from  the  public  service  of  God,  had  no  doubt  tended  to  render  even
the  best  men  less  conversant  with  the  Divine  requirements  than  they  would
have  been  in  happier  times,  but  it  seems  strange  that  such  a  man  as  David
should  not  have  been  careful  to  observe  all  things  written  in  the  book  of  the
law  upon  this  matter.  We  can  only  account  for  it  by  remembering  how  prone  even
good  men  are  to  perform  one  holy  duty  at  the  expense  of  another,  and  either
to  approach  God  in  worship  with  irreverent  familiarity  or  to  stand  too  far  off  in
mere  external  observance  of  forms  and  ceremonies.  From  the  closing  incident
in  the  chapter  we  learn —

IV.  How  impossible  it  is  for  hearts  untouched  by  love  to  God  to  enter
into  the  feelings  of  one  under  its  dominion.  To  Michal  the  transports  of
David  schemed  more  like  the  excitement  of  a  madman,  and  his  expressions  of
deep  feeling  foolish  and  degrading  performances.  But  this  was  because  she
lacked  that  sympathy  with  liim  which  is  the  only  key  to  the  soul  of  another,
and  without  which  all  its  deepest  and  holiest  experiences  must  remain  a
mystery.  And  sympathy  is  only  possilde  where  there  is  some  similarity  of
feeling  and  exj)erience,  and  there  is  none  between  a  godly  and  a  godless  person
upon  tlie  most  vital  and  soul-stirring  subjects.  Michal  could  as  little  enter
into  David's  feelings  as  Judas  could  into  those  of  Mary  when  she  broke  the  box


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  ii.


of  perfume  over  tlie  liead  of  her  Lord,  or  as  Festiis  could  into  those  of  Paul
when  the  prisoner  in  bonds  discoursed  with  such  .uh)\Ying  entliiisiasm  to  tlio.se
who  sat  in  ])onip  uixni  the  judgment  seat.  To  those  who  have  no  spiritual  life
ieligi(ms  fervour  is  looked  upon  either  as  fanaticism  or  hypocrisy,  and  the
purest  actions  attributed  to  the  most  unworthy  motives.  This  is  a  trial  to
which  all  eminent  servants  of  God  are  exi)osed,  and  sonjetiuies,  as  in  the  case
before  us,  it  comes  through  those  who  are  near  and  dear  according  to  the  flesh,
though  far  off  according  to  the  spirit.  "  I'he  natural  man  receiveth  not  the
things  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him ;  neither  can  he
know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned,"    (1  Cor.  ii.  14.)


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  1.  What  a  contrast  to  the  fallen  through  his  neglect,  would  not
<  rdinary  rule  of  public  life,  and  of  the  whole  multitude  have  cried  shame
}irivate  life  too  !  Where  shall  we  find  upon  him  and  perchance  done  worse
the  public  men,  whose  first  concern  is  unto  him  ?  The  Philistines  would  have
for  the  honour  of  God,  and  who  really  blasphemed,  that  the  ark  of  the  God
believe  that  the  favour  of  the  Highest  of  Israel  had  now  at  length  caught  a
is  the  true  palladium  of  their  country's  fall,  as  well  as  their  Dagon  had  formerly
welfare?  Or  when,  in  private  life,  before  the  ark.  Devotion  in  the  people
shall  the  rule  be  reversed,  to  give  to  w^ould  have  been  abated,  religion  scan-
temporal  interests  and  worldly  comforts  dalized,  God's  ordinances  and  holy
the  first  share  of  attention — while  the  mysteries  less  reverenced  and  esteemed,
cause  of  Christ  ...  is  either  wholly  But  infinite  such  pretensions  weigh
neglected,  or  served  with  mere  scraps  nothing,  where  the  law  of  God,  and
and  fragments  ?  "  If  I  be  a  father,  obedience  required  of  man  are  laid  iu
where  is  mine  honour  ?  and  if  I  be  a  the  contrary  scale. — Bp,  Prideaux.
master,  where  is  my  fear  ? — Blaikie.

Ver.  7.     The   special  moral  of  this

Ver.  6.    It  must  be  men's  care  'Hhat  warning  is,  that  no  one,  on  the  plea  of

their  deeds  may  be  made  manifest  that  zeal  for  the  ark  of  God's  Church,  should

they  are  wrought  in  God"  (John  iii.  21).  resort  to  doubtful  expedients  and  un-

Two  things  make  a  good  Christian —  lawful  means  for  the  attainment  of  his

good  actions  and  good  aims.     A  good  end.     Let  him  not  say,  that  for  the

aim  maketh  not  a  bad  action  good,  as  advancement  of  the  Church  of  God,  all

here,  and  yet  a  bad  aim  maketh  a  good  acts  are  pleasing  to  Him.     No  ;  if  the

action  bad,  as  we  see  in  Jehu. — Trapp.  vessel  of  the   Church  is  tossed   with

A  man  would  think  this  act  deserved  storms,  the  disciples  may  not  approach

commendation  rather  than  punishment,  and    touch  Him    with    familiar    irre-

for,  alas !  what  should  he  have  done?  verence  in  order  to  awake  Him    who

'J'he   ark   had   long  sojourned   in   his  sleeps  as  man,  but  who  sees  all  things

father's  house,  and  he  and  his  brother  as  God.   Here  is  the  trial  of  their  faith,

had  done   (at  least  as  he  conceived)  Let  them  tarry  the  Lord's  leisure,  and

acceptable   service  about   it.     Li  this  He  will  rise  and  succour  them,   and

present  removal,  by  the  king's  appoint-  bless  them  for  their  trust  in  Him. —

ment  (at  least  by  his  consent)  as  his  Wordsworth.

brother   went  before  to  guide,  so  his  You  must  rather  leave  the  ark  of  the

place  was  behind  to  attend  and  help.  Church  to  shake,  if  so  it  please  God,

...    He  saw  the  oxen  staL-gering,  the  than   put  unworthy  hands  to  hold  it

cart  shaking,  the  ark  rolling  and  he  up. — Lo7'd  Bacon.
(as  it  should  seem)  next  at  hand,  and  This  interruption  of  a  joyful  festival

who  would  not  have  put  forth  his  hand  was  to  everyone  a  new  admonition,  that

in  «uch  a  case  ?     Had  the  ark  actually  the  kindness  and  grace  of  God  are  never
306


onAP.  VI.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


alone,  but  are  always  accomjiaiiied  by
\\\^  ItoUness.  God  never  permits  it  that
anyone  should  sin,  and  yet,  sinning,
should  rejoice  and  be  glad  before  him.
If  his  benevolence  tends  to  draw  us
aside  to  levity  and  presumption,  we  will
soon  see  Ilim  exchange  gentleness  for
severity,  though  He  thereby  imbitter
to  us  tlie  fairest  day  of  our  lives.  In
educating  us,  God  cares  more  that  we
should  fear  Him  (with  the  more  of  a
child-like  spirit  the  better)  as  the  Holy
One,  and  as  demanding  holiness  in  us,
than  that  we  should  always  prosecute
our  piluirimage-journey  here  below  with
unci  aided  joy.  He  therefore  causes  it
frequently  to  happen  that  we  are
compelled,  in  the  midst  of  the  super-
abundance of  our  prosperity  and  ot  our
joy,  suddenly  to  join  in  the  lamentation
of  Job,  '*  Thou  art  become  cruel  to  me  ;
with  thy  strong  hand  thou  opposest
thyself  against  me." — Krummacher.

Uzzah  here  was  struck  down  at  the
inauguration  of  a  new  era  in  the  Jewish
worship;  and  Ananias  and  Sapphira
were  ])unished  in  the  same  way  in  the
early  infancy  of  the  Christian  Church.

jNow  the  connection  of  this  latter
case  with  that  of  Uzzah  here  will  show
you  how  we  in  these  days  can  be  guilty
of  Uzzah's  sin.  The  Corinthians  were
guilty  of  it  when,  forgetting  the  sacred
character  of  the  Lord's  Sn})per,  they
became  intoxicated  at  the  table  of  the
Lord  ;  and  we  shall  be  guilty  of  it  if,
with  hearts  estranged  from  (j!od,  ancl
lives  which  are  inconsistent  with  His
Word,  we  presume  to  connect  ourselves
with  His  Church,  and  take  part  in  the
management  of  its  affairs.  David,
therefore,  rightly  read  the  meaning  of
the  breach  of  IJzzah  when,  in  addition
to  rectifying  his  error  by  putting  the
ark  on  the  shoulders  of  the  priests,  he
sang  these  words  :  "  Who  shall  ascend
into  the  hill  of  the  Lord?  orwhosliall
stand  in  His  holy  })lace  ?  He  that
hath  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart ;"
and  unless  we  who  are  members  of  the
Church  have  this  character,  we  shall  be
guilty  of  Uzzah's  sin. — Taylor.

Ver.  8.  A  man  di'^pleased  with
God;    thinking    himself    wiser,   more


kind,  more  jn^t  than  God.  Really,
perhaps,  vexed  that  his  grand  solem-
nity was  interrupted,  his  rejoicing
people  disap})ointed,  his  prestige  da-
maged, his  enemies  encouraged.  Often
when  men  complain  of  Providence  on
"high  moral"  grounds,  they  are  in
fact  mainly  influenced  by  some  secret
personal  feeling.  Now  highly  elated
with  spiritual  pride,  at  once  angry  and
self-complacent,  and  presently  dejected,
irritated  and  disposed  to  give  up  alto-
gether. (Ver.  9.)  When  any  pro-
mising religious  enterprise  of  which
we  have  had  the  lead  is  disastrously
interrupted,  we  are  tempted  to  find
fault  with  Providence. — Tr.  of  Langes
Commentary.

Ver.  9.  I  do  not  hear  David  say,
Surely  this  man  is  guilty  of  some  secret
sin  that  the  world  knows  not;  God
hath  met  with  him,  there  is  no  danger
to  us  ;  why  should  I  be  discouraged  to
see  God  just  ?  We  may  go  on  safely
and  pros[)er.  But  here  his  foot  stays,
and  his  hand  falls  from  his  instrument,
and  his  tongue  is  ready  to  tax  his  own
unworthiness  :  ''How  shall  the  ark  of
the  Lord  come  unto  me  ? "  That  heart
is  carnal  and  proud  that  thinks  any
man  worse  than  himself.  David's  fear
stays  his  progress :  perhaps  he  might
have  proceeded  with  good  success,  but
he  dares  not  venture  where  he  sees
such  a  deadly  check.  It  is  better  to
be  too  fearful  than  too  forward  in  those
affciirs  which  do  immediately  concern
God.  As  it  is  not  good  to  refrain  from
holy  businesses,  so  it  is  worse  to  do
them  ill :  awfulness  is  a  safe  interpreter
of  God's  secret  actions,  and  a  wise
guide  of  ours. — Bp.  Hall.

Ver.  11.  See  here  the  courage  and
faith  of  Obed-edom  ;  he  knew  that  the
presence  of  the  ark  had  been  disastrous
to  Dai^on,  and  had  brought  plagues  on
the  Philistines,  and  that  the  men  of
Bethsheinesh  had  been  struck  dead  for
looking  into  it,  and  that  Uzzah  had
been  smitten  for  touching  it  ;  and  yet
he  gladly  welcomed  it  and  harboured
it  for  three  months,  and  God  blessed
him   for   his  faith.     Obed-edom   well

307


nOMILETIO  COMMENTAUY  :  SAMUEL.  book  ri.


knew  that  tliongh  "God is  a  consuming  officious  to   onr    friend   as    after   an

fire  "  to  tliose  who  treat  Hiin  with  irre-  un kindness.— Z^;?.  Hall.

verence,     He  is  infinite  in   mercy  to  Evidently  this  service  was  not  looked

those  who  obey  Him.     The  Gadarenes,  on  as  a  toilsome  one,  but  as  a  bappy

smitten  with  fear,  besought  Jesus  to  occasion,  admirably  adapted  to  raise

depart  out  of  tlieir  coasts,  and  we  do  the  spirits  and  clieerthe  heart.     What

not  hear  tliat  He  ever  visited  them  was  the  nature  of  the  service?    .     ,     ,

again.   But  Zaccheus,  animated  by  love,  In  spirit  it  was  bringing  God  into  iha

received  him  ghidly,  and  Jesus  said,  very  midst  of  the  nation ;  and  on  the

**  This  day  is  salvation    come  to  tbis  most  prominent  pedestal  the  country

bouse."     (Luke  xix.    9.)     All  divine  now  supplied,  setting  up   a  constant

things  are  set,  as  Cbrist  Himself  was,  memento  of  the  presence  of  the  Holy

**for  the  fall  and  rising  again  of  many  One.     .     .     To  those  who  knew  Him

in   Israel"  (Luke  ii.  34),  they  are  a  as  tbeir  reconciled  Father,  the  service

savour  (or  odour)  of  death  unto  death  was    inexpressibly    attractive.      Why

to  those  who  reject  or  despise  them,  should  there  not  be  more  joy  in  the

but  "an  odour  of  life  unto  life"  to  worship  of  this  gracious  God  ?     Why

those  who  love  them.     (2  Cor.  ii.  16).  should  our  praises  not  be,  at  times  at

—  Wordsworth.  least,  more  lively,  fitted  to  express  and

While  the  ark  brought  the  plague  deepen    such    feelings    of    exuberant

everyone  was  glad  to  be  rid  of  it ;  but  delight  in  the  presence  of  a  covenant

when  it  brought  a  blessing  to  Obed-  God? — Blaikie,
edom,  they  looked  upon  it  as  worthy

of  entertainment.     Many  will   own  a  Vers.  13-19.     This  was  the  greatest

blessing  ark,  a  prospering  truth;  but  day  of  David's  life.     Its  significance  in

he  is  an  Obed-edom  indeed  that  will  his  career  is  marked  by  his  own  pre-

own  a  persecuted,  tossed,  banished  ark.  eminent  position  :    Conqueror,    Poet,

— Trapp.  Musician,  Priest,  in  one.  .     .     .     But

the  Psalms  which  directly  and  indirectly

Ver.  12.    When  pious  men  who  have  spring  out  of  this  event  reveal  a  deeper

been  betrayed  into  unwarrantable  con-  meaning  than  the  mere  outward  ritual,

duct  have  had  time  for  self-examina-  It  was  felt  to  be  a  turning  point  in  the

tion,    searching    the    Scriptures    and  history  of  the  nation.     It  recalled  even

prayer,  they  will  discover  and  confess  the  great  epoch  of  the  passage  through

their  mistakes  and  be   reduced   to  a  the  wilderness.     It  awoke   again  the

better  temper ;  they  will  justify  God  inspiriting  strains  of  the  heroic  career

in  His  corrections  ;  they  will  be  con-  (Psa.  Ixviii.  7-9,  comp.  Judges  v.  4)  of

vinced  that  safety  and  comfort  consist,  the  Judges.    .     .     .     That  glory  which

not  in  absenting  themselves  from  His  fled  when  the  ark  was  taken  was  now

ordinances,  or  in  declining  dangerous  returning.     From  the  lofty  towers  the

services,  but  in  attending  to  their  duty  warders  cry,   **  Who  is  this   King   of

in  a  proper  spirit  and  manner.     They  Glory?"     The  old  heathen  gates  will

will  profit  by  their  own  errors. — Scott,  not  at  once  recognise  this  new  comer.

The  answer  comes  back,  as  if  to  prove

Vers.  14-15.     Now  the  sweet  singer  by  the  victories  of  David  the  right  of

of  Israel  revives  his  holy  music,  and  the  name  to  Him  who  now  comes  to

juids  both  more  spirit  and  more  pomp  His  own  again,  Jehovah,  the  Lord,  the

to  so  devout  a  business.     I  did   not  Mighty  One.  .    .    .  This  is  the  solemn

before  bear  of  trum])ets,  nor  dancing,  inauguration  of  that  great   name   by

nor  shouting,  nor  sacrifice,  nor  the  linen  which  the  Divine  Nature  was  especially

ephod.     The  sense  of  God's  past  dis-  known  under  the  monarchy.  As,  before,

I'leasure  doubles  our  care  to  please  Him,  under  the  patriarchs,  it  had  been  known

and  our  joy  in  His  recovered  appro-  as  Elohim,  the  strong  ones' — as  through

ba tion  ;  we  never  make  so  much  of  our  Moses    it     had     been     Jehovah — the

Ijcalth  as  after  sickness,  nor  ever  are  so  Eternal, — so,  now,  in  this  new  epoch
303


CHAP.  VI.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,


of  civilisation,  of  armies,  of  all  the  com-
plicated machinery  of  second  causes,  of
Church  and  State,  there  was  to  be  a
new  name  expressive  of  a  wider  range
of  vision  o])ening  on  the  minds  of  the
people.  Not  merely  tlie  Eternal
solitary  existence— but  the  Maker  and
Snstainer  of  the  host  of  heaven  and
earth  .  .  .  were  now  attracting  the
attention  and  wonder  of  men.  Not
merely  the  Eternal  Lord  of  the  solitary
human  soul,  but  the  Leader  and
Snstainer  of  the  hosts  of  battle,  of  the
hierarch>  of  war  and  peace  that  [rathered
round  the  court  of  the  kings  of  Israel.
.  .  .  This  great  change  is  briefly
declared  in  corresponding  phrase  in  the
historical  narrative  which  tells  how
David  "brought  up  the  ark  of  God
whose  name  is  called  by  the  name  of
the  Lord  of  Hosts."  This  was  indeed
as  the  68th  Psalm  describes  it,  a  second
Exodus.  David,  was,  on  that  day,  the
founder  not  of  freedom  only,  but  of
empire — not  of  religion  only,  but  of  a
Church  and  commonwealth. — Dean
Stanley.

The  ark  had  been  the  witness  to  the
people  that  they  were  one  people,  be-
cause they  had  the  one  God  dwelling
in  the  midst  of  them  while  they  were
shifting  their  tents  continually  in  the
wilderness.  It  was  to  be  the  same
truth  to  those  who  were  dwelling  in
settled  habitations.  ...  It  spoke
to  them,  as  it  had  to  the  others,  of  a
permanent  Being,  of  a  righteous  Being,
always  above  His  creatures,  always  de-
siring fellowship  with  them,  a  fellowship
which  they  could  only  realise  when
they  were  seeking  to  be  like  Him.
"  Lord,  who  shall  ascend  to  Thy  taber-
nacle ?  "  "  who  shall  dwell  in  Thy  holy
hill?" — so  spake  David  as  he  brought
the  ark  to  its  resting  place.  "Even
he  that  hath  clean  hands  and  a  pure
heart."  .  .  .  The  moral  being  of
the  nation,  then,  as  of  each  individual
in  it,  stood  in  the  confession  of  a
])erson  absolutely  good,  the  ground  of
all  goodness  in  His  creatures,  acces-
sible to  them  while  they  sought  Him
with  fear  and  reverence  as  the  King,
Protector,  Priend,  of  each  and  all. —
Maurice,


Ver.  19.  This  was  a  most  characte-
ristic act — an  index  of  that  delight  in
the  comfort  and  welfare  of  his  ])eoi)le
that  marked  the  character  of  David.
It  may  be  that  the  pr.ictice  is  liable  to
abuse,  .  .  .  yet  it  was  a  ])1  easing
feature  of  this  memorable  occasion.  It
has  a  lesson  especially  appropriate  to
wealthy  Christians  on  occasions  of  law-
ful rejoicings.  In  the  olden  time  the
festival  of  Christmas  used  to  be  thus
observed,  and  there  were  far  worse
things  about  the  old  feudal  system
than  the  flowing  hosj)itality  which  used
to  make  poor  men  feel  that  times  of
refreshing  for  the  soul  opened  men's
hearts  to  their  bodily  w^ants.  It  would
be  quite  in  the  spirit  of  David's  exam-
ple for  wealthy  Christians  to  make
communion  seasons  and  similar  occa-
sions times  of  ample  distribution. —
Blaikie.

Ver.  20.  Let  us  learn  from  the
conduct  of  David  in  retiring  to  bless
his  house,  that  public  religious  services
should  not  be  allowed  by  us  to  interfere
with  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of
family  religion.  After  such  a  day  as
that  which  we  have  attempted  to
describe,  David  might  have  imagined
that  he  had  a  good  excuse  for  omitting
all  domestic  worship ;  but  it  rather
seemed  that  the  devotions  of  the  day
gave  him  new  zest  for  the  exercises  of
the  family  altar.  And  this  is  what
always  ought  to  be.  It  is  to  be  feared,
however,  that  many  among  us  content
themselves  with  a  mere  go-to-meeting
piety,  and  seem  to  believe  that  religion
consists  in  a  round  of  public  religious
services.  They  attend  all  manier  of
holy  convocations.  You  see  them  at
every  important  devotional  meeting
you  take  part  in.  But  they  rarely
enter  the  closet ;  they  never  bless  their
houses ;  and  their  lives  are  just  as
selfish  and  unspiritual  as  are  those  of
multitudes  who  make  no  profession  of
attachment  to  Jesus  whatever.  1  do
not  make  \vA\t  of  the  ordinances  of
God's  worship ;  on  the  contrary,  I
believe  them  to  be  most  serviceable  in
feeding  the  fire  of  piety  within  the
heart.     But  what  I  mean  to   say  is,

309


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,


BOOK  U.


tliat  piety  does  not  consist  in  attending
on  tliese  means  of  grace,  and  that  our
en<;Mgcment  in  public  services  must
never  be  made  an  excuse  by  us  for  the
neglect  of  household  duties.  "Why
did  3()U  not  come  to  churcli  last  night,"
said  one  working-man  to  another,  on  a
Monday  morning  ;  "our  minister  was
preaching  a  third  sermon  on  the  duty
of  family  religion  ;  why  did  you  not
come  ?"  "  Because,"  was  the  re])ly,  "  I
was  at  home  doing  it."  I  would  like
to  see  not  less  earnestness  in  attendance
at  the  sanctuary  but  more  ot  this  "at
home  doing  it." — Taylor.

A  man  may  be  as  zealous  as  he
pleases  about  what  relates  to  this  life
only,  and  yet  be  had  in  admiration  ;
but  to  be  zeal(;us  in  religion  seems
to  be  regarded  a  mark  of  imbecility.
Devotion  to  God  alone  is  regarded  as
something  degiading — something  un-
worthy the  dignity  of  man — which
renders  him  a  lit  subject  for  the  finger
of  scorn  to  point  at — for  the  ridicule
or  contempt  of  a  world  that  lieth  in
wicked  n  ess. — Lindsay.

Ver.  21.  It  is  hard  for  the  best  men
to  recriminate  without  some  tincture
of  tartness,  and  to  keep  quick  the  fire
of  zeal  without  some  smoke  of  sin. —
Trajjp.

Vers.  21,  22.  If  David  had  not
loved  Michal  dearly,  he  had  never
stood  upon  those  points  with  Abner :
he  knew  that  if  Abner  came  to  him,
the  kingdom  of  Israel  would  accom-
pany him  ;  and  yet  he  sends  him  the
charge  of  not  seeing  his  face,  except  he
brought  Michal,  ISaul's  daughter,  with
him  ;  as  if  he  would  not  regard  the
crown  of  Israel  while  he  wanted  that
wife  of  his :  yet  here  he  takes  her  up
roundly,  as  if  she  had  been  an  enemy.
All  relations  are  aloof  off,  in  comparison
of  that  betwixt  God  and  the  soul :
"  He  that  loves  father,  or  mother,  or
wife,  or  child,  better  than  me  (saith
our  tSaviour),  is  not  worthy  of  me." —
Bp.  liall.

1.  We  should  be  afraid  of  censuring
the  devotion  of  otiiers,  though  it  may
not  agne  with  our  own  sentiments,
310


because,  for  aught  that  we  know,  the
heart  may  be  upright  in  it,  and  who
are  we,  to  despise  those  whom  God  has
accepted  ?  2.  If  we  can  approve  our-
selves to  God  in  what  we  do  in  religion,
and  do  it  as  before  the  Lord,  we  need
not  value  the  censures  and  reproaches
of  men.  3.  The  more  we  are  vilified
for  well-doing  the  more  resolute  we
should  be  in  it,  aid  hold  our  religion
the  faster,  and  bind  it  the  closer  to  us,
for  the  endeavours  of  Satan's  agents  to
shake  us  and  to  shame  us  out  of  it. —
henry.

Vers.  14-22.  In  the  portrait  of  David,
as  it  here  appears  to  our  view,  several
essential  marks  of  a  true  state  of  grace
unveil  themselves  before  us.  There  are
these  five.  We  may  describe  them
thus,  in  the  language  of  the  New
Testament: — (1.)  Joy  in  Christ;  (2.)
separation  from  tlie  world ;  (3.)  the
open  conjession  of  the  crucified  one ;
(4.)  love  to  the  people  of  God;  and  (5.)
bearing  willingly  the  shame  of  the  cross.
But  how  frequently  does  one  meet
such  ill-temper  as  that  of  Michal  even
at  the  present  day  !  It  displays  itself
when  at  any  time  one  belonging  to  the
higher  ranks  of  life,  who  has  been
brought,  through  the  grace  of  God,
from  the  "  broad  way,"  salutes  in  the
time  of  his  "  first  love "  every  com-
panion in  the  faith  as  a  brother,  and
is  hai)piest  among  those  who,  whether
they  be  distinguished  in  rank  or  lowly,
rejoice  like  himself  in  the  Lord  ;
wor!shi])S  in  the  same  fellowship,  and
joins  with  them  in  spiritual  songs  ;
meeting  familiarly  with  the  lowliest
among  them,  as  it  birth,  position,  rank,
and  social  etiquette  were  the  most
indifferent  things  in  the  world.  How
frequently  does  one  also  see  relations
and  Iriends  change  their  demeanour
towards  such  as  disregard  the  conven-
tional boundaries,  and  convert  it  into
hateful  mockery  !  That  king  himself
did  not  escape  such  scorn  whom  history
has  adorned  with  the  name  of  the
"  Confessor,"  and  who  once,  when  in
the  presence  of  an  assembly  of  believing
preachers,  gave  free  expression  in  high
excitement  to  the  ieeiings  of  his  heart,


CHAP.  VI,  nOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


glowing  witli  love  to  Christ,     "  I  know  was  on  that  day  of  festal  joy.     But  he

well,"  he  said,  "it  is  not  politic  for  me  is  deserving  of  pity  who  understands

to  say   what   I   now    utter    in    your  not  the  flapping  of  the  eagle's  wings,

presence  ;'*  but  he  did  not,  on   that  by  which  souls  consecrated  to  God  are

account,  for  a  moment  check  the  flow  in   times   of  particular    visitations   ot

of  his  thoughts  aad  feelings.     But  this  grace  lifted  up  above  all  the  boundaries

state  of  pious  elevation  of  mind  never  of  their  common  life,  and  placed  in  a

continues  long.     It  soon  gives  place  to  condition  where,  in  the  emotions  that

the    accustomed    calm    and    uniform  fill  them,  they  rise  above  all  earthly

course    of   thought.      David    is    not  things. — Krummacher,
alway  so  lofty  in  his  experience  as  he


CHAPTER  VII.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes. — ^Ver.  1.    ••  When  the  king  sat  in  his  houso,"  etc.,  i.e.

the  palace  mentioned  in  chap,  v.  11,  Many  commentators  place  the  events  of  this  chapter  later
on  in  the  life  of  David,  inasmuch  as  they  think  it  could  not  be  said  at  this  period  that  he  had
"  rest  from  all  his  enemies,"  yet  nearly  all  agree  in  understanding  from  ver.  11  that  Solomon  was,
not  born  at  the  time.  It  therefore  seems  necessary  to  understand  the  rest  spoken  of  as  only  a
temporary  interval  of  peace  (for  he  was  more  or  less  involved  in  war  until  the  end  of  his  life),
and  if  so,  the  conception  of  building  a  temple  to  Jehovah  seems  to  follow  here  most  naturally.
It  is  quite  in  keeping  with  David's  devout  character,  and  just  what  we  should  expect  from  him,
that  his  first  interval  of  repose  should  be  occupied  with  such  a  purpose.

Ver.  2.  **  Nathan,  the  prophet,"  This  prophet  here  appears  for  th9  first  time,  and  it  is
evident  that  he  sustained  a  similar  relation  to  David  as  Samuel  and  Gad  had  done,  and  as  the
latter  still  continued  to  do  (see  chap.  xxiv.  11-19).  "If  the  expression  first  and  last  in  2  Chron.
ix.  29  is  to  be  taken  literally,  he  must  have  lived  late  into  the  life  of  Solomon,  in  which  case  he
must  have  been  considerably  younger  than  David.  At  any  rate  he  seems  to  have  been  the
yoimger  of  the  two  prophets  who  accompanied  him,  and  may  be  considered  as  the  latest  direct
representative  of  the  schools  of  Samuel,  The  peculiar  affix  of  '  the  prophet '  as  distinguished
from  the  *seer'  given  to  Samuel  and  Gad  (1  Chron.  xxix.  29)  shows  his  identification  with  the
later  view  of  the  prophetic  office  indicated  in  1  Sam.  ix,  9."  {Dean  Stanley.)  Most  bible  scholars
consider  that  this  part  of  the  book  of  Samuel  is  at  least  compiled  from  Nathan's  work  mentioned
in  1  Chron.  xxix.  29.    Within  curtains,  literally,  within  the  tent-cloth.

Ver.  3.  "  Nathan  said,"  etc.  This  answer  shows  that,  even  if  David  did  not  expressly  state
his  intention,  Nathan  understood  his  purpose  to  build  the  temple,  and  sanctioned  his  design
"from  his  own  feelings,  not  by  Divine  revelation."      ( Michaelis. )

Ver.  4.  "  That  night."  The  one  following  the  day  in  which  the  conversation  took  place.
**  The  Word  of  the  Lord  came."  '*  By  the  conversation  held  with  David  during  the  day,
Nathan's  soul  with  all  its  thoughts  and  feelings  was  concentrated  on  David's  great  and  holy
purpose;  this  was  the  psychological  basis  for  the  Divine  inspiration."  (Erdmunn)  "Shalt
thou,"  etc.     •*  The  question  involves  a  negative  reply."     (Keil.)

Ver.  6,  7.  Here  "  Jehovah  gives  two  reasons  why  David's  proposal  should  not  be  carried  out

.  .  .  but  this  does  not  involve  any  blame  as  though  there  had  been  any  presumption  on  David's

part  .  .  .  but  simply  showed  that  it  was  not  because  of  any  negligence  ou  the  part  of  tlie  former

eaders  of  the  people  that  they  had  not  thought  of  erecting  a  temple,  and  that  even  now  the  time

for  such  a  work  had  not  yet  come."     (Keil)

Ver.  11.  '*  And  as  since,"  etc.  The  first  clause  of  this  verse  should  be  connected  with  verse
10,  thus,  neither  shall  the  children  of  wickednesa  afflict  them  any  more,  as  before  and  as  since,  or
from  the  day,  etc,

Ver  8-11,  "The  connection  between  these  verses  and  verses  6-7  is  as  follows :  Thou  sh alt
not  build  a  house  for  Me,  but  I,  who  have  from  the  very  beginning  glorified  myself  in  thee  and
my  people,  will  build  a  house  for  thee.  .  .  .  The  kingdom  of  God  in  Israel  first  acquired  its
rest  and  consolation  through  the  efforts  of  David  ....  and  the  conquest  of  Zion  and  the

311


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  n.


elevation  of  this  foitress  into  the  ]>nlace  of  the  king  formed  the  commencement  of  the  establish-
ment of  the  kingdom  of  God.  But  this  commencement  received  its  first  pledge  of  perpetuity
from  the  Divine  assurance  that  the  throne  of  David  should  be  established  for  all  future  time.
And  this  the  Lord  was  about  to  accon.plish.  He  would  build  David  a  house,  and  then  his  seed
should  build  the  Ik  use  of  the  Lord.  No  definite  reason  is  assigned  why  David  himself  was  not
to  build  the  temjile  ;  we  learn  this  first  from  1  Clnon.  xxii.  8.  .  .  .  But  this  did  not  involve
David  in  any  blame  .  .  .  but  inasmuch  as  these  wars  were  necessary  and  inevitable,  they
were  practical  proofs  that  David's  kingdom  and  government  were  not  yet  established,  and  there-
fore that  the  time  for  the  buik.ing  of  the  temple  had  not  yet  come."     ( Keil.)

Ver.  12.  "Thy  seed."  "  Not  the  whole  posterity,  as  is  clear  from  the  explanatory  words
in  1  Chron.  xvii.  11,  nor  merely  a  single  individual,  but  a  selection  from  the  posterity."
( Erdmann.)

Ver.  14.  "A  father,"  etc.  This  denotes  in  the  first  place  the  most  cordial  mutual  love,
which  attests  its  enduring  character  hy  fidelity,  and  demonstrates  its  existence  towards  the  Lord
l)y  active  obedience.  But  besides  this  ethical  relation  of  David's  seed  to  God  we  must,  from  the
connection,  note— first,  the  origin,  or  descent  of  the  son  from  the  fatlier.  The  seed  of  David,
entrusted  with  everla-ting  kingly  dignity,  has,  as  such,  his  origin  in  the  will  of  God — owes  his
origin  to  the  Divine  choice  and  call  (comp.  Psa.  ii.  7,  Ixxxix.  27,  28).  Secondly,  in  the  desig-
nations father  and  son  is  denoted  community  of  possession.  The  seed  as  son  receives  dominion
from  the  father  as  heir,  and  as  this  dominioji  is  an  everlasting  one  he  will,  as  son  and  heir,  reign
/'or  ever  in  the  possession  of  the  kingdom.  The  father's  kingdom  is  an  unlimited  one,  embiacing
the  whole  world  ;  so  in  the  idea  of  sonship  there  lies,  along  with  everlastiiigness,  the  idea  of  all-
embracing- world-dominion."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  1  4.  "  With  the  rod  of  men,"  etc  Such  punishments  as  are  inflicted  on  all  men
when  they  sin.  Grace  is  not  to  release  David  and  the  Davidic  line  from  this  universal
human  lot,  is  not  to  be  for  them  a  charter  to  sin,"     ( Jlenystcnberej.)

Ver.  15.  "As  I  took  it  from  Saul,"  etc.  '' l^he  contrast  is  between  the  punishment  of
sin  in  individuals  and  the  favour  that  remains  permanently  with  the  family,  whereby  the  Divine
promise  becomes  an  unconditional  one."    ( Uetujstenbery.)

Ver.  16.     "For  ever."     It  is  obvious  that  this  promise  related  primarily  to  Solomon,  and

had  a  certain  fulfilment  in  him  and  in  his  reign At  the  same  time,  the  substance

of  the  promise  is  not  fully  exhausted  in  him.  1'he  threefold  repetition  of  the  expression
"  for  ever,"  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  and  throne  of  David  for  ever,  points  incontro-
vertibly  beyond  the  time  of  Solomon,  and  to  the  eternal  continuance  of  the  seed  or  David.
.  .  ,  .  We  must  not  reduce  the  idea  of  eternity  to  the  popular  notion  of  a  long  incalcul.d)le
period,  but  must  take  it  in  an  absolute  sense  as  it  is  evidently  understood  in  Psa.  Ixxxix.  30.
No  earthly  kingdom,  and  no  posterity  of  any  single  man,  has  eternal  duration  like  the  heaven
and  the  earth  ;  but  the  different  families  "f  men  become  extinct  as  the  different  earthly
kingdoms  perish.     The  posterity  of  David,  therefore,  could  only  last  for  ever  by  running  out  in

a  person  who   lives   for  ever  ;    i.e.,  by  culminating  in  the  Messiah The  promise

consequently  refers  to  the  posterity  of  David,  (ommencing  with  Solomon  and  closing  with
Christ ;  so  that  by  the  seed  we  are  not  to  understand  Solomon  alone,  with  the  kings  who
succeeded  him,  nor  Christ  alone  to  the  exclusion  of  the  earthly  kings  of  David's  family;  nor  is
the  allusion  to  Solomon  and  Christ  to  be  regarded  as  a  double  allusion  to  two  different
objects."    (Kea.)

Ver.  17.  "Words."  .  .  .  "Vision."  "  The  itwc?^,  as  the  content  of  God's  revelation
to  Nathan,  are  distinguished  from  the  vision  as  indication  of  its  form  and  viode.^'  (Erdmann.)
"  Tlie  vision  (a  communication  received  in  a  waking  condition)  is  constantly  distinguished  from
a  revelation  in  a  dream."     (Keil. J

Ver.  18.  *'  Sat,"  rather  tarried.  "  Even  if  the  verb  be  rendered  sat,  it  is  not  necessary  to
suppose  that  David  remained  sitting."  (JJib.  Commentary.)  "  Yet  sitting  under  such  circum-
stance would  be  a  respectful  attitude,  and  elsewhere  we  have  no  proof  in  Scripture  of  a
customary  attitude  in  prayer."     (  Tr,  of  Lanyes  Commentary.)

Ver.  19.  "Manner  of  mm."  Eather  the  law  of  man,  i.e.,  according  to  Keil,  "the  law
hich  determines  or  regulates  the  conduct  of  men."  The  explanations  of  this  phrase  are  very
varied  and  numerous.  Keil,  Grotius,  Thenins,  De  Witte,  Hengstenberg,  and  others,  with  some
differences,  understand  it  to  refer  to  the  condescension  of  Jehovah  in  treating  David  as  one
human  creature  might  treat  another,  and  think  the  parallel  text  in  Chron.,  chap.  xvii.  1 7
confirms  this  view.  Many  expositors  give  it  a  direct  Messianic  reference,  and  others  thus  para-
phrase it  :  "  It  is  not  thus  that  men  act  towards  one  anoth  r,  but  Thy  ways,  O  TiOrd,  are  above
men's  ways."  But  the  objection  to  this  and  to  the  meaninir  given  above  is  that  the  word
translated  l.'^w  is  in  these  cases  rather  taken  as  manner  or  custom,  which  it  does  not  signify.

312


CHAP.  Vit  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


Erdmann  says  "  This  must  be  referred  to  tlie  Divine  determination  that  the  everlasting  kingdom
here  spoken  of  is  to  be  in  connection  with  hi;s  iiouse.  This  is  the  Divine  torah  or  pr(;scri{)tion
whicli  is  to  hold  for  a  weak  insignificant  man  and  his  seed,  for  p  tor  luuuan  creatures."  Siniilaily
Von  Oerlach:  "  Such  a  hiw  Thou  tstablishest  for  a  man  and  his  house,  viz.,  that  Thou  promisest
it  everlasting  duration."  So  also  Banstn  :  ''Of  so  grand  a  promise  hast  Thou,  O  God,  thought
a  man  woithy."

Ver.  21.  **For  Thy  word's  s^ko."  "  This  must  contain  an  allusion  to  the  earlier  promises
of  God,  or  the  Messianic  projihcciLS  generally,  paitivuiarly  (ien.  xlix.  10,  and  Numb.  x\iv.  17  i^'iq.
Foi  the  fact  that  Davitl  recognised  the  connection  between  the  promise  communicated  to  him  by
Nathan  and  Jacob's  prophecy  is  evident  from  1  (/hron.  xxviii.  4,  where  he  refers  to  his  election
as  king  as  being  the  conseciuence  of  Judah's  election  as  ruler."     (Keil.)

Ver.  23.  "  Whom  God."  J^llohim  here  stands  with  a  plural  verb,  as  often  elsewhere  when
heathen  idols  are  referred  to  (as  Exod.  xxxii.  4-8),  because  the  thought  is  here  intended  to  be
expressed  that  there  is  no  other  nation  which  the  deity  worshipped  by  it  redeemed  as  Jeliovah
redeemed  Israel.  (So  Keil,  Enhnann,  etc.)  "For  you."  It  tiiis  reading  is  correct,  David's
sudden  turning  from  addressing  God  to  addressing  tlie  uution  must  be  attributed  to  his  deep
emotion.

Ver.  29.  ••Let  the  Louse,"  etc.,  rather  •*  Will  the  house,"  i.e.,  God  has  said  it,  and  it  will
be  80."


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Ver sta  1—7.

David  forbidden  to  Build  the  Temple.

I.  A  good  man's  desire  may  be  in  harmony  with  the  min'  of  God,  yet  its
accomplishment  may  be  contrary  to  the  Divine  will.  It  must  always  be  right
and  always  pleasiiif^  to  a  good  father  for  his  son  to  desire  to  honour  him  and  to
express  hy  some  outward  act  his  sense  of  love  and  gratitude.  But  while  the
feeling  is  in  itself  most  acceptable  to  him,  he  may  desire  it  to  take  some  other
form  of  expressing  itself,  or  he  may  see  that  some  other  season  will  be  a  more
fitting  one  for  this  particular  outward  expression  of  his  child's  love  and
reverence.  The  feeling  which  prompts  the  desire  must  be  right  at  all  seasons,
but  the  accomplishment  of  the  desire  may  be  unseasonable  or  undesirable.  So
it  was  with  David's  desire  and  purpose  at  this  period.  It  was  most  fitting  and
could  not  but  be  pleasing  to  God  that  David  should  desire  to  build  Him  a  house
far  more  beautiful  than  his  own  palace.  We  should  teel  that  David  was  out  of
harmony  with  himself  if  he  had  sat  contentedly  in  his  palace  while  the  ark  of
God  was  within  curtains.  And  it  is  plain  that  the  feelings  which  gave  birth  to
his  purpose  were  very  acceptable  to  God,  as  all  grateful  emotion  and  desire  to
express  them  must  ever  be.  Yet  he  was  forbidden  to  carry  out  his  design.  Let
no  good  man,  then,  ever  think  that,  because  his  desire  is  not  fulfilled  it  is  dis-
pleashig  to  God.  It  may  be  quite  the  opposite.  The  gratitude  and  reverence  that
desires  to  do  something  for  the  glory  of  God  must  be  most  pleasing  to  such  a
God  as  ours;  but  although  the  feeling  may  be  genuine  and  the  motive  pure,
He  may  see  reasons  for  not  permitting  the  purpose  to  be  carried  out.

II.  Those  who  instruct  others  in  the  oracles  of  God  may  be  right  in  their
general  interpretation  of  the  Divine  will,  and  yet  wrong  in  their  ap(jlication
to  special  instances.  Every  servant  ot  God  is  sure  that  it  is  the  will  of  God
that  His  glory  shall  bo  the  ruling  aim,  and  His  service  the  first  thought  in  the
life  of  His  chddren.  But  he  may  sometimes  be  mistaken  as  to  the  best  methods
of  promotmg  that  glory  or  the  best  time  for  undertaking  a  special  service,  and
he  must  not  therefore  be  dogmatic  on  these  matters.  Nathan  was  quite  right
in  encouraging  David  in  his  endeavours  to  bring  his  own  people  and  the  surround-
ing n;itious  into  more  intimate  relation  with  the  God  ot  IsraeL  Like  that  of
all  the  good  in  all  ages  his  prayer  was  "  Let  the  people  praise   Theej  O  God ;

313


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,  book  ii.


let  all  the  people  praise  Thee"  But  right  as  lie  was  in  the  general  priiici'iJe,  lie
erred  in  tlie  special  application  on  this  occasion.  Although  it  was  quite  true
that  the  Lord  was  with  David  in  the  sense  of  approval  of  his  general  feeling,  He
was  not  with  him  in  the  sense  that  He  would  permit  him  to  undertake  this  par-
ticular work.

III.  But  when  God's  servants  sincerely  desire  to  do  His  will,  He  will  not  per-
mit them  to  remain  long  in  ignorance.  If  a  father  knows  that  his  children  only-
need  to  know  what  is  right  in  order  to  do  it,  it  would  surely  be  cruel  of  him  to
let  them  remain  in  ignorance.  And  when  our  Heavenly  Father  sees  in  His
children  such  integrity  of  heart  that  they  joyfully  acquiesce  in  His  purposes  con-
cerning themselves,  and  desire  above  all  other  things  His  guidance,  we  cannot
for  a  moment  suppose  He  will  withliold  from  them  a  revelation  of  His  will.
When  they  are  permitted  to  err,  it  must  be  because  there  is  some  self-will  which
prevents  entire  singleness  of  purpose — some  alloy  mixed  with  the  pure  gold  of  a
desire  right  in  the  main.  David  and  Nathan  were  very  soon  put  in  full  posses-
sion of  God's  mind  in  respect  to  the  building  of  the  temple,  and  that  it  was  so
is  a  proof  of  their  undivided  loyalty  to  the  Divine  will,  and  a  jiledge  that  all  who
are  like  minded  shall  be  as  certainly  instructed  in  the  work  they  are  to  do  and
the  part  they  are  to  fulfil.  ^

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  2.     The  sentiment  underlying  brethren,"  and  before  our  God.     The

these  words  was  in  the  highest  degree  principle  here  acknowledged  by  David

honourable  to  David.     'J'hey  indicate  is  a  thoroughlj''  sound  one,  and  though

that  he  felt  it  to  be  a  moral  anomaly,  he  was  discouraged  from  applying  it  in

if  not  a  species  of  dishonesty,  that  he  the  particular  way  on  which  he  had  set

should   look   so   well    after    his    own  his  heart,  we  must  not  su])])ose  that  his

personal    comfort  and   regal   dignity,  feelings,  as  expressed  to  Nathan,  were

while  yet  the  house  of  God  was  but  a  wrong.     On  the  contrary,  the  spiritual

tent.     It  were  well,  in  these  days,  that  instinct  in  him  was  true,  and  God  de-

we  all  shared  these  convictions,  for  we  clared  that  "  it  was  well  that  it  was  in

are  too  apt  to  lavish  our  wealth  ex-  hisheart."  Now  what  was  this  principle?

clusively  upon  our  own  enjoyment  and  It  was  this,  that  in  proportion  as  we

indulgence,    forgetful    of    the   higher  increase    our  expenditure  upon   our-

claims  which  God  and  His  cause  have  selves  for  the  comforts  and  the  elegan-

upon  us.     I  say  not,  indeed,  that  it  is  cies  of  life,  we  ought  to  increase  our

wrong  for  a  man  to  take  such  a  position  offerings  to  God  for  the  carrying  on  of

in  society  as  his  riches  warrant  him  to  worksof  faith  and  labours  of  love  among

assume,  or  that  there  is  sin  in  spending  our  fellow-men.     If  we  can  afford  to

money  on  our  residences,  or  in  sur-  enter  a  larger  dwelling,  we   ought  to

rounding  ourselves  with  the  treasures  make  ourselves  afford  to  add  ^jropor-

of  human   wisdom  in   books,   or  the  tionately  to  our  contributions  for  all

triumphs  of  human  art  in  pictures  or  good  objects.     If  we  allow  ourselves  to

statuary  ;  but  I  do  say  that  our  gifts  gratify  our  taste  in  the  purchase  of  a

to  the  cause  of  God  ought  to  be  at  least  new  picture  or  a  new  book,  we  should

abreast  of  our  expenditure  for  these  feel  impelled  to  do  just  so  much  more

other  things  ;  and  that  if  we  so  cripple  for  the  gratification  of  the  impulse  of

ourselves  by  our  extravagance  on  house,  Christian  benevolence.     The  value  of

or  dress,  or  luxuries,  as  to  render  it  this  principle,  when  rightly  understood,

impossible  for  us  to  do  anything  for  the  and  conscientiously  carried  out,  will  be

promotion  of  the  Gospel  abroad,  or  for  very  great.     It  will  act  in  two  ways,

the  instruction  of  theignorant  at  home.  On  the  one  hand,  it  will  keep  us  from

we  are  **  verily  guilty  concerning  our  hampering  ourselves  in  our  beuevoleuce
314


OHAP.  viL  UOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  RY :  SA  MUEL,


by  personal  extravngnnco,  and  so  be  a  Ver.   6.     The  cnrtainnJ   tabernacle

chock  on  that  tendency  to  luxuiy  which  had  i)tMMi  spociady  d(\si^iied  by  God  to

is  manifested  even  in  many  Christian  wean  His  people  (Voui  those  sensuous

houseliolds.     On  the  oilier  hand,  it  will  ideas  of  worship  to  which  the  gorgeous

impel  us  to  add  to  our  gifts  to  the  templesof  Egypt  had  accustomed  them;

Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  since  every  time  and  to  give  them  the  true  notion  of  a

we  do  anything  for  ourselves  there  will  spiritual  service,  along  with  the  visible

be  a  new  call  made  upon  us  to  do  more  emblem  of  a  present  God.     The  time

for  li'un  — Taylor.  had  not  quite  arrived  for  changing  this

David  was  not  one  of  those  easy-  simple  arrangement,  and  as   long  as

minded  men  who  are  content  to  keep  it  was  God's  pleasure  to  dwell  in  the

things  just  as  they  are,  but  one  of  those  tabernacle  so  long  might  David  expect

who  are   ever   pressing   onward,    and  that  His  grace  might  be  shed   forth

urging   others   towards   progress,   ira-  most  abundantly  there.    Andso,  when-

provement,  development.     A  most  use-  ever  it  seems  to  be  indicated  by  God

ful  order  of  mind  it  is,  especially  when  in  His  providence  that  a  body  of  wor-

duly    ballasted    by    minds   in   which  shippers  should  remain  in  a  tent-like

caution   is   more  predominant.      The  building,  they  may  expect  that  He  will

world    would    stagnate  —  the  church  then  shine  forth  in  the  fulness  of  His

would  settle  down  into  the  poorest  and  grace. — Blaikie.
tamest  society  on  earth,  if  such  men

were  not  raised  up,  with  their  trumpet-  Ver.    8.      God    signified    His  good

tongues  and  burning  hearts,  to  rouse  acce[)tance  by  calling  him  His  servant

their  fellows  to  high  and  lofty  enter-  David  ;  for  at  another  time  when  he

prise. — Blaikie.  hadotfendedit  was  plain  David.  (Chap.

xxiv.  12.)     I  took  thee  from  the  sheep-

Ver.   4.     God   will  not  suffer   His  cote.     So   that  thou   needest   not   to

dear  children  to  lie  long  in  error ;  but  doubt  of  my  love,  though  I  use  not  thy

ifinanything  they  beotherwiseminded,  service  in  this  particular.     To  be  ruler

He  will  reveal  even  this  unto  them  over  my  people.     Do  this  well,  and  thou

(Phil.  iii.  15). — Trapp.  ueedest  not  be  idle. — Trapp.

Vers.  4  and  5.  God  demands  not  so  Ver.  9.  Fame.  1.  Fame  is  a  gift
much  splendid  outward  service,  but  of  God's  providence — hence  to  be  en-
rath  er  an  inner  and  honest  service  of  jo3^ed  with  humility.  2.  Fame  is  one
the  heart  (Isa.  iv.  24.) — ISchmid.  of  God's   noblest  gifts — hence  it  may

God  is  much  more  desirous  of  giving  be   desired    and    earnestly   sought    if

to  ns  than   of  receiving  from   us. —  righteously.      3.  Fame,  like  all  otiier

Wuert.  Bible,  gifts,    has    weighty    responsibilitiis —

The  true  house  of  God  is  His  people  ;  hence  to  be  used  for  the  good  of  men

there  would  He  make  His  abode  in  the  and  the  glory  of  God. — Translator  of

hearts   of  His  own.     A  human  heart  Langes  Commentary.
that  opens  itself  to  God  is  a  temple

more  pleasing  to  Him  than  the  stateliest  Ver.  11.     This  thought  contains  the

structure  of  gold  and  marble,  and  a  deep  general  truth  that  God  must  first

church  that  really  has  the  Lord  dwell-  of  all  build  a  man's  house  before  the

iiig  in  its  midst  is  in  the  sight  of  God  man  can  build  God's  house,  and  applies

more  precious  than  the  noblest  showy  it  especially  to  the  kingdom  of  Israel,

building  which    sets  all  the  world  a  — KeiL
wondering, — iSchlierm


815


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  Book  11.

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12-16.

The  Messianic  Promise  to  David.

This  promise —

I.  Reveals  the  special  purpose  of  God  in  the  election  of  David.    As  the

king  now  sits  in  his  palace  of  cedar,  God  takes  him  back  to  the  days  when  as  a
youth  lie  followed  tlie  sheep.  During  all  the  years  that  had  intervened,  and  in
all  the  manifold  experiences  through  which  he  had  passed,  he  had  been  the
object  of  special  Divine  care  and  guidance.  His  life  had  been  such  that,
however  he  ndi^ht  have  sometimes  yielded  to  despair  in  the  past,  he  must  have
now  felt  deeply  conscious,  upon  looking  hack,  that  he  had  been  highly  favoured
above  all  the  men  of  his  nation.  Doubtless  he  was  more  gifted  than  most —
perhaps  than  any, — but  the  gifts  that  fitted  him  for  the  throne  were  from  the
same  Divine  giver,  and  only  increased  his  obligation.  But  he  is  here  reminded
that  he  had  not  been  made  thus  great  for  his  own  sake  alone,  or  chiefly.  He
was  to  use  all  that  had  been  bestowed  upon  him  for  the  people  over  whom  he
had  been  called  to  rule,  and  was  to  be  the  founder  of  a  race  through  whom  not
only  Israel  but  all  the  families  of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed.  This  is  always
the  purpose  of  God's  electing  grace,  whether  of  the  individual  or  the  nation.
Men  receive  special  favours  that  they  may  dispense  special  blessings,  and  are
intended  to  be,  not  like  those  lakes  in  which  a  mighty  river  is  ever  emptying
itself,  and  yet  from  which  no  stream  ever  flows,  but  like  the  fountain-head  of
that  river  which,  as  fast  as  it  is  fed  by  the  mountain  snows,  sends  forth  its
waters  and  becomes  a  channel  of  blessing  to  all  around.  The  spirit  of  many  of
David's  psalms  reveal  that  he  entered  fully  into  the  Divine  purpose  of  his
election,  but  the  spirit  of  many,  both  of  his  immediate  and  remote  descendants,
shows  that  they  utterly  failed  to  discern  it.

II.  It  reveals  the  progressive  nature  of  the  Divine  dispensations  in  relation
to  man.  A  dim  outline  is  here  given  to  Nathan  by  prophetic  vision  of  a  kingdom
far  more  glorious  than  that  which  David  founded.  We,  who  live  after  the
earthly  sceptre  has  departed  from  Judah,  can  fill  in  the  details,  and  recognise  in
David's  Lord  the  only  Son  who  could  establish  his  house  for  ever.  In  the  king-
dom of  God  under  the  Old  Testament,  the  name  of  David  takes  a  high  place,
and  among  the  kings  of  Israel  he  holds  a  deserved  pre-eminence,  on  account  of
the  great  national  blessings  which  attended  his  powerful  and  beneficent  rule.
But  One  who  descended  from  him  according  to  the  flesh  has,  by  the  majesty  of
His  person,  and  the  excellence  of  His  character,  and  the  transcendent  glory
of  His  kingdom,  caused  the  name  of  David  to  sink  into  nothing  in
comparison.  The  kingdom  of  Christ  endures  because  it  is  founded  upon  a
purely  spiritual  basis  ;  it  knows  no  limit  of  time  or  place  because  its  laws  have
their  origin  in  the  eternal  moral  necessity  of  the  universe.  For  its  King  rules
always  and  everywhere  because  His  throne  is  in  the  heart  oi  each  of  His  subjects.
"iy^  shall  judge  the  poor  of  the  people,  He  shall  save  the  children  oj  the  needy,
and  break  in  pieces  the  oppressor  ;  "  and  therefore  "  lie  shall  be  feared  as  long
as  the  sun  and  moon  endure.''  '^ IJe  shall  spare  the  poor  and  needy"  and
''redeem  their  soul  from  deceit  and  violence^'  and  the  name  of  such  a  King
must  ''  endure  for  ever''  and  ''be  continued  as  long  as  the  sun"  (Fsa.  Ixii).
His  name  is  called  "Jesus ;  for  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sii^s"
and  as  a  necessary  consequence,  "  Ue  shall  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob
Jor  ever,  and  of  His  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end."  (Luke  ii.  33).  David
v\as  elected  by  God  to  shepherd  Israel,  arid  his  reign  was  upon  the  whole
iraught  with  blessing  to  his  .subjects.  But  the  disjicnsjition  in  which  he
ministered   was,  in  comparison    with   that   of  the   jNew    Testamerit,   only   as

316


OUAP.  VTl.


UOMlLErrC  CO^tMEXTARY:    SAMUEL


tlie  acorn  to  the  oak,  and  he  could  as  little  conceive  of  the  f^loiy  of  these
latter  da3's  as  we  could  picture  to  ourselves  some  monarch  of  the  forest,  if  we
had  never  seen  anytliinij  more  than  the  tiny  seed  which  enfolds  its  j^erm.  And
God  h;is  yet  more  in  reserve  for  the  race  for  whom  the  Great  Shei)herd  laid
down  His  life.  We  as  little  comprehend  what  wonders  of  grace  and  ^lory  are
yet  to  he  unfolded  under  the  riui^n  of  Christ,  as  David  comprehended  all  that
was  included  in  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  came  to  Nathan.  We  have  the
Kini;  of  whom  it  spake,  mid  who  can  never  be  succeeded  by  another  ;  but  we
have  no  concoptioji  of  the  infinite  possibilities  yet  hidden  in  God  in  connection
with  that  kingdom  which  can  never  be  removed  but  abideth  for  ever.  "  Eye
hath  not"  yet  "  st^eii,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man
the  things  which  (Jod  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him"  (1  Cor.  ii.  9).


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


In  considering  this  prophecy  we  need
to  bear  in  mind  the  peculiar  form  of
therevelationsrespecting  Messiah  which
God  communicated  to  David.  'J^o  other
prophets,  revelations  of  the  Messiah
were  made  objectively — apart  from
themselves  ;  they  were  shown  Christ
and  His  day  afar  off  ;  they  had  no  more
personal  relation  to  the  thing  revealed
than  other  believers  around  them.  But
when  revelations  of  Messiah  were  made
to  David,  they  were  usually  connected
with  something  in  his  own  life,  history,
or  experience ;  they  had  a  shadowy
foundation  in  something  subjective  or
pesonal  to  himself;  that  thing  enlarged,
purified,  glorified,  constituted  the
revelation  of  Christ.  This  was  in  keep-
ing with  the  typical  relation  which
David  and  his  kingdom  had  to  Christ
and  His  kingdom.  As  this  was  the
character  of  the  revelations  made  to
David  respecting  Christ,  so  also  was  it
the  character  of  many  of  his  prophetic
songs.  .  .  .  Melting  and  shading
insensibly  into  each  other  as  the  tw©
classesof  objectsdo,  itisoften  extremely
difficult  to  say  which  of  them  is  meant.
— Blaikie.

It  is  plain  that  the  building  of  a
house  of  rest  for  the  ark  was  designed
to  stand  out  prominently  in  the  si^ht
of  Israel  as  a  great  and  ndghty  under-
taking— as  a  work  of  sufficient  magni-
tude and  importance  to  form  the  one
great  enter])rise  of  a  king  who  could
give  himself  to  it  without  distraction
or  disturbance.  Such  was  obviously
the  impression  which  the  Divine  ap-


pointment, regarding  the  building  of  a
house  for  the  name  of  God,  must  have
made  upon  the  minds  of  the  people  of
Israel — the  church  of  that  day  ;  and
the  reason  why  David  was  forbidden
and  Solomon  permitted  to  build  that
house  is  still  more  clearly  unfolded  to
us  now  that  the  promises  and  predictions
connected  with  that  work  have  been  and
are  in  the  way  of  being  fulfilled  ....
David  was  honoured  to  be  an  eminent
type  of  the  Messiah,  inasmuch  as,  by
his  trials,  his  conflicts,  and  his  conquests,
he  did  very  significantly  prefigure  a
suffering,  but  at  the  same  time,  a  trium-
phant Saviour.  This  however,  was  only
one  aspect  of  Christ's  kingly  office  .  .  .
there  is  another  view — even  the  relation
in  which,  as  king,  lie  stands  to  His
church.  .  .  .  This  view  God  was
also  graciously  pleased  to  typity  or  pre-
figure in  the  kingly  office  as  it  had  been
established  in  Israel  ;  and  we  cannot
fail  to  perceive  the  wisdom  which  ])ro-
vided  that  this  should  be  done,  not  in
the  person  of  the  same  king  who  wms
em})loyed  to  represent  Clirist  in  His
conflict  and  His  victory,  but  in  that  of
another  who  should  be  pre-eminently
a  peaceful  king. — Gordon.

The  fulfilment  of  the  great  and
gracious  promise  of  God  to  David  in
Christ  the  ISon  of  David.  1.  In  His
person,  He  is  not  merely  David's  seed —
seed  of  the  woman — Abraham's  seed,
but  also  God's  tSon.  2.  In  His  office,
He  is  King  over  the  kingdom  of  God,
King  of  all  Kings.  3.  In  His  possession
of  power,  He  has  an  everlasting  king-

317


EOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :    SA  .1/  UEL.


BOOKIL


flom,  to  Him  is  c^iven  all  power  in
lioaven  and  on  earth.  4.  \i\  Ilia  work.
He  bnilds  for  the  name  of  God  tlie
Father  a  house,  a  spiritual  temple  in
humanity,  out  of  living  stones.  (Comp.
John  ii.  19.) — Langes  Commentary.

Why  is  there  this  frequent  repetition
in  tliis  promise  ?  (Verses  13  and  16).
Three  times  is  the  perpetuity  declared.
"Why  is  this  ?  It  is  to  meet  the  diffi-
culties of  our  faith,  arising  from  the
lengthened  suspension  of  the  promise,
and  the  apparent  improbability  of
Ciirist's  everlasting  monarchy .-^2c/:^r-
steth.

We  have  seen  that  David  was  himself
a  ])roj)hecy  of  Christ.  It  follows  from
that,  therefore,  that  the  Temple  which
he  so  desired  to  build  is  a  prophecy  of
the  Ciiurch.  With  all  its  grandeur
nuder  Solomon,  that  stately  building
was,  after  all,  only  a  type  of  that  more
glorious  spiritual  fabric  which  is  "  built
upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles
and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  himself  being
the  chief  corner-stone,  in  whom  all  the
building,  htly  framed  together,  groweth
into  an  holy  tem})le  in  the  Lord."
Now,  in  the  erection  of  this  living
temple  we  may  all  take  part.  When
by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  we  become
united  to  Him,  and  receive  the  Holy
Spirit  into  our  hearts,  we,  as  it  were,
build  ourselves,  or,  in  another  aspect
of  it,  are  built  by  God,  as  living  stones
into  that  glorious  edifice  which  Jehovah
through  the  ages  is  rearing  for  His  own
eternal  abode.  When,  again,  by  our
instrumentality,  either  directly  in  the
efforts  which  we  put  forth  at  home,  or
indirectly  through  the  labours  of  those
whom  we  sustain  abroad,  we  work  for
the  conversion  of  others,  we  are  engaged
ns  under-builders,  on  the  same  spiritual
edifice,  David  w<uild  have  counted  it
the  highest  privilege  of  his  life  if  he
had  been  permitted  to  build  the  Temple
on  Moriah  ;  and  even  after  the  pro-
hibition came  by  the  mouth  of  Nathan,
it  was  the  joy  of  his  latter  years  to
collect  materials  wherewith  Solomon,
his  son,  might  raise  a  liouse  worthy  of
Jehovah's  worship.  Nay,  more,  in  the
days  of  Solomon  himself,  after  the
gorgeous  structure  had  been  raised,
318


everyone  who  had  done  anything,  liow-
ever  small,  in  the  way  of  ht^lpiiig  on
its  erection,  was  invested  with  a  pecu-
liar honour  in  the  ey(\s  of  his  fellow-
countr\nien.  As  the  Psalm  expresses
it :  "  A  man  was  famous  according  as
he  had  lifted  axes  u])on  the  thick  trees."
But  a  higher  privilege,  and  a  more
lasting  renow^n,  will  be  the  portion  of
him  who  assists  in  the  most  humble
capacity  in  the  uprearing  of  that  Church
which  is  to  be  "  for  a  habitation  of  God
through  the  Spirit."  "  They  that  be
wise  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the
firmament,  and  they  that  turn  many  to
righteousness  as  the  stars  for  ever  and
ever." — Taylor.

Ver.  13.  Where  Jesus  reigns  in
power  men  must  yield  obedience  of
some  sort.  His  kingdom,  moreover,  is
no  house  of  cards  or  dynasty  of  days  ;
it  is  as  lasting  as  the  lights  of  heaven  ;
days  and  nights  will  cease  before  He
abdicates  His  throne.  Neither  sun  nor
moon  as  yet  manifest  any  failure  in
their  radiance,  nor  are  there  any  signs
of  decrepitude  in  the  Kingdom  of  Jesus,
it  is  but  in  its  youth,  and  is  evidently
the  coming  power,  the  rising  sun.  .  .  .
Throughout  all  generations  shall  the
throne  of  the  Redeemer  stand.  Hu-
manity shall  not  wear  out  the  religion
of  the  Incarnate  God.  No  infidelity
shall  wither  it  away,  nor  superstition
smother  it  ;  it  shall  rise  immortal  from
what  seemed  its  grave  ;  as  the  true
phaMiix,  it  shall  revive  from  its  ashes.
As  long  as  there  are  men  on  earth
Christ  shall  have  a  throne  among  them.
Instead  of  the  fathers  shall  be  the
children.  Each  generation  shall  have
a  regeneration  in  its  midst,  let  Pope
and  devil  do  what  they  may.  Even  at
this  hour  we  have  the  tokens  of  His
eternal  power  ;  since  He  ascended  t
His  throne  eighteen  hundred  years  a
Ilis  dominion  lias  not  been  overturned,
though  the  mightiest  of  empires  have
gone  like  visions  of  the  night.  We
see  on  the  shores  of  time  the  wrecks  of
the  Caesars,  the  relics  of  the  Moguls,
and  the  last  remnant  of  the  Ottomans.
Charlemagne,  Maximilian,  Napoleon,
how  they  flit  like  shadows  before  us  !


o

JIO.


CHAP.  VIL  UOMILETIU  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


Tliey  were  and  are  not  ;  but  Jesus  for  tramples  upon  tlie  p^eatest  tyrants^

ever  is.     As   for   tlie   houses   of  IIo-  the  powers  of  darkness.  ...  8.  The

henzollern,  Guclph,  or  Ilapsburt^,  they  next  advantage  from  a  <,^ood  government

have  their  hour  ;  but  the  Son  of  David  h  plenty.     To  secure  this  is  sometimes

has  all  hours  and  ages  as  His  own. —  beyond  iiuman  power  and  policy.  .  .  .

Spurgeon.  Iii  general   it   may   be  asserted   that

human  laws  should   not  interfere   too

Ver.  16.    The  advantages  of   civil  much.  .  .  .    Everyone  should  be  left

govemmeut  contrasted  with  the  blessings  at    liberty,    as    far     as     possible,    to

of  the  spiritual  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ.  choose  his  own   way  in   pursuing  his

1.    The   first  and  primary  advantage      prosperity Under  the

expected  from  every  well  constituted  best    systems    of   government    there

huu)an   government    is   security,    and  must  remain  many  cases  of  want  and

the  sense  of  security.  .  .  .  Whatever  distress;  but  in  the  kingdom  of  Jesus

may  be  the  imperfections  attaching  to  Christ  there  exists  an  infinite  plenty

various  modes  of  government,  the  i«;or5^  for  all  the  wants  of  the  soul.     .     .     .

is  preferable  to  a  state  of  society  desti-  4.   A  tendency  to  improvement  in  its

tute  of  public  authority  and  law  ;  in  social  institutions  ought  to  accompany

such  a  state  there  can  exist  not  only  every  well-ordered  government.     The

no  security,  but  no  tranquillity  ....  best  of  those  institutions  are  such  as

But  the  utmost  that  can  be  enjoyed  will  be  at  once  permanent  and  pro-

under  any  form  of  civil  power  is  a  most  gressive  by  their  intrinsic  wisdom  and

imperfect  shadow  of  the  safety  which  excellence — by  their  adaptation  to  all

Jesus  Christ  bestows  upon  the  subjects  the  varying  circumstances  of  the  nation

o^  W'lii  spiritual  xii\g\\.  .  .  2.  The  second  — by  their  power  of  providing  for  pos-

benefit  expected  from  human  govern-  sible  emergencies—  they  will  gradually

ment  is  liberty.     So  far  as  this  advan-  rise  from  security  to  convenience,  and

tage   is   consistent   with    the    former,  t\\Qi\  QXdlt  convenience  mio  or v\^v[iqi\\, —

the  more  largely  it  is  enjoyed  the  better.  into  just  refinement  and  diffused  illu-

Every  diminution  of  our  liberty,  ex-  mination.    .     .     .     The  gospel  empire

cept  such  as  is  necessary  to  our  protec-  possesses    within    itself    interminable

tion  from  evils  which  might  otherwise  energies  and  tendencies  to  benefit  its

be  apprehended,  is  itself  just  so  much  subjects.     .     .     .      All   those   elysian

redundant  evil.   .    .    .  Restraint  that  images  of  prophecy  which  paint  with

connot  be  justified  by  the  production  so  much  beauty  the  latter  days  of  the

of  some  greater  benefit  than  could  be  world,  are  nothing  in  their  substantial

attained  without  it,  is  not  2 wjt?^/;/^c^/(???,  fulfilment  but   the   impress   of  Jesus

it  is  injustice.  .  .  .    But  suppose  the  Christ  on  the  minds  and  manners  of

utmost  degree  of  civil  liberty  to  be  mankind — the   image   of   Christianity

enjoyed,   what  is  that  in  comparison  embodied  in  society,  and  righteousness

with  that  real  spiritual  freedom  whicli  dwelling  in  the  new-created  universe.

Jesus  Christ  confers  ?  .  .  .  From  the  ...     5.  The  fifth  and  last  element

moment  the  Christian  enters  into  the  is  stability  ;  this  is  the  crown  of  all  its

kingdom  of  grace  and  truth,  he  leaves  other   advantages.      Nothing   can    be

his  bonds  behind  ;  invigorated  with  a  wanting  to  such  a  reign   but  that  it

Divine  strength    he  purposes  and    it  should  last ;  and  this  is  what  the  text

stands  fast ;  \\q  triumj^hs  over  himself ;  emphatically  expresses. — llobt.  Hall,
is  victorious  over   the  world,   .    .    ,

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAO RAPE. -^Verses  77—29.

David's  Thanksgiving  and  Prayer.

I.    The  bestowal  of  new  honours  should  awaken  a  new  sense  of  humility.
The  vessel  that  carries  much  sail  and  looks  well  above  the  water,  should  have

319


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAM  I' EL.  'ch.vp.  il.


much  ballast  belo*/  the  water-line.  Only  some  heavy  weight  in  the  hold  will
give  the  needful  steadiness  to  the  ship.  So  the  soul  tliat  receives  from  God  many
and  great  gifts,  and  is  honoured  by  Him  in  a  special  manner,  needs  to  be  well
ballasted,  lest,  being  too  higldy  exalted,  it  make  shipwreck  on  the  rock  of  pride.
But  if  the  man  be  in  right  relations  to  God,  a  sense  of  his  unworthiness  and  of
the  increase  of  responsibility  wliioli  eacli  new  gift  and  honour  brings,  will  be  to
him  what  the  iron  and  stone  in  the  hold  are  to  the  full-rigiied  ship.  With  David,
humility  seems  ever  to  have  kept  ])nce  with  the  honour  bestowed  upon  him  by
God.  On  the  day  when  he  was  first  brought  before  Saul  as  the  deliverer  of  his
people  from  the  Philistine  giant,  his  words  and  bearing  show  that  he
possessed  that  spirit  of  dei)pndence  upon  God  which  is  only  found  in  those
who  have  formed  a  lowly,  and  thevelore  a  right  estimate  of  themselves.  We  find
no  trace  of  any  other  spirit  in  him  at  any  period  of  his  history  up  to  this
crowning  day  of  his  life,  when  it  was  revealed  to  him  that  he  was  to  be,  not
only  a  great  and  mighty  monarch  himself,  but  the  ancestor  of  one  who  should
rule  a  far  more  mighty  and  enduring  empire.  The  manner  in  which  he  receives
the  revelation  shows  how  well  htted  he  was  to  carry  with  a  steady  hand  the
overflowing  cup  of  blessing  held  out  to  him.

II.  Prayer  for  the  fulfilment  of  Divine  promises  is  a  law  of  the  kingdom

of  God.  The  promise  that  God  gave  to  David  concerning  the  Messiah  was
certain  to  be  fulfilled  ;  no  power  in  the  universe  could  prevent  it.  But  many
things  are  included  in  the  certainty  of  its  fulBlment,  and  prayer  is  one — the
j)rayers  of  all  the  faithful  who  lived  before  the  coming  of  Christ.  The  very
longing  of  these  souls  for  some  more  comi)lete  manifestation  of  God  than  they
possessed  was  in  itself  a  prophecy  of  it,  and  the  assurance  which  they  received
of  the  coming  blessing  did  by  no  means  cause  them  to  cease  to  pray  for  it,  but
gave  them  matter  for  supplication  and  a  motive  to  continue  in  it.  David  here
feels  no  inconsistency  in  asking  that  what  God  has  promised  shall  come  to  pass,
but  links  his  prayer  to  the  Divine  word,  and  makes  the  promise  the  basis  of  the
petition  :  "  And  now  0  Lord  God,  the  word  tJiat  'Ihou  hast  spoken  concerning
Thy  servant,  and  concerning  his  house,  establish  it  for  ever,  and  do  as  Ihou
hast  said.''  (Ver.  25.)  "  And  now  0  Lord  God,  .  .  .  Thy  words  be  true,
and  'Ihou  hast  promised  this  goodness  unto  'J'hy  servant :  therefore  now  let  it
please  Thee  to  bless  the  house  of  Thy  servant.  (Verses  28  and  29.)  So  Daniel,
when  he  understood  that  the  time  was  drawing  nigh  for  the  return  of  the
captives  from  Babylon  '^  set  his  face  unto  the  Lord  God  to  s^ek  by  prayer  and
supplications,  with  fastings''  (Dan.  ix.  3),  and  besought  the  Lord  ''to  hearken,
and  do,  and  defer  not''  (ver.  19)  to  fulHl  the  promise  which  He  had  made  by
Jeremiah.  And  this  not  because  Daniel  had  any  misgivings  concerning  the
faithfulness  of  Jehovah,  but  because  that  very  faithfulness  furnished  him  with
the  ground  for  his  appeal.  The  same  connection  between  Divine  promises  and
human  prayers  is  taught  and  practised  in  the  dispensation  of  the  New  Testament.
We  know  that  the  kingdom  of  God  will  "  come,''  and  His  will  one  day  "  be  done,
as  in  heaven,  so  on  earth,"  yet  our  Lord  commands  His  disciples  to  pray  constantly
for  this  blessed  result.  Paul  declares  in  Rom.  x.  1,  that  his  "  heart's  desire  and
prayer  to  God  for  Israel  is,  that  they  might  be  saved,  and  in  the  next  chapter
(ver.  26)  says  that  it  is  the  purpose  and  plan  of  God  when  the  fulness  of  the
Gentiles  be  come  in,  that  ''all  Israel  shall  be  saved."  Promise  and  petition  are
indissolubly  linked  together  in  the  Divine  economy,  and  as  Dr.  Chalmers  remarks,
"  God's  prophecies  tell  us  what  ought  to  be  the  subject  of  our  prayers,"


B20


CHAP.  VTT.


no  MI  LET  IC  CO  M  MENTA  P,  Y :  SA  M  UEL.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


Ver.  17.  We  see  the  fidelity  of  the
Lord's  prophet,  which  all  His  servants
in  the  n)inistry  should  imitate,  and  that
he  is  not  ashamed  to  recall  and  recant
what  formerly  he  had  said  to  David
upon  better  ground  and  information
from  the  Lord.  Which  should  teach
all  men  humbly  to  submit  to  truth,  and
quit  error  and  not  to  stand  upon  their
own  credit,  in  maintaining  what  once
they  have  professed  without  retracta-
tion.— Guild.

Here  there  presents  itself  to  us  a
striking  testimony  of  the  reality  of
immediate  divine  revelations.  David
and  Nathan  united,  according  to  their
best  knowledge  and  conscience,  in  a
trnly  piousand  holy  work, and  suddenly
they  renounce  their  cherished  purpose,
whoseexecution  everything  appeared  to
counsel.  Why  did  they  give  up  the  noble
intention  ?  Not  certaiidy  of  their  own
accord,  but  rather  because  God  the
Lord  gave  forth  his  voice  regarding  it,
and  inteiposed  immediately  his  veto.
And  liow  should  the  living  personal
God,  who  has  given  to  man  the  power
of  speech,  not  himsolf  be  able  to  speak
to  the  children  of  men  ?  No  argument
that  can  stand  the  test  can  be  urged  to
the  contrary. — KrummacJier.

This  revelation  is  an  epoch-making
one  for  David's  inner  life.  It  brought
an  entirely  new  element  into  his  life,
which  as  the  Psalms  show,  moved  him
powerfully  .  .  .  David  saw  its
meaning  more  and  more  clearly  when
he  compaied  the  promise  with  the
Mes-sianic  idea  which  had  been  handed
down  from  the  fathers,  and  finally
attained  to  perfect  certainty  by  the
further  inner  disclosures  attached  to
this  fundamental  promise,  with  which
he  was  occupied  day  and  night.  P>sa.  ii.
and  P.^a.  ex.  afford  sp3cial  proof  that
such  spiritnal  disclosures  were  really
given  Lo  him.  The  Messianic  hope,
which  had  experienced  no  further
development  since  Gen.  xlix,  now
acquired  much  greater  fulness  and  life.
It  had  a  substratum  for  further dcvelo])-
ment,  hallowed  by  God  Himself,  in  the
kingdom    already    in    existence,   and


especially   in  David's  personality  and
fortunes. — Hengstenberg.

The  narrative  shows  that  the
Messianic  sense  of  the  prediction  was
not  oidy  understood,  but  that  it  filled
David's  heart  wi til  the  warmest  emotions
of  gratitude  and  delight.  We  found
this  remark  partly  on  the  elevated
strain  of  David's  thanksf]:ivino:  .  .  .
It  is  abrupt,  impassi(med,  sublime.  It
is  the  language  of  one  who  has  been
raised  to  the  same  lofty  pedestal  as
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  the  illus-
trious fathers  of  the  nation,  and  made
to  occupy  the  same  relation  to  tlie  Seed
of  the  Woman.  Both  in  spirit  and  in
sentiment  there  is  a  close  corresi)ondence
between  this  thanksgiving  and  that  of
the  Virgin  Mary.  Generally,  the
announcement  was  understood  by  the
people  as  a  prediction  of  the  Messiah.
Henceforth  the  Hope  of  Israel  waa
known  as  the  Son  of  David. —  Blaikie,

Ver.  25.  There  are  two  ways  wherein
David's  faith  works.  L  By  believing
the  Divine  word,  "  Thou  hast  said.  *
'I'he  object  and  ground  of  faith  is  the
Divine  saying — it  is  not  u})on  thus
saith  a  man,  or  thus  saith  a  minister,
nay,  nor  thus  saith  an  angel.  Divine
faith  can  stand  only  upon  a  Divine
testimony.  If  you  have  faith,  then
you  have  received  the  word,  not  as  the
word  of  man,  but,  as  it  is  indeed,  the
Word  of  God.  II.  h a ith  acts  by  plead-
ing the  accomplishment  of  the  promise,
"  Do  as  Thou  hast  said."  It  is  the
business  of  faith  to  put  God  to  His
word.  1.  To  plead  upon  the  mercy
that  made  the  })romise.  2.  Upon  the
truth  that  is  to  make  out  the  promise.

3.  Upon   the  power  of  the   Piomiser.

4.  Upon   the  Blood  of  the  Covenant.

5.  Upon  the  love  of  God  to  Christ.^
Krskine,

Ver.  29.  Blessed  conviction  !  What
matters  it  that  our  offspring  be  suc-
cessful in  business,  or  rise  in  the  world,
or  form  hi^h  connections,  or  accumu-
late great  fortunes,  if  there  be  no  grace
in  their  hearts,  enlightening,  refining,
\  321


tiOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   SA M UEL.  book  ii.


:ind  enlarging  their  moral   faculties;  would  be  a  Divine  and  spiritual  one?

and  what  matters  it  though  the  world  In  what  sense  an  earthly  and   niannifi-

pity  them,  and  scorn    and  liate  them,  cent  one?     I   answer — he  looked  for

it"  Christ  be  in  them  the  hope  of  glory,  ifo  earthly  magnificence  which  was  not

lUaikie.  the  manifestation  of  an   inward   and

spiritual     dominion  ;     he     feared    no

In  what  sense,  I  shall  be  asked,  did  earthly    magnificence,    which    was    a

David  expect  that  his  sons'  kingdom  manifestation  of  it. — Maurice,


CHAPTER    VIII.

Critical  AND  ExposiTORT  Notes.— Ver.  1.  •*  Metheg-ammah.*  This  is  a  very  obscure
word,  and  has  been  very  variously  translated.     *' Metheg  "  is  a  "bridle,"  and  "ammah  "  is

translated  mother  by  Keil,  Erdmann,  Phillipson,  and  Wordsworth.  Gesenius  says  this  word  is
always  used  in  a  figurative  sense  as  the  head,  or  foundation  of  a  thing,  and  agrees  with  the
scholars  above  named  in  understanding  it  here  to  signify  a  capital  or  chief  city.  If  so,  to  tuLe
the  bridle  can  only  mean  to  subdue,  and  this  entire  rendering  is  borne  out  by  the  parallel  passage
m  1  Chron.  xviii.  1.  Havernick,  Michaelis,  Ewald,  and  others  translate  arm-bridle^  but  attach
the  same  meaning  to  the  words.

Ver  2.  *•  Moab."  Nothing  is  known  of  the  cause  or  history  of  this  war.  Probably  David's
former  friend  (1  Sam.  xxii.  3,  4)  had  been  succeeded  by  a  ruler  of  a  different  spirit.  "  Probably
in  this  war  occurred  what  is  mentioned  in  1  Chron.  xi.  22  of  Benaiah,  one  of  David's  heroes."
{Erdmann).  "  Thus  he  fulfilled  Balaam's  prophecy  in  part  "  (Numb.  xxiv.  17).  {Wordsworth,)
"  Measured  them,"  "  This  refers  to  a  well-known  practice  of  Eastern  kings,  to  command  their
prisoi^ers  of  war,  particularly  those  who  had  greatly  incensed  the  victors,  to  lie  down  on  the
ground,  and  then  to  put  to  death  a  certain  portion  of  them,  which  was  determined  by  lot,  but
most  commonly  by  a  measuring  line.  This  usage  was  not,  perhaps,  usually  practised  by  the  people
of  God ;  but  Jewish  writers  assert  that  the  cause  of  this  particular  severity  against  Moab  was
their  having  massacred  David's  parents  and  family."  {Jamieson.)

Ver.  3.  **  Hadadezer."  Hadad  was  the  sun-sfod  of  the  Syrians,  and  the  name  signifies
Hadad  our  help.  "  Zobah."  A  portion  of  Syria  forming  a  separate  kingdom  in  the  time  of
Saul,  David,  and  Solomon.  See  1  Sam.  xiv.  47.  It  is  difficult  to  define  its  exact  position  and
limits,  but  there  seems  to  be  grounds  for  regarding  it  as  lying  chiefly  east  of  Coele-Syria,  and
extending  thence  north-east  and  east,  towards,  if  not  even  to,  the  Euphrates.  Smithes  Bib,
Dictionary.  "  As  he  went,"  That  these  words  refer  to  Hadadezer  and  not  to  David  seems
evident  from  the  use  of  the  word  recover.     David  had  not  possessed  territory  in  this  direction.

Ver.  4.  "  Seven  hundred  horsemen."  As  the  word  chariots  does  not  appear  in  the  original
text,  the  actual  reading  here  is  17<  0  horsemen,  whereas  in  Chronicles  7000  horsemen  and  1000
chariots  are  mentioned.  Most  scholars  agree  that  the  word  "chariots*'  has  been  accidentally
omitted,  and  the  numeral  for  a  thousand  confounded  with  one  denoting  a  hundred.  For  "  in  the
plains  of  Syria  seven  thousand  horsemen  woidd  be  a  much  juster  proportion  to  twenty  thousand
foot  than  seventeen  hundred"  (Keil,Thenius,etc.),  and,  further  on,  David  is  said  to  have  lamed  the
chariot-horses,  thereby  implying  the  use  of  chariots  in  the  engagement.  "  Houghed,"  etc.  The
word  translated  chariot-horses  denotes  all  animals  used  for  riding.  "  The  reason  of  this  mutila-
tion was,  that  horses  being  forbidden  by  the  Mosaic  constitution  to  the  Hebrews,  both  in  war  and
agriculture,  it  v\as  of  no  use  to  keep  them  ;  and  their  neighbours,  placing  much  dependence  on
cavalry,  but  having,  for  want  of  a  native  bieed,  to  procure  them  by  purchase,  the  greatest
damage  that  could  be  done  to  them  was  to  render  their  horses  unserviceable  in  war."  {Jamieson).
'*  He  reserved  a  hundred  of  them,  not  for  war,  but  for  a  triumph  or  guard  ;  whether  or  not  this
reservation  was  illegal  and  ungodly  is  not  said.     ( Translator  of  Lange's  Commentary.)

Ver.  7.  *'  The  servants  of  Hadadezer."  Either  his  "  governors  and  vassal  princes  "  (Keil)
or   "  his  immediate  guard.'*    {Erdmann.)

Ver.  8  The  cities  here  mentioned  are  unknown.  "  Brass,"  rather,  copper.  "  Some  centuries
before  this  copper  was  carried  in  quantities  from  Syria  to  Egypt."     {Bib.  Commentary.)


Ver.  9.     "  Hamath."    The  principal  city  of  upper  Syria  in  the 'valley  of  the  Orontes.

LO.     '

Q  is  ai

322


Ver.  10.     "  Joram."     Called  Hadoram  in  Chronicles,  and  this  is  most  likely  the  true  readinj^
fts  Joram  is  an  Israelitish  name.


CHAP.  VIII.  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


Ver.  13.  "  iTie  Syrians  in  the  valley  of  salt."  As  the  valley  of  salt,  near  the  Dead  Sea,
is  at  so  great  a  distance  from  Syria,  eitlun-  Edom  must  be  here  substituted  for  Aram  (here  rendered
Syrians),  or  the  words  "  and  Edom  "  must  be  inserted  before  "  the  valley  of  salt.^'  The  sequel
a(,nees  with  this  readings.  "  The  facts  were  probably  these  :  Whilst  David,  or  rather  Israel,
was  entangled  in  tlie  war  with  the  Ammonites  and  Aramaens,  the  Edoraites  seized  upon
tlie  opportunity  whicli  appeared  to  them  a  very  favourable  one  to  invade  the  land  of  Israel,  and
advanced  as  far  as  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  the  Aramaeans
were  defeatei  and  subjugated,  and  the  Israeliti^h  army  had  returned  from  this  war,  David
ordered  it  to  march  against  the  Edomites,  and  defeated  them  in  the  valley  of  salt."     {Keil.)

Ver.  16.  "  Jehoshaphat."  Nothing  farther  is  known  of  this  man.  "Recorder."  Literally,
one  who  calls  to  remembrance,  therefore  most  likely  one  who  recorded  the  most  important
ev<'Tits  of  the  nation.  Kcil  and  som<^  others  liken  the  oflBce  to  t)iat  of  the  ^*  mwjisier  memorice  of
the  later  Komans,  or  the  waka  nuns  of  the  Persian  court,  who  kee]>s  a  record  of  everything  that
takes  place  around  the  king,  furnishes  him  with  an  accoimt  of  all  that  occurs  in  his  kingdom,
places  his  visi  upon  all  the  king's  comtnauds,  and  keeps  a  special  protocol  of  all  these  things."

Ver.  17.  "Zadok."  A  descendant  of  Aaron's  son  Eleazar  (1  Chron.  v.  29-34,  vi.  37,  38).
"  Ahimelech."  It  is  strange  to  find  this  name  in  connection  with  Zadok  in  the  priesthood,  as
both  b(;fore  and  after  this  time  Abiathar  is  himself  mentioned  as  the  priest  (1  Sam.  xxii.  JO,  etc.  ;
1  Kings  i.  7,  etc.).  As  the  father  of  Abiathar  was  named  Ahim»  lech  some  have  proposed  to
triinspose  the  names,  but  this  would  not  solve  the  difficulty  in  1  Chron.  xxiv.  3,  6,  31.  But  the
preferable  solution  appears  to  be  that  held  by  Keil,  Wordsworth,  Berthean,  and  others,  that
Abiathar  had  a  son  of  the  same  name  as  his  (Abiathar's)  father,  who  with  Zadok  assisted  in  the
priestly  duties.  "The  historian  states,"  says  Wordsworth,  "that  Zadok  and  Ahimelech  were
priests  ;  not,  as  in  our  version,  the  priests.  He  supposes  the  reader  to  know  the  notori'  'US  fact
that  Abiathar  was  the  priest.  But  he  tells  us,  in  addition  to  Abiathar  the  High  Priest,  Zadok
and  Ahimelech  olBciated  as  priests,  just  as  we  read  of  "  the  two  sons  of  Eli  .priests  of  the  Lord."
(1  Sam.  i.  3.)  Abiathar  and  Ahimelech  descended  from  Ithamar,  Aaron's  younger  son.
•*  Scribe."     Probably  the  State-secretary.

Ver.  18.  "Benaiah."  A  mighty  warrior  mentioned  in  chap,  xxiii.  20.  Cherithites  and
PeJethites.  The  first  of  these  words  is  from  a  verb  meaning  to  cut  down  or  exterminate,  and
probably  points  to  one  duty  of  iheim  men,  viz.,  that  of  executioners.  Pelethites  is  deri\  ed  from
a  word  signifying  to  run,  to  hasten,  and  intimates  that  they  had  to  carry  the  royal  orders  to
distant  places.  They  were  evidently  David's  body-guard.  Some  have  derived  the  names  from
the  Philistines,  and  from  a  Philistine  tribe  mentioned  1  Sam.  xxx.  14,  but  the  derivation  seems
far-fetched.  "  Chief  rulers."  The  same  word,  used  in  1  Kings  iv.  5  and  translated  "principal
officer,"  is  afterwards  explained  as  "  the  king's  friend."  It  probably  signifies  confidential
advisers.

MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  CHAPTER.

David's    Conquests.

I.  However  long  the  conflict  continues  between  the  kingdom  of  God  and  the
enemies  of  that  king-dom,  the  final  issue  is  not  doubtful-  The  land  of  Palestine
had  long  since  been  given  by  God  to  the  descendants  of  Al)raliam,  who  then
constituted  the  Church  of  God  upon  the  earth.  But  from  the  days  of  Joshua
until  the  reign  of  David,  the  struggle  between  the  old  inhabitants  and  the  new
had  been  continued  with  varying  success.  There  had  been  dark  days  when
Israel  had  been  almost  entirely  subdued  by  her  enemies,  yet  she  had  never  lost
her  footing  in  the  promised  land;  and  now,  under  David,  she  saw  herself  the
mistress  of  Jerusalem  in  the  heart  of  the  kingdom,  and  her  foes  subdued  on  every
side.  So  it  must  and  shall  be  in  every  contest  of  the  Church  of  the  Living  God
with  those  who  oppose  her.  She  will  be  subject  to  varying  fortunes,  and  will
sometimes  appear  to  sink  too  low  to  rise  again  ;  but  she  shall  eventually  subdue
all  her  enemies,  and  instead  of  the  Church  militant  shall  become  the  Church
triumphant.

II.  The  victory  of  the  kingdom  of  God  depends  upon  the  fulfilment  of  moral
conditions.  The  success  of  the  Philistines  and  the  other  nations  against  Israel
had  arisen  from  the  moral  degeneracy  of  the  latter — from  their  neglect  to  fiiltil
the  conditions  upon  which  God  had  promised  them  a  peaceful  occupation  of  the
land.  And  David  now  subdued  them,  and  brought  in  a  long  period  of  rest,  not
because  he  was  a  mighty  and  skilful  warrior,  but  because  he  was  a  man  of  faith

323


no  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,  book  n.


in  the  Unseen,  and  one  wlio,  on  the  vvliole,  was  sincere  in  his  devotion  and
undivided  in  liis  service  to  God.  It  is  because  the  nominal  members  of  God's
kingdom  in  the  world  have  not  fnKilled  His  conditions  of  success  tliat  the  victory
of  the  Cross  is  so  long  delayed  and  the  Gospel  makes  so  little  progress  among  the
nations.  The  earth  has  been  given  to  Christ  and  His  ])eople,  and  the  Great
David  will  one  day  subdue  all  things  to  Himself  and  put  an  end  to  the  conflict.
But  the  "  coming  of  the  kingdom  "  is  retarded  by  the  want  of  faith  in  the
so  called  disciples  of  Christ,  and  by  their  apathy  and  worldliness — by  their
attempts  to  serve  other  gods  beside  Jehovah,  and  by  their  unwillingness  to  deny
themselves  for  the  cause  they  profess  to  have  at  heart.

III.  However  diversified  the  enemies  of  God  may  be,  they  are  one  in  opposition
to  Him  and  to  His  rule.  There  are  birds  of  prey  wearing  a  variety  of  plumage
and  exhibiting  other  differences  which  show  them  to  belong  to  different  families.
But  they  have  one  and  the  same  instinct,  and  though  they  may  sometimes  be  found
fighting  with  each  other,  a  desire  after  the  carcase  is  common  to  all.  The  people
mentioned  here  as  warring  against  Israel  were  of  different  races,  and  inhabited
different  lands,  and  doubtless  often  warred  against  each  other  ;  but  they  were
one  in  their  hatred  of  Israel  and  opposition  to  David.  They  are  typical  of  the
enemies  of  the  spiritual  Israel  and  of  those  who  oppose  the  progress  of  the
kingdom  of  David's  Son  and  Lord.  Men  who  differ  in  all  other  points  are  found
agreeing  in  this,  and  although,  like  Herod  and  Pilate,  they  may  be  o])po8ed  to
each  other  on  other  matters,  they  will  often  be  found,likethem,  uniting  for  this  end.

IV.  Yet,  when  the  Church  of  God  has  temporal  ascendancy  and  external
prosperity  some  who  care  not  for  her  principles  will  court  her  friendship.
When  David  had  subdued  many  nations  the  king  of  Ilamath  saluted  and  blessed
him  and  so  showed  himself  an  exception  to  the  general  rule  mentioned  above.
But  this  friendship  for  David  was  not  founded  on  religious  sym])athy,  but  on
hatred  of  a  rival,  and  on  policy.  So  the  hatred  between  the  enemies  of  God  may
sometimes  for  a  time  be  niore  active  than  their  enmity  to  His  kingdom  ;  but
friendship  arising  from  such  a  source  will  oidy  last  while  the  Church  is  in
temporal  prosperity.  Like  the  multitudes  who  shouted  **  Hosanna  !  "  during  the
brief  moment  of  Christ's  ])opularity,  and  molted  away  or  joined  in  crying  **  Away
with  Him,"  in  the  hour  of  darkness,  they  will  ever  be  found  on  the  side  which  has
the  outward  ascendancy.

V.  Those  who  do  the  work  of  preparation  and  those  who  inherit  and  carry
on  their  labour  are  one  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  man  who  fells  the  tree,
and  digs  up  the  roots,  and  plans  out  the  ground  for  a  city,  is  a  co-worker  with
him  who  raises  the  walls  and  bnilds  the  palacos.  Without  the  toil  of  the  first
the  work  of  the  latter  could  not  be  accomplished,  but  there  is  danger  that,  when
the  whole  is  finished,  the  part  which  the  first  labourer  had  in  the  work  may  he
forgotten.  David,  in  what  we  may  believe  was  far  less  congenial  work  than  the
building  of  a  temple  would  have  been,  made  the  building  of  that  tem[)le
possible,  and,  by  the  establishment  of  an  orderly  system  of  Divine  worship  and
service,  educated  the  s])iritual  perceptions  of  the  people,  so  that,  when
they  possessed  a  more  permanent  and  gorgeous  house  of  God,  they  might  under-
stand that  it  was  but  the  means  to  an  end — only  the  outward  and  visible  sign
of  an  inward  and  unseen  reality — of  that  worship  of  the  heart  and  homage  of
the  life,  without  which  all  other  gifts  and  service  are  not  only  worthless  in  the
sight  of  God,  but  an  insult  nnd  an  abomination.  Let  no  worker  fi)r  God  be
discouraged  because  he  cannot  do  the  completed  work  npon  which  he  has  set  his
heart,  it  is  a  law  of  the  Divine  kingdom  that  one  man  "sows  and  another  reaps."
The  sowing  is  not  the  most  joyous  part  of  the  work,  but  for  this  very  reason
it  mav  be  more  honourable,  and  is  that  without  which  the  other  could  not  exist,

32i


CHAP.  VIII.  nOMlLETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  SA  MUEL.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

The  transitions  of    the  Bible,  like  would  be  beyond  the  power  of  human

those    of  actual  life,  are  often  singii-  nature   to    resist   the   temptation    to

larly  abrupt  ;  that  which  now  hurries  describe   great  battles, — the  story   of

us  from  the  scene  of  elevated  commu-  which  is  always  read  with  such  interest,

nion    with    Ilo.ivcn,    to   the   confused  and  which  reflect  so  much  earthly  glory

noise  and  dismal  struggles  of  a  battle-  on  one's  nation. — Blaikie.
field,  is  peculiarly  startling.  ...  It  is

an  instructive  fact  that  the  history  of  Vers.  15-18.  In  the  minds  of  most
these  wars  occupy  so  small  a  portion  readersof  the  Bible,  the  name  of  David,
of  the  Bible.  A  single  verse  is  all  that  king  of  Israel,  is  associated  maiidy
can  be  afforded  to  most  of  them.  Had  with  military  power,  poetic  genius,  and
they  been  narrated  at  length,  they  personal  piety  ;  and  only  on  the  rarest
would  probably  have  formed  a  narra-  occasions  do  we  hear  any  reference
tive  that  would  have  placed  David,  made  to  his  administrative  ability,
as  a  captain,  on  a  level  with  Cyrus,  Yet  in  this  last  quality  he  was  at  least
Hannibal,  or  Alexander.  It  is  one  of  as  remarkable  as  in  any  one  of  the
the  less  noticed  ])roofs  of  the  inspira-  others  ;  and  great  injustice  is  done  to
tion  of  the  Old  Testament,  that  such  him  if  we  leave  out  of  view  the  emi-
dazzling  transactions  as  these  are  nent  services  which  he  rendered  to  his
passed  over  so  briefly.  There  is  no  country  by  the  exercise  of  his  govern-
other  history  in  the  world  where  more  ment  and  his  organising  faculties.  .  .  .
space  would  be  occupied  in  describing  More  than  Charlemagne  did  for  Europe,
the  carrying  of  an  ark  to  its  perma-  or  Alfred  for  England,  David  accom-
nent  resting-place  than  in  narrating  plished  for  the  tribes  of  Israel. —
seven  great  military  campaigns.      It  Taylor,


CHAPTER  IX.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1.  "And  David  said."  This  could  not  have
occurred  until  David  had  reigned  many  years,  seeing  that  Mephibosheth  was  only  five  years  old
when  his  father  died,  and  was  now  a  father  himself.     (See  ver.  12  and  chap.  iv.  4.)

Ver.  3.  "  The  kindness  of  God."  This  expression  is  understood  by  some  as  "  love  and
kindness  shown  in  God,  and  for  God's  sake,"  (Keil)\  by  others  as  "a  kindness  such  as  God
Himself  shows,"  {Erdmann) ;  while  Patrick  takes  the  expression  as  a  superlative  form  to  denote
simply  very  (jreat  kindness.  Wordsworth  paraphrases  it  "  love  for  the  Lord's  sake,  and  in  the
Lord's  sight,  and  according  to  the  Lord's  example."

Ver.  4.  **  Lodebar.**  From  chap.  xvii.  27  we  learn  that  this  was  beyond  Jordan,  near
Mahanaim  ;  it  is  generally  thoujL'ht  to  be  identical  with  Lidbir  or  Debir,  mentioned  in  Josh,
xiii.  26.     From  the  same  source  we  learn  that  Machir  was  a  man  of  position  and  wealth,

Ver.  7.  "Fear  not."  Mephibosheth's  alarm  may  have  arisen  merely  from  "  the  simplicity
and  bashfulness  of  a  youth  who  had  lived  in  a  nomad  country,  and  who  was  awed  by  the
splendour  of  a  court,"  {Jamieaon),  or  from  the  fear  that  David  was  about  to  follow  the  custom  of
oriental  rulers,  and  slay  all  the  representatives  of  the  royal  family  which  he  had  displaced.
"All  the  Land,"  etc.  "  It  is  evident  from  these  words  that  the  landed  property  belonging  to
JSaul  had  either  fallen  to  David  as  crown  lands,  or  had  been  taken  possession  of  by  distant
relations  after  the  death  of  Saul."     (Keil.)

Ver.  8.  "A  dead  dog."  "  Mephibosheth's  early  misfortunes  threw  a  shade  over  his  whole
life,  and  his  personal  deformity — as  is  often  the  case  when  it  has  been  the  result  of  accident —
set'ms  to  have  exercised  a  depressing  and  depreciatory  influence  on  his  character  (see  also  chap.
xix.  26,  26)."     (Smith's  Bib.  Vict.)

Ver.  10.  "  Although  a  daily  guest  at  the  royal  table,  Mephibosheth  had  to  make  provision
as  a  royal  prince  for  the  maintenance  of  his  own  family  and  servants."     {Keil.)

325


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL,  book  ii.

main  homiletics  of  tub  chapter,
David  and  Mephibosheth.

I.  The  merit  of  a  dead  parent  is  often  a  channel  of  blessing  to  the  living
child.  Other  things  being  equal,  it  is  doubtless  a  blessing  to  descend  from
parents  of  gentle  blood — from  those  who  beh)ng  to  the  nobility  of  this  world.
Any  member  of  such  a  family,  if  he  be  at  all  worthy  of  the  name  he  bears,  finds
that  name  a  fortune  in  itself  in  respect  to  the  earthly  and  temporal  advantages
it  confers  u})()n  him.  But  such  a  man  does  not  monopolize  all  the  honour  and
respect  shown  to  children  on  account  of  their  parentage.  Men  who  cannot
boast  of  a  long  pedigree,  but  who  can  rejoice  in  the  greater  honour  of  descending
from  the  morally  great,  iiave  often  found  the  goodness  of  their  departed  father
or  mother  bearing  fruit  for  them,  their  sons  and  daughters,  long  after  their
parents  have  left  the  world.  It  is  a  principle  which  has  received  a  Divine  sanc-
tion, for  God  who  declares  that  He  visits  the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  chil-
dren (Exod.  XX  5),  has,  both  by  word  and  deed,  repeatedly  blessed  the  children
for  the  father's  sake.  (Gen.  xxvi.  4,  5,  xxviii.  13,  etc.).  In  the  case  of  Mephi-
bosheth, the  principle  had  not  until  now  fully  asserted  itself.  The  son  of  one
whose  nature  was  as  noble  as  his  birth  was  princely,  and  whose  heroic  submission
to  the  Divine  will  and  devoted  friendship  have  been  very  rarely  equalled  and
never  surpassed,  Mephibosheth  seems  hitherto  to  have  come  sadly  short  of  what
was  due  to  him  as  the  sole  surviving  heir  of  Jonathan.  Those  who  protected
his  helpless  infancy  and  sheltered  him  in  his  crippled  manhood  may  have  been
in  part  actuated  by  regard  for  his  father,  but  none  owed  him  so  much  as  David,
who  now  at  last  discharges  the  debt  and  makes  his  friend's  child  feel  that,  after
all,  God  had  not  forgotten  to  care  for  the  son  of  a  faithful  servant.

II.  True  friendship  rejoices  to  find  a  child  to  receive  the  gratitude  which
it  would  have  rendered  to  the  dead  father.  If  Jonathan  had  lived  until  this
day  of  David's  exaltation,  he  would  have  been  satisfied  to  be  David's  friend — to
be  7iext  unto  him  (1  Sam.  xxiii.  17)  in  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  and  David  would
have  known  how  to  estimate  such  unselfish  loyalty  and  must  have  regarded  such
a  friend  with  profound  and  admiring  gratitude.  We  may  be  sure  that  nothing
would  have  been  wanting  on  David's  side  which  could  give  expression  to  the
feelings  which  must  have  filled  his  soul.  But  the  calamity  which  had  deprived
Mephibosheth  of  his  father  had  removed  David's  beloved  friend,  and  all  that  he
could  now  do  was  to  put  the  son  in  the  father's  place.  This  he  did  so  far  as  it
was  possible.  He  could  not  rejoice  in  the  presence  of  Jonathan  at  his  table,  but
Mephibosheth  should  take  his  place  and  keep  his  father's  memory  green  in  the
king's  heart.  None  who  is  truly  grateful  to  a  friend  for  favours  in  the  past  will
make  that  friend's  death  an  excuse  for  neglecting  to  acknowledge  and  to  repay
the  debt  of  gratitude.  A  true  man  will  feel  it  his  duty  and  his  delight  to  place
an  J  vvho  belong  to  his  benefactor  in  that  benefactor's  place,  and  to  do  that
relatively  which  he  can  no  longer  do  personally.

III.  Elevation  to  power  should  be  embraced  as  a  God-given  opportunity
for  repaying  past  favours.  When  David  first  received  kindly  notice  from
Jonathan  he  was  but  an  unknown  youth  who  could  only  give  grateful  love  in
return  for  the  prince's  favour.  And  as  the  years  rolled  on  and  he  became  more
known  only  to  be  more  in  need  of  a  true  friend,  Jonathan's  brotherly  faithfulness
was  often  his  only  source  of  human  counsel  and  cheer.  But  now  times  had
changed,  and  David  was  on  the  throne  of  Israel,  while  Jonathan's  child  was  an
exile  and  apparently  de])endent  upon  the  bounty  of  otliers,  and  so  an  opportunity
was  given  to  the  king  to  testify  his  grateful  remembrance  of  past  kindnesses,

326


OHAP.  IX.


IIOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


It  would  be  well  if  all  men  who  rise  from  ohsciiiity  to  fame  and  power  were  to
make  their  elevation  a  like  opi)ortunityof  remembering  those  who  befriended  them
in  their  days  of  adversity,  and  of  testifying  their  gratitude  to  them.  If  tliey
neglect  to  do  this,  they  omit  to  perform  a  most  sacred  duty,  and  show  themselves
wanting  in  one  of  the  main  elements  of  a  noble  disposition.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


This  fragment  of  history  may  be
looked  upon  in  two  lights.  I.  As
supplying  a  fine  illustration  of  human
friendship.  .  .  .  Jonathan  was
still  fresh  in  the  heart  of  David.  Death
cannot  really  deprive  us  of  our  friends
after  all.  Memory  holds  them,  enshrines
them,  presses  them  to  the  heart,  makes
them  more  real  to  us  after  death  than
before.  .  .  .  Friendship  gives  a
common  interest  :  what  our  friend
loves,  we  love  ;  His  children  in  a  sense
are  ours.  ...  II.  As  a  faint
image  of  Divine  love  to  the  world.  .  .  .
We  are  warranted  I  presume,  to  use
facts  in  human  history,  as  Jesus  used
the  waving  cornfields,  etc.  ...  to
illustrate  spiritual  and  Divine  facts.
Besides,  the  good  in  man  is  a  Divine
emanatio?i,  2iud  the  best  means  of  giving
an  idea  of  God.  I  see  more  of  the
Eternal  in  a  true  kindness  of  a  holy
man — such  kindness  as  David  now
displays — than  in  any  part  of  material
nature  ...  I  feel  justified  there-
fore, in  looking  upon  David's  conduct
towards  Mephibosheth  as  serving  to
illustrate  God's  conduct  towards  our
ruined  world.  .  .  .  1.  7 he  kind-
ness was  unsought.  The  son  of  Jonathan
did  not  make  any  application.  .  .  .
Did  the  world  seek  the  gift  of  God  ?
.  .  .  2.  The  kindness  was  in  con-
sideration of  someone  else.  It  was  "for
Jonathan's  sake."  .  .  .  Christ  is  not
the  cause  of  God's  love,  but  He  is  the
channel.  .  .  .  3.  7 he  results  of
the  kindness  are  illustrative  of  the
Divine.  It  found  out  Mephihosheth.
,  .  .  Christ  came  to  seek  and  to
save.  .  .  .  Tiie  apostles  were  sent
out  in  search  of  God's  objects  of  love.
.  .  .  God's  love  searches  out  men.
Providence,  conscience,  and  the  Gospel,
are  His  messengers.  .  .  .  It  restored
to  him  his  patrimonial  inheritance.
•    •    ,     God's  love  restores  us  to  our


lost  possessions.  Salvation  is  "paradise
regained "  etc.  It  exalted  to  distin-
guished honours.  "  And  thou  shalt  eat
bread  at  my  table  continually."  "  If
any  man  hear  my  voice,  1  will  come  in
unto  him,"  etc. — Dr,  David  Thomas.

Ver.  1.  Good  men  should  seek
opportunities  of  doing  good.  The
liberal  deviseth  liberal  things  (Isa.
xxxii.  8.)  For  the  most  proper  objects
of  our  kindness  and  charity  are  such  as
will  not  be  frequently  met  with  without
inquiry.  The  most  necessitous  are  the
least  clamorous.  David  had  too  long
forgotten  his  obligations  to  Jonathan,
but  now,  at  length,  they  are  brought  to
his  mind.  It  is  good  sometimes  to
bethink  ourselves  whether  there  beany
promises  or  engagements  that  we  have
neglected  to  make  good  ;  better  do  it
late  than  never. — Henry.

We  must  also  see  where  Jesus  our
fast  friend  hath  any  receivers  ;  that
since  our  goodness  extend^th  not  to
Him,  we  may  show  Him  knidness  in
His  people,  who  are  H^s  seed  and
prolong  His  days  upon  eajnh.  (Isa.  liii.
10,  Psa.  xvi.  3. — Trapp.

Ver.  8.  Humiliation  is  a  right  use  of
God's  affliction.  What  if  he  was  born
great  ?  If  the  sin  of  his  grandfather  hath
lost  his  estate,  and  the  hand  of  his  nurse
hath  deformed  and  disabled  his  person,
he  now  forgets  what  he  was,  and  calls
himself  worse  than  he  is,  "a  dog."
Yet,  ''  a  living  dog  is  better  than  a  dead
lion."  There  is  dignity  and  comfort  in
life  ;  Mephibosheth  is  therefore  a  dead
dog  unto  David.  It  is  not  for  us  to
nourish  the  same  spirits  in  our  adverse
estate,  that  we  found  in  our  highest
prosperity.  What  use  have  we  made
of  God's  hand,  if  we  be  fl?t  the  lower
with  our  fall  ?  God  intends  we  should
carry  our  cross,  not  maKe  a  hre  of  it  to
warm  us  :  it  is  no  bearing  up  our  sai.'»

32T


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,  book  ii.


in   a  tempest.      Good  David   cannot  son   of    Jonathan,    was   admitted    to

disesteein  Mepliiboslieth  ever  the  more  partake   in  the  royal   prerogatives  of

for  dis})ara;iiiig  himself;  he  loves  and  David's  son,  and  to  sit  continually  at

honours   this  humility  in  the  son  of  David's  table  ;  and  so  it  will  be  with

Jonathan.     There  is  no  more  certain  the  Jews  ;  when  they  are  Mephibosheths

way  to  glory  and  advancement,  than  a  in   faith  and  humility,   they   will    be

lowly  dejection  of  ourselves.- Z?p.  Hall.  Mephibosheths  in  honour,  they  will  be

admitted  to  share  in  the  glory  of  the

Ver.  13.     Here  also  we  see  that  the  True  David   in  the   Church   militant

'*  sure  mercies  of  David  "  overflowed  on  here     and     triumphant    hereafter. —

the  faithful  and  humble-minded  in  the  Wordsworth,
family  of  Saul.      Mepliiboslieth,   the


CHAPTER  X.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  2.  "Nahash."  This  may  be  the  same  Nahash
mentioned  in  1  Sam.  xi.  ;  but  as  this  was  probably  forty  years  after  the  event  there  recorded,  it
is  more  likely  a  son  of  the  same  name.  "As  his  father  showed  kindness."  What  this
kindness  was,  or  when  shown  is  nowhere  recorded ;  most  likely  some  friendly  act  in  the  days  of
David's  exile.

Ver.  3.  "  The  city."  Kabbah,  or  Rabbath-Ammon  the  capital  city,  which  was  a  city  of
much  importance  from  these  days  until  the  fourth  century.  Its  position  and  defences  would
make  it  necessary  that  an  enemy  proposing  to  besiege  it  should  examine  it  from  within.  The
remains  of  this  city  which  still  exisc  are  among  the  most  remarkable  in  Syria ;  and  although
most  of  the  Imildings  are  said  to  be  lloman,  the  citidel  is  said  to  be  much  more  ancient,  and
Mr.  Oliphant  (Land  of  Gilead)  refers  some  of  the  fortifications  to  the  days  of  David.
••  Shaved  cff;"  etc.  "  Cutting  off  a  person's  beard  is  regarded  by  the  Arabs  as  an  indignity
quite  equal  to  flogging  and  branding  among  ourselves.  Many  would  rather  die  than  have  their
beards  shaved  oflf.  Niebuhr  relates  a  similar  occurrence  as  having  taken  phice  in  modern  times.
In  the  year  1764,  a  pretender  to  the  Persian  throne,  named  Kerim  Khan,  sent  ambassadors  to
the  prince  of  Bendervigk,  on  the  Persian  gulf,  to  demand  tribute  of  him ;  but  he  in  return
cut  off  the  ambassador's  beards.  Kerim  Khan  was  so  enraged  at  this,  that  he  made  war  up  >n
the  prince  and  took  the  city."  {Keil)  "  The  Iraelites,  except  the  priests,  wore  no  breeches  ;
BO  much  the  grosser,  therefore,  was  the  second  insult."     (Krdmann).

Ver.  6.  "  Beth-rehob."  Probably  identical  with  the  present  Rubaibeh,  about  twenty-five
miles  N.E.  of  Damascus.  "  Tobah,"  see  on  chap.  viii.  3.  "  King  Maacha,"  rather,  *'  king  of
Ma  .cha."  A  territory  on  the  northern  border  of  Bashan,  on  the  south-west  declivity  of  Her-
mon.  (Dent.  iii.  14.)  "Ish-tob."  Rather  the  men  of  Tob,  a  region  near  the  Ammonite  territory,
where  Jephthah  took  refuge.  (Judges  xi.  5.)  Its  exact  location  cannot  be  fixed.  Twenty
thvvusand  footmen."  The  account  of  the  composition  of  the  forces  differs  here  from  that  in
Chronicles,  no  chariots  being  here  mentioned.  There  are  copyists'  errors  in  both  texts.  For  the
Syrian  troops  consisted  neither  of  footmen  alone,  nor  of  chariots  and  horsemen  alone,  but  of
infantry,  cavalry,  and  war  chariots,  as  is  evident,  not  only  from  chap.  viii.  4,  and  1  Chron.  xviii.  4,
but  also  from  the  close  of  our  narrative."     (Keil.)

Ver.  8.  **  Here  the  position  of  the  Syrians  in  the  field,  i.e.,  on  the  broad  plain  of  Medeba,  is
clearly  distinguished  from  the  Ammonites  before  the  city,  so  that  the  position  of  Joab's  army  is
clear.     He  could  (see  ver.  9)  be  attacked  both  in  front  and  rear."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  12.  **The  cities  of  our  God."  "Joab  and  Abishai  were  about  to  fight,  in  order
that  Jehovah's  possessions  might  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  heathen,  and  become  subject  to
their  gods."     (Keil.  J

Ver.  13.  "They  fled."  '*As  often  happens  for  those  that  fight  for  pay  alone,  and  not  for
the  cause."     [Grotius.)

Ver.  14.  "  Joab  returned."  As  may  be  inferred  from  chap.  xi.  1,  because  it  was  too  late
in  the  season  to  besiege  Kabbah.  "  Or  also  because  the  Syrians  were  not  sufficiently  broken,  or
he  tad  not  the  materials  for  a  siege,"     {Biblical  Commentary.)

228


CHAP.  X.  UOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


Ver.  16.  "  Hadarezcr."  (See  on  cliap.  viii.  8.)  "The  river."  The  Euphrates.  This
king  had  tributaries  in  Mesopotamia,  (f^ee;  cliap.  viii.  3)  "  i  elam."  The  h  cality  of  this
phice  is  not  known.  "  As  this  is  the  same  battle  that,  according;  to  1  Chron.  wiii.  3,  was
fou<4ht  at  Haniath,  it  must  be  .-icross  the  Jordan,  (see  ver.  17),  not  on  the  Euphrates,  but  further
west  than  Hamath."     {Erdmann.)     For  Hamath,  see  chap.  viii.  9.

Ver.  18.  "Seven  hundred  chariots,"  etc.  (See  Keil's  remark  at  the  close  of  ver.  6.)
He  and  other  schohu-s  consider  that  in  this  chapter  we  have  simply  a  more  circumstantial
account  of  the  war  of  whi  li  the  result  is  given  in  clia]).  viii.  In  support  of  this  view  it  is
urged  that  in  the  former  chapter  David  is  said  to  liave  sulxhied  the  Syrians  and  the  children  of
Ammon,  and  there  is  nothing  said  here  of  a  revolt  from  an  authority  previously  acquired,  but
the  circumstances  which  led  to  the  svd)j ligation  of  Ammon  are  here  fully  related  on  account  of
its  couuection  with  the  death  of  Uriah  in  the  next  chapter.

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  CHAPTER.

David  and  the  Ammonites.

I.  The  wisdom  and  virtues  of  the  parent  are  not  necessarily  found  in  the  child.

Although  we  have  no  iurtlier  information  concerning  the  father  of  Hanun  than
that  which  is  furni.shed  by  the  words  of  David,  they  are  tiufficient  to  sliow  that
he  was  a  far  wiser  and  better  man  than  his  son.  It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that
lie  showed  kindness  to  David  at  that  period  in  David's  life  when  nothing  but  a
kindly  dis[)Osition  could  have  prompted  him  to  the  deed — when  the  present  kin;^
of  Israel  was  not  in  a  position  either  to  resent  an  insult  or  reward  a  service
rendered.  We  may  fairly  then  assume  that  this  former  king  of  the  Ammonites
was  a  man  whose  character  was  above  the  level  of  the  monarchs  by  whom  he  was
surrounded,  and  it  is  possible  that,  as  a  descendant  of  Lot,  he  cherished  some
regard  for  tlie  nation  of  Israel,  and  some  reverence  for  Israel's  God.  But  the
conduct  of  his  son  is  a  proof  of  the  painful  truth  that  neither  wisdom  nor  moral
worth  are  hereditary.  If  Hanun  had  been  only  politically  wise  he  would  have
given  David's  ambassadors  a  different  reception.  If  goodwill  to  his  father's  old
ally  did  not  move  him  to  continue  the  friendship,  a  wise  man  would  have  seen  it
would  be  politic  to  do  so.  For  David  was  now  a  king  himself,  and  a  king  whom
it  was  worth  while  to  propitiate.  When,  therefore,  Hanun  not  merely  cast  from
him  an  opportunity  of  strengthening  his  kingdom  by  alliance  with  David,  but
added  great  insult  to  his  rejection,  he  showed  himself  a?  weak  as  he  was  wicked,
and  an  unworthy  son  of  a  worthy  parent.

II.  Those  who  are  in  the  wrocg  are  often  the  first  to  strike  the  blow
which  leads  to  war.  It  does  not  appear  tliat  David  took  any  steps  to  avenge
the  insult  offered  to  himself  aud  to  his  country — he  probably  felt  he  could
afford  to  let  it  pass,  and  was  willing  to  leave  the  Ammonites  and  their  king  in
the  hand  of  God.  But  Hanun  and  his  followers  measured  David  by  their  own
standard,  and  concluding  that  he  wouhl  be  filled  with  feelings  of  revenge,
hastened  to  follow  up  their  first  act  of  defiance  by  another,  which  compelled
David  to  take  action  against  them.  Thus  they  forced  upon  Israel  the  battle
which  ended  in  their  own  destruction,  for  David  would  have  failed  in  his  duty
had  he  not  have  now  dealt  out  retribution.  This  principal  is  ever  in  operation
in  the  various  spheres  of  human  life.  Even  in  the  play-ground  the  boy  who  is
in  the  wrong  is  often  more  eager  than  the  companion  whom  he  has  offended  to
settle  the  dispute  by  blows,  and  ascending  to  the  unequal  contest  which  rebellious
man  wages  with  his  Maker,  we  find  that  all  the  defiance  and  active  insolence  is
on  the  side  of  the  offending  human  creature,  and  all  the  long-sulfering  and  for-
bearance on  that  of  the  God  against  whom  he  has  siiuied.  Let  all  in  such  case
beware,  lest,  like  these  Ammonites,  they  force  the  sword  of  retribution  to
descend  upon  them.

329


HOMILETJC  COMMENIARY:   SAMUEL.


RMoA    I'l.


III.  If  those  who  are  in  the  wrong  are  bold,  much  more  should  those  who
are  in  the  right  show  courage  and  determination.  These  Syrijuis  and
Ammonites  were  engaged  in  an  unjust  war — they  had  no  possible  excuse  for  the
attack  they  made  upon  Israel,  and  therefore  they  could  have  had  no  conviction  of
being  in  the  right  to  sustain  them.  Yet  they  came  to  the  contest  with  bold
hearts — venturing  their  liberties  and  their  lives  in  a  wrong  cause.  As  we  have
before  had  occasion  to  notice,  men  will  be  brave  in  trying  to  advance  wrong  as
well  as  in  defending  what  is  right.  But  seeing  that  they  who  are  engaged  iu
fighting  for  the  righteous  cause  have  God  and  conscience  on  their  side,  it
behoves  them  at  all  times  to  equal,  if  not  to  surpass,  tlieir  opponents  in  courage
and  devotion.  Joab  could  here  draw  inspiration  from  the  certainty  that  he  was
fighting  for  God  in  fighting  against  the  heathen,  and  this  thought  enabled  him
to  be  of  good  cheer,  and  leave  the  issue  in  God's  hands.  Although  he  was  not
a  true  servant  of  God,  he  was  at  this  time  engaged  in  a  service  for  God's  peo})le,
and  the  consciousness  of  this  seems  to  have  lifted  him  for  a  time  above  his
ordinary  frame  of  mind,  and  filled  liim  witii  a  real  religious  devotion.  If  Joab
could  be  thus  animated  and  strengthened,  surely  no  truly  godly  man  ought  to
fear  or  falter  in  the  day  of  righteous  conflict.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


Ver.  3.  It  is  hard  for  a  wicked  heart
to  think  well  of  any  other  ;  because  it
can  think  none  better  than  itself  and
knows  itself  evil. — Bp.  Hall.

Ver.  5.  1.  We  must  beware  of
casting  pearls  before  swine  (ver.  2).
The  Ammonites  must  have  been  known
to  David  as  a  cruel  and  barbarous
people.  2.  Nothing  is  so  offensive  as  a
wanton  insult  in  return  for  respect  and
kindness.  3.  The  gravest  men  are
sensitive  to  ridicule  of  their  personal
appearance.  4.  All  persons  of  noble
nature  are  considerate  of  the  feelings
of  others.  5.  Time  heals  many  ills. —
2'r.  of  Langes  Commentary.

Ver.    6.      It  is    one   of  the    mad

principles  of  wickedness,  that  it  is  a
weakness  to  relent,  and  rather  to  die
than  yield.  Even  ill  causes,  once
undertaken,  must  be  upheld,  although
with  blood ;  whereas  the  gracious  heart,
finding  his  own  mistaking,  doth  not
only  remit  of  an  ungrounded  dis-
pleasure, but  studies  to  be  revenged  of
itself,  and  to  give  satisfaction  to  the
offended. — Bp.  Hall.

That  is  the  way  with  an  evil
conscience  ;  it  flees  before  it  is  hunted.
(Job  XV.  20.) — Cramer.


Ver.    12.

S30


That  soldier  can  never


answer  it  to  God,  that  strikes  not  mor€
as  a  justiciar,  than  as  an  enemy ;  neither
doth  he  content  himself  with  his  own
courage,  but  he  animates  others.  The
tongue  of  a  commander  fights  more
than  his  hand.  It  is  enough  for  private
men  to  exercisii  what  life  and  limbs
they  have  :  a  good  leader  must,  out  of
his  own  abundance,  put  life  and  spirits
into  all  others  :  if  a  lion  lead  sheep  into
the  field,  there  is  hope  of  victory.
Lastly,  when  he  hath  done  his  best,  he
resolves  to  depend  upon  God  for  the
issue,  not  trusting  to  his  sword,  or  his
bow,  but  to  the  providence  of  the
Almighty,  for  success,  as  a  man  reli-
giously awful,  and  awfully  confident,
while  there  should  be  no  want  in  their
own  endeavours.  He  knew  well  that
the  race  was  not  to  the  swift,  nor  the
battle  to  the  strong  ;  therefore  he  looks
up  above  the  hills  whence  cometh  his
salvation.  All  valour  is  cowardice  to
that  which  is  built  upon  religion.—
Bp.  Hall.

Joab  was  a  selfish,  unscrupulous,
unprincipled  man  ;  yet  in  entering
upon  a  perilous  battle  he  talks  piously.
So  do  almost  all  civil  rulers  and  generals
in  any  great  emergency ;  not  only
because  they  know  that  the  people  feel
their  dependence  upon  God,  but  because
iu  the  hour  of  trial  they  feel  it  them*


CHAP.  X.  TTOMJIETTC  COMMENT  A  RY:  SAMUEL.


selves.      Such    lani>iia<;e    under    such  It  may  express  an  hunil)le  subuii.ssioii

circumstances  does  not  clearly  ])rove  to  the  disposal  of  providence,  let  tlie

one  to  be  devout,  or  to  be  hypocritical  ;  event  turn  (jut  as  it  would  we  have  not

it  expresses  a  feeling  which  may   be  the  disposal  of  the  event,  nor  do  we

genuine,  though  transient  and  super-  know   what   it  will  be  ;    but  Jehovah

iicial. — Tr.  of  LoHge's  Commentari/.  knows  and  that   is  enougli.     .     .     4.

I.    Cournge  is  an  essential  character-  These  words,  in  their  connection,  ma^'

istic  of  a  good  soldier — uot  a  savage  intimate,  that,  let  the  event  be  what

ferocious  violence  ;  not  a  foolhardy  in-  it   will,    it    will   afford   us  satisfaction

sensibility  of  danger, or  headstrong  rash-  to  think  that  we  have  done  the   best

ness  to  rush  into  it ;  not  the  fury  of  we   could,  q.d.  We  cannot  command

inflamed  passions  broke  loose  from  the  success  :  but  let  us  do  all  in  our  power

government  of  reason  ;   but  calm  de-  to  obtain  it,  and  we  have  reason  to  hope

liberate  rational    courage  ;    a  steady,  we  shall  not  be  disappointed  ;  but  it  it

judicious,   thoughtful   fortitude;    the  should  please  God  to  render  all  our

courage  of  a  man,  and  not  of  a  tiger,  endeavours  vain,  still  we  shall  have  the

.    .    .  This  will  render  men  vigilant  and  generous  pleasure  to  reflect,  that  we

cautious  against  surprises,  prudent  and  have  not  been  accessory  to  the  ruin  of

deliberate  in  concerting  their  measures,  our  country,  but  have  done  all  we  could

and  steady  and  resolute  in  executing  for  its  deliverance. — From  a  sermon

them.     ...     II.     It    is  of   great  by   [Resident  Davies  of  New  Jersey,

importance   to    excite    and    keep   up  preached   on   the  invasion   of  British

courage  in  such  an  expedition  that  we  America  by  the  French,  1755.
should  be  fully  satisfied  that  we  engage

in  a  righteous  cause — and  in  a  cause  of         Ver.  13.  Joab  provided  for  the  worst,

great  moment;  for  we  can  not  prosecute  and  put  the  case  that  the  Syrians  or

a  suspected,  or  wicked  scheme  which  Ammonites  might  prove  too  strong  for

our  own   minds  condemn,    but   with  him  ;    but  he  proved  too   strong   for

hesitation  and  timorous  apprehensions ;  them   both.     We  do  not  hinder   our

and  we  cannot  engage  with  spirit  and  successes  by  preparing  for  disappoint-

resolution  in  a  trifling  scheme,  from  ment. — {Henry),
which  we  can  expect  no  consequences

worth   our  vigorous  pursuit.     .     .     .  Ver.  1-19.     One  injustice  produces

The  consideration  of  the  justness  and  another,  and  drags  men  on  irretardably

importance   of    the   cause    may    also  to  destruction  by  the  resulting  chain

encourage  hope  that  the  Lord  of  Hosts  of  sins  and  injustices. — {Langes  Com-

will  espouse  it,  and  render  its  guardians  mentary).

successful.  The  event,  however,  is  in  Our  Psalter  contains  several  songs
His  hands  as  the  closing  words  of  the  which  betray  an  undeniable  reference
text  suggest.  They  may  be  looked  to  the  last  wars  and  victories  of  David,
upon  in  various  views ;  as  1.  The  .  .  .  To  these  belong,  in  the  first
language  of  uncertainty  and  modesty,  place  the  sixtieth  ...  in  which
.  .  .  Such  language  becomes  us  in  he  begins  by  looking  back  on  the  in-
all  our  undertakings  ;itsoundscreature-  vasion  of  the  Syrians,  in  which  his
like,  and  God  approves  of  such  self-  army  had  to  lament  sorrowful  losses,
diffident  humility.  .  .  .  2.  It  may  and  on  all  the  terrors  of  war  which  had
be  expressive  of  a  firm  persuasion  that  spread  over  the  land.  "0  God,  Thou
the  event  of  war  entirely  depends  upon  hast  cast  us  off,  etc.  .  .  .  Thou
the  providence  of  God.  q.d.  Let  us  hast  given  a  banner,  etc.  .  .  .  {i.e.,
do  our  best;  but  after  all,  let  us  be  Thou  didst  give  them  deliverance,  and
sensible,  that  the  success  does  not  didst  raise  up  that  before  them  like
depend  upon  us.  .  ,  .  It  is  no  an  encouraging  banner)."  .  .  .  He
great  exploit  of  faith  to  believe  this;  concludes  with  "God  hath  spoken  in
it  is  but  a  small  advance  upon  atheism  His  holiness  "  (glorious  promises  has
and  downright  intidehty.     ...     3.  He  given   to  me);  "therefore"  {i,e,

331


HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL,  boi)k  il.


oil  the  ground  of  tliem)  '*  I  will  rejoice:  had  granted  to  his  people  after  the
I  will  divide"  (to  Israel)  '*  Shechem  "  conquest  of  Canaan  till  the  erection  of
(the  laud  on  this  side  of  Jordan),  and  the  tabernacle  on  Mount  Zion.  After
mete  out  the  valley  of  Succoth"  (the  a  description  of  the  glory  of  God,  who,
land  on  the  farthest  side  of  Jordan),  as  the  King  of  all  kings  sat  enthroned
The  whole  land  David  regards  as  his  in  majesty  on  His  holy  hill  of  Zion,  and
possession.  But  why  does  he  name  had  again  shown  himself,  in  the  sub-
only  these  two  places  ?  He  names  them  jugation  of  all  the  enemies  of  His
as  denoting  the  two  portions  of  the  people,  that  He  was  the  God  of  Israel,
land,  with  a  retrospective  reference  to  the  Psalmist  describes  the  festal  pro-
the  patriarch  Jacob,  who,  after  his  cession  in  which  the  holy  thing,  the
return  from  Mesopotamia,  settled  first  ark  of  the  covenant,  which  had  accom-
in  Succoth,  and  then  afterwards  in  panied  the  army  into  the  field  during
Shechem,  and  there  built  an  altar,  the  Ammonitish  war,  was  brought  back
thus  foreshadowing  the  taking  posses-  again  to  Jerusalem.  He  names  several
sion  of  the  land  at  a  later  period.  tribes,  among  others  those  of  Benjamin
The  twentieth  Psalm  is  a  Davidic  and  Judah,  Zebulun  and  Naphtali,
war  song,  belonging  to  the  same  days,  which  took  part  in  this  procession,  as
,  .  .  also  the  forty- fourth,  and  we  representatives  of  the  whole  nation,
have  in  the  sixty-eighth  Psalm,  an  Then  he  sees  in  spirit  the  veil  raised
animated  song  of  triumph,  which  has  from  the  most  distant  future,  and  all
reference,  with  its  whole  contents,  to  the  nations  of  the  earth  bending  under
the  issue,  so  glorious  for  Israel,  of  that  the  sceptre  of  the  God  of  Israel.  Then
most  fearful  of  all  their  wars,  the  Syro-  the  song  becomes  Messianic,  and  closes
Ammonitish.  The  Psalmist  begins  it  with  these  words  :  "Ascribe  ye  strength
with  joyful  expressions  of  praise  to  unto  God:  His  excellency  is  over  Israel,
Jehovah  as  the  Protector  of  the  right-  and  His  strength  is  in  the  clouds.  0
eous,  and  the  inflexible  Judge  of  the  God,  Thou  art  terrible  out  of  Thy  holy
wicked.  Then  he  recalls  to  remem-  places  :  the  God  of  Israel  is  He  that
brance  the  mighty  deeds  by  which  God  giveth  strength  and  power  linto  His
had  made  himself  glorious  to  Israel  people.  Blessed  be  God  1 " — {Krum-
during  their  marchings  in  the  wilder-  macher).
ness,  and  the  peaceful  days  which  he


CHAPTER  XL


Critical  and  Expository  Notes.  Ver  1.  •*  After  the  year,"  etc.,  rather,  at  the  return  of
*Jic  year,  i.e.,  in  the  spring  when  kings  were  accustomed  to  beuin  military  operations.  "  His
servants,"  the  military  chieftans  about  his  person.  '*  All  Israel,"  i.e.,  the  whole  army.  "  The
children  of  Ammon."  "  It  was  usual,  when  some  strong  point  was  attacked,  to  ravage  the
land  far  and  near  by  incursion  parties."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  2.  "  In  an  eveningtide,"  etc.  When  the  mid-day  rest  was  over,  and  noon  was  past.
"  Walked  upon  the  roof."  This  was  an  eastern  custom,  and  the  place  and  hour  often  used  for
religious  meditation.  "  Saw  a  woman,"  etc.  Either  at  the  well  in  tlie  court-yard  of  her  house
or,  as  some  suggest,  in  her  chamber,  the  casements  being  open.  "  In  either  case,  the  place  was
private,  visible  only  from  a  neighbouring  roof  ;  and  in  the  East  people  refrain  from  looking  down
from  a  roof  into  neighbouring  courts,  so  that  it  is  an  unfounded  suggestion  that  Bathsheba  was
purposely  bathing  in  an  exposed  place  in  order  to  attract  the  king's  gaze."  {Tr.  of  Lanye'i
Commentary.)

Ver.  3.  "  Bathsheba."  .  .  "  Eliam."  In  1  Chron.  iii.  5,  she  is  called  Bathshua,  daughter  of
Ammiel.  "Animiel  has  the  same  meaning  as  Eliam,  and  is,  indeed,  the  same  word,  its  compound
parts  bein'4  inverted,  and  means  "  God's  people."  (  Wordsworth.)  From  2  Sam.  xxiii.  34,  where  Eliam
is  called  the  son  of  Ahithophel,  it  is  supposed  by  some  that  Eath;,heba  was  the  grand-dangliter
of  1  )avid's  counsellor,  and  that  this  may  explain  his  adherence  to  Absalom.  "  Uriah  the  Hittite.'
One  of  L>avid'8  heroes.  The  Hittites  were  dwelling  in  Palestine,  as  far  back  aa  the  days  of  Abra-
hauL.  (Gen.  xv.  20,  xxiii.  7.)
332


CHAP.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.


Ver.  4.  "David  sent,"  etc.  '*  Djivi<l  had  prohably  hopud  that  she  was  unmarried,  but  now
tliat  his  passion  was  inflamed  the  knowledge  that  she  was  a  wife  did  not  deter  him  from  his
[)urpose."  (  Wordsworth.)  "  The  narrative  leads  us  to  infer  that  Bathshel>a  carae  an  i  >ul)mitted
herself  to  David  without  opposition.  She  was  moved  doubtless  by  vanity  and  ambition  in  not
venturing  to  refuse  the  demand  of  tha  klny."  (Erdmann.)  **  For  she  was  purified,"  etc.
Rather,  when  she  was  purified,  etc.,  she  returned.     (See  Lev.  xv,  18.)

Ver.  5.  "And  sent  and  told  David."  Adultery  was  punishable  with  death.  "  This  in-
volved an  appeal  to  him  to  take  the  necessary  steps  to  avert  the  evil  consequences  of  the  sin."
(Keil.)

Ver.  8.  "  Wash  thy  feet,"  etc.  "  These  words  contained  an  intimation  that  he  was  to  go
to  his  own  home."     {Keil.)

Ver.  9.  "  Slept  at  the  door,"  etc.  "  In  the  guard  room  (1  Kings  xiv.  27,  28)  with  the
royal  court  officials  or  the  body^ruard.  It  is  possible  that  he  did  this  merely  out  of  zeal  of
service,  but  also  his  sus])icions  may  have  been  already  aroused,  and  he  may  have  heard  something
of  the  affair  with  Bathsheba."     {^Erdmann.)

Ver.  11.  "The  ark,"  etc.  This  seems  to  indicate  that  the  ark  had  accompanied  the  army.
••  As  thou  livest,"  etc.  Literally,  hy  thy  life  and  the  life  of  thy  soul.  "  This  is  not  a  tautology,
but  a  strengthening  of  the  oath  by  a  repetition  of  the  thought."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  16.  "When  Joab  observed,"  literally,  watched,  "We  must  understand  from  this  a
procedure  different  from  the  usual  siege,  a  nearer  approach,  which  challenged  the  warriors  in  the
city  to  a  sally."    (  Bunsen.)

Ver.  17.  "And  Uriah  the  Hittite  died  also."  "Joab  could  foresee  that  this  would
happen  from  the  danj^erousness  of  the  post.  In  becoming  the  instrument  of  David's  murderous
artifice,  Joab  needed  not  to  know  the  ground  of  the  order.  As  obedient  servant  of  the  king,  he
carried  out  the  order  imhesitatingly,  inasmuch  as  it  was  an  order  of  the  commander  of  the  army
In  relation  to  a  soldier  who  might  have  committed  some  grave  offence  against  him,  and  whose
seemingly  accidental  death  might  be  desired  by  him  for  special  reasons."    (Erdmann.)

Ver.  20.  "If  so  be  that  the  king's  wrath,"  etc.  "Joab  assumed  that  David  might
express  his  displeasure  at  the  fact  that  Joab  had  sacrificed  a  number  of  his  warriors  by
approaching  close  to  the  wall,  if  such  should  be  the  case,  to  announce  Uriah's  death  to  the  king,
for  the  purpose  of  mitigating  his  wrath  "     (Keil.)

Ver.  27.  "When  the  mourning  was  past,"  etc.  The  usual  mourning  of  the  Israelites
lasted  seven  days.  (Gen.  i.  10  ;  1  Sam.  xxxi,  13.)  It  is  not  known  whether  it  was  longer  in
the  case  of  widowhood.  It  is  obvious  that  David  would  make  Bathsheba  his  wife  as  early  aa
possible.


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OP  THE  CHAPTER,

David's  Fall.

I.   Times  of  prosperity  and  inactivity  are  times  of  special  temptation.

In  all  the  clays  of  David's  adversity  lie  maintained  an  unsullied  reputation.  In
this  day  of  his  prosperity  he  was  guilty  of  a  series  of  the  blackest  crimes.  Men
by  great  successes  in  life  become  a  special  mark  for  the  i;reat  enemy  of  the  race,
and  the  more  so  in  proportion  as  they  have  hitherto  been  loyal  to  God  and
goodness.  At  such  times  the  path  of  active  duty  is  the  least  likely  to  lead  into
temptation.  If  David  had  been  at  this  time  at  the  head  of  his  army  it  is  likely
he  would  have  esca])ed  this  dark  stnin  upon  his  life,  for  plenty  of  work  is  a
preventive  of  certain  kinds  of  sin.  While  a  brook  is  in  motion  its  waters  are
pure,  but  it  their  flow  is  st<>p})ed  they  become  sla-nant ;  so  there  are  men  who
cannot  pass  from  a  life  of  activity  to  one  of  repose  without  degenerating  in
diameter.  It  seems  as  though  David,  with  all  his  intense  devotion  and  deep
religious  emotion,  was  of  this  class.  He  had  been  on  the  throne  for  a  consider-
able number  of  years,  but  until  now  had  probably  had  little  leisure,  and  the
constant  demands  upon  his  energies  had  kept  the  arrows  of  the  tempter  from

333


HO  MI  LET IC  COM  ME  NT AR  Y :  SA  M  TJEL.  book  ii.


piercing  the  weak  place  in  his  armour.  How  much  safer  he  would  have  been  in
tlie  thickest  of  the  fight  before  Rabbath-Ammon  than  upon  his  house-top  in
Jerusalem.

II.  Even  good  men  have  evil  tendenc'es,  of  whose  strength  they  have  no
conceiDtion.  A  vessel  filled  with  gunpowder  looks  very  trim,  and  clean,  and  safe,
but  the  black  powder  is  there  in  the  hold,  only  needing  a  single  spark  to  make
its  power  felt.  A  lake  seems  filled  with  the  purest  water,  but  a  stone  cast  into
it  will  stir  up  the  mud  at  the  bottom  and  change  it  into  a  thick  and  turbid
])ool.  A  tendency  to  a  certain  disease  may  lie  dormant  for  years  in  the  con-
stitution, and  suddenly  circumstances  may  favour  its  rapid  development,  and  it
may  carry  off  its  victim  in  a  few  days.  So  is  it  with  the  human  soul.  If  any
human  eye  had  marked  David  as  he  sought  his  roof  on  this  day,  could  they
have  dreamedth  at  there  were  the  possibilities  of  such  a  fall  within  him  ?  Had  he
any  conception  himself  of  the  strength  of  his  passion,  and  the  weakness  of  his
will  on  the  side  of  righteousness  ?

III.  If  sin  is  not  resisted  when  in  the  heart  it  will  sooner  or  later  become
manifest  in  the  life.  When  the  sensual  thought  in  relation  to  Bathsheba
entered  David's  heart  he  did  not  bid  it  depart,  but  dallied  with  it  until  even
the  knowledge  that  she  was  the  wife  of  another  seemed  no  obstacle  to  him.
Even  the  best  man  while  in  this  world  needs  ever  to  stand  sentinel  over  his
inner  life,  lest  before  he  is  aware  a  sinful  desire  lay  hold  of  him  and  speedily
pass  from  the  region  of  thought  into  that  of  action.  For  sin  never  remains
hidden  in  the  s'ml  unless  it  is  fought  and  conquered  there.  If  the  spring  be  not
cleansed  the  streams  must  reveal  the  fact,  and  if  the  root  be  not  good  the  fruit
must  betray  it.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.  1.  This  entire  campaign,  with  doors  and  windows  of  his, — those  other-

the  siege  of  a  capital,  and  the  slaying  wise  windows  of  wickedness,  and  loop-

of  thousands,  interests  us  now  only  as  holes  of  lust,  the  eyes  ;  through  which

the  occasion  of  David's  series  of  great  the  old  serpent  easily  windeth  himself

sins.^   And  in  truth  the  striking  excel-  into  the   heart,    and    maketh  himself

lencies  or  faults  of  one  great  and  good  master  of  the  whole  ujan.     This  made

man,  when  permanently  recorded  and  good  Job  to  step  from  a  prayer  into  a

widely  read,  become  more  important  to  vow  (Job  xxxi.  1).     Yea,  from  a  vow

the  welfare  of   the  human  race  than  to  an  imprecation  (ver.  7.),  as  knowing

the  overthrow  of  cities  or  kingdoms. —  the  danger  of  irregular  glancing,  or  in-

7r.  of  Langes  Commentary.  ordinate  gazing. — Trapp.

While  Joab  is  busy  laying  siege  to

Rabbah,   Satan  is  to  David,   and  far  Ver.  3.    David  should  rather  have

sooner  prevailed. — Irapp.  taken  an  antidote  of  mortification,  be-
fore the  venom  of  lust  had  got  to  the

Ver.   2.  There  can  be  no  safety  to  vitals.     But  it  is  hard  for  him   who

that  soul,  where  the  senses  are  let  loose,  hath  fallen  down  the  ladder  of  hell  for

He  can  never  keep  his  covenant  with  a  round  or  two,  to  stop  or  step  back

God,  that  makes  not  a  covenant  with  till   he   come  to  the  bottom,  without

his  eyes. — Bp.  Hall.  extraordinary  help  from  the  hand  of

David  had  once  prayed,  "  Turn  away  Heaven.    Can  a  man  commit  one  sin

mine  eyes  from  beholding  vanity  ;  "  more,  and  but  one  sin  more? — Trapp.
and   should   have   still   continued  his

suit  :  that  as  he  might  keep  a  door  in  Ver.   4.    Had  Bathsheba  been  mind-
God's  house,  so  God  would  keep  the  ful  of  her  matrimonial  fidelity,  perhaps
334


CHAP.  xr.


nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :  SAMUEL.


David  had  been  soon  checked  in  his
inordinate  (ie.sire  ;  her  facility  furihor.s
the  sin.  The  first  niotioiier  of  evil  is
most  faulty  ;  but  as  in  quarrels,  so  in
offences,  the  second  blow  (which  is  tlie
consent)  makes  the  fray.  Sin  is  not
acted  alone  ;  if  but  one  [)arty  be  wise,
both  escape.  It  is  no  excuse  to  say,  I
was  temj)ted,  thou<,di  by  the  great,
though  by  the  holy  nnd  learned  :  almost
all  simiersaremisled  by  that  transformed
angel  of  light..  The  action  is  that  we
must  regard,  not  the  person.  Let  the
mover  be  never  so  glorious,  if  he  stir
us  to  evil,  he  must  be  entertained  with
defiance. — Bp.  Hall.

Ver.  15.  David  hath  forgotten  that
himself  was  in  like  sort  l)etiayed  in  his
master's  intention,  u{)on  the  dowry  of
the  Philistines'  foreskins.  I  fear  to
ask,  vvho  ever  noted  so  foul  a  plot  in
David's  rejected  predecessor?  Uriah
must  be  the  messenger  of  his  own  death,
Joab  must  be  a  traitor  to  his  friend,
the  host  of  God  must  shamefully  turn
their  backs  upon  the  Ammonites,  all
that  Israelitish  blood  must  be  shed,
that  murder  must  be  seconded  with
dissimulation  :  and  all  this  to  hide  one
adultery.  0  God,  thou  hadst  never
suffered  so  dear  a  favourite  of  thine  to
fall  so  fearfully,  if  thou  hadst  not  meant
to  make  him  an  universal  example  to
mankind,  of  not  presuming,  of  not
despairing.  How  can  we  presume  of
not  sinning,  or  despair  for  sinning,  when
we  find  so  great  a  saint  thus  fallen,
thus  risen  ! — Bp.   Hall.

it  is  a  sign  of  the  irresistible  power
of  cr)nscience,  and  an  involuntary  self-
condemnation,  when  a  man  seeks  in
every  way  to  conceal  his  sin  fro  w  men,
but  to  extenuate  and  justify  it  before
God,  and  on  the  other  hand  unwilling-
ness to  make  confession  has  its  deepest
ground  in  the  pride  of  the  human  heart,
which  increases  in  proportion  as  the
man  becomes  involved  in  sin,  and  the
evil  in  him  develops  itself  from  the
slightest  begimiings  into  a  power  that
exercises  domiidon  over  the  whole  inner
life.  "  Whosoever  commits  sin,  he  is
the  servant  of  sin."— ^r.  of  Langes
Commentary,


Ver.  1  1.  Kv('i>  \]w.  best  aotiiuis  nre
not  always  seasonable,  n)uch  less  the
indifferent.  He  that  ever  takes  liberty
to  do  what  he  may,  slia,ll  offend  no  less
than  he  that  sometimes  takes  liberty
to  do  what  he  may  not.

If  anything,  the  ark  of  God  is  fittest
to  lead  our  tunes;  according  as  that
is  either  distressed,  or  prospereth,
should  we  frame  our  mirth  or  mourn-
ing. To  dwell  in  ceiled  houses,  while
the  temple  hes  waste,  is  the  ground  of
God's  just  quarrel.—^/?.  JIall,

Vers.  1-27.  It  has  been  said,  "  But
such  a^sin  is  so  unlike  David's  cha-
racter." Doubtless  it  was,  on  the
theory  that  David  was  a  character
mingled  of  good  and  evil.  Bnt  on
David's  own  theory,  that  he  was  an
utterly  weak  person  with(mt  the  help
of  God,  the  act  is  perfectly  like  David.
It  is  David's  self.  It  is  what  David
would  naturally  do  when  he  had  left
hold  of  God.  Had  he  left  hold  of  God
in  the  wilderness  he  would  have  be-
come a  mere  robber-chieftain.  He
does  leave  hold  of  God  in  his  palace  of
Zion,  and  he  becomes  a  mere  Eastern
despot. — Kingsley.

Let  it  be  noted  that  when  Satan
comes  to  a  man,  he  makes  his  appeal
to  that  particular  part  of  his  nature
where  passion  is  strongest  and  prin-
ciple is  weake.st.  Now  in  David  what
that  was  might  be  very  easily  discovered.
From  an  early  period  of  his  career,  he
had  been  especially  susceptible  in  the
very  matter  in  which  now  he  fell.
This  is  evident  from  his  marriage  of
Abigail,  and  also  from  the  great  lati-
tude in  which  he  allowed  himself,  after
his  settlement  in  Jerusalem,  in  respect
to  his  harem.  Polygamy,  though  not
forbidden  by  the  Mosaic  law,  was  re-
gulated and  discouraged  ;  but  David
proceeded  as  if  it  had  been  a  perfectly
warrantable  and  legitimate  thing,  and
this  conduct  on  his  part  undoubtedly
tended  to  weaken  his  impression  of  the
sanctity  of  marriage.  That  sense  of
delicacy  and  chastity,  which  has  .such
a  purifying  and  pre.serving  influence
on  the  life,  could  not  flourish  side  by
side  with  the  polygamy  in  which  he

333


hOMlLETJC  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL,  book  II.


perrnitted  liiniself :  and  so,  though  he  greater  than  those  of  common  men,  as
tliouglit   not   of  it   at   the  time,  l»is  in  other  circumstances  his  excellencies
taking  of  many  wives  to  himself  pre-  were  nobler   than   theirs.      We  often
pared  the  way  for  the  revolting  iniquity  make  great  mistakes  in  judging  of  the
which  he  committed.     Here,  then,  in  characters  of  others,  because  we  ignore
the   moral   weakness    which    constant  all    these   considerations  ;    and   many
prosperity  had  created,  in  the  oppor-  well-conducted  persons  among  us  get
tnnity    which     idleness     afforded    to  great  credit  for  their  good  moral  cha-
temptation,  and  in  the  blunted  sensi-  racter,  while  the  truth  is  that  they  are
bility    which    polygamy    had    super-  blameless  not  so  much  because  they
indnced,  we  see   how   David   was  so  have     higher-toned    principles     than
ensily  overcome.  others,  as  because  they  have  feeble,
But  it  may  be  asked,  How  can  you  timid  natures,  that  are  too  cautious  or
account  for  such  enormous  iniquity  in  too  weak  to  let  them  go  very  far  either
such  a  man  as  we  have  soon  that  Dnvid  into  holiness  or  into  sin.     But  David
was?     To  this  I  answer,  that  we  may  was   not   one    of   these.      Everything
explain  it  by  the  absence  for  the  time  about  him   was  intense  ;    and   hence,
being    of    that    lestraining    influence  when  he  sinned,  he  did  it  in  such  a
which  his  better  nature  was  wont  to  way  as   to  make  well-nigh   the   most
exercise  over  his  life.    Passion  had  de-  hardened   shudder.      In   all    this,   ob-
throned  conscience ;  and  then,  owing  serve,  I  am  not  extenuating  David's
to  the  intensity  of  his  character,  and  guilt.     It  is  one  thing  to  explain,  it  is
the  general  greatness  of  the  man,  his  another  thing  to  excuse.     A  man  of
sins    became    as   much    blacker    than  David's  nature  ought  to  be  more  pe-
those  of  others,  as  his  good  qualities  culiarly  on  his  guard  than  other  men.
were   greater   than    theirs.     In  every  The  express  train,   dashing  along  at
good  man  there  are  still  two  natures  furious  speed,  will  do  more  mischief  if
striving  for  the  mastery.     "  The  flesh  it  runs  off  the  line  than  the  slow-going
lusteth    against    the    spirit,   and   the  horse-car  in  our  city  streets.    Everyone
spirit   against  the   flesh."      The  new  understands  that ;    but  everyone  de-
nature is  generally  in  the  ascendant,  mands,  in  consequence,  that  the  driver
but  sometimes  the  old  evil  nature  will  of  the   one   shall   be   proportionately
re-assert  its  supremacy,  and  the  effect  more  watchful  than  that  of  the  other,
of  this   temporary   revolution   will  be  Now  with  such  a  nature  as  David  had,
determined  by  the  temperament  and  and  knew   that  he  had,  he  ought  to
characteristics  of  the  individual.    Now  have    been   supremely   on   his  guard,
I  here  are  some  men  in  whom  every-  while   again  the  privileges   which    he
thing  is  on  a  large  scale.     When  their  had   received   from    God   rendered   it
good  nature  is  uppermost,  they  overtop  both  easy  and  practicable  for  him  to
all   others    in    holiness  ;    but   if,    un-  be  vigilant. —  Taylor.
happily,  they   should    be    thrown    off  Thus  far  the  story  belongs  to  the
their  guard,  and  the  old  man  should  usual    crimes  of    an    Eastern   despot.
^ain     the     mastery,     some     dreadlul  Detestable  as  was  the  double  guilt  of
wickedness  may  be  expected.     This  is  this  dark  story,  we  must  still  remem-
all  the  more  likely  to  be  the  case  if  ber  that  David  was  not  an  Alfred  or  a
the  quality  of  intensity  be  added  to  Saint  Louis.    He  was  an  Eastern  king,
tiieir  greatness  ;  for  a  man  with  such  exposed   to  all  the  temptations  of  a
a  temperament  is  never  anything  by  king  of  Amnion  or  Damascus  then — of
half    But  it  was  just  thus  with  David,  a  sultan  of  Bagdad  or  Constantinople
He  was  a  man  of  great  intensity  and  in  modern  times.     What  follows,  how-
pre-eminent  energy.     He  was  in  every  ever,  could  have  been  found  nowhere
respect  above  ordinary  men  ;   and  so  in  the  ancient  world,  but  in  the  Jewish
when,  for  the  time,  the  fleshly  nature  monarchy. — IStaiiley.
was  the  stronger  within  him,  the  sins  For  a  king  to  take  the  wife  of  a  poor
which   he   committed   were   as   much  man — how  light  a  fault  may  this  have
336


CHAP.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,


appeared  to  one  witli  tlie  power  and  afford  a  testimony  to  tlie  perfect  insight

privileges  which  David  possessed.    Sup-  of  God  into  our  hearts  and  lives,  to

posing   there  was  a  fixed  law  against  His     .     .     .     present    observation   of

adulter}^  did    this  law   apply   to    the  them,  His  judgment  upon  them  both

ruler  of  the   land?      Was  he  not  in  ])resent  and  future     ....     Every

some  sense  above  law  ?     Such  are  the  single  thing  that  we  say  and  do  either

arguments  and  sophistries  which  would  pleases  or  displeases  God.     If  it  has  no

occur  to  one  who  was  wrestling  with  his  other  value,  it  is  made  pleasing  to  Him

conscience  eitl.er  to  give  him  leave  to  by  a  pervading  spirit  of  faith,  by  an

commit  a  wrong,  or  not  to  torment  liim  habitual  regard  to  Him,  on  the  part  of

for  it  when  it  was  done.     And  then,  if  him  who  does  it,  or  displeasing,  what-

the  husband  of  this  woman  stood  in  the  ever  its  apparent  merit,  by  the  habitual

way  of  the  full  gratification  of  his  pur-  absence  of  this  spirit.     .     .     .      God

pose,  or  of  the  concealment  of  it,  was  for  a  whole  year  looked  upon  David  with

there  anything  strange  that   he,  who  disapprobation  and  disfavour.    It  is  not

was  exposing  thousands  of  his  subjects  said  that  David  was  aware  of  this.    The

to  the  chances  of  battle  and   death,  contrary  is  rather  to  be  inferred.     .     .

should  expose  this  one  ?    Why  was  his  But  we  see  clearly     .     .     that  all  the

life   more  precious  than  that  of  any  prayers  and  all  the  praises  of  that  whole

other  Israelite  ?  Was  it  precious  siniply  year  went   for   nothing  with   Him  to

because  it  was  so   convenient    to    his  whom   they   were   addressed,

master  than  he  should  lose  it?    And  so  It  is  a  solemn  thought  that  there  are

the  deeds  were  done.  .  .  .  And  David,  multitudes   with   whom  this  is  so  all

no   doubt,    performed   all   his   ofhcial  their  life  long  ;  multitudes  with  whom

tasks  as  before,  went  daily  to  the  ser-  this  is  so  for  an  integral  portion,  it  may

vices  of  the  tabernacle,  was  probably  be,  of  their  threescore  years  and  ten.

most  severe  in  enforcing   punishment  ....     But  it  is  not  only  upon  our

upon  all  wrong  doers. — Maurice,  intercourse  with  God  that  this  deplor-
able condition  acts  so  fatally  :  it  puts

Ver.  27.     Such  is  the  solemn  quali-  our  life  all  wrong  :  it  is  impossible  that

fication    which    the    Holy    Scriptures  anything  can  be  in  its  place.     .     .     .

append  to  a  record  of  successful  wicked-  Remember,  tiiuilly,    this   state   is  not

ness.    .     .     .    From  the  moment  when  necessarily,  nor  perhaps,  commonly,  a

a  lawless  desire  first  planted  itself  in  temporary  ?,t2XQ.   It  may  last  till  death  :

David's  heart,  till  the  full  completion  and  then  : — !     It  is  the  tendency  of

of  that  desire  in  the  sinful  act  and  its  such  a  state  to  prolong,  to  perpetuate

consequences,  there  had  not  been  one  itself  ;  it  contains  in  itself  a  blinding,

single   impediment   in   the  way  of  his  searing,  deadening  power.     ...     If

gratification  which  had  not  been  easily,  these  things  be  so,  let  us  not  disguise  it.

triumphantly   surmounted;    not    one  Our  eternal  life  depends  upon  knowing

misgiving    of    conscience    obstinately  the  truth  ;  first  the  truth  of  man,  and

importunate;    not  one   agent   \\\  the  then  the  truth  of  God  ,  first  our  state

crime     reluctant     or    inaccessible    to  as  it  is,  and  then  the  change  promised,

persuasion  ;  not  one   adverse  circum-  Vang/tan.

stance   to    interfere    with     the  exact  Even   in   David's   fall   Satan  is  de-

onler  of  the  meditated  ])lan.     .     .     .  feated  and  God  is  glorified  by  means

"  But  the  thing  disj)leased  the  Lord."  of  Satan's  devices,   which   appears  as

This  is  the  point  of  contrast  between  follows,    viz.  : — 1.     We    have    iiere    a

the  text  and  its   immediate  context  ;  strong   proof  of  the  veracity  of  Holy

between  the  smooth  and  easy  course  of  Scripture.     David's  sin  was  committed

king  David's  trans<,^ression,  and  the  few  in  })rivate.     He  was  a  king,  a  powerful

emphatic  words  which  close  the  record  king,  beloved  by  his  people,  and — as  is

and  carry  the  question  from  the  judg-  clear  from  his  penitential  Psalms — he

nient    of    earth    to     the    tribunal    of  was  sincerely  contrite  for  his  sins ;  and

heaven    ,     .     .     The  words  first  of  all  in  the  rest  of  his  life  he  did  that  which

I  337


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL


BOOK  II.


was  rii^lit  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord
(1  Kings  XV.  5).  Besides,  one  of  the
worst  consequences  of  the  publication
of  his  sin  wouki  be  that  he  would  have
^iven  great  occasion  to  the  enemies  of
the  Lord  to  blaspheme  (ch.  xii.  14).
Might  it  not  therefore  have  been  ex-
pected that  a  veil  would  have  been
thrown  over  his  sin,  and  that  it  would
not  have  been  exposed  to  the  eyes  of
the  world  in  Holy  Writ?  If  Holy
Scripture  had  been  the  work  of  man,
the  considerations  would  have  probably
prevailed,  and  David's  sin  would  not
have  been  exposed  to  our  view ;  or,  if
it  had  been  revealed  the  historian
would  have  extenuated  it,  as  many  of
the  Hebrew  Rabbis  have  done.  But
the  Author  of  this  book  is  the  Holy
Ghost.  .  .  .  He  reminds  us  that
we  have  to  do  with  One  who  is  no
respecter  of  persons  ....  and  in
reading  the  Bible  we  have  the  satisfac-
tion of  knowing  that  in  it  there  is  no
suppression  of  facts,  no  disguise  or
extenuation  from  worldly  motives;  that
in  the  Bible  alone  we  have  the  revela-
tion of  the  perfect  Historian,  "  Ne  quid
falsi  dicere  audeat,  ne  quid  veri  non
audiat"  ...  2.  This  history  is
also  a  moral  test  of  the  readers  of  the
Bible.     The  consequence  of  David's


sin  is  stated  by  Nathan  (chap.  xii.  14).
But  woe  to  the  enemies  of  the  Lord !
Woe  to  those  who  blaspheme  Him !
For  it  is  written,  "All  thine  enemies,
0  Lord,  shall  feel  thine  hand,"  etc.
(Psa.  xxi.  8).  The  enemies  of  the  Lord
may  turn  the  food  of  Scripture  into
poison,  and  may  abuse  David's  sin  into
an  occasion  of  sellinu;  themselves  into
the  hands  of  the  tempter,  but  the
friends  of  God  will  take  warning  from
his  fall  .  :  .  and  thus  will  derive  a
blessing  from  the  Divine  record.  .  .
3.  If  David's  sin  had  not  been  recorded
we  should  have  been  astonished,  per-
plexed, and  staggered  by  the  series  of
tribulations  which  followed  him  hence-
forth to  the  grave.  But  this  sad  scene
explains  them  aU.  .  .  If  we  had  a
similar  view  of  men's  secret  sins,  if  we
had  a  clear  insight  into  our  own  as
they  are  seen  by  God,  the  anomalies
of  the  present  state  of  things  in  this
world  would  in  a  great  measure  dis-
appear. ...  4.  The  failings  of  a
David  and  a  Solomon  reminds  us  also
that  no  human  examples  are  to  be
substituted  for  the  Divine  law  as  a
rule  of  life,  and  that  there  is  no  spot-
less example  but  that  of  Christ.—
Wordsworth,


CHAPTER  XII.


Critical  and  Expository  Notes.  Ver.  3.  "  Was  unto  him  "  etc.  "  The  custom  of  keeping

pet  sheep  in  the  house,  as  we  keep  lap-dogs,  is  still  met  with  amon^  the  Arabs."  {Keil.)  "As
a  poor  man  he  had  the  means  of  buying  only  one  little  lamb,  which  he  was  now  raising,  and
wliich  he  loved  the  more  as  it  was  his  only  property."     {Erdmaan.)

Ver.  5.  "  Shall  surely  die,"  or,  "  deserves  to  die.^*  "  Because  the  forcible  robbery  of  a  poor
man's  pet  lamb  was  almost  as  bad  as  man-stealing.'*  (Keil.)  "  Four-fold."  This  was  the  com-
pensation demanded  by  the  Mosaic  law.     (Exod.  xxi.  37.)

Ver.  7.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  *'  Just  as  in  the  parable  the  sin  is^  traced  to  its  root-  —
namely,  insatiable  covetousness — so  now,  in  the  words  of  Jehovah  which  follow  the  prophet  brings
out  in  the  most  \insparing  manner  this  hidden  background  of  all  sins."     [Keil.)

Ver.  8.  "Thy  master's  wives."  It  is  a  general  custom  in  the  East  for  a  king  to  succeed
to  his  predecessor's  harem,  and  these  words  seeni  to  show  it  was  permitted  to  the  kings  of  Israel.
''  Bishop  Patrick  and  others  yive  the  later  Jewish  understanding  of  the  law  or  custom  ;  the  king
and  no  other  person  fell  heir  to  the  property  and  harem  of  his  predecessor,  but  it  did  not  follow
tliat  he  actually  marrietl  tiu-  inmates  of  tlie  harem  ;  they  might  l)e  merely  a  part  of  the  establish-
ment. If  it  was  a  snn  that  succeeded  his  father,  lie  treated  these  woinen  with  reverence  ;  if  no
bltiod  relation  exi-ted  between  the  two  kini^s,  the  successor  might  actually  take  the  women
as  his  wives,"  {Phillipson.)  *'  As  to  the  morality  of  the  act,  it  was  the  natural  result  of  a  poly*
gamous  system,  and  morally  in  the  same  category  with  it."     (?'r.  of  Lanycs  Commentary.)

338


CHAP.  XTi.  HOM I LFA'IC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


Ver.  9.  "Slain."  "This  word  to  murder  in  the  Hebrew  is  stronj,'er  than  the  one  translated
to  kUl  in  the  former  chuise.  *'  With  the  sword  of  ,  .  .  Ammon."  'i'hat  David  used  the
lioath.'n  to  c<Miimit  the  deed,  atUhd  to  the  j,niilt.

Ver.  10.     "Never  depart."     "That  is,  as  h)ng  as  the  house  or  posterity  of  David  shall  last.

The   hloody   sword  appears  in  the  murder  of  the  incestuous  Ammon   by   Absalom

(ch.  xiii.  \LB>,  29),  in  the  death   of  the  rebel   Absalom   (oh.   xiii.-xiv.),   and  in  the  execution  of

Adonijah."    [Erdmann.)    "Thou  has  despised  Me."    "  This  is  here  said  instead  of  "  Thou  hast

despised  the  word  of  the  Lord.'  For  in  His  word  the  Lord  Himself  reveals  Himself."    (Erdmann. )

Ver.  11.  "I  will  take  thy  wives."  The  two  crimes  of  murder  and  adultery  were  to  be
visited  by  distinct  and  separate  punishments.     (See  chap.  xvi.  22.)

Ver.  13.  "Thou  Shalt  not  die."  What  is  the  exact  meaning  of  these  words  as  applied  to
David  ?  .  .  .  The  application  of  the  law  (Lev.  xx.  10  ;  Deut.  xxii  22)  to  an  absohite
Eastern  monarch  is  out  of  the  question,  and  if  it  were  not,  such  an  apj^lication  would  utterly
mar  the  foice  of  the  passai^e.  It  is  obvious,  too,  to  observe  that  the  criminal's  death  in  the
par.d)le  must  rej^resent  some  nnalogous  punishment  in  the  wider  field  in  which  the  real  events
lay,  where  the  criminal  was  above  human  laws,  and  Almighty  God  was  the  Judge.  In  other
words,  the  death  of  the  soul  is  certainly  meant,  as  in  Ezek.  xviii.  4,  13,  etc.  [Biblical
Commentary.)

Ver.  14.  "The  enemies  of  the  Lord  to  blaspheme."  "Transgression  of  God's  com-
mand by  the  king  himself  must  lead  the  heathen  to  heap  shame  and  reproach  on  Israel  and  its
God  ;  and  there  must  therefore  be  expiation  l)y  punishment."     (Erdmann.)

"  Not  only  to  the  heathen,  but  also  to  the  unbelieving  among  the  Israelites."  [Keil.)  ■  The
external  sufferings  of  David  would  l)e  to  all  such  blasphemers  a  witness  to  the  holiness  and
justice  of  God.     "  David  was  also  to  discern  in  it  a  distinct  token  of  the  grace  of  God."   {Keil.)

Ver.  15.  "The  Lord  struck  the  child."  It  appears  that  Nathan  did  not  visit  David
until  after  the  birth  of  Bathsheba's  child,  and  therefore  that  David's  impenitent  state  of  mind
lasted  for  many  months.

Ver.  16.  "  Besought  God."  "  In  the  case  of  a  man  whose  penitence  was  so  earnest  and  so
deep,  the  prayer  for  the  preservation  of  his  child  must  have  sprung  from  some  other  source  than
excessive  love  of  any  created  object.  His  great  desire  was  to  avert  the  stroke,  as  a  sign  of  the
wrath  of  God,  in  the  hope  that  ho  might  be  able  to  discern,  in  the  preservation  of  the  child,  a
proof  of  Divine  favour  consequent  upon  the  restoration  of  his  fellowship  with  God."  [Von
Gerlach.)  "Went  in."  Kather,  "he  came,"  not  into  the  house  of  the  Loid  (ver.  20  is  proof
to  the  contrary),  but  into  his  house,  or  into  his  chamber."     (Keil.)

Ver.  17.     **  The  elders."     As  in  Gen.  xxiv.  2,  his  oldest  and  most  trusted  servants.

Ver.  21.  "Wliat  thing  is  this?"  "This  state  of  mind  is  fully  explained  in  Psalm  li.,
though  his  servants  could  not  comprehend  it."     (Keil.)

Vers.' 15-22.  "  In  this  short  passage  the  Divine  names  are  used  with  greater  variation  than
usual.  Verse  15  has  "Jehovah"  (the  Lord);  verse  16  has  "God;"  and  in  verse  22  the
Hebrew  text  has  "  Jehovah,"  where  in  our  version  is  God.  Whether  the  sacred  historian  was
guided  in  the  employment  of  these  names  by  some  unknown  principle,  or  he  used  them  indiscri-
minately it  is  difficult  to  decide."     ( Jamieson. )

Ver.  23.  "  I  shall  go  to  Him."  Wordsworth  sees  in  these  words  "  an  evidence  of  David's
belief  in  the  personal  itientity  of  risen  saints,  and  in  everlasting  recognition  in  a  future  state."
It  seems  quite  evident  that  at  least  "  the  continued  existence  of  the  child's  soul  in  Sheol  is  here
assumed,  and  the  hope  of  re-union  with  it  expressed."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  24.  "  She  bare  a  son."  "  In  all  probability  Solomon  was  not  born  until  after  the
capture  of  Rabbah  and  the  termination  of  the  Ammonitish  war.  His  birth  is  simply  mentioned
here  because  of  its  connection  with  what  immediately  precedes."  (Keil.)  "  Solomon,"  i.e.  the
man  of  peace  [Keil.)  It  was  probably  given  "  from  the  wish  that  ])eace  might  be  allotted  to  him
as  God's  gift,  in  contrast  with  the  continual  wars  of  his  father's  life."  [Erdmann.)  Or  as  Keil
and  others  remark,  "  because  David  regarded  his  birth  as  a  pledge  that  he  should  now  become  a
partaker  again  of  peace  with  God."

Ver.  25.  '*  He  sent,"  Expositors  differ  as  to  whether  Jehovah  or  David  is  the  subject
here.       It    seems    most    in    keeping  with    the    construction    to   read    with    Kiel    and  others,

^' Jehovah  loved  him,  and  sent,'^  etc ^^  and  he  (Nathan,  in  obedience  to  the  Divine

direction)  called,^'  etc.  Some  however  make  David  the  fiist  subject,  and  understand  the  verb
sent  in  the  sense  of  delivered;  i.e.,  David  conimitted  the  child  to  the  care  of  Nathan,  and  Nathan
gave  him  his  hi'jher-  n;in»e.  Others  again  make  David  the  subject  of  both  verbs.  "  Jedidiah,"
i.e.,  beloved  of  Jehovah.

33?


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  SAMUEL,  book  ii.


Ver.  26.  The  narrative  now  returns  to  chapter  xi.  1.  "The  royal  city."  From  verse  29
it  appears  that  Rabbah  was  not  wholly  captured  until  David  came,  and  unless  "the  whole  result
is  here  summarily  stated  in  advance"  (Erdmann),  this  seizure  must  refer  to  that  part  called  ia
the  next  verse  the  water  city.

Ver.  27.  "The  city  of  waters,"  or,  the  icater  city.  The  rains  of  this  city  (see  note  on
chap.  X.  3)  show  that  it  lay  on  both  sides  of  a  narrow  valley,  through  which  runs  a  stream  wliich
is  a  tributary  to  the  river  Jabbok.  The  citadel  still  stands  on  the  northern  declivity.  Apparently,
Joab  took  all  the  city  with  the  exception  of  this  stronghold.

Ver.  28.  "  It  "be  called  after  my  name."  Erdmann,  Keil,  and  others,  prefer  to  read
"and  my  name  be  named  vpon  it;  "  i.e..  I  receive  the  honour  of  the  capture.  "  Joab's  conduct
here  is  either  that  of  a  devoted  servant,  wishing  to  give  his  master  honour  or  shield  him  fvoin
popular  disfavour  (on  account  of  Bathsheba),  or  that  of  an  adroit  courtier  who  will  not  run  the
risk  of  exciting  his  king's  envy  by  too  much  success  (see  1  Sam.  xviii.  6-8). — (Tr.  of  Lange's
Commentary. )

Ver.  29.  "All  the  people,"  i.e.,  all  the  men  of  war  who  had  remained  behind  in  the  land  ;
from  which  we  may  see  that  Joab's  besieging  army  had  been  considerably  weakened  during  the
long  siege,  and  at  the  capture  of  the  water-city."     {Keil.)

Ver.  30.  "  Their  king's  crown,"  "  So  that  he  was  either  taken  prisoner,  or  slain  at  the
capture  of  the  city."  (Keil. )  "A  talent,"  etc.  "  About  100  English  pounds."  (TV.  of  Lange's
Commentary.)  "  This  heavy  crown  of  gold  and  precious  stones  might  have  been  worn  during
the  coronation  by  a  strong  man  like  David.  In  many  places  now  weights  scarcely  less  heavy
are  borne  on  the  head  even  by  women.  We  need  not  therefore  suppose  that  the  weight  is
accidentally  exaggerated,"  {Keil),  or  that  "  the  crown  was  supported  on  the  throne  above  the
head."     (Clericus.)     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  31.  *'  Under  saws,"  etc.  This  must  be  rendered  "he  cut  them  in  two  with  the  saw.**
The  other  instruments  mentioned  denote  also  cutting  tools.  "The  brick-kiln."  Keil  under-
stands that  they  were  burned  in  the  brick-kiln,  but  some  expositors  read  with  Kimchi,  "/i«;
passed  them  t/irovgh  Malckam,"  i.e.,  the  place  where  the  Ammonites  laid  human  sacrifices  in  the
arms  of  the  red-hot  image  cf  their  god,  Moloch.  (See  Lev.  xviii.  21.)  But  many  contend  that
the  Hebrew  text  caimot  be  so  translated,  and  its  true  signification  is  very  uncertain,

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  I-IZ.

David's    Repentance.

I.  The  first  step  in  David's  return  to  God  is  taken  by  God  Himself     "  The

Lord  sent  Nathan."  Tlie  man  who  has  fallen  into  a  |5it  and  broken  his  limbs
must  have  help  from  without.  It  is  useless  to  expect  him  to  climb  out  unaided
— someone  must  come  and  lift  him  out  if  he  is  ever  again  to  find  himself  on  the
spot  whence  he  fell.  The  first  step  to  recovery  must  come  from  outside  and  from
above  himself.  David  had  fallen  by  his  own  want  of  vigilance  into  a  horrible  pit
of  sin  ;  his  moral  backbone  was  broken  (Psa.  li.  8),  and  he  could  no  longer  stand
upright  before  his  conscience  and  God,  and  the  longer  this  state  continued  the
deeper  did  he  sink  into  the  mire  of  moral  insensibility.  Some  help  must  come
from  without  if  he  is  ever  to  recover,  in  any  degree,  his  lost  position — some
means  must  be  taken  to  awaken  within  him,  first  a  sense  of  guilt  and  then  a  hope
of  pardon.  God  sends  the  means  and  thus  takes  the  first  step  towards  recon-
ciliation between  Himself  and  David,  and  He  does  the  same  we  believe  in  all
similar  cases.  The  tendency  of  sin  is  either  to  harden  the  transgressor  or  to  fill
him  with  despair.  He  either  tries  to  palliate  his  guilt  or  he  is  so  overwhelmed
})y  the  consciousness  of  it  that  he  becomes  hopeless  of  ever  being  free  from  either
its  penalty  or  its  power.  But  provision  has  been  made  by  God  to  meet  both
states  of  mind.  He  has  sent  a  greater  than  Nathan,  and  in  Christ  (2  Cor  v.  19)
has  taken  the  first  step  in  reconciling  tlie  world  unto  Himself.

II.  The  means  used  are  wonderfully  adapted  to  attain  the  end  desired.

There  is  no  parable  of  the  Old  Testament  that  can  be  compared  with  that  of
the  *'  ewe  lamb."  Its  skill  in  concealing  its  application  reminds  one  of  our  Lord's
340


ciiAi'.  XII  HOMlLLTlU  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


p<xral)le  of  the  vineyard  and  the  wicked  husbandmen,  (Mark  xii.  1-12)  and  in
practical  application  to  the  heart  and  conscience  it  has  never  been  surpassed.
A  consideration  of  the  analogy  and  contrast  which  it  sets  forth  as  existing
between  Uriah  and  David  shows  how  fitted  it  was  to  set  before  the  latter  the
aggravated  guilt  of  his  deed.  1.  The  analogy.  The  men  in  the  parable  were,
in  some  respects,  on  an  equality  ;  they  were  fcllt)U'-men  and  fellow-citizens.
"There  were  two  men  in  one  city."  So  David  and  Uriah,  although  one  was  a
king  and  the  other  a  subject,  were  on  a  level  on  the  conimon  ground  of  humanity,
and  were  both  subject  to  the  laws,  political,  social,  and  religious  which  had
been  given  by  God  to  the  nation  which  regarded  Jerusalem  as  the  seat  of
government.  David  was  by  birth  a  member  of  the  highly  favoured  nation  to
whom  God  had  given  laws  direct  from  heaven,  and  Uriah  by  choice  was  a  citizen
of  the  city  of  the  great  king,  and  stood  in  this  sense  on  a  level  with  his  royal
master,  as  did  the  poor  man  of  the  parable  with  his  oppressive  fellow-
citizen.  2.  The  contrast.  "  The  one  rich  and  the  other  poor."  Wealth
means  power  to  gratify  one's  desires,  to  execute  one's  purposes  to  a  great
extent.  Poverty  often  means  the  necessity  of  submission  to  the  will  of  those
socially  above  us  even  though  they  be  beneath  us  in  every  other  respect.
It  was  so  with  the  oppressor  and  the  oppressed  in  the  parable,  and  it  was  so
with  Uriah  and  David.  The  king's  positiim  made  it  possible  for  hiui  to  indulge
his  lawless  desires  without  hindrance.  The  position  of  Uriah  put  his  domestic
happiness  and  his  life  at  his  master's  disposal,  and  this  inequality  aggravated
David's  crime.  The  parable  seems  to  hint  at  a  further  ct)ntrast.  "  The  rich  man  had
exceeding  many  flocks  and  herds,  but  the  poor  man  had  nothing  save  one  little
ewe  lamb."  David  had  many  wives  ;  we  infer  from  the  narrative  that  Uriah  had
but  one.  His  love  was  therefore  deeper,  because  purer,  than  that  of  David.
The  owner  of  many  wives  could  not  gauge  the  deep  affection  of  the  husband  of
one  wife,  even  as  the  rich  man  of  the  parable  could  not  understand  the  feeling
with  which  his  poor  neighbour  regarded  his  only  lamb.  Both  the  points  of
resemblance  and  of  contrast  were  calculated  to  set  the  many  aggravations  of
David's  sin  before  him  when  once  his  conscience  began  to  awake  from  its  long
slumber.  Until  this  moment  David  had  evidently  never  looked  his  crime  in  the
face  ;  now  it  was  so  placed  before  him  that  he  saw  it  in  all  its  enormity,  stripped
of  any  palliation  or  excuse  which  he  might  have  thrown  over  it,  if  he  had  known
it  for  his  own.  It  is  also  probable  that  Nathan,  who  was  evidently  much
esteemed  by  David,  had  in  past  days  informed  the  king  of  deeds  of  injustice
committed  by  his  rich  subjects  against  their  poorer  brethren.  Add  to  this  the
fact  that  Nathan  had  been  the  mouthpiece  of  God's  goodwill  to  David  and  his
house,  and  we  shall  see  how  adapted  were  both  the  messenger  and  the  message  —
first  to  secure  the  desired  attention,  and  then  to  produce  the  needed  conviction.
The  whole  transaction  is  an  exhibition  of  the  manifold  wisdom  and  the  gracious
condescension  which  ever  marks  the  dealings  of  God  with  his  erring  creatures,
and  puts  into  the  mouth  of  every  restored  wanderer  the  song,  "  The  Lord  is
merciful  and  gracious,  slow  to  anger,  and  plenteous  in  mercy."  (Psa.  ciii.  8),

III.  God's  pardon  of  the  sin  follows  immediately  upon  David's  confession.
This  is  the  law  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  both  before  and  since  the  death  of  the
Sinbearer — ''  if  we  confess  our  sins.  He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our
sins."  (1  John  i.  9.)  In  the  narrative  before  us  the  same  verse  contains  the
acknowledgement  of  the  guilt  and  its  remission  ; — it  seems  as  though  David  ha<l
hardly  uttered  his  confes.sion  before  he  received  an  assurance  that  he  was
pardoned, — that  is,  that  the  worst  effect  of  sin — the  displeasure  of  God — was
removed.  This  by  no  means,  as  we  see  from  David's  subsequent  history,  frees
the  transgressor  from  all  the  penalty  of  his  transgression,  but  it  opens  or  reopens
the  way  of  access  to  a  merciful  God,  and  gives  a  different  as})ect  to  all  the
chastibcment  that  follows.     If  David  had,  in  his  own  words,  still  ''kept  silence''

ail


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  ii.


before  God,  (Psa.  xxxiii.),  he  would  have  liad  no  place  of  refiioje  in  the  cala-
mities of  liis  after  life  ;  but  havin^;  acknowledged  his  iniquity,  he  was  able  to
look  for  help  to  tlie  very  hand  that  smote  him.  This  is  the  great  and  vital
difference  between  the  afflictions  of  the  forgiven  and  the  unforgiven  sinner.
'J^he  former  must  still  suffer  many  of  the  consequences  of  sin,  but  the  deadly
sting  is  g(me  from  them,  and  although  the  sentence  pronounced  at  the  fall  is
not  reversed  for  him  any  more  than  for  the  latter,  his  relations  to  the  Lawgiver  are
tliose  of  a  forgiven  child  instead  of  a  rebel  subject.  David's  history  shows  how
ready  God  is  to  let  a  man  pass  from  the  one  position  to  the  other.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  1.  He  must  be  of  God's  send-  tures,  might  be  startled,  as  was  David,

ing  that  shall  effectually  awaken  con-  if  once  they  could  be  convinced  of  its

science  and  s})eak  to  the  heart.  Nathan  mean     and     selfish     baseness. — Dean

tiie  pro})het  is  here  purposely  sent  to  Sta7ileij.
let  good  David  feel  the  bruise  of  his

fall.  ...  If  God's  best  children  have  Vers.  5  and  6.    This  energy  of  virtue,

been  sometimes  suffered  to  sleep  in  sin,  this  mighty   effort  to  get  credit  with

at  last  he  awakeneth  them  in  a  fright.  oneself  for  a  lively  sense  of  right  and

Now  because  men  that  are  awakened  haired  of  injustice — who  does  not  re-

hastily  out  of  a  deep  and  sweet  sleep  cognise  it  ?     Who  should  not  tremble

are  apt  to  take  it  ill,  and  to  brawl  with  when   he  thinks — tlie  evil  spirit  who

their  best  friends,  wise  Nathan  begin-  prompts  to  this  consummate  deceit  and

netli  his  reproof,  not  in  plain  terms,  but  hypocrisy  is  near  to  me  ?    I  am  tempted

by  an  allegory  ....  and  it   is  most  continually  to  fly  from  the  light  which

likely  he  did  it  privately,  that  he  might  would  show  me  the  foul  spots  in  my

the  more  easily  work  and  win  upon  own  soul,  by  projecting  them  outside

him.  .    .    .    Private  admonition   saith  of  me,  and  pronouncing  sentence  upon

one,   is   the   pastor's   privy   purse,    as  them  in  another  man. — Maurice.

princes  have  theirs,  besides  their  public  I.  Jmpartial  reason  is  ever  ready  to

disbursements. — Trapp.  condemn  any  flagrant  iniquity,    lliere

is  as  discernable  a  difference  between

Ver.  2.  The  greater  was  his  sin,  since  good  and  evil  as  between  white  and

pressed  with  no  necessity.    What  need  black,  when  nothing  interposes  to  ob-

had  the  angels  to  leave  their  first  estate  struct  the  sight,  or  misrepresent  the

and  habitation  ?   (Jude  6.)  What  need  object.  Whenaparticular  case  happens

had   Adam    to   reach   after   a   deity  ?  to    be   entangled    with  something    of

What  need  had  Ahab  to  covet  Naboth's  nicety,  there  may  be  room  for  doubt,

vineyard?  etc.     It  is  no  small  aggra-  or  need  of  consideration,  but  in  general

vation   of  a  man's  sin  to  fall  into  it  men  can  pass  judgment   readily   and

without  strong  temptation. — Trapp.  boldly.     David  wanted  not  the  wisdom

of  an  angel   to  discern  what  common

Vers.  3-5.     It  is  most  instructive  to  sense  would  have  dictated  in  a  like  case,

observe  that  Nathan   in    his   parable  But — II.     'J he  prejudices  of  interest

calls  attention,   not  to  the  sensuality  and  lust,  may,  and  do  hinder  men  from

andcruelty  of  David's  crime,  but  simply  discerninri,   or  at  least  distinguishing

to  its  intense  and  brutal  selfishness.  .  .  in  practue  between  right  and  wrong.

Remember  this,  even  as  regards  the  even  in  the  plainest  cases.     Such  was

special  sin  of  which  David  was  guilty.  most  apparently  the  case  with  David.

Many,  perhaps,  who  would  excuse  them-  There  was  no  room  for  comparison  be-

selves  on  othei*^  grounds  for  the  ruin  tween  two  injuries  of  a  size  so  unequal,

which,  by  the  indulgence  of  their  own  He  who  was  so  tenderly  sensible  of

passions,  they  help  to  bring  upon  the  what  the  poor  man  was  supposed  to

souls  and  bodies  of  their  fellow-crea-  sufier,  could  not  possibly  be  ignoruat
U2


Oil  p.  xir.


IIOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


of  h(nv  niiich  tlie  injured  Uriah  must
have  sulleretl.  In  the  \w.\t  of  his  in-
dignation a,i;ainst  a  ,sui»])<>se(l  o,'[)re.ssor,
he  put  on  the  severity  of  a  judge  more
ri<]^orous  than  the  hiw  directed.  And
this  when  he  had  heen  i^uilty  of  a
cruelty  winch  left  not  the  possibility
of  restitution.  III.  Although  men  do
sometimfiS  suffer  themselves  to  commit
gross  sh/s,  in  ojyen  contrwVictioa  to
their  own  inward  light,  yet  all  noto-
rious iniquity  stands  condemned  by  the
universal  verdict  oj  mankind.  It  is  no
easy  niatter  to  bribe  tlie  reason  and
warp  the  judgment  so  far  as  to  make
men  advocate  their  own  irregularities  ;
but  let  sinners  once  sit  in  judgment
on  each  other,  and  they  will  all  come
in  condemnation  in  their  turns,  and  all
with  equal  justice.  While  the  affec-
tions are  unengaged,  and  teni})tation
at  a  distance,  nature  recoils  at  the
very  thought  of  a  great  enormity.
(See  2  Kings  viii.  13.)  It  is  probable
had  David  been  foretold  by  Nathan
liow  he  would  act  in  the  matter  of
Uriah,  he  would  have  answered  him  in
the  words  of  Hazael,  "  Is  thy  servant
a  dog  that  he  should  do  this  thing  ?  " —
Dean  Moss.

Vers.  5-7.  I.  Men  as  sinners  are
frequently  ignorant  of  their  own
characters.  .  .  .  Although  there
is  no  subject  of  more  vital  interest  to
man  than  himself,  and  none  which  he
has  such  facilities  for  studying,  yet  of
nothing  is  he  more  ignorant.  .  .  .
When  (Jhrist  warned  Peter  of  his  deinal
of  Him,  the  apostle  exclaimed  "  Tliough
all  men  deny  thee,  yet  will  not  I  deny
thee;"  but  within  a  few  hours  Peter
repeatedly^  and  with  oaths,  denied  his

Master Why  are  we  so

ignorant  of  our  own  characters?  I
mny  mention  three  reasons : — First,
The  lack  of  a  sin-resisting  force.  "Sin,"
says  Caird,  in  his  admirable  sermon  on
^elf- Ignorance,  "can  be  truly  measured
only  when  it  is  resisted."  Steam  is  an
illustration.  So  long  as  it  is  allowed
to  pass  away  freely  and  unrestrained
from  the  boiling  vessel  its  power  is  in-
appreciable ;  but  resist  it,  endeavour
to  coniiue  it,  and  it  will  gather  a  force


that  will  shiver  you  to  atoms.  Con-
scienco  is  the  sin-rcsi.^iing  force,  and
this  in  the  sitnier  isweak:,t3tc.  Secondly,
The  i)ifrii,ity  of  the  sin-detecting
powi'.r.  Ctmscience  is  this  power,  auit
by  depravity  it  often  gets  dea«lened  so
that  it  does  not  feel  or  see.  If  tiie
thermometer  is  frozen,  how  can  you
ted  the  temperature  of  the  air?  .  .
Thirdly,  The  re'pulsii'eness  of  a  sin-
polluted  heart.  Man  feels  that  all
things  within  are  not  right.  He  sus-
pects that  there  are  disease,  danger,
and  a  lurking  enemy  there,  and
he  keeps  away.  He  regards  his  own
heart  as  the  insolvent  debtor  regards
his  ledger,  etc.  II.  1  he  men  who  are
most  ignorant  of  themselves  are  most
severe  in  their  judgment  of  others  ....
This  principle  is  illustrated  also  in  the
parable  of  the  Inmseholders  (Matt.  xxi.
33-42)  ;  in  the  history  of  Caiaphas
(Mark  xiv.  63)  ;  and  in  the  conduct
of  the  Pharisee  in  the  temple,  in  rela-
tion to  the  Publican.  He  that  has
the  "  beam "  in  his  own  eye  sees  the
"mote"  in  his  brother's  eye  .  .  .  .
III.  However  self-ignorant  a  man  may
he,  a  'period  of  self-recognition  must

come I  have  read  in  ancient

history  of  a  dumb  prince  who  had
never  spoken  a  word  in  all  his  life,
till  one  day  he  saw  an  enemy  draw  a
sword  against  his  fcither  ;  and  as  he
beheld  the  fatal  blow  descending,  the
terrible  feeling  unlocked  his  tongue
and  made  him  speak.  So  it  will  be
with  all  dumb  consciences  soon.  The
period  of  self-recognition  came  to  some
of  the  murderers  of  Christ  on  the
day  of  Pentecost  ;  and  they  cried  out,
**  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we
do?"  It  came  to  Paul,  and  he  ex-
claimed, "  What  things  were  gain  to
me,  I  counted  loss."  When  God
touches  the  conscience,  the  man  stands
self-revealed.

Awakened  conscience  acts  the  artist    ;
Uses  the  8un  of  Heaven's  law
To  pliotograpli  the  sinner's  life,
Then  holds  it  up  a  life-like  picture —
A  hideous  monster  to  the  affriglited  eye.

— Vr.  David  Thomas.

Ver.    13.      Two  things   are    to  be
remarked  in  connection  with  David's


HOMILETW  C OMMENTA  R  Y .-   SA  M  VEL.  book  il.


penitential  utterance.  1.  1  hat  he  re-  tence  tliiis  suddenly  produced  cculd  he
garded  social  wrongs  as  siiis  against  neitlier  very  deep  nor  very  thorough.
the  Lord.  All  that  appears  to  us  in  But  to  those  who  think  thus,  three
the  crinies  of  which  he  was  con-  thinizs  must  be  said,
victed  was  purely  social First  :  an  impression  may  be  pro-
Still,  inasmuch  as  social  order  is  a  duced  in  a  moment  which  will  remain
Divine  institution,  wrongs  ai^ainst  indelible.  We  have  heard,  for  example,
society  are  sins  against  God.  Things  of  one  who,  as  he  was  travelling  in  an
are  right  and  wrong  between  m.-m  and  Alpine  region  at  midnight,  saw  for  an
man  because  Heaven  has  willed  them  instant,  by  the  brilliancy  of  a  flash  of
so  ...  .  and  the  sinner's  grief,  lightning,  that  he  was  in  such  a  position
when  conscience  is  aroused,  is  not  so  that  another  step  would  have  been  over
much  that  he  has  injured  man,  as  that  a  fearful  precipice,  and  the  effect  upon
he  has  insulted  his  Maker.  "Against  him  was  that  he  started  back  and
Thee,  Thee  only  have  I  sinned."  waited  for  the  morning  dawn.  Now
2.  'I hat  he  felt  that  he  himself  was  re-  such  a  flash  of  lightning  into  the  dark-
sponsihle  for  the  commission  of  those  ness  of  David's  soul,  tliis  "Thou  art
sins.  He  does  not  refer  to  the  tempter  the  man,"  of  Nathan's,  was  to  him.
or  the  temptation, — does  not  say  a  It  revealed  to  him,  by  its  momentary
word  about  necessity  and  the  influence  brilliance,  the  full  aggravation  of  his
of  circumstances  upon  his  orjanisation  ;  iniquity.  He  did  not  need  or  desire  a
no,  no  !  all  this  will  do  very  well  when  second  sight  of  it.  That  was  enough
conscience  is  sleeping  for  the  intellect  to  stir  him  up  to  hatred  of  his  sin,  and
to  speculate   about.      But  conscience  of  himself.

despises  your  fatalism,  dashes  its  logi-  But,  second  :  we  must,  in  connection

cal  fabrics  to  ]>ieces.    "  I  have  sinned."  with  this  narrative,  read  the  Psalms  to

.     .     .     .     Taking  Nathan's  language  which  David's  penitence   gave   birth,

as  expressing  forgiveness  of  sin,   tlie  namely,  the  51st  and  the  32nd  ;  and

following      remarks      are     suggested,  if  these  are  not  the  genuine  utterances

1.   J^ orgiveiiess   is  a  real  act.      It  is  of  a  passionate  sincerity,  where  shall

not  a   mere   vision,   or  an  idea  of  a  we  find  that  quality  in  any  literature?

superstitious  mind,  nor  a  mere  figure  Admirably  has  Chandler  said  of  the

of  speech; — \t  i^  d^,  "  puttiiig  away  of  51st  Psalm:   "The  heart  appears  in

sin.'*  ....     2.  l^orgiveness  is  an  every  line  ;  and  the  bitter  anguish  of

act  perjormed  by  the  Lord.     ....  a  wounded  conscience  discovers  itself

None  can  forgive  men's  sins  but  the  by  the   most  natural  and  convincing

Lord 3.    Lorgiveness    is  symbols.     Let  but  the  Psalm  be  read

a7i   act    which    delivers   Jrom   death,  without  prejudice,    and   with   a  view

**  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."    ....  only   to   collect    the   real    sentiments

"  Thou   shalt    not    die  "  ;    even    thy  expressed  in  it,  and  the  disposition  of

physical   dissolution   shall   be   only  a  heart    that    appears    throughout   the

sleep.     4.    Forgiveness  is  an  act  de-  whole  of  it,  and  no  man  of  candour,  I

pendent    on    repentance am  confident,  will  ever  suspect  that  it

Repent,  that  your  sins  may  be  blotted  was  the  dictate  of  hypocrisy,  or  could

out,  etc.    5.  Lorgiveness  is  an  act  with  be  penned  from  any  other  motive  but

which  the  true  7ninister  has  much  to  do.  a  strong  conviction  of  the  heinousness

Whilst  we  repudiate  the  doctrine  of  of  his  offence,  and  the  earnest  desire

priestly  absolution,  we  hold  it   to  be  of    God's   forgiveness,   and    being    re-

the   right    and    duty    of    every   true  strained  from  the  commission  of  the

minister  of  Christ  to  do  what  Nathan  like    transgressions     for    the    future,

now  did, — Declare  Divine  forgiveness  Furthermore,  as  another  evidence  of

to  Him  who  has  proved  the  genuine-  the  genuineness  of  David's  repentance,

ness    of    his    penitence. — Dr.    David  we   point   to    the    words   of    Nathan,

Ihomas.  "The  Lord  also   hath  put  away  thy

It  may  seem  to  some,  that  a  peni-  sin,"    and    ask    if    the    prophet,    as
344


CHAP.  XII.  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


J«^]m\  all's  representative,   would  have  dry  sand  is  pure.    David's  life  and  liis-

saiil  aiiything  like  that  if  the  penitence  tory,  as  written  for  us  in  those  Psalms

of  David  had  not  been  sincere.     ...  of  his,    1    consider   to    be    the    truest

What,   really,   is   the   distinction    be-  einbleni  ever  given  of  a  man's  moral

tween    the   people   of    God    and    the  })r()gress  and  warlare  here  below.     All

wicked  on  the  earth?     Is  it  that  the  earnest  souls  will  ever  discern  in  it  the

one  class  comniit    no   sins,  while  the  faithful  struggle  of  an  earnest  human

other    fall   into  iniquity?      No;    the  soul  toward   what  is  good   and   best,

godly  man  does  sin.     No  one  will  be  Struggle  often  baffled  sore,  baffled  down

more  ready  to  acknowledge  that  than  into  entire  wreck,  yet  a  struggle  never

himself.       The    ditference,    therefore,  ended  ;   ever   with   tears,  repentance,

is  not  there.    It  lies  in  this  :  that  when  true,    unconquerable    purpose    begun

the  child  of  God  falls  into  sin,  he  rises  anew.     Poor  human  nature  !    Is  not  a

out  of  it  and  leaves  it,  and  cries  to  God  man's   walking   in   truth  always   that

for  pardon,  purity,  and  help  ;  but  when  — *  a  succe^^sion  of  falls  ? '    Man  can  do

the  ungodly  man  falls  into  sin,  he  con-  no  other.     In  this  wild  element  of  a

tinues  in  it,  and  delights  in  it,  as  does  life,  he  has  to  struggle  upward  :  now

the  sow  in  her  wallowing  in  the  mire.  fallen,  now  abased  ;  and  ever  with  tears.

It  is  a  poor,  shallow  philosophy,  there-  repentance,  and  bleeding  heart,  he  ha.s

fore,  that  sneers  at  such  a  history  as  to  ri>e  again,  struggle  again,  still  on-

this  of  David  ;  nay,  it  is  worse  even  ward.     That  his  struggle  be  a  faithful,

than  that  :  it  is  the  very  spirit  of  Satan,  unconquerable  one,  that  is  the  question

rejoicing,  as  it  does,  in  the  iniquity  of  of  questions." — laylor.
others.     On    this    point,    however,  I  The    greatest   griefs   are   not   most

gladly  avail  mj'self  of  the  language  of  verbal.      Saul  confessed  his  sin  more

a  living  writer,  not  usually  considered  largely,    less   effectually.       God   cares

to  have  any  very  strong  bias  in  favour  not    for    phrases,    but    for    affections.

of  the   Scriptural  views  of  men   and  The  first  piece  of  our  amends  to  God

things  —  I     mean     'JMiomas     Carlyle.  for  sinning  is  the  acknowledgment  of

"Faults!"    says   this   author,    in   his  sin:  he  can  do  little,  that  in  a  just

"Lecture  on  the  Hero  as   Pro[)het ; "  offence  cannot  accuse  himself.     If  we

"  the  greatest  of  faults,  I  should  say,  is  cannot  be  so  good  as  we  would,  it  is

to  be  conscious  of  none.     Readers  of  reason    we   should   do   God   so    much

the  Bible,  above  all,  one  wouhl  think  right,  as  to  say  how  evil  we  are.     And

might  know  better.       Who   is   called  why  was  not  this  done  sooner  ?     It  is

there  the  man  according  to  God's  own  strange  to  see  how  easily  sin  gets  into

heart  ?     David,  the  Hebrew  king,  had  the  heart ;  how  hardly  it  gets  out  of

fallen  into  sins  enough ;  blackest  crimes;  the  mouth  :  is  it  because  sin,  like  unto

there  was  no  want  of  sins.   And  there-  Satan,  where  it  hath  got  possession,  is

upon   unbelievers  sneer  and  ask,    'Is  desirous  to  hold  it,  and  ktiows  that  it

thisyour  man  according  to  God's  heart?'  is  fully  ejected  by  a  free  confession?

The  sneer,  I  niust  say,  seems  to  me  but  or  because,  in  a  guiltiness  of  deformity,

a  shallow  one.    What  are  faults?  what  it  hides  itself  in  t lie  breast  where  it  is

are  the  outward  details  of  a  life,   if  once  entertained,  and  hates  the  light  ?

the   inner  secret  of  it — the  remorse,  or  because  the  tongue  is  so  feed  with

temptations,  true,  often  baiffed,  never-  self-love,  that  it  is  loath  to  be  drawn

ending   struggle  of   it — be  forgotten?  unto  any  verdict  against  the  heart  or

*  It   is    not  in  man    that    w^alketh    to  hands  ?  or  is  it  out  of  an  idle  misprision

direct  his  steps.'     Of  all  acts,  is  not,  of  shame,   which,   while  it  should  be

for  a  man,  repentance  the  most  Divine?  placed    in   ollending,   is   misplaced    in

The  deadliest  sin,  I  say  were  that  same  disclosing  of  our  offence? — Bp.  Hall.
supercilious  consciousness    of   no   sin.

That  is  death.     The  heart  so  conscious  Vers.  5-13.  'JMie  sin   of  David,  and

is   divoiced   from    sincerity,    humility,  his  unconsciousness  of  his  own  sin —

and  fact — is  dead.     It  is  pure,  as  dead  and  so  also  his  repentance  through  the

345


HO  MI  LET  l€  CO  MM  EN  TAR  Y :   8 A  M  UEL.


BOOK  TI.


disclosure  to  him  of  his  own  sin — are
exactly  what  are  most  likely  to  take
place  in  characters  like  his,  like  ours,
made  up  of  mixed  forms  of  good  and
evil.  The  hardened,  depraved,  worldly
man  is  not  ignorant  of  his  sin  ;  he
knows  it,  defends  it,  he  is  accustomed
to  it.  But  tlie  good  man,  or  the  man
who  is  half  good  and  half  bad — he
overlooks  his  sin.  His  good  deeds
conceal  his  bad  deeds,  often  even  from
others,  more  often  still  from  himself.
.  .  .  For  others,  this  history  teaches
us  to  regard  with  tenderness  the  faults,
the  sins,  the  crimes,  of  those  who,
gifted  with  great  and  noble  qualities,
are,  by  that  strange  union  of  strength
and  weakness  which  we  so  often  see,
betrayed  into  acts  which  more  ordinary,
com  monplace  characters  avoid  or  escape.
We  need  not,  nor  dare,  deny  their  sin
,  .  .  hut  we  must  thankfully  acknow-
ledge the  background,  the  atmosphere,
so  to  speak,  of  excellence  which  renders
a  return  from  such  sins  possible  ....
And  for  ourselves,  let  us  remember  that
such  a  foundation  of  good  as  there  was
in  David's  character  is  never  thrown
away.  If  it  is  not  able  to  resist  the
trial  altogether,  it  will  at  least  be  best
able  to  recover  from  it.  David's  fall
sufficiently  teaches  us,  not  to  rely  on
our  religious  principle,  however  sound,
nor  to  trust  in  our  religious  zeal,  how-
ever fervent  ;  but  his  repentance  bids
us  humbly  ho})e  that  whatever  good
purposes  and  sincere  prayers  and  faith
in  God,  and  love  of  Christ,  we  have
been  able  to  retain  amid  the  changes
and  chances  of  the  world,  will  stand  in
the  evil  day,  and  do  us  good  service
still :  there  will  be  something  to  which


we  can  anpoal  with  the  certainty  of
some  response  when  the  first  flush  of
passion,  the  fir.-^t  cloud  of  self-deceit
has  passed  away. — Dean  Stanley.

Another  view  of  the  effect  of  David's
humiliation  may  be  noticed,  not  as  if
it  were  a  matter  of  certainty,  but
rather  as  a  suggestion  for  study  and
consideration.  There  is  reason  to  think
that  this  new  exercise  of  David's  soul
— his  deep  sense  of  sin,  and  bitter  ex-
perience of  its  fruits — fitted  him  for  a
most  important  function,  which  he
would  now  begin  to  fulfil  more  espe-
cially than  heretofore.  These  exercises
of  his  soul  enabled  him  to  become  more
suitably  the  type  of  the  sin-bearing
Jesus,  and  to  give  utterance  to
those  feelings  of  deep  oppression  and
agonizing  grief  that,  in  their  fullest
and  deepest  meaning,  none  could  ap-
propriate but  the  Man  of  Sorrows.  Up
to  this  time  David  had  had  compara-
tively little  acquaintance  with  the
burden  of  sin  ;  .  .  .  .  but  no
one  could  in  any  measure  foreshadow
the  Messiah  wi'hout  a  deep  personal
acquaintance  with  the  burden  of  guilt.
In  one  aspect  it  may  be  a
startlinir  thing  to  suggest  that  a  time
of  writhing  under  the  horrors  of  guilt
fitted  David  better  to  become  the  type
of  the  sinless  One.  But  in  another
aspect  the  statement   is  no  paradox.

.  .  .  It  is  not  meant  that  either
in  kind  or  degree  David's  feelings  were
identical  with  the  suffering  Messiah,
but  only  that  the  resemblance  was  such
that  the  language  which  was  suggested
by  the  one  was  suitable,  and  shown  to
be  suitable,  to  express  the  other.—
Blaikie.


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  14—25.


David's  Puj^ishment.


I.  A  sinful  deed  committed  by  a  child  of  God  must  be  punished  to  vindicate
the  justice  of  the  Livine  government.  The  human  king  and  father  who  claims
to  be  the  representative  and  executor  of  law  is  bound  to  begin  at  home,  and
exact  strict  obedience  from  tlie  members  of  his  own  family  before  he  deals  with
those  outside  his  household.  For  if  his  home  discipline  be  lax,  and  he  overlook
transgressions  in  his  children  that  he  would  punish  in  other  men,  he  loses  his
reputation  as  a  just  and  impartial  ruler.  Indeed,  those  who  stand  most  nearly
346


CHAP.  xn.  HO MTLFTIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


related  to  him  are  riglitl}-  counted  more  blameworthy  than  others  if  the}^  viol.ite
the  law,  inasmuch  as  their  near  rubition  imi)lies  a  more  perfect  knowlcd-e  of
wliat  ought  to  be  done,  and  therefore  a  more  })inding  oblii^ation.  It  is  especially
needful,  therefore,  that  their  sins  be  visited  with  the  deserved  penalty,  and  such
a  visitation  is  quite  consistent  with  ])ersonal  for<;iveness  of  the  offender.  God,
who  ckims  to  be  the  supreme  ruler  of  all  the  nations,  chose  the  Hebrew  people
as  Ilis  especial  iidieritan.ee,  and  selected  David  from  the  rest  of  the  nation  to
stand  in  a  peculiar  and  intimate  relation  to  Plimself.  All  the  nation  was  under
special  obligation  to  obey  the  laws  of  God,  and  David  was  bound  to  obedience
by  even  stronger  ties  than  any  of  his  subjects.  As  an  Israelite  he  was  called
upon  to  show  to  the  heathen  around  an  example  of  godly  living,  and  as  the
chosen  king  of  Israel,  and  the  professing  servant  of  Jehovah,  he  was  bound  to  be
a  living  revelation  of  God's  law  to  his  own  people.  If  his  great  sin  had  not  been
openly  punished,  and  if  the  punishment  had  not  been  heavy,  the  reputation  of  the
Divine  Law-giver  would  have  suffered.  Therefore,  although  his  sin  was  *'i)ut
away"  upon  confession,  justice  demanded  all  the  suffering  that  followed.  'J'his
law  is  of  necessity  in  constant  operation  in  the  government  of  God.  "  You  only
have  I  known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth  ;  therefore  I  v) ill  punish  you  for  all
your  iniquities.''  (Amos  iii.  3.)  Peculiar  privileges  and  distinguishing  marks  of
Divine  favour  are  not  licences  to  sin,  but  reasons  why  it  cannot  be  lightly
passed  over.

II.  The  result  of  an  unlawful  deed  soon  changes  from  a  source  of  pleasure
into  one  of  pain.  The  thief  who  succeeds  in  capturing  his  booty  congratulates
himself  upon  all  the  enjoyment  he  hopes  to  purchase  with  it.  But}  it  may  be
that  he  presently  stumbles  beneath  its  weight,  and  so  enables  the  officer  of
justice  to  overtake  and  capture  him,  and  thus  the  very  largeness  of  the  gain
that  he  secured  for  an  hour  becomes  the  means  of  days  and  months  of  sorrow.
It  is  not  always,  nor  generally,  that  retribution  follows  so  quickly  upon  the  heels
of  wrong-doing,  but  whether  its  results  be  enjoyed  for  a  longer  or  shorter  period,
they  will  one  day  be  the  cause  of  bitterness.  David  was  allowed  to  enjoy,  so
far  as  a  guilty  conscience  would  permit  him,  the  fruits  of  his  sinful  union  with
Bathsheba  for  a  short  time.  It  is  evident  that  the  child  that  was  born  to  him
was  a  source  of  joy  to  his  heart.  But  soon  that  very  source  of  his  gladness  was
smitten,  and  the  fountain  whence  the  streams  of  pleasure  had  flowed  now  sent
forth  only  bitter  waters.  From  what  we  know  of  David  we  may  conclude  that
the  sufferings  of  an  innocent  child  would  have  given  him  pain  under  any  circum-
stances, but  how  great  an  addition  to  his  mental  suffering  must  it  have  been  to
remember  that,  in  this  instance,  his  guilty  passion  was  the  cause  of  all.  This
leads  to  the  remembrance —

III.  That  those  who  commit  the  sin  are  not  the  only  sufferers  from  it.

This  is  an  inevitable,  although  sad,  consequence  of  that  relativity  between
human  creatures  which  is  also  the  cause  of  so  many  blessings.  As  none  can
say  where  the  effects  of  sin  will  end  in  relation  to  his  own  soul,  so  it  is  impos-
sible to  calculate  how  far  its  evil  influence  will  extend  in  relation  to  others.
Sometimes,  as  in  the  case  before  us,  only  bodily  suffering  is  entailed  upon  the
child  by  the  transgressions  of  the  parent,  but  often,  alas,  the  sin  of  the  father
bears  more  deadly  fruit  in  the  moral  contamination  which  it  communicates  to
the  children.  David's  infant  child  suffered  bodily  pain  and  death  because  of
the  iniquity  of  its  parents,  and  no  man — especially  no  parent — can  sin  without
bringing  misery  of  some  kind  upon  those  related  to  him.  Our  children,  and
others  connected  with  us,  can,  by  Divine  help,  free  themselves  from  the  moral  con-
sequences of  our  wrong-doing,  but  the  law  which  binds  our  sin  and  their  bodily
or  mental  suffering  together  is  one  which  cannot  be  broken  in  the  present  life.
Blessed  be  God  it  can  reach  no  further ;  but  surely  it  reaches  far  enough  to

347


tfOMTLETW  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL


BOOK  11,


furnisli  an  all-powerful  motive  to  every  man  to  pray,  ''Lead  me  not  into  tempta-
tion." If  men  will  not  hear  the  voice  which  cries  "Do  thyself  no  harm,"  jind
will  contend  that  tliey  may  do  what  they  please  with  their  own  souls,  can  they
find  even  the  shadow  of  an  excuse  for  hrin^ing  pain  and  loss  upon  others,  even
though  that  pain  and  loss  be  only  temporal  ?

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Ver.  14.  This  observation  gives  us
an  insight  into  the  whole  position  of
David.  In  him  the  good  princij)le  had
attained  to  sn[)reniacy ;  the  godless
party  had  seen  this  with  terror ;  and
now  they  mocked  piety  in  its  re])re-
sentative,  who,  because  he  held  this
position,  ought  to  have  kept  watch
over  his  heart  the  more  carefully. —
Hengstenherg.

Ver.  15.  It  is  solemnizing  to  think
that  the  one  sinless  member  of  the
family — sinless  as  to  actual  sin — is  the
first  to  reap  the  deadly  wages  of  sin.
It  leads  the  thoughts  straight  to  the
doctrine  of  inn)uted  guilt ;  it  makes
us  think  of  mankind  as  one  great  tree
with  ten  thousand  branches  ;  and  when
the  faithless  root  sends  up  poison  in-
stead of  nourishment,  it  is  the  youngest
and  tenderest  branchlet  that  first  droops
and  dies. — Blaikle.

Ver.  16.  We  like  to  read  these
words,  for  they  tell  us  that  David,
though  an  erring  son  of  God,  was  yet
a  son.  A  godless  man  would  have
been  driven  farther  from  Jehovah  by
these  troubles,  and  might  have  been
led  to  make  proclamation  of  his  utter
atheism  ;  but  David  wenii  to  God.
The  more  heavily  he  felt  the  rod,  the
nearer  he  crept  to  him  who  used  it.
He  fled  from  God  to  God.  He  hid
liimself  from  God  in  God.  This  shows
that  his  sin  was  out  of  the  usual  course
of  his  nature.  It  was  like  the  deflection
of  the  needle,  due  to  certain  causes,
which  at  the  time  he  permitted  to  have
influence  over  him  ;  but,  these  causes
reujoved,  his  old  polarity  of  soul  re-
turned, and  in  his  time  of  trouble  he
called  on  Jehovah.  This  was  his  habit.
Kepeatedly  in  his  Psalms  has  he  em-
ployed language  which  clearly  indicates
348  •


that  God  was  regarded  by  him  as  a
strong  rock,  whereunto,  in  time  of  trial,
he  continually  resorted.  Thus  we  have
him  saying,  on  one  occasion,  of  his
enemies  :  "  For  my  love  they  are  njy
adversaries:  but  I  give  myself  unto
prayer;"  and  again,  "From  the  end
of  the  earth  will  1  cry  unto  Thee,  when
my  heart  is  overwhelmed  :  lead  me  to
the  rock  that  is  higher  than  I." —
Taylor.

Ver.  18.  Eepentance  may  come  too
late — is  res^iect  of  tem[)oral  chastise-
ments, which  are  yet  not  penal,  but
medicinal.  (1  Cor.  xi.  32.)  Thus
Moses  and  Aaron  were  kept  out  of
Canaan  for  their  disobedience  at  the
waters  of  Meribah. — Trapp.

Ver.  20.  A  godly  man  saith  Amen
to  God's  Amen  ;  and  })ntteth  his  fiat
and  placet  to  God's.  (Acts  xxi.  J  4.) —
Trapp.

It  is  worthy  of  particular  observa-
tion that  the  first  step  of  the  Psalmist
in  the  day  of  his  sorrow  is  "  to  the
house  of  the  Lord."  His  conduct  is
worthy  of  imitation.  I  know  not
where  the  children  of  sorrow  should
go,  if  not  to  the  house  of  their
heaveidy  Father.  It  is  in  the  holiness
of  the  sanctuary  that  this  "  beauty  "  is
found  which  the  prophet  was  to  give
instead  of  ashes  to  those  "  who
mourned  in  Zion."  It  is  in  the  sacred
vessels  of  the  temple  that  the  "  oil  of
joy"  is  kept  which  God's  people  are  to
have  "for  mourning." — Bp.  Dehon.

Ver.  22.  God  was  gracious  to  him
in  that  the  child  did  not  live.  How
could  he  ever  have  looked  upon  him
without  grief  and  shame  ?  Ht)W  oft  do
God's  children  find  themselves  crossed
with  a  blessing !  and  out  he  contrary.
— Trapp.


OtfAt.  Xlt.


BOmileTW  Com  v  e  v  ta  ti  v  ■  .s.i  v  rt:i.


Ver.  23.  We  may  learn  from  David's
words  here,  that  we  may  cherish  the
most  unwavering  assurance  of  the
salvation  of  those  who  die  in  infancy.
]']ven  in  the  comparative  darkness  of
the  Jewish  dispensation,  the  Psahnist
had  tlie  fullest  persuasion  of  the  eternal
welfare  of  his  baby-boy  ;  and,  under
the  Gospel  economy,  there  are  many
things  revealed  which  tend  to  make
the  doctrine  of  infjint  salvation  perfectly
indubitable.  Not  to  refer  to  the  fact
that,  as  they  have  committed  no  actual
transgressions,  little  children  do  not
personally  deserve  condemnation,  and
may,  therefore,  presumably  be  regarded
as  included  in  the  provisions  of  the
covenant  of  grace,  there  are  certain
things  which  to  my  mind  place  the
doctrine  to  which  I  refer  beyond  all
question.

In  the  first  place,  there  seems  to  me
a  moral  impossibility  involved  in  the
very  thought  of  infants  being  consigned
to  perdition.  For  what  are  the  elements
in  the  punishment  of  the  lost  ?  So  far
as  we  know,  they  are  these  two,  memory
and  conscience.  But  in  an  infant
conscience  is  virtually  non-existent.
Moral  agency  and  responsibility  have
not  yet  been  developed,  and  so  there
can  be  no  such  thing  to  it  as  remorse.

Again  :  memory  has  nothing  of  guilt
in  an  infant's  life  to  recall,  and  so  it
seems  to  me  to  be  utterly  impossible  to
connect  retribution  of  any  sort  in  the
other  world  with  those  who  have  been
taken  from  the  present  in  the  stage  of
infancy.

But,  in  the  second  place,  there  are
positive  indications  that  infcints  are
inchided  in  the  work  of  Christ.  I
grant  at  once  that  there  is  no  one
passage  which  in  so  many  words  makes
the  assertion  that  all  who  die  in  infancy
are  eternally  saved  ;  but  then  we  may
not  wonder  at  the  absence  of  such  a
declaration,  since  it  would  have  been
liable  to  great  abuse  ;  and  we  do  not
need  to  regret  that  we  have  it  not,
because  there  are  many  passages  which
very  clearly  imply  it.  Thus  Jesus  said
of  infants,  "  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of
heaven."  This  does  not  mean  only,  as
some  would  have  us  to  believe,  that  the


kingdom  of  heaven  consists  of  persons
resembling  little  children.  The  word
translated  "of  such  "  has  evidently  a
deli  nite  reference  tochildren  themselves,
and  has  elsewhere  been  employed  in  that
way  by  the  Saviour  himself. — Taylor.

The  issue  of  things  doth  more  fully
show  the  will  of  God  than  the  predic-
tion :  God  never  did  anything  but
what  He  would  ;  He  hath  sometimes
foretold  that  for  trial  which  His  secret
will  intended  not :  He  would  foretell
it ;  He  would  not  effect  it ;  because
He  would  therefore  foretell  it  that  He
might  not  effect  it.  His  predictions  of
outward  evils  are  not  always  absolute  ;
His  actions  are.  David  well  sees,  by
the  event,  what  the  decree  of  God  was
concerning  his  child,  which  now  he
could  not  strive  against  without  a  vain
impatience.  Till  we  know  the  deter-
mination of  the  Almighty,  it  is  free
for  us  to  strive  in  our  prayers  ;  to
strive  with  Him,  not  against  Him  :
when  once  we  know  them,  it  is  our
duty  to  sit  down  in  a  silent  contenta-
tion. — Bp.  Hall.

Whether  David  clearly  expressed
faith  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul  or
not,  we  know  that  the  thing  is  true  ;
and  .  .  .  even  the  heathen  derived
consolation  from  the  reflection  that
they  should  meet  their  friends  in  a
conscious  state  of  existence.  And  a
saying  in  Cicero,  De  Senectute,  which
he  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Cato  of
Utica,  has  been  often  quoted,  and  is
universally  admired  :  "  0  happy  day"
(says  he)  "  when  I  shall  quit  this  im-
pure and  corrupt  multitude,  and  join
myself  to  that  Divine  company  and
council  of  souls  who  have  quitted  the
earth  before  me  !  There  1  shall  find,
not  only  those  illustrious  personages  to
whom  I  have  spoken,  but  also  my
Cato,  who  I  can  say  was  one  of  the
best  men  ever  born,  and  whom  none
ever  excelled  in  virtue  and  piety.  I
have  placed  his  body  on  that  funeral
pile  whereon  he  ought  to  have  laid
mine.  But  his  soul  has  not  left  me  ;
and  without  losing  sight  of  me,  he  has
only  gone  befiu'e  me  into  a  country
where  he  saw  I  should  soon  rejoin
him." — A.  Clarke,

349


IWMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  it.


Ver.  24.  Yea,  sons,  and  David's  best  both  in  his   name  and   in   liis   reii^n.

sons  came  of  Bathsheba,  because  they  This  may   be  for  comfort  to  such  as

were  the   fruit   of   their  humiliation.  have  leaped  rashly  into  marriage;  yea,

Nathan,  of  whom  c;ime  ('hrist  (Luke  have  entered  into  that  holy  ordinance

iii.),  is  ranked  before  Solomon  (2  Sam.  of  God   through   the  devil's  portal,  if

V.  14  ;  1  Chron.  iii.  5,  and  xiv.  4),  but  for  that  they  be  after  soundly  humbled.

Solomon  was  the  elder  brother  by  Bath-  Trapp.
sheba,  and  a  notable  type  of  Christ,

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  2Q—Z\,

The  Final  Conquest  of  Ammon.

I.  To  forego  honour  in  favour  of  another  is  often  as  prudent  as  it  is  kind.

If  a  man  is  beneath  us  in  social  position,  or  is  less  known  or  esteemed  than  we
are,  we  ought  to  be  able  sometimes  to  stand  back  a  little  in  order  that  he  may
he  raised  or  brought  forward  and  reap  some  of  the  benefits  of  which  we  have
enjoyed  so  large  a  share.  It  is  surely  not  a  great  self-denial  for  him  who  has
won  many  prizes  in  the  race  of  life,  now  and  then  to  slacken  his  pace  so  that  a
less  favoured  person  may  taste  the  sweets  of  victory.  But  when  those  with
whom  we  are  engaged  are  our  equals  or  superiors,  prudence  sometimes  dictates
such  a  course  when  benevolence  does  not  prompt  it.  Those  who  feel  themselves
on  a  level  with  us,  or  know  that  they  stand  above  us  in  many  respects,  are  more
likely  to  be  jealous  of  our  successes,  and  to  look  on  us  with  suspicion  if  we  leave
them  too  far  or  too  constantly  behind  in  the  contest  for  renown.  If  we  desire
to  retain  their  goodwill  we  must  sometimes  put  aside  our  just  claims  in  their
favour.  The  previous  and  the  subsequent  history  of  Joab  lead  us  to  incline  to
the  view  that  his  conduct  at  this  time  was  actuated  by  this  latter  motive.  He
might  certainly  have  acted  as  he  did  out  of  kindness  of  heart.  If  this  event
happened — as  is  most  likely — before  David's  repentance,  Joab  must  have  seen
how  ill  at  ease  his  master  was,  or,  if  the  occurrence  took  place  after  the  message
of  Natlian,  David  would  still  be  in  a  depressed  state  of  mind,  and  it  is  possible
that  Joab  suggested  his  expedition  against  Kabbah  to  divert  him  from  his
gloomy  thoughts.  Or  David's  reputation  among  his  subjects  may  have  suffered
by  his  sinful  conduct,  and  his  general  may  have  resorted  to  this  expedient  to
restore  the  king  to  his  old  place  in  their  esteem  by  reviving  his  military  fame.  But
we  think  his  proposal  was  dictated  rather  by  prudence.  David  had  already  some-
what against  him  in  the  murder  of  Abner,  and  had  doubtless  marked  him  as  an
ambitious  and  unscrupulous  man.  Joab  could  not  be  unconscious  of  the  deep
offence  he  had  given  to  David  when  he  slew  Abner,  and  was  too  wise  a  politician
not  to  know  how  far  he  might  go  and  yet  retain  his  position  at  the  head  of  the
army.  So,  although  he  had  a  perfect  right  to  com})lete  the  undertaking  which
he  had  carried  so  far,  he  showed  great  wisdom  in  now  giving  it  into  David's
hands,  and  thus  laying  him  under  a  new  obligation  to  continue  his  favours.

II.  External  success  is  no  criterion  by  which  to  judge  how  a  man  stands  in
relation  to  the  favour  of  God.  By  the  conquest  of  Rabbah  David  completed  that
series  of  victories  which  made  him  secure  against  all  his  heathen  foes.  When
the  crown  of  the  king  of  Ammon  Avas  placed  upon  his  head  and  he  returned  to
Jerusalem  laden  with  spoil,  those  who  measure  how  far  a  man's  ways  please  the
Lord  by  the  amount  of  temporal  success  which  He  grants  iiim,  would  say  that
now  David  was  enjoying  more  of  the  Divine  favour  than  ever  before.  'But  there
can  be  little  doubt  that  this  campaign  was  undertaken  while  the  heavy  displeasure
of  God  was  resting  upon  David,  and  even  if  it  did  not  take  place  until  after  his
repentance,  all  this  outward  splendour  stands  in  sad  contrast  to  the  inward  gloom
which  must  have  overshadowed  David's  spirit  when  he  thought  of  the  terrible

350


CHAP.  XII.


ilOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  SAMUEL.


sentence,  "  The  sword  sliall  never  depart  from  thine  liouse  because  thou  hast
despised  Me."  David  the  shepherd  and  the  fugitive  was  really  enjoying  farniore
of  the  Divine  a])proval  and  favour  tlian  David  the  conqneror  of  Amnion,  and  this
episode  of  his  life  is  another  illustration  of  a  truth  we  are  prone  to  forget  even
in  the  light  of  the  Cross,  that  a  man's  external  circumstances  are  no  indication
of  his  standing  in  the  kingdom  of  God.

III.  Isolated  actions  of  men  are  often  strangely  at  variance  with  their
character  as  a  whole.  As  we  read  this  paragraph,  we  seem  to  want  to  transpose
the  names  of  the  actors — to  put  into  David's  mouth  the  words  of  Joab,  and  to
make  Joab  responsible  for  all  that  is  here  ascribed  to  David.  Such  a  change
would  harmonize  entirely  with  the  characters  of  the  two  men  regarded  in  their
entirety.  As  the  record  stands,  the  apparently  unselfish  words  of  Joab  sound
as  strangely  in  his  lips  as  the  boastful  and  cruel  deeds  of  David  seem  out  of
harmony  with  his  general  spirit.  If  we  knew  no  more  of  either  of  these  men,
how  false  would  be  the  estimate  we  should  form  of  their  characters.  But  all
who  are  observant  of  men  in  general,  and  especially  of  their  own  lives,  know
well  how  often  very  good  men  act  inconsistently  with  their  profession,  and  how
it  not  unfrequently  happens  that,  in  individual  instances,  they  suffer  when
compared  witli  men  who  are  morally  far  below  them.  A  bad  man  sometimes
seems  to  rise  above  himself,  and  rea.lly  does  so  at  times,  and  even  the  best  of
men  often  fall  far  below  their  better  nature.  It  behoves  us,  therefore,  always  to
abstain  from  passing  hasty  judgments,  and  to  look  at  a  man's  deeds  in  the  light
of  the  general  tenor  of  his  life.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


The  whole  conduct  of  David  at
Rabbah  is  strange  and  painful.  It
was  not  creditable  to  be  roused  to  an
enterprise  by  an  appeal  to  his  love  of
fame ;  he  might  have  left  Joab  to
complete  the  conquest  and  enjoy  the
honour  which  his  sword  had  substan-
tially won.  It  was  unworthy  of  him
to  go  through  the  empty  ceremony  of
being  crowned  with  the  diadem  of  the
Ammonitish  king,  as  if  he  set  an  extra-
ordinary value  on  having  so  precious  a
crown  upon  his  head.  Above  all,  it
was  very  terrible  to  show  so  harsh  a
spirit  in  disposing  of  his  prisoners  of
war.  But  all  this  is  quite  likely  to  have
happened  if  David  had  not  yet  come
to  repentance.  When  a  man's  con-
science is  ill  at  ease,  his  temper  is


commonly  sullen  and  irritable.  Feeling
himself  pursued  by  an  enemy  whom  he
dare  not  face,  he  avoids  solitude  and
reflection — he  courts  bustle  and  busi-
ness, and  every  kind  of  exciting  and
engrossing  occupation.  Uncomfortable
and  unhappy  in  his  inmost  soul,  he  is
just  in  the  temper  to  become  savage
and  cruel  when  crossed.  .  .  .  The
whole  occurrence  shows  that  want  of
humility,  admiration,  love,  and  obe-
dience towards  God,  tells  darkly  upon
the  whole  life  and  character. — blaikie.

Ver.  28.    Do  we  the  like  by  Jesus

Christ,  when  we  get  any  victory  over
our  s[)iritual  enemies,  let  him  have  the
whole  glory ;  say  we  as  those  two
disciples  in  Acts  iii.  12-16. — Tra^p.


351


nOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  vl


CHAPTER  XIII.

Critical  ahD  "Exposttort  Notes. — Ver.  1.  "Absalom"  and  "Tamar"  were  the  children
of  Maacha,  and  "  Amnon  "  was  David's  eldest  son  by  Ahinoam  the  Jezreelitess  (see  chap  iii  2,  3).

Ver.  2.  "  Was  so  vexed,"  etc.  Literally^  "  it  became  narrow  or  strait  to  Amnon  unto
becoming  sicJc,^'  i.e.,  his  desire  wrought  upon  him  and  affected  his  health,  "  He  thought  it  hard,"
etc.,  rather,  it  seemed  impossible  to  him  to  do  anything:  to  her.  Tamar,  as  all  Eastern  women
are,  was  of  course  kept  in  close  seclusion,  she  was  also  evidently  modest  and  reserved.  "  Though
Amnon's  T>assion  was  forV)idden  by  the  law  (TjCv.  xviii.  11).  yet,  with  the  sanction  of  Abraham's
example  (Gen.  xx.  12),  and  the  common  practice  in  neiuhbouring  countries  for  princes  to  marry
their  half-sisters,  he  seems  not  to  have  considered  it  an  improper  connection."  {Jamieson.)
Ewald  remarks  that  Amnon's  character  and  conduct  were  doubtless  affected  by  the  fact  that  he
was  the  firstborn  son,  and  that  his  mother  was  not  of  noble  origin.

Ver.  3.  "  Jonadab."  Although  none  of  David's  brothers  were  promoted  to  places  of  honour
and  emolument  under  government,  probably  from  the  feeling  of  alienation  which  existed  between
the  king  and  them,  David  seems  to  have  acted  in  a  kindly  spirit  towards  their  children  ;  and  the
c;ise  of  Jonadab  is  one  of  several  known  instances  in  which  he  had  these  young  relatives  about
his  court,     {Jamieson.)

Ver.  4.  "  "Hay  to  day."  Lit.  from  morning  to  morning.  *'  His  aspect  was  more  wretched
in  the  morning  after  a  night  made  sleei)l''ss  by  torturing  passions."  ( Erdmann ) .  "  A  finely
chosen  point  in  the  description  of  his  mal.uly,  from  which  also  it  appears  that  Jonadab  was,  if
not  his  house-mate,  at  least  his  daily  companion."  ( Thenius).  ''M/  brother  Absalozn's
sister."  **In  Eastern  countries,  where  polygamy  prevails,  the  girls  ara  considered  to  be  under
the  spt  cial  care  and  protection  of  the  uterine  brother,  who  is  the  guardian  of  their  interests  and
their  honour,  even  more  than  their  father  himself  (see  Gen.  xxxiv.  6-25).     {Jamieson).

Ver.  6.  "  Cakes."  Literally  heart  calces.  *'  Whether  they  received  their  name  from  their
heart-like  shape,  or  their  heart-strengthening  power,  is  undecided.  The  word  is  lebibah  and  the
Hebrew  for  heart  is  leb,'*     (Erdmann).

Ver.  7.  "  Amnon's  house."  "  It  is  evident  that  the  king's  children  lived  in  different  houses.
Probably  each  of  the  king's  wives  lived  with  their  children  in  a  different  compartment  of  the
palace."  (Keil).  "Dress  him  meat."  "  The  cakes  seem  to  have  been  a  kind  of  fancy  bread,
in  the  preparation  of  which  oriental  ladies  take  great  delight."     (Jamieson).

Ver.  9.  "  A  pan."  The  etymology  of  this  word  is  uncertain,  and  many  scholars  think  it  is  a
name  for  some  preparation  of  food.  "  Have  out  all  men,"  etc.  This  might  have  been  simply
regarded  as  the  whim  of  a  sick  man.

Ver.  12.  "Folly."  "The  words  recall  Gen.  xxxiv.  7,  where  the  expression  folly  [nehalah)  is
first  used  to  denotw  a  want  of  chastity.  Such  a  sin  was  altogether  out  of  keeping  with  the
calling  and  holiness  of  Israel."     ( KeiL)

Ver.  13.  This  is  generally  understood  to  be  an  expedient  resorted  to  by  Tamar,  by  which  she
sought  to  "escape  from  the  hands  of  Amnon  by  aiiy  means  in  her  power,  and  to  avoid  inflaming
him  still  more,  and  driving  him  to  sin,  by  precluding  all  hope  of  marriage."     (Clericus.)

Ver.  15.  "Then  Amnon  hated  her."  "  This  sudden  change,  which  may  be  fully  explained
from  a  psvchological  point  of  view,  and  is  still  frequently  exemplified  in  actual  life,  furnishes  a
striking  proof  that  lust  is  not  love."     {Keil.)

Ver.  16.  "This  evil,"  etc.  This  entire  phrase  is  very  obscure,  and  has  been  variously
rendered.  Erdmann  supposes  an  unfinished  sentence  in  which  Tamar  was  interrupted  by
Anmon.  Keil  understands  her  to  say,  "  Do  not  add  to  the  great  wrong  which  thou  hast  done
nie  the  still  greater  one  of  thrusting  me  away,"  and  adds,  "  Tamar  calls  his  sending  her  away  a
greater  evil  than  the  one  already  done  to  her,  becau>e  it  woidd  inevitably  be  supposed  that  she
h.'td  been  guilty  of  some  shameful  conduct  herself,— that  the  seductiun  had  come  from  her,—
whereas  she  was  perfectly  innocent."

Ver.  17.  "  Then  he  called,"  etc.  "  Thus  leading  the  servant  to  suppose  that  Tamar  had
done  something  shameful."     (Erdmann. )

Ver.  18.  "A  garment,"  etc.  Rather,  "a  long  drcf^s  with  sleeves."  "The  usual  under-
garment covered  only  the  upper  arm,  while  this  coveied  the  whole  arm,  and  took  the  place  of
the  armless  outer  garment  or  robe."  ( Erdmami.)  "  For  in  this  manner,"  etc.  Tjanslate —
"  Thus  did  the  kinys  damjhters,  the  vir'jins,  clothe  thenisdvts  with  robes  "    *'  Ihe  writer  iuserts  this

35$^


CHAP.  XIII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


remark  to  show  tli.at,  notwithstanding  this  dress,  by  wliich  a  king's  daughter  could  at  once  be
recognised,  Amnon's  servant  treated  Tamar  like  a  common  woman."    ( Kell.J

Ver.  19.     "Laid  her  hand  on  her  head,"  etc.     "As  a  sign  that  the  hand  of  God  was

resting  on  her  as  it  were,  vid.  Jer.  ii.  37."    (  Keil.)

Ver.  20.  "  Been  wit ^  thee?  "  A  euphemism  for  what  had  taken  place.  See  Gen.  xxxix.  10.
"  Hold  now  thy  peace."  "  Because  he  was  determined  to  take  revenge,  but  wished  to  conceal
his  plan  of  vengeance  for  the  time."  [Ktil.)  "  Desolate,"  i.e.,  "  as  one  laid  waste,  with  the  joy
of  her  life  ho])elessly  destroyed.  It  cannot  be  proved  that  the  word  ever  means  single  or
solitary."    {Keil.)

Ver.  22.     "  Neither  good  nor  bad."     Not  a  single  word,  as  in  Gen.  xxiv.  50.

Ver.  23.  "  Hari  sheep-shearers,"  See  on  1  Sam.  xxv.  8.  "  Baalhazor."  This  place  cannot
be  exactly  identified.  "  Ephraim."  No  city  of  this  name  is  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament.
Erdniaun  contends  that  the  use  of  the  preposition  shows  that  a  city  is  meant,  and  Eusel)ius  says
that  there  was  otie  of  that  name  eight  miles  north  of  Jerusalem,  Keil,  however,  understands
the  clause  to  "  point  to  a  situation  on  the  border  of  the  tribe-territory  of  Ephraim."

Ver.  25.  "  Blessed  him,"  i.e.,  wished  him  a  pleasant  and  successful  feast,"  see  1  Sam.  xxv.  14.
(Kiel).  *' Be  chargeable."  "The  first  intimation  in  history  of  the  ruinous  expense  of  royal
visits."     (Kitto).

Ver.  26.  "My  brof^er  Amnon."  "The  first-born,  as  thy  representative."  (Thenius).
"  Why  should  he  go  ?  "  Seeing  that  David  eventually  yielded,  it  is,  as  Kiel  remarks,  uncertain
whether  he  had  any  suspicion  of  foul-play,  but  it  is  well  known  that  the  long  delay  of  the  act
of  revenge  would  l)e  quite  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  Eastern  nations.  Erdmann  remarks  that
David's  yielding  is  an  indication  of  weakness.

Ver.  29.  "  As  David  had  weakly  left  Amuon's  crime  unpunished,  Absalom  held  it  his  duty
to  take  vengeance  on  Amiun:,  and  maintain  his  sister's  honour.  This  feeling  does  not,  however,
exclude  the  motive  of  selfish  ambition  in  Absalom  ;  by  the  death  of  Amnon  he  would  be  one
Bt»^p  nearer  to  the  succession  to  the  throne  ;  there  may,  indeed,  have  been  another  brother,
Chileab,  older  than  he  (chap.  iii.  3),  but  probably  (to  judge  from  Absalom's  conduct,  chap.  xv.  1-6)
he  was  no  longer  alive.  Absalom's  andiition,  which  afterwards  led  him  into  rebellion,  probably
welcomed  this  pretext  for  putting  Amnon,  the  heir  to  the  throne,  out  of  the  way."  (Erdmann).
"  Mule."  "  This  is  the  fiist  mention  of  a  mule  in  Scripture.  The  meaning  of  Gen.  xxxvi.  24  is
questionable.  Compare  below,  chap,  xviii.  9  ;  1  Kings  i.  33.  The  breeding  of  mules  was
forbidden  to  the  Hebrews  (Lev.  xix.  19)  ;  but  their  use  was  regarded  as  lawful."    (  Wordsworth).

Ver.  31.     "  Servants,''  i.e.,  Courtiers.

Ver.  32.  "By  appointment,"  etc.  Rather,  "  On  AhsalorrCs  mouth  was  it  laid,'*  etc.  Either
one  could  infer  from  his  words  what  his  intention  was  or,  according  to  Thenius  "one  could  see
it  in  him,  for  the  movements  of  the  soul  are  seen  (next  to  the  look)  most  clearly  about  the
mouth."

Ver.  34.  "Behind  him."  "  That  is,  according  to  well-known  usus  loquendi  (see  Exod.  iii.  1,
comp.  with  Isa.  ix.  11  ;  Job  xxiii.  8)  simply  from  the  west,  since  in  front  means  geographically
the  east.  "By  the  way  of  the  hill,"  or  rather,  from  the  side  of  the  mountain,  is  probably
Mount  Zion.  The  princes  came  not  from  the  north,  but  from  the  west,  because  the  return  by
this  route  was  easier  and  quicker.     (Erdmann).

Ver.  37.     "  Talmai."     The  father  of  Maacha,  Absalom's  mother  (see  chap.  iii.  3).

Ver.  39.  This  verse  begins  with  a  difficult  clause,  which  renders  its  meaning  very  obscure
"  The  verb,"  says  Dr.  Jamieson,  "  being  feminine,  does  not  refer  to  David,  neither  is  it  correct
to  say  that  David  longed  to  go  forth  to  Absalom  ;  for  there  is  no  ground  to  suppose  that  he
entertained  either  an  intention  or  a  wish  to  visit  his  exiled  son.  The  clause  should  be  rendered,
The  anrjer  of  David  ceased  to  go  forth,"  etc.  Erdmann  and  Keil  translate,  "  David  held  back,  or
did  not  go  forth,"  etc.  ;  and  the  former  remarks,  in  support  of  this  rendering,  that  "  David  could
have  sent  for  Atjsalom  if  he  wanted  him,  and  that,  so  far  from  feeling  any  love-longing  towards
Absalom,  David  was  permanently  set  against  him,  as  appears  from  the  fact  that  after  Joab  had
got  him  back  it  was  two  years  before  the  king  would  see  him."  This  view  necessitates  a  reading
of  chap.  xiv.  1  directly  opposite  to  the  English  translation,  which  conveys  the  idea  that  David
did  long  to  recall  Absalom,  but  was  prevented  from  doing  so  by  judicial  ami  p<ilitical  coa«
•iderations.    (See  on  that  verse.)


HOMILETW  COMMLNTARY :  SAMUEL,  book  n.


main  hon  i  let  i cs  of  the  chapter.
The  Sin  and  Murder  of  Amnon.

I.  Children  who  have  both  a  bad  and  good  example  are  more  inclined  to
follow  the  former  than  the  latter.  This  truth  is  seen  in  little  things  as  well  as
in  great,  and  the  reason  is  the  same  in  both  cases.  If  a  cliild  wlio  is  learning
to  draw  has  both  a  good  and  had  specimen  set  before  him  he  will  be  much  more
likely  to  imitate  the  bad  than  the  good,  because  it  is  always  easier  to  make
crooked  lines  than  straight  ones,  and  to  produce  a  faulty  piece  of  work  than
one  that  is  perfect  of  its  kind.  And  so  it  is  in  higher  and  more  important
things.  If  a  parent  is  guilty  of  transgression  at  one  period  of  his  life,  or  con-
tinually indulges  in  one  bad  habit,  he  is  more  likely  to  see  his  children  copy
him  in  that  respect  than  in  those  things  in  which  he  fulfils  his  duty  and  is
blameless,  inasmuch  as  it  needs  no  effort  on  their  part  to  do  wrong,  but  it  is
sometimes  a  great  struggle  to  do  right.  This  law  was  in  operation  to  its  fullest
extent  in  the  case  before  us.  Amnon  and  Absalom  had  seen  their  father  do
many  noble  deeds.  For  many  years  David  had  lived  before  his  children  a  life
consistent  with  his  high  calling  and  profession.  But,  so  far  as  we  know,  none
of  the  children  who  were  witnesses  of  these  things  walked  in  the  same  path;
but  these  two  elder  sons  who  might  have  been  expected  to  profit  most  by  his
good  example  were  not  slow  to  imitate  his  crimes.  This  is  not  so  surprising  as
it  is  sad,  when  we  remember  that  every  one  of  us  comes  into  the  world  with  a
tendency  to  go  the  wrong  way,  and  that  a  man  has  only  to  give  himself  up  to
the  rule  of  his  passions  in  order  to  become  a  monster  of  iniquity  while  it  ia
hard  work  to  fight  against  our  evil  tendencies,  and  more  than  human  strength
is  needed  to  overcome  them.  Amnon  and  Absalom  had  only  to  make  no
resistance  to  evil  suggestions — only  to  give  impure  and  malicious  thoughts  a
lodging-place  in  their  hearts — and  the  work  was  done.  The  seeds  were  sure  not
to  lie  dormant  but  in  due  time  to  gernjinate  and  bring  forth  the  fruit  of
wickedness  after  their  own  kind.  It  is  this  indwelling  evil  inclination  in
every  human  soul  which  makes  it  so  much  more  certain  that  our  evil  deeds
will  he  copied  than  that  our  goodness  will  be  imitated,  and  which  should  there-
fore make  every  child  of  God  doubly  watchful  over  all  his  actions  for  the  sake
of  others  as  well  as  for  his  own.  For  how  doubly  bitter  is  the  sorrow  of  a  good
parent  over  an  erring  child  if  he  ever  find  himself  in  the  position  to  which
David's  sin  had  now  brought  him.

II.  Those  who  violate  the  sanctity  of  their  neighbours'  homes  do  so  at  the
peril  of  their  own  family  honour  and  peace.  There  is  a  law  in  the  spiritual  as
in  the  physical  world,  that  like  will  produce  like.  The  law  of  the  vegetable
kingdom,  that  each  herb  should  yield  seed  after  its  kind  and  thus  multiply  its
own  likeness,  has  its  counter};art  in  the  moral  kingdom,  and  it  is  found  that
sin  not  only  propagates  sin  in  general  but  sins  of  the  same  class.  And  thus
retribution  of  the  severest  kind,  and  yet  in  accordance  with  the  strictest
justice,  is  brought  home  to  the  offender.  By  the  base  and  brutal  conduct  of
Amnon  and  the  murderous  revenge  of  Absalom  the  entire  household  of  David
was  afflicted  and  his  family  honour  and  peace  destroyed.  But  Amnon  was
only  indulging  the  same  unlawful  desires  to  which  his  father  had  sacrificed  the
honour  of  Bathsheba  and  the  life  of  Uriah,  and  Absalom's  murder  of  his  guilty
brother  was  certainly  not  a  blacker  crime  than  David's  sacrifice  of  his  faithful
servant.  And  if  the  deeds  of  these  young  men  brought  desolation  into  David's
home  they  only  did  what  David  had  himself  done  in  the  case  of  Uriah.     Let

354


CHAP.  XIII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


men  beware  how  they  trample  on  these  sacred  rights,  for  they  may  be  sure  that
God  will  now,  as  then,  vidicate  them  in  a  like  manner.

III.  Those  who  do  not  bridle  their  animal  passions  become  a  compound  of
brute  and  demon.  In  this  transaction  Aninon  exhibits'  all  the  propensities  of
the  animal,  and  adds  to  tliem  the  malicionsness  of  the  devil.  He  was  not
content  with  accomplishing  by  violence  the  ruin  of  his  young  and  innocent
sister,  but  he  was  base  enou^li  to  lay  upon  iier  all  the  disgrace  of  the  crime.
We  might  liave  thou<:ht  that  when  he  descended  to  the  level  of  the  beast
he  migiit  have  remained  there,  and  at  least  have  siiown  the  regard  for  his  victim
which  a  beast  would  have  done.  But  a  man  is  not  a  beast,  and  therefore
when  he  lets  his  animal  nature  get  the  upper  hand  he  suffers  by  comparison.
'JHiat  which  is  natural  to  the  creature  without  reason  and  conscience  is  sin
to  those  created  in  the  image  of"  God,  and  it  is  vain  for  any  man  to  thiidc
that  unlawful  indulgence  of  the  body  will  ever  fail  to  degrade  the  spirit.
There  have  been  those  in  all  ages  who  have  taught  otherwise,  and  especially
with  regard  to  the  sin  here  under  consideration.  But  if  the  word  of  God
did  not  emphatically  contradict  this  doctrine  (1  Cor.  vi.  15-20,  etc.)  the
experience  of  life  would  show  its  fallacy.  Sin  against  the  body  is  sin  against
the  whole  man,  and  that  which  is  sensual,  unless  very  speedily  repented  of,  soon
leads  to  that  which  is  devilish.

IV.  The  freedom  and  power  given  and  permitted  to  the  wicked  in  this
world  is  a  strong  argument  for  the  existence  of  another  life  The  weak  and
the  virtuous  among  men  are  here  often  at  the  mercy  of  those  vvho  are  strong
and  wicked;  the  former  often  suffer  grievous  wrong  by  reason  of  the  liberty
which  the  latter  have  to  carry  out  their  evil  purposes.  Herod,  the  base  liber-
tine, had  power  to  imprison  and  to  slay  John,  the  greatest  of  the  prophets,  thus
violating  every  sense  of  justice,  and  the  kings  and  potentates  of  every  age  have
always  had  it  more  or  less  within  their  power  to  persecute  the  moral  salt  of  the
earth  because  they  had  the  greater  physical  force  at  their  command.  And  in
the  narrow  circles  of  social  and  domestic  life  the  same  things  have  happened
ever  since  Cain  slew  his  brother  Abel,  because  his  own  works  were  evil  and
his  brother's  righteous.  The  story  of  Amnon  and  Tamar  is  always  being
repeated  in  its  main  features,  and  the  strong  man  is  ever  using  the  weaker
woman  to  satisfy  his  guilty  passion  and  then  casting  her  forth  to  bear  the
shame  alone.  Does  not  the  sense  of  justice  within  us  call  for  a  hereafter  to
set  these  things  right  and  to  give  compensation  and  punishment  according
to  men's  deserts  ?  The  partial  retribution  which  is  dealt  out  here  and  now
is  an  earnest  that  a  more  complete  system  of  rewards  and  punishments  exists
in  the  future  life,  and  that  a  day  is  at  hand  when  full  restitution  shall  be
made  to  those  who  have  here  been  the  innocent  victims  of  the  wicked  and
powerful.

V.  When  those  in  authority  do  not  punish  crime  they  betray  their  trust
and  give  occasion  to  greater  wickedness.  A  man  in  David's  position  is  not
at  liberty  to  consult  his  own  feeling  as  to  the  punishment  of  the  transgressor.
As  God's  minister,  he  is  set  for  the  terror  of  evil  doers  and  for  the  praise  of
them  that  do  well,  and  a  failure  of  duty  in  this  direction  makes  him  a  partaker
of  the  evil  deed.  If  he  bear  the  sword  in  vain  and  withold  his  hand  when  he
ought  to  strike,  he  will  hnd  that  he  will  only  give  opportunity  and  encourage-
ment to  other  lawless  men,  and,  like  David,  he  will  have  two  offenders  instead
of  one.  If  he  had  punished  Amnon  as  he  deserved  he  might  not  have  had  to
mourn  the  rebellion  and  death  of  Absalom.

355


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL  book  n.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.  4.     He  saitli  not,  my  sister,  for  degrees  to  enter  into  His  mind  and

sliame  ;   sin  is  a  blushful  business. —  purposes  and  to  mould  their  own  into

IrayiJ.  conformity  with  His.     If  we  want  ex-
emplifications of  all  the  miseries  and

Ver.   1-39.      David   had  his   wives  curses  which  spring  from  the  mixture

and  concubines.     No  divine  edict  told  of  families   and   the  degradations   of

him  that  such  indulgence  was  unlaw-  women  in  a  court  and  country  where

ful.      For,  thanks  be  to  God,  though  polygamy  exist,  David's  history  sup-

Ile  makes  use  of  edicts  and  statutes,  plies  them.      No  maxims  of  morality

it  is  not  by  these  mainly  that  He  rules  can   be  half  so  effectual  as  a  faithful

the  universe.     The  Bible  is,  from  first  record  of  terrible  facts  like  these. —

to    last,    the    history   of  a   practical  Maurice,
education  ;  God  leading  men  by  slow


CHAPTER  XIV.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1.  *'  Now  Joab,"  etc.  Most  commentators  attribute
Joab's  action  in  this  matter  to  motives  of  self-interest.  It  appears  bighly  prol)ably  that
Absalom  was  now  the  heir  to  the  throne  (see  on  chap.  xiii.  29),  and  Joali  was  therefore  anxious
to  secure  his  goodwill  by  being  of  service  to  him.  "  Toward  Absalom."  Most  scholars,  in
accordance  with  the  Syriac,  the  Septuagent,  and  the  Vulgate  versions,  sustain  the  English
reading  here,  but  Erdmann  and  Keil  contend  that  the  preposition  here  used  has  the  sense  of

aguinst  in  this  place.  The  latter  says  !2  .- ,  written  with  ^  V  and  without  any  verb,  only  occurs
again  in  Dan.  xi.  28,  where  it  means  against.  He  further  remarks  that,  "  if  Joab  had  noticed
the  re-awakening  of  David's  good  feeling  towards  Absalom,  there  would  have  been  no  necessity
for  him  to  bring  the  cunning  woman  from  Tekoah  to  induce  him  to  consent  to  Absalom's  return
Moreover,  David  would  not  in  that  case  have  refused  to  allow  Absalom  to  see  his  face  for  two
whole  years  after  his  return."

Ver.  2.  "  Tekoah."  Now  Tekue,  about  five  miles  south  of  Bethlehem  and  the  home  of  the
prophet  Amos.  "According  to  the  Talmud,  there  were  important  oil  plantations  in  the  neigh-
bourhood, and  the  women  there  were  noted  for  their  shrewdness."(     FhUippson.)

Ver.  7.  "The  heir  also.''  "  These  words  are  added  to  the  preceding  (we  will  kill  him)  by
reason  of  the  second  thought  that  characterises  the  blood-revenge,  namely,  that  while  they  kill
him  for  hlood-Vfn;jeance,  they  wish  at  the  same  time  to  destroy  the  surviving  heir.  The  woman's
purpose  is  not  only  to  bring  out  the  design  of  the  kinsman  in  their  blood-avenging  as  harshly  as
possible,  but  also,  with  reference  to  David's  hostile  feeling  to  Absalom,  to  emphasize  the  point
that  the  latter  is  the  heir  to  David's  throne,  and  to  save  him  as  such  from  his  father's  anger."
(Erdmann.)  "  Quench  my  coal."  "  The  burning  coal  with  which  one  kindles  a  fresh  fire  to
denote  the  last  remnant."     {Keil).

Ver.  8.  "  Go  to  thine  house,"  etc.  This  declaration  on  the  part  of  the  king  was  perfectly
just.  If  the  brothers  had  quarrelled  and  one  had  killed  the  other  in  the  heat  of  the  quarrel,  it
was  right  that  he  should  be  defended  from  the  avenger  of  blood,  because  it  could  not  be  assumed
that  there  was  any  previous  intention  to  murder.  This  declaration,  therefore,  could  not  be
applied  as  yet  to  David's  conduct  towards  Absalom."     (Keil.)

Ver.  9.  *'  The  iniquity  he  on  me,"  i.e.,  "  If  it  be  wrong  not  to  carry  out  the  blood-
Bhedding."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  11.  "Let  the  king  remember  the  Lord,"  etc.  Either  she  desires  David  to  con-
firm his  promise  by  an  oath  or  she  reminds  him  of  the  great  mercy  which  God  had  extended  to
Himself  in  pardoning  the  murder  of  Uriah.

356


CHAP.  XIV.  IIOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


Ver.  13.  ''Against  the  people  of  God."  The  ambiguity  of  this  phrase  has  led  some  to
render  it,  "  Why  dost  thou  propose  such  things  towards  the  people  of  God,"  i.e.  such  protection
towards  me  and  my  son."  But  most  critics  reject  this  rendering.  Erdmann  understands  by
the  people  of  God,  the  nation  who  would  suffer  by  the  rejection  of  one  who  would  one  day  be
their  King^.

Ver.  14.  "  We  must  needs  die,"  etc.  Thenins  refers  these  words  to  Amnon's  death  with
the  meaning,  "  he  had  to  die  sometime,  and  all  you  can  now  do  against  the  murderer  will  not
restore  him  to  life."  But  most  writers  understand  the  woman  to  mean  "  Absalom  may  die  in
banishment  and  then  your  pardon  may  come  too  late,"  or  "  As  life  is  so  short  and  uncertain
do  not  euibitter  it  by  enmity."  "  Neither  doth  God  respect,"  etc.  llather.  "  God  doth  not
take  awaij  any  soul,  but  thinks  thoughts,  not  to  banish  a  banished  one.^*  '*  An  argument  from
God's  })ri'cedure  with  the  sinner,  lie  does  not  take  away  the  soul  (life)  of  one  that  is  bani>hed,
condemned  for  sin,  so  as  thus  to  banisli  him  for  ever.  The^>e  words  must  have  brought  to
David's  recollectif)n  God's  mercy  towards  himself ."  (Erdmann.)  '*  This  is  one  of  the  noblest
and  profoundest  declarations  of  the  Scripture.  God,  who  has  determine*!  us  to  death,  neverthe-
less does  not  deprive  us  of  life,  of  personality,  but  has  the  holy  purpose  to  receive  against  the
banished,  the  sinful."  (Philippson.)  "This  (last)  explanation  makes  the  first  half  of  the  verse
merely  introductory  to  the  th(  uglit  in  the  second,  merely  a  relative  sentence  containing  an
affirmati'-n  Hl)out  God  ;  tliis  is  not  so  pro])al)le  as  the  view  wliich  makes  the  first  half  a  separate
argument.  The  aigument,  tliough  powerful,  is  false  ;  the  human  Judge  cannot  set  aside  the
demands  of  justice,  though  God  may  pardon  the  sinner."     {Translator  of  Lang' s  Commentary.)

Ver.  15.  "  The  people  have  made  me  afraid,"  i.e.  Her  kinsfolk  who  demanded  her  son.
"  The  woman  returns  again  to  her  own  affairs,  to  make  the  King  believe  that  nothing  but  her
destress  led  her  to  speak  thus."     ( Keil.)

Ver.  17.    "  Comfortable,"  literally,  for  rest,  i.e.,  shall  give  me  rest.    "  Angel  of  God."    "  The

angel  of  the  covenant,  the  mediator  of  divine  grace  to  the  covenant  nation."  (Kel.)  "Ta
discern  good  and  bad."  "  This  affirms  two  things.  1.  In  every  case  brought  before  him,  the
king,  he  will  impartially  hear  both  sides.  2.  He  helps  the  oppressed."  {Erdmann.)  "  There
is  a  great  deal  of  artifice  in  all  this.  For  to  presume  upon  the  kindness  of  another  and  expect
gracious  answers  from  their  noble  qualities  is  very  moving."     {Patrick),

Ver.  19.  '*  None  can  turn  to  the  right,"  etc.,  t.g.  The  king  always  hits  the  right  point
She  compliments  the  king  on  the  sagacity  which  enabled  him  to  penetrate  the  secret.

Ver.  20.  "  To  fetch  about  this  f^rm,"  etc.  Erdmann  tran.slates  this,  "  To  turn  the  face  of
the  thing,  i.e.,  to  change  the  relation  of  Absalom  to  his  father."  Keil  renders,  "  To  turn  the
appearance  of  the  kiny,'^  understanding  thereby,  to  disguise  the  affair  in  the  finest  way.

Ver.  23.  "  Hath  fulfilled  the  request."  These  words  are  generally  understood  to  indicate
that  Joab  had  repeatedly  pleaded  for  Absalom's  return.

Ver.  24.  "  Let  him  not  see  my  face."  "  This  was  no  real  pardon.  David's  anger  still  con-
tinued. It  is  a  natural  surmise  that  this  was  because  Absalom  showed  no  repentance  and  did
not  ask  for  forgiveness."  {Erdmann.)  "  His  ovirn  house."  His  being  obliged  to  send  for  Joab
suggests  that  Absalom  was  confined  to  his  house.

Ver.  26.  "  He  polled  his  head,"  i.e.,  cut  his  hair.  "  Two  hundred  shekels  after  the
king's  weight."  The  king's  shekel  is  probably  a  different  weight  from  the  sacred  shekel,  and
probaly  less  than  that.  Kitto  mientions  reading  of  a  lady's  hair  that  weighed  more  than  four
pounds  ;  and,  if  two  hundred  shekels  is  not  more  than  this,  it  is  a  possible  weight.  The  ancients
were  accustomed  to  bestow  much  care  on  the  hair."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  27.  "  Three  sons."  Erom  the  fact  that,  contrary  to  custom,  the  names  of  these  sons
are  not  given,  and  from  chap,  xviii.  1  it  is  concluded  that  they  died  in  infancy.

Ver.  30.  "  Set  the  field  on  fire,"  Some  commentatoi  s  regard  this  act  of  Absalom  as  an
expedient  to  bring  him  face  to  face  with  Joab  ;  and  others  look  upon  it  merely  as  an  act  of
angry  revenge.

Ver.  32.  ''Let  me  see  the  king's  face."  Rather,  "7  will  sec,"  etc.  "Being  sure  that
if  he  could  do  that  all  would  be  gained  ;  such  was  his  confidence  in  the  tender-heartedness  of
David."  {WordswortJi.)  "The  message  sent  by  Absalom  through  Joab  to  his  father  contain  —
1.  A  reproach.  *Why  am  I  come  from  Geshur?*  Why  didst  thou  send  for  me  if  lam
not  permitted  to  appear  before  thee  ?  2.  A  repudiation  of  the  indulgence  shown  him  in  the
permission  granted  him  to  return  home  :  *  it  were  better  for  me  that  I  were  still  there.
3.  A  self-willed  demand,  'and  now  I  will  see  the  king's  face.'  4.  A  defiant  challenge.
'  If  there  be  iniquity  in  me,  Itt  him  kill  me.'  From  the  tone  of  his  speech  he  does  not
allow  that  he  has  done  wrong,  but  relies  on  the  right  he  thinks  he  has  against  his  father,  who
bad  been  too  indulgent  to  Amnon."     {Erdmann.)

357


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  ir.

MAJN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1-24.

The  Return  of  Absalom.

I.  The  most  mischievons  reasonings  is  that  which  is  a  compound  of  truth  and
falsehood.  When  an  argument  is  wholly  fbiuided  on  an  untruth,  the  conscience
not  entirely  blinded  can  pass  sentence  upon  it  without  hesitation,  and  if  a  man
yield  to  such  an  argument,  he  does  so  with  his  eyes  wide  open.  But  where,  as
in  the  case  before  us,  mniiy  undeniable  facts  are  pleaded  in  favour  of  acts  which
at  best  are  of  doubtful  cluiracter,  only  the  most  honest  and  unprejudiced  can  see
through  the  delusion,  'i'he  assertions  of  this  wise  woman  were  perfectly  true.
Those  who  grant  mercy  abroad  should  begin  at  home,  and  enniity  ought  to  die
before  those  who  are  at  enmity  die.  The  long  forbearance  and  abounding
mercy  of  God  are  also  blessed  and  undeniable  facts,  and  all  these  considerations
mi;jht  have  been  law'fully  urged  upon  David  in  relation  to  any  private  act  in
which  Absalom  had  sinned  only  against  his  father.  But  he  had  transgresseil
that  Divine  law  which  it  was  David's  special  duty  to  uphold,  and  against  which
the  king  sinned  when  he  permitted  it  to  be  violated  with  impunity.  No  human
executor  of  law  is  actuated  by  a  feeling  of  i)ersonal  enmity,  but  is  simply  a
rei)rf'sentative  of  laws,  which,  if  they  are  just,  are  necessary  safeguards  of  society,
and  as  such,  are  approved  and  even  commanded  by  God.  Such  a  man  fails  in
his  duty  both  to  God  and  man  if  he  allow  personal  feelings  to  influence  his
Conduct  either  for  or  against  the  offender.  We  cannot  gather  from  the  history
(see  Oitical  Notes)  what  David's  real  feelings  were  in  relation  to  his  son,  and
therefore  cannot  tell  what  effect  the  argument  of  this  parable  had  upon  him  ;
but  it  is  an  excellent  sample  of  many  of  the  sophistries  by  which  people  in  all
ages  and  under  all  circumstances  seek  to  justify  what  is  contrary  to  justice  when
it  is  agreeable  to  their  inclinations  and  likely  to  promote  their  interests.

II.  Those  who  are  conscious  of  having  committed  great  sins  are  not  fit
to  deal  with  other  offenders.  The  immediate  result  of  this  parable  was  a
half  measure  which  made  matters  worse  than  they  were  before,  and  leave  us  in
as  much  doubt  as  ever  as  to  David's  real  motives  and  feelings.  It  was  more
trying  and  irritating  to  Absalom  to  be  banished  from  bis  father's  presence  in
Jerusalem  than  in  Geshur,  and  if  his  message  to  him  was  defiant  there  was
reason  in  it,  for  it  seemed  mockery  to  recall  him  merely  to  make  him  a  prisoner
or  keep  him  in  disgrace  at  home.  But  all  David's  weakness  and  unsteadiness  of
purpose  in  dealing  with  liis  sons  arose  from  the  consciousness  that  when  one
became  an  adulterer  and  the  other  a  murderer,  they  were  only  following  his
example.  Such  a  man  is  as  unfit  to  i\Q.\\  rightly  with  a  transgressor  as  he  who
is  smitten  with  paralysis  is  unable  to  administer  corporal  chastisement.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  14.     It  is  by  right  of  this  apt  phetess  of  that  dark  age  and  distant

beautiful  saying  that  the  wise  woman  of  land  can   still  touch  our  hearts   and

of  Tekoah  holds  an  eartidy  immortality,  shape  our  thoughts.     .     .     The  larger

Ah,  how  Gud  must  have  liound  us  each  and    more    general    application,    the

to  each ;  what  subtle  far-reaching  links  ^jrinclple  of  the  words  1  take  to  be,

must  bind  all  the  children  of  Adam  "  Don't   fret  over  the  inevitable,  the

into  one  ;  how  solemn  and  niysterious  irreparable.     The  past  is  past  and  can-

an   iidluence  the  humblest  ot  us  may  not   be    recalled  ;    thereiore  be   more

exert  on  all,  when  the  obscure  pro-  intent  on  a  wise  use  of  the  present.
358


CHAP.  XIV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


liirttcad  of  crjiug  over  .s[»ilt  water  or  pas.-;,  aiul  tlie  iiievira'ule  cliaii^L;o.s  ensue,
trying  in  vain  to  gather  it  up  fVomtlie  we  are  too  apt  to  spend  time  in  crying
dust,  betake  you  to  the  fountain  of  over  spilt  water  and  in  trying  to  gather
living  water,  drink  of  the  untainted  it  up  again,  and  when  we  are  haunted
perennial  spring.  Let  your  feet  wear  with  the  ghosts  of  lost  opportunities
a  track  that  shall  guide  other  feet  to  and  past  sins,  we  are  filled  with  a
its  pure  waters.  Let  your  example  be  regret  singularly  like  the  sorrow  of
a  standing  invitation  to  your  neigh-  bereavement,  and  like  that  it  is  very
hours,  that  they  also  may  repair  to  the  apt  to  weaken  us  still  more,  and  to
fountain  which  no  dust  can  defile,  and  interpose  between  us  and  the  duties
drink  of  the  clear  life-giving  waters  we  have  still  to  discharge.  .  .  .
wliich  flow  on  for  ever."  1.  Apply  It  is  vain  to  mourn  tliat  we  are
this  principle  to  the  limited  facts  of  what  we  are.  Tlie  weaker  we  are  the
death  and  bereavement.  .  .  Fretting  more  need  to  husband  our  strength;
will  not  alter  the  inevitable.  We  the  more  frequent  and  ample  the  op-
must  accept  it  whether  with  our  portunities  we  have  missed,  the  more
will  or  against  it.  Let  us  then  we  should  strive  to  improve  those
accept  it  with  a  patient  cheerfulness  which  are  still  open  to  us.  .  .  .  We
which  will  take  the  sting  out  of  it.  are  assuredly  to  repent  of  our  sins  and
'Tis  weak,  'tis  useless,  to  sit  down  and  mistakes,  but  the  true  cleansing  virtue
weep  over  spilt  water,  when  we  have  of  repentance  does  not  lie  in  the  tears
yet  a  long  steep  path  to  climb,  and  we  shed  but  in  the  amendment  which,
many  around  us  who  look  to  us  for  trusting  to  a  higher  strength  than  our
guidxince  and  refreshment.  .  .  .  But  own,  we  hopefully  attempt.  And  in
it  is  not  difficult  to  understand  how  nothing  perhaps  is  the  healthy  bracing
many  might  say,  "Why  remind  me  spirit  of  the  gospel  more  conspicuous
that  it  is  of  no  use  to  cry  over  spilt  than  in  this,  that  when  we  are  truly
water?"  I  know  it,  and  hence  my  sorry  for  our  sins,  we  find  that  it  is  a
tears.  I  weep  the  more  because  1  sorrow  that  worketh  life;  that  while
weep  in  vain."  .  .  .  But  we  may  find  we  are  still  mourning  over  our  mani-
in  the  wise  woman's  words  a  larger  and  fold  offences  it  virtually  says,  "  Leave
more  consolatory  meaning  than  any  of  all  those  with  Him  who  has  made  an
which  she  was  conscious.  .  .  .  For,  atonement  for  the  sin  of  the  world."
observe;  this  spilt  water  of  hers — what  ....  Nay,  more,  though  i^;^  cannot
after  all  becomes  of  it  ?  Though  we  gather  up  tlie  spilt  water,  God  can  and
cannot  raise  it  up  again,  it  neverthe-  does.  The  sun  of  His  love  shines
less  does  rise  again  ;  no  particle  of  it  down  on  the  earth  on  which  it  has
is  lost.  For  a  little  while  it  lies  in  the  fallen,  and  lo,  it  rises  from  the  earth
dust  and  helps  to  make  that  fruitful,  in  new  and  purer  forms  !  All  the  use-
But  it  will  be  gathered  up  again  ;  it  ful  and  helpful  elements  of  our  past
must  be.  It  will  be  drawn  up  into  the  experience  are  gathered  up  by  Him,
skies  to  form  a  gracious  cloud,  which  and  detached  from  the  polluting  dust
by  and  bye  will  fall  in  enriching  with  which  they  were  blent,  and  the
showers  and  will  be  again  lifted  to  the  very  tears  we  have  shed  are  drawn  up
skies,  again  to  fall,  again  to  rise — so  into  the  spiritual  heaven,  to  fall  in
passing  into  a  life  of  perpetual  service,  fertilising  showers  on  ground  barren
.  .  .  And  God,  our  sun,  will  shine  upon  but  for  them;  and  as  they  fall  the
our  departed  ones  and  will  raise,  purify.  Sun  of  Righteousness  shines  full  upon
and  ennoble  them,  consecrating  them  them,  and  lo,  a  new  bow  of  hope
to  an  eternal  service.  .  .  .  l\.  Jf  we  stretches  across  our  brightening  heaven,
bring  the  more  general  application  of  giving  us  the  welcome  assurance  that,
this  principle  home  to  our  experience^  unfruitful  as  we  have  been  in  the  past,
we  shall  find  it  has  instruction  for  all,  henceforth  seed-time  and  harvest  shall
and  not  only  for  the  bereaved.  ...  As  never  fail  us. — (Samtiel  Cox,  a.hvidged),
we  recall  the  past,  and  as  the  years

859


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  SAMUEL.  book  ii.


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Versa  25-33.

David's  Reconciliation  to  his  Son.

I.  The  di^erence  between  the  godly  and  the  ungodly  is  manifested  by  the
different  light  in  which  they  regard  their  sins.  This  truth  becomes  very
apparent  if  we  coni})are  the  behaviour  of  Absalom  at  this  time  with  that  of  his
fatlier  after  his  great  falL  We  cannot  say  that  the  sin  of  the  ungodly  son  was
greater  than  that  of  his  godly  parent — indeed  we  are  compelled  to  admit  that
the  opposite  was  the  case.  Although  no  rightful  excuse  can  be  found  for  any
wrong  deed,  Absalom  could  plead  some  extenuations  of  his  crime  and  might
even  have  invested  it  witli  a  show  of  justice.  But  nothing  can  be  said  which
can  in  any  degree  make  David's  guilt  look  less.  And  it  must  be  confessed  that
in  later  days  the  godly  man  sometimes  falls  into  more  gross  sin  than  his  ungodly
brother.  But  the  grand  line  of  demarcation  is  found  in  the  difference  in  their
conduct  in  relation  to  it.  The  one  acknowledges  and  mourns  over  his  fault,
and  perhaps,  like  David,  goes  with  broken  bones  all  the  rest  of  his  days,  while
the  other  either  fails  to  see  that  he  has  done  anything  wrong  or  else  excuses  it
on  the  plea  of  necessity  or  expediency.  While  all  the  acts  of  David,  after  his
great  sin,  are  pervaded  more  or  less  by  a  consciousness  of  his  own  unworthiness,
we  find  in  Absalom  no  trace  of  any  regret  that  he  was  guilty  of  his  brother's
blood.  On  the  contrary,  all  liis  subsequent  actions  are  marked  by  the  same
unscrupulousness.  The  same  regard  for  his  own  supposed  interest  and  entire
disregard  of  what  he  owed  to  other  men  or  to  God  are  displayed  in  every  deed
that  is  recorded  of  him,  and  make  him  a  striking  example  of  the  radical
difference  which  exists  between  the  natural  and  the  spiritual  man  even  when
the  latter  falls  sadly  below  the  moral  standard  we  might  reasonably  expect
him  to  maintain.

II.  To  restore  a  wrong-doer  to  favour  unconditionally,  is  a  sin  against
the  person  forgiven.  The  prodigal  whom  the  father  welcomed  back  returned
with  a  confession  upon  his  lips  and  such  contrition  in  his  heart  as  showed  that
his  restoration  to  his  old  place  in  the  home  would  be  a  blessing  to  himself  and
others.  But  if  he  had  been  re-instated  without  any  acknowledgment  that  he
had  sinned,  it  would  have  been  not  only  useless  but  injurious  to  him.  If  he
had  not  felt  the  sinfulness  of  the  past,  he  would  have  wandered  again  into  the
far  country  if  a  tempting  prospect  had  been  held  out  to  him,  and  his  last  state
would  have  doubtless  been  w^orse  than  the  first.  The  elder  brother  might  have
justly  complained  at  such  an  unconditional  blotting  out  of  the  past,  and  would
have  rightly  urged  that  it  did  harm  both  to  the  sinner  and  to  the  innocent  man.
This  is  not  God's  method.  With  Plim  it  is—"  If  we  confess  our  sins,  He  is
faithful  and  just  to  forgive  "  (1  John  i.  9).  "  Repent  and  he  converted  (turn
to  God)  that  >our  sins  may  be  blotted  out"  (Acts  iii.  19).  For  it  is  only  the
repentant  to  whom  God's  forgiveness  can  be  of  any  use.  In  Absalom's  case  we
see  the  consequence  of  his  restoration  to  favour  without  any  acknowledgment
of  his  guilt — it  gave  him  ample  opportunity  to  organise  and  complete  those
rebellious  designs  which  resulted  in  his  downrfall  and  ruin,  and  was  therefore  not
only  unjust  but  unkind.


360


JHAP.  XV.  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.


CHAPITER  XV.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes.  Ver.  1.  "After  this."  Keil,  Erdmann  and  Thenius
attach  the  idea  of  immediateness  to  the  Hebrew  adverb  here  used,  but  other  scholars  consider
this  doulitful.  'I'he  word  occurs  only  here,  in  chap,  iii,  28,  and  in  1  Chron.  xxxii.  23,  and  its
precise  meaning  cannot  theiefore  be  determined  by  usage.  "  Chariots,"  i.e.,  "a  state  carriage."
{Kcil.)  "  Fifty  men."  "These  runners  are  accustomed  to  precede  the  equipage  of  persons  of
distinction  in  Oriental  countries.  They  usually  carry  a  staff  or  baton,  whicli  they  constantly
wave  about  them,  and  strike  right  and  left  to  clear  the  way,  especially  in  the  streets  of  Oriental
cities  which  are  always  narrow  and  crowded.  .  .  .  They  can  keep  on  at  a  rapid  pace,  with
the  equipage  which  they  precede,  for  many  miles  without  stoppage,  their  feet  covered  with  dust
and  frequently  bleeding  from  wounds.  In  ancient  times  fifty  of  these  runners  formed  the  usual
attendance  upon  royalty.     See  1  Kings  i.  5."     (J amieson).

Ver.  2.  "  Rose  up  early,"  etc.  "  The  gate  here  referred  to  is  the  gate  of  the  royal  palace,
whither  those  came  that  sought  the  decision  of  the  king  in  law  matters.  (Erdmann).  Malcolm-
son  says  that  Oriental  ministers  hold  their  levees  before  western  people  of  rank  rise  from  their
beds.

Ver.  3.  "No  man,"'  etc.  Lit.  "No  hearer  for  thee  on  the  part  of  the  Jcing.**  The  hearer
signifies  the  judicial  officer,  who  heard  complainants  and  examined  into  their  different  causes
for  the  purpose  of  laying  them  before  the  king."     (Keil.)

Ver.  4.     "  O  that  I  were,"  etc.    Lit.  "  Who  will  make  mc,*'  etc.

Ver.  6.  "  So  Absalom  stole,"  etc.  *'  The  phrase  may  also  mean  to  deceive  the  heart,  as
in  Gen.  xxxi.  20  ;  but  the  connection  shows  that  the  meaning  here  is  to  bring  a  person  over
to  one's  side  secretly  and  by  stratagem."     {Erdmann  and  Keil.)

Ver.  7.  "After  forty  years."  It  seems  imposssble  to  re&d /brty  in  this  connection  as  it
cannot  be  understt)od  either  of  David's  reign  or  Absalom's  age,  as  David's  entire  reign  was  only
forty  years  and  a  half,  and  Absalom  was  born  after  liis  father  became  king.  Almost  all  com-
mentators read  four  years,  but  the  chronology  here  must  evidently  be  regarded  as  uncertain.

Ver.  7.  "  Hebron."  "  Probably  assigning  as  a  reason  that  he  was  born  there,  but  really  because
his  father  had  been  made  king  there,  and  also  possibly  because  there  may  have  been  many
persons  there  who  had  been  displeased  by  the  removal  of  the  court  to  Jerusalem."     (Keil. )

Ver.  8.  *'  Serve  the  Lord."  Rather  to  do  a  service,  explained  by  Josephus  to  mean  to  offer
a  sacrifice.  "  We  have  here  an  example  of  sacrificial  feasting,  not  in  connection  with  the
tabernacle  (as  in  1  Sara.  xx.  6),  an  indication  that  the  strict  law  of  Leviticus  (Lev,  xvii.  3,  4,
and  Dent.  xii.  13,  14)  was  not  in  practical  operation,  else  David  would  have  objected  to  sacri-
ficing in  Hebron."     {Translator  of  Lange's  Commentary.)

Ver.  9.  "  Go  in  peace."  "  That  David  observed  nothing  of  all  this  till  the  startling  news
reached  him  that  the  heart  of  Israel  was  turned  towards  Absalom,  cannot  be  reckoned  to  his
disadvantage,  since  so  ancient  and  simple  a  kingdom  had  nothing  like  our  modern  state  police  ;
it  is  rather  a  mark  of  the  noble-minded  security  that  we  elsewhere  see  in  him,  that  he  gives  so
free  scope  to  his  beloved  son,  who  might  be  regarded  as  first-born  and  heir-apparent."     {Ewald.)

Ver.  10.  "Spies."  "  So  called  because  they  were  first  of  all  to  find  out  the  feeling  of  the
people  and  only  execute  their  commission  where  they  could  reckon  on  support.  {Keil.)  *'  The
trumpet."  "  We  must  suppose  that  there  were  various  stations  where  the  summons  was
repeated."    {Cohen.)

Ver.  11.  "  Two  hundred  men."  "  Courtiers  such  as  usually  accompanied  kings  and  kings*
sons  on  their  journeys."  {Erdmann.)  "  Called,"  i.e.,  invited  to  the  sacrificial  feast.  "  Knew  not
anything,"  i.e.,  were  ignorant  of  the  conspiracy.

Ver.  12.  "  Giloh."  Upon  the  mountains  of  Judah  and  a  little  to  the  south  of  Hebron  (Josh.
XV.  61).  "Ahithophel  had  no  doubt  been  previously  initiated  into  Absalom's  plans,  and  had
probably  gone  to  his  native  city  merely  that  he  might  come  to  him  with  greater  ease,  since  his
general  place  of  abode,  as  king's  councillor,  must  have  been  in  Jerusalem."  {Keil.)  On  the
possible  cause  of  Ahithophel's  desertion  of  David,  see  notes  on  chap.  xi.  3.

Ver.  14.  "  Let  us  flee."  "  David's  immediate  flight  is  to  be  explained  by  the  reason  that  he
himself  gives,  by  the  fact  that  he  sees  that  the  fulfilment  of  Nathan's  prophecy  of  approaching

361


nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  ^\.


misfortime  is  now  beginning,  that  the  punishment  cannot  be  warded  off,  and  that  to  stay  in  the
city  will  only  occaHion  much  bloodshed."  {Evdmann.)  "To  leave  the  city  would  be  to  gain
tlie  advantage  of  his  military  skill  and  of  the  discipline  of  his  tried  warriors  in  the  open
country."     {Translator  oj  Lange's  Commentary).

Ver.  15.     "Servants,"  i.e.,  soldiers.     ( Lange* s  Commentary . )

Ver.  17.  *'  A  place  that  was  far  off."  Literally,  "  The  house  of  the  distance?*  "Probably
a  proper  name  given  to  a  house  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  city,  and  ou  the  road  to  Jericho,
which  was  called  *  the  farthest  house,*  viz.,  from  the  city."     (Keil.)

Ver.  18.  *' Cherithites,"  etc.  See  note  on  chap.  viii.  18.  "  Gittites."  Most  scholars
identify  this  body  of  men  with  the  Gibborim  or  mighty  men  mentioned  in  chap.  xvi.  6.  Some
suppose  that  Gitdte  is  a  corruption  of  Gibborim.  It  is  not  likely  that  they  were  all  natives  of
Gath,  although  they  are  said  to  have  followed  David  thence.  Most  commentators  consider  that
this  body-guard  was  formed  of  David's  first  faithful  followers  (1  Sam.  xxii.  2),  kept  always  up
to  the  number  of  six  hundred  by  the  addition  of  other  trusted  and  valiant  soldiers.

Ver.  19.  "  A  stranger,"  etc.  "  Do  you  remain  with  whoever  is  or  shall  be  king,  since  there  is
no  necessity  for  you  as  a  stranger  to  take  sides  at  all,"  (Keil)  or,  **  You  may  remain  quiet  and  see
whom  God  shall  appoint  as  king,  and  whether  it  be  I  or  Absalom  ;  you  can  serve  the  one  whom
God  shall  choose."  {Schmidt).  "  Stranger — not  an  Israelite  ;  emigrant  or  exile — one  not  in  his
native  land."  {Erdmann).  Some  suppose  that  the  latter  noun  signifies  that  Ittai  was  a  captive
or  a  hostage  taken  in  war,  but  his  position  in  David's  army  is  against  such  a  supposition.

Ver.  *20.  ''  Mercy  and  truth."  From  this  and  from  Ittai's  saying,  "As  the  Lord  lives,"  it  is
pn)ba])le  that  Ittai,  with  his  whole  house,  had  already  become  a  believer  in  the  God  of  Israel."
{Erdmann,)

Ver.  22.  "Passover,"  rather,  ^^ass  on,  {Keil.)  "  The  little  ones."  "  It  is  characteristic
of  Oriental  people  that  they  carry  their  whole  family  along  with  them  in  all  their  migrations."
{Jamieson.)

Ver.  23.  "  Kidron."  This  mountain  torrent,  which  only  flows  during  the  rainy  season,  runs
through  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  between  the  eastern  side  of  Jerusalem  and  the  Mount  of
Olives.  "  Afterwards  passed  over  by  the  son  of  David,  the  King  of  Israel,  when  He  was
rejected  by  Jerusalem."     {Wordswo7-th.)

Ver.  24.  "  Zadok"  and  Abiathar.  (See  notes  on  chap.  viii.  17.)  "Zadok  is  placed  before
Abiathar  by  the  historian,  although  Abiathar  was  the  High  Priest,  either  because  Zadok,  as  the
younger  man,  took  the  lead  in  bearing  the  ark,  or  perhaps  because  Abiathar  was  already
beginnino-  to  show  some  signs  of  lukewarmness  and  disatfeotioJi  towards  David  and  his  cause.
The  writer  composed  the  history  at  a  time  when  it  was  a  well-known  fact  that  Abiathar  was
deposed  by  Solomon  for  disloyalty,  and  Zadok  was  placed  in  his  room  (See  1  Kings  i.  7,  ii.  35.)
(Wordsworth.)  Keil  and  Erdmann  consider  that  Abiathar  did  not  join  the  procession  until  all
the  people  had  passed  out  of  the  city,  and  therefore  his  name  could  not  have  been  placed  first
here.  But  the  same  order  is  observed  in  verse  29.  "  Went  up."  "  That  is,  to  the  summit  of  the
Mount  of  Olives,  where  the  ark  was  set  down."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  27.  "Art  not  thou,"  etc.,  rather,  "  Thou  seer."  On  this  word  see  note  on  1  Sam.  ix.  9.
David's  reasons  for  so  naming  Zadok  is  found  in  verse  25  seq.  Through  him  David  is  to  learn
whether  the  Lord  will  again  take  him  into  favour  and  restore  him  to  Jerusalem  ;  that  is,
Zadok  was  to  act  as  seer  for  him."     {Erdmann).

Ver.  28.     "  The  plain,"  rather  the/brds,  the  place  w^here  the  Jordan  could  be  crossed.

Ver.  30.  "The  ascent  of  Olivet."  *' Josephus  reckons  the  distance  from  Jerusalem  to  the
top  of  the  mount  at  five  stadia,  and  Luke  (Acts  i.  i  2)  says  it  was  a  Saljbath  day's  journey.  The
same  pathway  over  that  mount  has  been  followed  ever  since  that  memorable  day."  {Jamieson.)
"  His  head  covered."  "  Covering  the  head  is  the  symbol  of  the  mind  sorrowfully  sunk  in
itself,  wholly  withdrawn  from  the  outer  world.  Oomp.  Esther  vi.  12,  Ezek.  xxiv.  1«."
(Erdmann. )  "  See  examples  of  King  Darius  having  his  head  covered,  2  Curtius,  lib.  iv.  cap.
10,  sec.  33,  and  lib.  v.  cap.  12,  sec.  8.  {Jamieson.)  "  Bare-foot."  While  all  covered  the  hea  i,
this  sign  of  mourning  appears  to  have  been  adopted  by  David  only  either  *'  as  a  penitent "
{Ewald),  or  "  to  manifest  his  humiliation  in  the  sight  of  God."     {Thenius).

Ver.  32.  "  Where  he  worshipped."  Bather,  where  men  worshipped,  etc.,  supposed  to  have
been  one  of  the  "  high  places  "  which  then  existed  in  Palestine.  "  Hushai  the  Archite."  See
ver.  37,  chap.  xvi.  16,  and  1  Chron,  xxvii.  33.  Keil  and  others  consider  him  to  have  been  a
privy  councillor.    He  was  probably  a  native  of  the  city  of  Ezek.     (See  Josh,  xvi  2.)

362


CHAP.  XV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL,


Ver.  33.     "  A  burden,"     **  ITe  was  pi'obably  a  very  old  man."     {Keil).

Ver.  34.  "  I  will  bo  thy  servant."  "  This  was  not  honest,  but  it  was  according  to  the  policy
practised  in  those  days,  and  indeed  in  all  ages  ;  which  Procopins  Gazaens  approves  so  far  as  to
say  tliat  '  a  lie  told  for  a  good  end  is  equivalent  to  truth.'  But  I  dare  not  justify  such  doctrine."
{Patrick).

Ver.  36.  "Zadok,"  etc.  *'  This  was  not  an  ordinary  stratagem  ;  these  men  were  not  simply
spies,  but  we  can  avoid  calling  them  traitors  by  supposing  that  the  priests  were  not  recognised
as  adherents  of  Absalom,  but  as  iudififereut  non-combatants,  or  as  friends  of  David."  {Translator
of  Lange's  Commentary).

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  CHAPTER.

The  Rebellion  under  Absalom,

We  have  here —

I.  An  aggravated  crime.  The  rebellion  of  Absalom  against  his  fatlier
would  have  been  an  act  of  great  wickedness  in  whatever  manner  he  had  carried
it  out,  but  the  cloak  wliich  lie  used  to  conceal  it  added  to  his  guilt.  He  must
have  been  a  bad  man  indeed  to  conspire  against  his  father's  throne  ;  but  to
dress  up  his  base  designs  in  the  garb  of  patriotism,  and  even  of  piety,  added
hypocrisy  to  his  other  sins.  But  there  appears  to  be  no  limit  to  the  extent  to
which  men  will  veil  a  vicious  act  in  the  semblance  of  a  virtuous  deed,  and  thus
give  proof  of  the  great  depravity  of  which  human  nature  is  capable.

II.  An  aggravated  calamity.  If  Absalom's  guilt  was  increased  by  the
attendant  circumstances  so  was  David's  sorrow.  There  was,  first,  the  quarter
from  which  it  came.  It  was  no  small  addition  to  the  severity  of  the  trial  that
the  evil  sprang  from  David's  own  house — that  the  rebel  was  one  of  his  own
children  and  apparently  a  son  for  whom  he  had  a  deep  affection.  And  added
to  this  was  the  fact  that  Absalom  was  aided  and  encouraged  by  one  in  whom
David  had  placed  implicit  confidence,  his  *'  familiar  friend,"  Ahithophel,  whose
faithfulness,  it  seems,  he  had  never  doubted  (Psalm  xli.  9).  David  had  been
warned  to  look  for  trouble,  and  for  trouble  from  his  own  family  ;  but  he  could
hardly  have  expected  so  heavy  a  calamity  as  the  one  which  now  befel  him  nor
is  it  likely  he  had  ever  thought  it  possible  that  Absalom  and  Ahithophel  would
be  the  chief  instruments  of  his  chastisement.  Then,  again,  it  must  have  been
a  bitter  surprise  and  mortification  to  David  to  find  that  so  many  of  his  people
were  ready  to  renounce  their  allegiance  to  him  and  to  follow  one  who  was  m  all
respects  his  inferior,  and  who  had  no  claims  upon  their  gratitude.  Faulty  as
David  had  been  in  his  later  years,  and  just  as  might  have  been  the  charge  brought
a.L-ainst  him  by  Absalom  (ver.  3),  his  rule  upon  the  whole  had  been  productive
of  great  good  to  the  nation,  whereas  Absalom  had  done  nothing  for  it.  Yet,  when
the  standard  of  rebellion  was  raised,  many  men  gathered  to  it  wlio  doubtless  owed
much  to  the  efforts  which  David  had  made  to  benefit  the  people  and  thus
showed  themselves  capable  of  great  ingratidude.  And  we  all  know  that
uiikinduess  from  such  a  quarter  is  much  harder  to  bear  than  when  it  comes
from  the  hand  of  strangers.  But  by  far  the  greatest  aggravation  of  David's
trial  must  have  been  the  consciousness  that  he  had  brought  it  on  himself.  It
was  no  arbitrary  sentence  which  God  passed  upon  him  w  u3n  He  warned  him
that  evil  would  come  from  his  own  house.  If  David's  iiousehold  had  been
ordered  more  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God,  and  his  own  personal  life  been
under  more  strict  discipline,  it  is  more  than  probable  he  would  have  had  no
such  sons  as  Amnon  and  Absalom,  and  no  subjects  so  faithless  as  Ahithophel
and  those  who  followed  with  him.  But  even  if  then  such  circumstances  had
arisen,  the  fixther  and  the  king  would  have  found  strong  consoLition  in  the
reflection  that  he  was  in  no  sense  blameworthy.     But  he  could  not   have   this

363


ffOMILEriG  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  bouK  ii.


strongest  support  in  trial  but  had  this  burden  in  addition  to  nil  the  otiiers,  that
he  was  only  reaping  as  he  had  sown.  And,  ahis  !  although  he  alone  was
responsible  for  the  sowing,  many  besides  himself  had  to  taste  the  bitter  fruit.
To  a  man  like  David,  this  must  have  been  an  inexpressible  grief.  To  any  true-
hearted  man  or  woman  it  is  far  easier  to  suffer  than  to  be  the  means  of  bringing
suffering  upon  others,  even  when  it  is  a  matter  of  pure  misfortune.  But  surely
nothing  can  cause  such  agony  of  miml  as  to  look  upon  the  nuseries  of  others  and
to  feel  that  we  are  the  cause  of  it,  and  that  by  our  own  transgression.  David
now  saw  his  kingdom  rent  by  civil  war  with  all  its  attendant  desolations,  and
knew  that  he,  and  he  only,  was  to  blame  ;  and  as  we  look  upon  tliis  man  after
God's  own  heart,  ascending  the  Mount  of  Olives,  where  can  we  find  a  more  vivid
illustration  of  the  terrible  consequences  of  sin  or  of  the  inflexible  impartiality  of
God.  If  David  must  thus  suffer  even  after  his  repentance,  what  must  be  the
tribulation  necessary  for  those  who  live  a  life  of  rebellion  against  their  God  and
their  conscience  and  who  have  never,  like  him,  acknowledged  their  transgressions
and  sought  to  be  cleansed  from  their  sin.

III.  Calamity  lightened  by  the  faithfulness  of  friends  and  by  confidence
in  God.  If  Absalom  and  his  followers  afford  painful  examples  of  human
hypocrisy  and  ingratitude  and  make  us  ashamed  of  our  manhood,  the
Viuselfishness  and  fidelity  of  Ittai  and  other  servants  of  David  more  than
redeem  it  from  the  disgrace.  Although  there  are  many  false  and  cowardly
men  in  the  world,  there  are  also  many  brave  and  noble  ones,  and  times
of  trial,  whether  personal  or  national,  are  times  of  self-revelation  which
bring  to  light  the  real  character  of  both  the  good  and  bad.  If  it  had
not  been  for  Absalom  and  Ahithophers  treachery,  David  would  never  have
known  how  deep  was  the  affection  which  his  friends  felt  for  him,  and
their  devotion  would  not  have  had  the  opportunity  of  manifesting  itself
and  of  gaining  for  them  the  admiration  of  future  generations.  So  it  is  in
all  times — the  wickedness  of  some  brings  out  the  goodness  of  others  and
strengthens  their  virtue  and  makes  it  shine  more  brightly.  And  to  David,  in
this  hour  of  sorrow,  this  loyalty — vvhere  perhaps  he  least  looked  for  it — must
have  been  what  a  spring  of  living  water  is  to  a  weary  traveller  in  a  spot  where
he  did  not  expect  it.  For  the  friend  that  comes  without  being  sought  in  the
day  when  friends  are  few,  is  indeed  a  well  in  the  wilderness,  which  restores  the
strength  of  the  fainting  wayfarer  and  enables  him  to  go  on  his  way.  To  David
this  faithfulness  on  the  part  of  man  would  be  a  pledge  of  the  faithfulness  of
God,  and  a  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  his  own  words,  "  Unto  the  upright  there
ariseth  light  in  the  darkness."

But  David's  own  conduct  and  temper  under  the  trial,  tended  also  to  lighten
the  affliction.  Behind  the  wrong-doing  of  man  he  sees  the  righteousness  of
God  and  acknowledges  the  justice  of  the  permissive  providence  which  allowed
such  a  calamity  to  overtake  him.  And  although  he  knows  that  he  is  being
chastised  for  Ids  sin,  he  does  not  lose  the  sense  of  God's  loving-kindness  ;  but,
as  his  words  testify  (see  Psalm  iii.)  hopes  in  Him  against  whom  he  has  sinned,
having  the  blessed  assurance  that  although  he  is  thus  afflicted,  his  iniquity  is
forgiven.  Any  man  who  is  able  thus  to  meet  affliction,  finds  its  sting  removed  ;
but  a  soul  which  cannot  see  a  Divine  hand  behind  the  dark  cloud,  or,  seeing  it,
does  not  recognise  it  as  a  hand  of  justice  and  love,  is  indeed  in  a  sad  case-
Many  as  were  the  aggravations  of  David's  calamity,  it  had  this  greatest
alleviation.


8G4


CHAP.  XV.  HOMILETJC  COMMENTAR Y:   SAM UEL.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.  2.     The  plot  wliich  Absalom  star — a  comet.     .     .     ,     That  cement

was   working    out    required    a    great  which  conghitinates  hearts  is  grace  and

amount    of   Ra])ping    and    mining — a  goodness,  whereof  many  politic  heads

kijid   of  labour  extremely  trying,  and  are  utterly   devoid  (1  Cor.  i.  26),  and

demanding   much    patience   and   self-  politic  men  make  their  own  profit  the

command.      Yet  for  years,  apparently,  rule  and  square  of  their  lives.    .    .     .

he  persevered   in   it,  upheld  and  en-  Do  not,  then,  undervalue  the  love  of

couraged  by  the  one  hope  of  ultimate  tiiose  who   are  of  mean  and  inferior

success.      How   much    wiser   in   their  parts.     Wise  men  have  made  use  of

generation   are   the   children   of    this  such  servants  and  found  them  more

world  than  the  cliildren  of  light !     If  manageable     and     more     profitable;

for  wicked  or  selfish    ends   men   toil  though  their  judgments  were  weaker,

with  so  much  perseverance,  how  should  their  affections  might  be  stronger  than

good  men  labour  in  the  service  of  God  1  wiser  men.      III.    False  friends  will

— Blackie.  forsake  thee  in  times  of  adversity.    He

that  believeth  that  all  those  who  smile

Ver.  19.  David's  general  desertion  on  him  and  promise  fair  in  time  of
by  his  own  people — the  tribe  of  Judah  prosperity  will  perform  it  in  time  of
— and  the  attention  which  he  received  his  want  may  as  well  believe  that  all
from  comparative  strangers  fore-  the  leaves  that  be  on  trees  at  Mid-
shadowed  the  Lord's  own  experience,  summer  will  hang  there  as  fresh  and
when  betrayed  by  Judas,  denied  by  as  fair  on  New  Year's  Day.  Come  we
Peter,  and  forsaken  by  all  the  apostles,  now  to  consider  what  good  uses  one
His  only  sympathy  seemed  to  come  may  make  to  himself  from  the  unfaith-
from  the  weeping  women,  and  when  fulness  of  friends  when  they  forsake  us.
strangers  like  Nicodemus  and  Joseph  I.  Consider  with  thyself  whether  thou
were  left  to  attend  his  funeral. —  hast  not  been  faulty  in  entertaining
Blackie.                                    ~  tale-bearers,  and   lending  a  listening

ear    to   them.       Solomon    says,    "  A

Ver.  31.     This  text  is  a  glass  where-  whisperer    separateth    chief  friends"

in  God's  justice  is  plainly  to  be  seen.  (Prov.  xvi.  28.)    ...     2.  If  herein

David   had  formerly   falsely  forsaken  thy     conscience     accuse     thee     not,

Uriah,  and  now  God  suffers  Ahitho-  examine    thyself,  whether   there    was

phel  to  forsake  David.  ...      I.  Let  not  a  eassum  principium  in  the  first

us  learn  when  our  friends  forsake  us,  initiation  of  your  love.    How  came  you

to  enter  into  a  serious  scrutiny  with  fir«t  acquainted.  .    .    .  Didst  thou  first

our    oivn    souls.      Hast    thou    never  purchase  his  favour  with  the  price  of  a

played  false  or  foul  with  thy  friend,  if  sin  ?      For,     know,    friends    unjustly

not  in  action  yet  in  intention  ?    Dost  gotten  are  not  long  comfortably  en-

thon  not  mean  to  prove  base  if  put  to  joyed.  .  .  .     We  see  King  Hezekiah,

the  trial  ?  If  so,  know  thy  false  friend  who  procured   Sennacherib's   love    by

hath  only  got  the  start  of  thee his  sacrilege,  enjoyed  not  that  purchase

11.  The  most  politic  heads  have  not  which  he  made  God  and  Plis  temple
always  the  faithfullest  hearts.  .  .  .  pay  for.  (2  Kings  xviii.  16.)  ...  3.
While  David  swayed  the  sceptre,  who  If  there  has  been  no  fault  in  the  in-
more  loyal  to  him  than  Aliithophel?  clination,  examine  hath  there  been
and  once  David  is  in  banishment,  none  in  the  continuance  of  your
he  falls  first  to  Absalom  ;  he  loved  to  friendship  ?  Hast  thou  not  committed
worship  the  sun  rising ;  yea,  while,  many  sins  to  hold  in  with  him  ?  .  .  ,
David,  the  true  sun,  was  but  overcast  Hast  thou  not  flattered  him  in  his
with  a  cloud,  he  falls  adoring  a  blazing  faults,  or  at  leastwise  by  thy  silence

365


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


BOOK  II.


consented  to  liim.  ...  If  Arnnon,
in  cold  blood  viewing  tlie  heinousness
of  his  offence,  so  bated  'J^aniar,  who
only  concurred  passively  in  bis  trans-
gression, bow  may  onr  friends  jnstly
hate  ns,  if  haply  we  have  been  the
cansers,  movers,  and  procurers  of  our
liadness  !  ...  4.  Hast  thou  not  idola-
triscd  to  thy  friend  ?  Hath  he  not
totally  monopolised  thy  soul?  It  is
just  with  God  that  those  wooden
))illars  should  break,  on  whom  we  lay
too  much  heft.  5.  Hast  thou  not
undervalued  thy  friend?  ...  If  so,
God  bath  taught  the  worth  of  a  pearl
by  losing  it.  And  this  often  comes  to
pass,  though  not  in  our  friends  volun-
tary deserting  us,  yet  when  God  takes
them  away  by  death.  ...  6.  It  may
be  God  suffers  thy  friends  to  prove  un-
faithful to  thee,  to  make  thee  stick
more  closely  to  Himself  Excellent  to
this  puv])ose  is  Micab  vii.  5-7.  As  if
he  had  snd,  "Is  the  world  come  to
this  bad  pass  that  one  must  be  far
from  trusting  their  nearest  friends?
It  is  well,  then,  I  have  one  fast  Friend
on  whum  I  may  rely,  the  God  of
heaven."  I  must  confess  these  words
of  the  prophet  are  principally  meant
of  the  time  of  persecution,  but  they
contain  an  eternal  truth,  whereof  good
use  may  be  made  at  any  time. — Ihos.
iuller.

Ver.  34.  In  the  midst  of  such  piety
and  resignation,  it  is  strange  to  tind
David  asking  his  friend  thus  to  act  a
dishonest  part,  and  play  the  spy.  We
are  not  called  to  vindicate  his  conduct.
The  Scriptures  simply  record  it ;  and
we  must  not  suppose  that  everything
here  is  approved  which  is  not  directly,
and  in  so  many  words,  condemned.
But  we  may  say  two  things  by  way  of
debarring  hasty  judgment  here.  First
— and  I  am  using  now  the  words  of
Professor  Plumptre  :  "  Slowly  in  the
character  of  any  people  ;  more  slowly


still  in  that  of  any  Eastern  ])eo])le  ;
most  slowly  of  all,  perhaps,  in  that  of
Israel,  have  men  risen  to  the  excellence
of  v(  racity.  We  must  not  think  that
the  king's  religion  was  a  hypocrisy  l,e-
cause  it  did  not  bear  at  once  the  fruit
of  the  s])otless  honor  and  unswerving
truth  which  mark  the  highest  forms  of
Christian  goodness.  The  Christian
Church  herself  has  to  notice  many
like  inconsistencies  among  her  crowned
martyrs."  Second  :  let  us  not  forget
what  those  means  are  by  which,  even
in  these  modern  days,  with  all  our
Christian  loftiness  of  character,  we  seek
to  countermine  and  check  political
rebellion.  Some  years  ago,  while  I
was  a  resident  in  Livi  rpool,  there  was
great  talk  of  Fenianism.  We  heard
oi"  plots  [k\x  the  taking  of  the  ancient
city  of  Chester,  and  the  burning  of
ships  in  our  own  docks.  How  did  we
hear  of  them  ?  By  spies,  who  feigned
themselves  Fenians  for  the  time  !  and
the  man  whose  astuteness  made  these
discoveries  through  means  of  Hushai-
like  instruments  was  rewarded  by
being  made  a  companion  of  the  Most
Honorable  Order  of  the  Bath  !  Ob-
serve, I  do  not  vindicate  either  David
or  these  modern  officers.  I  sim})ly
state  the  facts,  and  beg  to  say,  that  if
men,  with  the  New  Testament  in  their
hands,  can  do  such  things,  we  ought  to
be  tender  in  our  treatment  of  David
here. — Taylor.

Vers.  16-27.  There  is  no  single
day  in  the  Jewish  history  of  which  so
elaborate  an  account  remains  as  of
this  memorable  flight.  There  is  none,
we  may  add,  that  combines  so  many  of
David's  characteristics — his  patience,
his  high-spirited  religion,  his  gener-
osity, his  calculations  :  we  miss  only
his  daring  courage.  Was  it  crushed,
for  the  moment,  by  the  weight  of
parental  grief,  or  bitter  remorse? —
Stanley.


366


OH  AP.  XVI.  IIOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  RY :    SAM  UEL.


CHAPTER  XVI.

Critic \L  and  Expository  Notf  s. — Ver.  1.  "Met  him."  "  Ziba  had  therefore  gone  on  in
advance  of  the  army  (as  Hushai  did)  in  order  more  easily  to  secure  David's  attention  after  the
first  disorder  was  over."  (Erdmann.)  "  Bunches  of  raisins,"  i.e.,  raisin  cakes.  "Summer
frUits,"  probably  fig-cakes,  as  iu  1  Sam.  xxv.  18.     "  A  bottle,"  ixskm.

Ver.  2.  "The  asses,"  etc.  "The  manner  of  Ziba's  trick  was  this  (chap.  xix.  26).
Mephibosheth,  learning  of  David's  iligbt,  had  ordered  .issts  saddled  for  liiniself  and  his  servants,
ill  order  to  repair  to  the  king  in  token  of  lii>!  faithful  attachment.  Ziba  had  taken  the  asses
together  with  the  presents  intended  by  Mepliibosheth  for  the  king,  come  to  the  latter,  and  left
the  helpless  Mephibosheth  in  the  lurch."     [Erdmann.)

Ver.  5.     "  Bahurim."     (See  note  on  chap.  iii.  IG).

Ver.  6.     "  On  his  right  hand,"  etc.     i.e.,  "  On  the  right  and  left  of  the  king."     {Keil).

Ver.  7.  **  Come  out,"  etc.,  or  "  Away,  away."  "  Thou  bloody  man."  "  He  may  possibly  have
attributed  'o  David  the  murder  of  Ishbosheth  and  Abner."  (Keil.)  "  Other,  less  probably,
think  also  ol  Saul  and  Jonathan,  and  even  of  Uriah."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  8.  "  The  Lord,"  etc.  "  Shimei  is  so  far  devout  and  religious  that  he  ascribes  the  present
state  of  things  wholly  to  Jehovah,  but  he  ignores  Samuel's  sentence  of  rejection  (1  Sam.  xv.)
and  otherwise  shows  a  bad  spirit."  [Translator  of  Lunge's  Commentary).  "Taken  in  thy
r^ischief,"  rather  "  thou  art  in  thy  misfortune."

Ver.  10.  "  What  have  I  ?  "  etc.  Lit.,  "  What  to  me  and  you  ?  "  i.e.,  what  feelings  and  desires
have  we  in  common.  It  is  evident  that  Joab  also  desired  to  put  Shimei  to  death.  "  The  Lord
hath  said,"  etc.  "  By  allowing  him  to  do  so.  Since  nothing  hajipens  against,  or  without  the
will  of  Him."  {Wordswo^'tfi.)  In  the  East  they  make  use  of  bold  figures,  much  less  common
among  us,  although  not  altogether  unknown.  They  speak  of  the  mediate  cause  without  saying
it  is  the  mediate  cause,  and  use  the  very  expression  which  denotes  the  immediate  cause.  We
should  regard  Shimei  as  an  instrument  in  tiie  hands  of  Providence.  In  the  East  they  go  a  far
greater  length.  There  God  has  done  and  commanded  all  that  men  do  contrary  to  His  command-
ments."    {Jamieson.)

Ver.  12,  "Affliction."  Some  translate  this  word  into  "  eye,"  and  understand  David  to  refer
to  his  tears;  but  the  correct  translation  appears  to  be  ^'iniquity,"  oa  which  Erdmann  remarks,
"  God's  looking  upon  his  iniquity  "  can  then  only  be  a  gracious  and  merciful  looking.

Ver.  14.  "Weary."  Ayephim.  Most  scholars  regard  this  as  the  name  of  a  place  since,  if  it
is  rendered  weary,  there  is  no  mention  of  the  place  referred  to  by  the  word  there.  Jamieson,
however,  remarks  that  the  absence  of  the  particle  of  motion  favours  the  English  version.  There
is  no  other  mention  of  a  place  of  this  name  but  that,  as  Kiel  remarks,  applies  to  many  other
places  whose  existence  is  never  called  in  question.

Ver.  15.    "Men  of  Israel."     "Very  significant  :  The   old   malcontents,  chap.    ii.    8,  9.**

{Thenius).

Ver.  20.    "  Give  counsel,''  etc.     This  is  the  first  cabinet  council  on  record."    {Jamieson).

Ver.  21.  "  Go  in  unto,"  etc.  "  This  advice  was  sagacious  enough.  Lying  with  the  king's
concubines  was  an  appropriation  of  the  royal  harem,  and,  as  such,  a  complete  usurpation  of  the
throne  (see  at  chap.  iii.  7)  which  would  render  any  reconciliation  between  Absalom  and  his
father  utterly  impossible,  and  therefore  would  of  necessity  instigate  the  followers  of  Absalom
with  all  the  greater  firmness.  This  was  what  Ahithophel  hoped  to  attain  by  his  advice.
For  unless  the  breach  was  too  great  to  be  healed,  with  the  affection  of  David  towards  his
sons,  which  might  in  reality  be  called  weakness,  it  was  always  a  possible  thing  that
he  should  forgive  Absalom,  and  in  this  case  Ahithophel  would  be  the  one  to  suffer
But  under  the  superintendence  of  God  this  advice  was  to  effect  the  fulfibnent  of  the  threat  held
over  Davi<l  in  chap.  xii.  8."  (Kal.)  Perhaps  Ahithophel  was  also  avenging  the  wrong  done  to
Bathsheba.     (See  note  on  chap.  xi.  3.)

Ver.  22,  "The  top  of  the  house."  The  same  roof  where  David's  look  at  Bathsheba  led
him  into  the  path  of  sin.

Ver.  23.  "  The  oracle  of  God."  That  is,  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel  had  almost  the  weight
oi  a  Divine  command  with  both  father  and  son.

367


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    iSAMVEL.  book  n.

MAIN  H0MILETIC8  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  1-4.
The  Treachery  of  Ziba.

I.  Benevolent  acts  are  often  performed  from  motives  of  policy  and  some-
times at  another  man's  expense.  Altlionoli  it  is  not  our  business  at  all  times
to  inquire  niiiiutely  into  the  sources  wlieiice  men  obtain  the  means  of  doing
deeds  of  charity  and  apparent  kindness,  or  to  be  severe  in  passing  judgment
upon  them,  tlie  interests  of  truth  and  justice  sometimes  demand  such  an  in-
vestigation and  sentence.  For  instance,  in  olden  times,  the  smuggler  and  the
highwayman  were  sometimes  lavish  in  giving  of  the  fruits  of  their  dishonesty  to
the  poor  and  needy,  but  in  doing  so  they  gave  what  did  not  belong  to  them  and
therefore  deserved  blame,  and  not  praise.  And  men  now-a-days  often
give  away  what  they  have  gotten  by  means  quite  as  unlawful,  though  more
outwardly  respectable.  We  can  hardly  suppose  that  in  any  such  case  what
is  given  is  given  from  a  right  motive.  In  the  case  of  Ziba,  the  motive
for  his  liberality  was  evidently  as  corrupt  as  its  source.  We  cannot  believe
that  he  was  prompted  by  the  same  feelings  as  were  David's  other  benefactors.
The  character  of  the  man  forbids  such  a  supposition,  and  we  must  conclude
tliat  he  was  farsighted  enough  to  see  that  David  would  be  victorious,
and  credulous  enough  to  think  that  he  would  not  discover  his  falsehood.  Like
the  unjust  steward  of  our  Lord's  parable,  he  could  well  afford  to  be  generous  at
his  master's  expense,  and  although  his  selfishness  might  be  less  palpable,  his
dishonesty  warrants  us  in  concluding  it  was  quite  as  real.

II.  The  best  of  men  often  err  in  their  judgment  of  others.  David  here  looks
upon  Ziba  as  his  true  friend,  and  upon  Mephibosheth  as  a  most  ungrateful  man.
Li  this  we  know  he  was  altogether  mistaken,  yet  how  entirely  were  appearances
in  favour  of  his  opinion.  In  these  days,  in  a  civilized  country,  a  man  could  not
suffer  such  a  wrong  as  Mephibosheth  here  suffered  at  the  hand  of  David,  for  he
would  not  be  condemned  without  an  opportunity  of  defending  himself,  but  in
other  forms  men  often  suffer  much  from  the  calumny  and  mistakes  of  others.  A
wicked  and  designing  person,  for  his  own  selfish  ends,  falsely  accuses  a  good  man
to  his  friend,  the  accused  person  is  ignoratit  of  the  charge,  circumstances  seem
against  him,  and  the  very  esteem  in  which  his  friend  has  hitherto  held  him  seems
to  increase  his  indignation  at  the  supposed  treachery.  For,  if  David  had  not  had  so
great  a  regard  for  Mephibosheth,  he  would  not  have  been  stung  so  keenly  by  his
supposed  desertion,  and  probably  would  not  have  so  hastily  passed  so  severe  a
sentence  upon  him.  Li  view  of  his  error  let  us  learn  to  be  slow  in  believing
evil  of  any,  especially  of  those  whom  we  have  hitherto  had  reason  to  regard  as
honest  and  true,  and  let  us  be  thankful  that  above  and  over  all  human  judges
there  is  One  who  cannot  err  in  His  judgment,  because  *'  He  shall  not  judge  by
the  ^ight  of  His  eyeSy  neither  reprove  (decide)  after  the  hearing  of  His  ears^
l»ut  will  judge  with  righteousness  and  reprove  (decide)  with  equity."  (Isa.
xi.  3,  4).

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.    4.      Flatterers   are   generally  treachery  and  ingratitude  have  been

backbiters ;  for  it  is  as  easy  to  them  exi)erienced,  men  are  apt  to  become

to   forge    slanders   of    the  absent    as  too  suspicious,  and  to  listen  to  every

to   pretend  affection  and  respect  for  plausible     tale     of    calumny.       The

the   present When   much  mind   being    greatly    agitated,   views

363


CHAr.  XVI.  HOMILEIIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


everytliing  through    a   false  medium,  for  us,  than  with  those  who  are  avowed

and  we   are   naturally  most   precipi-  enemies.     It  is  the  remark  of  an  old

tate   when    least   capable    of  judging  vfriteT  (jF idler),   that  "  Ziba's  gifts  did

ariglit.— ♦S'c(;^^.  David  more  harm  tlian  k5hiniei's  curses,

There   is   often    more   danger,    and  for  those  betrayed  him  into  an   act  of

therefore  more  need  of  caution,   with  injustice,    whilst    these    reproved    his

those  who  profess  an  especial  regard  patience." — Lindsay.

MAIN  nOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  5-1^.

SniMEi  CURSING  David.

I.  The  day  of  adversity  is  the  day  when  we  may  look  for  insult  from  the
mean-spirited.  We  hear  nothing  of  Shimei  in  the  day  of  David's  prosperity,
although  the  deeds  for  which  he  upbraided  him  had  been  done  long  before.  A
truly  noble  man  will  reprove  another  from  a  sense  of  duty,  and  will  do  it  with-
out considering  what  tlie  consequences  to  himself  ujay  be.  There  are  also  many
men  who,  although  they  will  not  risk  their  own  safety  by  rebuking  the  real  or
supposed  faults  of  those  who  have  })ower  to  punish  them  for  so  doing,  have  too
much  humanity  in  them  to  do  so  when  their  respective  positions  are  reversed.
But,  alas  for  our  human  nature  !  there  are  those  also  who,  like  the  cur,  which
oidy  barks  when  he  thinks  the  object  of  his  dislike  has  no  means  of  defence,
gladly  avail  themselves  of  another's  misfortune  to  charge  him  with  all  manner
of  iniquity.  Although  David,  as  it  appears  from  the  narrative,  had  even  now
the  means  of  avenging  himself,  it  is  quite  evident  from  what  took  place  after-
wards that  Shimei  would  not  have  acted  as  he  did  if  he  had  not  felt  tolerably
secure.

II.  The  manner  and  circumstances  in  which  an  accusation  is  made,  and
the  spirit  in  which  it  is  borne,  will  often  help  us  to  decide  as  to  its  truth  or
falsehood.  If  we  knew  nothing  of  David  before  this  event,  as  we  know  nothing
ol  Shimei,  we  should  conclude  that  he  did  not  deserve  the  character  here  given
to  him.  Great  as  his  fall  had  been  on  the  one  great  transgression  of  his  life,
the  charges  brought  against  him  by  Shimei  were  false — he  was  not  a  blood-
thirsty tyrant  who  had  risen  to  power  by  injustice  and  cruelty.  But  where
there  is  manifest  cowardice,  we  may  safely  conclude — without  any  other  proof —
that  there  is  falsehood.  The  more  meekly,  too,  an  accusation  is  borne,  the  less
likely  is  it  to  be  true,  Such  a  spirit  as  David  here  displays  never  goes  hand  in
hand  with  such  selhsh  ambition  as  Shimei  here  lays  to  his  charge,  and  the
accuser  here  is  as  surely  condemned  out  of  his  own  mouth,  and  by  his  own
conduct,  as  the  accused  man  justifies  himself  by  his  humble  words  and  by  his
patient  forbearance.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  5.     There  is  no  small  cruelty  in  adversary  when  he  is  once  down.    It  13

the  picking  out  of  a  time  for  mischief ;  the   murder   of  the  tongue  to   insult

that   word   would   scarce  gall  at  one  upon  tliose  whom  God  hath  humbled,

season,  which  at  another  killeth.    The  and  to  draw  blood  of  that  back  which

same  shaft  flying  with  the  wind  pierces  is    yet   blue   from    the   hand   of    the

deep,  which  against  it  can  hardly  find  Almighty. — Bp,  Hall.

strength  t^  stick  upright.     The  valour  Was  not  David  rightly  punished  by

and  justice  of  children  condemn  it  for  Shimei's  railing,  for  his  hearkening  so

injuriously   cowardly,   to  strike  their  readily  to  Ziba's  flattering  ?     Wan  not

2b  369


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  ii.


he  justly  spoiled  of  lu's  honours,  who  trouble  ;   the   strong   recollects   itself,

had  so  unjustly  spoiled  Mephibosheth  and  is  grown  so  skilful,  that  it  bears  off

of  his  good  ? — Trapp.  one  mischief  with  another. — Bp,  hall.

Ver.  11.  Even  while  David  laments  Ver.  12.  According  to  His  usual
the  rebellion  of  his  son,  he  gains  by  it,  dealing  with  His  poor  afflicted.  How-
dA\di  makes  that  the  argument  of  his  soever,  if  lie  bring  not  down  His  will
patience,  which  was  the  exercise  of  it :  to  theirs,  He  will  bring  up  their  will
"  Behold  my  son,  which  came  forth  of  to  His,  which  will  make  infinite  amends
my  bowels,  seeketh  my  life  ;  how  much  for  all  their  patience. — Trapp.
more  now  may  this  Benjamite  do  it  ?  "  We  may  here  learn  how  falsely  and
The  wickedness  of  an  Absalom  may  rob  wickedly  men  sometimes  wrest  the
his  father  of  comfort,  but  shall  help  to  providence  of  God,  to  justify  their  un-
add  to  his  father's  goodness.  It  is  the  just  surmises,  and  gratify  their  male-
advantage  of  great  crosses,  that  they  volent  passions.  Many  who  are  them-
svvallow  up  the  less.  One  man's  sin  selves  living  without  God  in  the  world,
cannot  be  excused  by  another's,  the  have,  at  the  same  time,  no  scruple  in
lesser  by  the  greater.  If  Absalom  be  a  speaking  of  the  calamities  which  hcfal
traitor,  Shimei  may  not  curse  and  others,  as  Divine  judgments.  .  .  Job's
rebel ;  but  the  i)assion  conceived  from  friends  condemned  him  on  this  false
the  indignity  of  a  stranger,  may  be  principle,  and  our  Lord  censures  a
abated  by  the  harder  measure  of  our  similar  rash  judgment  which  some  in
own  ;  if  we  can  therefore  suffer,  because  His  day  had  formed  of  certain  others,
we  have  suffered,  we  have  profited  by  in  consequence  of  their  extraordinary
our  affliction.  A  weak  heart  faints  sufferings. — Lindsay,
with    every    addition    of   succeeding


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.^Verses  20-23.

Ahithophel's  Counsel.

I.  When  all  the  plans  of  the  wicked  have  been  worked  out,  God's  counsel
will  be  found  to  prevail.  Sometimes  a  man  may  permit  a  thief  to  escape  from
his  grasp  and  run  away  from  him  because  he  knows  that  in  front  of  him  is  a
precipice,  and  that  every  step  he  takes  brings  him  nearer  to  his  final  fall.  He
has  only  to  let  him  pursue  his  own  course  and  he  will  be  the  author  of  his  own
ruin.  So,  when  men  break  away  from  God,  and  seem  to  think  they  can  leave
llim  out  of  their  calculations.  He  sometimes  leaves  them  entirely  to
their  own  devices,  and  they  become  their  own  destroyers,  and  at  the  same  time
fulfil  the  Divine  purposes.  At  this  crisis  in  the  history  of  the  people  of  Israel
it  might  have  seemed  to  some  good  men  that  God  had  entirely  withdrawn  from
the  nation,  and  that  these  bad  men  were  having  their  own  way  in  everything.
The  last  assumption  was  true,  but  not  the  first — Aliitho[)hel  and  Absalom  met
with  no  hindrance  as  yet  in  the  execution  of  their  designs,  but  God  was  looking
on  and  seeing  in  them  the  instruments  of  His  will,  as  they  unconsciously
executed  a  part  of  the  sentence  against  David,     (chap.  xii.  11).

II.  The  sin  which  the  parent  commits  in  secret  will  probably  be  committed
openly  by  the  child.  Children  show  theujselves  apt  pupils  in  the  school  of  vice,
and  often  go  far  beyond  their  teachers  in  the  wrong  direction.  None  of  David's
virtues  were  reproduced  in  Absalom,  but  his  deed  of  sin  was  not  only  closely
imitated  but  far  exceeded,  and  what  the  father  did  in  secret  the  son  did  not
blush  to  do  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel.  Let  no  })arent  or  any  man  deceive  himself
by  thinking  that  those  under  his  influence  will  stop  in  the  path  of  sin  just

370


CHAP.  XVT.  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


where  lie  stopped — it  is  a  downward  road  and  they  who  set  out  upon  it  neitlier
know  wiicre  they  will  stop  themselves,  nor  can  they  stay  the  course  of  those  who
may  follow  in  their  steps.  Let  the  father  or  mother  who  breaks  God's  law  and
blushes  for  the  sin,  think  how  likely  it  is  that  their  child  may  make  a  boast  of
the  same  deed  of  shame.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

It  is  not  improbable  that  Ahithophel  not  the  secret  purposes,  but  the  revealed

remembered  (jod's  denunciation  against  precepts  of  God;  that  a  man  maybe

D.Lvid    by    the  prophet   Nathan,   and  iultilUing    the   former,    yet  incurring

therefore  considered  it  a  deep  stroke  of  God's  severe  displeasure  by  transgressing

policy  tlius  to  take  adA^antage  of  exist-  the  latter. — Lindsay.
ing    circumstances,    to    establish    the

Divine  purposes,     lie  might  hope  per-         Ver.  23.     David's  chief  counsellors

haps,  thus  to  encourage  a  belief,  that  were  God's  testimonies  (Psa.  cxix.  24)

Absalom  was  a  chosen  instrument  in  to  these  as  to  the  test  he  brought  all

the  hands  of  God  for  the  execution  of  counsel  given  him,  whether  by  Ahitho-

His  judgments,  and  consequently,  that  phel  or  any  other     .     .     .     Absalom

all  o})position  to  him  was  both  wicked  and  his  adherents  followed  Ahithophel's

and  fruitless.     But  Ahitho[)hel  with  all  counsel,  howsoever,  as  infallible,  because

his  wisdom,  was  not  wise  enough  to  it  was  for  their  purpose. — Trajpp.
know  that  the  rule  of  man's  conduct  is


CHAPTER  XVII.

CRrnoAL  AND  Expository  Notes.    Ver.  1.    *•  This  night."    "  The  night  following  David's

flight  and  Absalom's  entrance  into  Jerusalem,  as  we  may  see  very  clearly  from  ver.  16."     {Keil.)

Ver.  3.  "Bring  back,"  "  Ahithophel  regards  Absalom's  government  as  the  only  lawful  one
to  which  those  fugitives  must  submit  ;  their  flight  is  in  his  eyes  an  act  of  insubordination,  from
which  they  are  to  be  hrowjht  6acA;." — {Erdmann  and  others).  "Tne  man  whom  thou
seekest,"  etc.  This  is  a  very  obscure  phrase,  but  many  expositors  understand  it  to  mean — "  the
removal  of  David  is  tantamount  to  the  return  of  all  the  people  to  thee."

Ver.  7.     "  At  this  time."     "  His  former  advice  was  good  (chap.  xvi.  21),  but  not  this."

Ver.  8.     **  Will  not  lodge,"  etc.     So  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  surprise  and  slay  him,  as

Ahithophel  suggests.

Ver.  9  "  Son^e  of  them  be  overthrown,"  etc.  Hushai  suggests  that  David,  from  his  hiding
place  will  surprise  and  defeat  Absalom's  followers.  "  It  is  likely  that  Absalom  was  not  a  man
of  courage,  and  Hushai,  knowing  this,  adroitly  magnified  the  terror  of  the  prowess  of  David  and
his  men."     (Biblical  Commentary).

Ver.  11.  "  Thine  own  person."  Hushai  insinuates  that  Ahithophel  by  his  counsel  had
been  indulging  in  an  egotistical  vaunting.  Ahithophel  had  said,  "  /  will  arise  ;  /  will  come
upon  him,"  etc.  ;  and  he  insinuates  also  that  Aliithophel  had  been  desirous  of  robbing  Absalom
of  the  glory  of  the  victory  over  David,  and  of  assuming  it  to  himself.  And  thus  Hushai
practises  on  Absalom's  vain  glory  and  self  love.     (  Wordsworth).

Ver.  12.  **As  the  dew."  "This  figure,  together  with  that  of  the  sand,  fitly  sets  forth  the
swift  and  quiet  settling  of  the  huge  host  upon  the  enemy.  And  with  this  accords  perfectly  the
statement  of  the  success  of  the  attack.**     {Erdmunn).

Ver  13.  "  Draw  It  into  the  river."  A  bold  hyperbole,  designed  to  produce  a  momentary
effect

871


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  ii.


Ver.  14.  "  The  Lord  had  appointed,"  etc.  •'  All  that  Hushai  had  said  about  the  bravery
and  heroism  of  David  and  his  foUovi^ers  was  well  founded.  The  deception  lay  in  the  assumption
that  all  the  people  from  Dan  to  Beersheba  would  crowd  around  Absalom  as  one  man  ;  whereas
it  might  easily  be  foreseen  that  after  the  first  excitement  of  the  revolution  was  over,  and  greater
calmness  ensued,  a  large  part  of  the  nation  and  army  would  gather  around  David.  But  such  a
possibility  as  this  never  entered  into  the  minds  of  Ahithophel  and  his  supporters.  It  was  in
this  that  the  Divine  sentence  was  seen."     {Keil.)

Ver.  16.  "The  plains,"  Kather,  the /o?-cZs  ov  ferries.  "Lest  the  king,"  etc.  Lit.,  lest
there  he  a  swallowing  up.  ''  Either  destruction  to  the  king,  it  will  fall  upon  him,  or,  if  we  supply
the  subject  from  the  previous  clause,  that  it  (the  transit)  may  not  be  swallowed  up  or  cut  off
from  the  king."     (Ked.)

Ver.  17.  "En-rogel."  Or  *'  Fuller's  fountain.**  Many  identify  this  with  the  modern  foun-
tain of  Job,  or  Nehemiah,  situated  at  the  junction  of  the  Valleys  of  Kedron  and  Hinnon,  but
Jdsephus  describe-  the  incident  recorded  in  1  Kings  i.  9,  as  taking  place  in  the  royal  ganlen,  and
Dr.  Bonar  identifies  En-rogel  with  the  present  "  Fountain  of  the  Virgin,"  the  perennial  source
from  which  the  pool  of  Siloam  is  supplied.  Among  other  arguments  in  favour  of  this  view  he
remarks  that  the  fountain  of  Job  is  a  well  and  not  a  spring,  and  that  it  is  too  far  off  from
Jerusalem  and  from  the  road  over  Olivet  to  Jordan  and  too  much  in  view  of  the  city  to  meet
the  requirements  of  this  chapter.  Mr.  Grove  {Biblical  Dictionary)  adds  to  these  considerations
the  fact  that  the  Fountain  of  the  Virgin  is  still  the  great  resort  of  the  women  of  Jerusalem
for  washing  and  treading  their  clothes,  and  that  Jlogel  is  generally  held  to  be  derived  from
the  Hebrew  Eaf/el  to  tread.  "  Wench."  Hebrew,  the  maid  servant,  one  belonging  to  the  high
priest's  household.

Ver.  18.  "A  well."  "A  cistern,  then  empty.  It  seems  to  have  been  summer  time.**
{Wordsworth.)

Ver.  19.  "  The  woman."  The  man's  wife.  "  Ground  corn."  Groats  or  peeled  barley.
The  article  before  the  noun  indicates  that  she  was  occupied  at  the  time  with  the  grain.
Josephus  says  she  laid  fleeces  of  wool  over  the  men.

Ver.  21.  "The  water,*' i.e.,  the  Jordan.  "The  circumstances  of  that  distressing  flight,
aggravated  by  the  lone  hour  of  midnight,  and  the  roar  of  the  numerous  cataracts  of  the  Jordan,
aie  gra]>hically  depicted  in  Psalms  xlii.  and  xliii.,  which,  although  bearing  the  name  of  the
sons  of  Korah,  represent  vividly  and  fully  the  feelings  of  the  disconsolate  but  pious  monarch."
{Jamieson.)    "Mahanaim."     (See  on  chap.  ii.  8.)     "Frobably  a  fortified  city."     [Ke'd.)

Ver.  25.  "An  Israelite."  Rather,  as  in  1  Chron.  ii.  17,  an  Tshmaelite.  He  was  an
illegitimate  son.  "  Fi'om  the  description  here  given  of  Abigail  as  a  daughter  of  Nahash  and
sister  of  Zeruiah,  not  of  David,  some  of  the  earlier  commentators  have  very  justly  concluded
that  Abigail  and  Zeruiah  were  only  step-sisters  of  David,  i.e.,  daughters  of  his  mother  by
Nahash  and  not  by  Jesse."  (Keil).  Otherwise  we  must  either  take  Nahash  as  a  woman's  name
or  as  another  name  for  David's  father.

Ver.  27.  "  Shobi."  "  Possibly  a  son  of  Nahash,  the  deceased  king  of  the  Ammonites,  and
brother  of  Hanun,  who  was  defeated  by  David  (chap.  x.  1),  and  one  of  those  to  whom  David
had  shown  kindness  when  Rabbah  was  taken."  (Keil).  "  Machir."  (See  chap.  ix.  4.)
*'  Rogelini."     Only  mentioned  here  and  in  chap,  xix.  32,  and  otherwise  unknown.

Ver.  28.     "  Basons."     Metal  vessels  for  cooking.

Ver.  29.  "  Butter."  "  Rather;  curdled  milk,  which  being  mixed  with  the  honey,  forms  a
light  and  refreshing  beverage."  (Song  Sol.  i v.  11).  {Jamieson).  *•  Cheese  of  kine."  "Slices
of  coagulated  milk."    (Jamieson).


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PAFAGFAPH.~-V«rsa  1-24.

The  Death  of  Ahithophel.

The  account  given  here  of  Ahithophel  is  very  brief,  and  is  a  record  of  only  a
few  weeks  of  his  life,  yet  it  is  enough  to  enable  us  to  see  what  manner  of  man
he  was.  He  exhibits  in  a  large  degree  three  characteristics  found  in  most  god-
less men — in  men  who  are  not  governed  by  a  desire  to  please  God — who  are,  in
iiitt,  so  far  as  it  is  possible,  a  law  unto  themselves.
372


ciiAi'.  XVII.  llOiMlLETlC  COMMENTAR  Y:    SAMUEL.


I.  They  are  fickle  men.  If  self-interest  be  the  guiding  prmciple  of  a  man's
life,  even  his  most  intimate  acquaintance  can  never  be  quite  certain  what  his
next  step  in  life  may  be.  For  a  man  who  makes  his  temporal  well-being  the
pole-star  of  life  will  not  be  sure  long  together  which  is  the  road  to  it.  What
may  seem  expedient  to-day  may  appear  inexpedient  to-morrow,  and  lie  will  often
be  found  giving  u])  tlie  pursuit  of  one  prize  to  follow  after  another  which  looks
more  tempting.  The  downward  road  is  not  only  broad,  but  it  has  many  by-
paths and  windings,  so  that  one  never  knows  exactly  where  to  find  him  who  walks
in  it.  Only  the  man  who  follows  after  righteousness — who  takes  God  and  his
conscience  for  his  guides,  can  be  safely  trusted  in  as  unchangeable  in  the  great
purpose  and  direction  of  his  life.  Ahithophel  had  been  implicitly  trusted  by
David,  and  there  had  doubtless  been  a  time  when  it  would  have  seemed  impossible
to  others  and  perhaps  to  himself  that  he  should  even  be  found  among  the  king's
enemies.  But  circumstances  had  changed,  and  Ahithophel  had  changed  his
front  with  them.

II.  They  are  proud  men.  This  sin  is,  perhaps,  at  the  root  of  all  ungodliness,
for  it  was  tlie  sin  of  the  angels  that  kept  not  their  first  estate  and  "  is,"  says
Thomas  Adams,  '*  the  first  thing  that  lives  and  the  last  that  dies  in  us."  In
some  lorm  or  other  it  is  a  characteristic  of  all  ungodly  souls,  leading  them,  as  it
did  Ahithophel,  to  be  mortified  at  any  depreciation  of  themselves  and  their
doings,  and  oftentimes  hurrying  them  on  to  some  desperate  deed  of  wickedness.
While  their  wishes  are  followed  and  their  advice  sought  before  all  others,  they
are  content  and  active,  but  as  soon  as  they  meet  with  a  check  they  are  driven
by  conflicting  passions  like  a  vessel  struck  by  cross  seas,  and  like  it,  shipwreck  is
often  the  end.  Like  every  other  form  of  ungodliness,  pride  is  a  foolish  passion
which  recoils  upon  him  who  gives  it  the  mastery  over  him.  The  counsel  of
Ahithophel  had  hitherto  been  as  the  oracle  of  God,  first  to  David  and  then
to  Absalom,  but  a  little  reflection  might  have  shown  him  that  his  present
master  was,  like  himself,  governed  by  no  sense  of  duty  or  motives  of  gratitude,
and  was  not  likely  to  be  more  true  to  him  than  he  himself  had  been  to  David.
It  was  then  very  unlikely  that  Absalom  would  give  him  unlimited  control  over
the  rebellion  any  longer  than  his  supposed  interest  was  served  by  it.  This  is
the  way  of  the  world,  and  he  who  does  not  take  it  into  account  in  the  shaping
of  his  life  i&  as  unwise  a  man  as  he  who  puts  out  to  sea  expecting  no  contrary
winds.  But  it  is  only  in  the  service  of  the  world  that  pride  can  be  gratified  at
all ;  there  is  no  place  for  it  in  the  service  of  God.  Pride,  then,  in  all  cases,  as
in  the  one  before  us,  "  goeth  before  destruction  " — the  destruction  of  the  proud
man's  schemes  and  sometimes  of  himself.

III.  They  are  cowardly  men.  What  a  despicable  exodus  from  the  world
does  Ahithophel  make  !  He  is  afraid  to  face  the  consequences  of  his  own
actions.  Probably  the  rebellion  would  never  have  gone  to  the  length  which  it
did  if  Ahithophel  had  not  been  associated  with  it,  and  now,  at  the  most  critical
point  he  leaves  it  to  the  direction  of  others,  because  he  foresees  its  defeat.
How  different  is  the  attitude  of  a  man  who  embarks  in  an  enterprise  from  a
godly  motive  !  He  knows  that  he  is  not  responsible  for  its  success  or  failure,
but  only  for  his  own  faithfulness  unto  the  end,  and  as  he  has  not  undertaken
the  cause  to  promote  his  own  ends  or  gratify  personal  ambition,  his  own  fate  is
the  last  thing  that  he  thiidcs  about.  This  enables  him  to  meet  reverses  with
fortitude  and  to  be  defeated  without  being  disgraced.  But  those  who  are
prompted  by  Ahithophel's  motives  find  themselves  in  the  day  of  adversity
destitute  of  that  sustaining  principle  without  which  there  can  be  no  true  and
lasting  courage,  and  often  close  very  ignominiously  a  career  which  was  once
influential  and  prosperous.

373


UOMILETW  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.  book  ii.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  5.     It  was  not  unwise  in  Ab-  wliab  they  have  in    their  breasts  ! —

saloin  to  seek  the  advice  of  another  Bp.  Hall.

experienced  counsellor  also  (Prov.  xxiv.  This  is  tlie  first   recorded   case   of

6)  ;  his  fault  was  that  he  did  not  know  deliberate  suicide.    Saul,  alread}-  mort-

vzliich  advice  to  follow,  and  was  misled  ally  wounded  on  the  battle-field,  fell

by  high  sounding  and  flattering  words,  upon  bis  sword,  but  this  is  the  earliest

In  choosing  couns'ellors,  and  in  judging  instance  in  history  of  premeditated  sell-

of  their  counsel,  lies  great  part  of  the  murder.    Perhaps  there  was  a  mingling

wis(hiin  of  life. — Translator  of  Langes  of  remorse  with  those  other  emotions

Commentary.  of  pride.     He  had   left  a  master  who

loved  and  valued  him,  who,  indeed,

Ver.  23.  What  a  mixture  do  we  regarded  him  as  his  equal  and  guide,
find  here  of  wisdom  and  madness!  and  he  had  transferred  his  services  to
Ahithophel  will  needs  hang  himself;  one  who,  as  he  now  discovered,  had  not
there  is  madness  :  he  will  yet  set  his  the  wisdom  to  a])preciate  his  worth,
house  in  order  ;  there  is  an  act  of  wis-  but  preferred  the  gaudy  glitter  of
dom.  And  could  it  be  possible  that  empty  rhetoric  to  the  substantial  wis-
he,  who  was  so  wise  as  to  set  his  house  dom  of  unadorned  speech.  This  con-
in  order,  should  be  so  mad  as  to  hang  trast,  thus  forced  upon  him,  might
hiuiself  ?  that  he  should  be  careful  to  awaken  his  conscience  to  the  value  of
order  his  house,  who  regarded  not  to  the  friendship  which  he  had  forfeited
order  his  impotent  passions?  that  he  when  he  turned  against  David,  until  at
should  care  for  his  house  who  cared  length  remorse  and  shame  so  over-
not  for  either  body  or  soul?  How  whelmed  him,  that,  like  a  deeper
vain  it  is  for  a  man  to  be  wise,  if  traitor,  of  whom  he  was  only  the
he  be  not  wise  in  God  !  How  pre-  feeble  prototype,  he  could  not  endure
posterous  are  the  cares  of  idle  world-  life,  and  hurried  himself  into  eternity,
lings,  that  prefer  all  other  things  to  It  never  occurred  to  him  to  ask,  "  If  I
themselves,  and,  while  they  look  at  cannot  face  David,  how  shall  I  look
what  they  have  in  their  coffers,  forget  upon  Jehovah  ?  " — Dr.  Taylor,

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. —Verses  25-29.

David  at  Mahanaim.

I.  That  help  is  the  most  effectual  which  is  most  fitted  to  supply  the
present  need.  Although  the  seat  of  David's  distress  at  this  time  was  in  the
mind  rather  than  in  the  body,  the  goodwill  of  his  friends  in  Gilead  could  have
been  expressed  in  no  more  acceptable  manner  at  this  moment  than  by  giving  to
him  and  his  followers  food  and  the  means  of  bodily  rest.  The  events  of  the
past  day  must  have  told  greatly  upon  David's  body,  and  he,  in  common  with
the  most  ordinary  man,  must  sometimes  submit  to  be  at  the  mercy  of  his  animal
organism.  He  was  at  this  moment  most  likely  incapable  of  appreciating  any-
thing of  a  spiritual  nature  so  highly  as  this  kindly  provision  for  his  material
wants.  That  is  the  true  and  real  sympathy  which  discerns  the  most  pressing
need  of  the  present  moment,  and  hastens  to  supply  it  to  the  best  of  its  ability.
For  those  wrung  with  the  deepest  anguish  of  soul  cannot  ignore  the  demands  oi
the  body,  and  solace  to  a  wounded  spirit  som<^times  enters  by  this  channel.
When  Elijah,  in  bitterness  of  soul,  lay  down  in  the  wilderness  and  prayed  for
death,  the  first  step  which  God  took  to  restore  his  spiritual  strength  was  to
provide  food  for  his  body  (1  Kings  xix.  6-8).  The  goodwill,  also,  which  is
expressed  by  such  a  ministration,  is  a  direct  balm  to  a  soul  in  sorrow.
374


CHAP.  xvii.  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


II.  Even  self-love  should  prompt  men  to  a  generous  treatment  of  those
beneath  them.  The  reversals  of  position  which  are  continually  taking  place  in
hiuDan  life  ought  to  teach  men  wisiloni  in  this  matter.  Human  beings  are
continually  changing  places,  the  servant  becomes  the  master,  and  he  who  rules
to-day  may  soon  be  at  the  mercy  of  those  whom  In*  now  commands.  When
David  set  the  crown  of  Ammon  upon  his  own  hcail  (chap.  xii.  30)  it  did  not
seem  likely  that  in  a  few  years  he  would  be  a  fugitive  from  his  kingdom  and
indebted  to  the  good  offices  of  an  Ammonite  prince.  But  this  had  now  come  to
pass,  and  any  kindness  whicli  he  then  showed  to  those  whom  he  conquered  was
now  returned  with  interest,  or,  if  he  had  upon  that  occasion  been  unduly  harsh,
the  magnanimity  of  Nahash  must  have  smitten  him  with  remorse.  If  we  would
in  adversity  receive  the  favours  of  others  without  self-reproach  we  must  beware
lest  in  prosperity  we  forget  the  claims  of  those  over  whom  for  a  time  God  has
exalted  us.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

The  same  God  that  raised  enmity  to  It  has  been  conjectured  with  much
David  from  his  own  loins,  procured  probability  that  as  the  first  sleep  of
him  favour  from  foreigners  :  strangers  that  evening  was  commemorated  in
shall  relieve  him,  whom  his  own  sou  the  fourth  Psalm,  so  in  the  third  is
persecutes  :  here  is  not  a  loss,  but  an  expressed  the  feeling  of  David's  thank-
exchange  of  love.  Had  Absalom  been  fulness  at  the  final  close  of  those
a  son  of  Ammon,  and  Shobi  a  son  of  twenty-four  hours,  of  which  every
David,  David  had  found  no  cause  of  detail  has  been  handed  down,  as  if
complaint.  If  God  takes  with  one  with  the  consciousness  of  their  impor-
hand,  he  gives  with  another;  while  tance  at  the  time.  He  had  "  laid  him
that  divine  bounty  serves  us  in  good  down  in  peace"  that  night  and  slept;
meat,  though  not  in  our  dishes,  we  have  for  in  that  great  defection  of  man
good  reason  to  be  thankful.  No  sooner  *' the  Lord  alone  had  caused  him  to
is  David  come  to  Mahanaim,  than  Bar-  dwell  in  safety."  The  tradition  of  the
zillai,  Machir,  and  8hobi,  refresh  him  Septuagint  ascribes  the  143rd  Psalm
with  provisions.  Who  ever  saw  any  to  the  time  "when  his  son  was  pur-
cliild  of  God  left  utterly  destitute  ?  suing  him."  Some  at  least  of  its
Whosoever  be  the  messenger  of  our  contents  might  well  belong  to  that
aid,  we  know  whence  he  comes  :  night  (verses  2,  8).  There  is  another
heaven  shall  want  power,  and  earth  group  of  Psalms,  the  41st,  the  55th,
means,  before  any  of  the  household  of  the  69th,  and  the  lOOth,  in  which  a
faith  shall  want  maintenance. — Up.  long  popular  belief  has  seen  an  ampli-
l^all.  fication  of  David's  bitter  cry,  "  0  Lord,

The  faithfulness  of  human  love  is  turn  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel  into

not  only  the  co^iy,  but  also  the  means  foolishness."      Many   of  the   circum-

and    instrument  of  the   Divine   love,  stances  agree.     The  dreadful  impreca-

granted  to    those   who   bow    humhly  tions  in  these  Psalms — unequalled  for

beneath  God's  hand  and  wholly  trust  vehemence  in  any  other  part   of  the

Him.  —  Lange's  Commentary.  sacred  writings — correspond  with  the

David  was  received  with  kindness  in  passion   of  David's    own   expressions.

tlie  land   of  Gilead,    on   the   east   of  The    greatness,    too,    of    Ahithoi)hel

Jordan,  at  a  time  when  he  was  driven  by  himself  in  the  history  is  worthy  of  the

his  own  son  out  of  his  own  capital,  Jeru-  im])ortance   ascribed  to  the  object  of

salem,  in  his  own  tribe.     The  Jews  re-  those      awful      maledictions.        That

jected    Christ,    but    the    gospel    was  oracular     wisdom     which     made     his

gladly  received   by  Samaritans   (Acts  house  a  kind  of  shrine  (chap.  xv.  31)

viii.  4-6)  and  by  the  Gentiles  (Acts  seems  to  move  the  spirit  of  the  sacred

xiii.  46-48;  xxviii.  28). —  Wordsworth,  writer  with  an  involuntary  admiration.

375


nOMlLETlG   COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.  book  ii.


Everywiiere  he  is  treated  with  a  touch  whom  the  religious  sentiment  of  man-

of  awful   reverence.       When   he  dies,  kind  has  placed  under  its  ban.     When

the  interest  of  the  plot  ceases,  and  his  "  he  hanged  himself,   and  died"   he

death  is  given  with  an  awful  grandeur,  was  buried,   not  like  an  excommuni-

quite  unlike  tlie  mixture  of  the  terrible  cated   outcast,    but   like   a  venerable

and  the  contemptible  which  has  some-  Patriarch    '  in    the   sepulchre   of    his

times  gathered  round  the  end  of  those  father.'  " — Stanley,


CHAPTER  XVIII.

Crittoal  and  Expository  Notes.  Ver.  1.  "David  numbered,"  etc.  "The  hardy
mountaineers  of  Gilead  came  in  great  numbers  at  the  call  of  their  chieftains." — {Jamieson.)
Josephus  says  the  army  numbered  about  4000.

Ver.  6.  The  situation  of  this  battle-ground  is  much  disputed.  Erdmann  thinks  the  name  can
be  understood  only  of  the  forest  covering  the  mountains  of  Ephraim  mentioned  in  Josh.  xvii.
15-18,  and  Keil  agrees  with  him  ;  but  against  this  view  the  majority  of  writers  on  the  subject
urge  the  statement  that  Absalom  encamped  in  Gilead  (chap,  xvii.  'iQ.),  and  the  fact  that  the
army  returned  to  Mahanaim  after  the  battle  (chap.  xix.  3,  1.")).  The  expression  in  verse  3,  "  that
thou  succour  us  out  of  the  city  "  is  also  strongly  in  favour  of  the  assumption  that  the  battle  took
place  in  (xilead.  But  if  so,  there  is  no  satisfactory  answer  to  the  questi<»n  why  the  site  bore  this
designation.  Mr.  Groves  suggests  {Blh.  Dtct.)  that  the  forest  may  have  been  so  called  after  this
battle  on  account  of  the  conspicuous  part  which  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  probably  took  in  the
rebelli(m.  Grotiiis  suggests  that  the  name  was  derived  from  the  slaughter  of  the  Ephrainiites  by
Jephthah  in  the  neigh l:)ourhood  (Juiiges  xii.  1-3),  and  Dean  Stanley  and  others,  that  there  was  a
settlement  of  Ephraim  there  in  connection  with  the  neighbouring  brother  tribe  of  Manasseh.

Ver  7.  "  People  of  Israel."  "  This  designation,  together  with  the  immense  slaughter
afterwards,  shows  the  large  extent  to  which  the  people  were  enlisted  in  this  unhappy  civil
contest." — (Jameison.)  *' Twenty  thousand  men."  It  is  commonly  supposed  that  Ab.salom's
army  was  far  larger  than  David's.  ...  A  great  loss,  yet  not  improbable  under  the  circum-
stances. The  victory  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  superior  organisation  of  David's  troops  and
the  superior  generalship  of  his  army-leaders." — (Translator  ofLanges  Commentary.)

Ver.  8.  "  The  wood  devoured."  "  Most  likely  the  woody  region  was  full  of  ravines,
precipices,  and  marshes,  into  which  the  flying  foe  was  pursued,  and  where  so  many  perished." —
{Keil).

Ver.  9.  "  Met."  Rather,  Came  upon,  found  himself  among,  "  A  mule."  Lit.  "  upon  the
mule."  Josephus  says  that  it  was  the  king's  mule.  Compare  1  Kings  i.  33,  38,  44,  where  tlie
riding  upon  the  king's  mule  is  represented  as  an  act  of  royal  authority. — (Wordsworth).
"  Oak."  "  Terebinth.'''  "  Probably  Quercus  ^(jilope,  Valonia  Oak,  for  which  Gilead  and  Bashan
were  famous." — Jameison.  "  Caught  hold."  Lit.,  madx  itself  fust  in.  There  is  no  mention
made  here  of  the  hair  of  Absalom  being  the  cause  of  his  entanglement.  That  would  be  covered
by  his  helmet.

Ver.  11.  "A  girdle."  "A  girdle,  curiously  and  richly  wrought,  was  among  the  ancient
Hebrews  a  mark  of  honour,  and  sometimes  bestowed  as  a  reward  of  military  merit."    (Jamieson.)

Ver.  13.  "Otherwise,"  etc.  E-ather,  "  Or,  had  I  dealt  deceitfully  against  his  life,  i.e.,  have
wrought  falsehood  by  killing  him,  inasmuch  as  I  should  then  have  acted  against  the  express
prohibition  of  tiie  kin-.  The  words,  '  and  nothing  is  hid  from  the  king^^  form  a  parenthesis  ;
the  apo-dosis  begins  with,  *  and  thou.'  "     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  14.  "  Darts."  The  Hebrew  word  means  a  sharp,  wooden  staff.  "  This  explains  the
reason  for  his  taking  three,  whereas  one  javelin  or  dart  would  have  been  sufficient  ;  and  also  the
fact  that  Absalom  was  not  slain,  notwithstanding  their  being  thrust  at  his  heart.  The  last
clause  of  this  verse  belongs  to  what  follows  : — "  Still  living  in  the  midst  of  the  terebinth,  ten  young
men,"  etc.    (Keil. J

Ver.  17.  "Laid."  Rather,  threw.  "The  people  of  the  East  indicate  their  detestation  of
the  memory  of  an  infamous  person  by  throwing  stones  at  the  place  where  he  is  buried.     The

376


CHAP.  xvTii.  nOMlLETIG  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.

heap  is  increased  by  the  gradual  accumtilatioti  of  stones  which  passers-by  add  to  it."    {Jamieson.)
(See  also,  Joshua  viii.  26,  29).     *'  All  Israel."     Absalom's  army.

Ver.  18.  "The  king's  dale."  The  valley  of  the  Kidron,  or  Jehoshaphat,  so  called  from
the  events  recorded  in  Gen.  xiv.  17.  "No  son."  Those  mentioned  in  chap.  xiv.  27  must  have
died,  or  were  born  after  the  erection  of  the  pillar.  "Absalom's  place."  L^t.,  liand,  that
which  pointed  him  out.     "  And  perhaps,  also,  as  being  his  handiwork."     (  Wordsworth.)

Ver.  21.  "  Cushl."  It  is  imcertain  whether  this  is  a  proper  name  for  an  Israelite,  or  whether
it  signifies  a  descendant  of  Cush.  "  The  form  of  the  name  rather  favours  the  latter  view,  in
which  case  it  would  sug^gtst  the  idea  of  a  Moorish  slave  in  the  service  of  Joab."  ( Keil.)  "  He
sent  an  Ethiopian,  thinking  it  small  damage  if  he  received  hurt  of  the  king."     (Grotius.)

Ver.  22.  "  No  tidings  ready."  "  The  messacje  is  not  a  reward — hrinrjinij  one.''''  {Erdmann.)
"  Thou  wilt  not  carry  a  good  message."  {Luther.)  "  Thou  hast  not  idings  sufficient"  that  is—
"  The  Cushite  has  already  carried  the  news."    (Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  23.  *'  The  plain."  The  Jordan  valley.  Those  who  contend  that  the  battle  was  fought
on  ike  west  of  the  Jordan,  think  that  this  statement  confirms  their  view.  But  those  who  favour
the  general  opinion,  contend  that  if  the  battle  were  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  river,  Ahimaaz
might  still  have  found  a  quicker  way  to  Mahanaim  by  way  of  the  Jordan  valley  ;  and  that  the
expression  intimates  that  Cushi  did  not  take  that  route  which  he  would  have  done,  had  he  been
on  the  west  of  Jordan,

Ver.  24.  "  The  two  gates."  "  The  outer  and  inner  gate  of  the  fortified  city  wall,  between
which  there  was  a  small  court."     {Keil.)

Ver.  25.  "  Tidings."  "  Good  tidings.*^  If  the  army  had  been  defeated  there  would  have
been  many  as  fugitives.

Ver.  27.     "  Good  man."     One  whom  Joab  would  not  have  sent  as  a  messenger  of  evil.

Ver.  28.     "All  is  well."     Heb.  Shalom,  Peace/    The  usual  Hebrew  salutation,

Ver.  33.  "The  chamber,''  etc.  A  sequestered  part  of  the  building  to  which  a  person  can
retire  for  meditation  and  undisturbed  solitude."  {Dr.  Skaio.)  "  O  my  son."  "  To  understand
this  passionate  utterance  of  anguish,  we  must  bear  in  mind  not  only  the  excessive  tendem-  ss,  or
rather  weakness,  of  David's  paternal  affection  for  his  son,  but  also  his  anger  that  Joab  and  his
generals  should  have  paid  so  little  regard  to  his  command  to  deal  gently  with  Absalom.  With
the  king's  excitable  temperament,  this  entirely  prevented  him  from  taking  a  just  and  correct
view  of  the  crime  of  his  rebel  son,  which  merited  death,  and  of  the  penal  justice  of  God  which
had  been  manifest  in  his  destruction."     {Keil.)


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  CHAPTER,

The  Death  of  Absalom.

I.  The  wickefl  are  successful  only  until  they  have  fulfilled  God's  purposes.
Hitherto  all  Absalom's  plans  had  prospered.  Great  numbers — possibly  a  large
majority  (see  note  on  verse  7)  of  the  people  of  Israel — had  gathered  to  his
standard  ;  he  had  entered  the  capital  without  resistance  and  had  apparently
secured  an  efficient  leader  of  his  army.  So  far  he  was  allowed  to  proceed  with-
out; check,  because  he  was  the  instrument  in  God's  hand  of  executing  His
sentence  upon  David.  But  his  mission  was  now  fulfilled.  David  had  received
his  chastisement  with  becoming  submission,  and  given  full  evidence  of  his
sincere  and  hearty  repentance,  and  now  God  has  no  more  work  for  Absalom  to
do,  and  permits  so  insignificant  a  thing  as  the  branch  of  a  tree  to  seize  and
hold  him  until  he  receives  the  doom  he  deserves.  This  is  the  lot  of  all  ungodly
men.  Unwilling  to  be  wiu'kers  with  God — having  no  sympathy  with  His
desires  and  aims — they  shall  yet  unconsciously  workybr  Him,  while  they  follow
the  lead  of  their  own  unl.twful  passions.  In  this  sense  God  called  Nebuchad-
nezzar his  "servant"  (Jer.  xxv.,  9  ;  xxvii.,  6  ;  xliii.,  10)  because  while  he  was
pursuing   his   own   ambitious    designs,   he   was    unconsciously    inflicting    the

377


nOMJLETTC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  ii.


chastisement  necessary  to  Israel's  moral  restoration  ;  but  wlien  he  and  his
descendants  had  accomplished  the  work  their  power  was  given  into  other  hands.
It  is  ever  so  when  the  rulers  of  the  world  take  **  counsel  against  the  Lord  and
against  IJis  anointed*'  (Psa.  ii.) — for  a  time  all  their  plans  seem  to  prosper,  but
when  they  have  fulfilled  the  counsel  of  the  most  Higii,  the  word  goes  forth  : —
''Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no  further ;  and  here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be
stayed."  (Job  xxxviii.  11.)

II.  There  are  depths  of  human  affection  which  no  ingratitude  can  exhaust.
The  strength  of  human  love  is  measured  by  the  demands  made  upon  it.  We
cannot  certify  that  the  well  is  deep  from  which  we  only  draw  a  few  buckets  of
water,  but  if  it  yields  abundantly  after  an  unusual  demand  has  been  made
upon  it,  we  know  certainly  that  it  must  be  fed  from  an  almost  inexhaustible  source.
There  is  an  ordinary  natural  affection  whicli  will  bear  an  ordinary  strain,
but  gives  way  under  the  pressure  of  great  unkindness  or  even  neglect.  But,
as  in  the  case  of  David,  there  is  a  human  love  so  strong  and  deep  that  no
cruelty  can  dry  it  up  or  even  lessen  its  intensity.  If  Absalom  had  been
David's  most  dutiful  son  he  could  have  scarcely  uttered  a  more  pathetic
lament  over  him  ;  although  he  had  received  at  his  hands  as  much  dishonour
and  insult  as  it  was  ])ossible  for  one  man  to  offer  to  another,  the  father's
heart  still  acknowledges  the  tie  between  them  and  first  tries  to  save  the
traitor's  life  and  then  bitterly  mourns  the  failure  of  his  effort.  Perhaps  no
man  could  thus  retain  his  tenderness  towards  an  erring  child  unless  he  had
himself  been  made  sensible  of  the  love  of  the  Divine  Father  towards  himself,  a
deep  consciousness  of  our  own  ingratitude  to  God  and  of  His  infinite  patience
and  mercy  to  us  must  make  us  long-suffering  and  pitiful,  and  even  loving  towards
those  who  sin  against  us.  This  sense  of  the  love  of  God  is  the  living  spring
whence  must  flow  unfailing  springs  of  tenderness  towards  all  men,  and  especially
towards  those  related  to  us  by  natural  ties,  and  streams  so  fed  are  not  dried  up
by  tlieir  wrong-doing.  David's  love,  we  know,  was  fed  by  such  a  fountain,  and
hence  its  depth  and  strength.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.  4.  So  meekly  doth  David  submit  Gilead  ;  it  was  wise  in  him  to  make

himself  to  the  will  of  his  men.     Afilic-  Mahanaini    his  head-quarters  ;  it  was

tion  and  meekness  grow  both  on  the  wise,  as  we  shall  by  and  bye  see  to

same  root  in  a  holy  tongue. — Irapp.  have  a  wood  in  the  neighbourhood  of

the  battle-field  ;  and  it  was  wise  too,

Vers.  1-4.  Whatever  fears  of  Divine  to  make  the  arrangements  that  were
desertion  might  occasionally  darken  actually  adopted,  in  expectation  of  the
the  soul  of  David,  between  the  day  of  enemy's  attack.  ...  It  is  instructive
his  flight  and  the  battle,  it  is  certain  to  mark  this  ;  because  there  is  a  lurk-
that  these  visitations  of  alarm  did  not  ing  feeling  in  the  minds  of  some,  that
restrain  him  from  prayer.  .  .  .  The  it  is  not  so  proper  to  pray  for  wis(l()m
immediate  answer  to  prayer,  in  the  as  for  other  and  more  spiritual  gifts.
present  emergency,  consisted  to  a  large  And  yet  it  is  very  certain  that  sound
extent  in  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  discretion  is  one  of  the  gifts  we  are
counsel  poured  out  upon  David  and  most  specially  invited  to  ask,  and
his  friends.  Every  step  they  took  was  which  believers  through  the  merits  of
taken  with  prudence,  while  every  move-  Christ,  may  most  certainly  expect. —
ment  of  their  o[)pnnents  was  a  blunder.  Blaikie.
It  was  wise  in  David,  as  we  have  already

Been,  to  cross  the  Jordan  and  retire  to  Vers.  4-8.     Easy  gained,  easy  lost.
3"8


CHAP.  XVIII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


Al>S!il()in's  example  shows  that.  And
to-day  also,  in  great  as  in  small  things,
how  can  it  be  otherwise  ? — Schlier,

Ver.  10.  When  the  honr  of  Absa-
loms's  calamities  arrived  it  found  him
witliout  a  single  friend  !  Even  Raul
had  his  armour-bearer  at  his  side  when
he  fled  over  the  mountains  of  Gilboa  ;
but  not  an  armour-bearer,  not  a
servant,  not  a  friend,  not  a  single
human  being  attended  Absalom  as  lie
hastened  from  the  battle-field.  It
could  hardly  be  that  he  was  last  of  all
his  army.  Riding  on  a  mule,  he  must
have  made  more  speed  than  most.
Many  of  those  who  flocked  to  his
standard  must  have  passed  him  as  he
hung  with  his  hair  entangled  in  the
prickly  oak  ;  but  not  one  would  spare
the  time  to  help  him  :  intent  on
saving  himself,  each  one  left  him  to
his  fate.  The  world  has  seldom
witnessed  a  more  striking  instance  of
retribution  than  in  the  fate  of
Absalom.  As  Saul  had  destroyed  all
the  wizards  in  the  land,  and  could
hardly  find  one  when  he  desired  their
help ;  so  Absalom  had  made  havoc  of
the  loyal  hearts  of  the  kingdom,  and
when  he  needed  a  loyal  heart  not  one
could  he  obtain.  If  he  had  secured
but  one  heart  by  honest  means,  it
would  have  served  him  in  better  stead
than  all  that  he  had  stolen. — Blaikie.

Ver.  14.  It  was  the  purpose  of  the
Lord  that  Absalom  should  perish,  and
in  the  person  of  Joab  God  found  a
fitting  instrument  for  carrying  His
purpose  into  effect.  How  often  have
we  occasion  to  remark  the  intrepid
boldness  of  the  ways  of  Providence.
The  mind  of  God  is  a  wonderful  com-
bination of  qualities;  with  a  tenderness
more  soft  than  that  of  the  most  affec-
tionate woman,  it  combines  a  courage
more  fearless  than  that  of  the  most
iron-hearted  warrior.  When  once  it
appears  to  God  that  some  dreadful
blow  is  necessary  for  the  greater  good
of  an  individual  or  the  world,  He
advances  to  strike  it  with  an  unhesi-
tating and  unshrinking  step

But  it  is  not  always  when  such  things


must  he  dorie  that  God  finds  an  instru-
ment for  doing  them,  animated  by  the
same  spirit  of  mingled  firmness  and
tenderness  as  Himself  Nay,  it  is  not
often  that  He  does  so.  Firm  men  are
not  commonly  tender  ;  tender  men
are  not  commonly  firm.  The  separa-
tion is  the  usual  result  of  human
imperfection.  The  instruments  God
has  to  employ  for  His  sterner  judg-
ments are  commonly  men  of  little
compassion,  of  firm  nerve,  and  relent-
less purpose.  Such  was  His  instrument
in  the  death  of  Absalom. — Blaikie.

Ver.  18.  So  did  Absalom  esteem
himself,  that  he  thought  it  would  be  a
wrong  to  the  world  to  want  the
memorial  of  so  goodly  a  person.  God
had  denied  him  sons  ;  how  just  it  was
that  he  should  want  a  son,  who  had
robbed  his  father  of  a  son,  who  would
have  robbed  himself  of  a  father,  his
father  of  a  kingdom  !  It  had  been
pity  so  poisonous  a  plant  should  have  *
been  fruitful  :  his  pride  shall  supply
nature  ;  he  rears  up  a  stately  pillar  in
the  king's  dale,  and  calls  it  by  his  own
name,  that  he  might  live  in  dead  stones,
who  could  not  survive  in  living  issue  ;
and  now  behold  this  curious  pile  ends
in  a  rude  heap,  which  speaks  no
language  but  the  shame  of  that  carcass
which  it  covers.  Hear  this,  ye  glorious
fools,  that  care  not  to  perpetuate  any
memory  of  yourselves  to  the  world,
but  of  ill-deserving  greatness ;  the  best
of  this  affectation  is  vanity;  the  worst,
infamy  and  dishonour  ;  whereas  the
memorial  of  the  just  shall  be  blessed  :
and  if  his  humility  shall  refuse  an
epitaph,  and  choose  to  hide  himself
under  the  bare  earth,  God  Himself
shall  engrave  his  name  upon  the  pillar
of  eternity.

Vers.  9-18.  Absalom  and  David
did  each  his  utmost,  and  showed  what
he  could  do  ;  how  bad  it  is  possible  for
a  child  to  be  to  the  best  of  fathers,
and  how  good  it  is  possible  for  a  father
to  be  to  the  worst  of  children  ;  as  if  it
were  designed  to  be  a  resemblance  of
man's  wickedness  towards  God,  and
God's  mercy  towards  man,  of  which  it

379


nO^TTLETlC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


BOOK  It.


is  h.ird  to  say  which  is  more  amazing.
— Henry.

Heaven-wide  opposites  that  cannot  he
reconciled.  I.  God's  strict  righteons7iesSy
wlieii  (he  measure  of  His  holy  wrath  is
full,  and  human  comjjns^^ion,  wheu  the
measure  of  Divine  patience  and  long-
suffering  is  full.  II.  Rude  exercise  of
power,  which  in  self-will  and  reckles-ness
destroys  a  human  life,  and  tender  con-
scientiousness,  which  fears  to  strive
against  God  by  attempts  uj)on  a  human
life.  III.  The  honour^  which  man  in
his  pride  prepares  for  himself  before
the  world,  and  the  shame,  with  which
God  punishes  such  pride.  —  Langes
Commentary.

Justly  was  he  lift  up  to  the  oak,
who  had  lift  up  himself  against  his
fatlierand  sovereign;  justly  is  he  pierced
with  darts,  who  had  pierced  his  father's
heart  with  so  many  sorrows;  justly  is
he  mangled,  who  hath  dismembered
and  divided  all  Israel ;  justly  is  he
stoned,  who  not  only  cursed,  but  pur-
sued his  own  ])arent. — Up.  Hall.

What  is  this  we  hear?  that  he,
whoso  life  Israel  valued  at  ten  thousand
of  theirs,  should  be  exchanged  with  a
traitor's:  that  a  good  king,  whose  life
was  sought,  should  wish  to  lay  it  down
for  the  preservation  of  his  murderer.
The  best  men  have  not  wont  to  be  the
least  passionate.  But  what  shall  we
say  to  that  love  of  thine,  0  Saviour,
who  hast  said  of  us  wretched  traitors,
not  ''Would  God  I  had  died  for  you  !"
but,  I  will  die,  I  do  die,  I  have  died
for  you.  0  love,  like  thj^self,  infinite,
incomprehensible,  whereat  the  angels
of  heaven  stand  yet  amazed,  where-
with thy  saints  are  ravished  ! — Dp.
hall

When  the  infant  of  Bathsheba  died,
he  could  say,  **I  shall  go  to  him;"  but
on  this  occasion  there  is  no  such  com-
forting assurance.  Absalom's  sun  had
gone  down  in  thickest  darkness  ;  no
one  ray  of  hope  remained  to  relieve
the  gloom  of  his  father's  heart ;  and
none  but  those  who  have  been  called
to  mourn  in  similar  circumstances  can
tell  how  bitter  is  a  grief  like  that.

But  worse  than  either  of  these  in-
gredients in  this  cup  of  anguish  would
380


be,  as  I  think,  the  consciousness  in
David's  heart,  that  if  he  had  himself
been  all  he  ought  to  have  been,  his  son
might  not  thus  have  perished.  Was
there  no  connection  between  his  own
great  trespass  and  Absalom's  iniquity  ?
If  he  had  been  less  foolishly  indulgent,
Absalom  might  never  have  rebelled.
Nay,  if  he  had  been  wiser,  even  after
Absalom's  fratricidal  guilt,  probably
he  had  not  stung  him  into  revolt.
Such  thoughts  and  questionings  as
these,  would,  I  doubt  not,  intensify
the  sadness  of  the  Psalmist  in  this
trying  hour;  and  it  becomes  every
parent  among  us  to  see  that  in  his
training  of  his  children,  and  in  his  life
before  them,  there  is  nothing  that  may
tend  to  ruin  them.  David  now  pro-
fesses, and  I  believe  with  truth,  to
desire  that  he  had  died  for  Absalom  ;
but  that  was  a  vain  wish.  He  ought
to  have  lived  more  for  Absalom.  He
ought,  by  his  own  character,  to  have
taught  him  to  love  holiness,  or,  at  all
events,  he  ought  to  have  seen  that
there  was  nothing  in  his  own  conduct
to  encourage  his  son  in  wickedness  or
to  provoke  him  to  wrath  ;  and  then,
though  iVbsalom  had  made  shipwreck,
he  might  have  had  the  consolation
that  he  had  done  his  utmost  to  pre-
vent such  a  catastrophe. — Taylor.

We  must  bring  David's  terrible  grief
to  the  standard  of  God's  Word,  and  try
to  apportion  to  it  in  due  measure  its
need  of  praise  and  of  blame,  l^o  begin
with  the  least  agreeable  element.  V\^e
cannot  but  be  struck  with  the  absence
of  what  had  kept  him  so  calm  in  the
climax  of  his  public  trials — the  absence
of  any  recognition  of  the  hand  of  God,
and  of  any  expression  of  submission  to
his  will.  .  .  .  His  uncontrolled
vehemence  confirms  a  former  remark,
that  in  domestic  matters,  the  Divine
will  was  not  regarded  as  his  rule  so
much  as  in  his  public  undertakings.  It
was  not  so  regarded  actively  in  con-
sidering what  ought  to  be  done,  nor
passively,  in  bearing  what  had  to  be
borne.  .  .  .  In  the  agony  of  his  private
grief  he  forgot  the  public  w^elfare  of  his
kingdom.  Noble  and  generous  though
the  wish  was — "  Would  God  I  had  died


CHAP.  XVIII.  IJOMILETTC  COMMENTARY :    SA MtlEL.


for  thee  " — it  was  not  on  public  grounds  wrong,     {a)  In  that  it  excluded  grati-

a  wish  that  could  be  justified. — Blaikie.  tude  to  his  faithful  and  brave  followers.

David  mourning  over  Absalom.     I.  (b)    In    preventing    attention    to    the

Wherein  it  was  77'^A#.     (a)  Parent  love  pressing  duties  of  his  position,     (c)  In

is  indestructible,    {b)  Absalom  was  not  causing  him  to  overlook  the  fact  that

wholly   bad,  and  his  faults  had  been  so  long  as  Absalom  lived  the  kingdom

aggravated    by    the     misconduct     of  could  have  no  peace,     (d)  In  so  far  as

others,     (c)  David  was  conscious  that  it  was  not  tenipered  by  submission  to

all  this  was  a  chastening  required  by  the   will   of  Jehovah. — Translator  of

his    own   sin.      11.    Wherein   it   was  Langes  Commentary,


CHAPTER  XIX.


Critical  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1,  Comp.  xviii.  33.  The  purpose  of  the  informant
was,  •'  it  seems,  to  explain  to  Joab  and  the  army  why  the  king  did  not  come  forth  to  greet  his
returning  victorious  warriors."     {Erdmann.)

Vers.  2,  3.  "  These  men's  hearty  'participation  in  the  sorrow  of  their  beloved  king,  for  whom
they  had  perilled  their  lives,  soon  changed  into  gloomy  dissatisfaction  at  the  fact  that  the  king,
absorbed  in  his  private  grief,  did  not  deign  to  bestow  a  look  upon  them.  The  description  of  the
manner  in  which  the  troops,  thus  dissatisfied,  returned  to  the  city;  is  pyschologically  very  fine."
(Erdmann.)

Ver.  4.  '*  Covered  his  face."  See  on  chap.  xv.  20.  "  A  loud  voice."  According  to  the
open  and  violent  mode  of  expressing  grief  common  in  the  East  (and  so  also  the  heroes  of  the
Illiad) ;  there  are  striking  illustrations  ot  this  in  the  Arabian  Wights."  {Translator  of  Lange^s
Commentary.)

Ver.  5.  "  Thou  hast  shamed,"  etc.  "  By  deceiving  their  hopes  that  thou  wouldest  rejoice  in
the  victory."    (Keil)

Ver.  6  "I  perceive,"  etc.  Joab  dissects  David's  words  of  lamentation  with  inexorable
cruelty,  and  draws  thence  with  his  intellectual  acuteness  and  the  grim  bitterness  of  his  rude
nature,  consequences  that  are  seemingly  logical,  yet  lay  far  from  David's  nature,  though  his
conduct  looked  like  what  he  was  reproached  with."   (Erdmann.)

Ver.  7.     *•  Speak  comfortably."    Lit,  SpeaJc  to  the  heart.    *'  There  will  not  tarry  one."

*'  This  tlweat,  grounded  as  it  was  on  Joab's  unbounded  popularity  with  the  army,  showed  him
to  be  a  dangerous  person  ;  and  that  circumstance,  together  with  the  violation  of  an  express  order
to  deal  gently  for  his  sake  with  Absalom,  produced  in  David's  mind  a  settled  hatred,  which  was
strongly  manifested  in  his  last  directions  to  Solomon."     {Jamieson.)

Ver.  8.  "  The  people  came,"  etc.,  i.e„  "  the  troops  marched  before  the  king,  who  (as  we
may  supply  from  the  context)  manifested  his  good  will  both  in  looks  and  words"  (Keil J.
"Israel."  "  It  is  the  other  tribes,  excepting  Judah,  that  are  meant."  {Erdmann.)  "To  his
tent,"  i.e.,  gone  home.  It  has  been  remarked  that  the  use  of  this  expression  must  have  been
handed  down  from  the  days  of  tlie  wilderness- journeyings,  when  Israel  did  actually  dwell
in  tents.

Ver.  9.  "  At  strife,"  etc.  "  The  kingdom  was  completely  disorganised.  The  sentimental
of  the  three  different  parties  are  represented  in  this  and  the  following  verse —  the  royalists,  the
adherents  of  Absalom,  who  had  been  very  numerous,  and  those  who  were  indifferent  to  the
Davidic  dynasty."     {Jamieson.)

Ver.  10.     "Why  speak  ye  not?"     "  The  people  are  re-assembled  after  their  dispersion;

their  representatives  consult  zealously  together  about  the  restoration  to  the  throne,  to  which
they  had  raised  the  insuri^^ent  Absah)m  by  the  act  of  anointing.  They  reproach  one  another  for
doing  nothing  to  restore  tiie  king.  In  their  hearts,  therefore,  they  feel  the  grievous  wrong  they
have  done  an  anointed  of  the  Lord,  as  is  shown  indirectly  by  their  words,  in  which  David's
great  deeds  and  the  terrible  misfortunes  of  the  time  just  past  are  mentioned."     {Erdm,ann.)

381


BOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y:   SAMUEL.  book  ii.


Ver.  11.  "Why  are  ye  the  last?"  "The  backwardness  of  Judah  in  the  movement  is
explained  by  the  fact  that  the  insunection  started  in  Judah,  and  Absalom  was  first  recognised
as  king  in  Jerusalem.''  (Erdmann.)  "  Conscious  that  they  had  ofiended  David,  and  fearing
Absalom's  garrison  in  Zion,  they  did  not  dare  to  recall  him."     {Cornelius  or  Lapide.)

Ver.  13.  "Captain  of  the  host,"  etc.  Very  different  opinions  are  held  concerning  this
action  of  David.  Ewald  consiilers  that  it  "was  not  only  a  wise  and  politic  act,  but  strictly  con-
sidered no  injustice  to  JoaV),  who,  long  notorious  by  his  military  roughness  had  now  shown  such
disobedience  to  the  royal  command  in  the  case  of  Ab  alom  as  could  not  be  pardoned  without
offence  to  the  royal  dignity."  On  the  other  hand  Keil  says,  *'  It  was  not  only  unwise,  but
unjust,  to  give  to  Aniasa,  the  traitor-general  of  the  rebels,  a  promise  on  oath  tliat  he  should  be
commander-in  chief  in  the  place  of  Jonb  ;  for  even  if  the  promise  was  only  given  privately  at
first,  the  fact  that  it  had  been  given  could  not  remain  a  secret  from  Joab  very  long,  and  would
be  sure  to  stir  up  his  ambition,  and  load  him  to  the  commission  of  fresh  crimes.  .  .  .  For
however  Joab  might  have  excited  Davitl's  anger  by  slaying  Absalom,  and  by  the  offensive  man-
ner in  which  he  had  reproved  the  king,  David  ought  to  have  suppressed  his  anger  in  existing
circumstances."

Ver.  14.  "The  partial  severance  of  the  kingdom  which  David  apprehended  from  the  cold-
ness and  inaction  of  Judah,  was  nearly  produced  by  the  sudden  impetuosity  of  their  zeal  in  the
cauae  of  royalty."  (Jamieson.)  "Throughout  this  narrative  the  tribal  feeling  which  never
wholly  disappeared,  is  apparent,  see  12,  chap.  xx.  4,  xvi.  8."  {Translator  of  Lunge's  Commen-
tary.)

Ver.  15.  "  To  Jordan."  From  Mahanaim  to  the  eastern  bank  of  the  river.  Oilfjal,  west
of  the  Jordan  below  Jericho.  "  The  place  consecrated  by  the  historical  associations  of  Joshua
and  of  Samuel,  Josh.  v.  9  ;  ix.  6  ;  x.  6  ;  1  Sam.  vii.  16  ;  xv.  33."     {Wordsworth.)

Ver.  16.  "  Came  down."  From  the  mountainous  table-land  into  the  Jordan  valley.**
{Erdmann.)

Ver.  17.  "  A  thousand  men."  "  To  show  what  force  he  could  raise  for  or  against  the  king."
{Jamieson.)  "  They  show  the  consideration  which  Sliiinei  enjoyed  in  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,
and  testify  that  a  change  had  taken  place  in  the  former  hostile  feeling  of  this  tribe  towards
David,  comp.  ver.  31."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  17.     "Went  over."     Kather,  "they  haded  or  pressed  over."     "Before  the  king,"

rather,  in  the  presence^  etc.     They  passed  over  to  the  eastern  bank,  probably  through  a  ford.

Ver.  18.  "A  ferry-boat."  "Probably  rafts,  which  are  still  used  on  that  part  of  the  river.
Josephus  calls  it  a  bridge  of  boats."  {Jamieson.)  "  As  he  was  come  over."  Keil,  Bunsen
and  others  refer  this  pronoun  to  David  and  read  "  as  he  (the  king)  was  about,"  etc.  Erdmann
understands  it  to  refer  to  Shimei.     Both  place  the  transaction  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  river,

Ver.  29.  "  The  house  of  Joseph."  "  The  rest  of  the  tribes  with  the  exception  of  Judah.
This  designation  of  the  tribes  that  opposed  Judah  by  the  name  of  the  leading  tribe  {Joseph.
Josh  xvi.  1)  was  as  old  as  the  jealousy  between  these  tribes  and  Judah,  which  did  not  commence
with  the  division  of  the  kingdom  but  was  simply  confirmed  thereby  into  a  permanent  distinction.
{Keil.)  "  He  might  have  employed  this  phrase  in  order  to  exculpate  his  own  tribe,  by  insinuat-
ing that  it  was  drawn  away  by  the  preponderating  influence  of  the  great  house  of  Joseph."
{Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  22.  "  Ye  sons,"  etc.  This  expression  shows  that  it  was  Joab's  proposal  also.
"Adversaries."  ''Lit.,  a  satan  (See  Numb.  xxii.  22;  comp.  Matt.  xvi.  23).  {Erdmann.)
*To-day."  David  appears  to  lay  stress  upon  this  word — to-day,  the  day  of  restoration  when  he
himself  was  receiving  tokens  of  Divine  forgiveness.  "  I  am  this  day  king."  David  will  show
mercy,  not  because  he  has  now  become  king  and  has  the  right  to  pardon,  but  because  he  sees  in
his  restoration  to  his  kingdo  m  a  proof  of  restoration  to  the  Divine  favour,  and  by  showing  favour
to  Shemei  as  his  right  will  fulfil  the  ohliyation  of  gratitude  to  the  Lord."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  24.  "Dressed  his  feet,"  etc.  Lit.,  had  not  "made  his  feet  and  his  beard,"  i.e.,  not
washed  his  feet  or  arranged  his  beard.  (See  Ezek.  xxiv.  17).  "The  Hebrews  cut  off  the  hair
on  the  upper  lip  and  cheeks,  but  in  mourning  let  it  grow  carelessly,  as  on  the  chin.  There  are
various  modes  of  trimming  the  l)eard,  but  whatever  the  mode  it  is  always  done  with  the  greatest
c.ae,  and  a  small  comb  is  usually  carried  for  the  purpose."     (^Jamieson).

Ver.  25.  "He  was  come  to  Jerusalem."  Most  modern  expositors  read  here  "  When
Jerusalem  {i.e.,  the  inhabitants  of  the  city)  came  to  meet,  etc.  So  Kiel  and  Erdmann.  A  few
change  the  proposition — when  he  was  come  from,  etc.

Ver.  26.     "  I  will  saddle,"  etc.    This  is  the  literal  rendering,  but  as  Erdmann  remarks  "  tho

382


CHAP.  XIX.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,


lame  prince  could  not  have  thought  of  going  himself  to  saddle  the  ass,  and  in  all  languages  the
expression  "  to  do  a  thing  "  is  equivalent  to  have  it  done.  It  is  therefore  better  to  translate
"  ]  will  cause  to  he  saddled.''*

Ver.  27.      "  He  slandered.'*     Mephibosheth  had  not  merely  inferred  this  from   David's

words,  and  the  tone  in  which  they  were  spoken,  but  had  certainly  found  it  out  long  ago,  since
Ziba  would  not  delay  very  long  to  put  David's  assurance,  that  all  the  possessions  of  Mephibosh-
eth should  belong  to  him,  in  force  against  his  master."  {Keii).  "An  angel,"  etc.,  i.e.,  "he  sees
all  just  as  it  really  is  "  {Kcil)  or,  "  he  knows  what  is  truth  and  right."     {Erdmann).

Ver.  29.  "  Why  spcakest  thou,"  etc.  Some  see  in  these  words  of  David  a  disbelief  in  the
explanation  of  Mephibosheth,  and  others  an  expression  of  displeasure  against  Ziba.  But  they
seem  rather  to  express  David's  vexation  at  his  former  busty  decision,  and,  at  the  same  time,  his
lack  of  courage  to  confess  himself  wholly  in  the  wrong  on  that  occasion.

Ver.  29.  "I  have  said,"  etc.  Some  expositors  think  that  David  here  goes  back  to  the  first
arrangement  mentioned  in  chap.  ix.  7-10.,  whereby  Ziba,  as  the  tiller,  would  of  course  have  an
interest  in  the  produce.  But  Keil  remarks  that  the  words  here  are  directly  at  variance  with
the  first  promise  :  "  /  will  restore  thee  all  the  land  of  Saul"  etc.  The  half-measure  here  adopted
was,  (Says  Erdmann,  "  only  a  /?a//-exculpation  of  an  innocent  man,  and  David  was  herein
probably  controlled  by  political  considerations,  being  unwilling  to  make  the  respectable  and
influential  Ziba  his  enemy."  "  Jerome  says,  that  the  later  Jews  believed  the  division  of
David's  kingdom  was  an  act  of  retributive  justice  for  the  unequal  measure  awarded  to  Mephi-
bosheth."    {Jamieson.)

Ver.  35.  "  Can  I  discern."  Perhaps  "  intellectually  too  dull  to  be  useful  as  a  counsellor."
(Erdmann)  or  simply  too  weak  in  body  to  enjoy  the  luxuries  of  a  court.

Ver.  37.     "Chimham."    According  to  Josephus,  his  son.    This  is  confirmed  by  1  Kings  ii.  7.

Ver.  40.  "Half  Israel."  "The  thousand  Benjamites  who  came  with  Shimei,  and  other
Israelites  who  dwelt  near."     (Kell  and  others).

Ver.  41.  "All  the  men,"  etc.  The  representatives  of  the  other  tribes.  This  is  generally
iinderstood  to  have  taken  place  at  Gilgal.

Ver.  42.  "  Have  we  eaten,'*  etc.  i.e.,  Have  you  reason  to  be  envious  of  us  because  we
have  enjoyed  advantages  that  yon  were  deprived  of  ?  '*     (Erdmann).

Ver.  43.  "That  our  advice,"  Both  Keil  and  Erdmann  read  here  "And  was  not  my  word
first  to  bring  hack  the  king."  From  verses  10  and  11,  it  appears  that  they  were  the  first  to  pro-
pose David's  recall.


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  I-ISJ

David's  Restoration.

I.    A  good  man  must  beware  lest  sorrow  make  him  forgetful  of  duty.

David's  deep  grief  at  the  death  of  Absalom  made  him  insensible  for  a  time  to
the  claims  of  both  God  and  man.  He  has  now  an  abundant  answer  to  his
prayer,  "  0  Lord,  turn  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel  into  foolishness,"  yet  his
distress  at  the  means  by  which  his  desire  is  accomplished  is  so  great  as  to  banish
from  his  soul  all  sense  of  gratitude  to  God.  The  death  of  the  rebel  leader  was
the  only  way  by  which  peace  could  be  restored  to  tiie  nation  and  the  throne  to
the  l<ing,  and  was  therefore  an  event  which  David  should  have  regarded  from
other  points  of  view  beside  the  [)arental  one.  But,  omitting  to  do  this,  hia
natural  grief  over  an  unworthy  child  is  allowed  to  swallow  up  other  emotions
which  should  also  have  had  a  place  in  his  soul,  and  which  would  have  made
him  more  alive  to  his  duty  to  others.  David's  fault  here  is  one  of  which  all  in
similar  circumstances  should  bew.ire.  If  we  allow  our  thoughts  to  dwell  entirely
upon  a  personal  loss,  we  shall  forget  both  our  gains  and  the  gratitude  and
service  we  owe  to  God  and  our  fellow-creatures,  and  thus  shov^  ourselves  both
self-willed  and  selfish.      Immoderate  and  absorbing  sorrow  is  a  reflection  upou

383


EOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  SAM  UEL.  book  ii.


the  dealings  of  God,  and  no  private  sorrow  can  absolve  a  man  from  his  obliga-
tions to  others,  especially  when  he  has  received  from  them  much  sympathy  and
devotion.

II.  An  ungodly  man  may  sometimes  administer  needed  rebuke  to  a  servant
of  God.  Only  men  of  very  higli  spiritual  attainments  and  well-balanced
character  behave  themselves  at  all  times  in  such  a  manner  as  to  deserve  no
reproach  from  the  ungodly.  David  was  perhaps  the  most  godly  man  of  his  age,
yet  he  well-merited  the  reproof  which  be  now  received  from  the  unprincipled
Joab.  Although  exception  may  be  taken  to  tlie  spirit  of  Joab's  words,  none
can  gain.-ay  their  truth.  It  \vas  altogether  unworthy  of  David  to  ignore,  as  he
did  at  this  time,  the  obligations  w^hich  lay  upon  him  as  the  anointed  king  of
Israel  and  the  object  of  so  much  loyal  devotion.  A  great  crisis  in  the  history
of  the  nation  had  now  arrived,  and  if  Joab  had  not  roused  him  to  action  the
consequences  might  have  been  most  disastrous.  David  showed  himself  a  true
man  by  not  refusing  to  listen  to  truth  when  spoken  in  anger ;  but,  having  brought
Joab's  accusations  to  the  bar  of  conscience,  and  found  himself  guilty,
he  forthwith  obeyed  the  call  of  duty,  although  it  came  to  him  by  so
unwelcome  a  messenger.  Herein  he  manifested  the  true  spirit  of  a  child  of
God,  who  should  ever  be  willing  to  acknowledge  himself  wrong  even  when
the  admission  is  felt  to  be  very  humiliating.  But  let  us  bear  in  mind  it  should
be  his  aim  to  be  so  watchful  as  not  to  lay  himself  open  to  such  reproof  as
David  here  merited  and  received  from  Joab.  It  was  good  neither  for  David
nor  for  Joab,  that  the  latter  should  be  able  more  than  once  to  convict  the
better  man  of  wrong,  and  it  is  probably  never  for  the  interests  of  righteousness
when  a  man  of  God  and  an  unspiritual  man  stand  in  such  a  relation  to  each
other.

III.  A  policy  founded  on  injustice  may  have  a  short-lived  success.  It  can
hardly  be  doubted  that  David's  motive  in  promoting  Amasa  was  a  political
one, — that  he  ventured  upon  so  unjust  a  measure  out  of  no  regard  for  his
late  enemy,  but  in  the  hope  of  reconciling  those  who  had  lately  followed
him  in  the  rebellion.  It  certainly  can  be  regarded  in  no  other  light  than
as  an  act  of  gross  injustice  to  Joab,  wdio  had  just  won  the  victory  which
restored  David  to  his  throne.  But,  though  it  bore  bitter  fruit  later  on,
for  the  moment  it  succeeded  in  bringing  back  the  men  of  Judah  who  had
revolted.  It  seems,  however,  impossible  that  those  who  had  been  faithful
to  him  through  all  his  trial  could  have  seen  the  promotion  of  Amasa  without  a
feeling  of  disappointment  and  mistrust.  Yet  the  immediate  result  did  not
justify  that  most  certain  truth  that  what  is  morally  wrong  can  never  he
'politically  right.  The  real  and  permanent  results  of  any  action  may  be  long  in
manifesting  themselves,  and  njay  often  seem  at  first  to  be  far  different  from
what  they  really  are,  which  shows  how  unsafe  it  is  to  make  the  apparent  success
or  failure  of  a  deed  the  standard  by  which  to  judge  of  its  morality.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Vers.    1-8.     The  sinfuhiess  of  tin-  suffering  from  all  selfishness.     2.  As

measured  grief.     I.      Wherein  it  con-  regards  our  neighbour,  in  slighting  and

sists  and  manifests  itself    1.    As  re-  violatinu  the  duties  of  love  that  we  owe

^a/'C?5  ^/^^  Zon/, in  ignoring  the  gracious  Him.      3.   As  regards  our  own  heart

gifts  which  He  sends  us  along  with  and  and  conscience,  in  reckoning  the  powers

amid  our  sufferings,  and  in  frustrating  of  spirit  andwill  by  exhausting  emotion

His  gracious  design  to  purily  us  by  and  enervating  inactivity.     II.    Ilow
884


riiAP.  XIX.


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,


it  must  be  overcome.  1.  Through  the
word  of  earnest  {uhiionitioii,  which
[lives  pain.  2.  By  ener.^ctically  rising
up  to  new  life  and  faillirul  discharge  of
the  (hi ties  of  our  cahing.  3,  By  ac-
cepting the  consohition  and  strengtli
which  come  from  above  through  the
spirit  oi  God. — Langes  Commentary.

Vers.  11-15.  Could  not  David  him-
self go  back  w  ith  the  victorious  army
he  had  with  him  in  Gilead  ?  He  could,
no  doubt ;  but — 1.  He  would  go  back
as  a  ])rince,  with  the  consent  and
unanimous  approbation  of  the  ])e(.ple,
and  not  as  a  conqueror  forcing  his  way.
He  would  restore  their  liberties  and
not  take  occasion  to  seize  them  or  en-
croach upon  them.  2.  He  would  go
back  in  peace  and  safety,  and  be  sure
that  lie  should  meet  witii  no  difhculty
or  opposition  on  his  return,  and  there-
fore would  be  well  satisfied  that  the
l)eople  were  vvell  affected  to  him  before
he  vvould  stir.  3.  He  would  go  back
in  honour  and  like  himself,  and  there-
fore would  go  back,  not  at  the  head  of
his  forces,  hut  in  the  arms  of  his  sub-
jects, for  the  prince  that  has  wisdom
and  goodness  enough  to  make  himself
his  peo})le's  darling,  without  douht
makes  a  much  better  figure  than  the
prince  that  has  strength  enough  to
make  himself  his  people's  terror.  .  .
Our  Lord  Jesus  will  rule  in  those  that
invite  Him  to  the  throne  in  their
hearts  and  not  till  He  is  invited.  He
first  bows  the  heart  and  makes  it
willing  in  the  day  of  His  power,  and
then  rules  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies
\T$3k.  ex.,  2,  3). — Henry.

Ciie  of  the    best    proofs,  it   seems
to    me,  that   David's    schooling    was


eftectua',  is  this,  that  all  his  family
griets,  his  experience  of  his  own  evil,
the  desertion  of  his  subjects,  did  not
lead  him  to  fancy  that  he  should  be
following  a  course  acceptable  to  God,
if  he  retired  to  the  deserts,  or  ceased
to  be  a  shepherd  of  Israel,  instead  of
doing  the  Work  which  was  ap])ointed
for  him.  It  shows  how  healthy  and
true  his  repentance  and  faith  were
that  he  again  set  himself  to  organise
the  people  and  to  fight  their  battles,
to  feed  them  and  rule  them  with  all
his  power  ;  when  a  religious  prudence
or  self-interest  might  have  whispered,
''  Do  thy  best  to  make  amends  )))'
services  to  God  for  the  ills  thou  hast
done  ;  save  thyself  whatever  become
of  thy  people  Israel."  These  ungodly
sugijestions,  the  like  of  which  came  as
angels  of  light  to  so  many  Christian
monarchs  in  the  middle  ages,  and  sent
them  to  do  penance  for  their  evils  and
to  seek  a  crown  of  glory  in  monasteries,
may  have  presented  tliemselves  to  the
man  after  God's  own  heart.  If  they
did,  he  proved  his  title  to  the  name  by
rejecting  them.  He  showed  that  he
Ci)uld  trust  God  to  put  him  in  the
position  that  was  best  for  him,  that  he
knew  God  did  not  put  iiim  into  the
world  to  provide  either  for  his  body  or
his  soul,  but  to  glorify  His  name  and
to  bless  His  creatures. — Maurice.

Ver.  14.  So  it  will  one  day  be
with  the  Jewish  nation,  which  is  now
serving  an  Absalom  of  their  own  will,
but  will  then  greet  the  return  of  their
true  king,  and  say,  "  Blessed  be  the
kingdom  of  our  father  David  that
Cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."
(Mark  xi.  9,  \0).— Wordsworth,


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAORAPH.— Verses  16-^0.


Shimei,  Mephibosheth,  and  Barzillai.


David  on  his  way  back  to  his  capital  exhibits  in  his  conduct  and  experience
some  of  the  penalties,  the  dangers,  and  the  blessings  of  prosperity.

I.  One  of  its  penalties.  The  man  who  had  most  bitterly  insulted  David  in
his  day  of  adversity  was  the  first  to  render  him  houjage  on  lii-  restoration  to
power.     Taking  into  account  the   change  in    David's  circumsiaac-is,   we  can

2  0  o5j


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.  book  ii.


scarcely  be  doing  Sliimei  an  injustice  if  we  assume  that  he  was  much
more  real  when  he  was  cursiui,^  and  stoning  tlie  fugitive  king  than  when
he  was  asking  pardon  at  the  feet  of  the  victorious  monarch.  It  is  one  of  the
blessings  of  adversity  that  men  then  reveal  tlieir  real  feelings  towards  us  ;  we
are  not  sought  by  the  hypocrite,  or  the  self-seeker,  when  there  is  nothing  to  be
gained  by  serving  us  or  professing  to  esteem  us.  And  on  the  other  hand,  all
who  are  prosperous  to  any  great  extent,  must  pay  the  penalty  of  sometitups
lieing  in  doubt  about  the  sincerity  of  some  of  those  who  court  their  favour
and  sound  their  praises.  The  more  exalted  the  position,  the  more  likeli-
hood there  is  of  attracting  false  friends  and  of  tinding  it  difficult  to  discern
Itetween  tlie  real  and  the  seeming  in  those  who  surround  us,  and  it  is  one  of
the  trials  which  those  in  high  places  must  always  have  to  bear.  It  meets
David  on  the  very  threshold  of  his  return  to  prosperity.

II.  One  of  its  dangers.  The  treatment  which  David  gives  to  Mephibosheth
exhibits  an  indifference  to  the  feelings  of  the  son  of  Jonathan,  and  an  amount
of  injustice  which  are  very  unworthy  of  him.  Almost  all  students  of  the  Bible
agree  in  accepting  Mephibosheth's  explanation  as  the  truth  of  the  matter — the
meekne.ss  with  which  he  submits  to  David's  decision  reminds  us  of  the  unselfish
spirit  of  his  father,  and  makes  us  feel  sure  that  he  had  been  the  victim  of  a  false
and  designing  man.  How  painful,  then,  must  have  been  the  reception  which
David  gave  him,  granting  him  no  opportunity  of  proving  his  innocence  and
fidelity,  but  dismissing  him  with  the  implication  at  least  that  he  and  his
traitorous  servant  stood  on  a  level  in  David's  estimation.  Various  motives
have  been  assigned  to  account  for  David's  unworthy  conduct  in  this
matter.  Some  think  he  acted  from  motives  of  policy  (see  critical  notes),  and
others  that  he  was  irritated  by  the  consciousness  that  he  had  been  deceived
by  Ziba,  yet  was  unwilling  to  confess  himself  wrong.  But  in  whatever  light
we  regard  his  action  we  must  find  David  guilty  of  an  arbitrary  exercise  of  rights
which  might  belong  to  him  legally,  but  which  were  no  more  morally  his  than  if
he  had  been  in  a  private  station.  If  Mephibosheth  had  had  only  the  ordinary
claim  of  a  subject,  David  could  have  had  no  moral  right  to  dispose  of  his  case  in
this  summary  manner,  and  deprive  him  of  half  his  estate  without  good  reason.
But  it  would  have  been  difficult  for  David  to  find  any  man  in  the  land  to  whom
he  owed  so  much  as  to  the  son  of  Jonathan,  and  his  obligati(m  was  not  lessened
but  increased  by  the  error  of  judgment  into  which  he  had  lately  fallen.  The
fact  that  he  had  passed  so  unjust  a  sentence  upon  him  on  the  former  occasion
made  it  his  duty  now  to  make  every  rej)aration  in  his  power,  instead  of
which  he  treats  him  with  a  haughty  indifference,  if  not  with  disdain.  This  in-
difference to  the  feelings  and  claims  of  those  whose  destinies  are  in  their  hands
is  a  sin  to  which  men  in  power  are  especially  prone  ;  when  their  deeds  are  not
liable  to  be  called  in  question  by  their  fellow  men  they  are  apt  to  act  as  though
their  will  was  the  rule  of  the  universe,  and  to  forget  that  the  higher  the  posi-
tion the  greater  the  responsibility.  David  at  this  time  seems  to  have  thus
fallen  into  this  common  temptation.

III.  One  of  its  greatest  blessings.  There  can  be  no  more  blessed  gift  of
wealth  or  power  tlian  the  ability  which  it  affords  a  man  to  show  gratitude
to  those  who  have  befriended  him  in  his  time  of  need.  It  is  always
more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,  but  it  is  a  special  joy  to  a  grate-
ful heart  to  repay  those  whose  kindness  has  cheereil  it  in  the  dark
days  of  sorrow,  and  to  show  them  that  we  know  how  to  value  the  most
precious  gift  which  one  human  creature  can  bestow  upon  another.  David
experienced  this  joy  when  he  found  himself  in  a  position  to  say  to
Barzillai,  "Whatsoever  thou  shalt  require  of  me,  that  will  I  do  unto  thee,"  and
386


CHAP.  XIX.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


we  may  be  sure  tliat  he  did  not  fail  to  fulfil  his  promise  to  the  son,  althongh
unable  to  do  so  to  the  father.  We  can  but  desire  that  he  who  rewarded
Barzillai's  fidelity  in  the  person  of  ("liinham,  had  remembered  to  repay  Jonathan's
love  by  being  generous  to  Mephihoshetli.  In  this  inconsistency  of  David —
in  this  mingling  of  dutiful  reiiiembrance  and  ungrateful  forget  fulness,  we  see
how  far  removed  are  the  best  men  from  that  symmetry  of  character  which
marked  the  Perfect  Man,  Christ  Jesus.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


Ver.  30.  It  is  just  a  soul  capable  of
such  noble  self-denial  that  feels  most
keenly  the  sting  of  any  suspicion  of  its
love  or  fidelity,  and  as  no  further
reference  is  made  to  Mephibosheth  in
the  sacred  narrative,  especially  as
David  gives  no  charge  concerning  him
to  Solomon  at  his  death  eight  years
later,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  he  did
not  long  survive  the  grief  and  pain
that  Ziba's  treachery  caused  him. —
Taylor.

Mephibosheth  thought,  perhaps,  of
the  word  of  the  law,  that  God  visits
sins  on  children  unto  the  third  and
fourth  generation. — Peter  Martyr.

Vers.  31-40.  The  picture  and  ex-
ample of  a  venerable  and  pious  old
age.  1.  Blessed  of  God,  it  devotes
the  temporal  goods  it  has  received  to
the  service  of  compassionate  brotherly
love,  far  from  all  avarice  ;  2.  Honoured
by  men,  it  desires  not  the  vain  honour
of  this  world  far  from  all  ambition  ;
3.  Near  the  grave,  it  longs  only  for
home,  far  from  all  disposition  to  find
blessedness  in  this  life ;  4.  But  as
long  as  God  grants  life,  even  with
failing  powers  it  still  serves  the  Lord
and  His  kingdom,  and  in  this  service
honours  him  by  the  devotion  even  of
its  dearest — far  from  ail  self-seeking.
— Langes  Commentary

Barzillai's  words  remind  us  of  the
influence  that  age  produces  upon  men.
I.  A  mellowness  of  heart.  There  is
a  feeling  soft  and  subdued  running
through  the  words  of  this  patriarchal
Gideonite.  Old  Time  has,  I  think,
generally  this  effect  on  the  hearts  of
men.  '*  Men,  hke  peaches  and  pears,"
says  Holmes,  '*  grow  sweet  a  little
while  before  they  begin  to  decay.     I


don't  know  what  it  is — whether  a
spontaneous  change,  mental  or  bodily,
or  whether  it  is  through  the  experience
of  the  thanklessness  of  critical  honesty,
but  it  is  a  fact  that  most  writers,
except  sour  and  unsuccessful  ones,  get
tired  of  finding  fault  at  about  the  time
they  are  beginning  to  grow  old.  At
thirty  we  are  all  trying  to  cut  our
names  in  big  letters  upon  the  wall
of  this  tenement  of  life  ;  twenty  years
later  we  have  carved  them  or  shut  up
our  jack-knives.  Then  we  are  ready
to  help  others  and  care  less  to  hinder
any,  because  nobody's  elbows  are  in
our  way.  Do  you  know  that  in  the
gradual  passage  from  maturity  to  help-
lessness the  harshest  characters  have
sometimes  a  period  in  which  they  are
gentle  and  placid  as  young  children  ?
I  have  heard  it  said,  but  I  cannot  be
sponsor  for  its  truth,  that  the  famous
chieftain,  Lochiel,  was  rocked  in  a
cradle  like  a  baby  in  his  old  age."
Time  ])roduces  upon  men. — II.  An  in-
dispositio?i  for  exertion.  It  seems
benevolently  arranged  that,  as  the
liujbs  get  feeble  and  incai)able  of  action,
the  inclination  to  exertion  decreases
too.  The  patriarch,  therefore,  gets
reconciled  to  his  position.  The  mind
ceases  to  will  what  the  body  is  inca-
pable of  performing.  A  craving  for
rest  creeps  over  the  frame  as  years
advance.  It  is  well  that  it  should  be
so,  in  order  that  the  soul  may  cnlmly
l)ondor  upon  questions  of  its  imperish-
able interests  and  that  death  may  come
with  no  sudden  shock.  If  age  brings
on  this  indisposition  to  effort,  let  us
work  while  we  can — work  while  the
mind  is  active  and  the  limbs  are  blithe.
Time  produces  upon  men — III.  A  lack
of  interest  in  the  world.    At  one  time

387


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  u.


an  invitation  to  attend  in  state  a  king  instinct  glowing  in  tlie  breast  of  an
to  his  capital  would  have  been  a  very  old  man.  After  the  romantic  wander-
strong  temptation  to  this  very  great  ings  of  a  long  life,  time  brings  the
man,  but  now  such  an  invitation  has  spirit  back  to  the  home  of  the  child-
no  attraction  ;  he  declines  the  king's  hood,  and  makes  it  yearn  to  sleep  the
pressing  offer.  To  an  ohi  man  the  long  sleep  of  death  by  the  side  of
world  is  a  plum  that  has  lost  its  bloom  '*  father  and  mother."  Here  is  a  re-
— an  orange  that  has  been  sucked  till  buke  to  worldliness.  What  if  you
the  peel  is  dry.  Time  produces  upon  amass  a  princely  fortune  ?  Whilst  it
men — IV.  An  incapacity  for  earthly  will  not  make  you  happy,  either  in
enjoyments.  Years  not  only  steal  away  the  morning  of  your  youth  or  the
our  strength,  but  our  relish  for  earthly  zenith  of  your  noon,  it  will  be  utterly
pleasures.  In  this  I  see  divine  bene-  worthless  to  you  if  you  live  to  old  age.
volence,  for  it  means  a  loosening  of  Here  is  too,  an  argument  for  religion,
the  bonds  that  link  us  to  this  mortal  Form  an  alliance  with  those  eternal
state.  Time  produces  upon  men — V.  principles  that  will  make  your  spirits
An  interest  in  the  dead.  ''Let  thy  young  and  strong  amidst  the  infirmities
servant,  I  pray  thee,  turn  back  again  of  age. —  Dr,  David  Thomas.
that  I  may  die  in  my  own  city  and  be  The  subject  of  verses41  to  43  belongs
buried  in  the  grave  with  my  father  to  the  next  chapter,
and  my  mother."     Here  is  the  filial


CHAPTER  XX.


Critical  and  Expository  Notes •'  There."     "  In  Gilgal,  at  the  assembly  of  the  tribes ;

the  word  indicates  directly  the  place  ;  indirectly  the  time  of  the  following  history."  {Erdmann).
**A  man  of  Belial."  A  worthless  man.  "He  was,"  says  Luther,  "one  of  the  great  rogues
of  the  high  nobility,  who  had  a  large  retinue  among  the  people,  and  consideration  or  name,  as
Catiline  in  Rome."  "A  Benjamite."  "  I'robably  one  of  the  rabid  Sauline  party,  if  he  were
not,  as  is  possible,  of  Saul's  own  family."  {Erdmann)     "  To  his  tents."    "  See  on  Chap.  xix.  8."

Ver.  2.  **  Went  up."  "  From  the  plain  of  Gilgal  to  the  hill  country  of  Ephraim."  (Erdmann).

Ver.  3.  "Living  in  widowhood."  Lit.  In  widowhood  of  life.  Probably  meaning  so  long
as  their  lifetime,  or  it  may  mean  during  the  lifetime  of  David.  "  They  were  not  divorced,  for
they  were  guiltless  ;  but  they  were  no  longer  publicly  recognised  as  David's  wives  ;  nor  was
their  confinement  to  a  sequestered  life  a  very  heavy  doom  in  a  region  where  women  have  never
been  accustomed  to  go  much  abroad."     {Jamieson).

Ver.  4.  "  Said  to  Amasa."  Thus  appointing  him  to  the  position  which  he  has  proUiised
him  in  chap.  xix.  13.

Ver.  5.  "  He  tarried."  **  Either  because  he  met  with  distrust  and  opposition  among  the
people,  and  could  not  so  soon  execute  his  commission  ;  or,  because  he  did  not  wish  to  make
haste,  and  noui'ished  in  his  breast  traitorous  designs."     [Erdmann).

Ver.  6.  **  Abishai."  "  Joab's  was  still  David's  official  commander-in-chief,  but  David  speaks
to  Abishai  rather  than  to  him,  because  he  wished  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  latter  on
account  of  his  crabbedness,  and  fui'ther  knew  that  he  would  take  Amasa's  appointment  ill."
{Erdmann).  "Servants,  soldiers.'"  "The  standing  army  in  distinction  from  the  levy  of  the
people  for  which  Amasa  was  sent."  {Erdmann).  "  Escape  us."  The  verb  means  "  to  take
away,"  and  the  phrase  has  been  variously  rendered,  escape,  turn  away,  and  tear  out,  our  eye.
This  latter  rendering  (adopted  by  Keil,  Thenius  and  others)  is  taken  to  be  eqiiivalent  to
"severely  injure  us."  But  it  seems  more  probable  that  one  of  the  other  readings  is  more
correct,  and  that  the  expression  means  to  elude  the  sight— to  escape.

388


OHAP.  XX.  HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


Ver.  7.  **  Joab's  men."  Some  have  thought  it  strani/e  tliat  those  who  went  out  with
Abishai  should  be  so  designated,  and  have,  therefore,  witliout  .-ufHcient  reason,  substituted
Joab's  name  for  that  of  his  brother  in  verse  6.  But  from  what  follows,  Joab  appears  to  have
marched  with  his  brother  to  the  field.  "  Cher ethites,"  etc.  (see  on  chaj).  viii.  18).  "The
mighty  men."  Gibborim.  "  The  six  hundred  heroes  mentioned  in  chap.  xv.  18."  {Erdmann.)

Ver,  8.  "  The  great  stone,"  etc.  Doubtless  an  isolated  rock  of  considerable  size.  Gibeon
lay  north-west  of  Jerusalem,  in  the  mountains  of  Ephraim,  whither  Sheba  (verse  2),  had  gone.'*
(Erdmann).  "Went  before,"  rather  came  towards.  "Joab's  garment."  "The  minute
description  of  Joab's  military  dress  and  arms  is  intended  to  make  it  clear  how  he  could  suddenly
kill  Amasa  without  anyone's  noticing  his  purpose."  {Erdmann).  "  His  loins."  "  This  state-
ment receives  ample  illustration  from  the  Assyrian  sculptures  on  which  warriors  are  depicted,
their  swords  not  upon  the  thigh,  but  on  the  loin  or  side."  [Jamieson.)  *'  Fell  out."  Josephus
explains  that  Joab  purposely  allowed  it  to  drop  out  so  that  stooping  to  raise  it  at  the  moment
when  he  saluted  Amasa,  he  might  hold  it  naked  in  his  hand  ready  for  action,  without  exciting
suspicion.

Ver.  9.  "  By  the  beard."  A  mode  of  salutation  in  the  East.  Kissing  the  beard  is  also  a
token  of  great  respect  and  goodwill.  "  My  brother,"  "  He  was  his  first  cousin."  {Biblical
Commentary),

Ver.  10.  "Fifth  rib."  "  Rather  <^e  aJcZowen."  {Kdl).  "Joab  and  Abishai."  "The
connection  of  the  two  favour  the  view  that  Joab  had  gone  out  at  the  head  of  the  body  of
troops  under  Abishai."     {Erdmann).

Ver.  11.  "By  him,"  t.6„  Amasa,  no  doubt  by  Joab's  command.  " He  that  favour eth,"
etc.  This  was  said  to  the  men  whom  Amasa  had  gathered,  and  who  came  on  ignorant  at  first
of  their  leader's  fall,  and  then  of  the  cause  of  his  death.  This  plan  of  Joab  identifies  his  cause
with  that  of  David.

Ver.  14.  "Abel."  Lit.y  meadoio,  and  the  name  of  several  places  in  Palestine,  but  from
its  proximity  to  Beth-Maachah  (with  which  it  is  sometimes  joined,  verse  15,  1  Kings  xv.  20,
2  Kings  XV.  29),  known  to  be  the  present  Christian  village  of  Abilel-Kamh  (wheat  meadow)  in
the  extreme  north  of  the  country.

Ver.  15.  "They."  "Him.**  Evidently  the  first  pronoun  refers  to  Joab  and  his  followers,
and  the  second  to  Sheba.  "  A  bank."  "  The  first  preparation  for  a  siege  was  the  construction
of  a  causeway,  or  embankment,  for  wheeling  the  battering  rams  and  other  military  machines
close  to  the  walls,"  {Jamieson).  "  It,"  i.e.,  the  embankment,  "  in  the  trench,"  rather,  by  the  wall,

Ver.  16.  "  A  wise  woman.**  (See  chap.  xiv.  2).  Some  suppose  her  to  have  been,  like
Deborah,  a  judge  or  leader.

Ver.  18.  "  They  were  wont,"  etc.  These  words  are  variously  explained,  but  the  most
natural  construction  appears  to  be  that  Abel  had  formerly  been  famed  for  the  wisdom  of  its
inhabitants,  and  that  it  was  unfair  to  besiege  the  city  without  consulting  them.  Erdmann
observes  that  "  negotiation  before  laying  siege  to  a  city  (and  a  foreign  city,  indeed),  such  as  the
woman  here  refers  to,  is  prescribed  in  the  law.     (Deut.  xx.  10  sq.q  comp.  Numb.  xxi.  21.)

Ver.  19.  "A  mother."  A  chief  city.  (See  on  chap.  viii.  1).  The  villages  surrounding
such  a  city  were  called  her  daughters.      (See  the  margin  in  Numb.  xxi.  25,  32)  etc.

Ver.  21.  •*  Hath  lifted,"  etc.  Some  have  supposed  that  the  inhabitants  of  Abel  now  learned
for  the  first  time  of  the  guilt  of  Sheba.

Ver.  22.  "  The  woman  went,"  etc.  To  report  the  result  of  her  parley,  and  to  counsel  the
inhabitants  to  give  up  Sheba.  '•  And  Joab  returned,"  etc.  "  The  issue  of  this  occurrence,
how  David  received  the  victorious  Joab,  is  omitted  in  our  present  narrative  ;  he  was,  doubtless,
now  also  forbearing  to  a  man  who  as  a  soldier  was  indispensable  to  him,  and  who,  with  all  his
punishment — deserving  savagery,  always  meant  well  for  his  government."     {Ewald.)

Ver.  23.  "The  enumeration  of  David's  cabinet  is  here  given  to  show  that  the  government
was  re-established  in  its  wonted  course."     {Jamieson.)     "Benaiah"  (see  on  chap.  viii.  18).

Ver.  24.  "  Adoram."  Or  Adoniram.  "  The  nature  of  his  office  is  indicated  1  Kings  v.  27  sq.
compared  with  1  Kings  iv.  6."  {Erdmann.)  He  continued  in  office  vmtil  the  time  of  Kehoboam
(see  1  Kings  xii.  18,  and  is  called  Hadoram  in  2  Chron.  x.  18).

Ver.  25.  "  Ira.'*  Not  mentioned  elsewhere.  For  his  office  see  on  chap,  viii,  18,  where
David's  sons  are  mentioned  as  holding  such  a  position.  The  other  names  and  offices  enumerated
are  alike  in  both  places.

389


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  SAM V EL.  book  ii.

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.- Chapter  xix.,  41,  to  xx.,Z

The  Rebellion  of  Siieba.

I.    The  fidelity  of  those  who  serve  from  self-interest  cannot  bs  depended  on

for  a  single  day.  All  the  acts  of  the  men  of  Israel  at  this  time  seem  to  have
been  inspired  by  one  consideration  only,  viz.,  What  line  of  ])olicy  looks  most  likely
to  promote  our  interests  ?  There  was  no  question  as  to  their  duty,  eirJier  to  God
or  man.  Hence  they  rallied  to  the  standard  of  Absalom  when  he  hid  fair  to
overturn  the  throne  of  his  father,  returned  to  David  when  thev  fi)und  they  had
embarked  in  a  losing  cause,  and  revolted  ai^ain  from  him  the  first  moment  all
did  not  fall  out  in  accordance  with  their  wishes.  So  little  are  those  to  be
depended  on  who  have  no  hijher  rule  of  life,  and  so  greatly  are  those  to  be
pitied  who  put  their  tiTist  in  them.  '*  We  have  ten  parts  in  David,'*  said  they,
and,  almost  in  the  same  breath,  We  have  no  part  in  him.  To-day,  Hosanna,
to-morrow,  Crucijy. — Henry.

II.  The  unreasoning  discontent  of  the  multitude  is  the  opportunity  of  the
selfish  and  ambitious  leader.  There  are  always  men  quick  to  take  advantage
of  the  passion  and  ignorance  of  their  fellow  creatures,  and  to  use  them  as
stei)ping  stones  for  their  own  aizgrandisement.  But  for  the  foolish  petulance  of
the  men  of  Israel  on  this  occasion,  tliis  son  of  Bichri  would  have  never  had  even
the  pitiful  notoriety  which  he  thereby  acquired  ;  and  there  have  been  many  like
him  in  all  ages  who  have  only  risen  from  ohseuritv  by  similar  means.  It  would
have  been  indeed  for  the  peace  of  the  world  if  all  such  reckless  men  had  met
with  as  si)eedy  a  downfall  as  did  Sheba,  but  they  have  often  lived  hmg  enough
to  involve  many  more  in  a  common  ruin.  Before  men  give  themselves  up  to  the
leadership  of  another  they  should  consider  well  whither  he  is  leading  them  and
what  guarantees  he  can  give  that  his  motives  are  pure.  But  they  cannot  do  this
if  they  themselves  are  under  the  dominion  of  pride  and  envy,  as  the  men  of
Israel  were  at  this  time.  Where  any  unruly  passion  is  in  the  ascendant,  the
voices  of  reason  and  conscience  are  not  listened  to,  and  downfall  of  some  kind
must  come.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Chap.  XIX.,  vers.  41  to  43.     In  the  others  like  the  tribe  of  Judah,  whe»]

conduct  of  the  different  tribes  on  this  once  ])ersuarled  of  their   duty,  admit

occasion,  we  may  see  a  faithful  i)icture  no  farther  argument  on  its  expediency,

of  what  is  every  day  to  be  witnessed  in  but  act  with  promptitude  and  decision,

the   world   around   us.      While   some  This  forward  zeal,  however,  gave  great

men,  although  convinced  of  the  proper  umbrage  to  the  rest  of  Israel,  for,  like

course   to    pursue,    are    still    taUing  other  worldly  characters,  it  was  not  so

about  their  intentions — are  consulting  much  the  good  itself  that  they  desired

with   their   own    interests — resolving,  to  see  done,  as  to  have  themselves  the

and  hesitating,  and  again  resolving —  credit  of  performing  it. — Lindsay,
yet,  after  all  doing  nothing  effectually;

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3-13.

David's  Return  to  Jerusalem  and  the  murder  of  Amasa.

I.    The  consequences  of  violating  God's  laws  are  not  in  this  life  confined  to
him  who  violate  them.    David  had  no  sooner  returned  to  his  city  and  Im
390


CHAP.  XX.  nOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Yt  8 A  MUEL.


pnlacG  tlian  he  found  himself  confronted  with  a  difiiculty  arising  out.  of  a  double
transgression.  As  we  have  before  hnd  occasion  to  remark  (see  on  1  Samuel  i.,  2,
etc.),  polygamy  was  a  violation  of  God's  intention  with  regard  to  marriage,
which  brouglit  great  sorrow  upon  David  and  upon  others.^  The  practice  of
concubinage  seems  a  much  farther  remove  from  the  Divine  ideal,  and  a  nearer
approach  to  the  custom.s  of  the  heatlien  nati(ms,  and  must  in  any  case  have  often
been  felt  to  be  a  hardship  by  the  woman.  But  David's  great  transgression  en-
tailed upon  the  women  of  his  harem  a  heavier  penalty  than  was  common  to
such  a  position.  It  it  true  they  were  Eastern  women,  and  thereibre  less  alive
to  their  humiliation  by  Absalom  than  women  of  this  ago  and  nation  would  be  in
similar  circumstances,  but  they  were  women,  and  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose
they  were  entirely  destitute  of  the  instincts  and  desires  proper  to  their  sex.
Upon  them  the  consequences  of  David's  transgression  fell  very  heavily,  and
endured  to  the  end  of  life.  The  certainty  that  in  this  sense,  as  in  many  others,
no  man  liveth  to  himself,  ought  to  be  a  strong  motive  to  keep  us  from  forbidden
paths.

II.  The  consciousness  of  even  pardoned  guilt  makes  one  in  power  weak  and
cowardly  towards  similar  offenders.  One  of  the  most  bitter  elements  in  David's
cup  of  affliction  after  his  fall  must  have  been  to  see  his  own  evil  deeds  so
faithfully  imitated  by  those  around  him,  and  to  feel  unable  to  deal  out
the  punishment  they  deserved.  Amnon  closely  copied  his  adultery  and
Absalom  his  act  of  murder,  without  his  being  able  to  deal  with  either  as  he
could  have  done  if  he  had  himself  been  innocent.  And  now  when  he  probably
hoped  he  had  reaped  the  last  of  the  harvest  from  that  fatal  sowing  of  sin,  he
sees  his  deed  reproduced  by  Joab  with  startling  similarity.  The  master  had  not
scrupled  to  remove  by  violent  means  one  who  stood  in  his  way,  and  it  could
not  be  expected  that  his  less  scrupulous  servant  would  falter  on  the  same  line
of  action.  Truly  Joab  had  known  the  way  before  (chap.  iii.  27),  but  he  could  be
bolder  now  that  David  had  gone  the  same  road.  David  had  been  able  to  declare
himself  guiltless  before  the  Lord  from  the  blood  of  Abner,  but  he  is  silent
concerning  the  death  of  Amasa,  remembering  without  doubt  how  he  had  once
commanded  Joab  to  commit  as  cowardly  a  crime.  It  must  have  surely  been
this  sense  of  blood-guiltiness  which  sealed  his  lips  at  this  time,  and  almost
compelled  him  henceforth  to  accept  in  silence  whatever  measures  Joab  thought
fit  to  adopt,  and  to  leave  to  his  son  the  odious  task  of  reckoning  with  him.

MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Versa  14-26.

The  Death  of  Sheba.

I.  A  peace-maker  is  a  blessing,  both  to  the  victors  and  the  vanquished,
A  victorious  commander  may  deservedly  win  great  praise  when  he  wins  a  great
battle,  because  he  may  really  be  the  nieans  of  bringing  peace  to  a  nation.  Yet
the  blood  of  many  may  cry  against  him,  because  he  can  only  gain  his  end  by
the  loss  of  many,  and  the  tears  and  maledictions  of  those  whom  he  defeats
mingle  with  the  rejoicings  of  those  whom  he  saves.  And  not  only  so,  the  blood
of  many  of  his  own  faithful  followers  must  flow  to  win  him  reputation  and
success,  so  that,  if  he  be  a  truly  humane  man,  he  will  feel  indeed  that  "  there  is
nothing  so  terrible  as  a  victory  except  a  defeat,"  and  will  rejoice  greatly  if
wrongs  can  be  put  right  in  any  other  way.  Greatly  are  they  to  be  held  in
honour,  who,  by  wise  words  and  deeds,  avert  so  great  a  catastrophe  as  war,
especially  that  most  terrible  form  of  it — civil  war.  It  was  Joab's  good  fortune
to  have  such  a  mediator  at  the  siege  of  Abel— one  who  had  sufficient  good

391


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  tt.


sense  and  influonce  enough  with  botli  parties  to  put  an  end  to  the  strife  witliont
injury  to  the  innocent  on  either  side.  For  this  i^ood  olhce  this  nameless  woman
deserves  to  be  held  in  honourable  remembrance  now^,  as  she  doubtless  was  by  her
fellow-countrymen  of  her  own  day.  To  her  mnst  be  awarded  the  blessing  of  the
peace-makers — to  be  "  called  the  children  of  God."

II.  The  life  of  one  man  is  sometimes  justly  sacrificed  to  secure  the  life  of
many.  Slieba  had  no  reason  to  complain  that  the  citizens  of  Abel  bought  their
own  safety  with  his  head.  Although  it  is  cowardly  and  wrong  at  all  times  to
act  U})on  the  doctrine  of  Cairaphas  (John  xi.  50)  and  save  many  at  the  expense
of  one,  yet  it  is  right  to  do  this  when  the  one  man  is  the  sole  cause  of  the
impending  calamity,  when  the  mass  of  the  people  have  been  misled  and  injured
by  him,  and  when  there  can  be  no  safety  for  them  while  he  lives.  Such  appears
to  have  been  the  state  of  things  in  relation  to  Sheba  and  the  inhabitants  of
Abel,  and  therefore  they  only  acted  in  accordance  with  a  recognised  and  just
law  when  they  delivered  his  head  to  Joab.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  20.     Joab,  in  the  prosecution  lead  him  on  to  crime  and  infamy. —

of  war,  does  not  seem  chargeable  with  Lindsay.

peculiar   "swiftness   to   shed    blood,"         Spiritually  the  case  is  ours;  every

inasmuch  as  he  could  exclaim,  as    if  man's   breast   is  as   a   city  inclosed  ;

indignant  of  the  imputation,  '*  Far  be  every  sin    is  as   a    traitor  that  lurks

it  from  me  that  I  should  swallow  up  or  within    those   walls.     God  calls  to  us

destroy  !  "     But  when  his  private  and  for  Sheba's  head,  neither  hath  he  any

personal    interests   were    affected,    he  quarrel  to  our  person,  but  for  our  sin.

then  gave  full  scope  to  his  furious  pas-  If  we   love  the  head   of   our   traitor

sicms,  without  regard  either  to  God  or  above  the   life  of   our  soul,  we  shall

men.     A  man's  general  conduct  may  justly  perish   in  the  vengeance.     We

be  good,  and  even  exemplary,  so  that  cannot  be  more  willing  to  part  with

on    the  whole  he  may  move    in  the  our  sin  than  our  merciful  God  is  to

world  with  reputation  and  usefulness,  withdraw  his  judgments. — B]p,  Hall.
yet  one  indulged  lust  or  passion  may


CHAPTER  XXI.

Critical  and  Expository  Notes. — Ver.  1.  **  Then.'*  Rather,  And,  consequently  there  is
nothing  to  indicate  the  period  when  the  events  here  recorded  took  place,  and  many  commenta-
tors consider  that  the  words,  "  in  the  days  of  David  "  are  "  expressly  inserted  to  denote  that  they
are  not  narrated  in  their  chronological  order."  {Biblical  Commentary).  Keil  says,  "  This  occur-
rence certainly  did  not  take  place  in  the  closing  years  of  David's  reign  ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is
evident  from  the  remark  in  verse  7,  to  the  effect  that  Mej>hibosheth  was  spared,  that  it  happened
after  David  had  received  tidings  of  Mephiliosheth."  "  Three  years."  "  For  the  first  two
seasons  the  scarcity  did  not  cause  much  anxiety,  t<ince  David  and  the  oificers  of  his  government
probably  regarded  it  as  the  natural  consequence  of  neglecting  the  cultivation  of  the  land  during
the  troubles  occasioned  by  Absalom  and  Sheba,  and  hoped  that  the  internal  resources  of  the
country  would  be  sufficient  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  population."  (Jamieson),  **His  bloody
house,"  rather  "the  houseof  blood- guilt i." ess."  This  expression  is  in  apposition  to  Saul,  and
determines  the  meaning  more  precisely."  [Ked).  "  He  slew."  Nothing  is  said  elsewhere  of
this  deed.     The  covenant  made  with  these  people  is  described  in  Josh.  ix.  3,  sq.  q.

Ver.  4.  "  No  silver,"  etc.  "  Money  payments  as  a  compensation  for  blood-guilt  were  very
xommon  among  many  nations.     Thus  the  h,vr  of  Edward  the  Elder,  in  England,  regulated  the

392


OflAP.  xxt.  HOMILETIC  COMil/ENTAIilr:  SAMUeL


ver-gyld  to  be  paid  by  the  slayer  upon  the  principle,  "  If  anyone  be  slain,  let  him  be  paid  for
according  to  his  birth,"  {Biblical  Commentary).  '*  Neither  for  us,"  etc.,  railier,  not  to  us  does
it  pertain  to  Tcill,  etc.,  i.e.,  "  it  is  not  permitted  us  without  niore  ado  to  execute  Ijlood-revenge  for
the  murder  of  our  people."  (Erdmann).  **  What  y©  shall  say,"  etc.  "Assuming  the
necessity  of  blood-expiation."     {Erdmann).

Ver.  5.  •'  The  man  that  consumed,"  etc.  "  It  appears  then  that  Saul  had  broken  the
power  of  the  tribe  by  his  bath  of  blood."     {Erdmann),

Ver.  6.  "  Seven  men,"  etc  "  A  sacred  number,  denoting  the  performance  of  a  work  of
God."  {Keil).  "According  to  Numb.  xxxv.  31-33,  homicide  was  to  be  expiated  by  death
but  the  death  of  the  murderer,  not  of  his  kindred ;  it  is,  however,  intimated  in  verse  1,  that
Saul's  kindred  had  shared  in  the  murderous  deed.  (Translator  of  Lunge's  Commentary).
*'  Hang  thee  up,"  etc.,  i.e.,  Crucify  them.  "  Whom  the  Lord  did  choose  "  or,  the  chosen  of
the  Lord.  Exception  has  been  taken  to  this  designation  of  Saul,  and  other  renderings  have
been  proposed.  But  the  expression  seems  to  indicate  that  "  if  Saul  was  the  chosen  of  the
Jehovah,  his  actions  ought  to  have  been  more  in  accordance  with  his  divine  election  {Keil),  and
that  all  the  more  must  there  be  such  expiation  to  the  Lord  for  his  sin  as  the  Lord's  anointed.*'
(Erdmann).

Ver.  7.  "  The  king  spared,"  etc.  "  The  calamity  brought  upon  Israel  by  Saul's  breach  of
the  oath  to  the  Gibeonites  would  make  David  doubly  careful  in  the  matter  of  his  own  oath  to
Jonathan."  (Biblical  Commentary).  '*  Rizpah."  (See  chap.  iii.  7).  "  Michal."  Nearly  all
commentators  agree  that  this  is  an  error  of  memory  or  a  copyist's  mistake,  seeing  that  Merob,
Saul's  eldest  daughter,  was  the  wife  of  Adriel,  and  it  seems  almost  certain  that  Michal  had  no
children.  (See  on  chap.  vi.  23).  Jamieson  says  that  Kennicott  has  shown  that  two  Hebrew
M.SS.  read  Merab  instead  of  Michal.

Ver.  9.  "The  hill,"  etc  In  or  near  Gibeah,  the  home  of  Saul.  (1  Sam.  x.  5).  "Before
the  Lord,"  i.e.,  in  a  place  devoted  to  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  "It  is  true  that  God  had  said
that  the  children  should  not  be  put  to  death  for  the  parents  (Deut.  xxiv.  16)  ;  but  this  law,
while  it  controlled  the  action  of  the  magistrate,  did  not  restrain  God,  who  required  and  accepted
the  expiation."     (Woi'dsworth).

Ver.  9.  **  The  barley  harvest."  **  In  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  this  takes  place  in  the  l^st
half  of  April.     (Jamieson.)

Ver.  10.  "  Until  water  dropped,"  etc.  The  early  rain  usually  began  in  October.  But  rain
may  have  been  sent  earlier  as  a  token  of  forgiveness.  The  reason  of  the  bodies  being  left
unburied,  contrary  to  Deut.  xxi.  23,  probably  was  that  the  death  of  these  men  being  the  expiation
of  a  violated  oath  they  were  to  remain  until  the  fall  of  rain  should  give  the  assurance  that  God's
anger  was  appeased  and  the  national  sin  forgiven."     (Biblical  Commentary.)

Ver.  14.  "  And  the  bones,"  etc.  Although  not  expressly  stated,  it  is  implied  that  the
remains  of  the  crucified  men  were  interred  at  the  same  time  and  place,  if  not  actually  in  the
same  tomb.     "  Zelah."     The  situation  of  this  city  is  unknown.

Ver.  15.  **  Moreover,"  or,  and  **Yet,"  rather,  again.  "This  refers  generally  to  earlier
wars  with  the  Philistines,  and  has  probably  been  taken  without  alteration  from  the  chronicles
employed  by  our  author,  where  the  account  which  follows  was  attached  to  notices  of  other  wars."
(Keil.)  "Probably  this  fragment  belongs  chronologically  in  the  group  chap.  v.  18-25,  in  favour
of  which  is  the  fact  that  David  is  here  already  king  of  all  Israel,  since  he  is  called  (verse  17)
the  light  of  Israel.''^    (Erdmann.)     But  see  also  on  verse  17.

Ver.  16.  **  Ishbi-benob."  Many  scholars  understand  this  name  to  mean  "  the  dweller  on
the  rock."  If  this  rendering  be  correct,  he  probably  lived  in  some  mountain  fastness.  "The
giant,"  rather  Haphah,  a  proper  name  for  the  ancestor  of  the  giant  race  described  in  Deut.  ii,
11,  20,  etc.  "Three  hundred  shekels."  About  eight  pounds,  half  the  weight  of  Goliath's
(1  Sam.  xvii.  7).  "  A  new  sword."  The  last  word  is  not  in  the  Hebrew  and  the  better
rendering  is  "  he  ivas  newly  armed.'*

Ver.  17.  •*  The  light  of  Israel.'*  "  David  had  become  the  light  of  Israel  from  the  fact  that
Jehovah  was  his  light  (chap.  xxii.  29),  or,  according  to  the  parallel  passage  in  Psa.  xviii  29,
that  Jehovah  had  lighted  his  lamp  and  enlightened  his  darkness,  i.e.,  had  lifted  him  out  of  a
state  of  humiliation  and  obscurity  into  one  of  honour  and  glory."  (Keil.)  This  address  of
David's  men  seems  to  be  against  the  assumption  that  the  event  here  narrated  occurred  early  in
David's  reign.

Ver.  18.  "Gob."  In  1  Chron.  xx.  4,  this  is  said  to  have  taken  place  at  Gezer.  It  is
generally  supposed  Gob  was  a  small  place  near  Gezer.     "  SibbechaL"     According  to  1  Chron,

a93


BOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  Rf:  SA  MUEL.  bo<  .  re  n.


xxvii,  11,  the  leader  of  a  division  of  David's  army.  **  Hushathite."  "In  1  Chron.  xxvii.  11,
Sibbecai  is  said  to  have  belonged  to  the  Zarhites,  that  is  (probal^ly)  the  descendants  of  Zerah,
of  the  tribe  of  Jndah.  So  far  this  is  in  accordance  with  a  connection  between  this  and  Hushah,
a  name  apparently  of  a  place  ( 1  Chron.  iv,  4),  in  the  genealogies  of  Judah.  {Sniit/i's  Biblicdl
Dictionary).  It  seems  quite  ns  probable  that  Hushah  was  the  name  of  an  ancestor.  Josephus
says  that  Sibbechai  was  a  Hittite.  "  Saph,"  or  Sippai.  (1  Chron,  xx.  5).  Miss  Roj/ers.  in
Domestic  Life  in  Palestine,  says,  "  I  saw  a  number  of  Arabs  belonging  to  the  valley  of  Urtas,
with  their  chief,  a  tall,  powerful  man,  called  Sheikh  Saph,  whose  family,  according  to  social
tradition,  has  for  ages  been  distinguished  for  the  height  and  strength  of  its  men."

Ver.  19.  This  verse  in  the  original  says  that  Elnathan  sleio  Goliath,  etc.,  but  it  is  evidently  a
record  of  the  same  occurrence  as  that  narrated  in  1  Chron.  xx.  5,  which  is  most  likely  the  correct
reading,  although,  according  to  Gesenius,  G-oliath  means  simply  a  stranger^  an  exile^  and  might,
therefore,  have  described  all  the  members  of  a  family  or  tribe.

Ver.  20.  "  Six  fingers,"  etc.  Such  men  have  been  met  with  elsewhere.  Pliny  (Hist,
Nat.  xi.  43),  speaks  of  certain  six-fingered  Romans  {sediyitl).  This  peculiarity  is  even  here-
ditary in  some  families.  (Keil).  "  Was  born,"  etc.,  i.e.,  was  also  a  descendant  of  Raphah,
Shimeah,  or  Shammah,  Jesse's  third  son.     (1  Sam.  xvi.  9,  chap.  xiii.  3).

Ver.  22.  A  postscript,  summing  up  the  preceding  verses.  "  By  tlie  hand  of  David."
Evidently  only  in  the  sense  that  he  commanded  the  heroes  who  slew  these  giants,

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH. —  Verses  1-9.

Saul's  Breach  of  Covenant  with  the  Gibeonites  punished  in  his

Descendants.

I.— Natural  laws  work  or  rest  as  God's  servants.  The  Bible  refers  all
the  workings  of  the  natural  world  to  the  will  of  God.  It  claims  for  Him  the
power  to  set  in  motion  or  to  stay  the  operation  of  any  one  or  of  all  the  forces  of
nature  as  He  sees  fit.  They  are  not  the  masters  of  our  earth  or  of  man,  but
servants  obeying  Him  who  is  Lord  of  all.  It  is  true  that  man  will  sometimes
ignorantly  or  wilfully  pervert  and  arrest  the  action  of  those  laws  which  are  to
some  extent  within  the  reach  of  his  influence,  but  this  does  not  affect  their
divine  origin.  When,  therefore,  certain  ordinary  gifts  of  nature  are  withheld
— when,  as  was  most  likely  the  case  in  the  present  instance,  rain  or  sunshine
do  not  visit  the  earth  and  quicken  the  seed  into  life  and  growth,  those  who
believe  in  the  God  of  the  Bible  refer  the  event,  not  to  an  impersonal  law,  but  to
a  living  Ruler  of  the  universe.  Indeed,  apart  from  all  scriptural  teaching,  it
seems  impossible  for  men  who  think  to  come  to  any  other  conclusion,  for  laws
necessarily  include  a  law-giver,  and  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  of  such  a  being
as  in  any  way  fettered  by  his  own  methods  of  working.  David  was  a  true
philosopher,  as  well  as  a  devout  believer,  when  he  looked  to  the  Lord  as  the  only
Being  who  could  give  rain  from  heaven  and  fruitful  seasons,  or  command  the
clouds  to  withhold  their  blessings  and  so  bring  dearth  and  famine  upon  the
land.

II.  The  cause  of  the  suspension  of  beneficent  natural  laws  is  to  be  found  not
in  God  but  in  man.  When  David  inquired  of  the  Lord  concerning  the  repeated
dearth  in  the  land,  he  evidently  did  so  with  the  conviction  that  the  cause  of  the
dispensation  was  to  be  found  not  in  the  good  nature  of  God  bat  in  the  bad
nature  of  man.  He  had  forujed  such  an  estimate  of  the  character  of  Jehovah
as  to  be  sure  that  He  would  not  afflict  his  children  willingly,  or  withdraw  from
them  any  of  His  gifts  out  of  caprice,  still  less  out  of  a  desire  to  cause  them  ])ain
or  suffering.  For  no  good  hun)an  creature  would  be  guilty  of  such  conduct,  and
it  would  be  blasphemy  to  ascribe  to  the  ever-blessed  God  that  which  we  should
condemn  in  a  fellow  man.  If  a  loving  father  withholds  from  his  child  his
394


CHAP.  XXl.


UOMILETIQ  COMMES  TA  R  Y  :  SA  M UEt.


accn.^tomed  provision  for  his  need^,  all  unprejudiced  minds  at  once  conclude
that  tlie  reason  is  to  be  found,  not  in  the  disposition  of  the  parent,  but  in  the
character  of  t!ie  child.  So  God  declared  of  old  it  was  with  Him  and  Israel,  and  so
it  must  ever  he  wiih  Him  and  all  His  creatures.  Ail  His  withholdings  of  good
gifts  or  infliction  of  positive  ills  are,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  the  outcome
of  man's  sin,  and  are  eitlier  for  his  correction  or  instruction,  either  to  bring  him
back  to  the  ways  of  God  or  to  quicken  and  direct  his  steps  after  his  return.

III.  The  punishment  of  sin  is  not  remitted  because  it  is  delayed.  Tlie  chief
actor  in  this  crime  had  long  since  left  the  earth,  and  had  not  in  his  own  ])ersoii
received  special  retribution  for  this  special  act,  but  had  i  een  altogether  rejected
by  God  for  an  almost  lile-long  disobedience  to  His  commands.  But  there  were
njost  likely  many  still  living  who  had  been  Saul's  willing  instruments  on  this
occasion,  and  they  now  learnt  that  this  unrighteous  deed  had  not  been  forgotten
by  God,  although  He  had  so  long  kept  silence  concerning  it.  It  is  n(»t  more
certain  that  the  stone  thrown  into  the  air  will  return  to  tlie  earth  than  that
retribution  will  follow  sin,  and,  although  individuals  may  escape  in  this  world,
the  crimes  of  families,  and  other  communities  rarely  fail  to  be  punished  in  the
present  life,  although  tliat  punishment  iray  be  so  long  delayed  as  to  pass  over
many  of  those  who  are  guilty.  This  fact  in  God's  government  is  closely  linked
with  another,  viz.  :

IV.  That  one  g^eneration  of  men  often  suffer  for  crimes  for  which  other
generations  are  also  responsible.  It  was  so  in  the  case  of  Saul  and  the
Gibeonites.  However  guilty  Saul's  sons  might  be  in  this  matter,  they  were  not
the  only  guilty  persons,  nor  were  they  so  guilty  as  their  father,  yet  uj^on  them
only  fell  the  ])en;dty  for  this  particular  crime.  Many  generations  of  Egyi)tians
oppressed  the  children  of  Israel,  yet  only  those  who  lived  in  the  days  of  the
Exodus  suffered  for  it.  Many  generations  of  Jews  were  guilty  of  killing  the
prophets,  but  Christ  told  those  who  lived  in  His  day  that  the  righteous  blood  of
all  was  upon  their  heads.  (Matthew  xxiii.  35).  In  secular  history  we  have
many  similar  cases,  and  if  we  ask  if  such  a  law  be  just,  we  can  only  answer  that
the  God  of  all  the  earth  can  have  no  motive  for  wroiiging  any  of  His  creatures,
and  that  there  is  another  world  wherein  all  these  apparent  inequalities  will  find
their  level.  Such  a  law  of  entail  has  a  bright  as  well  as  a  dark  side,  for  the
blessed  influence  of  righteous  deeds  descends  also,  and  one  great  end  of  such  a
law  in  the  Divine  government  is  evidently  to  deter  men  from  iniquity  by  the
consideration  of  the  misery  they  may  bring  upon  their  posterity.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


Ver.  1.  There  are  things  deeper  and
truer  than  any  such  philosophy,  and
among  these  I  place  the  spiritual
instincts  of  the  human  heart.  Why  is
it,  we  are  disposed  to  ask,  that  in
almost  all  languages  pestilence  has
been  called  by  a  name  which — like
our  own  word  plague,  which  means  a
stroke — directly  points  to  God's  agency
in  ifes  appearance  ?  and  whence  comes
it  that,  when  a  people  are  enduring
such  a  calamity,  there  is  a  general
thought  of  God  among  them,  and  their
resolution  becomes  that  of  Jeremiah;


*  Let  us  search,  and  try  our  ways,  and
turn  again  unto  the  Lord  ?  "  l)o  not
these  things,  and  others  like  them,
point  to  the  fact  that,  by  the  mystic
intuitions  of  the  soul,  God  is  recognised
in  all  such  visitntioiis  ?  and  while  we
take  into  account  the  laws  of  external
nature,  shall  we  refuse  to  pay  regard
to  the  nature  that  is  within  us  ? — JJr,
Taylor.

Let  no  one  think  it  strange  that  the
penalty  should  come  thus,  in  famine,
upon  an  entire  nation,  after  a  ne\7
generation    had  sprung    u]).      For  a

395


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  SAMUEL.


BO0&  it.


nation's  history  is  a  unit ;  and  as  there
can  be  no  such  thing  as  retribution  of
a  nation  in  the  future  state,  it  follows
that  if  punishment  for  national  sins  is
to  be  inflicted  at  all,  it  must  fall  in  the
subsequent  earthlyhistory  of  the  nation
that  committed  them.  Tlie  generation
which  was  alive  in  France  at  the  eras
of  the  massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew  and
the  revocation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes
was  a  different  one  from  that  wiiich
lived  at  the  time  of  the  first  llevolu-
tion  ;  yet  in  the  events  of  the  latter,
with  its  Reign  of  Terror  and  rivers  of
blood,  we  liave  the  undoubted  con-
sequences of  the  former.  Many  genera-
tions have  come  and  gone  in  Spain
since  the  days  of  Piiilip  and  the  great
Armuda,  yet  we  can  not  doubt  that
the  miserable  condition  of  that  land
for  more  than  a  century — a  condition
out  of  which  its  inhabitants  find  it  hard
even  now  to  emerge — was  due  to  the
sins  of  those  who  knew  not  the  day  of
their  visitation,  and  suppressed  the
Protestantism  which,  but  for  the  In-
quisition, would  have  arisen  among
them,  and  enabled  them  to  lead  the  van
of  European  progress.  The  English
occupants  of  India  in  1857  were  not
the  same  as  those  who,  under  Clive
and  Hastings,  and  others,  so  un-
righteously obtained  ];OSsession  of
large  portions  of  that  empire  ;  nay,
they  were  in  many  instances  men  of
another  order  and  a  nobler  nature ;
yet  upon  these,  ay,  even  upon  the
heads  of  sainted  missionaries  who  repu-
diated and  condemned  the  cruelty  and
craft  of  the  first  invaders,  the  terrible
Nemesis  of  the  mutiny  did  fall. —
Dr.  Taylor.

Fools  look  only  who  stands  on  the
next  stair  or  step,  but  Jacob,  when  he
saw  the  angels  ascending  and  descend-
ing, he  inquired  who  stood  on  the  top
of  tlie  ladder  and  sent  them  to  and  fro.
Ezekiel  also  inquireth  who  standeth  on
the  top  of  the  wheel.  Whatever  is
the  instrument  of  our  sufferings,  let
God  be  looked  upon  as  the  chief  ngent.

.     .     The  wiiole  people  suffered  for
Saul's   sin,    either    because    they   ap-
proved it,  or  at  least  bewailed  it  not,
neither  did  what  they  could  to  hinder
396


it,  whereby  they  became  accessory. —
Trai^p.

Ver.  2.  Leal  to  Israel,  not  to  God,
whose  law,  nevertheless,  he  might  seem
to  have  on  his  side  (Deut.  viii.  16,
etc.).  .  .  .  And  yet  he  might  also
be  moved  to  this  by  covetousness  to
gain  their  lands  and  goods.  .  .  .
The  hypocrite  is  fitly  compared  to  the
eagle,  which  soareth  aloft,  not  for  any
love  of  heaven,  for  her  eye  is  all  the
while  upon  the  prey  which  by  this
means  she  spieth  sooner,  and  seizeth
upon  better. — Trapp.

Vers.  1-9.  Our  feelings,  influenced
by  the  Gospel,  recoil  from  this  pro-
ceeding. The  implacableness  of  the
Gibeonites  astonishes  us  ;  and  also  the
compliance  of  the  king  appears  to  us  to
be  in  violent  contrariety  to  his  whole
disposition,  as  well  as  to  the  state  of
mind  in  which  he  was  at  the  time.
But  let  it  always  be  remembered  that
it  was  the  economy  of  the  law  under
which  those  things  were  done,  and
with  the  character  of  which  they
harmonised  ;  and  that  the  care  of
God,  in  his  educating  of  the  human
race,  aimed  above  all  things  at  this —
that  He  should  be  recognised  and
feared  as  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just.
To  this  divine  purpose  David  must
bend  himself,  and  make  full  account
of  it,  whatever  inner  conflict  it  may
cost  him.  The  great  guilt  of  the  house
of  Saul — perjury  and  murder  at  the
same  time — demanded  blood,  according
to  the  inviolable  law  of  God's  kingdom.
Already,  indeed,  that  house,  laden
with  sins,  had  been  smitten  by  many
judgments ;  but  yet  by  none  which
discovered  itself  at  the  first  glance  to
every  one  among  the  people,  as  a
requital  for  that  most  culpable  of  all
their  crimes,  the  murder  of  the
innocent  Gibeonites.  This  special
chastisement  must  not  be  omitted.
For  the  prevention  of  doubtful  inter-
pretations in  Israel,  and  for  the
heightening  of  esteem  for  every  iota
of  the  divine  law,  it  must  follow  all
that  w^ent  before  ;  and  it  truly  did
follow.     The  majesty  and  inexorable


CHAP.  XXI.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


rigour  of  the  law,  as  it  was  in  Ism  el
divinely  manifested,  was  scarcely  ever
more  brightly,  and  in  a  more  alarming
manner,  bronght  to  view  than  it  was
on  this  occasion.  —  Krummacher.

Little  did  the  Gibconites  think  that
God  had  so  taken  to  heart  their
wrongs,  that  for  their  sakes  all  Israel
should  suffer.  Even  when  we  tliiidc
not  of  it,  is  the  righteous  Jud^e
avenging  our  unrighteous  vexations.
Our  hard  measures  cannot  be  hid
from  Him  ;  His  returns  are  hid  from
us.  It  is  sufficient  for  us,  that  God  can
be  no  more  neglective  than  ignorant  of
our  sufferings. — Bp.  Hall.

We  may  learn  from  this  history —
I.  What  should  in  every  case  he
the  effect  of  temporal  troubles,  and
afflictive  dispensations.  Tliey  have
not  answered  their  first  purpose,  till
they  have  brought  us  to  God.  Had
David  sooner  "  inquired  of  the  Lord,"
he  and  his  people  had  been  sooner
relieved  from  their  distress  ;  but  while
their  hearts  continued  hard,  and  their
consciences  at  ease,  the  evil  not  only
continued,  but  continued  to  increase.
Such,  in  general,  is  our  conduct  under
the  calamities  of  life.  The  mind  is  too
deeply  depressed — too  fondly  attached
to_  present  objects,  to  rise  at  once  to
Him  who  orders  all  things,  both  in
heaven  and  earth.  While  we  are
passionately  repining,— looking  around
for  modes  of  relief,  or  for  the  sources
of  our  suffering,  we  are  too  much
occupied  with  secondary  and  external
causes,  to  think  of  the  sinful  cause  in
ourselves,  which  may  have  drawn  down

upon  us  these  troubles Where-

ever  God  afflicts,  there  He  speaks,—
not  indeed  always  in  anger,  more  fre-
quently in  mercy Yet  in  such

admonitions  He  will  not  be  disregarded ;
every  successive  stroke  will  be  yet
heavier  and  heavier,  till  it  either
draw  us  to  Him  or  drive  us  from  Him.
II.   The  danger  of  trifling  with  oaths

and  solemn  engagements God

would  teach  us,  by  this  instance  of
jupt  severity,  that  His  honour  is  im-
plicated in  every  oath,  and  that  he
will  exact  an  awful  retribution  for  the
violation  of  such  solemn  engagements.


The  very  insignificance  of  the  injured
party,  as  here,  may  be  a  farther  rejison
with  Him  for  taking  the  cause  upon
Himself.  ....  In  confirmation  of
this,  we  have  another  striking  example
in  Scripture.  In  the  days  of  Zede-
kiah  a  solemn  treaty  had  been  ratified
with  the  King  of  Babylon,  upon  tliese
humiliating  conditions,  "  that  the  king-
dom might  be  base,  that  it  might  not
lift  itself  up,  but  that,  by  keeping  of
his  covenant  it  might  stand."  Zede-
kiah,  thinking  to  throw  off  this  yoke,

rebelled Therefore,  thus  saith

the  Lord  God  :  As  I  live,  surely  mine
oath  that  he  hath  despised,  and  my
covenant  that  he  hath  broken,  even  it
will  I  recompense  upon  his  own  head."
(Ezek.  xvii.  19). — Lindsay.

This  whole  narrative  strikes  us  as
extraordinary,  at  first  almost  staggers
us.    It  places  David  in  a  strange  light,
it  seems  at   first  to  place   God  in  a
strange  light,  but  on  a  closer  examina-
tion  its   myotery  vanishes,  and   it   is
seen    to    harmonise     both    with    the
character  of  David  and  the  righteous
judgment  of  God.     .     .     .    Wiiat  was
Saul's  motive  in  attacking  the  Gibeon-
ites  ?     There  is  reason  to  believe  that
when  he  saw  his  own  popularity  de-
clining and  David's  advancing,  he  had
recourse  to  base,  unscrupulous  methods
for  increasing  his  own  (see  1  Sam.  xxii.
7,  8).     Evidently  he  had  rewarded  his
servants,   especially  those   of  his  own
tribe,  with  fields  and  vineyards  ;  but
how  had  he  got  them  ?     In  no  other
way   that   we   can   suppose   than    by
robbing  the  Gibeonites  of  theirs.    .    .  .
Probably  he    would    give   the    larger
share  to  the  members  of  his  family,
but  to  prevent  the  transaction   from
h<wing   a  mean   personal    aspect,    lie
might    so    arrange    that    the    people
generally  should  have  a  share  of  the
spoil.     ...     If  this  was  the  way  in
which  the  transaction  was  gone  about,
it  was  fair  that   the  nation  should  be

visited  with  chastisement

No^  remonstrance  had  gone  forth
against  the  deed.  .  .  .  The  authors
of  the  outrage  might  now  be  dead,
but  their  children  were  quietly  living
on  the  plunder.     Even  David  himself

397


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


BOOK  IL


was  not  free  from  blame.  When  he
came  to  the  tlu'one  he  should  have
seen    justice    done    to    this    injured

people The  famine  was,

therefore,  a  retribution  deserved  both
by  David  and  his  i)eopIe.  Ifc  was  a
less(Mi  on  the  consequences  of  riches
ii^nined  by  robbery.  It  was  to  show
that  pcrtidy  and  theft  cost  far  more
thaij  they  bring  in.  .  .  We  now  come
to  tlie  main  difficulty  in  this  transaction.
Where  was  the  justice,  it  may  be  asked,
of  this  frightful  execution  ?  Why
should  these  unoffending  men  be
punished  so  terribly  for  the  long-
forgotten  sin  of  their  father  ?  It  is
not  the  rule  of  Scripture.  "  The  son
shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  his  father,
but  every  man  shall  bear  his  own
iniquity."  .  On  the  other  hand,  it  may
be  said,  is  it  not  a  rule  of  God's  govern-
ment ?  *'  I,  the  Lord,  am  a  jealous
God,  visiting  the  iniquities  of  the
fathers  u])oii  the  children, etc.  ?"  There
is  no  real  contradiction  between  these
seemingly  conflicting  rules.  In  the
righteous  judgments  of  God  every  man
has  to  bear  his  own  iniquity.  Saul
had  to  bear  every  atom  of  his.  .  .  .
There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  son  bearing
the  iniquity  of  his  father  in  the  sense


of  relieving  the  father  of  the  load.  .  .
But  there  is  a  law  that  often  operates
in  the  government  of  God.     When  a
father  is  addicted  to  a  sin  .  .  .  it  often
gets  ingrained,  as  it  were,  into  the  very
substance  of  the  race,  and  .  .  .  incases
where  the  iniquity   of  the  fathers  is
visited  upon  future  generations,  it  will
commonly  be  found  that  the  children
have  served   themselves  heirs  to  the
sins  of  their  fathers.  ...  It  was  the
blood  that  lay  upon  the  house,  as  well
as  on  Saul  personally,  that  cried  to
heaven  for  vengeance.     The  sons  that
were  given  up  to  justice  were  proh.ibly
living  and  fattening  upon  the  fruits  of
that  unprincipled  niassacre.  .  .  .  And
if  it  should  be  said  that,  in  going  into
this  transaction,  David  appears  to  have
felt    litlle    or    no    horror,    we    must
remember  how  sparing  the  Scriptures
are  in  their  mention  of  men's  feelings
in  such  matters.      He  may  have  felt
much  that  is  not  here  expressed  ;  or,
if  he  did  feel  less  concern  about  this
deed  of  death  than  might  have  been
expected,    we    must    remember    how
familiar  he  had  been  all  his  life  with
the  most  ghastly  scenes  and  how  much
familiarity  tends  to  deaden  the  ordinary
sensibilities  of  our  nature. — Blaikie,


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  10-14.

RizpAH  AND  David.


I.  Deep  affliction  often  brings  forth  a  nobility  of  character  which  would
otherwise  remain  latent.  It  is  not  likely  that  Rizpah  showed  herself  to  be  in
any  respect  a  remarkable  woman  before  this  great  bereavement.  She  manifested
probably  no  exceptional  amount  of  affection  for  her  children,  and  is  hardly
likely  to  have  herself  sounded  the  depths  of  her  maternal  love.  But  when
plunged  into  this  deep  sorrow  she  revealed  a  self-sacrificing  devotion,  which
lifted  her  at  once  far  above  the  level  of  ordinary  humanity.  The  death  of  her
children  awakened  within  her  a  noble  heroism  which  would  in  all  probability
have  lain  dormant  under  less  trying  circumstances.  This  is  not  an  uncommon
occurrence.  Men  and  women  who  seem  very  commonplace  while  no  special
demand  is  made  upon  their  better  nature,  often  rise  into  true  heroes  and
heroines  in  the  day  of  extraordinary  trial,  when  the  emotional  side  of  their
nature  is  called  upon  to  assert  itself.

II.  Such  nobility  of  character  forms  a  common  meetings  ground  for  those
otherwise  widely  sunderei.  There  was  little  in  common  between  David  and
Saul's  concubine.  The  king  had  scarcely  before  this  felt  ;iny  interest,  much
less  admiration,  for  llizpah.     But  being  himself  a  noble  man  and  capable  of

398


CHAP.  XXI.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


^reat  self-devotion,  this  display  of  deep  love  and  grief  bridged  over,  for  a  time
at  least,  the  gulf  that  had  hitherto  divided  them.  Men  are  not  unfrcqiiently
surprised  into  the  discovery  that  some,  from  whom  in  all  other  respects  they  are
;is  widely  sundered  as  the  poles,  are  one  with  them  in  dee])  and  noble  emotion
wiiicli  breaks  down  the  wall  of  partition  raised  hy  o])posing  interests  and
differing  circumstances.  The  father  who  mourned  for  Absalom  as  David  did
could  not  fail  to  be  touched  by  such  sorrow  as  Hizpah's,  and  for  the  moment  we
may  well  believe  their  common  humanity  made  them  forget  all  past  differences.

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  moved  by  her  affecting  piety,  buried

famine  did  not  cease  with  the  hanging  the  bones  of  her  sons    with    those  of

of  the  sons  of  Saul For  three  Saul  and    Jonathan  ....  and  after

long  months  the  bereaved  daughter  of  that,     God     was     entreated    f  )r    the

Aiah  held  her  watch But  still  land Both  the  infliction  and

the  Lord  was   not   entreated   for  the  removal    of    this    scourge    of    famine

land.  ....  But  though  private  piety  afford  a  striking  proof  how  deeply  the

is  all  too  weak  to  avert  God's  judg-  well-being    and    happiness  of  nations

ments  on  a  guilty  nation,  it  is  of  force  may    be    affected     by    the     personal

to  draw  down  from  heaven  a  private  character  of  their  rulers,  and  conse-

blessing,  and  is  never  wholly  unavailing.  quently,  what  just  reason  we  have  to

Deep,  we  may  well  believe,  were  the  attend    to  the   A})Ostle's   exhortation,

comimmings  which  Rizpah  held  with  (1  Tim.   ii.  2.)—T.  IJ,  Z.,   Dean  o)

God  in  her  awful  loneliness,  and  fervent  Exeter,

her  supplications And  David,

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGBAPET. -Verses  15-22.

David's  Warriors.

I.  Men's  qualifications  for  service  differ  at  different  periods  of  life.    When  a

man  is  young  his  body  answers  to  his  will  as  the  well-built  vessel  answers  to
her  helm,  going  hither  and  thither  in  obedience  to  every  behest  of  the  soul  as
the  ship  turns  to  obey  every  motion  of  the  wheel.  But  as  years  pass  on  the
body  becomes  a  less  ready  instrument  of  the  human  will,  and  we  are  all  made
painfiiUy  conscious  that  our  ability  to  perform  falls  far  more  below  our  desires
and  aims  than  in  the  days  of  youth.  At  whatever  period  in  David's  life  the
event  took  place  which  is  recorded  in  verses  15  to  17,  it  is  certain  that  it  must
point  to  a  time  when  the  strength  of  his  outer  man  was  no  longer  equal  to  that
of  his  inner,  when  he  lacked  neither  the  courage  nor  the  skill  to  lace  and  fight
a  foe,  but  when  he  found  that  his  powers  of  endurance  were  not  so  great  as  they
had  once  been.  To  will  was  present  with  him  still,  but  how  to  perform  what  he
willed  he  found  not.  But  if  David  had  no  longer  the  })hysical  gifts  which  had
distinguished  his  earlier  days,  he  had  other  and  far  more  needful  qualification.^
for  his  present  duties  which  he  con  Id  not  have  possessed  when  he  was  a  young
man.  There  is  this  compensation  given  to  all  faithful  men  when  they  feel  theu-
bodily  powers  decline,  that  they  now  are  far  richer  in  all  those  gifts  and  graces
which  can  only  be  gained  by  a  long  experience,— that  their  knowledge  of  God,  of
themselves,  and  of  their  fellow-men,  having  grown  with  their  years,  they  can
now  serve  their  generation  in  a  higher  capacity  than  a  phyMcal  one,  inasmuch
as  wisdom  to  guide  is  more  rare  and  precious  than  ability  to  act.  David  was
more  truly  a  light  to  Israel  now  than  when  he  sluw  Goliath  or  captured  the
Stronghold  of  Zion.

399


no MILETW  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,  book  ii.


II.  Men  fall  in  with  the  purpose  of  God  when  they  recognise  the  fact  that
a  diversity  of  gifts  tends  to  the  common  good.  David  and  his  warriors  seem
to  have  shown  true  wisdom  coticerniiig  this  matter.  The  king  acknowledged
That  he  was  now  not  able  to  do  as  well  on  the  field  of  battle  as  they  were,  and
was  content  to  confine  himself  to  other  duties,  while  they,  freely  rendering  such
services  as  they  were  able,  declared  that  what  they  could  do  was  as  nothing  in
comparison  with  the  worth  of  his  services.  Such  a  spirit  tends  to  create  that
bond  between  men  which  was  doubtless  one  great  end  which  God  had  in  view
when  He  made  them  to  differ  so  much  in  mental  and  physical  endowments.
By  making  it  impossible  for  them  to  be  independent  of  each  other's  services,
the  Father  of  the  Universe  would  bring  them  into  that  fellowship  without  which
they  can  not  fulfil  the  destiny  which  He  desires  for  them.


CHAPIER  XXII.


Critical  and  Expository  Notes.    Ver.  1.    This  Psalm,  with  a  few  iinimportant  variations,

is  identical  with  the  eighteenth  in  the  Psalter.  Wordsworth  suggests  that  the  modifications  which
there  appear,  where  the  title  has  '*  to  the  chief  musician,"  may  be  accounted  for  from  the
circumstance  that  in  the  present  chapter  the  song  appears  as  used  by  David  for  his  own  private
devotions  ;  and  in  the  Psalm  xviij.,  it  exhibits  the  form  in  which  he  delivered  it  for  the  general
liturgical  use  of  the  Hebrew  Church.  The  genuineness  of  the  Psalm  is  acknowledged  by  all
critics,  except  Olshausen  and  Hupfield,  but  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  time  when
it  was  composed.  Keil  thinks  it  belongs  to  David's  later  years.  Tlie  "  Biblical  Commentary  "
refers  it  *'  to  the  early  part  of  David's  reign,  when  he  was  recently  established  upon  the
throne  ;  "  and  Erdmann  says  "  the  time  of  composition  (the  reference  in  verse  51  to  2  Sam.  vii.
being  immistakeable)  cannot  be  before  the  date  when  David,  on  the  ground  of  the  promise  given
him  through  Nathan,  could  be  sure  that  his  dominion,  despite  all  opposition,  was  immovable,  and
that  the  throne  of  Israel  would  remain  for  ever  with  his  house.  The  words  of  the  title  agree
with  the  description  of  victories  in  verses  29-46,  and  point  to  a  time  when  David  had  established
his  kingdom  by  war,  and  forced  heathen  princes  to  do  homage  (comp.  verses  44-49).  But  as
God's  victorious  help  against  external  enemies  is  celebrated  in  the  second  part  of  the  song,  and
the  joyous  tone  of  exultation  shows  that  David's  heart  is  taken  up  with  the  gloriousness  of  that
help,  it  is  a  fair  assumption  that  the  song  was  written  not  after  the  toil  of  Absalom's  con-
spiracy and  the  succeeding  events,  but  immediately  after  the  victorious  wars  narrated  in  chaps,
viii.  and  x."  "  Spake  unto  the  Lord,"  etc.  "  These  expressions  are  borrowed  from
Exod.  XV.  1,  and  Deut.  xxxi.  30.  This  is  the  more  observable  because  the  Psalm  contains
obvious  allusions  to  the  song  of  Moses  in  Deuteronomy."  {Alexander).  "The  hand  of  Saul."
"  Not  because  Saul  was  the  last  of  his  enemies,  but  rather  because  he  was  first,  both  in  power  and
importance."  [Alexander).  "  The  poet's  imagination,  in  its  contemplation  of  the  two  principal
periods  of  war,  moves  backwards,  presenting  first  the  external  wars,  which  were  the  nearest  and
then  the  internal,  with  Saul  and  his  house."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  2.  "  My  rock  "  Seta,  my  roclc-cleft,  a  place  for  refuge  ;  not  the  same  word  as  that
used  in  verse  3.  "  First  and  frequently  used  by  David,  who  had  often  found  refuse  on  a  seta  in
his  persecution  ;  inde^ed,  it  is  only  once  used  by  any  other  writer  (Isa.  xxxii.  2)  in  the  Old
Testament,  in  a  figurative  sense,  and  there  the  metaphor  is  derived  from  the  shadow  and  not
fram  the  height  of  the  rock."  [Wordsivorth.)  *' My  deliverer."  "The  explanation  of  the
foregoing  figures.  Whilst  David  took  refuge  in  rocks,  he  placed  his  hope  of  safety  not  in  their
naccessible  character,  but  in  God  the  Lord."     [K«il).

Ver.  3.  "  God  of  my  rock."  Rather  my  roch-God.  The  word  here  rendered  rock  {tsur)
indicates  what  is  solid  and  immovable.  "  Horn."  "  A  term  borrowed  from  animals  which
have  their  strength  and  defensive  weapons  in  their  horns."  {Kiel  and  others).  "  Not  only  a
protection  against  attack  (as  a  shield),  but  also  a  weapon  of  attack."     {Erdmann).

Ver.  4.  "  I  will  call."  "  Shall  be  saved."  Not  to  be  taken  as  future,  but  as  "  indefinite
as  to  time,  the  English  general  present."  {Trans,  of  Lanjes  Commentary).  •'  Worthy  to  b©
praised."     Eather  the  praised  one^

400


OHAP.  XXII.  no  MILE  TIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :   SA  M  UEL.


Ver.  6.  "  Hell."  Sheol,  the  under  world,  the  place  of  departed  spirits.  "  In  the  wide  old
English  sense,  a  poetical  equivalent  to  death."     {Alex^inder .)      Prevented,  rather  encountered.

Ver.  7.  Temple.  Better,  pa Zace,  "for  Jehovah  is  here  represented  as  a  King  enthroned
n  heaven."     (Erdmann.)     The  Hebrew  word  means  both.

Ver.  8.  "The  earth  shook,"  etc.  A  few  writers  understand  the  followins:  as  a  description
a  real  st^rrn,  and  refer  it  to  a  battle  with  the  Syrians  when  a  storm  occurred  (2  Sam.  vii.  5),
utmost  agree  with  Kiel  that  it  is  a  poetical  description  of  David's  deliverance  which  "  had  its
type  in  the  miraculous  phenomenon  which  accompanied  the  descent  of  God  upon  Sinai,  and
which  suggested,  as  in  Judges  v.  4,  5,  the  idea  of  a  terrible  storm  that  the  saving  hand  of  God
from  heaven  was  so  obviously  manifested,  that  the  deliverance  experienced  by  him  could  be
poetically  described  as  a  miraculous  interposition  on  the  part  of  God."

Ver.  9.  "  Smoke,"  etc.  The  figurative  idea  Is  that  of  snorting  or  violent  breathing,  which
indicates  the  rising  of  wrath,"  (A'et/ and  others.)  Tholuck  sees  in  the  picture  thus  far  an
image  ''to  be  referred  to  the  rising  of  the  storm-cloud,  and  the  flashes  of  sheet-lightning  which
announces  the  storm."

Ver.  10.  "Bowed  the  heavens."  A  picture  of  the  low  hanging  storm-clouds,  at  whose
approach  the  heaven  seems  to  bend  down  to  the  earth."  {h'rdmann.)  "  Came  dow^n."  "  The
scene  here  seems  to  be  transferred  from  heaven  to  earth,  where  the  Psalmist  sees  not  only  the
Divine  operation,  but  the  personal  presence  of  Jehovah."  (Alexander).  Darkness,  rather
gloom,    A  poetical  expression  applied  to  thick  clouds  and  vapours.     {Alexander.)

Ver.  11.  '•  A  cherub,"  "  The  cherubim  of  the  Mosaic  system  were  visible  representations
of  the  whole  class  of  creatures  superior  to  man.  The  singular  form  seems  to  be  used  here  to
convey  the  indefinite  idea  of  a  superhuman,  yet  created  being.  As  earthly  kings  are  carried  by
inferior  animals,  so  the  heavenly  King  is  here  described  as  being  borne  through  the  air  in  His
descent  by  beings  intermediate  between  Himself  and  man."  {Alexander.)  "  The  poetical  figure
is  borrowed  from  the  fact  that  God  was  enthroned  between  the  two  cherubim  upon  the  lid  of
the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  above  their  outspread  wings.  As  the  idea  of  His  '  dwelling  between
the  cherubim  '  (chap.  vi.  2,  etc.)  was  founded  upon  this  typical  manifestation  of  the  gracious
presence  of  God  in  the  Most  Holy  place,  so  here  David  thus  depicts  the  descent  of  Jehovah,
picturing  the  cherub  as  a  throne  upon  which  God  appears  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  though
without  imagining  Him  as  riding  upon  a  sphinx  or  driving  in  a  chariot-throne.  Such  notions
are  precluded  by  the  addition  of  the  term,  *  did  fly.'  "     {Keil.)

Ver.  12.  "  Pavilions,"  i.e.,  tevts  or  coverts.  Alexander  takes  this  as  expressive  of  the
brightness  insupportable  by  mortal  sight ;  Keil  thinks  that  it  represents  Jehovah  as  hiding  His
face  from  man  in  wrath.  "  Dark  waters."  Literally,  water  c/nthcriri'/s,  or  watery  darkne-ys.
"A  beautiful  description  of  clouds  charged  with  rain."  (Alexander.)  "Thick  clouds,"  or
cloud-thicket.  "  This  second  noun  is  used  only  in  the  plural,  and  seems  properly  to  designate  the
whole  body  of  vapours  constituting  the  visible  heavens  or  sky."    (Alexander.)

Ver.  13.     "Through,"  or  out  of,  were  kindled,  rather  burned.

Ver.  14.  "Thundered."  "  Uttered  His  voice."  The  second  clause  is  a  poetical  repetition
of  the  first.     {Alexander.)

Ver.  15.  "Arrows."  "  The  lightnings  of  the  last  clause  may  be  understood  as  explaining
the  arrows  of  the  first."  (Alexander.)  "Discomfited."  "The  standing  expression  for  the
destruction  of  the  foe  accomplished  by  the  miraculous  interposition  of  God."     (^Keil.)

Ver.  16.  "The  breakers  of  death  "  and  tht  streams  of  evil,  have,  according  to  verse  5,  over-
whelmed David.  Under  the  image  of  water-waves  he  has  thus  depicted  the  dangers  that  liave
threatened  his  life.  The  Lord  in  revealing  Hi.s  an^'er  against  his  enemies,  saves  him  by  laying
bare  the  depths  of  the  sea  to  which  he  had  sunk,  and  uncovering  the  foundations  of  the  earth
hy  the  storm-wind  of  His  wrath.  Thither  descending  from  on  high  the  Lord  seized  him  and
drew  him  forth  from  the  waves  as  described  in  the  following  verses."  ( DcUtzsch  and  Erdmann.)
Some  writers  also  see  here  a  reference  to  the  early  history  of  Moses.  "  The  verb  to  draw,"  says
Dr.  Jamieson,  "naturally  suggests  it."  "  Luther,"  says  Jlengstenberg,  "already  called  attention
to  this  reference.  It  is  the  more  important  as  Moses  was  a  type  of  the  Israelitish  people  ;  the
waters  an  image  of  the  hostile  oppression  to  which  he  was  exposed  ;  and  the  event,  a  prophecy
constantly  fulfilling  itself  under  dififerent  circumstances."

Ver.  18,     Here  is  a  transition  from  the  figurative  to  the  literaL

Ver.  19.  Prevented.  (See  on  verse  6).  "Dxy  of  calamity."  Most  writers  think  the
time  of  Saul's  persecution  is  here  specially  intended.

2D  401


UOSIILETW  C OMMENTAR  Y :   ^A  M  lEL.  book  n.


Ver.  20.  *'Lir?e  place,"  liit.  the  broad,  a  condition  of  freedom  and  safety  in  contrast
with  the  straits  and  dangers  of  the  past.

Ver.  21.  21ie  Lord  rewarded,  or,  requited.  Alexander  in  Psalm  xviii.  translates  the  verbs  of
this  clause  into  the  future  tense  :  "  They  have  reference,"  he  says,  "  to  the  condition  of  the
Psalmist  under  his  afflictions,  and  the  hopes  which  he  was  even  then  enabled  to  cherish."
"  Cleanness  of  hands."  Dr.  Jamieson  sees  here  a  special  reference  to  David's  refusal  to
injure  JSaul,  or  to  free  himself  by  any  unrighteous  act.

Ver.  22.  "  Ways  of  the  Lord."  "  The  rules  of  human  conduct  given  in  His  law."  {Erdmann.)
"Wickedly  departed,"  etc.  Literally,  "wicked  from  God.'^  "The  combination  of  the
verb  and  preposition  shows  clearly  that  the  essential  idea  in  the  writer's  mind  was  that  of
apostasy  or  total  abjuration  of  God's  service."     {Alexander.)

Ver.  23.  "Judgments."  Rights,  {KeU,)  Judicial  decisions.  {Alexander.)  The  verbs
here  are  in  the  present  tense.

Ver.  24.  *' Mine  iniquity."  "  That  to  which  I  am  naturally  prone,  An  undoubted  con-
fession of  corruption."  {Alexander.)  "An  indirect  testimony  to  indwelling  sinfulness."
{Erdmann.)

Ver.  25.  "  Therefore,"  etc.  "  This  verse  shows  clearly  that  the  futures  in  verse  21  must
be  strictly  understood."     {Alexander.)

Veifc  26.     "  Merciful,"  or  gracious.

Ver.  27.  " Pure,"  or  grmume.  (Keil.)  "Unsavoury."  Better, perverse,  or  crooJced.  "The
resemblance  of  the  last  clause  of  this  verse  to  Lev.  xxvi.  23,  24,  makes  it  highly  probable  that
the  whole  form  of  this  singular  dictum  was  sugtrtsted  by  that  passage,  the  rather  as  this  Psalm
abounds  in  allusions  to  the  Pentateuch  and  imitations  of  it."     {Alexander.)

Ver.  28.  **  Thou."  This  word  is  emphatic.  "  However  men  may  despise  thy  afficted
people,  I  know  that  thou  wilt  save  them."     {Alexander.)

Ver.  29.  "  Lamp."  "  Wliile  light  is  always  the  symbol  of  good  fortune  and  well-being
(Job  xviii.  5),  the  burning  lamp  denotes  the  source  of  lasting  happiness  and  joyful  strength."
(Job  xviii.  6  ;  Ps.  cxxxii.  17  ;  compare  Isaiah  xlii.  3  ;  xliii.  17).     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  30.  "  By  thee."  Literally,  in  thee.  "  By  the  first  noun  David  means  the  hostile  bands
he  has  encountered  ;  by  the  second,  the  fortified  'places  he  has  conquered."     {Erdmann.)

Ver.  31.  "  Perfect,"  i.e.,  blameless,  free  from  all  taint  of  injustice.  "  Tried."  As  metals
are  by  fire,  and  thus  proved  to  be  genuine.     "  Buckler,"  i.e.,  skidd.

Ver.  32.  "  A  Rock."  "  He  adopts  the  language  of  Moses  in  his  song  in  Deut.  xxxii.
4,  15,  18,  30,  31,  in  all  of  which  places  the  word  tsur,  rock,  is  applied  to  God  ;  and  that  is  the
first  passage  in  the  Bible,  and  the  only  chapter  in  the  Pentateuch,  where  that  figure  is  used,  and
it  is  next  adopted  in  1  Sam.  ii.  2.  In  the  present  chapter  the  figure  is  used  four  times,  in
verses  3,  32,  47  twice,  and  in  chap,  xxiii.  3.  These  are  the  only  places  up  to  this  point  in  the
Hebrew  Bible  where  the  word  tsur  is  thus  iised,  and  they  serve  to  mark  the  connection  between
the  hymns  of  Moses,  of  Hannah,  and  of  David."     {Wordsworth.)

Ver.  33.  ''  My  strength."  Better,  fortress.  "  Maketh  my  way,"  etc.  Erdmann  and
Keil  read,  "  He  leads  the  perfect,  or  innocent,  on  his  way.'*  Alexander  explains  it,  "  Who  gives
my  conduct  the  perfection  which  belongs  to  it."

Ver.  34.  "Hinds."  The  female  gazelle,  noted  for  her  agility  and  swiftness.  Probably
alluding  to  David's  speed  in  pursuit  of  his  enenues.  "  A  figurative  element  lies  in  what  is  here
said  of  fleetness,  which  becomes  quite  obvious  when  we  take  it  along  with  the  last  clause,
David  points  to  the  quick  and  unrestrained  course  of  his  conquests  just  as  in  verse  29.
{Jamieson.)  "High  places."  Either  the  strongholds  taken  from  the  enemy  [Hcni/stenberg),
or  those  of  his  own  land  which  he  held  securely,  and  from  which  he  ruled  as  king.     {Keil.)

Ver.  35.  "  Steel."  Rather,  brass  or  bronze.  Both  skill  and  strength  are  the  gifts  recorded
in  this  verse.

Ver.  36.  "Gentleness."  Keil  and  Erdmann  read  "hearing,'^  i.e.,  favourable  acceptance  of
a  request.     Alexander  translates  "  condescension,"  Hengstenberg  "  lowliness."

Ver.  37.  "Enlarged  my  steps,"  i.e.,  given  me  ample  room  to  walk  without  hindrance.
"  Feet.'      Rather,  ankles.     The  whole  verse  expresses  safe  guidance.

402


OHAf.  XXII.  BOMILETIC  COMMr.NTARY:   SAMUEL.

Vers.  3S,  39.     A  picture  of  a  victory  where  the  enemy  is  entirely  vanquished.

loiIrth.!i  the^rnVre'  ,forf  KtL  " t  r™""  ''""l  "f  ■?"  /^'^  garments  and  fortify  their
Litc-aUy,  " duL  Zl  IbZ^e  l^"        '"''"'°"'  '=''°"-       (•^'"»«-"-)      "  Subdued^  etc.

Ver.  41.     "  The  aecV  or  "the  back."    Made  them  turn  to  flee.     (See  Ex.  xxiit  27.)

wiir;f,Ln;'tnqrr„^":!:;;::['t!s;fwhr.^  -^  ^^i  t^^^  "■

true  that  they  mi«ht  soon  be  reduced  a.  smafl  <^  ,1  .st*^  The"  bod  e.  nf  If  ^  "'  '  "  ""'■^'"^
exp„.sed  with..ut  the  rites  of  buri.il  on   tbp  fiZl.l    ,.  '.f      T  I        "'*'"  seniles  that  lie

vultures,  and  the  bones,  stripped  of  .Z  flcsl,  b  a U  In  tt'wal  .""""f  ""i  "^'^^  "^  *'»'^  "'
ion,  in  being  crumbled  to  duS,  and  so  trodde'a  'u'^Wth:  ill  ^fXi^r^rr-S-^  T^^'^rr"

T^:^^t:;^!:^%:]^:^'::!^,;^j:^  ''StLitUnis^Vth'r'  r'^'i '-

ol.vn.us  connection  with  the  promises  in  2  Sam  vii  show  H  ,t  L  *■  ■  »•  /f ''"'  •"'''  '*■'
of  the  psalm  was  not  limited  to  David's  pe.sral  tti'um  Z  .f,  ,  ">tic.pat.on  of  the  last  clause
to  comprehend  the  victories  of  his  successors  and  esnl^^.fl^^^  """l  °'  '''^'•™'''  ''»'  ■"«""

at  once  to  end  and  be  perpetuatS.'"    ( JSX  )    "^         '^  "*  ^™  '"  "'^''°'  *^  '°y^'  ""«  »a.

subnnt  at  the  mere  report,  or  when  they  hear  the  comL^dThey  ^l^r.^J^-^  17;^;";:^'^!

Ver  47.     "The  Lord  liveth."     In  contrast  to  imaginary  gods  or  dead  idol,     <«„^
expositors  understand  this  to  be  equivalent  to  the  acclamation  uttered  ?tth„  T-®  ""f""

earthly  monarch,  but  Keil,  Alexander,  Erdmann,  and  o  ,  "s  po  nt  out  tLt  r^*'""  ?!  J"
inappropriate  to  any  but  a  mortal  being.  They  take  it  simnlv  as  aTnl^ f  u^'l  "'""''*  ^^
to  be  taken  as  praise  of  God  "  (A'eil)  for  "  m-llin^cJi^-  T  ''""[^ration  which  "itself  is
perfections  whi^h  belong  to  Hii  ;  tVhLe^ordTtlgte'Hirwte'Hisrn  .?i'^*^g■"--
Blessed,"  «.,  praised,  or  worthy  to  be  praij.     "^Rock. "  Tsle  on  verse72  andl2T       "■^■'

buTro  him  a:'t?prc^:irc  "s"°-"    """'  ""'^^  ""-  *■■■«  *»  -'-  -  «•«  arat  instance  to  Saul,

m^i^strl^^oTraftrat^ieat:  o?^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

of   Palestine       He    can    only   have  a   nroner    aurlitorv   ,-7  f)  /  .    *^^ ''^''^^^  ^«"nds

(Benystmberj.)     -Paul   M^as  therefoie  Cfeotlv  wT^^  ^"^"f   ^^   *^^^    ^^^«^«   «^^rth."

along  with  Deit.  xxxii.  ^B^nd  Ps  cxvii^f  as  aVroo/  t^^^^^^  7'A'  ^'"  ^°^»-  ^^^-  9,

for  Gentiles  also."     (^e^Y.)  '  ^    ^  ^^'^^  *^^  salvation  of  God  was  intended

n.JI:ifie]was!fotDavfda;a;i;div'^Lrb^^^^^  ;  The  ki^^ose  salvation  the  Lord  had

royal  family  of  David  which  cnlnratedt  QrSt  David  cmirtl: «•''''-•  ^"'  '^  I"  ^^^'  *^-
of  the  promise  which  he  had  received  fchao  vi?  1 9  ^11^  [•  i^  ''"^  P'^''^'  ^"  ^^^  ground
in  the  last  clause  of  this  veL"'     (Tli")  ""  ''  "'^'^^"^  ^^"'"'^^  ^"^^^^""

i/J/iVT  BOMILETICS  OF  THE  PAIiAORAPff.-Verses  1-19.

David's  Song  of  Thanksgiving.— Part  I.
I.  Deep  gratitude  in  the  heart  will  find  its  wav  fn  tho  Hr.    t^  i.

Ueep  .sliirnig  of  the  luuer  hfe-especiaDy  when  it  is  of  a  joyous  nature-aud

Aiiti


no  Ml  LET W  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.  book  it.


the  utterance  of  it  in  speech,  so  that  the  experience  of  eacli  man  may  be  helpful
to  all,  and  individual  joy  be  increased  by  the  sympathy  of  others.  It  is  so  in
the  heavenly  world,  for  there  we  are  told  the  redeemed  Church  gives  expression
to  its  grateful  love  in  songs  of  praise,  and  it  was  so  with  David.  Even  while
surrounded  with  much  to  sadden  him,  he  could  not  look  back  upon  a  life  so
fdled  with  tokens  of  Divine  favour  without  bursting  forth  into  a  song  of  thanks-
giving, which,  although  addressed  in  the  first  instance  to  Jehovah,  was  doubtless
intended  also  to  be  a  testimony  to  his  fellow-men.

II.  The  foundation  of  all  joy  in  God  is  found  in  a  conviction  of  His  personal
interest  in  the  individual  man.  The  key-note  of  this  jtsalm,  and,  indeed,  of
the  whole  psalter,  is  a  sense  of  personal  relationship  to  an  Ahnighty  and  Loving
Father;  not  simply  a  share  in  a  general  providence  which  extends  to  all,  or  even
to  a  few,  but  of  s|)ecial  interposition  and  guidance  on.  behalf  of  one  man  as  truly
if  he  were  the  sole  object  of  God's  care.  There  are  many  ascriptions  of  praise
in  the  Bible  to  God  as  the  God  of  nations  and  of  all  created  beings,  but  theie
are  many  in  which  the  writers  coJifine  themselves  ])rincipally,  and  often  entirely,
to  celebrating  His  goodness  to  them  as  individual  men  and  women,  and  this
not  because  they  were  selfish,  entirely  or  chiefly  occu))ied  with  their  own  con-
cerns and  thinking  little  of  the  needs  of  others.  In  this  song  David  makes  no
mention  of  anybody  but  himself,  and  yet  we  know  he  had  the  welfare  of  his
people  very  near  his  heart,  and  grieved  deeply  when  his  sin  brought  trouble
upon  them  (see  chap.  xxiv.  17).  Nehemiah  gave  up  his  place  in  the  king's
palace  to  devote  himself  to  his  ])eople,  yet  he  could  not  feel  heart-satisfaction
merely  in  the  help  God  gave  to  him  as  one  of  a  nation,  but  craved  a  special  and
individual  remembrance  also  (see  Neh.  v.  19,  xiv.  14,  22,  31).  Nor  is  this
feeling  confined  to  Old.  Testament  saints.  Paul  was,  perhaps,  the  most  self-
forgetful  man  who  has  ever  lived,  yet,  amidst  all  his  praises  for  the  riches  of
Clirist's  mercy  to  the  world,  his  gratitude  is  never  deeper  than  when  he  speaks
of  the  Saviour  who  'Moved  him  and  gave  himself  for  him''  (Gal.  ii.  20) ;  and
he  never  penned  a  n)ore  glowing  ascrijUion  of  praise  to  God  than  when  he
contemplated  the  abundant  grace  which  had  been  manifested  to  himself
personally  (1  Tim.  i.  12-17).  The  Bible  does  not  require  men  to  ignore  their
individuality,  on  the  contrary  Christ^  himself  a])peals  to  that  Divinely-implanted
self-love,  which  is  so  far  removed  from  selfishness  (Mark  viii.  36),  that  those
who  obey  its  instincts  are  never  at  rest  unless  they  can  persuade  others  to
partake  of  the  same  blessedness.  An  unsliaken  confidence  that  God  is  his  God
in  a  personal  and  direct  sense,  is  the  only  foundation  for  that  rest  and  satisfac-
tion of  the  spirit  without  which  no  obedience  to  God  or  service  to  man  can  ever
be  rendered.

III.  No  material  similitude  is  too  strong^  to  express  soul-experience.     The

ocean-depths  are  great,  but  they  are  not  too  great  to  set  forth  the  deep  agony
into  which  a  soul  is  sometimes  plunged  by  remorse  or  by  a  sense  of  God's
displeasure.  The  waves  of  the  sea  are  often  rough,  and  buffet  the  weary
swiuimer  until  his  bodily  strength  entirely  fails  him  ;  but  they  are  not  rougher
than  the  waves  of  adverse  circun^stances  which  often  overwhelm  his  soul.  God's
hand  was  seen  very  plainly  when  He  drew  Moses  out  of  the  water  and  made  a
way  for  Israel  through  the  sea,  but  when  David  looked  back  on  his  eventful  life
he  felt  that  Divine  interposition  was  as  plainly  seen  in  the  deliverances  which
he  had  experienced.  Storm  and  fire  and  earthquake  are  wonderful  manifesta-
tions of  the  power  of  God,  but  they  are  not  so  mighty  nor  so  glorious  as  the
omnipotence  which  rules  in  the  world  of  spirit,  and  works  all  things  there  also
according  to  the  counsel  of  His  own  will.  It  is  great  to  still  the  noise  of  the
V\a-ves,'but  it  is  greater  to  keep  in  check  the  passions  of  evil  men  (Ps.  Ixv.  7),
404


eHAF.  XXII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


and  more  glorious  to  rule  over  the  tlie  countless  myriads  that  people  the  globe
than  to  ride  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind.  Therefore  no  metaphor  that  David
here  uses  can  even  adequately  set  forth  what  he  desires  to  express,  because
nothing  that  belongs  to  the  world  of  sense  can  perfectly  represent  the  unseen
and  the  spiritual.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGEST/ VB  COMMENTS,


Ver.  1.  God  lets  out  His  mercies  to
us  for  this  rent  of  our  praises,  and  is
content  we  have  the  benefit  of  them,
so  He  have  the  glory.  —  Irapp.

The  mention  of  Saul  in  the  title
does  not  indicate  that  the  Psalm  was
composed  in  David's  early  life,  but
rather  that,  even  though  thirty  years
had  gone  since  his  persecution  by  the
son  of  Kish,  the  deliverances  which  he
then  experienced  had  not  faded  from
his  memory,  but  still  stood  out  before
him  as  the  greatest  mercies  which  he
had  ever  received.  We  are  prone  to
forget  past  favors.  The  benefactors  of
our  youth  are  not  always  remembered
in  our  after  years  ;  and  in  the  crowd
and  conflict  of  events  in  our  later
history  we  have  too  often  little
thought  to  spare,  and  few  thanks  to
express,  for  our  early  mercies.  We  do
not  enough  consider  that,  in  mounting
the  ladder  of  life,  it  is  often  more
difficult  to  set  our  foot  on  the  first
round  than  to  take  any  single  step
thereafter  ;  and,  therefore,  that  those
who  aided  us  in  the  beginning  have
given  us  by  far  the  most  effectual
assistance.  But  it  was  not  so  with
David,  for  as  he  sits  here  looking  back
on  his  career,  his  first  conflicts  seem
still  his  greatest ;  and  much  as  he
blessed  God  for  after-kiudness,  he
places  high  above  all  the  other  favors
which  he  had  received  his  deliverance
out  of  the  hand  of  Saul. — Dr.  Taylor.

Ver.  2.  In  the  chapiter  that  imme-
diately follows  the  names  of  David's
great  captains  are  faithfully  recorded
and  their  exploits  duly  chronicled,  but
in  his  address  to  God  there  does  not
occur  the  name  of  a  single  human
being.  .  --  -  In  the  intensity  of
the  gaze  which  is  fixed  on  him  who  is
i»^ visible,  the  eye  of  faith  lost  sight  for


a  time  of  the  human  instruments
through  whom  much  of  the  work  was
done.  He  who  in  the  depths  of  his
penitence  saw  but  One  injured  Being,
and  said  "  Against  Thee,  Thee  only
have  I  sinned  ;  "  now  at  tlie  height  of
his  prosperity  sees  but  one  gracious
Being. — Blaikie.

Vers.  2,  3.  It  pleased  holy  David
more  that  God  was  his  strength  than
that  God  gave  him  strength  ;  that
God  was  his  deliverer  than  that  he
was  delivered  ;  that  God  was  his  for-
tress, buckler,  horn,  his  high  tower,
than  that  he  gave  him  the  effect  of
all  these.  It  ])leases  all  the  saints
more  that  God  is  their  salvation,
whether  temporal  or  eternal,  than  that
he  saves  them  ;  the  saints  look  more
at  God  than  at  all  that  is  God's. —
Caryl.

This  is  no  vain  repetition,  neither  is
it  a  straining  after  effect,  like  that  of
the  young  orator  who  piles  epithet
upon  epithet,  weakening  only  where
he  meant  to  strengthen  ;  but  it  is  an
attempt  to  describe,  from  many  sides,
that  which  he  felt  could  not  be  fully
shown  from  any  single  standpoint.  He
means  to  say,  that  for  every  sort  of
peril  in  which  he  had  been  placed,  God
had  been  a  protection  appropriate
thereto;  as  if  he  had  said,  "those
whom  God  intends  to  succour  and
defend  are  not  oidy  safe  against  one
kind  of  danger,  but  are,  as  it  were,
surrounded  by  impregnable  ramparts
on  all  sides  ;  so  that,  should  a  thou-
sand deaths  be  presented  to  tiicir
view,  they  ought  not  to  be  afraid  even
at  this  formidable  array."  Nor  is  this
many-sided  description  of  God's  pro-
tection without  its  value  to  us  ;  for
though  we  may  have  proved  his  power
to   help  us  in  one  way,  we   are   apt

405


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL


BOOK  n


to  fnll  into  despair  wlien  some  new
danger  tlireatens  us,  and  therefore  it
is  reassuring  to  have  David's  testi-
mony to  the  fact  that  tliose  whom  God
shiehls  are  incased  all  round,  and  will
have  perfect  protection  in  every  emer-
gency.— Dr.   W.  M.  Taylor.

Ver,  4.  When  David  called  on  God
in  danger,  he  very  specially  set  Him
hefore  his  mind  as  "worthy  to  be
praised."  A  very  remarkai)le  habit
this,  and  the  key  to  many  of  his
spiritual  triumphs.  He  first  sets  before
his  mind  the  gracious,  encouraging,
reassuring  aspects  of  God's  character,
then  asks  deliverance  from  his  enemies.
— Blaikie.

This  doctrine  is  in  tribulation  the
most  ennobling  and  truly  golden.  One
cannot  believe  wliat  assistance  such
[)raise  to  God  is  in  pressing  danger.
For  as  soon  as  you  begin  to  praise
God,  the  sense  of  the  evil  will  also
begin  to  abate,  the  comfort  of  your
heart  will  grow,  and  God  will  be  called
upon  with  confidence. — Luther.

Vers.  4-7.  The  cordial  intercourse
of  prayer  between  the  Old  Testament
saints  and  their  covenant-God  is  the
factual  proof  of  the  positive  self-revela-
tion of  the  personal,  living  God,  without
whose  initiative  such  over-springing  of
the  chasm  between  the  holy  God  and
sinful  man  were  impossible,  and  also
the  most  striking  refutation  of  the
fahe  view  that  the  religion  of  the  old
covenant  presents  an  absolute  chasm
between  God  and  man.  1  he  real  life
communion  between  the  heart  that
goes  inmiediately  to  its  God  in  prayer
and  the  God  who  hears  snch  prayer,
is,  on  the  one  hand,  in  contrast  to
the  extra  testamental  religitm  of  the
pre-Christian  world,  alone  founded  on
God's  positive  historical  self-revelation
to  his  people  and  the  thereby  estab-
lished covenant  relation  between  them,
and,  on  the  other  hand,  as  sporadic
anticipation  of  the  life  communion
with  God  established  by  the  New
Testament  Mediator,  it  is  a  factual
prophecy  of  the  religious  ethical  life-
communion  (culminating  in  prayer)
40G


between  man  redeemed  by  Christ  and
His  heavenly  Father. — Krdmann.

Ver.  7.  Prayer  is  that  postern-gate
which  is  left  open  even  when  the  city
is  straitly  beseiged  by  the  enemy ;  it
is  that  way  upward  from  the  pit  of
despair  to  which  the  spiritual  miner
flies  at  once  when  the  floods  from
beneath  break  forth  upon  him.  Observe
that  he  calls,  then  he  cries — prayer
grows  in  vehemence  as  it  proceeds.
Note  also  that  he  first  invokes  his
God  under  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and
then  advances  to  a  more  familiar  name
— ''My  Godr  Thus,  faith  increases
by  exercise,  and  He  who  we  first  viewed
as  Lord  may  soon  be  our  God  in
covenant.  .  .  .  Above  the  noise  of
the  racing  billows  of  death  or  the
barking  dogs  of  hell,  the  feeblest  cry
of  a  true  believer  will  be  heard  in
heaven.  Far  up  within  the  bejewelled
walls  and  through  the  gates  of  pearl
the  cry  of  the  suffering  suppliant  was
heard.  Music  of  angels  and  harmony
of  seraphs  availed  not  to  drown  or  even
impair  the  voice  of  that  humble  call.
The  King  heard  it  in  His  palace  of
light  unsufferable,  and  lent  a  willing
ear  to  the  cry  of  his  beloved  child. — •
iSpurgeon.

if  you  listen  even  to  David's  harp
you  shall  hear  as  many  hearse-like
airs  as  carols,  and  the  pencil  of  the
Holy  Ghost  hath  laboured  more  in
describing  the  afflictions  of  Job  than
the  felicities  of  Solomon.  Prosperity
is  not  without  many  fears  and  distastes,
and  adversity  is  not  without  comforts
and  hopes.  We  see  in  needlework  and
embroideries  it  is  more  pleasing  to
have  a  lively  work  upon  a  sad  and
solemn  ground  than  to  have  a  dark
and  melancholy  work  upon  a  light-
some ground.  Judge,  therefore,  of  the
pleasures  of  the  heart  by  the  pleasures
of  the  eye.  Certainly,  virtue  is  like
precious  odours — most  fragrant  when
they  are  crushed  ;  for  prosperity  doth
best  discover  vice,  but  adversity  doth
best  discover  virtue. — Lord  Bacon.

Ver.  12.  Blessed  is  the  darkness
which  eucurtains  my  God.     If  I  njay


CHAP.  xxn.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


not  see  PTim,  it  is  sweet  to  know  that  through  the  living  tablets  of  a  heart

He  is  working'  in  secret  for  my  eternal  deeper    and    vaster    than    the   whole

good.     Even    fools   can    helieve   that  legislation  of  Moses.     It  \yas  the  be-

God  is  abroad  in  the  sunsliine  and  in  ginning  of  a  new  dispensation. — Dean

the  calm,  but  faith  is  wise  ami  discerns  ^tanh'H.

them   in    the    terrible   darkness    and  At   the   basis  of  the   symbolism  of

threatening  storm. — ^purgeon.  nature  lies  the  idea  that  certain  pecu-
liarities in  the    nature  and  action  of

Vers.  1,  19.     The  means  by  which  God  correspond  with  it.     Thence  God

this  deliverance  was  achieved  were,  as  Himself  is  at  times  described  as  present

far  as  we  know^  those  which  we  see  in  and   actioe   in    these    phenomena   of

the    books  of  Samuel— the  turns  and  nature,    not   merely   accompanied   by

chances  of  Providence,  his  own  extra-  them,  and  in  bold  but  contemplative

ordinary  activity,  the   faithfulness  of  expressions  the  stirring  up  and  expres-

his  followers,  the  unexpected  increase  sion  of  his  wrath  is  represented  as  the

of  his  friends.     But  the  act  of  deliver-  kindling  of  His    light— nature  in  all

ance  itself  is    described   in    language  the  turns  of  fiery  and  flaming  figures,

which    belongs   to    the   descent   upon  .     .     .     These  natural  phenomena^

Mount  Sinai  and  the  passage  of  the  not  so  much  in  themselves  as  under

Red  Sea.     It  was  the  exudus,  though  certain  circumstances  and    more  par-

of  a  single  human  soul,  yet  of  a  soul  tlcular  forms,  form  partly  the  symbol,

which  reflected  the  whole  nation.     It  partly  the  means  of  a  Theophany. —

was  the  giving  of  a  second  law,  though  Dr.  Moll.


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  20-28,

David's  Song. — Part  II.

I.  Men  are  to  be  judged  by  the  spirit  of  their  lives,  and  not  by  isolated
actions.  It  is  evident  that  we  must  read  David's  words  here  concerning  himself
in  the  light  of  others  found  elsewhere,  and  then  we  shall  understand  that  he
does  not  claim  to  have  been  faultless  even  in  his  outward  life,  or  to  have  merited
the  distinguishing  marks  of  divine  favour  that  he  had  received.  (See  Suggestive
Comments.)  He  can  only  be  recording  his  consciousness  of  a  generally  faithful
discharge  of  his  public  duties  and  of  a  life  which  had,  upon  the  whole,  been
governed  by  pure  and  holy  motives.  If  a  man  holds  a  fort  again.st  an  enemy
for  many  years,  and  is  upon  one  occasion  overpowered  and  taken  pri.soner,  even
if  it  be  by  his  own  negligence,  he  cannot  be  cla.ssed  with  him  who  treacherously
parleys  with  the  foe  and  betrays  his  trust  for  selfish  ends.  He  must  be  regarded
as  blameworthy,  but  if  he  make  every  possible  effort  to  retrieve  his  failure  he
cannot  be  treated  as  a  deserter.  David's  reputation  was  sadly  tarnished  by
his  being  surpri.sed  through  being  found  morally  asleep  by  the  tempter  when  he
ought  to  have  been  awake  and  standing  upon  his  watch-tower.  Bur.  though  he
was  at  that  time  caj)tured  by  the  devil  at  his  will,  and  remained  for  some  time
tied  and  bound  in  the  camp  of  the  enemy,  the  51st  Psahn  reveals  his  efforts  to
escape,  and  his  desire,  so  far  as  it  was  pos.sible,  to  regain  his  ohl  position  and
again  serve  God  in  serving  his  people.  God's  subsequent  treatment  of  David
reveals  that  He  did  not  judge  him  by  this  fall,  or  even  by  repeated  false  steps,
but  by  the  general  spirit  and  intent  of  his  whole  life,  and  the  heart  and  conscience
of  every  upright  ujan  testify  to  the  justice  of  the  divine  verdict.  It  has  been
remarked  that  the  disobedience  of  Saul  in  the  matter  of  the  sacritice  (1  Sam.  xiii.)
bears  no  comparison  in  itself  to  the  crimes  of  David  in  relation  to  tJriah,  yet  it
seems  to  have  been  visited  by  a  far  heavier  penalty.     We  can  only  ex])lain  the

407


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,  book  n.


different  treatment  of  the  two  offenders  upon  the  principle  just  considered    CSee
also  on  this  subject,  page  360.)  *

II.  The  character  of  man  influences  the  conduct  of  God.  David  here  teaches  this
truth  by  connecting  Ins  own  faithfuhie<sand  integrity  with  the  gracious  dealin^rs
o\  (jod  towards  him,  making,  m  fact,  the  one  dependent  on  the  other.     Valuable
possessions  of  any  kind  give  a  man  worth  and  importance  in  the  eyes  of  others
Lven  material  wealth  increases  a  man's  worth  in  the  estimation  of  his  fellow
men— because  such  an  addition  to  his  existence  enables  him  to  do  what  poorer
men  cannot  do,  he  is  treated  with  more  considerntion,  and  his  life  is  regarded
as  more  precious.     The  gifts  and  i)ossessions  of  the  intellect  more  justly  give
value  to  him  to  whom  they  beL)ng— great  knowledge  and  mental  ability  can  be
so  beneficial  to  the  community  at  large  that  he  who  has  them  is  held  in  high
estimation,  and  men  who  can  appreciate  such  a  i)erson  delight  to  honour  him
hut  much  more  does  moral  excellence  make  a  man  precious  in  the  sight  of  other
good  men.     They  look  upon  character  as  the  real  and  personal  and  eternal
possession,  and  value  human  creatures  onl^  in  proportion  as  they  are  holy  and
true.      1  his   they  do,  not   only   because  of  the   sympathy  which   must   exist
between  all  who  are  united  in   desire  and  aim,  but  because  of  the  beneficial
influence  of  such  a  character— because  of  the  blessed  use  of  such  a  life  in  the
world  and  in  the  universe.     It  would  be  strange  indeed  if  we  found  this  rule
reversed  as  we  ascended  in  the  moral  scale-^if  the  infiidtely  good  God  did  not
set  a  high  price  upon  human  character,  and  deal  with  men  accordingly.     True
is  it  that  he  can  discern  flaws  and  imperfections  in  the  best  of  human'creatures
but  His  moral  perfection  does  not  prevent  Him  from  looking  with  approval  upoii
those  who  love  and  seek  after  righteousness,  however  morally  weak  they  may  be
He  not  only  loves  them  for  all  that  is  God-like  within  them,  but  for  the  efforts
they  make  to  uphold  and  advance  His  kingdom  in  the  world.     Such  beino-  the
regard  m  which  they  are  held  by  God,  it  must  be  that  His  dealings  with  them
are  in  accordance  vyith  His  gracious  approval  of  them,  and  there  must,  therefore,
be  a  special   and   intimate   connection  between  human  character  and  Divine
conduct.

III.  ITpon  the  character  and  conduct  of  men  depends  their  view  of  the
character  and  conduct  of  God.    Many  commentators  do  not  think  this  idea  is
expressed  i;^^  verses  26  and  27,  but  that  they  only  express  the  truth  just  dwelt
upon  viz.,     that  Gods  objective,  real  conduct  towards  men,  according  to  His
retributive  justice,  corresponds  exactly  to  man's  ethical  conduct  towards  God '*
{trdmann).     But  David  may  also  here  refer  to  the  undoubted  fact  that  every
man  s  conception  of  God  depends  upon  his  own  condition  of  heart  and  conscience
Men  see  each  other  through  the  same  medium.     The  face  that  looks  into  the
muTor  is  the  same  that  is  seen  reflected  ;  there  are  laws  which  forbid  that  dis-
torted or  unlovely  features  should  give  back  a  beautiful  and  pleasing  reflection
And  there  are  also  laws  which  make  all  other  men  jq.pear  morally  unattractive
and  even  disagreeable  to  a  wicked  or  even  an  unloving  man.     He  who  lives  for
self  thinks  everybody  whom   he  meets  is  a  selfish   being,  and  the  proud  and
angry  man  is  alwa3.'s  complaining  of  the  pride  and  bad  temper  of  those  around
Jiiin.     iliere  is  some  objective  foundation   for  these  conceptions,  inasmuch  as
evil  passions  in    ourselves  call   forth  and   foster  the  same  in  others  and  the
reverse  ;  and  there  is  a  sense  in  which  even  the  unchanging  and  righteous  God
as  we  have  already  seen,  must  really  manifest  a  side  of  His  i-erfect  character  t.i
the  unholy  and  rebellious  which  differs  from  (hat  which  is  seen  by  those  who  love
Him  an,l  desire  to  serve  Him.     But  apart  Irom  the  actual  fact,  all  the  ways  of
the  Almighty  seem  hard  and  often  unjust  to  those  who  will  not  fall  in  with  His
methods  of  blessing  them,  and  the  more  they  rebel  under  the  yoke  the  heavier
408


CHAP,  XXII.


IIOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMUEL.


it  must  really  become.  The  old  statute  is  still  in  force  :—'  If  ye  will  not  be
reformed  by  me  in  these  things,  but  will  walk  contrary  unto  me,  then  will  I  walk
contrary  unto  you  "  (Lev.  xxvi.  23,  24),  but  every  man  who  is  unreconciled  to
God  regards  even  His  most  luerciful  dispensations  and  laws  from  a  false  stand-
point, and  often  transfers  his  own  unrighteousness  to  the  spotless  character  of  his
Maker.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


Ver.  21.  Albeit  the  dispensations
of  Divine  grace  are  to  the  fullest  degree
sovereign  and  irres))ective  of  human
merit,  yet  in  the  dealings  of  Providence
there  is  often  discernible  a  rule  of
justice  by  which  the  injured  are  avenged
and  the  righteous  ultimately  triumph.
David's  early  troubles  arose  from  the
wicked  malice  of  envious  Saul,  wlio,  no
doubt,  prosecuted  his  persecutions
under  cover  of  charges  brought  against
the  character  of  the  man  after  God's
own  heart.  These  charges  David  de-
clares to  have  been  utterly  false,  and
asserts  that  he  possessed  a  grace-given
righteousness  which  the  Lord  had
graciously  rewarded  in  defiance  of  all
liis  calumniators.  Before  God,  the
man  after  God's  own  heart  was  a  humble
sinner ;  hut  before  his  slanderers  ho
could,  with  unblushing  face,  speak  of
the  cleanness  of  his  hands  and  the
righteousness  of  his  life.  He  knows
little  of  the  sanctifying  power  of  Divine
grace  who  is  not,  at  the  bar  of  Imman
equity,  able  to  plead  innocence.  There
is  no  self-righteousness  in  an  honest
man  knowing  that  he  is  honest,  nor
even  in  his  believing  that  God  rewarded
him  in  Providence  because  of  his
honesty,  for  such  is  often  a  most  evident
matter  of  fact.  It  is  not  at  all  an
opposition  to  the  doctrine  of  salvation
by  grace,  and  no  sort  of  evidence  of  a
Pharisaic  spirit,  when  a  gracious  man,
having  been  slandered,  stoutly  main-
tains his  own  integrity  and  viuorously
defends  his  character.  A  godly  man
lias  a  clear  conscience,  and  knows  him-
self to  be  upright.  Is  he  to  deny  his
own  consciousness,  and  to  despise  the
work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  hypocriti-
cally making  himself  out  to  be  worse
than  he  is?  A  godly  man  prizes  his
integrity  very  highly,  or  else  he  would


not  be  a  godly  man  at  all ;  is  he  to  be
called  proud  because  he  would  not
readily  lose  the  jewel  of  a  reputable
character  ?  A  godly  man  can  see  that
in  the  long  run  uprightness  and  truth
are  sure  to  bring  their  own  reward  ;
may  he  not,  when  he  sees  that  reward
bestowed  in  his  own  case,  praise  the
Lord  for  it?  Yea,  rather  must  he  not
show  forth  the  faithfulness  and  good-
ness of  his  God  ?  Read  the  cluster  of
exi)ressions  in  this  and  the  following
verses  as  the  son;-  of  a  good  conscience,
alter  having  safely  outridden  a  storm
of  oblo(]uy,  persecution,  and  alaise,  and
there  will  be  no  fear  of  our  upbraiding
the  writer  as  one  who  set  too  high  a
price  upou  his  own  moral  character. —
Spur  g  eon.

Ver.  22.  That  is,  with  a  purpose
and  resolution  to  continue  in  the  way
of  sinning,  and  that  is  the  property  of
sincerity.  A  man  indeed  ujay  be
overtaken  and  surprised  in  a  tempta-
tion, but  it  is  not  with  a  resolution  to
forsake  God  and  to  cleave  unto  the
sin,  or  rest  in  it.  He  will  not  sleep  in
it,  spare  it,  or  favour  it ;  that  is,  to  do
wickedly  against  God,  to  have  a  double
heart  and  a  double  eye  ;  to  look  upon
two  objects,  partly  at  God  and  partly
at  sin  ;  so  to  keep  God  as  to  keep  some
sin  also,  as  it  is  with  all  false-hearted
men  in  the  world.  They  look  not
up(m  God  alone,  let  them  pretend  to
religion  never  so  much,  but  upon
something  else  together  with  God  ;  as
Herod  regarded  John,  but  regardt'd
his  Hcrodias  more  ;  and  the  young
man  in  the  gosjtel,  comes  to  Christ,
yet  he  looks  after  his  estate;  and
Judas  followed  Christ,  yet  looks  after
the  bag  ;  this  is  to  depart  wickedly
from  God, —  \V.  (Strong,

409


HOMILETIC  COMM1.NTARY:    SAMUEL.


BOOK  n.


Ver.  24.    Ke^^p  liiniself !  Who  made
man  his  own  keeper  ?     'Tis  the  Lord
that  is  his  keeper  ;  He  is  the  keeper
of  Israel  and  the  preserver  of  nieu.    If
a    man    cannot    keep    himself    from
sorrow,  how  can  he  keep  himself  from
sin?     God  indeed  in  our  first  conver-
sion works  upon  us  as  He  works  upon
the  earth,  or  Adam's  body  in  paradise,
before  He  breathed  a  soul  into  it,  or
niade  a  living  creature  ;  such  a  power
as  Christ  put  forth  on  Lazarns  in  his
grave,    for  we  are  dead  in    trespasses
and  sins  ;    but  yet,  being  living,  he
must  w.i.k  and  act  of  himself,  the  Lord
will  have  as  to  co-operate  together  with
Him,  for  we  are   built   upon   Christ,
not  as  dcail,  but  as  "  living  stones."
(1  Pet.  ii.  b).—  W.  iStrong.

There  is  "7  have'*  and  "I  have
not"  both  of  which  must  be  blended
in  a  truly  sanctified  life  ;  constraining
and  restraining  grace  must  each  take
its  share. — Spurgeon.

Mark  ''from  mine  iniquity."     The
godless  man,  though  he  do  much,  will
be  sure  to  fail  here,  and  the  godly  man
will  strike  home  here  wherever  he  be
favourable.     A  horse  that  is  not  sound,
but  foundered,  will  favour  one  foot,  if
not  more ;  the  lapwing,  some  observe,
will  cry  and  make  a  great  noise,  but  it
is  when  she  is  farthest  from  her  nest ;
the  hypocrite  may  keep  a  great  stir
about  many  sins,  but  there  is  one  sin
which  he  meddleth  not  with.     There
is,  says  a  learned  divine,  no  greater
argument  of  unsound  rei)enfance  than
indulgent  thoughts  and  reserved  de-
light and  complacency  in  a  master-sin.
As  some  grounds  are  most  proper  soils
to  breed  and  nourish  some  particular
weeds,  so  are  some  men's  hearts  for
some  particular    sins,    and   the   devil
holds  them  as  fast  by  this  sin  as  by  ten
thousand.     .     .     .     The  creature  may
do  much  by  the  command  of  God,  but
there  is  old  stir  and  pulling  before  this
sin  be  separated  from  him.     If  this  be
once  done  thoroughly  the  man  is  con-
verted truly. — Swinnock

Ver.  25.     God  first  gives  us  holiness
and  then  rewards  us  for  it.     We  are
His  workmanship- -vessels  made  unto
410


honour,  and  when  made  the  honour  is
not  withheld  from  the  vessel;  though,  in
fact,  it  all  belongs  to  the  Potter  upon
whose  wheel  it  was  fashioned.  The
prize  is  awarded  to  the  flower  at  the
show,  hut  the  gardener  reared  it  ;  the
child  wins  the  prize  from  the  school-
master, but  the  real  honour  of  his
schooling  lies  with  the  master,  al  thou- h,
instead  of  receiving,  he  gives  the
reward. — IS  pur g  eon,

Ver.  26.  Note  that  even  the  mer-
ciful need  mercy.  No  amount  of
generosity  to  the  poor  or  forgiveness  to
enemies  can  set  us  beyond  the  need  of
mercy. — ^purgeon.

Vers.   22-25.      What    David    here

extols  is  not  the  ground  upon  which
he  personally,  as  a  sinner,  obtained  the
favour  of  God,    but    the    ground  on
which  he,  as  the  public  champion  of  a
great  cause,  enjoyed    God's    counten-
ance, while  he  was  honestly  and  faith-
fully maintaining  that  cause.      There
could  be  no  self-praise  in  the  lieutenant
of  a  ship  saying  to  his  ca[)tain,    "  1
adhered  to  your  instructions  in  every
])oint,  and  my  success  was  complete."
There     would     have     been     no    sidf-
rigiiteousness  in  such  a  man  as  Luther
saying,  "I  constantly  maintained  the
principles  of  the  i3ible— God  crowned
my   labours  with   success ; "    for   the
honour  in  such  ca-es   is  not  claimed
by    the    person  acting,  it  is  given  to
his  superior,  by  whose  instructions  he
has  acted  ....  No  other  spirit  tlian
this  can  with  consistency  be  claimed
for  David. — Blaikie.

The  current  of  his  moral  being
flowed  on  in  the  channel  of  everlasting
right.  His  sins  were  only  wavelets  on
the  stream,  which  the  winds  of  tempta-
tion occasionally  dashed  over  the
embankments. — Dr,  David  Thomas.

As  you  may  see  a  proportion  between
sins  and  punishments  which  are  the
rewards  of  them,  so  that  you  can  say,
such  a  sin  brought  forth  this  affliction,
it  is  so  like  its  father  ;  so  you  might
see  the  like  proportions  between  your
prayers  and  your  walking  with  God
and   God's  answers  to  you  and  His


OHAP.  XXII.


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL.


dealings  with  you.  So  did  David.
According  to  the  cleamiesSy  etc.  His
speech  denotes  some  similitude  or  like-
ness, as,  for  example,  the  more  by  ends
or  carnal  desires  you  had.  in  praying,
and  the  more  you  mingled  of  these  with
your  holy  desires,  and  the  more  want
of  zeal,  fervency,  etc.,  were  found  in
your  prayers,  the  more  you  shall,  it
may  be,  find  of  bitterness  mingled
with  the  mercy,  when  it  is  granted,
and  so  much  imperfection,  and  want
of  comfort  in  it.  So  says  David  in
this  psalm,  "  With  the  pure  thou  wilt
show  thyself  pure"  Pure  prayers  have
pure  blessing,  and  ^  contra,  *'  With  the
froward  thou  wilt  show  Thyself  Jro-
ward."  And,  again,  as  you  in  prayer
sometimes  slackened  and  grew  cold,  so
you  might  see  the  business  in  like
manner  to  cool  and  cast  backward,  as,
when  Moses'  hands  were  down  Amalek
prevailed,  and  when  they  were  lifted
up  Israel  had  the  better.  A  man  finds
in  praying  that  his  suit  sometimes
sticks,  and  goes  not  on  as  he  ex})ected  ;
but,  on  the  contrary,  when  he  was
stirred  up  to  pray,  then  still  he  found
things  to  go  well.  By  this  a  m;m  may
clearly  see  that  it  was  the  prayer  which
God  did  hear  and  regarded.  Thus,
likewise,  when  a  man  sees  hills  and
dales  in  a  business,  fair  hopes  often,
and  then  all  dashed  again,  and  the
thing  in  the  end  brought  to  pass,  let
him  look  back  upon  his  prayers.  Didst
thou  not  in  like  manner  just  thus  deal
with  God  ?  When  thou  hadst  prayed
earnestly,  and  thought  thou  hadst
even  carried  it,  then  dash  all  again  by
interposing  some  sin,  and  thus  again
and  again.  Herein  God  would  have
you  observe  a  proportion,  and  it  may
help  you  to  discern  how  and  when  they
are  obtained  by  prayer,  hecause  God
deals  thus  with  you  therein  in  such  a
proportion  to  your  prayers. — 2\  Good-
win.

Vers.  2G,  27.  If  men  will  deal
plainly  with  God,  He  will  deal  plainly
with   them.      He  that  is  upright  in


performing  his  duty  shall  find  God
upright  in  performing  His  promises.
It  is  God's  way  to  carry  to  men  as
they  carry  to  Him.  If  thou  hast  a
design  to  please  Him,  He  will  have  a
design  to  please  thee  ;  if  thou  wilt
echo  to  Him  when  He  calls.  He  will
echo  to  thee  when  thou  callest. —
It.  Steele.

Even  as  the  sun  which,  unto  eyes
being  sound  and  without  disease,  is
very  pleasant  and  wholesome,  but  unto
the  same  eyes,  when  they  are  feeble,
sore,  and  weak,  is  very  troublesome
and  hurtful,  yet  the  sun  is  ever  all
one  and  the  self-same  that  it  was
before ;  so  God,  who  hath  ever  shown
Himself  benign  and  bountiful  to  those
who  are  kind  and  tender-hearted  to-
wards His  saints,  is  merciful  to  those
who  show  mercy.  But  unto  the  same
men,  when  they  fall  into  wickedness
and  show  themselves  full  of  beastly
cruelty,  the  Lord  showeth  Himself  to
be  very  wrathful  and  angry,  and  yet  is
one  and  the  same  immutable  God  from
everlasting  to  everlasting. — Cawdray.

But  doth  the  Lord  take  colour  from
everyone  He  meets,  or  change  His
temper  as  the  company  changes  ?
That's  the  weakness  of  sinful  man.
He  cannot  do  so  with  whom  is  no
variableness  nor  shadow  of  changing.
God  is  pure  and  upright  with  the  un-
clean and  hypocritical,  as  well  as  with
the  pure  and  upright,  and  His  actions
show  Him  to  be  so.  God  shows  Him-
self froward  with  the  froward,  when
He  deals  with  them  as  He  has  said
He  will  deal  with  the  froward — deny
them  and  reject  them.  God  shows
Himself  pure  with  the  pure  when  He
deals  with  them  as  He  has  said  He
will — hear  them  and  accept  them.
Though  there  be  nothing  in  purity
and  sincerity  which  deserveth  mercy,
yet  we  cannot  expect  mercy  without
them.  Our  comforts  are  not  grounded
upon  our  graces,  but  they  are  the
fruits  or  consequences  of  our  graces. —
Caryl,


411


BOM ILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMt/EL.  Book  U.


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  29-40.

David's  Song. — Part  III.

I.  God  can  disperse  the  darkness  of  man's  ignorance  and  cheer  the  night
of  his  sorrow  'I'here  are  but  few  tliouglitful  huiuan  creatures  who  do  not
feel  themselves  in  need  of  some  clue  to  guide  them  in  their  walk  through
life  and  of  some  hand  stronger  than  ujan's  to  lift,  them  up  when  earth's
sorrows  seem  to  weigh  them  to  the  ground  ;  of  something,  in  short,  of  a  spiritual
kind  which  shall  he  to  their  inner  sense  what  the  light  is  to  their  bodily  vision.
The  godly  in  all  ages  have  testified  that  their  God  can  and  does  supply  this
want — that  what  the  sun  is  to  the  physical  nature  of  man  the  Creator  of  the
sun  is  able  and  willing  to  be  to  the  souls  of  His  creatures.  He  reveals  Himself
as  the  Light  of  men  and  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  and  those  who  have  put  Him
to  the  test  declare  that  enough  spiritual  enlightenment  and  joy  and  strength
are  found  in  Him  to  satisfy  all  their  needs.  Light  is  a  revealing  power — It
reveals  us  to  ourselves.  Without  the  light  of  day  we  could  not  know  what  we
do  of  our  own  bodily  structure  and  ai)[)earance.  Liglst  reveals  itself  to  us  while
it  reveals  us  to  ourselves.  There  is  tliis  twofohl  revelation  ever  in  operation
w  herever  a  ray  of  lii^ht  falls.  Those  who  walk  in  the  lii^ht  of  God  feel  that  as
He  reveals  Himself  to  them.  He  reveals  tliem  unto  themselves,  and  that  know-
ledge of  Him  goes  hand-in-hand  with  right  conceptions  of  their  own  nature,
and  needs,  and  destiny.  Light  is  a  gladdening  injlaence.  Apart  from  all  its
life-giving  power,  the  rays  of  the  sun  help  to  revive  the  sad  at  heart,  and  even
the  rays  of  a  lam[)  or  candle  are  cheering  after  long-continued  darkness.  So
God  can  and  does  give  a  gladness  of  soul  to  His  children  which  uplifts  them  in
the  dark  and  cloudy  day  of  adversity,  and  causes  them  to  joy  in  Him  when  all
earthly  sources  of  comfort  are  dried  up.  It  was  in  God  as  this  fountain  of
enlightenment  and  joy  that  David  had  found  the  moral  strength  to  war  life's
warfare  and  the  courage  to  return  to  the  conflict  after  defeat  and  almost  despair.

II.  God's  ways  with  men,  and  His  word  to  them,  will  stand  the  utmost  test
which  can  be  applied  to  them  Only  those  who  will  not  trust  God  find  flaws
in  His  do  dings,  and  charge  Him  with  non-fulfilment  of  His  promises.  Tiiose
who  put  themselves  under  His  guidance  by  opening  their  hearts  to  receive  His
word,  enter  upon  such  an  experience  of  His  wisdom  and  love,  that  the  more  they
know,  and  the  longer  they  live,  the  more  settled  is  their  conviction  that  the
Judge  of  all  the  earth  always  has  and  ever  must  do  right  to  every  one  of  His
creatures,  and  thus  the  more  exultant  is  their  song  of  hope  for  the  future.
David's  te.^timony  here  is  one  with  all  who  have  exercised  the  same  trust  in  God,
and  obeyed  Him  in  the  same  spirit.  The  details  and  the  form  of  expression
change  from  age  to  age,  but  the  principle  and  the  spirit  must  ever  be  one.
To  David,  God  is  the  ''Hock''  whose  ''way  is  perfect"  and  whose  "  ?^70r<i  2S
tried"  to  those  around  the  sea  of  glass  He  is  the  "  lloltj  and  I'rue  One^just  and
true  in  IJis  ways"  (Rev.  vi.  10 ;  xv.  3.)  But  none  can  arrive  at  this  assurance
without  putting  Him  to  the  test.  The  sun  would  be  what  it  is  if  no  man  upon
the  face  of  the  earth  opened  his  eyes  to  receive  its  light — the  ocean  would  be  as
al)le  to  float  the  navies  of  the  world  if  no  vessel  ever  ventured  upon  its  waters.
To  know  the  glory  of  either,  and  their  ad;iptation  to  his  needs,  man  must  put
them  to  the  test.  And  as  he  must  do  with  the  creatures  of  God,  so  must  He  do
in  relation  to  God  Himself.

III.  The  perfection  of  God's  nature  is  manifested  for  the  perfacting  and
uplifting  of  His  creatures.     The  elevation  of  God  above  sinful  men,  and  His

412


CHAP.  XX II.


nOMlLETiC  COMMEXTARY:    ^AMVEL.


separation  from  them  by  reason  of  tlie  great  moral  gulf  between  tliein  and  Him,
IS  alway.s  dwelt  upon,  both  by  God  Himself  and  by 'His  inspired  messengers,  as  a
ground  of  hope  and  a  reason  for  joy.  True  the  High  and  Lofty  On'e  stands
alone  \w  His  purity  and  glory,  as  the  snowy  mountain  peak,  unsullied  by  the
impurities  of  the  lower  earth,  is  isolated  from  it  by  its  height  and  grandeur;  but
as  from  ?7  ])our  (town  abundant  streams  to  give  life  to  the  dwellers  below,  so
Irom  Him  flow  rivers  of  grace  to  revive  and  glorify  His  needy  children.  The
arm  of  His  power  is  not  outstretched  with  the  desire  to  subdue  by  omnipotent
lorce,  but  to  upraise  by  gentleness  ;  His  Almighty  strength  is  not  displayed  for
the  purpose  of  filling  men  with  terror,  but  to  encourage  \liem  to  flee  to  Him  for
shelter,  and  to  draw  from  Him  the  help  they  must  have  if  they  are  to  triumph
over  the  powers  of  evil.  All  who  rightly  apprehend  God  do  as  David  does  iiere,
see  in  His  perfection  and  might  matter  for  triumphant  praise  because  they  feel
that  they  have  been  used  to  raise  them  in  the  past,  and  are  assured  that  by
them  they  will  at  last  be  more  than  conquerors.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.


Ver.  29.  Even  the  children  of  the
day  sometimes  need  candle-light.  In
the  darkest  hour  light  will  arise ;
a  candle  shall  be  lit,  it  will  be  a  com-
fort such  as  we  may  fittiiioly  use  with-
out dishonesty — it  will  be  our  own
candle.  Yet  God  Himself  will  find
the  holy  fire  with  which  the  candle
Bhall  burn.  Our  evidences  are  our
own,  but  their  comfortable  light  is
from  above.  Candles  which  are  lit  by
God  the  devil  cannot  blow  out.  All
candles  are  not  shining,  and  so  there
are  some  graces  which  yield  no  present
comfort,  but  it  is  well  to  have  candles
which  may  by-and-bye  be  lit,  and  it  is
well  to  possess  grace  which  may  yet
aflbrd  us  cheering  evidences. — ^/?wr-
geon.

Ver.  30,  God's  warriors  may  ex-
pect to  have  a  taste  of  every  form  of
lighting,  and  must  by  the  })ower  of
faith  determine  to  quit  themselves  like
men,  but  it  behoves  them  to  be  very
careful  to  lay  all  their  laurels  at
Jehovah's  feet,  each  one  of  them  say-
ing "  by  my  God  have  I  wrought  this
valiant  deed." — Spargeon,

Ver.  31.  This  is  the  language  of
one  who,  in  his  own  history,  combines,
in  a  very  high  degree,  the  character  of
the  saint,  the  poet,  the  hero  and  the
prince.  The  testimony  of  such  a  man
is  worth  having  on  any  subject,  especi-


ally on  the  greatest  of  all  subjects —
God.      The   authors'   testimony   may
apply — I.   To  the  way  which  God  pre-
scribes.   He  prescribes  a  way — a  course
of  action — for  all  the  creatures  fie  has
inade.     .     .     .     The  stars,  the  ocean,
insects,  brutes,  and  souls  of  every  kind,
from  the  least  to  the  greatest,   have
each  their  "  way  "  marked  out,  and  the
highest  science  attests  that  the  way  is
"  perfect."     But  the  course  or  the  way
which  is  prescribed  for  man  is  what
the  writer  refers  to.     First.   The  way
which  is  prescribed  for  our  moral  con-
duct is  perfect.     Who  can  improve  the
decalogue  ?  How  perfect  in  justice  and
in  compass  is  the  golden  rule,  "■  What-
soever ye  would  ? "  etc.  Secondly.   The
way  that  is  prescribed  for  our  spiritual
restoration  is  perfect.      What  is  the
way  ?      Here  it  is  :    "  What  the  law
could  not  do,"  etc.     "  God  so  loved
the  world,"  etc.    Faith  in  Christ  is  the
prescribed  way.    This  way  is  "  perfect  "
in  its   wisdom  ;    it   is   in    every  way
adapted.     *'  Perfect "  in  its  justice — it
honours    the    righteousness    of    God.
*'  Perfect  "    in  its   sufficiency  —  it    is
adequate  to  the  needs  of  each  man  and
all.  H.    'Jo  the  way  which  God  pursues.
God  has  a  method  of  action.     He  acts,
not  by  caprice  or  impulse,  but  by  an
eternal  settled  plan.     It  is  but  a  little
of  that  plan  we  can  see  ;  but  so  far  as
our  knowledge  of  the  order  of  nature,
the  hitttory  of  providence,  and  tliepro-

413


HOMIL  ETW  COMMENT  A  R  Y :    SA  M  UEL,


BOOK  n.


visions  of  redeinption  exteiuls,  we  joia
ill  the  testimony  of  the  text  and  say  :
**  His  way  is  perfect,  l^'irst  Ills  method
of  procedure  is  perfect  in  conception.
We  have  not  the  lull  draft  of  this  plan.
An  infinitesimal  section  only  comes
under  our  eye.  The  Architect  of  the
great  bnilding  presents  you  with  a
whole  plan,  and  you  may  understand
it  and  see  the  superstructure  onpai)er.
Thus  God  has  not  acted,  and  if  He
had  given  us  the  whole  phm  we  could
not  have  scanned  the  uiillinnth  part.
What  we  see,  however,  we  feel  to  be
perfect.  iSecondly.  Ills  method  of  pro-
cedu7'0  is  perfect  in  execution.  What
His  infinite  benevolence  prompted  and
His  infinite  wisdom  conceived,  His
Almightiness  carried  out  with  perfec-
tion. A  conviction  of  the  perfection
of  God's  way  (1)  is  essential  to  our
well-being.  Without  this  we  cannot
supremely  love  and  trust  Him.  (2)  Is
the  most  attainable  of  beliefs.  Our
reason,  conscience,  Bible,  observation,
experience,  all  concur  in  urging  this
on  the  soul — this,  the  grandest  of  all
conclusions.  (3)  Must  flash  on  every
sinner's  nature  sooner  or  later.  If
not  here  in  the  day  of  grace,  yonder  iu
the  period  of  retribution. — Dr.  David
Thomas.

Ver.  34.  When  our  thoughts  are
nimble  and  our  spirits  rapid,  let  us  not
forget  that  our  best  beloved's  hand  has
given  us  the  choice  favour.  .  .  .
We,  too,  have  had  our  high  places  of
honour,  service,  temptation  and  danger,
but  hitherto  we  have  been  kept  from
falling.  — Sp  u  rgeon.

Ver.  36.  Gentleness  in  a  deity —
what  other  religion  ever  took  up  such
a  thought  ?  When  the  coarse  mind  of
sin  makt'S  up  gods  and  a  religion  by  its
own  natural  light,  the  gods,  it  will  be
seen,  reveal  both  the  coarseness  and  the
sin  together,  a.s  they  [properly  should.
They  are  made  great  as  being  great  in
force,  and  terrible  resentmetits.  .  .  .
Just  opposite  to  all  tlie.^e,  the  God  of
Revelation,  the  God  and  Father  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  contrives  to  be  a
gentle  being;  even  hiding  His  power
and  withholding  the  stress  of  His  will,
414


that  He  may  put  confidence  and  courage
in  the  feelings  of  His  children.  .  .  .
What,  then,  do  we  mean  by  gentleness  ?
To  call  it  sweetness  of  temper,  kindness,
patience,  flexibility,  indecisiveness,does
not  really  distinguish  it.  When  you
speak,  for  example,  of  dealing  gently
with  an  enemy,  you  mean  that  instead
of  trying  to  force  a  point  straight
tlirough  with  him  you  will  give  him
time,  and  ply  him  indirectly  with  such
methods  and  modes  of  forbearance  as
will  put  him  on  dilfereut  thoughts  and
finally  turn  him  to  a  better  mind.
Here,  then,  lies  the  true  conception  of
God's  gentleness.  ...  It  means  that
He  does  not  set  Himself,  as  a  Ruler,  to
drive  His  purpose  straight  through,
but  that,  consciously  wise  and  right,
.  .  .  He  is  only  too  great  to  fly  at  His
adversary,  and  force  him  to  the  wall
if  he  does  not  instantly  surrender ;
that,  instead  of  coming  down  upon
him  thus,  in  the  manner  of  direct
onset,  to  carry  his  iuimediate  submis-
sion by  storm,  He  lays  gentle  siege  to
him,  waiting  for  his  willing  assent  and

choice That  we  may  have

it  in  true  estimation,  observe  how  far
off  it  is  from  the  practice  and  even
the  capacity  generally  of  mankijvd.
We  can  do  almost  anything  more
readily  than  consent  to  any  sort  of
indirectiim,  when  we  are  resisted  in
the  exercise  of  authority  or  encounter
another  at  some  point  of  violated
right.  .  .  .  To  redress  the  injury  by
gentleness,  to  humble  an  adversary  by
the  circuitous  approach  of  forbearance
and  a  siege  of  true  suggestion— that  is
not  the  manner  of  men,  but  only   of

God How  openly  He  takes  this

attitude  in  the  Scriptures.  When  our
first  father  breaks  through  law  by  his
act  of  sin.  He  does  not  strike  him
down  by  His  thunders,  but  He  holds
them  back,  comes  to  Him  even  by  a
word  of  promise,  and  sends  him  forth
into  a  world  un[)aradised  by  guilt,  to
work,  and  suffer,  and  learn,  and,  when

he  will,  to  turn  and  live What

we  call  the  Gospel  is  only  a  translation,
so  to  speak,  of  the  gentleness  of  God —
a  matter  in  the  world  of  fact,  answer-
ing to  a  higher  matter,  antece<leut,  iu


CHAP.xxU  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


the  magnanimity  of  G«>d.     I  do  not  ties  of  our  luim.iii  nature,  and  much

say  that  it  is  a  mere  effusion  of  Divine  higlier  designs  concerning  it We

sentiment,  apart  from  all  counsel  and  do  m)t   undorsland   Him,   in  fact,  till

government It  is  at  once  the  we  conceive  it  as  a  truth  that  He  wants

crown  of  God's  purposes  and  of  His  to  make  us  great  in  will  in  the  breadth
governmental  order.  And  ....  that  and  freedom  of  our  intellect,  great  in
wondrous  indirection  of  grace,  the  courage,  enthusiasm,  self-respect,  firm-
incarnate  life  and  cross  cf  Jesus,  is  the  ness,  su])ori()rity  to  things  and  matters
very  plan  to  carry  the  precept  of  law  of  condition,  great  in  sacrifice  and
by  precepts  higher  than  force,  by  honoficence,  great  in  sonship  with
feeling  and  character,  and  sacrifice.  Himself,  great  in  being  raised  to  such
....  So,  too,  the  Holy  Spirit  ....  common  counsel  and  such  intimate
working  efiiciently,  and,  in  a  certain  unity  with  Him  in  His  ends — that  we

sense  in  the  man,  or   subject,  circles  do,  in  fact,  reign  with  Him

round   the  will,  doing  it  respect  by  His  object  is  to  gain  our  will  in  such  a

laying  no    force    upon    it,    and   only  manner   as   to   save   it,   and  make  it

raising  appeals   to  it  from   wiiat    lie  finally  a  thousand-fold  stouter  in  good,

puts  in  the  mind,  the  conscience,  the  ....    and  to  recover  our  intellect

memory,  the  sense  of  want,  the  fears  by  bidding  us  to  set  it  for  seeing  by  a

excited,  the  aspirations  kindled.  .  .  .  wholly  right  intent  and  a  willingness

Holding  this  view we   ought  even  to  die  for  the  truth,     ....

to  find  that  God's  whole  management  and  so  He  manages  to  save  all   the

of  us  and  the  world  corresponds.     Is  attributes  of  force   and  magnanimity

it  so  ?  ...  .   Where  is  the  gentleness  within  us  while  reducing  us  to  love

of  God    in  the  unpitying,  inexorable,  and  obedience,
fated  powers  of  the  worhl  ?  ....  Just  Easy  enough  were  it  for  Him  to  lay

here Able   to   use   force,  He  His  force  upon  us,  and  dash  our  obsti-

can  use  character,  and  time,  and  kind-  nacy  to  the  ground.     He  might  not

ness.  Real  gentleness  supposes  counsel,  thrust  us  into  love.  He  could  not  into

order,   end,   and   a   determinate  will,  courage  and  contidence,  but  He  might

Not  even  a  weak  woman  can  be  pro-  instantly  crush  out  all  wilfulness  for

perly   called  gentle See  how  ever.     ...    But  He  wants  no  slaves

it    goes   with    us    in    God's    manage-  about  His  throne,  and     .    .    .     there-

ment  of  our  experience.    Doing  every-  fore   refuses   to  subdue  us   unless  by

thing  to  work  on  our  feeling,  tempera-  some  such  method  that  we  may  seem,

ment,   thought,  will,    and   so  on  our  in  a   certain  other  sense,  to  subdue

eternal  character  He  still  does  nothing  ourselves. — Bashnell.
by   direct  impulsion.     It   is   with    us

here    in    everything    as   it    was   with  Ver.  37.     It  is  no  small  mercy  to  be

Jonah   when    the   Lord   sent    him   to  brought  into  full  Christian  liberty  and

Nineveh Jonah  steers  straight  enlargement,  but  it  is  a  still  greater

the  other  way,  and  there  ])Uts  to  sea,  favour  to  be  enabled  to  walk  worthily

sailing  off  upon  it,  and  then  under  it,  in  such  liberty,  not  being  permitted  to

and   through   the   belly   of  hell,  and  slip  with   our  feet.      To   stand   upon

comes   to  land  nobody  knows  where,  the  rock  of  affliction  is  the  result  of

After  much  perambulation  he  i;ets  to  gracious  upholding,   but   that   aid   is

Nineveh,  and  gives   his  message  dog-  quite  as  much  needed  in  the  luxurious

gedly,  finally  to  be  tamed   by  a  turn  plains  of  prosperity. — Spurgeon.
of  hot  weather  and  the  withering  of  a

gourd.  .  .  .  The  subject  culminates  in         Ver.  42.     As  nature  prompteth  men

the  end  God  has  in  view,  which  is  to  in  an  extremity  to  look  up  for  help  ;

make  us   great.     He  certaiidy  has  a  but  because  it  is  but   the   prayer  of

different  opinion  of  greatness  from  that  flesh  for  ease,  and  not  of  the  spirit  for

which   is  cimimonly  held  by   men — a  grace,  and  a  good   use  of  calamities,

much  higher  respect  for  the  cajnibili-  and  not  hut  in  extreme  despair  of  help

415


EOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  U  Y :  SAM  UEL.  book  n.


ols>\\]!ere,  tl  ere  fore  God  bears  tliera  others,  alas,  who  are  accustomed  to  its

nit.      "  I'liey   looked,"   etc.,   q.d.      If"  joyful  sound,  are  rather  hardened  than

the\'  could  have  made  any  otlier  shift,  softened  by  its  teachings.     Tlie  grace

God  should  never  have  heard  of  them,  of  God  sometimes  runs  as  fire  among

Trapp.  stubble,  and  a  nation  is  born  in  a  day.

"  Love  at  first  sight  "  is  no  uncommon

Ver.  45.     In  many  cases  the  gospel  thing  when  Jesus  is  the  wooer.      He

is  speedily  received   by  hearts  appa-  can   write    Csesar's    message    without

rently  unprepared  for  it.     Those  who  boasting,  Veni,  vidiy  vici ;  His  gospel

have  never  heard   the   gospel    before  is  sometimes    no    sooner  heard  than

have  been  charmed  by  its  first  message,  believed. — tSpargeon,
and  yielded   obedience   to  it;    while


MAIN  HOMTLETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  47-5t

David's  SoNa — Part  IV.

I.  That  Jehovah  lives  ought  to  be  enough  to  satisfy  every  human  soul.

All  that  David  has  said  or  can  say  is  wrapped  up  in  the  woids,  "  The  Lord
liveth."  That  God  lives  is  a  sufficient  guarantee,  not  only  that  His  children
will  live,  but  that  the  best  that  is  possible  will  be  done  for  them  and  with  them.
Man  feels  conscious  that  he  does  not  exist  of  himself  and  that  he  needs  a
stronger,  a  better,  a  higher  life  than  his  own  upon  which  he  can  rest  and  whence
he  can  draw  supplies.  In  God,  those  who  seek,  find  this  need  supplied — they
testify,  ^^With  Thee  is  the  fo  an  tain  of  life,  iti  thy  light  shall  we  see  light '^
(Ps.  xxxvi.  9).  They  feel  that  the  bodily  and  the  spiritual  life  they  now
possess  is  from  this  living  Jehovjih,  that  He  who  gave  them  existence  has  given
them  what  alone  makes  it  worth  having,  a  participation  in  His  own  Divine
nature  (2  Pet.  i.  4),  and  they  rejoice  in  the  confidence  that  while  He  lives
they  shall  also  live  in  the  highest  and  best  sense  of  the  word.  The  life  of  God
is  a  life  separated  from  all  injustice  and  unkindness,  and  it  is  a  life  not  merely
without  any  shadow  of  unrighteousness  but  a  life  of  active  justice  and  mercy.
This  being  so,  His  existence  ought  to  be  for  all  men  what  it  was  to  the  Psahnist,
a  ground  for  hope  and  exultation.  We  cannot  ex|>Iain  all  the  mysteries  of  His
dealings  with  the  children  of  men,  some  of  Daviil's  own  words  here  do  but
remind  us  that  clouds  and  darkness  are  often  round  about  Him,  but  the  simple
fact  of  the  existence  of  such  a  God  is  a  rock  upon  which  we  may  rest.

II.  Every  human  life  lived  to  purpose  is  lived  in  dependence  upon  the
living  God.  It  is  David's  constant  testiuumy  that  so  far  as  he  had  fulfilled  the
high  destiny  to  which  he  had  been  called,  he  had  done  so  by  remembering  that  he
was  nothing  and  that  God  was  everything.  "  'Ihe  Lord  is  my  strength''  was
his  watchword  on  the  day  when  he  slew  the  giant,  and,  with  few  exceptions,  it
continued  to  be  so  until  the  hour  in  which  he  went  "  the  way  of  all  the  earth  "
(1  Kings  ii.  2).  He  has  left  it  upon  record  that  every  deed  of  his  life  that  had
been  worth  doing  had  been  done  in  dependence  u[)on  the  Lord  who  took  him
from  the  shee[)fold  and  who  had  never  failed  him  whenever  he  had  sought  His
help.  Every  man  who  has  lived  a  lite  worth  living  has  lived  it  by  putting  his
trust  in  David's  God,  and  every  life  has  been  worth  living  that  has  been  so  lived.
The  narrow  circle  of  every  man's  experience,  and  the  wider  range  of  history,
furnish  abundant  proofs  how  poor  a  rec(n-d  the  greatest  leave  behind  them  when
they  try  to  stand  alone,  and  how  blessed  and  honoured  is  the  memory  of  many  a
lt>wly  servant  of  God,  who,  when  on  earth,  lived  a  lile  of  laiih,  and  therefore  was

416


CHAP.  xxiL  HOMILETIO  COMMENTAR  Y :    6  J .)/  LEE..


enabled  to  fulfil  the  end  of  his  being.  But  it  is  not  only  obscure  lives  that  have
been  thus  en-nobled — all  the  greatest  names  that  adorn  the  pages  of"  human
history  belong  to  tliose  who  have  said  with  David,  ''  God  is  mi/  strength  and
power  "  and  with  Paul,  "  Yet  not  /,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me  "  (Gal  ii.  20).


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  47.  A  certain  sense  of  solitari-  Why  do  you  not  boast  in  your  God

ness  grows  upon  a  man  as  he  becomes  and  bear  up  yourselves  big  with  your

older.     Those  who  were  venerable  in  expectations  from  him  ?     i)o  you  not

his   youthful  days,  and  to  whom  he  see  young  heirs  to  great  estates  act

looked   for   counsel,  are    one  by   one  and   spend   accordingly?      And    wliy

carried  to  the  tousb.     The  companions  shall  you,  being  the  King  of  Heaven's

of  his  early  manhood  fall  at  his  side,  son,  be  lean  and  ragged  from  day  to

lie  comes  at  length  to  a  time  when  he  day,  as  though  you  were  not  worth  a

does    not   care   to    make   many   new  groat?     Oh,  sirs,  live  upon  your  por-

iriends;    and    when    he    reaches    the  tion  ;   chide  yourselves  for  living  be-

limit  of  three-score  years  and  ten,  he  side  what  you  have  !     There  are  great

begins  to  feel  himself  almost  a  stranger,  and  precious  promises  ;  rich,  enriching

even  in  the  i)lace  where  he  has  spent  mercies  ;  you  may  make  use  of  God's

his  life.      Perhaps  a  king,  more  than  all -sufficiency  ;    you  can    blame   none

most  other  men,  will  realize  this  ex-  but  yout.-clves  if  you  be  defective  or

perience.      The    poet    has  spoken    of  discouraged.     .     .     .    Ask  your  faint-

"  the  lonely  glory  of  a  throne."     The  ing    spirits    under    pressing   outward

monaich  has  no  equals,  and,  from  the  sorrows,  is  not  God  alive  ?     And  why,

nature  of  the  case,  can  have  few  con-  then,  doth  not  thy  soul  revive  ?     Why

fidants  and  counsellors,  except  >such  as  doth  thy  heart  die  within  thee  when

are    venerable   for   age.      But   as    his  comf)rts  die?     Cannot  a  living  God

reign  wears  on,  one  after  another  of  support    thy    dying    hopes? — Oliver

these  early  friends   are  taken  away ;  Hey  wood.
and  as  each  is  removed,  he  is  apt  to

think  that  a  part  of  himself  has  been  Ver.  50.  Paul  cites  this  verse  (Rom.

withdrawn  from  him.     Thus  loneliness  xv.  9).     This   is   clear  evidence   that

steals  over    him,   and    he    conies    at  David's  Lord  is  here,  but  David  is  here

length   to  be,  like  Moses  anpmg  the  too,  and  is  to  be  viewed  as  an  example

tribes,  the  solitary  survivor  ot  a  buried  of  a  holy  soul  making  its  boast  in  God,

generation.      Something    like  this,    I  even  in  the  presence  of  ungodly  men.

doubt  not,  was  felt  by  David  as   h«  Who  are  the  despisers  of  God  that  we

advanced  into  old  age.     Sainuel  was  should    stop   our    mouths   for   them  ?

gone  ;  Jonathan  was   no  more  ;  A  hi-  We  will  sing  to  our  God  whether  they

thophel   had   })ioved  a  traitor  ;  Joab  like  it  or  no,  and  force  upon  them  the

had  become  a  thorn  in  his  side;    but  knowledge  of  His  goodness.     Too  much

there  was  One  always  true,  and  it  was  politeness  to  traitors  may  be  treason  to

with  no  ordinary  emotion,  we  may  be  our  King. — Spurgeon.

sure,  that  out  of  his  earthly  solitude  W IwU  chapter.    This  psalm  is  called

he  sang  of  his  fidelity  and  deathless-  by  Michaelis  more  artificial,  and  less

ness:  "The  Lord  liveth,  and   b!e.-sed  truly  terrible,  than  the  Mosaic  odes,

be  my  rock,  and  exalted  be  the  God  of  In  structure  it  may  be  so,  but  surely

my  salvation."     Let  the  a.ed  among  not  in  spirit.     It  appears  to  many  be-

us   fall    back   on    this  assurance,  and  sides  us,  one  of  the  most   magnifecent

find  their  solace  in  the  con  panionship  lyrical  raptures  in  the  Scriptures.     As

of  the  Most  High.     He  hath  said,  "  I  if  the  poet  had  dipped  his  pen  in  "  the

will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee."  brightness   of    that    li.ht    which    was

• — Dr  Taylor.  before  his  eye  ; "  so   he  dr>cribes  the

2  U  il7


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAM L EL.


BOOK  n.


aescondiiii,^  Ood.  Perhaps  it  may  be
objecied  that  the  nodus  is  hardly
worthy  of  the  vlndex — to  deliver  David
from  his  enemies,  could  Deity  ever  be
imagined  to  come  down  ?  But  the
objector  knows  not  the  character  of
the  ancient  Hebrew  mind.  God  in
His  view  had  not  to  descend  from
heaven  ;  He  was  ni<^h — a  cloud  like
a  man's  hand  might  conceal — a  cry,  a
look,  might  bring  liim  down.  And  why
should  not  David's  fancy  clothe  Him,
as  He  came,  in  a  panoply  befitting
His  dignity,  in  clouds  spangled  with
coals  of  tire?  If  he  was  to  descend,
why  not  in  state?  The  proof  of  the
grandeur  of  this  psalm  is  in  tlie  fact
that  it  has  borne  the  test  of  almost
every  transhition,  and  made  doggerel
itself  erect  itself  and  become  Divine.
Even  Sternhold  and  Hopkins  its  fiery
whirlwind   lifts  up,  purifies,   touches


into  true  power  and  then  throws  down,
hel[)lessand  panting, upon  their  ancient
common.  Perhaps  its  great  charm,
apart  from  the  poetry  of  the  descent,
is  the  exquisite  and  subtle  alternation
of  1  and  TJiou.  We  have  spoken  of
parallelism,  as  the  key  to  tlie  mechan-
ism of  Hebrew  song  We  tind  this
existing  between  David  and  God — the
delivered  and  the  Deliverer — beauti-
fully pursued  throughout  the  whole  of
this  psalm.  ...  It  has  been  in-
geniously argued  that  the  existence  of
the  /  suggests  inevitably  as  a  polar
opposite  the  thought  of  the  Thou,  that
the  personality  of  man  proves  thus
the  personality  of  God  ;  but,  be  this  as
it  may,  David's  ])erception  of  that  per-
sonality is  nowhere  so  intense  as  here.
He  seems  not  only  to  see,  but  to  feel
and  touch,  the  object  of  his  gratitude
and  worship. — Gilljilan,


CHAPTER  XXIII.


Critical  and  Expository  Notes.    Ver.  1.
utterances.     Keil  thus  translates  the  verse  :


Words,  rather,  Divine  sayings,  i.e.,  prophetio


"  Divine  saying  of  David  the  son  of  Jesse,
Divine  saying  of  the  man,  the  highly  exalted
Of  the  anointed  of  the  God  of  Jacob,"  etc.

*'  The  following  words  of  David  are  thereby  announced  to  be  a  peculiarly  prophetic  declaration
which  rests  on  an  inspeaking  of  God  by  His  Spirit  to  His  soul."  (Erdmann).  This  introduction
to  the  prophetic  announcement  rests,  both  as  to  form  and  siibstance,  upon  the  last  sayings  of
Balaam  concerning  the  future  history  of  Israel.  (Num.  xxiv.  3-15).  This  not  only  shows  to  what
extent  David  had  occupied  himself  with  the  utterances  of  the  earlier  men  of  God  concerning
Israel's  future,  but  indicates,  at  the  same  time,  that  his  own  prophetic  utterance  was  intended
to  be  a  further  expansion  of  Balaam's  prophecy  concerning  the  star  out  of  Jacob  and  the  sceptre
of  Israel.  Like  Balaam,  he  calls  his  prophecy  a  Divine  saying,  or  oracle,  as  a  revelation  which
lie  liad  received  direct  from  God.  (Num.  xxiv.  3).  But  the  recipient  of  this  revelation  was  not,
like  Balaam  ihe  son  of  Beor,  a  man  with  closed  eye,  whose  eyes  had  been  opened  by  a  vision
of  the  Almighty,  but  *■'  the  man  who  was  raised  up  on  high^'  i.e.,  whom  God  had  lifted  up  out  of
humiliation  to  be  the  ruler  of  His  pieojde,  yea,  even  to  be  the  head  of  the  nations.  Chap.  xxii.
44),  {Kiel),  "  A  statement  of  the  grounds  on  which  it  was  to  be  expected  that  he  would  be
employed  as  an  agent  of  God  in  the  utterance  of  this  important  prophecy." — (Jamieson).

Ver.  2.    "  Spake."  Rather,  speaJceth,  i.e.,  in  the  following  revelation.  "  On  my  tongue."  The

parallelism  here  employed  is  oVjviously  gradational,  in  which  the  idea  introduced  in  the  former
member  is  continued,  but  amplified  in  the  latter.  (Henderson.  J  "  While  in  verse  1  the  pro-
phetic organ  of  the  Divine  saying  is  doubly  characterised,  verse  2  sets  forth  in  two-fold  expression
the  two-fold  Divine  medium  of  the  ini-pired  prophetic  word."     (Erdmann.)

Ver.  3.     *'  God     .     .     .     Rock."     '*  To  indicate  that  the  contents  of  His  prophecy  relate  to

the  salvation  of  the  people  of  Israel,  and  are  guaranteed  by  the  faithfulness  of  God."     {Keil.)

**  Said     .     .     .     Speaks."     Rather,  "  Saith      .     .     .     SpeaJceth."     "  He  that  ruleth."    This

should  be — "  A  ruler  over  men — just — A  ruler  in  the  fear  of  God."  It  evidently  refers  exclusively

418


CHAP.  XXIII.  EOMILETIC  CO  MM  EN  TAR  Y :  SAMUEL.


to  the  INressiah,  as  in  Tsa.  y.\.  2,  3.  and  is  a  sentence  abrupt  and  isolated  ;  not,  as  Erdmann  remarks,

syntactically  connected  citli  r  with  verse  2  or  4.

Vtr.  4.  All  the  figures  in  this  verse  express  the  bleftsinr/s  of  the  Messiah's  rain.  He  is  not
personally,  as  the  English  version  makes  it  appear,  the  subject  of  the  verse.

Ver.  5.  "  Although  ....  yet."  Here,  a<;ain,  the  En<>lish  version  must  be  rejected.
The  verse  read  correctly  is — **  For  is  not  my  house  so  loith  God.  For  He  hath  made  with  me  an
everlasting  covenant,  provided  with  all,  and  attested.  For  all  my  salvation  and  all  good  pleasure
shoidd  lie  not  make  it  to  grow 'i  The  covenant  referred  to  is  the  ])romise  made  in  chap.  vii.  12,
which  is  said  to  be  guarded  or  provided  with  all  that  can  secure  its  fulfilment.  *'  My  salvation,
i.e.,  the  salvation  promised,  assured  to  me  and  my  seed.  The  pleasure  must  be  taken  (as  the
salvation  is  from  God)  as — what  is  well-pleasing  to  God,  not — what  is  well-pleasing  to  me."
(Erdmann. )

Vers,  6,  7.  "  As  thorns  are  extirpated  out  of  a  land  that  is  about  to  be  brought  under  culture,
so  wicked  men  will  disappear  from  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah — the  wicked  enemies  and
persecutors  of  this  kingdom  of  righteousness.  They  resemble  those  prickly  thorny  plants  which
are  twisted  together,  whose  spires  point  in  every  direction,  and  are  so  sharp  and  strong  that
they  cannot  be  approached  without  danger  ;  but  hard  instruments  and  violent  means  must  be
taken  to  destroy  or  u{)root  them.  [Jamieson.)  *'  In  the  same  place."  "  Where  they  dwell,  or,
on  the  spot.  ( Kimchi  a.nd  Kiel. )  Erdmann  and  others  read,  "so  that  there  should  be  an  end
of  them."

Ver.  8.  "  Tachmonite"  Rather,  Ben  Hachmoni,  of  the  family  of  Bachmon,  not  as  in
1  Chron.  xxvii.  32,  a  son,  because  in  verse  2  of  that  chapter,  Zabdiel  is  mentioned  as  his  father.
"Chief,"  "not  leader,  but  most  distinguished."  (Erdmann.)  "Captains,"  or  knights.
{Erdmann.)  "Eight  hundred."  "  This  is  not  to  be  understood  as  signifying  that  he  killed
eight  hundred  men  at  one  blow,  but  that  in  a  battle  he  threw  his  spear  again  and  again  at
the  foe,  until  eight  hundred  men  had  been  slain.  The  Chronicles  gives  three  hundred  instead
of  eight  hundred  ;  and  as  that  number  occurs  again  in  verse  18,  it  probably  found  its  way  from
that  verse  into  this  in  the  book  of  Chronicles.

Vers.  9-11.  There  are  some  variations  between  the  reading  here  and  in  the  parallel  account
in  1  Chron.  xi.,  but  many  of  the  apparent  discrepancies  are  easily  accounted  for  when  we
remember  that  they  may  be  independent  records,  and  are  not  necessarily  copied  one  from  the
other.  "  Only  to  spoil,"  i.e.,  they  had  nothing  to  do  but  enter  in  and  enjoy  the  fruits  of  the
victory.  Hararite,  "perhaps  the  mountaineer."  {Wordsworth).  A  troop.  Erdmann,
Ewald,  and  Thenius  translate  this  word  as  the  name  of  the  place,  viz.,  Lehi.  (See  Judges  xv.
9).  Lentiles.  "  In  the  Chronicles  it  is  added  there  was  barley  there.  Doubtless  the  field  (or
larire  plain)  was  sown  with  both  ;  the  independence  of  the  two  writers  is  thus  shown."
(  Wordsworth).

Ver.  13.  Three  of  the  thirty  chiefs ;  or,  the  three  chiefs  of  the  thirty.  The  thirty  are  those
enumeiated  at  the  end  of  the  chapter.  Thirty-one  (or  thirty-two)  are  there  mentioned,  and  more
in  Chronicles,  but  this  was  evidently  a  name  for  a  certain  corps  of  men,  which,  as  Kiel  suggests,
possibly  at  first  numbered  exactly  thirty,  but  which  would  at  times  receive  additions  in  the
different  wars  in  which  David  was  engaged.  AduUam.  **  According  to  the  situation  here
described,  this  exploit  occurred  in  the  Philistine  war,  narrated  in  chap.  v.  17,  sg."     {Erdmann) .

Ver.  15.  Well  of  Bethlehem.  "An  ancient  cistern,  with  four  or  five  holes  in  the  solid
rock,  at  about  ten  minutes'  distance  to  the  north  of  the  eastern  corner  of  the  hill  of  Bethlehem,
is  pointed  out  by  the  natives  as  Bir-Daoud — David's  well.  Dr.  Robinson  doubts  the  identity
of  the  well  ;  but  others  think  that  there  are  no  good  grounds  for  doing  so.  Certainly,  considering
this  to  be  the  ancient  well,  Bethlehem  must  have  once  extended  ten  minutes  further  to  the
north,  and  must  have  lain,  in  times  of  old,  not  as  now  on  the  summit,  but  on  the  northern  rise
of  the  hill  ;  for  the  well  is  by,  or  (1  Chron.  xi.  7)  at  the  gate.  (Jamieson)  "I  find  in  the
descriptions  of  travellers  that  the  common  opinion  is,  that  David's  captains  had  come  from  the
south-east,  in  order  to  obtain,  at  the  risk  of  their  lives,  the  so  much  longed  for  water  ;  while  it
is  supposed  that  David  was  then  himself  in  the  great  cave  that  is  not  far  from  the  south-east  of
Bethlehem  ;  which  cave  is  generally  held  to  have  been  that  of  Adullam.  But  (Josh.  xv.  3.5).
Adullam  lay  "in  the  valley  " — that  is,  in  the  un<lulatiug  plain  at  the  western  base  of  the
mountains  of  Judea,  and  consequently  to  the  south-west  of  Jerusalem.  Be  this  as  it  may,
David's  three  men  had,  in  any  case,  to  break  through  the  host  of  the  Philistines  in  order  to  reach
the  well  ;  and  the  position  of  Bir-Daoud  agrees  well  with  this.  (  Van  de  Velde).  Dr.
Thomson  (Land  and  the  Book)  says  that  Bethleliem  is  now  poorly  supplied  with  water.

Ver.  17.  "  In  Jeopardy,"  etc., /or  the  price  of  their  souls,  i  e.,  at  the  risk  of  their  lives.  "  The
water  drawn  and  fetched  at  the  risk  of  their  lives  is  compared  to  the  soul  itself,  and  the  soul  is
in  the  blood.  (Lev.  xvii.  11.)  Drinking  this  water,  therefore,  would  be  nothing  else  than
drinking  their  blood."     {Keil  )

4J0


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,  book  ii.


Ver.  19.  Chief  among  three.  As  the  historian  says  further  on  that,  neither  Abishaj  nor
Benniah  attained  unto  the  three  (so  the  Hel),)  ;  it  seems  better  to  read  here  chief  among  thirty,  i.e.,
they  distinguished  themselves  among  those  heroes,  but  were  not  so  renowned  as  those  mentioned
in  verses  8-12.

Ver.  20.  "Lion -like  men."  Literally,  Artels,  or  Lions  of  God.  The  Arabs  and  Persians  so
designate  every  remarkably  brave  men,  and  these  were  doubtless  two  celebrated  Moabitish
warriors.  "  Pit,"  or  Cisteim.  "  The  lion  had  been  driven  into  the  neighbourhood  of  human
habitations  by  a  heavy  fall  of  snow,  and  had  taken  refuge  in  a  cistern."     {^Keil  and  others.)

Ver.  21.  "An  Egyptian."  Better  2%e  Egyptian,  some  well-known  man,  celebrated  for  his
strength  and  stature.  "  A  goodly  man,"  lit.  a  man  o/ appearances  or  (as  in  Chronicles)  a  man
of  measure.

Ver.  22.  "  Three  mighty."  Here  also  it  seems  necessary  to  read  Thirty  instead  of  Three.
(See  on  ver.  19.)

Ver.  24-39.  Most  of  these  names  are  not  further  known.  "  Shammah."  Must  not  be
confounded  with  the  Shammahs  mentioned  in  vers,  11  and  33.  (Keil.)  "  Ittai."  *' Must  be
distinguislied  from  the  Gathite."  (Keil.)  "  Eliphelet,"  etc.  Many  Hebrew  scholars  consider
that  there  is  here  a  slight  error,  as  there  is  no  reason  why  the  grandfather's  name  should  be
given  in  addition  to  that  of  the  father,  and  it  better  suits  the  grammatical  form  of  some  of  the
words  to  read—  Eliphelet  the  son  of  Ur  ;  Hepher  the  Maachathite,  thus  adding  one  to  the  list.

Ver.  39.  "Thirty-seven."  "  This  number  is  correct,  as  there  were  three  in  the  first  class
(verses  8-12),  two  in  the  second  (verses  18-23),  and  thirty-two  in  the  third  (verses  24-39),  since
verse  34  contains  three  names  according  to  the  amended  text."  {Kiel.)  (See  above  on
Eliphelet),

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAORAPH,— Verses  1-7.

David's  Prophecy.

I.  That  God  has  spoken  to  man  is  a  fact  of  human  history.  Reflection
upon  the  aspect  of  things  around  us,  and  especially  upon  tlie  nature  and  needs
of  man,  would  lead  us  to  expect  that  God  would  break  the  silence  of  eternity
and  let  His  voice  be  heard  by  the  children  of  time.  When  a  vessel  is  built  to
sail  upon  unknown  seas,  the  builder  and  owner  of  the  sliip  does  not  consider  her
cora])lete  without  the  compass,  by  means  of  which  she  can  make  her  way  safely
to  distant  ports  and  so  fulfil  the  end  for  which  she  came  into  existence.  A  good
human  fatlier,  knowing  the  moral  perils  to  which  his  children  are  exposed,  will
not  leave  them  without  the  benefits  of  such  moral  instruction  as  he  is  able  to
impart  to  them.  He  would  be  a  cruel  man  indeed  if  he  perniitted  his  children
to  grow  up  without  giving  them  the  benefits  of  his  own  larger  experience  and
superior  knowledge — without  furnishing  them  with  the  best  rules  for  the
guidance  of  their  lives  which  he  was  able  to  frame.  Men  find  themselves
strangers  on  the  earth — compelled,  whether  they  will  or  no,  to  cross  the  stormy
and  mysterious  sea  of  life,  and  they  naturally  look  to  Him  to  whom  they  owe
their  being  for  some  guidance  to  a  haven  of  rest  and  satisfaction  at  the  close  of
the  voyage.  Tliey  know  how  carefully  a  good  earthly  father  provides,  so  far  as
he  is  able,  for  all  the  needs  of  his  children  ;  and  reasoning  from  the  creature  to
the  Creator,  they  conclude  that  God  must  have  so  provided  for  their  spiritual
needs,  especially  as  He  so  bountifully  and  constantly  supplies  their  bodily  wants.
Thoughtful  men  in  past  ages  were  driven  to  the  conclusion  that  God  would  thus
speak  to  men  ;  and  we,  who  possess  the  book  which  claiuis  to  be  the  revelation
of  His  mind  and  will,  accept  it  because  reason  and  analogy  lead  us  to  feel  that
such  a  revelation  must  be,  and  that  the  Bible  records  an  undoubted  fact  when  it
declares  that  it  has  taken  place.

II.  That  God  should  speak  by  one  man  to  many,  and  by  some  for  alL  is  in
accordance  with  the  social  constitution  of  all  things  around  us.     In  all  de-

420


CUAP.  XXIII.  nOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY :   SAMUEL,

paitments  of  life  we  find  that  blessini^s  come  to  man  through  man — that  tlie
gifts  of  God  as  a  rule  do  not  come  to  us  direct  from  iieaven,  but  through  tlie
iiiedium  and  ministration  of  those  who  are  bone  of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our
flesh.  Not  only  so,  but  the  most  precious  and  valued  benefits  do  not  come
throngli  every  man  or  anymim,  but  thnmgh  men  who  seem  to  be  specially  gifted
and  elected  to  be  the  channels  of  such  good  things.  One  great  scientific
discoverer  is  the  means  of  bringing  enlightenment  and  elevation  to  many
generations,  another  unfolds  a  secret  by  which  the  pain  and  suff*eiing  of  thousands
is  lessened  or  done  away  with.  A  great  statesman  brings  peace  and  prosperity
to  the  homes  of  hundreds  of  his  countrymen,  and  a  philaiithrophist  lifts  up  a
generation  of  down-trodden  men  and  women,  and  causes  them  to  sing  for  joy.
When  God  gave  to  man  that  greatest  of  His  gifts — a  knowledge  of  Him.self — He
did  but  work  in  harmony  with  His  own  constituted  methods  when  He  made
known  His  will  first  to  prophets  atid  apostles,  that  through  human  hearts  and
by  huinan  lips  the  goodwill  of  God  to  the  race  might  be  made  known.

III.  What  God  has  spoken  reveals  His  des're  that  the  rule  of  heaven  should
become  the  rule  of  earth.  One  reason  why  the  rule  of  heaven  is  the  rule  of
justice  is  because  its  King  can  make  no  mistake  as  to  what  justice  really  is.
Human  creatures  in  power  are  sometimes  unjust  through  ignorance  of  the
merits  of  the  case.  They  cannot  be  so  perfectly  acquainted  with  all  i;he  cir-
cumstances of  those  under  their  authority  as  to  act  at  all  times  with  strict
impartiality.  But  blessed  be  God,  it  is  not  so  with  Him.  He  who  made  man
knows  what  is  in  him  and  around  him,  and  cannot  therefore  err  in  His
judgment.  And  all  that  He  has  said  and  done  shows  Him  to  be  no  less  desirous
than  capable  of  thus  dealing  righteously  with  the  children  of  men.  He  has
found  the  Ruler  who  alone  is  able  to  bring  about  this  reign  of  righteousness
upon  the  earth.  His  beloved  Son  can  misjudge  none  through  ignorance,  and
His  perfect  holiness  makes  it  certain  He  will  not  abuse  the  power  which  He
holds  in  His  hand.  In  His  life  and  death  we  read  the  desires  and  purposes  of
God  concerning  us,  and  when  He  speaks  we  hear  the  voice  of  Him  who  sits
upon  the  throne  of  the  universe,  saying,  "A  just  God  and  a  Saviour,  there  is
none  beside  Me  "  (Isa.  xlv.  21).  In  proportion  as  men  listen  to  Him,  and  follow
His  guidance,  will  heaven  be  begun  upon  earth,  and  the  darkness  of  sin  and
sorrow  be  dispersed  by  the  rise  of  this  Sun  of  Eighteousness.  It  is  to  this
end  that  '*  God  spake  in  times  past  by  the  prophets"  and  has  "  in  these  last
days  spoken  by  His  Son."    (Heb.  i.  1.)

OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS.

Ver.  1.     Religion,  it  has  been  con-  battled  fields  of  earth  and  to  the  petty

tended,  is  not  the   proper   theme   of  strifes  and  achievements  of  men  ?  .  .  .

poetry But    if    poetry    be  No,  let  poetry  rise  amid  the  roll  of

adapted  to  body  forth  the  noblest  cherubic  wheels  and  the  rushing  of
conceptions,  and  to  breathe  the  Ian-  cherubic  wings  ;  let  her  glow  with
guage  of  stirring  emotion,  where  is  the  seraphic  ardour  and  learn  seraphic
theme  that  presents  a  field  so  sublime  strains  ;  let  her  celebrate  the  redeem-
as  religion,  or  awakens  emotions  so  ing  work,  and  put  hymns  into  the  lipa
fervent?  ....  The  most  daring  of  those  who,  struggling  with  emotions
flights  fall  far  short  of  the  elevation  which  they  have  no  language  to  utter,
which  such  themes  will  justify  ;  the  find  in  the  bold  and  tender  stanzas
most  glowing  language  cannot  exagge-  which  consecrated  talent  has  put  forth,
rate  such  emotion.  Must  the  noblest  the  impassioned  strains  that  both  ex-
forms  of  language  be  restricted  to  em-  press  and  excite  their  piety.      Were

421


EOMILETIC  COM  ME  NT AR  Y :  SA  M  UEL.  book  ii.


examples  asked  it  might  be  shown  tliat  and  blooming,  and  the  day  is  rich  in
poetry  is  the  selected  form  in  which  joy  and  peace. — Luther,
prophets  embodied  their  inspired  vati-
cinations, and  the  Psalms  might  be  Vers.  6  and  7.  Some  re^jjard  Cli list's
addnced  as  so  many  lyrical  coniposi-  sceptre  as  one  of  mercy  only,  bnt  tlie
tioiis  exclusively  dedicated  to  devotion.  nni form  representation  of  the  Bible  is
— John  Ehi.  different.  There  is  an  ominous  com-
bination of  mercy  and  judgment  in

Ver.  4.  The  chief  idea  of  the  em-  this,  as  in  most  predictions  of  Christ's
blem — the  grass  shining  clearly  after  kingly  glory.  In  the  bosom  of  one  of
rain — is  that  of  growth — fresh,  healthy,  Isaiah's  sweetest  promises,  the  Messiah
beautiful  development  and  progress^—  declares  that  He  was  anointed  to  pro-
steady,  silent  advance  in  holiness.  In  chiim^'the  day  of  vengeance  of  our
individuals  under  his  precious  influence  God^'*  ....  It  could  not  be  other-
the  graces  of  the  new  creation  are  seen  wise.  The  union  of  mercy  and  judg-
ripening,  the  understanding  becoming  ment  is  the  inevitable  result  of  that
more  clear,  the  will  more  firm,  the  con-  righteousness  which  is  the  foundation  of
science  more  vigorous,  the  habits  more  His  government.  Sin  is  the  abominable
holy,  the  temper  more  serene,  the  thing  which  He  hates.  To  separate
affections  more  pure,  the  desires  more  men  from  sin  is  the  grand  object  of
heavenly.  In  communities  conversions  His  rule.  For  this  end.  He  draws  His
are  multiplied,  and  souls  advance  people  into  union  with  Himself;  ....
steadily  in  holy  beauties  ;  intelligence  but  as  for  those  who  refuse  to  part
spreads,  love  triumphs  over  selfishness,  with  their  sin,.  .  .  .  the  sin  that  is
and  the  expansive,  genial  spirit  of  within  them  cannot  abide  in  His  holy
Christ  drives  out  the  bitter  spirit  of  kingdom,  and  as  they  refuse  to  let
strife  and  the  dry  spirit  of  mammon. —  their  sin  be  destroyed  and  their  per-
Blaikie.  sons  saved,  nothing  remains  but  that

Like  the  spring,  so  is  also  the  reign  they  and  their  sins  perish  together. —
of  grace,  a  joyous,  busy  time,  wherein  Blaikie*
Messiah  makes  us  righteous  and  God-
fearing, so  that  we  become  green.  Vers.  1-7.  True  preaching  is  alwk/s
blooming,  fragrant,  and  grow  and  be-  a  prophetic  testimony.  I.  As  to  its
come  fruitful.  And  now  go  so  ;  Who  origin:  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  speaks
lives  in  spring  he  dies  no  more;  who  through  it.  II.  As  to  its  contents:
dies  in  winter  he  lives  no  more,  for  the  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  upon  its
sun  goes  away  from  the  latter;  but  tongue.  III.  As  to  its  subjects:  the
to  the  former  the  sunrises  up  of  which  mysteries  of  God's  saving  purpose,
David  prophesies.  Where  the  sun,  which  only  God's  Spirit  can  explain  ;
Christ,  does  not  shine  clear,  the  spring  the  great  deeds  of  God's  grace,  which
also  is  not  pleasant;  but  Moses  with  can  be  proclaimed  only  on  the  ground
the  law's  thunder  makes  everything  of  personal,  inner  experience,  and  of
dreadful  and  quite  deadly.  But  here,  one's  own  seeing  and  hearing  ;  and  the
in  Messiah's  time,  says  David,  when  future  affairs  of  God's  kingdom,  in  the
He  shall  reign  over  Israel  itself,  with  manif'^station  of  Divine  salvation  and
grace  to  make  us  righteous  and  save  Divine  judgment,  which  only  the  eye
us,  it  will  be  as  delightful  as  the  best  illuminated  by  the  light  and  of  the
time  in  spring,  when  before  day  there  Spirit  can  behold. — Erdmann,
has  been  a  delightful  warm  rain,  that  The  prophetic  photograph  of  the
is,  the  consoling  gospel  has  been  future  7^i^/^r  in  the  ^n>////^c?/ of  David
preached,  and  quickly  thereupon  the  answers  in  its  outlines  to  the  counter-
sun,  Christ,  comes  up  in  our  heart  part  of  the  Julfitment  in  Christ,  and
through  rii;ht  faith  without  Moses'  this  : — I.  In  respect  to  His  personal
clouds  and  thunder  and  lightning.  appearing^  perfect  righteousness,  and
Then  all  proceeds  to  grow,  to  be  green  holiness  in  complete  fear  of  God  (re-
422


CHAP.  XXIII.  HOMILETW  COMMENT  A II Y:    SAM  UEL.


li.'ioiis  ethical  perfection).  II.  In  beaiin^- towards  tlie  Divine  saying  (the
respect  to  the  extent  of  His  royal  AV/«??z),  by  which  he  receives  an  2Vz/;/^-
dominion,  He  is  ruler  overmen,  univer-  dlate  revelation  in  plastic  form  of
sality  of  world  dominion.  HI.  In  what  he  hnd  previously  received  as  a
respect  to  the  foundations  of  His  king-  promise  through  Nathan. — Erdmann.
dom,  the  promises  of  God.  IV.  In  A  blessed  end,  when,  in  looking  back
respect  to  the  activity  and  effects  of  upon  the  path  of  life  that  lies  behind,
his  royal  rnle,  on  the  one  hand  in  the  one  has  nothing  to  utter  but  gratitude
enlightening,  warming,  animating,  and  and  praise;  when,  in  looking  around
fructifying  light  of  his  manifestations  U[)on  his  own  life's  acquis  lions  and
of  grace  and  blessings  of  salvation  ;  on  his  possession  of  salvation,  all  self-
the  other  hand,  in  the  fire  of  His  glorying  is  silent,  and  only  the  testi-
judgment  consuming  all  ungodliness,  mony  to  God's  grace  and  mercy,  that
— Erdmann.  has  done  all  and  given  all,  comes  upon
The  prophetic  element,  which  ap-  the  lips.  When,  in  looking  forward
pears  in  David's  Messianic  psalms,  into  the  future  of  God's  kingdom  upon
comes  out  most  strongly  here.  In  earth,  on  the  ground  of  the  grace  ex-
Nathan's  promise  and  prophecy  David  perienced  in  life,  one's  faith  becomes  a
is  merely  passively  receptive,  and  his  prophet,  beholding  the  ways  along
prayer  is  only  the  echo  of  the  Divine  which  the  Lord  brought  His  Kingdom
word  he  has  received,  but  here  he  through  darkness  to  light ;  through
rises  to  the  highest  prophetic  action,  conflict  to  victory. — Erdmann,
which  pre-supposes  indeed  a  passive

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  8^9.

The  Mighty  Men  and  The  Well  of  Bethlehem.

I.  There  is  a  loyalty  in  noble  natures  which  seeks  occasions  of  self-sacrifice.

Satan  very  greatly  belied  even  our  fallen  human  nature  when  he  said,  "'  Skin
for  skin,  yea,  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life"  (Job  ii.  4).  Here
he  shows  either  his  ignorance  or  his  malice,  for  millions  of  men  and  women  have
proved  its  falsity.  No  generation  has  ever  lived  upon  the  earth  in  which  some  have
not  been  found  willing  to  risk  their  lives,  not  merely  in  obedience  to  the  voice
of  conscience,  or  out  of  gratitude  to  Christ  and  for  the  sake  of  spreading  His
gospel,  but  as  David's  mighty  men  did  here,  with  a  devotion  which  seemed  on
the  watch  for  an  opportunity  to  manifest  its  depth.  We  should  have  good
reason  to  admire  these  warriors  if  they  had  fought  their  way  to  Bethlehem's
gate  to  rescue  their  master  from  the  hands  of  the  Philistines,  or  to  procure  for
him  some  necessary  food  or  drink.  Such  a  deed  would  have  entitled  them  to
receive  the  well-done  of  faithful  servants  and  would  have  established  their  claim
to  David's  grateful  love.  But  in  braving  death  to  gratify  a  passing  wish  of  their
king  they  went  far  beyond  the  strictest  requirements  of  duty,  and  their  conduct  is
a  striking  proof  of  the  fact  that  the  noblest  natures  find  their  purest  gratification
in  self-sacrifice — in  laying  all  that  they  have  and  are  at  the  feet  of  another.

II.  Those  who  are  the  objects  of  deep  affection  should  be  watchful  of  the
claims  they  make  upon  it.  David's  desire  was  perfectly  natural  and  lawful,  and
it  was  not  wnmg  to  express  it.  But  it  was  certainly  somewhat  inconsiderate,
seeing  that  he  must  have  known  the  kind  of  men  who  surrounded  him.
Probably,  however,  he  did  not  dream  that  the  utterance  of  his  wish  would  have
such  a  result,  and  we  may  well  believe  that  his  experience  now  made  him  more
careful  in  the  future  when  such  brave  and  loving  friends  were  near.  It  behoves
all  who  are  deeply  and  tenderly  loved  to  be  very  mindful  how  strong  such  love

423


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SAMf/JiL.


BnOK  II.


*s  and  how  much  it  will  do  and  bear  for  the  object  of  its  love.  True  it  is  thnt
self-devotion  raises  and  (,daddens  the  soul  that  exercises  it,  but  none  btit  the
utterly  mean  man  could  use  this  truth  to  excuse  his  own  selfishness.  Let  such
an  one  remember  that  he  loses  in  pro])ortion  as  the  other  i;ains,  and  let  all  be
so  anxious  to  find  out  and  gratify  the  desires  of  those  who  love  them  as  to
have  no  room  to  express  their  own.

III.  Heroic  deeds  have  a  tendency  to  beget  others  after  their  kind  It  is
quite  possible  that  David's  mighty  men  became  what  they  were  through  associa-
tion with  him.  He  had  set  them  many  noble  examples  of  bravery  and  self-
forgetful  ness,  and  they  had  been  apt  pupils  of  a  worthy  master.  And  now  their
deed  of  loyal  daring  begets  in  him  one  of  the  same  kind.  When  men  thus  seek
to  equal  and  out-do  each  other  in  bringing  their  lower  nature  into  subjection  to
the  higher,  and  in  seeking  who  shall  be  the  sjreater  in  acts  of  loving  service,
then,  indeed,  is  a  warfare  carried  on  which  is  all  gain  and  no  loss,  and  where
both  sides  gain  a  victory  worth  having.


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,


I.  Th  e  three  warriors  m  ust  be  surveyed
as  servants  of  David,  men  engaged  to
obey  his  commands  and  execute  his
will  to  the  utmost  of  their  power.  And
their  conduct  then  appears  very  ad-
mirable, as  far  removed  as  can  well  be
imagined  from  that  calculating  and
niggardly  obedience  which  betrays  a
disposition  to  do  the  least  possible,  to
render  as  little  to  a  master  as  that
master  can  be  prevailed  on  to  accept.

.  .  .  .  David  might  have  sum-
moned the  bravest  of  his  battalions
and  bidden  them  attempt  the  forcing
a  passage  to  the  well,  but  he  simply
uttered  a  wish,  .  .  .  and  it  was
sufficient  for  the  bold  and  true-hearted
men.  .  .  .  There  is  an  example
set  to  every  man  who  is  called  upon
for  obedience,  which  fits  the  history
before  us  to  be  inscribed  on  our
kitchens,  our  shops,  and  our  churches.
'J^he  example  lies  in  their  not  having
waited  for  a  command,  but  acted  on  a
wish,  and  there  is  no  man  to  whom  the
term  servant  applies — and  it  applies
to  every  man,  at  least  with  refeience
to  God — who  would  not  do  well  to
ponder  the  example.  .  .  .  Consider
men  generally  as  the  servants  of  God.

.  .  .  He  dealeth  with  us  as  with
children,  rather  not  laying  down  an
express  precept  for  every  possible  case,
but  supposing  in  us  a  principle  which
will  always   lead   to   our  considering


what  will  be  pleasing  to  Himself,  and
to  our  taking  His  pleasure  as  our  rule.
.  .  .  And  the  Christian  should
search  for  the  least  indication  of  God's
will,  and  give  it  all  the  form  of  a  posi-
tive statute.  .  .  .  H.  Then  what  care
should  there  be  that  nothing  may  be
said  in  joke  which  may  be  taken  in
earnest,  nothing  even  hinted  at  as  our
belief  or  desire  which  we  would  not
have  acted  upim  by  those  who  hear
our  words.  It  is  specially  to  children
that  this  remark  a[)plies  ;  for  they
may  be  supposed  to  have  all  that
submissiveness  to  authority  and  that
willingness  to  oblige  which  dis-
tinguished David's  warriors,  as  well
as  the  inability  of  discriminating  a
casual  expression  from  an  actual
direction.  .  .  .  There  may  occur
precisely  what  occurred  with  David's
servants.  It  is  not  that  the  monarch
has  commanded  his  warriors  to  dare
death  ...  or  even  wished  them
to  undertake  the  rash  and  perilous
enterprise.  It  is  only  that,  without
reflection  or  thought,  he  gave  utter-
ance to  something  that  was  passing  in
his  mind,  and  that  those  about  him
overheard  the  inconsiderate  expression.
And  do  you  mark  that  ycmng  person,
who  is  devoting  hiuis.df  with  uncal-
culatiiig    eagerness    to    some    worldly

pursuit The  parent  never

wished    him    thus    to    squander    his

424


CHAP.  XXTII,


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:    SAMUEL.


powers ;  tlie  parent  never  thonglit
that  he  would  ....  but  was
apt  to  give  words  to  feelings  which  he
wouUl  never  have  breathed,  had  he
reuienibered  the  possihility  of  their
being  received  as  genuine,  or  inter-
preted as  laudable.  .  .  .  III.  But
the  genuineness  of  the  repentance  of

David is    pn)ved    by

his  refusal  to  derive  benefit  from  his

sin And    we    are    now

concerned  with  the  question  as  to
what  is  binding  on  a  man,  if,  with  the
advantages,  procured  by  a  fault,  lying
at  his  disposal,  the  water  from  the  well
of  Bethlehem  sparkling  before  him,  he
become  convinced  of  his  fault  ?  .  .  .
Is  lie  to  drink  of  the  water,  to  enjoy
the  advantages?  It  may  often  be  a
hard  question,  but  we  do  not  see  how
there  can  be  any  true  penitence,  where
what  has  been  wrongfully  obtained  is
kept  and  used.  .  .  .  Let  the  case
be  that  which  is  not  unlikely  to  occur
amid  the  complicated  interests  ofagreat
mercantile  conimunity.  .  .  .  We
cannot  think  it  enough  to  give  large
sums  in  charity  as  an  atonement  or
reparation.  .  .  .  Zaccheus  made
an  accurate  distinction  between  resti-
tution and  almsgiving  ;  he  would  give
alms  of  that  only  which  had  been
honourably  obtained ;  the  rest  he
returned,  with  large  interest,  to  those
from  whom  it  had  been  unfairly  pro-


cured. And  tliough  it  might  be  im-
possible for  the  trader  to  niake  restitu-
tion precisely  to  the  parties  who  have
been  injured,  we  do  not  see  how,  with
his  conscience  accusing  him  of  having
done  wrong,  he  can  lawfully  appro[)riato
any  share  of  the  prohts  any  more  than
David  could  have  lawfully  drunk  of
the  water  procured  at  his  ill-advised
wish. — Canon  Melville.

A  knightly  deed  this  !  But  was  it
not  rather  foolhardiness,  if  not  down-
right servility,  and  was  not  this  expend-
ing courage  recklessly,  and  dealing
wastefully  with  human  life  ?  This
question  resembles  that  with  which
Judas  Iscariot  presumed  to  censure  the
anointing  of  Mary  at  Bethany.  True
love  has  its  measure  in  itself,  and  in
its  modes  of  manifestation  puts  itself
beyond  all  criticism. — Krummacher.

In  David's  conduct  to  the  heroes
that  bring  him  water  from  Bethlehem
at  the  risk  of  their  lives  are  set  forth
these  three  things  : — I.  Nohle  modest}/,
winch  regards  the  love-offering  of  one's
neighbour  as  too  dear  and  valuable  for
one's  self  and  declines  to  receive  it,
II.  Sincere  humility  before  the  Lord,
which  lays  the  honour  at  His  feet  as
He  to  whom  alone  it  belongs.  III.
A  clear  view  and  tender  estimation  of
the  infinite  moral  worth  of  human  life
in  men's  relations  towards  one  another
and  towards  God. — Erdmann,


CHAPTER  XXIV.


Ver.    1.     "Again.**      Evidently   referring  to  the  famine   mentioned   in    chap.    xxi.    1-14.
**  Israel."     Borne  spt-cial  national  guilt  not  specified  must  be  here  referred  to.     If,  as  most

writers  suppose,  this  occurred  in  the  closing  years  of  David's  life  it  may  be  the  rebellion  under
Al)salom.  "  He."  Attempts  have  been  made  to  translate  here  impersonally,  David  was  mored,
etc. ;  and  in  Chronicles  the  instigation  is  attributed  to  ISatan.  But  the  graminatical  construction
will  not  admit  of  any  other  rendering,  and  the  expression  has  parallels  in  other  parts  of
Scripture,  and  must  be  read  in  the  light  of  what  is  revealed  to  us  of  the  Divine  character.
(See  1  Sam.  xxvi.  19,  2  Sam.  xvi.  10.)  On  these  passages  Kiel  says  :  "  'I'hey  show  that  God  only
instigates  those  who  have  sinned  against  Him  to  evil  deeds  ;  and  therefore  that  the  instigation
consists  in  the  fact  that  God  compels  sinners  to  manifest  the  wickedness  of  their  liearts  in
deeos,  or  furnishes  the  opportunity  and  occasion  for  the  unfolding  and  practical  manifestation  of
the  evil  desires  of  his  heart,  trat  the  sinner  may  either  be  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  his
more  evil  ways  and  also  to  repentance,  through  the  evil  deed  and  its  consequences,  or  if  the
heart  should  be  hardened  still  more  by  the  evil  deed,  that  it  mav  become  ripe  for  the  judgment

425


nOMTLETIO  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


BOOK  II.


bis  to  U,e'''L'"„?.r'l  "'f  «"'"  1?'^'  ^""oertion  that  Gfod  incites  to  sin  in  the  Old  Testament
Deloiigs  to  tiie  i.ame  circle  of  thought  ns  tlie  idea,  carried  over  l.y  Paul  into  the  New  Testament
of  n,an  shankum,  in  si„  as  a  Divine  act     The  hardening;  pertains  only  to  the  inner  bein"o
.ntit>"?o.r"'"f '"t'u"*.''"™?"'''  insusceptible  to  .he  'influences  of  the  DMne  word  Ld
whole'' '"roLTiw'  Tto'      P^'-^'^*';""^  «^*^  ''-«  -='--'  «<"l'^  ^oly  v.ill,  to  tl,e  ethical  habitsof  tii
wnoie  persona  ity,  etc    .    .    .   The  Divine  »r»ci«CT!c»«  to  erf  on  the  other  hand  refers  to  individml

?con;p"j,me":T^9fbrit'?"v    ''"'™''"»  ^f■  "!'/'''  ^^"'"^  be  inconsistent  wthhirhJlin;
(comp.  d.mes  i,    9),  but  in  his  occasioning  the  evil  to  l.r.ak  forth  from  the  hidden  depths  of

but  irfthTr  iM;trd 'f 'V".f  "'■  """""J  ''"  "^^^  ""*''«'■  P— PP"-  ■-■  induce  ha  S  ng
but  IS  rather  intended  to  be  the  mean  and  avenue  to  the  salvation  and  b.  tterin»  of  the  sinner  "

man.  ^  He  may  always  free  liiniselt  from  it  by  penitence.     But  if  he  does  not  repent    then  the

{t       aitt' i '  rhf  "''f  '''fr  "fi,^'"'"'''  °!"l<=^  '''^  '""■"■"'■  ^"'  "-'-  God-s'drspel't°on."
etc.     But  It  IS  perhaps  safer  to  leave  this  very  difficult  subject  by  saying,  in  the  words  of  the

tCZ7^^^T^-  ^''"f^  Commentary,  that  "  there  i»\ere  Lvoied  the  who7e  subject  of
the  co-relation  of  Divme  and  human  action,  about  which  we  can  only  insist  on  the  two  unhar-

^^%^:LZ£^^^r'''  "'  «»^-  -^  ^-^^  -P'-«  independenot^^f

^^^^^^■^>^::^  Lrrrtafn\r?s  ^r^i

quHe'dfierl?Zr."ir7.  ^.^^^f**'"  ^^^^^^^liy.  ««  *'«  *'«.  Joab's  words  show  that  this  census  was
?  Ind  xxvTr  H  "^^If^^^  by  Moses  at  the  command  of  God.  (Exod.  xxx.  12  ;  Numbers
nature  of  i)av{J'.  evidently  regarded  it  at  least  as  impolitic.  Several  views  are  held  as  to  the
DavTf'sTnJ;^,oW.h  /^  T^'  ^u"  ^,Ef^^^^^"^  remarks,  Joab's  remonstrance  "  indicates
JJavid  s  purpose  to  be  to  please  h.mself  with  the  exhibition  of  tlie  imposing  military  stren-th  of

Inmself  and  his  people      His  sin  was  one  both  of  the  ln,t  of  the  eyes  and  p?ide      .     .
had    I  nL^d   I  f   ^'?-i^f?J   *'  f"  ^''^'^  ^  ^^^^^^^'  f-rgetti,.g  hims  If  l^efore  the  Lordj

Dledoe  ^TL7"%  ^f''^'''  *^'  .'?^'r^^^  ^"^^y  «^  ^'  P^"Pl«'«  "^i'i'^-'T  strength,  as  a
of     f.  ^  ^^  ^^'  f  ^™'^.   ^^   ^^'    ^"^'^   ^"^    P^^P^^'  ^^^d  of    the  further  development

of  the  promise  in  Deut.  xxxiii.  29."  "  The  nature  of  David's  sin  is  declared  bv  the
sacred  writer,  saying  that  it  was  prompted  by  Satan,  the  author  o"  pride  an^lunbdief
^o'nfidpnL T-  i'"''  ^^i'-^^'^.^^  f^^th  in  God,  and  in  Kis  protection;  it  was  the  sin  of  self
confidence,  vain  glory,  and  rehance  on  an  arm  of  flesh.'  (Wordsworth).  "Warlike  thoughts
transaction  t  "! ,  ^  ^  ,^-k-f  o«nd ;  if  we  fail  to  see  this,  we  lose  the  key  to  the  who  e
on  f  l^r.i  !'J  ^^'\  ^'  ^^^'*  ^'^  ^^'^  -'''^^  numbers,  on  the  thought  of  wh^t  his  successors

now  fh  TKfT^  ,  1^  '^°'^^-  ^^^^^'-^dy  tins  assurance  was  given  (Deut.  xxxiii.  29).  David
nZ-J^T^^  .^^  r""  '■^'^'  '^.^P  ^^  '^^P'  *^^  '"^^  elevation  without  the  help  of  God,  who  had
TZt  ^Z^^^^^^l^:'}'  •  The  records  should  bear  witness  to  all  time  !hat  he  had  laid  a
W  r.r.t,  ri;'i;  .^r-f  t  work  of  the  future.     Had  his  perception  been  clear,  he  would  not

nurhp.r^  /"Jf  special  hint  contained  in  the  law  respecting  the  danger  connected  with  the
numbering  of  the  people.  _  In  Exod.  xxx.  11,  it  is  ordained  that  on  the  numbering  of  the  people

^rj.  ffi!  ^-'''"i^  }i"-''^^  ''^"'^"^'  "*^^^  ^^'''^  b«  '^^  P^^Sne  among  them,  when  thou
numberest  them."  By  this  they  would  be  released,  as  it  were,  from  the  death  incurred  by  their
wCi  t      "T- ^-^^     It  reminded  them  of  the  danger  of  forgetting  human  weakness,  so  imminent

where  an  individual  feels  himself  the  member  of  a  large  whole With  thi^s  feeling  even

the  Romans  presented  offerings  of  atonement  at  their  census In  Psa.  xxx.,  which  has

reference  to  this  event,  David  himself  describes  the  state  of  his  mind,  which  offered  a  point  of
coi^act  for  the  temptation  According  to  this,  confidence  wns  the  melancholy  root  of  sin,  both
m  David  and  the  nation.  Soft  indolence,  says  Cnlvin,  had  taken  possession  of  his  mind,  so  that
r^J^,  T-  '"^^"'f '^^  ^^'^  l';:y^^>  "or  any  dependence  on  the  mercy  of  God,  but  trusted  too
much  to  his  past  fortune.  ^  Where  this  corrupt  disposition  is  found  in  the  soul,  God's  influence
making  use  of  Satan  as  its  instrument,  leads  the  corrupt  germ  to  its  deveh.pment,  nmsing  to
action  that  ^^  h-ch  slumbers  in  the  soul  in  order  to  bring  about  the  retributive  judgment  in  which
man,  it  other vvi.se  well  mtentioned,  learns  fully  to  recognise  his  sinful  condition,  and  is  moved
to  repentaiice.  Ihe  question  is  not  one  of  simple  permission  on  the  part  of  God,  but  of  a  real
action,  and  that  of  a  nature  which  each  one  may  still  perceive  in  his  own  tendencies.  Whoever
once  yields^  to  his  si.iful  disposition  is  infallibly  involved  in  the  sinful  deed  which  leads  to
retributive  j  udgment,  however  much  he  may  strive  against  it."     (Ilcngstenherg.)

r^Z^A    ^'     "ir*^«®?'"  '•^•'  ^^°''^™Pe<^  in  the  open  country  because  of  the  great  numbers  who
would  assemble.     "Aroer  .  river  of  Gad."     Rather,  the  -  brook-vllley,"  etc.     There

was  another  Aroer  in  Reuben,  and   one  mentioned  only  in  1    Sam.    xxx.   28.     This  town   is
generally  considered  to  be  identical  with  the  one  near  Rabbah  mentioned  in  Num.  xxxii.  34  and
Joshua  xm.  35.     Some  travellers  identify  it  with  the  modern  Ayra,  but  there  is  much  uncer-
42o


CHAP.  XXIV.  IIOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL,


tainty  about  its  precise  position,  "Jazer."  Mentioned  several  times  in  Joshua  and  in
Numbers,  and  sometimes  spelt  Ja-azer.  "  It  was  known  to  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  and  its
position  is  laid  down  witli  niitiuteness  in  the  Onannsticon  as  ten  lloman  miles  we-st  of  Phila-
dolphi  and  fifteeu  from  Heshbon."  (Biblical  Dictionary.)  Modern  travellers  are  divided  as  to
its  exact  site.

Ver.  6.  *'  Gilead."  The  mountainous  district  on  both  sides  of  the  Jabbok.  "  Tahtim-
Hodshi."  Tl)is  word  is  very  obscure,  and  neitlier  ancient  nor  modem  translators  can  discern
any  meaning  in  it,  either  as  a  ])ropcr  name  or  as  a  descriptive  j)hrase.  It  is  generally  ai^reed
that  the  text  is  incorrect.  "  Dan-jaan."  ''  There  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  well-known
Dan  is  intended.  We  have  no  record  of  any  other  Dan  in  the  north,  and  even  if  this  were  not  tlie
Case,  Dan,  as  the  accepted  northern  limit  of  the  nation,  was  too  important  a  place  to  escajie
mention  in  such  a  list  as  that  in  the  text."  {Biblical  Dirtionary.)  The  Vulgate  reads  Dan-jaar,
wliicih  Gesenius  translates  Dun  in  the  wood.  This  description  agrees  witli  the  character  of  the
country.

Ver.  7.  "Tyre,"  etc.  That  is,  in  the  region  afterwards  called  Galilee,  in  which  it  appears  the
heathen  nati.^ns  were  noc  exterminated  but  tributary.  (So  Keil  and  others.)  "  The  divi.sion
into  Hivites  and  Canaanites  is  remarkable  ;  perhaps  these  were  the  most  prominent  of  the
surviving  native  races."     (^Translator  o;f  Dangers  Commentary).

Ver,  8.  Gone  through,  etc.  "According  to  1  Chron.  xxi.  6,  the  census  was  not  extended
into  Benjamin  and  Levi,  "because  the  king's  word  was  an  abomination  to  Joab,"  and  according
to  1  Chron.  xxvii  j4,  Joab  did  not  finish  his  task  because  the  plague  broke  out  before  he  had
finished.

Ver.  9.     Eight  hundred  thousand Five  hundred  thousand.     These  numbers

do  not  agree  with  those  given  in  Chronicles  where  a  higher  number  is  given  for  Israel  and
a  lower  for  Judah  (1,100,000  and  470,000).  Some  think  there  were  two  countings,  one
according  to  the  private  lists  in  the  cities  and  villages,,  the  other  from  the  public  registers,  or
that  Chronicles  includes  the  non-Israelites  among  the  people.  "  The  numbers  are  yiven  in
thousands,  and  therefore  are  only  approximate  statements  in  round  numbers  ;  and  the  difference
in  two  texts  arose  chiefly  from  the  fact,  that  tlie  statements  were  merely  founded  Ufxm  oral
tradition,  since,  according  to  1  Chron.  xxvii.  24,  the  result  of  the  census  was  not  inserted  in  the
annals  of  the  kingdom.  There  is  no  ground,  however,  for  regarding  the  numbers  as  exaggerated,
if  we  only  bear  in  mind  that  the  entire  po])nlation  of  a  land  amounts  to  about  four  times  the
number  of  those  who  are  fit  for  military  service,  and,  therefore,  1,3' 0,000,  or  even  a  million  and
a  half,  would  only  represent  a  total  population  of  five  or  six  millions — a  number  which  could
undoubtedly  have  been  sustained  in  Palestine,  according  to  thoroughly  reliable  testimony  as  to
its  unusual  fertility."  [Kcil).  "  In  this  muster  of  Israel  it  is  probable  the  standing  army  of
David  (1  Chron.  xxvii ),  which  had  before  been  numbered,  is  not  reckoned,  but  it  is  inserted  in
the  Chronicles.  This  standing  army  consisted  of  12x24,000iw288,000  men,  who,  with  their
chiliarchs  and  twelve  generals,  will  make  300,000  ;  and  if  these  are  added  to  the  800,000
mentioned  here,  the  numbers  in  both  places  would  coincide."  (  Wordsworth).  With  regard  to  the
difference  in  the  number  allotted  to  the  tribes  of  Judah,  Wordsworth  suggests  that  "perhaps
David  had  30,000  stationed  with  him  at  Jerusalem,  and  the  other  470,000  were  mustered  by
Joab."

Ver.  11.  "  For,"  rather,  and.  It  is  not  intended  that  God's  visit  produced  the  conviction  in
David's  mind.

Ver.  13.  "  Seven  years."  In  Chronicles  the  number  is  three,  which  some  expositors  prefer
as  agreeing  better  with  the  connection,  viz.,  three  evils  to  choose  from,  and  each  lasting  through
three  divisions  of  time.  But,  as  Keil  remarks  :  "  This  agreement  favours  the  seven  rather  than
the  three,  which  is  open  to  the  suspicion  of  being  intentionally  made  to  conform  to  the  rest."
Some  suggest  that  in  the  Chronicles  three  successive  years  to  come  were  offered  ;  and  that  the
seven  here  include  the  three  former  years  of  famine,  which,  with  the  year  then  in  course,  would
make  seven.

Ver.  14.  "  The  hand  of  men."  "  It  is  not  easy  to  see  how  this  npiilies  to  famine ;  probably
inasmuch  as  it  tends  more  or  less  to  create  dependence  upon  those  woo  are  still  in  possession  of
the  means  of  life,"  {Keil.)  "  War  and  famine  would  not  have  hurt  David's  own  person.  With
noble  disinterestedness  he  chose  pestilence,  in  which  he  himself  would  be  exposed  to  death  no
less  than  his  subjects."     {Theoderet.)

Ver.  15.  "The  time  appointed."  A  doubtful  rendering,  and  some  translate  "to  the  time
of  the  evening  sacrifice,"  objecting  that  the  pestilence  did  not  last  three  days.  But  the  phrase
•'  time  appointed  "  may  even  then  be  taken  to  refer  ti>  the  appointed  hour  of  evening  sacrifice,
or  it  may  be  as  Erdraann  suggests  that  "tlie  narrator  combining  and,  in  the  Hebrew  fashion,
ftnticipaiirg  wliat  follows,  means  by  this  txpressiou  to  say  that  God  in  His  mercy  permitted  tlie

127


HO MILETia  COMMENTARY :    SAMUEL.  book  ii.


pestilence  to  go  on  only  to  a  determined  point  of  time  within  the  three  days.*'  "  Seventy
thousand."  If  the  pestilence  only  lasted  part  of  a  day  its  violence  was  greater  than  any  on
record.  It  is  recorded  by  Diodorus  that  in  the  siege  of  Syracuse  100,000  soldiers  in  the
Carthaginian  army  died  within  a  short  time.

Ver.  16.  "Tlie  angel."  Verse  17  affirms  that  David  saw  the  angel.  This  then  is  no
poetic  figure,  but  a  statement  of  a  supernatural  event,  which  removes  the  pestilence  from  the
region  of  ordinary  visitations  of  a  similar  nature.  "Jerusalem."  "The  pestilence  seems  to
have  broken  out  at  opposite  extremities  of  the  country,  and  to  have  advanced  with  gigantic
strides  until  it  was  ready  to  concentrate  its  violence  upon  Jerusalem."  {Jamieson.)  "Lord
repented."  (See  on  1  Sam.  xv.  10.)  "  Tbreshing-place."  These  places  were  in  the  open
air,  and  usually  outside  the  town  or  city,  and  on  an  eminence,  if  possible,  in  order  to  catch  the
wind,  which  was  utilised  to  wiunow  the  corn.  "  Araunah  the  Jebasite."  Called  Oman  in
the  Chronicles,  one  of  the  old  inhabitants  of  the  land,  who,  haviug  apparently  become  a
worshipper  of  Jehovah,  retained  his  possessions  in  the  city.

Ver.  17.  "And  David."  According  to  Chronicles,  the  elders  also  clothed  in  sackcloth  were
with  David  at  the  time.  "  I  have  sinned."  "  The  punishment  was  sent  for  the  people's  own
sin,  though  David's  sin  was  the  immediate  occasion  of  its  execution."     {Von  Gerlach.)

Ver.  23.  "  As  a  king."  The  readings  here  differ  somewhat.  If  we  take  it  as  translated  in
the  English  versicm,  we  must  understand  that  Araunah  belonged  to  the  royal  family  of  the
Jebusites,  an  important  fact  which,  as  Thenius  remarks,  *'  would  not  have  been  stated  in  a
single  word."  Another  reading  is  :  ''All  this  gives  Araunah,  the  servant  of  my  lord  the  Tcing,  to
the  king.'*     Keil  asserts  that  the  noun  is  a  vocative :  All  this  yiveth  Araunah,  0  king,  to  the  king.

Ver,  24.  Fifty  shekels.  In  Chronicles  the  sum  is  six  hundred  shekels  of  gold.  No  attempts
that  have  been  made  to  reconcile  these  statements  are  satisfactory,  and  it  seems  better  to
suppose  a  corruption  of  the  text  in  one  of  the  records.  "  Apparently  the  statement  in  Chronicles
is  the  more  correct  of  the  two  ;  for  if  we  consider  that  Abraham  paid  four  hundred  shekels  of
silver  for  the  site  of  a  family  burial-place,  at  a  time  when  the  land  was  very  thinly  populated,
and  therefore  land  must  have  been  much  cheaper  than  it  was  in  David's  time,  the  sura
of  fifty  shekels  of  silver  (about  £6)  appears  too  low  a  price."  {Keil).  "But  it  should  be
remembered  that  the  field  for  which  Abraham  gave  four  hundred  shekels  was  of  considerable
.«ize,  comprising  the  cave  at  one  end,  and  also  timber,  perhaps  several  acres  in  all,  whereas  the
threshing  floor  was  probably  not  one  hundred  feet  in  diameter.  The  explanation  given  by
Bochart  (which  is  far  the  best)  may  possibly  be  true,  that  the  fifty  shekels  here  mentioned  were
gold  shekels,  each  worth  twelve  silver  shekels,  so  that  the  fifty  gold  shekels  are  equal  to  the  six
hundred  silver  ;  and  that  our  text  should  be  rendered,  David  bought  the  threshing-floor  and  the
oxen  for  money,  viz.,  fifty  shekels,  and  that  the  passage  in  Chronicles  should  be  rendered,  gold
shekels  of  the  value  (or  weight)  of  six  hundred  shekels.

Ver.  25.  "  There."  As  we  learn  from  2  Chron.  iii.  1,  on  Mount  Moriah,  afterwards  the  site
of  Solomon's  temple.     (See  Critical  Notes  on  chap.  v.  7.)

MAJN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  CHAPTEB^

The  NuMBERiNa  of  the  People.

I.  The  motive  and  spirit  of  a  deed  determine  its  moral  character.  From  the
human  standpoint  the  act  of  David  appears  quite  harmless,  even  if  inexpedient
or  impolitic.  It  belongs  to  quite  a  different  class  from  his  adultery  and
murder,  because  tliose  deeds  at  once  shock  the  moral  sense  of  everyone  who  has
any  spark  of  moral  sensitiveness  within  him,  while  this  arouses  no  such  emotion.
Yet  God  here  convicts  His  servant  of  a  great  wrong,  and  David  acknowledges
the  justice  of  the  sentence.  We  must,  therefore,  look  behind  the  outward
action  to  the  inward  state  of  mind  which  prompted  it,  and  find  there  the
iniquity  of  which  David  confesses  himself  guilty.  But  this  is  in  accordance
with  all  tiie  teachings  of  Holy  Writ  from  the  dajs  of  the  fall  to  those  of  Christ.
The  deed  which  first  bn)ugiit  death  into  the  world  and  all  our  woe  was  one
which  in  itself  was  trivial,  and  under  other  circumstances  would  have  been
innocent.  But  as  an  act  ot  disobedience  to  a  plain  command  it  was  a  great
transgression,  heavily  weighted  with  terrible,  yet  justly-merited,  retribution.
428


CHAP.  xxrv.  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.


Looking  on  the  bright  side  of  this  doctrine,  how  small  a  thing  it  is  to  give  a
tliirsty  fellow  creature  a  cup  of  cold  water,  and  how  often  it  nay  he  (h)ne
without  having  any  moral  significance.  Bnt  Our  Lord  tells  us  there  is  a  spirit
and  a  motive  which  make  this  (  rdinary  and  simple  act  of  great  moral  value  and
worthy  of  His  notice  and  reward.  So  His  anointing  by  Mary  of  Betliany.  The
deed  itself  was  not  so  very  remarkable,  it  was  not  to  human  eyes  a  very  great
act  of  devotion,  But  the  accej)tance  which  it  met  with  from  Him  who  read  the
heart  of  the  doer  seals  it  as  one  of  no  ordinary  spiritual  worth.  In  this,  as  in
Viwvwy  other  points,  the  religion  of  the  Bible  differs  from  and  transcends  all
other  systems.  It  enters  into  a  man's  soul  and  takes  cognizance  of  what  passes
there,  and  condemns  or  justifies  accordingly.

IL  Very  ^odly  men  are  sometimes  strangpely  inconsistent  with  themselves
Notwithstanding  his  deep  spiritual  experience  and  his  ardent  spiritual  desires
and  emotions,  David  had  very  strong  tendencies  to  obey  the  lust  of  the  flesh,
the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life.  It  seems  almost  impossihle  that  the
man  who  penned  the  23rd  Psalm  could  have  ever  been  an  adulterer  and  a
murderer.  It  is,  perhaps,  more  surprising  at  first  sight  that  he  who  wrote  the
51st  Psalm  could  afterwards,  in  apostolic  language,  have  fallen  into  such  a
"  snare  of  the  devil  "  as  that  in  which  we  here  find  him.  Yet  every  godly  man
who  searches  his  own  spirit  knows  how  much  there  is  still  within  him  ready  to
respond  to  the  suggestions  of  the  evil  one,  and  every  Christian's  life  unites  with
that  of  David  in  testifying  to  the  universality  of  the  experience  of  Paul — /
delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man;  but  1  see  another  law  in  my
members  warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind  and  bringing  me  into  captivity  to
the  law  of  sin  which  is  hi  my  members  (Rom.  vii.  22,  23).

III.  A  man's  attitude  after  sin  settles  the  question  of  character,  and  his
position  in  relation  to  God.  A  child's  character  can  be  better  estimated
by  the  way  in  which  he  behaves  under  his  father's  just  displeasure  than
by  counting  the  actual  number  of  his  transgressions.  So  is  it  with  God's
children.  The  godly  flee  to  God  when  they  have  sinned  ;  the  ungodly  ^qq  from
Him  (Psalm  xxxiii.  1-8  ;  1  John  1-8).  (On  this  thought  see  also  on  chap.  xiv.
25-33,  pcge  360.  On  the  remonstrance  of  Joab  see  on  chap  xix.  1-15,  page
384.     On  David's  chastisement  see  on  chap.  xii.  14-25,  page  346).


OUTLINES  AND  SUGGESTIVE  COMMENTS,

Ver.  1.  The  Scripture  is  most  care-  ascertaining  the  armed  forces  of  the
ful  that  we  should  feel  the  reality  of  land — this  was  the  thought  of  a  self-
Divine  intimations,  that  we  should  exalted  man.  ...  I  do  not  know  any-
refer  them  to  their  true  source,  and  thing  so  instructive  to  us  if  we  use  them
yet  that  we  should  understand  how  as  we  ought,  as  these  passages  in  the
possible  it  is  for  a  man  to  pervert  Bible,  which  teach  us  that  all  good
them  and  found  wrong  inferences  upon  thoughts,  counsels,  just  works,  come
them,  if  his  own  mind  is  not  in  a  from  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  at  the
thoroughly  pure  and  healthy  condition,  same  time  that  we  are  in  most  immi-
The  thought  that  it  was  a  blessing  to  neut  peril  every  moment  of  turning  the
be  the  head  of  a  growing  and  thriving  Divine  suggestions  into  sin,  by  allowing
])eople — this  was  Divine.  The  thought  our  selfish  and  impure  conceits  and
that  it  was  well  for  a  ruler  to  be  ac-  rash  generalizations  to  mix  with  them,
quainted  with  the  condition  and  re-  — Maurice.
sources  of  his  people — this  was  Divine.

.  .  .  But  the  determination,  just  then,  Ver.  12.     The  chastisement  was  not

to  send  forth  officers  for  the  sake  of  sent  while  he  was  in  a  state  of  insensi-

429


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SAMUEL.  book  ii.


bility  to  liis  sin,  but  after  lie  awoke  to  of  his  more  remote  ch.ambers  ;  and  now

a  sen^e  of  it.     It  is  not  while  the  child  listen  ! — "I   have    sinned   greatly    in

is  in  a  state  of  proud  and  hardened  that  I  have  done,"  he  cries  out  with

im])enitence  that  the  rod  may  be  ap-  deep  emotion  of  heart:  "and  now,  I

lied   with  most  hope  of  success,   but  be.^eech  thee,  0  Lord,  take  away  the

when  conscience  has  begun  to  speak  iniquity   of  thy  servant,   for   I    have

out,    and    soft   relentings   to   ai)i)ear.  done   very   foolishly!"      Wonderful!

Dealing  with  conscience  and  appeals  to  That   very   thing   from   which  David

thf^.  heart  must  ordinarily  precede  the  promised  to  himself  kingly  joy,   now

inlliction  of  punishment. — Blaikie.  brings  him  only  bitter  sorrow,  and  that

which  ought  to  have  added  to  his  dig-

Ver.    14.     Whatever   correction    is  nity,  suddenly  humbles  him  in  deepest

necessary  to  God's  creatures,  it  is  their  debasement.  But  this  does  not  sur})rise

request  that  He  may  be  the  immediate  us.     As  the  sun  always  breaks  through

dispenser  of  it.     1.  Because  He  is  the  the  clouds  which  encompass  it,  so  tlie

fountain    of    mercy,    and    limits    the  conscience,  when  once  it  is  awakened

punishment  to  the  necessity.     2.  He  and  enlightened  by  the  Spirit  of  God,

chastises  to  r^-cZa/m  and  not  to  r^v^??^^.  always  comes  forth  a-ain  victoriously

3.  What  comes  from  the  hand  of  the  out  of  every  ecli[)se,  and  frees  itself

Lord  melts  the  heart  and  humbles  the  from  every  entanglement,  and  asserts

soul,  as  the  rod  in  the  hand  of  man  anew  its  authority  as  a  judge.     Yea,

can  never  do.  in  believers  it  constantly  increases  in

We  do  well  believe  thee,  0  David,  tenderness,  and  becomes  more  and
that  thou  v/ert  in  a  wondiuful  strait;  more  like  the  apple  of  the  eye,  to  which
this  very  liberty  is  no  other  than  the  smallest  mote  gives  annoyance  ;
fetters;  thou  needcst  not  have  famine;  nor  can  there  be  any  rest  obtained  till
thou  needest  not  have  the  sword  ;  it  is  removed.  The  world  cannot  com-
thou  needest  not  have  pestilence;  prehend  how  so  many  things  which  it
one  of  them  thou  must  have  ;  there  thinks  unimportant  and  small  fill  the
is  misery  in  all ;  there  is  misery  in  children  of  God  with  such  deep  shame
any  ;  thou  and  thy  people  can  die  and  make  them  so  sad.  "  What  is
but  once,  and  once  they  must  die,  there  so  serious,"  it  is  perhaps  said  to
either  by  famine,  war,  or  pestilence,  them,  "in  examining  thy  treasures,  or
0  God,  how  vainly  do  we  hope  to  pass  in  seeking  the  favour  of  this  or  that
over  our  sins  with  impunity,  when  influential  man,  or  taking  a  lottery-
all  the  favour  that  David  and  Israel  ticket  ?  Where  is  there  a  Divine
can  receive  is  to  choose  their  bane !  command  which  thou  hast  thereby
'—Bishop  Hall.  transgressed  ? "      And,   indeed,  those

who  thus  speak  are  not  conscious  where

Ver.    10.    "  See  then,  David,  thou  such  a  Divine  precept  is.      But  they

hast  gained   thy   purpose.      What   a  know  it  Avell  who  have  transgressed  it.

power   is   this   that  is  placed  at  thy  Their    heart   has  forsaken   the   Lord

disposal  !      A  population  of  six  mil-  and  distrusted  his  power  and  love. —

lions,   the    inhabitants    of    the   little  Kni-mmacher.

tribes  of  Levi  and  Benjamin  not  being  What  then,  was  David's  sin  ?     He

reckoned.     What  great  things  mayest  will  needs  have  Israel  and  Judah  num-

thou  now  undertake  !     Who  may  dare  bered.     Surely  there  is  no  malignity  in

raise  his  head  so  loftily  as  thou  mayest,  numbers;    neither   is   it   unfit   for   a

and  who  is  there  that  may  sit  on  his  prince  to  know  his  own  strength.   This

throne  so  i'ree  from  care  and  so  securely  is   not  the  first  time  thjit  Israel  had

as  thou  dost?"      So   many  in   si)irit  gnne    under   a   reckoning.      The    act

might  perhaps  sav  to  him.     But  what  offends  not,  but  the  misaffection  ;  the

happens?       Instead    of  glorying,    the  same   thing    had    been    commendably

king  bends  his  head,  descends  in  silence  done   out   of    a   princely   providence,

from  his  seat,  and  withdraws  into  one  which    now,    through    tlie   curiosity,
430


CHAP.  XXIV.  nOMlL ETTO  COMMENT AU  Y:  5 A  M  VEL.


)>ri(]e,mi,sconfi(lence  of  the  doer,  proves  needed  in  all  p^reat  influence.     In  the

heinously     vicious.       'J'lios)     actions,  home,  in  the  Church,  in  the  state,  they

which    are   in    themselves  indifferent,  only  climb  true  thrones,  and  wear  real

receive  either  their  life  or  their  hane  crowjis,  who  have  the  spirit  of  sacrifice,

from    the    intentions   of    the    agent.  The  Saviour  Himself  relied  U[)on  that

Moses    numi^ereth    the    peojde    with  — "I,  if  1  be  lifted  up,  will  draw,"  etc."

thanks ,  David  with  displeasure.  Those  ^  ^  does  the  Eternal  leather  of  men,  for

sins  which   carry  the  smoothest  fore-  He  has  made  "Christ,"  whois  incarnate

heads  and  have  the  most  honest  appear-  sacrifice,  "the  ])ower  of  (lod."    3. '  How

ances,  may  more  provoke  the  wrath  of  far  what  costs  you  nothing  is  acc^/)^a/>/^

God  than  those  which  bear  the  most  to  God\     Christ's  praise  of  the  poor

abomination  in  their  faces.    How  many  widow's  gift,  God's  acceptance  of  the

thousand  wickednesses  passed  through  sacrifice  of  Ciirist — sufficiently  indicate

the   hands   of  Israel,   which  we   men  the  Divine  estimate  of  self-denial.  And

would   rather  have   branded   out    for  since  that  service  which  costs  us  some-

judi^ment  than  this  of  David's  !     The  thing  has  the  pulses  of  reality,  the

righteous  judge  of  the  world  censures  glow   of  love,  and   the   reflection    of

sins,  not  by  their  ill  looks,  but  by  their  Christ — it  surely  is  acceptable  to  God.

foul  hearts. — Bishop  Hall.  — U.  Ji.  Thomas.

Ver.  24.     The  principle  that  comes         Vers.    24,    25.     An   altar  must   be

out  in   these  words  is  one  that  will  built  in  the  threshing-floor  of  Araunah

sweep  the  whole  circle  of  worship,  and  the  Jebusite  ;   lo,  in  that   very   hill,

work,  and  gifts,  and  personal  religious  where  the   angel   held   the  sword   of

life.     I.    Worship.     For  in  our  build-  Abraham  from  killing  his   son,    doth

ings,  in  our  s^mc^  of  praise  and  prayer,  God  now  hohl  the  sword  of  the  augel

preaching  and  hearing,  we  are  to  give  from  killing  his  people  !    Upon   this

our  best  in  effort,  in  intelligence,  in  all  very   ground   shall   the   temple   after

things,  facing  and  resisting  every  tempt-  stand:  here  shall  be  the  holy  altar,

ation  to  the  contrary,  with  the  words,  wi>ich   shall  send   up   the   acceptable

*' Shall  I  offer,"  etc.     H.    Work.    Not  oblations  of  God's  people  in  succeeding

to  schemes  only  that  are  pleasant,  and  generations.

in  times  that  are  convenient,  and  by  0  God,  what  was  the  threshing-floor

proxies  that  are  easily  obtainable  will  of  a  Jebusite  to  thee  above  all  other

the  true  worker  of  God  devote  himself,  soils  ?  what  virtue,  what  merit  was  in

JH.     Gijts.     Not  with  careless  gifts,  this  earth  ?  As  in  places,  so  in  persons,

almost  covertly  given,  or  the  smallest  it  is  not  to  be  heeded  what  they  are,

coin  dealt  out  niggardly,  can  he  give  but  what  thou  wilt;  that  is  worthiest,

who  says,  "  Shall  I  offer  ? "  etc.     IV.  which  thou  pleasest  to  accept. — Bp.

Personal  religion.     There  is  meanness  Hall.

and    ingratitude    in    the    spirit    tnat  It   is  very  remarkable  that  before

relegates    all   religious    care    to    the  the  outward  foundations  of  the  temple

leisure  of  Sunday,  or  of  the  sick-room,  were  laid,   God's  forgiving  mercy  was

or  of  the  infirmities  of  old  age.     Why  by  God  factually  declared  to  be   its

should  we  not  offer  to  God  that  which  spiritual  foundation. — Hengstenberg.
costs   us  nothing  ?     Three    questions

may  throw  light  upon  it.  1.  How  far  Vers.  1-25.  Whom  does  the  Lord
what  costs  you  'noth.mg  is  any  benefit  smite  for  his  sins  ?  Him  who — 1.  Lets
to  yourself^.  Such  may  be  of  some  his  heart  be  smitten  by  God's  earnest-
benefit.  But  only  what  "costs  some-  ness  and  goodness,  and  takes  to  heart
thing  "  call  out,  (1)  highest  motives  the  greatness  of  his  sin  in  contrast  to
and  employs  (2)  all/(7cw/^/^s.  2.  How  God's  loving  kindness.  2.  Recoi^nises
far  what  costs  you  nothing  has  much  his  sin,  in  the  light  of  (jod'^  word,  as  a
iiifiiience  upon  the  world  1  Sacrifice  is  transgression  of  His  Holy  will,  and — 3.
liie  subtle   and    tremendous   element  Maintains  in  his  sinning  and  in  spite

431


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAllY :  SAMUEL.  book  ii.


of  it  the  fundamental  direction  of    his  Ilumhle   bowing   beneath,    the    punish-

heart  towards  the  living  (iul,  and  has  tneut    imposed.      5.     Unreserved  sub'

been  preserved  from  falling  away  into  mission  to  the  Divine  mercy. — Erd^

complete  unbelief. — Erd,mann.  maun.

True  and  hearty  repentance  is  pre-         Tins   history  leads  us   to   notice —

served  in  the  life  of  God's  children.   1.  I.    The  severity  oj  God  in  pimishing

In  the  penitent  confession  of  their  sin  sin.     The  sin  which  David  committed

and  guilt  before  the  judgment  seat  of  was  exceeding  great.     It  was  manifest

God.     2.  In  fleeing  for  refuge  to  the  even  to  so  wicked  a  man  as  Joab.    His

forgiving  ^rac^  of  God.    3.  In  humbly  pnnishment  was  ])rop()rtionately  severe.

bowing  under  the  punitive  justice  of  What  shall  we  therefore  think  of  sin  ?

God.     4.    In  a  confidence  which  even  Is  it  so  light  a  matter  as  men  generally

amid  Divine  judgments  does  not  waver  imagine  ?     II.   llie  goodness  of  God  in

in    the   delivering   mercy   of    God. —  pardoning  sin.      David  evinced  true

Erdmann.  contrition  by  pleading  that  the  punish-

The  gradual  succession  in  the  inner  ment  might  fall  on  him  the  guilty  one,
life  of  a    penitent  sinner  under   the  and  not  on  his  innocent  people.      In-
chastening  of  God's  love.   1.  Beproving  stantly  did  God  command  the  angel  to
conscience.     2.     Penitent    conscience,  stay  his  hand
3.  Hearty  prayer  for  forgiveness.  4.


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS;


Accusation,  False,  How  to  meet

Actions,  isolated,  not  the  standard  of  character ...
„        Motive  of,  determine  their  character     ...

Advancement,  True

Adversity  reveals  enemies

„  „      hidden  excellence

Affection,  Examples  of  strong

Appearances  often  deceptive

„  cannot  deceive  God

Atonement,  Conscience  feels  need  of


Beneficence,  dishonest

Birth  of  a  child.  Importance  of    ...

„     natural,  no  guarantee  of  character
Blessings  may  be  turned  into  curses
Bravery  in  a  bad  cause  not  uncommon
Body,  Resurrection  of  the,  necessary


Calamities,  Aggravations  of

„  Amelioration  of

„  may  involve  both  innocent  and  guilty

„  not  always  soften      ...         ...         ...         •••         ••

Calling,  God's,  will  be  made  plain

Character  of  man  influences  conduct  of  God       ...         ...         ••

„  „  men's  conception  of  God    ...

Children  blest  for  parent's  sake     ...         ...

„        may  imitate  sin  of  parents

„         not  always  like  parents  ...         ...         ••.

Circumstances  often  misinterpreted  ...         ••.         ...         ...         ...         223


FAOB

•••

16

•  •.

403

•  ••

428

...

196

...231

,269

...

76

,398

...378

,423

•••

172

•••

173

•••

86

••.

368

•••

18

•••

40

...

86

•••

72

•••

105

•••

362

...

363

...

271

...

271

•••

133

•••

408

...

408

••«

326

...

370

105,212,

329

u


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS.


Claims,  just,  not  always  to  be  enforced
Confe.^sion  not  repentance...
Courage  with  humility

„       of  best  meu  may  fail        •••


Day  of  grace  has  its  limits

Death  of  the  righteous

Deceiver  may  be  deceived

Deed,  good,  lasting  influence  of  a

,,  may  be  done  from  bad  motive

Desires  may  be  granted  in  displeasure     ...

„       good,  not  always  granted  ...
Discontent,  popular ;  its  tendency
Disobedience,  Penalty  of   ...

Distrust,  Fruit  of

Dispensations,  Divine,  progressive...
Diversity  of  gifts,  Intention  of


Election,  God's  purpose  in

Elevation,  moral,  of  man  ;  its  source

Emotion,  religious;  its  expre^^sion  and  dangers  ...

„  „  Ungodly  cannot  sympathise  with

Enemies  of  God  sometimes  used  to  fuKil  His  purposes
„  „      unite  against  Him

„        of  the  good.  Portion  of  the
„        attack  in  times  of  weakness
Enmity,  Effects  of  ...

Epochs  in  life  of  men  and  communities    ...
Evil  men  thwart  each  other
„     powers  ruled  by  God  ...
„     tendencies  in  good  men
„     Tendency  of,  to  repeat  itself  .••         ...


•  •


Failure  in  lawful  undertakings,  Reasons  for

Faitb,  A  failure  of...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...

„       Opportunities  of     ...

„      Connection  between^  integrity  and

,,       V iCuones  oi ...         ...         ...         ...         ••»         ...

Family  life,  no  hindrance  to  spiritual  life  and  service     ...
Fleeing,  sometimes  better  than  fighting  ...
Forgiveness,  honourable     ...
Furgiven  sin,  may  be  punished


PAGB

•  ••

•  ••

350

...

...166

,238

...

•*.

152

...

•••

215

•  ••

•••

262

...

...

242

..•

...

275

•  ••

...

272

...

. .  •

287

...

...107.

,270

...

•  •  •

313

...

...

390

...

...

143

...

...143,

,258

...

•••

316

...

•••

400

•••

•••

316

...

...

412

...

...

305

...

...

305

...

...

99

...

...

324

...

...

87

...

...

131

...

...

226

...

.*•

123

...

...

232

.*•

•••

176

...

•••

335

•  ••

•••

254

•  ••

•••

69

...

...

215

...

...

226

...

••.

259

...

...152,

187

...

•  •  •

105

•  •  •

•  •  «

202

...

•  •  •

134

•  •  •

...267.

346

TNDEK  OP  SUBJECTS.


ill


Friendship,  true  elements  of
Capabilities  of...


»»


Proofs  of


Genealogy,  Value  of  a

Generosity  has  its  prudent  side     ...
Gifts  not  graces

,,     Diversity  of,  intention  of
God,  His  being  and  character

„     useless  to  contend  with

„     His  silent  working     ...

„     unchangeable...

„     Forbearance  of

„    the  refuge  of  the  perplexed  ...

„     His  ways  and  word  will  stand  the  test

„     has  spoken  to  man     ...

„     His  desire  for  man     ...

„     Views  of,  influenced  by  character    ...

,,     Existence  of,  a  source  of  human  satisfaction

„     Dependence  upon,  only  source  of  moral  success
Godly,  sometimes  rebuked  by  ungodly     ...

„       may  be  debtors  to  ungodly

„      help  each  other  in  trouble...

„       men,  often  inconsistent
Good,  Tendency  of,  to  repeat- itself
Gratitude  gives  courage     ...

„        good  to  give  personal  expression  to
„        of  the  heart  must  find  its  way  to  the
Greatness,  True      ...         •••
Guidance,  Divine


Hatred,  a  sustaining  power
Heart,  Sin  in  the,  must  be  resisted
Help,  Seasonable    ...

Heroic  deeds  beget  others

Home,  Serving  God  at

Humility,  True

„  Honour  should  produce


Inconsistencies  of  good  men

Indignation,  Righteous,  may  degenerate  ...
Ingratitude,  Nature  of


lip


PAGE

...193

211

...193

,211

...200

,326

•        •••

7

•        •  •  •

375

•        •  •  •

207

•        •  •  •

400

...  26

,412

•        •  •  •

33

»        •  •  •

79

...  85

,162

>        •  •  •

128

»        •  •

228

•        •  •  •

412

...

420

»        •  •  •

421

»        •  •  •

408

•  •  •

416

»        •  •  •

416

>        •  •  •

384

.

202

...

204

.  287,  351,

429

-.

254

•  •  •

272

•  •  •

100

•  •  •

403

•  ••

276

.  221,  314,

412

1    ..

233

••
. .

334

374

424

21

••

.118,

126
319

287,  351,

429

...

244

..

.

51

INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS.


Ingratitude,  Penalty  of

Integrity,  connection  of  faith  and...
Intercession,  Duty  of


Jealousy,  in  whom  found

„        Danj^er  of

„        Effects  of  •••

Joy  in  God,  its  foundation...
Judgments  on  the  godly  will  extend  to  the  ungodly

„         on  good  men  by  bad


PAGB

•  •  •

•  ••

•  ••

127

•  •  •

•  ••

•  •  •

259

•  ••

•  ••

•  •  •

138

•  •  »

•  ••

185

•  •  •

•  •  •

196

•  •  •

•  •  •

223

•  •  •

•  •  •

404

•  •  •

•  •  •

82

•  ••

•  ••

275

Knowledge  God's,  infinite...


128


Laws,  Temporary  and  permanent

„      Natural,  God's  servants

„      Cause  of  suspension  of  beneficial  ...
Liberty,  Foundation  of  true
Licentiousness,  its  degrading  power
Life,  God  the  Author  of    ...
Light,  Moral,  consequence  of  refusing     ...

„      God  the  source  of    ...
Love,  Strength  of  parental

„     strong  obligations  of  its  objects    ...


Man,  Influence  of  one

„     helped  by  man

„     must  work  with  God

„     God  speaks  by,  to  mnn
Marriage,  as  instituted  by  God     ...
Mediator,  Qualifications  for  a
Meekness,  Power  of

Mercy  with  chastisement

Messenger,  A  Divine

Ministry,  True

„         in  holy  things.  Training  for
„         Obligations  of    ...
Miracles,  not  always  convincing    ...
Misjudgment  of  others
Motives,  Importance  of
Music,  Influence  of.


•  ••

•  •  •                        •  •  •                        •

216

...

•  •  •                     •  •  •                     •  «

394

...

•  •  <                     •  •  •                     •<

394

...

•  •  •                     •  •  •                     •

96

...

•  •  «                        •  •  •                         •

.  41,355

...

...

30

...

...                   ...                  •

263

•  ••

...                         •  •  »                         .

412

...

•• •              •••              •

378

...

•••                     • • •                     •

423

•  ••

•  •  •                     •• •                     •

►.134,227

...

•  •  •                        •  •  •                         •

169

...

•  •  •                     •  •  •                     •

280

•  •  •

•  •  •                     •  •  •                     •

420

•  •  •

•  •  •                     •  •  •                     •«

9

•  •  •

•••                        •••                        •<

200

•  •  •

•  ••                  •  •  •                  •

186

•  ••

•  •  •                     •  •  •                     •

177

•  •  •

•••                     •••                     •«

50

•  •  •

•••                  •••                  •«

44

•  ••

•••                   •••                   mi

206

•  •  •

•••                                •••                                •!

92

•  •  •

•••                    •••                    •«

80

•  •  •

...   15,  16,  177,

288.  368

•  ••

•••                  •••                  •«

428

•  ••

•••                  •••                  •«

179

INDEX   OF  SUBJECTS.


National  discontent,  an  opportunity  for  the  ambitious..


sin


„  „  authority  of  its  retribution

,,         unity,  Need  of  ...

Nobility  of  nature,  common  meeting  ground

^        seeks  occasions  of  self-sacrifice


*f


PAOB

390
...158,395
159
97
398
423


Obedience,  when  unblest

partial,  useless ...

best  sacrifice,  Why  ?     .. .

to  parents
„  insures  help

Occasions  needed  to  reveal  men    ...
Omission,  Sin  of
Oppression  breeds  rebellion
Ordinances  of  God  must  be  reverenced

valued  when  lost


M


68

162

163

185

299

133

62

220

92

93

Peace-Maker,  a  double  blessing

Position,  Social,  to  be  respected    ...

Possessions,  Unlawful,  must  be  relinquished

Power  brings  obligation

Praise,  Duty  of

Prayer,  Elements  of  true

„      Character  gives  weight  to...

„      Duty  of  intercessory  ...

„      Conviction  of  the  good  in  relation  to

„      a  law  of  God's  kingdom    ...

„      when  unavailing    ...

„      must  be  offered  in  submission

„      Promises  fulfilled  in  answer  to     ...

„      self-willed.  Consequence  of

Promises  of  God

„  „       fulfilled  in  answer  to  prayer

„  „       fulfilled  by  means  of  the  ungodly

Prosperity  brings  false  friends

„         brings  special  temptation

Providence  of  God

ff  ff      ilind.  01  ...         »•.         ...         ...

,,  01  man...         ...         ...         ...         *..

Prudence,  Value  of ...

Prudent  sometimes  to  forego  just  claims


. .  •••  ij\j  X

• .  ••.  ^o  f

..  ...  2oi

..  ...  o^o

.  .  ...  2*^t    V  «l

. .  •*.  X  J.

99

..  ...  J  oO

160

160

161

99,320

270

. •  ...  4  0

«•  ...    «/«/,  o^U

99,  289

324

333

32,  115,  126,265

34

. .           ...  ij  oO
245

• .  •••  ijO\)


INDEX  OP  SUBJECTS.


PAGE

Punishment  of  sin  ...         •••         ...         ...         ...  ...           52

„             „       a  ruler's  duty  ...         ..           ...         ...         ...  ...         355

„             „       not  remitted  because  delaye*l            ...         ...  ...         395

Purposes,  God's,  fulfilled  by  unlikely  means        ...120,224

„               and  liunian  instrumentality      •••         ...         ...  21)2,  370, 377


Qualifications  for  service  differ  at  different  periods  of  life      399


Reasoning,  Mischievous    ...        •••  •••  ...  ...  ...  ...  358

Rejecting  God,  Consequences  of    ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  137

Relationship,  natural,  without  like  cliaracter  ...  ...  ...  ...  •    71

„                 „        Penalties  of  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  220

Rei)entance,  Elements  of  true       ...  ...  --.  ...  -.  ...  82,  94

„           God's  acceptance  of ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ^^5, 341

„           Exhortation,  helpful  to  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  95

„          God's,  nature  of       ...  ...  ...  ...  ••  ••.  162

„          Rewards  of    ...         ...  ...  ...  ...  •••  •••  268

„           God  brings  men  to    ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  340

Retribution,  Mational        ...         ...  ...  .••  «.•  ••.  ...159,395

Review,  the  past,  good  to  ...         ...  ...  •••  •••  ...  «••  137

Ruler,  Qualifications  of  a  good     ...  ...  ...  •••  ...  ...  46,  297

„      True,  will  find  obedient  subjects ...  296


Sacrifice  of  one  for  many,  when  just  ...  ...  ...  ...  •..  392

„         Divine  compensation  for  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  45

„         Self-influence  of            ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  424

Satan,  where  he  seeks  to  woik      ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  176

Secret  forces  in  life...         ..          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  122

Selfishness,  Punishment  of...         ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  243

Self-interest,  an  insecure  foundation  of  trust  ...  ...  ...  ...  390

Self-will,  Consequences  of  0-.         ...  ...  ...  153

„         Strength  of          ...         ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  282

Servants  of  God  sometimes  shrink  from  duty  ...  ...  ...  ...  170

„             „       often  misunderstood  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  171

Signs  from  God,  Intention  of        ...  ...  ...  ...  •.  ••«  124

Sin,  Power  of          ...         ...         ...  ...  .♦•  ...  ...  •.«  40, 44

„     beyond  human  intercession    ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  47

„     National          ...         ...         ...  ...  ...  ••  ...  •.•  158

„     confessed  without  repentance  ...  ...  •••  .••  •••  166

„     of  one  injures  many  ...         ...  ...  ...  ...  ...    283,  347,  390

„    Pleasure  of,  short  lived          ...  > 347


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS.


VIJ


Sin,  Divine  barriers  to

•••         •••         ,

„  unfits  to  deal  with  otlier  offenders

„  differently  viewed  by  godly  and  un«;()dly

„  must  be  repented  of  before  forgiveness

„  i)unishn)ent  of

Spirit  of  God,  where  He  works

''  »         i^ay  influence  without  sanctifying

„      of  a  man's  life,  the  standard  of  character
Sorrow  must  not  hinder  duty

„        human,  God  can  cheer  in

Soul-experience,  Metaphors  expressing

Standard,  true,  of  human  actions

Submission,  Grace  of  *

Success  not  always  token  of  Divine  favour

„        false,  short-lived

Supernatural  and  tiie  natural

„            manifestations  not  always  lead  to  godliness
Superstition,  Effects  of


PAOB

201
...358,391
.. .300,429
360
..  52,395
176
207
407
383
412
404
292
..  62,  161
350
384
115
207
71


Time  no  respecter  of  character
Training  early  :  its  advantages
Transitions  in  life  reveal  men
Trust  in  God,  when  practical


104

58
268
280


Ungodly  Man,  Characteristics  of  an     ...

Unity,  Need  of  national

„       Misfortune  bond  of

Unseen,  Voice  of  the

Reality  of  the

not  generally  preferred  to  the  seen
»»  Faith  in  the


»


»t


373

97

220

58

60

107

LSI,  299


>i


»


Victory,  Defeat  may  be  better  than

tlie  best ]]*

Blessings  following

„         of  faith

...         •••         •••         ,.,

XT'  'J-      .  ^^  ^^^"^'^  kingdom  on  earth  dependent  on  moral  conditions  Z

Vindication  of  an  innocent  man

Vows,  Use  and  obligation  of

^^  •••  •••  AAA  AAA  «...


69
134
102
187
323
237

21


War,  generally  begun  by  those  in  the  wrong


329


▼iii  INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS


PAGB

Wealth,  one  of  its  penalties,  and  one  of  its  dangers  and  blessings        ...385,  386
Wicked,  Freedom  of,  argument  from        ...         ...         ...         .  ...         355

Workers  for  God,  Oneness  of         ...         ...         ., 324

Worst  purposes  find  instruments  ...         223


Youthful  training,  Blessings  of 5a

Young,  Godliness  in  the 41


1


DATE  DUE

^^■

D  E  ■  '  r:  r;    —  -  -  --  ;

;::n^^;^;^^^vww,\;,\v,v,voo


'JA.r.'J/Ay.'J


^^MJ'AA^AMy/AA


'mmm.


y/M^A^AA^A-yAmmmAAAm^
