'^r''  ■  '"ir  .iF'""ii»"^ii»"«iipw«MniiMmi"Miii 


THE  GLORIOUS  LORD 


WM 


LIBRARY  QF  CONGRESS. 

Cliap...fef:.  Copyright  No. 

Shelt..M__S  S 


UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA, 


Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer's  Works. 

The  Shepherd  Psalm,  New  Presentation  Edition,  with 
illustrations  on  every  page,  by  Mary  A.  Lathburjr. 
Printed  in  two  colors.  i2mo,  cloth  covers  stamped  in 
ink  and  gold,  boxed $1.25 

The  Present  Tenses  and  The  Future  Tenses,  i6mo, 
white  vellum  cloth,  silk  inlaid,  gold  and  ink  stamping, 
per  set,  boxed 1.50 

The  Bells  of  Is  ;  or.  Voices  of  Human  Need  and  Sorrow. 
Echoes  from  my   early   pastorates.      With   portrait. 

i2mo,  cloth 75 

Prayers  for  Heart  and  Home,    Morning  and  Evening 

Devotions  for  a  Month.    8vo,  flexible  cloth 75 

Old  Testament  Heroes,    lamo,  cloth,  each i.oo 

David:  Shepherd,  Psalmist,  King.    {Just  published.) 

Jeremiah  :  Priest  and  Prophet.    {New.) 

Joshua  and  the  Land  of  Promise. 

Moses,  the  Servant  of  God. 

Joseph  :  Beloved— Hated— Exhalted. 

Israel,  a  Prince  with  God. 

Abraham  ;  or.  The  Obedience  of  Faith, 

Elijah  and  the  Secret  of  His  Power. 

The  Expository  Series,    lamo,  cloth,  each t.oo 

Christ  in   Isaiah,    Expositions  of  Isaiah,  XL.— -LV. 

(New.) 
The   Way  Into  the  Holiest   An  Exposition  of  the 

Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 
The  Life  and  Light  of  Men,    Expositions  in  John's 

Gospel. 
Tried  by  Fire,    Expositions  of  First  Epistle  of  Peter. 

The  Christian  Life  Series,    i8mo,  cloth,  each  50c.;  white 

cloth,  each 60 

Calvary  to  Pentecost,    {New.) 

Key  Words  to  the  Inner  Life, 

The  Future  Tenses  of  the  Blessed  Life, 

The  Present  Tenses  of  the  Blessed  Life. 

The  Shepherd  Psalm. 

Christian  Living, 

Envelope  Series  of  Booklets,  Packets  Nos.  i  and  2,  each 
containing  12  Tracts,  assorted net,      .20 

Choice  Extracts  from  the  Works  of  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer.  By 
Rev.    B.   Fay    Mills.      24mo,    paper,  each    5c.;  per 

doz net,      .35 

Larger  edition,  i6mo,  paper t . .  1 1  • .      .15 


THE  GLORIOUS  LORD. 


REV.  F.  B/MEYER,  B.  A. 

Author  of  ^^  Christian  Living,''^  *'  Shepherd  Psabu^'^  etc. 


APR   6  1B9R1       , 


FLEMING  H.  REVELL  COMPANY: 
Chicago,  New  York,  Toronto. 

Publishers  Evangelical  Literature. 


\x 


\ 


C 


Copyright  i8g6,  by 
Fleming  H.  Revell  Company. 


CONTENTS. 


Chap.  PAQB. 

I.  The  Hidings  of  God         .         .        5 

II.  Suffered  to  Hunger        .          .     16 

III.  There  is  a  River  .          .     26 

IV.  The  Soul's  True  Affinity        .      41 
V.  Christ  One  and  Manysided             52 

VI.  How  TO  Become  Like  Christ        63 

VII.  The  Immanence  of  Christ         .      74 

VIII.  The  Other  Advocate                   .    87 

IX.  Escape  from  the  World's  Cor- 
ruption   .....         100 

X.  Other  Worldliness            .             116 

XI.  The  Pitcher  and  God's  Well     127 


Zhc  (5lodou8  Xorb. 


CHAPTER  I. 

tri?e  ^tbtngs  of  ®o6. 

IsA.  xLv:  15. 

"  Thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  Thy- 
self," the  prophet  Isaiah  said,  as  he 
looked  up  from  his  study  of  the  pro- 
cesses by  which  God  was  educating  His 
people  for  their  great  destiny.  Per- 
mitted an  insight  into  the  ways  of  God's 
providence,  he  had  beheld  the  rise  and 
fall  of  dynasty  and  empire,  the  captiv- 
ity, the  exile,  the  restoration,  the 
gradual  elimination  of  idolatry  and 
impurity,  and  the  fusing  of  the  entire 
nation  into  a  condition  in  which  God 


6  C{?e  ©lortous  £orb 

could  use  it  for  His  own  purpose;  and 
now  breaking  away  from  his  long  and 
intent  scrutiny  of  the  ways  of  God,  he 
breaks  out  with  the  cry,  "  Verily  thou 
art  a  God  that  hidest  Thyself,  O  God 
of  Israel,  the  Saviour/' 

It  is  an  exclamation  that  often  rises 
to  our  lips  in  nature.  We  are  always 
treading  in  the  recent  footprints  of  God; 
entering  chambers  that  He  seems  just 
to  have  left;  catching  the  glow  of  light 
which  has  just  fallen  from  His  face; 
but  we  always  miss  him.  We  go  for- 
ward, and  He  is  not  there,  and  back- 
ward, but  cannot  perceive  Him;  we 
speak,  and  feel  that  He  hears,  but 
there  is  no  reply;  we  look  up,  and 
know  that  He  is  looking  down,  but  we 
cannot  see  Him;  we  feel  after  Him,  and 
are  conscious  that  His  hand  is  some- 
where within  reach,  but  we  never  touch 
it.  Men  talk  of  law,  and  force,  but 
what  are  these  expressions  save  con- 


Ctje  fitbings  of  ®ob  7 

fessions  that  God,  the  mighty  worker, 
is  hidden  from  our  view  ? 

What  thoughtful  man  can  look  upon 
the  state  of  the  world  without  acknowl- 
edging,   on  the   one    hand,    that    God 
must  be  present,  and  yet  feeling,  on 
the  other,   that  He  is  certainly  con- 
cealed.    He  does  not  step  out  of  the 
unseen  to  arrest  the  progress  of  crime 
and  high-handed  wrong.     There  is  no 
sign  of  His  displeasure.     Though  His 
name  is  constantly  taken  in  vain  He 
utters     no     word     of     remonstrance. 
Though  His  glory  is  constantly  trodden 
under  foot  He  does  not  strive  nor  cry. 
Though     His    help    is    invoked,     the 
heavens  do  not  rend,  or  the  cherub 
wings    become    the    chariot    of     His 
descent,  as  of  old,    to  the  Psalmist's 
thought.     He  cannot  be  far  away;  He 
evidently  hears  and  observes  and  feels 
all,  but  who  would  dare  to  speak  or  act 
as  bad  men  do  unless  men  were  wont 


8  ^{?e  glorious  £or6 

to  calculate  upon  God's  concealment  of 
Himself  ? 

In  our  0W71  life  also  we  have  to  do 
with  the  hidings  of  God.  Some  days 
we  walk  in  the  dark,  unable  to  see  His 
face  or  to  feel  Him  near;  we  sit  in  our 
deserted  chambers;  we  puzzle  over  our 
insoluble  problems;  we  ask  our  myriad 
questions.  It  seems  then  as  though  a 
thick  veil  hangs  between  us  and  Him 
whom  we  love.  We  are  not  sensible 
of  any  sin  or  inconsistency  which  has 
caused  Him  to  withdraw,  and  yet  there 
are  the  hidings  of  His  face.  Why  has 
He  taken  that  wife,  or  husband,  or 
friend  from  our  warm  embrace,  when 
so  many  another  life,  if  similarly  be- 
reaved, would  have  felt  it  less  }  Why 
this  passion  for  love  without  its  satis- 
faction  >  Why  this  hunger  for  knowl- 
edge and  service  without  gratification  ? 
From  all  these  questions  we  turn, 
heartsick  and  weary,  as  Noah's  dove 


Cf?e  J)tbtngs  of  ®o6  9 

from  winging  her  flight  over  the  rest- 
less water.  We  are  conscious  that  the 
miracle  of  the  gradual  healing  of  the 
blind  man  is  a  parable  of  our  experi- 
ence. Our  vision  is  but  indistinct;  we 
see  men  as  trees  walking.  It  will  be 
necessary  that  the  hand  of  Christ  be 
laid  again  upon  us  ere  we  see  all  things 
clearly. 

And  yet  we  cannot  wonder  at  the 
mystery  which  veils  God  and  His  zvays. 
We  are  but  children.  Yesterday  we 
were  in  the  cradle;  to-day  we  are  sit- 
ting on  the  low  form  of  the  infant 
school.  We  have  not  yet  commenced 
to  graduate  in  the  higher  classes,  and 
the  faculties  of  the  wisest  and  best 
amongst  us,  compared  with  those  of 
the  youngest  angel,  will  probably 
range  as  those  of  a  babe,  when  com- 
pared with  the  farthest  acquirements 
of  philosophic  thought. 

Besides,  God   has   to   graduate   Hi^ 


lo  ^f?e  ©lortous  £or6 

revelation.  Many  mysteries  have  been 
unfolded  to  mankind  in  the  later  pages 
of  the  Bible,  which  were  hidden  from 
ages  and  generations.  The  sudden 
blaze  of  uncreated  glory  would  dazzle, 
blind,  and  kill  us.  We  could  not  bear 
the  unveiled  view  of  God.  He  must 
needs  hide  His  glory  as  He  passes  by, 
revealing  only  His  back  parts.  The 
revelation  of  the  majesty  of  our  Sav- 
iour was  attempered  to  the  ability  of 
the  disciples  to  bear  it.  The  dawn  of 
revelation,  like  that  of  the  natural  day, 
must  be  by  almost  insensible  de^^rees. 
And  then,  further,  it  is  obvious  that 
there  are  reasons  for  God's  dealings 
with  ourselves  and  with  others,  which 
He  cannot  disclose.  If  He  did  we 
should  not  understand.  How  often 
does  a  parent  tell  a  child  to  wait,  be- 
cause there  are  things  which  cannot  be 
explained;  terms,  the  full  meaning  of 
which  cannot  be  understood;  relations, 


Cf?e  fjibings  of  606  11 

connections  with  others  that  involve 
principles  which  lie  altogether  beyond 
the  range  of  immature  thought.  God 
has  explained  as  much  as  our  human 
faculties  can  apprehend,  but  there  is 
much  beyond  our  range;  we  see  but 
part  of  His  ways,  and  the  thunder  of 
His  power  we  cannot  understand. 
What  if  evil  is  stronger  than  we  think  ? 
What  if  mere  Omnipotence  be  power- 
less to  deal  with  it,  and  that  it  can 
only  be  quelled  by  moral  and  spiritual 
processes  ?  What  if  the  moral  benefit 
of  the  universe  can  be  best  promoted 
by  allowing  evil  slowly  to  work  itself 
out  ?  What  if  the  redemptive  purpose 
needs  time  to  assert  its  supremacy  ? 
What  if  the  position  of  all  beings  and 
all  worlds  is  being  affected  by  the  inci- 
dents which  are  transpiring  upon  the 
surface  of  our  earth  ?  We  know  so 
little.  We  stand  upon  the  rim  of  inex- 
plicable mysteries;  our  circle  of  light 


12  Ct?e  ©lorious   £orb 

only  reveals  the  surrounding  realm  of 
darkness. 

Moreover,  God  must  teach  us  to 
walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight;  what 
we  see  we  cannot  hope  for.  Where 
there  are  no  rocks  we  need  no  pilot; 
where  the  path  is  plain  we  need  no 
guide.  It  often  happens  that  God  says 
to  His  child,  "  I  must  shadow  from  you 
the  sensible  enjoyment  of  My  Presence; 
I  must  withdraw  the  sunlight  from  your 
path;  I  must  lead  you  from  the  green 
pastures  and  still  waters  into  the  dark- 
ened valley;  I  must  deprive  you  of 
emotion,  for  you  will  grow  better  in  the 
dark;  but  trust  Me. "  When  God  hides 
from  us  so  much  that  we  would  fain 
know,  let  us  believe  that  the  same  love 
conceals,  as  at  other  times  reveals,  and 
that  shadow  and  sun  are  accomplishing 
our  growth  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowl- 
edge and  love  of  God. 

One  consideration^  however,  is  grow- 


Ct?e  ^ibings  of  (0o6  13 

ingly  precious — God  is  love.  He  that 
hides  Himself  is  also  the  Saviour. 
There  is  no  question  as  to  the  essen- 
tial nature  of  Him  who  is  working  all 
things  after  the  purpose  of  His  own 
will.  We  know  what  friendship  is. 
We  can  trust  some  souls  so  utterly  that 
no  act  of  theirs,  however  strange  it 
seemed,  could  shake  our  faith  in  their 
unutterable  love.  Instead  of  inter- 
preting their  heart  by  an  isolated  act, 
we  explain  the  act  by  the  tender  heart 
behind  it.  We  dare  to  believe  that 
whatever  appears  to  militate  against 
love  is  only  another  way  of  expressing 
it  more  deeply.  Thus  as  we  think  of 
God  and  know  Him  to  be  love,  we 
stand  in  the  sunshine  of  certainty,  and 
everything  settles  into  harmony  and 
peace. 

All  attests  His  love.  The  adapta- 
tion of  light  to  the  eye,  of  sound  to 
the  ear,  of  love  to  the  heart.     Take 


14  Cf?e  (glorious  Corb 

out  of  human  life  sin  and  its  conse- 
quences, and  the  residuum  proclaims 
the  beneficence  of  the  Creator.  We 
can  account  for  the  presence  and  power 
of  much  which  is  dark  and  forbidding, 
and  for  the  rest  we  can  trust.  The 
love  of  kindred  hearts;  the  rhythm  and 
beauty  of  Nature;  the  evident  purpose 
which  is  leading  all  events  and  minds 
to  a  goal  of  glory;  above  all,  the  revela- 
tion given  to  us  through  holy  men, 
through  the  Son  and  by  the  Cross — all 
prove  to  us  that  God  is  a  Saviour.  All 
His  purposes  emanate  from  His  heart; 
all  His  dealings  have  salvation  as  their 
end;  all  events  beneath  His  strong 
hand  subserve  the  aims  of  His  redeem- 
ing grace.  He  is  saving  us;  He  is 
saving  the  world;  He  is  saving  the 
universe;  the  Saviour  God  is  ever  going 
forth  upon  His  ministries  of  love,  and 
whatever  may  daunt  and  bewilder  is 
somehow   consistent    with   a   love  so 


trije  t^ibxn^s  of  ©o6  15 

divine,  so  all-embracing,  so  infinite, 
that  when  the  end  has  arrived  the 
universe  v^ill  be  compelled  to  admit 
that  not  one  act  was  inconsistent  with 
its  loftiest  conceptions  of  divine  tender- 
ness. 


CHAPTER  II. 

Suffered  to  ^ungen 

Deut.  viii:  i-io. 

From  the  foot  of  Pisgah  Moses  re- 
viewed the  wanderings  of  the  forty 
years,  and  bade  the  people  remember 
all  the  way  by  which  they  had  been 
led.  He  recognized  the  leading  of  Je- 
hovah in  every  step  and  every  day  of 
that  terrible  march,  and  with  the  clear- 
sightedness which  comes  at  the  end  of 
an  accomplished  purpose,  he  saw  some- 
thing of  God's  meaning  in  it  all.  There 
were,  apparently,  three  reasons  why 
God  chose  the  way  of  the  wilderness 
as  the  route  for  Canaan,  instead  of  the 
comparatively  easy  one  along  the 
shores  of  the  Mediterranean. 


Suffereb  to  i^unger  17 

The  first  purpose  was  that  God 
might  humble  His  people.  Theirs  had 
been  a  wonderful  history.  For  them 
the  land  of  Egypt  had  been  smitten 
with  the  ten  plagues.  For  them  the 
first-born  of  Pharaoh  had  been  stricken 
on  the  steps  of  the  throne.  For  them 
ten  thousand  lambs  had  shed  their  life- 
blood  on  the  eve  of  the  Exodus.  For 
them  the  Red  Sea  had  cleft  its  waves, 
whilst  Pharaoh  and  his  host  sank  like 
a  stone  in  its  depths.  For  them  angels 
had  spread  the  daily  breakfast  on  the 
desert  sands.  For  them  the  rocks  had 
flowed  with  water,  and  God  Himself 
had  descended  in  a  chariot  of  cloud. 
There  was  every  danger,  therefore, 
lest  the  pride  of  their  heart  should 
rise,  and  lead  them  to  think  that  there 
was  something  in  themselves  which 
had  secured  so  great  a  succession  of 
marvels.  Therefore,  God  led  them  by 
the  way  of  the  wilderness,  that,  as  they 


1 8  CI?e  ©lortous  Corb. 

came  face  to  face  with  its  difficulties, 
they  might  be  able  to  realize  their  im- 
potence and  dependence  on  Himself. 

This  is  a  clue  to  the  mystery  of  your 
life.  This  is  why  God  permits  you  to 
come  up  against  blank  walls  to  meas- 
ure yourself  in  vain  against  immeasur- 
able and  infinite  forces,  to  stand  look- 
ing down  into  depths  you  cannot 
fathom,  and  up  into  heights  you  cannot 
reach — to  peer  in  vain  into  the  mists 
that  roll  around  the  edge  of  your  little 
life.  Thus  you  shall  know  yourself  to 
be  but  finite,  insignificant — a  worm 
and  no  man — less  than  nothing,  and 
vanity. 

But  there  was  a  second  reason  why 
God  led  the  people  through  the  wilder- 
ness— that  He  might  know  what  was 
in  their  heart.  We  none  of  us  know 
how  weak  and  sinful  our  heart  is 
until  we  are  brought  face  to  face 
with  temptation.     We  pride  ourselves 


Suffereb  to  ^unger  19 

upon  our  purity,  as  white  robes;  but 
it  may  be  we  are  pure  only  because 
we  have  never  been  subjected  to  the 
temptations  which  have  blasted  the 
lives  and  characters  of  others.  We 
seem  gentle  and  forgiving;  but  it  may 
be  that  we  have  been  sheltered  from 
the  vehemence  of  jealousy,  envy,  and 
hatred;  have  lived  amongst  those  who 
have  loved  and  honored  us;  and  have 
been  undisputed  monarchs  in  the  little 
world  of  our  life.  We  boast  our  hon- 
esty; but  we  have  never  known  what 
it  was  to  leave  behind  us  in  our  homes  a 
number  of  little  children  crying  for 
bread,  whilst  all  around  plenty  seemed 
strewn  within  our  easy  reach.  It  is 
not  in  Goshen  with  its  flesh-pots  and 
unstinted  abundance,  but  in  the  wilder- 
ness where  the  supply  of  water  fails, 
and  the  last  crumb  of  bread  is  devoured, 
and  the  pressure  of  want  crushes  the 
soul — it  is  there  that  God  knows  what 


20  d?e  (Slortous  £oxb 

is  in  our  heart,  and  our  pretensions  to 
nobility  are  tested  to  the  uttermost. 

Bui  the  third  and  main  reason  why 
God  led  the  people  through  the  wilder^ 
ness  was  to  suffer  them  to  hunger.  It 
may  be  that  hunger  had  been  compar- 
atively unknown  by  them  before  they 
found  themselves  in  the  wilderness; 
and  is  it  not  a  remarkable  expression 
that  God  suffered  them  to  hunger  ?  Of 
course  He  could  have  so  contrived  that 
they  had  not  hungered.  The  manna 
might  have  fallen  before  ever  they  came 
to  Moses  to  murmur  against  him.  The 
vast  flocks  of  birds  might  have  been 
carried  on  the  wings  of  the  wind  within 
easy  reach  of  their  tents  before  the 
supplies  which  they  brought  with  them 
from  Egypt  had  been  exhausted.  But 
no,  God  suffered  them  to  hunger.  He 
had  implanted  the  appetite  for  food; 
He  knew  how  keen  the  pangs  of  hunger 
were,    and  yet  he  permitted  theni  to 


Suffered  to  ganger  21 

suffer.  How  wonderful  that  God  should 
let  people  suffer,  and  should  put  them 
into  circumstances  in  which  suffering  is 
inevitable  ! 

There  is  other  and  worse  hunger 
than  that  for  food.  The  hunger  for 
love  and  sympathy  !  The  hunger  for 
a  tone  in  a  voice  that  is  never  heard  ! 
The  hunger  for  the  touch  of  a  hand 
that  is  never  felt  !  The  hunger  for 
opportunities  of  ministry  that  always 
elude  the  grasp  !  The  hunger  for  con- 
genial occupation,  for  knowledge,  for 
travel,  for  refinement,  art,  beauty ! 
God  has  implanted  a  strong  desire  for 
these  things  in  our  hearts,  and  yet  He 
puts  us  into  positions  where  there  is  no 
food,  no  answer,  no  satisfaction — 
nothing  but  the  sense  of  a  gnawing, 
aching  desire. 

Why  is  this  ?  Partly,  that  we  should 
learn  that  the  true  life  after  all  does 
not  depend  upon    the    full    supply   of 


22  Ct?e  (glorious  £or6 

those  food-stuffs  which  men  deem  so 
necessary,  but  upon  something  deeper, 
purer,  diviner — God  Himself.  He  suf- 
fered them  to  hunger  that  He  might 
wake  them  know.  In  other  words, 
had  it  not  been  for  the  hunger,  Israel 
would  not  have  known,  and  we  should 
not  know,  what  is  revealed  in  the  lack 
of  all  else.  Life,  which  is  life  indeed, 
consists  not  in  the  abundance  of  things 
that  we  possess,  but  in  knowing  God,  in 
having  God,  in  being  known  and  pos- 
sessed by  God,  in  receiving  and  feed- 
ing upon  the  words  of  God.  Oh, 
blessed  hunger,  that  drives  the  soul  to 
God,  and  suddenly  finds  in  God  more 
than  all.  "Man  doth  not  live  by 
bread  only,  but  by  every  word  that 
proceedeth  from  the  mouth  of  God." 
We  would  not  say  one  single  word 
against  accepting  all  innocent  and  right 
things  that  God  puts  into  our  life  to 
meet    the    hunger    implanted    in    our 


Suffered  to  i^unger  23 

souls,  but  we  affirm  that,  as  it  was 
with  Jesus  in  the  wilderness,  so  it  is 
with  many  of  His  saints,  who  are 
chosen  to  close  fellowship  in  His  re- 
demptive purpose,  that  ordinary  sup- 
plies are  cut  off,  in  order  that  they 
may  be  driven  to  find  the  springs  of 
life  in  God. 

And  what  is  it  which  really  feeds 
man's  soul  in  the  things  that  he  so 
eagerly  seeks  ?  Is  it  not  a  Divine 
quality  which  is  in  them,  because  they 
have  come  from  God,  as  His  gift,  and 
as  containing  His  thought  ?  It  must 
be  possible,  therefore,  to  derive  from 
God  Himself  at  first  hand  and  without 
intervention  of  any  of  these  things, 
those  qualities  that  are  necessary  to 
sustain  and  satisfy  the  soul.  O  hungry 
one,  take  thy  hunger,  of  whatsoever 
kind  it  be,  to  God  Himself,  and  learn 
to  find  in  Him  thy  bread. 

Then  the  manna  came.     All  around 


24  Cf?e  (glorious  £or5 

the  desert-camp  there  lay  the  small, 
round  thing,  freshly  steeped  in  dew, 
and  waiting  to  be  gathered  by  the  host. 
Beautiful  in  appearance;  sweet  to 
taste;  prepared  and  ministered  by 
angels.  It  was  a  rare  gift,  but  Israel 
would  never  have  known  it,  had  they 
not  first  known  hunger.  God  has 
something  better  for  us  than  we  fear. 
Not  the  leek  or  the  onion,  the  garlic 
or  the  swine's  flesh,  but  angels'  food. 
Something  so  refined,  so  exquisite  in 
its  texture,  so  superabundant  in  its 
gladness,  so  divine  in  its  quality,  that 
it  were  better  for  us  to  have  one  meal 
of  it  a  day  in  the  desert  than  be  in 
Paradise  itself  without  it.  Arise  then, 
hungry  pilgrim  of  the  wilderness 
march,  do  not  sit  brooding  in  thy 
tent,  eating  out  thy  soul  in  thy  de- 
spair, go  forth  unto  God,  unto  God, 
thy  exceeding  joy.  Take  thy  vessel 
with  thee,    and  gather  for  thy  need. 


Suffereb  to  ^unger  25 

If  thou  gather  much  thou  shalt  have 
none  to  spare,  and  if  Httle,  thou  shalt 
have  enough.  "  Thou  shalt  eat  and 
be  satisfied,  and  bless  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  who  has  dealt  bountifully  with 
thee,"  and  God  alone  is  enough. 


CHAPTER  III. 
"  Cl^ere  is  a  Htper  1 '' 

Psalm  xlvi:  4. 

A  song  by  an  unknown  singer ! 
Some  son  of  Korah,  borne  on  the  tide 
of  inspiration,  uttered  it  in  one  of  the 
darkest  hours  of  his  nation's  history.  It 
is  evidently  contemporaneous  with  Isa. : 
xxxiii.  The  spirit  of  heroic  faith  that 
thrilled  Isaiah  had  passed  to  some 
younger  heart,  and  what  in  him  was 
prophecy,  in  this  was  Psalm. 

Sennacherib,  with  200,000  of  the 
cruellest  soldiers  that  ever  drew  the 
sword,  had  crossed  the  northern  frontier 
of  Palestine,  or  had  already  stationed 
himself  on  the  hills  that  were  round 
about  Jerusalem,  intent  on  its  capture 


"CI?ere  is  a  Htper  T'  27 

and  pillage.  The  virgin  daughter  of 
Zion  was  strongly  fortified.  Military 
skill  had  made  the  best  possible  use  of 
the  strong  natural  features  of  her  posi- 
tion, and  Jewish  patriots  had  chal- 
lenged their  children  to  tell  her  towers, 
mark  well  her  bulwarks,  and  consider 
her  palaces,  that  they  might  tell  the 
story  to  succeeding  generations. 

But  there  was  one  fatal  defect,  which 
invalidated  all  these  advantages.  Jeru- 
salem was  not  well  supplied  with  water. 
A  deficient  water  supply  !  This  meant 
disaster  to  the  best  concerted  schemes 
of  fortification  and  defence. 

Dr.  Geikie  gives  an  interesting  ac- 
count of  the  water  supply  of  ancient 
Jerusalem.  The  only  spring  known  to 
exist  there  rises  beneath  the  ancient 
site  of  the  Temple,  and  supplies  what 
are  known  as  the  Fountain  of  the  Vir- 
gin and  the  Pool  of  Siloam.  This  per- 
ennial supply  of  crystal  water  was,  how- 


28  d?e  glorious  €orb 

ever,  not  sufficient  to  meet  the  require- 
ments of  such  vast  populations  as 
crowded  the  city  at  the  great  festivals, 
and  w^ere  driven  thither,  as  at  the  time 
of  which  we  write,  by  the  pressure  of 
invasion.  Every  effort  was  therefore 
made  to  augment  the  supply.  There 
was  a  great  system  of  subterranean 
tanks,  forty  to  sixty  feet  deep,  hewn  out 
of  the  soft  limestone,  which  underlay  a 
harder  rock  on  which  the  city  was  built. 
These  were  of  great  antiquity,  and  in 
one  Jeremiah  was  confined.  Vast  cis- 
terns were  also  built  to  catch  and  keep 
the  rains.  But,  in  addition,  large  pools, 
fed  by  aqueducts,  were  added  outside 
the  city  and  within.  One  aqueduct, 
built  by  Solomon,  brought  water  from 
the  Pools  of  Solomon  beyond  Bethle- 
hem, and  poured  it  into  the  huge  reser- 
voirs of  the  Temple  area,  a  distance  of 
thirteen  miles.  Hezekiah  is  also  cred- 
ited with  having  built  yet  another  vast 


"  Cljere  is  a  Htper  1 ''  29 

conduit,  bringing  the  waters  of  Gihon 
straight  to  the  west  side  of  the  city 
of  David.  In  later  days  Herod  the 
Great  executed  a  marvellous  work  of 
the  same  kind. 

All  these  efforts  on  the  part  of  the 
citizens  to  remedy  their  water  supply 
were  a  confession  on  their  part  to  its 
deficiency,  and  afforded  the  ground  for 
the  perpetual  iteration  of  the  prophets 
that  God  Himself  would  be  to  His 
people  all  that  a  river  would  have  been 
in  the  abundance  and  freeness  of  its 
supplies. 

"  What ! ''  said  Isaiah,  in  one  of  his 
magnificent  outbursts,  "  do  you  require 
a  river,  whose  flashing  breadth  would 
intercept  the  assault  of  the  foe,  and 
make  it  impossible  for  him  to  place 
battering-ram  or  scaling  ladder  in  im- 
mediate proximity  to  the  walls  ?  You 
need  it  not.  The  glorious  Lord  will 
be  to  us  in  place  of  broad  rivers  and 


30  CI?e  glorious  £orb» 

streams.  AH  around  our  city  walls 
lies  the  engirding  protection  of  the  God 
of  our  fathers." 

"  What !"  said  this  son  of  Korah, 
"  do  you  want  a  supply  of  water  to  en- 
able you  to  withstand  the  exigencies  of 
the  siege  .^  All  that  will  be  yours  in 
having  God.  He  is  not  only  around 
us;  He  is  in  the  midst  of  us,  and  His 
presence,  like  a  river,  will  make  glad 
the  city.  Would  you  have  a  broad 
river  pouring  its  translucent  waters 
over  the  glistening  pebbles,  and  purl- 
ing in  its  majestic  flow,  supplying 
every  cistern  and  garden  with  abund- 
ant water  ?  This  is  yours  in  the  Most 
High,  who  counts  our  city  as  the  holy 
place  of  His  tabernacle.'* 

Mr.  Rendel  Harris  classes  the  water 
supply  of  Jerusalem  under  four  heads, 
and  uses  these  as  illustrating  certain 
conditions  of  spiritual  life,  with  which 
we  are  all  familiar. 


"Cljere  is  a  Kiperi"  31 

T/ie  Pool  of  Siloam  represents  the 
stagnation  of  those  whose  character 
and  hfe  show  no  signs  of  advance  from 
year  to  year;  always  overcome  by  the 
same  sins,  reading  the  same  chapters 
of  the  Bible,  offering  the  same  prayers. 

The  Pool  of  Bethesda  stands  for 
those  whose  life  is  intermittent.  An 
angel  comes  down  from  time  to  time 
to  trouble  the  waters,  and  for  a  while 
they  possess  and  impart  healing  virtue, 
but  the  impulse  is  soon  exhausted,  and 
many  a  weary  soul  waits  till  the  stir- 
ring comes  again. 

The  Brook  Kedron  was  fouled  with 
the  refuse  of  the  city  through  which  it 
flowed.  It  was,  therefore,  hardly  fit 
to  drink,  though  even  to-day  the  water- 
carriers  fill  their  water-jars  there.  This 
represents  such  as  mingle  with  their 
professions  of  Christianity  much  that 
is  inconsistent  and  worldly. 

The   Acque ducts  of  Solomon  recall 


32  Cf?^  Glorious  Cotb 

the  experience  of  many  who  are  always 
depending  for  their  rehgious  Hfe  on  the 
ministry  of  others.  They  do  seek 
water  from  the  distant  hills,  but  they 
are  somewhat  too  dependent  on  the 
teacher  or  conference  or  book  by  which 
it  is  brought  within  their  reach. 

Now  all  these  classes  of  Christians 
are  bidden  to  avail  themselves  of  the 
River  whose  streams  make  glad  the 
City  of  God.  There  is  a  sense  in 
which  the  heavenly  city  has  come 
down  out  of  heaven  from  God.  Our 
citizenship  and  conversation  are  there. 
There  are  times  when,  through  our 
union  with  the  living  Saviour,  we  may 
say  with  the  dying  Payson:  "  Its  glories 
beam  upon  me,  its  breezes  fan  me,  its 
odors  are  wafted  to  me,  its  sounds 
strike  upon  my  ears,  and  its  spirit  is 
breathed  into  my  heart."  These  are 
the  times  when  the  river  in  full  flow  is 
passing  before  us,  making  us  glad  with 


"Cljere  is  a  KtDcr  1''  33 

the  gladness  which  comes  straight  from 
the  heart  of  the  throne;  and  we  are 
bidden,  "whosoever  will,"  to  take  of 
the  water  of  life  freely.  Not  of  the 
future  only  did  the  Apostle  affirm  that 
he  saw  a  river  of  water  of  life,  gleam- 
ing as  crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the 
throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb,  in  the 
midst  of  the  street  of  the  New  Jerusa- 
lem. Its  source  may  be  at  the  throne, 
but  its  w^aters  have  flowed  down  to 
earth,  else  how  could  men  be  so  freely 
bidden  to  take  ? 

Let  us  live  by  the  river,  fellow-be- 
liever, taking  up  its  waters  at  any  mo- 
ment of  need,  just  as  the  dwellers  by 
the  mighty  Amazon  or  Congo  go  down 
to  its  vast  supplies  to  help  themselves 
without  stint.  They  can  afford  to  be 
extravagant,  prodigal,  wasteful !  Is 
there  not  plenty  ?  Can  they  not  come 
again  and  again  ?  Is  there  any  fear  of 
the  reservior  of  the  hills  running  dry  ? 


34  ^^^  (Slortous  £or5 

Yet  sooner  might  the  Congo  or  Amazon 
become  exhausted  than  thy  God;  and 
sooner  might  the  river  remonstrate 
with  the  child  for  dipping  its  tin  cup 
too  frequently  into  its  bosom,  than  the 
glorious  Lord  find  fault  with  thy  too 
incessant  resort  to  Him  for  His  more 
abundant  grace.  Take  !  take!  take  !  is 
Heaven's  repeated  invitation.  "  Thou 
shouldest  have  smitten  five  or  six 
times,"  is  God's  bitter  complaint. 

There  can  be  no  stagnation  where 
the  river  comes;  it  brings  life  with  it, 
and  deepens  from  the  ankles  to  the 
knees,  and  from  the  knees  to  the  loins 
till  its  waters  are  a  depth  that  cannot 
be  waded  through;  and  its  current 
bears  the  soul  forward  irresistibly  from 
grace  to  grace,  from  a  superficial  ex- 
perience to  the  deep  things  of  God, 
from  the  elements  of  the  Gospel  to  the 
love  that  passeth  understanding. 

There    can   be  no  inter^nittence^    as 


"Cijere  is  a  JJtper  T'  35 

when  the  waters  need  to  be  stored  in 
some  inner  rock-chamber  before  they 
can  gush  out  to  their  beneficent  minis- 
try, and,  having  exhausted  themselves, 
retire  to  gather  a  fresh  supply.  This 
intermittent  life  is  a  very  sad  one, 
God-dishonoring  and  man-disappoint- 
ing. There  is  something  better  when 
the  soul  is  in  perennial  and  abiding  fel- 
fowship  with  Christ,  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Certainly  there  are  freshets  for  us  all, 
but  these  come  on  a  full  stream,  and 
not  on  dry  watercourses  which  have 
become  heaps  of  stones.  This  main- 
tained experience  is  only  possible  when 
care  is  taken  over  the  early  morning 
hours,  and  we  can  say  with  the  Psalm- 
ist, "  Mine  eyes  are  ever  towards  the 
Lord." 

There  is  no  pollittion  or  impurity  in 
the  religious  life  of  those  who  drink  of 
that  river.  Too  often  the  religious 
observances  of  people  are  so  mingled 


36  Cl^e  glorious  £or6 

with  the  wordly  show  of  some  fashion- 
able church,  with  the  consciousness  of 
being  one  of  a  gaily-dressed  throng,  or 
with  the  desire  to  do  as  others  are 
doing,  that  the  spirit  is  befouled  in  the 
act  of  drinking  of  the  heavenly  stream. 
There  is  all  the  difference  between  the 
waters  that  have  flowed  through  a 
great  city  and  those  that  issue  from  the 
hills.  But  if  we  live  in  God  we  are 
ever  partaking  of  that  crystal  stream 
of  pure  and  undefiled  religion  of  which 
the  apostle  James  speaks. 

There  is  no  need  of  depending  on  hu- 
7nan  instrumentality ,  We  would  not 
undervalue  this — God  has  appointed 
it,  and  set  His  seal  on  it.  But  we 
must  ever  count  it  to  be  a  means,  and 
not  an  end.  Some  sculpture  the 
arches  of  the  aqueduct,  and  festoon 
them,  and  almost  worship  them  in 
their  senseless  adulation.  But  they 
cannot  quench  the  rage  of  the  thirst- 


"C^ere  is  a  Hber  1 "  37 

fever;  they  are  liable  to  be  broken 
down,  or  stopped  up;  they  may  at  any 
moment  cease  affording  their  wonted 
supplies.  Happy  are  they,  therefore, 
who  have  learnt  to  go  to  the  river  for 
themselves,  and  to  avail  themselves  at 
first-hand  of  its  supplies. 

The  flow  of  the  river  is  so  so/^;  such 
a  contrast  to  the  tumult  of  the  sea, 
which  represents  the  rage  of  the  foe. 
The  waters  roar  and  are  troubled,  the 
mountains  shake  with  the  swelling 
thereof.  We  can  hear  the  dash  of  the 
wild  waves,  the  emblem  of  unbridled 
power,  of  anarchy  and  fret  and  strife, 
of  tumult  and  unrest.  Such  is  the 
world,  and  such  the  wicked,  who  are 
like  the  troubled  sea  when  it  cannot 
rest.  What  a  relief  to  turn  to  the 
gentle  murmur  of  the  river,  whose 
waters  glide  in  musical  ripple  along 
their   banks.     The   greatest   and  best 


38  Ci?e  ©lortous  £or5 

things,  in  nature  and  human  life  and 
God,  are  stillest. 

The  flow  of  the  river  is  so  bountiful. 
"  The  streams  thereof "  are  the  divis- 
ions thereof;  as  when  each  Egyptian 
ryot  along  the  Nile  draws  off  its  waters 
by  the  tiny  canal  into  his  piece  of 
garden  ground,  or  when  our  house- 
pipes  tap  the  mains.  "  Unto  each 
one  of  us  was  the  grace  given  accord- 
ing to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of 
Christ.'*  "  The  same  Spirit  divides  to 
each  one  severally  even  as  He  will." 

The  flow  of  the  river  is  so  gladden- 
ing. There  is  the  gladness  of  perfect 
satisfaction,  of  security  against  possible 
need,  of  peace  that  passeth  under- 
standing, of  the  infinite  repose  of  the 
soul  when  it  has  found  its  rest.  The 
scorching  drought  may  bake  the  hills 
around,  till  the  landscape  pants  and 
faints,  and  every  hill  is  a  reflector,  and 
every  valley  a    furnace;  but  the  soul 


"Ct?erc  is  a  Xtpec  1/'  39 

which  has  learnt  to  avail  itself  of  God 
is  glad,  because  it  thirst^  not;  it  has 
become  like  a  garden,  whose  waters 
fail  not. 

This  river  is  the  blessed  Spirit.  He 
is  gentle;  He  is  pure  and  holy,  *clearas 
crystal;  He  is  bountiful.  Out  of  him 
who  receives  the  Spirit,  Jesus  said, 
"shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water.'' 
He  is  joy-giving  and  glad-making.  He 
proceeds  from  the  Father  and  the  Son, 
and  with  them  is  to  be  honored  and 
glorified.  It  was  only  when  the  Lamb 
had  gone  to  the  throne  that  the  Spirit 
could  be  given.  Directly  the  Second 
Person  of  the  Holy  Trinity  took  His 
seat  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father, 
as  a  lamb  which  had  been  slain,  there 
poured  out,  as  from  the  smitten  rock 
of  the  wilderness,  the  abundant  river 
whose  first  head  was  Pentecost,  its 
second  Samaria,  its  third  Ephesus,  and 
its  fourth  perhaps  will  be  not  far  di3- 


40  tri?e  ©lortous  £orb 

tant,  close  beside  the  end  of  the  pres- 
ent age. 

At  the  beginning  of  Genesis  we  read 
of  the  river  that  watered  the  garden, 
and  became  four  heads.  This  was  an 
emblem  of  things  that  were  to  come. 
Already  the  substance  has  been  given, 
in  part  perhaps  as  yet,  but  destined  to 
ever  fuller  and  richer  manifestation 
until  the  perfect  realization  of  its 
entire  significance  in  the  ages  which 
are  awaiting  the  summons  of  their 
King. 

In  the  meanwhile,  fellow-believer,  in 
the  absence  of  all  that  others  boast 
themselves  of  possessirfg,  be  sure  that 
there  is  a  river;  be  sure  to  find  its 
banks,  and  live  there;  make  much  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  as  He  speaks  in  Scrip- 
ture, and  breathes  through  the  open 
casement  of  the  soul. 


CHAPTER  IV. 
Cf?e  Sours  XTrue  afftnitu. 

Romans  vii:  i-6. 

Beneath  the  strong  rugged  thought 
which  runs  through  chapters  vi.  and 
vii.  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  we 
do  not  always  detect  the  tender  little 
allegory  which  connects  the  two.  It 
is  perhaps  more  than  an  allegory,  for 
earthly  relationships  are  probably  pat- 
terns of  things  in  the  heavens,  and 
there  are  correspondences  linking  the 
inward  with  the  outward,  the  unseen 
and  eternal  with  the  temporal  and 
seen. 

When  we  are  awakened  from  the 
lethargy  and  death  of  sin  to  seek  after 


42  Cl?e  ©lorious  £or6 

and  realize  the  Divine  ideal  which  calls 
to  us,  we  are  first  attracted  towards 
God's  holy  law.  If  only  we  may  enter 
into  alliance  with  it,  we  suppose  that 
we  shall  easily  attain  whatsoever 
things  are  true,  pure,  lovely,  and  of 
good  report.  We  are  strongly  drawn 
to  it.  As  it  looks  out  on  us  from  the 
ten  words  of  Sinai,  speaks  to  us  in  the 
voice  of  conscience,  or  is  reflected 
from  the  pages  of  a  Marcus  Aurelius  or 
Epictetus,  we  are  fascinated  by  its 
beauty.  It  is  as  when  the  traveller 
for  the  first  time  sees  the  touch  of 
dawn  on  a  line  of  snow-clad  Alps 
struck  out  sharp  against  the  deep  azure 
of  heaven. 

The  law  is  holy,  just  and  good.  We 
delight  in  it  after  the  inward  man. 
Our  judgment  approves  it,  our  reason 
vindicates  it,  our  conscience  bears 
witness  to  it,  our  sense  of  the  fitness 
of    things    acknowledges     its    claims. 


Cf?e  Soul's  Crue  affinity       43 

We  are  able  to  love  it  with  all  our 
mind,  if  not  with  all  our  heart.  And 
it  seems  to  us  that  by  constant  com- 
panionship we  shall  necessarily  become 
transformed  into  its  sublime  and 
heavenly  likeness.  The  soul  deems 
that  it  has  found  its  true  affinity. 
There  is  the  daw^n  of  a  new  joy,  the 
flush  of  a  new  hope. 

But  this  experience  is  destined  to  be 
short-lived.  There  is  a  fundamental 
incongruity  in  the  alliance.  It  is  not 
that  the  law  is  deficient  in  any  of  those 
qualities,  with  which  the  soul's  thought 
had  invested  it,  but  that  there  is  an 
everlasting  incompatibility  between  its 
holiness  and  the  manifold  weakness 
and  sinfulness  of  the  flesh.  The  law 
is  spiritual,  but  we  are  carnal;  the  law 
is  perfect,  we  are  sold  under  sin;  the 
law  is  heavenly,  we  are  of  earth, 
earthly.  And  thus  the  soul  becomes 
aware  of  its  awful  mistake,   cries  out 


44  ^^^  ©lorious  Corb 

in  the  bitterness  of  its  anguish,  and 
sighs  for  deHverance  and  reHef.  The 
dye  of  its  sinfulness  seems  even  deeper 
and  darker,  because  it  works  death  by 
that  which  is  good.  The  deceitfulness 
of  the  flesh  appears  more  inveterate, 
because  it  takes  occasion  by  the  com- 
mandment to  work  all  manner  of  con- 
cupiscence. And  yet  it  seems  as 
though  nothing  can  happen  to  free  the 
soul  from  its  union  with  the  law  it  has 
espoused. 

At  this  point,  when  the  blackness  of 
despair  has  settled  down  on  the  hopes 
and  anticipations  which  the  soul  had 
so  fondly  cherished,  it  awakes  to  dis- 
cover new  and  unrealized  depths  of 
meaning  in  the  Cross,  It  sees  its  sin- 
ful flesh  nailed  there  in  effigy  and  like- 
ness. It  realizes  that  we  who  believe 
have  become  dead  to  the  law  by  the 
body  of  Christ.  It  understands,  that  as 
death  intervenes  between  husband  and 


Cbe  Soul's  Crue  affinity       45 

wife,  dissolving  their  union  by  remov- 
ing one  into  another  sphere  so  that 
each  is  free  of  the  other,  similarly  the 
death  of  Christ,  in  which  we  were 
identified,  has  placed  the  law  and  our- 
selves in  different  spheres,  the  law  be- 
ing left  in  the  earth  sphere,  whilst  we 
have  risen  into  the  heavenly  and  eternal 
one,  and  thus  we  are  freed  from  the 
law,  "  having  died  to  that  wherein  we 
were  held,  that  we  should  serve  in 
newness  of  spirit,  and  not  in  the  old- 
ness  of  the  letter/' 

It  is  a  blessed  thing  when  we  appre- 
hend this  side  of  our  Saviour's  death. 
It  YSi  for  sin  certainly;  but  it  is  also  unto 
sin.  We  become  dead  to  the  law  by 
the  body  of  Christ.  It  is  the  release  of 
death:  and  the  soul,  with  thankful  glad- 
ness, knows  that  the  bonds  by  which  it 
was  bound  to  a  relationship  it  could  not 
sustain  is  forever  at  an  end.  The  law 
is  not  dead,  or  abrogated,  or  abolished, 


46  Ctje  glorious  £orb 

but  its  hold  on  the  soul,  as  a  means  of 
justification  and  sanctification,  is  for 
ever  at  an  end.  There  can  therefore 
be  no  charge  of  disloyalty  or  unfaith- 
fulness, even  though  it  be  married  to 
another. 

Then  in  this  new  glad  life,  on  Easter 
soil,  as  a  child  of  the  Resurrection,  and 
admitted  into  the  realm  of  the  Infinite 
and  Eternal,  the  soul  comes  on  its  true 
affinity^  in  which  it  can  meet  with 
neither  disappointment  nor  dissatisfac- 
tion. It  encounters  the  risen  Christ, 
in  whom  it  recognizes  Him  that  died  in 
weakness  on  the  Cross,  but  now  lives 
for  ever  in  power  and  glory,  and  all  its 
nature  leaps  towards  Him  as  its  true 
Spouse  and  Home.  All  that  attracted 
it  before  in  the  law  is  in  Him.  Was 
it  holy,  just  and  good }  So  is  He  ! 
Did  it  elicit  a  response  from  judgment, 
conscience,  and  sense  of  fitness }  So 
does  He!     But  He  has  qualities  the 


CI?e  Sours  Crue  affinity       47 

law  never  possessed.  He  can  forgive. 
He  has  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need. 
He  makes  no  appeal  for  the  obedience 
of  the  self-life,  but  promotes  the  obe- 
dience which  He  demands.  He  lifts 
us  into  a  new  sphere,  secures  death  to 
self  and  sin,  and  indwells  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

None  can  impute  to  Him  any  con- 
nivance with  our  imperfections,  frail- 
ties, and  sins.  They  cost  Him  agony, 
blood,  tears,  death.  There  is  on  His 
part  no  weak  yielding  of  the  lofty  ideal 
which  seems  to  mock  us,  as  we  lie 
paralyzed  at  its  base.  The  standard  of 
Christ,  which  is  that  of  Love,  is  more 
searching  and  comprehensive  than  that 
of  Law.  The  spirit  asks  for  more  than 
the  letter.  But  His  love  begets  in  us 
the  love  that  possesses  and  energizes 
the  soul;  His  death  involves  death  to 
sinful  passions,  and  to  the  law  as  a 
means  of  righteousness;  His  Spirit  frees 


48  Ct?e  Glorious  £or6 

us  from  the  power  of  the  self-hfe,  and 
fashions  us  by  imperceptible  but  cer- 
tain stages  into  the  Hkeness  of  His 
glory. 

The  Old  Version  says  we  are  married 
to  another;  the  Revised  Version  renders 
it  joined  to  another;  the  original  says 
simply  should  be  for  another.  What 
sublimity  lurks  in  this  simplicity  !  In 
life  and  death,  by  day  and  night,  in  the 
busy  haunts  of  toil,  and  in  its  repose, 
to  be  always  and  only  for  that  other, 
that  glorious  Man,  in  whom  truth  and 
mercy  have  met,  righteousness  and 
peace  have  kissed.  All  difficulties 
resolve  themselves  when  brought  to  this 
touchstone.  The  eye  is  single,  and 
the  whole  body  is  full  of  light.  All  sin 
becomes  personal  disloyalty  and  infidel- 
ity to  the  gentlest  and  truest  of  Friends. 
All  life  is  animated  by  the  purpose  of 
an  absorbing  love,  that  yearns  for 
nothing  so   much  as  to  set  forth  the 


Cl?e  Sours  Crue  (Ifftnitp       49 

praises  of  Him  who  fills  the  entire  hori- 
zon of  the  soul.  Thus  we  bring  forth 
fruit  unto  God. 

The  Apostle  uses  a  very  strong  word 
to  describe  the  service  zvhich  love  pro- 
motes.  He  says  that  we  serve  in  new- 
ness of  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the  old- 
ness  of  the  letter  (vii:  6).  It  is  the  serv- 
ice of  the  slave.  There  is  no  slavery 
so  absolute  as  that  of  love.  To  pro- 
mote the  well-being  of  the  loved  one  is 
the  one  aim  and  purpose  of  existence. 
The  fetters  never  hurt  wrist  or  ankle, 
because  there  is  no  disposition  to  be 
rebellious  or  turn  away  back.  Love 
prompts  the  heart  to  move  in  perfect 
accord  with  the  demands  that  the 
strictest  law  might  formiulate.  But  be- 
fore law  calls,  love  answers,  and  every 
need  is  anticipated  before  it  has  time 
to  assert  itself.  The  strings  of  daisies 
which  are  threaded  by  a  child's  fingers 
on    the   spring-lawns    will    compel    its 


50  Ct?e  ©lortous  £or5 

mother,  with  an  immediateness  and  im- 
perativeness which  iron  and  steel  could 
not  secure. 

It  is  thus  that  the  Divine  law  is  not 
annulled,  but  established  through  the 
work  of  Christ.  Not  only  does  He 
magnify  it  and  make  it  honorable  by 
His  own  obedience  unto  death,  but  He 
secures  its  supremacy  in  the  hearts  of 
those  who  are  joined  to  Him  by  faith, 
and  receive  of  His  Spirit.  What  the 
law  could  not  do  in  that  it  was  weak 
through  the  flesh,  is  done  through  the 
Son  Himself.  The  righteousness  of 
the  law  is  fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk  not 
after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit. 

But  we  must  be  very  careful  not  to 
take  advantage  of  God's  free  grace. 
The  greater  our  privileges,  the  deeper 
our  responsibility.  To  whom  much  is 
given,  of  such  will  more  be  required. 
Love    is  very  exacting  in  its    claims, 


gilje  Soul's  Crue  afftnita       51 

quick  in  its  instincts,  awful  in  its  jeal- 
ousy. Let  us  avoid  giving  needless 
pain  to  our  faithful  Lover,  Christ. 


CHAPTER  V. 

Cljnst  (Dm  ano  ITTanystbeb* 

ISA.   XXVII :  2. 

Life  presents  the  same  features  to 
the  toiUng  myriads  of  England  as  to 
the  dwellers  amid  the  vineyards  and 
pastm'e  lands  of  Judah,  to  w^hom  Isaiah 
w^rote  when  he  compared  it  to  the  ex- 
periences of  a  caravan  passing  across  a 
sandy  waste.  Sometimes  it  is  the  si- 
rocco blast  of  temptation,  burning  hot; 
the  air  is  laden  with  particles  of  grit 
that  sting  and  irritate,  and  find  their 
way  through  closed  doors;  thus  all  day 
long  the  devil  vexes  us.  Sometimes 
the  tempest  of  trouble  rises  high;  the 
qavilHngs  and  misjudgmepts  of   men, 


(£t?nst  ®ne  anb  UTanystbeb     53 

difficulties  in  daily  business,  the  over- 
whelming competition  and  strife  of  our 
time,  combine  to  fill  our  lives  with 
storm.  Now  we  happen  on  a  dry 
place,  from  which  human  love  seems 
to  have  retreated,  so  that  no  green 
thing  breaks  the  monotony  of  our  pil- 
grimage, no  child's  embrace,  no  tender 
caress,  no  tone  or  touch  of  love.  And, 
again,  we  are  traversing  a  weary  land; 
we  are  tired,  tired  of  the  inward  strife, 
of  the  daily  cross,  of  the  perpetual 
demand  on  our  sympathy  and  self- 
control,  longing  for  the  evening  bell, 
and  the  passage  across  the  harbor-bar 
from  the  restless  sea  to  the  tranquil 
waters  of  the  haven. 

We  must  not  take  the  pessimist's 
view  of  life.  In  every  year  there  are 
more  hours  of  sun  than  of  rain,  in  all 
lives  there  are  more  joys  than  sorrows. 
For  all  grief  there  is  an  anodyne;  for 
all  loss  there  is  compensation.    Nature 


54  ^h^  (Slortous  £or6 

is  always  beautiful.  Troops  of  fresh 
young  lives  are  ever  pouring  into  our 
w^orld,  with  their  merry  laughter  and 
their  gay  frolic.  The  very  work  of  life 
brings  zest  and  interest;  and  hope  is 
ever  painting  its  bright  frescoes  on  the 
dark  cloud  that  hides  the  future.  And 
yet  it  is  undeniable  that  there  are 
many  sad  aspects  to  life  which  press 
themselves  upon  our  notice,  and  some- 
times cause  heart  and  flesh  to  fail. 

Men  naturally  resort  to  the  readiest 
methods  of  averting  the  pressure  of 
anxiety  and  pain.  The  natural  man  is 
always  looking  out  for  his  hiding  place, 
the  niche  in  the  rock  which  may  serve 
as  one.  He  resorts  to  a  temporary  ex- 
pedient which  serves  him  in  pressing 
difficulty;  but  shortly  after  he  is  seek- 
ing for  a  covert  against  a  tornado,  which 
all  suddenly  has  broken  upon  him. 
After  a  while  he  is  sensible  of  consum- 
ing  thirst,    and    searches    in    another 


Cljrtst  (Due  anb  ITTanystbeb      55 

direction  for  water.  And  again  worn 
by  fatigue  he  looks  around  for  a  great 
rock,  casting  a  sharply-defined  shadow 
on  the  burning  sand,  in  whose  blue 
depths  he  may  find  shelter.  Thus  man 
is  always  seeking  help  in  different  quar- 
ters to  carry  him  through  the  pressing 
anxieties  and  difficulties  of  his  life. 

The  children  of  this  world  hide  them- 
selves under  the  golden  canopy  of 
money,  which  wards  off  many  of  the 
grosser  forms  of  evil,  but  cannot  satisfy 
the  craving  of  the  heart  for  love  and  sym- 
pathy and  rest.  They  yield  themselves 
to  systems  of  philosophy  that  brace  men 
to  suffer  with  stoical  fortitude  and  indif- 
ference, as  when  the  weak  and  boneless 
animal  makes  for  itself  the  hard  shell 
or  case  that  shelters  it  from  collision 
and  shock.  Or  they  take  refuge  in 
some  passionate  human  attachment, 
seeking  in  man  or  woman  the  covert, 
the  water-spring,  and  the  shadow  of  a 


56  Ctje  (Slorious  £orb 

great  rock;  a  hope  which  is  doomed  to 
disappointment,  because  none  is  all- 
sided  enough  to  supply  another's  need 
in  the  numberless  necessities  of  human 
experience.  These  are  broken  cisterns, 
clouds  without  rain,  the  mirage  with- 
out the  fountain,  the  grate  without  fire. 
In  all  true  life  there  is  education  and 
grozvth.  We  pass  upward  from  things 
to  human  sympathy,  and  seek  in  men 
and  women  the  comforter  we  orig- 
inally sought  in  wealth,  or  travel,  or 
book.  Then  we  pass  from  the  outward 
to  the  inward,  from  the  finite  to  the  in- 
finite, from  the  time  sphere  to  the 
eternal.  We  start  back  appalled  at 
the  insufficiency  of  the  tenderest  human 
love  to  meet  the  exhaustless  hunger  of 
our  souls,  and  long  for  the  Divine  in 
human  form,  presented  to  us  in  the 
Man.  Finally  there  comes  a  great 
unity  into  our  life,  and  having  found 
the  Man  in  whom  all  the  fulness  of  the 


Ctjrtst  One  anb  ITcanystbeb      57 

Godhead  dwells,  having  realized  some- 
thing of  what  He  can  be  to  the  soul 
that  He  made  and  redeemed,  we  return 
again  to  men  and  things,  and  find  in 
them  a  beauty  and  fitness  which  we  had 
never  realized  before.  Nature  wears  a 
lovelier  dress,  because  the  Man,  whom 
we  love,  arrayed  her,  and  her  hues  and 
scents  are  borrowed  from  His  thought. 
Children  are  lovelier,  because  they  re- 
flect traits  of  His  character.  All  true 
thoughts  are  more  satisfying,  because 
we  detect  in  them  the  intonations  of  His 
voice.  Earthly  friendships  are  trans- 
figured, because  as  we  lift  them  to  our 
lips  they  brim  with  water  from  the 
fountain  of  His  love;  and  the  com- 
monest incidents  of  life  are  invested 
with  unwonted  meaning,  because  all 
things  are  of  Him,  and  through  Him, 
and  to  Him  forever. 

For  the  Christian^  only  one  Being  is 
needful     There  is  a  blessed  unity  in 


58  d?e  (Slorious  £or6 

his  life.  He  desires  only  the  Man  of 
whom  Isaiah  spoke,  the  Man  that  trod 
the  soil  of  Palestine,  that  died  upon 
the  cross,  that  lives  in  the  glory,  the 
Man  Christ  Jesus.  Jesus  is  the  one 
answer  to  every  question,  the  one  sat- 
isfaction of  every  desire.  To  the 
Apostles  the  Master  was  all  in  all.  In 
Him  they  found  strength  for  spiritual 
conflict,  defence  from  their  foes,  ten- 
derness amid  rebuke  and  reproach,  rest 
in  weariness;  and  Jesus  Christ  is  will- 
ing to  be  as  much  and  more  to  all  who 
believe  on  Him  through  their  word. 
During  His  earthly  life.  He  was  the 
one  answer  to  all  the  aches  and  ills  of 
human  bodies.  Blindness,  paralysis, 
demon  possession,  found  their  antidote 
in  His  Presence,  His  name.  His  touch. 
And  He  is  still  all-sufficient  to  meet 
each  demand  now  of  the  spiritual,  as 
then  of  the  physical  life. 

All  we  require  for  this  life  and  the 


(Etjrist  ®ne  anb  Zltanysibeb      59 

7texf  IS  ours  in  Christ,  We  are,  alas, 
too  slow  to  possess  our  possessions. 
Do  we  need  a  shelter  from  the  sirocco 
of  temptation  ?  We  may  find  it  in 
Jesus.  Hiding  behind  Him,  taking  ref- 
uge in  the  pavilion  of  His  Presence, 
we  are  secure.  Put  the  Man  Christ 
Jesus  between  you  and  temptation  or 
adverse  circumstances,  as  the  Roman 
soldier  his  shield  between  him  and  the 
fiery  darts  of  the  foe.  In  days  of 
tempest  He  is  the  impenetrable  covert. 
In  loneliness  He  is  like  the  murmur  of 
waters  in  a  dry  place.  In  weariness 
He  is  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock,  be- 
neath which  we  may  sit  with  great  de- 
light. In  other  words  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  one  answer  of  the  soul  to  every 
possible  circumstance,  to  all  emergen- 
cies, to  the  demands  and  appeals  that 
constantly  knock  at  the  door  of  our 
life,   like  the  telegraph  lad    with  the 


6o  Cl?e  (Slortous  iovb 

buff-colored   envelope,    and  its    unex- 
pected summons. 

There  is  something  more.  The  soul 
that  abides  in  Christ  extracts  blessings 
from  the  repeated  discipline  which 
reveals  the  many-sidedness  of  Christ. 
It  greets  sirocco  and  tornado;  it  wel- 
comes drought  and  weariness;  it  re- 
joices in  tribulation;  because  out  of  all 
these  things  it  is  acquiring  an  experi- 
ence of  qualities  and  attributes  which 
otherwise  had  slumbered  in  Christ  un- 
known. Human  need  has  always  been 
the  background  for  the  revelation  of 
God's  nature,  as  the  ailments  of  a 
child  reveal  the  tender  patience  of  the 
mother,  and  as  the  virulence  of  dis- 
ease the  resource  of  doctor  or  nurse. 
You  asked  to  know  Him,  then  be  not 
surprised  if  you  are  placed  on  steep 
standpoints  of  vision  whence  unex- 
pected glimpses  of  His  nature  may  be 
obtained. 


Cl}vxst  ®ne  anb  lltanystbeb     6i 

No^  ttnfrequently  men  teach  us  zvhat 
the  Man  can  be.  They  are  but  broken 
lights  of  Him.  SpHnters  from  the 
crystal,  drops  from  the  fountain.  One 
setting  forth  this  trait,  and  another 
that  of  His  character,  but  none  of  them 
able  to  combine  more  than  one,  or  at 
the  most  two,  of  those  characteristics 
which  the  prophet  attributes  to  the 
Man  whose  praises  he  recites.  They 
are  coverts,  but  not  hiding-places;  or 
hiding-places,  but  not  rivers;  or  rivers, 
but  not  shadowing  rocks.  Take  the  best 
of  the  best  of  men;  gather  into  one  all 
the  chivalry,  bravery,  tenderness,  love- 
liness, which  have  dwelt  in  the  fairest 
of  our  race;  and  all  together  will  not 
suffice  to  depict  the  comprehensive- 
ness, and  glory,  and  sufficiency  of  the 
Son  of  Man. 

It  should  be  our  ambition  so  to  live 
that  men  may  catch  glimpses  of  Christ 
in  us,  so   that  they  may  say,   if   this 


62  Ct?e  ©lorious  £orb 

man  or  this  woman  is  so  strong  and 
sweet,  so  true  and  tender,  what  must 
not  He  be,  in  whom  their  virtues  dwell 
as  their  home  ?  And  for  ourselves, 
such  may  be  our  fellowship  with  Christ, 
that  we  shall  be  less  sensitive  to  the 
transitions  and  trials  of  our  mortal  life. 
There  shall  be  no  more  sirocco,  or 
waterless  waste,  or  unbearable  heat, 
because  in  having  Him,  we  shall  be 
shielded  in  Him.  These  great  modern 
cities  will  become  in  our  eyes  as  fair  as 
lands  of  perennial  spring;  and  sad, 
homeless,  desolate  hearts  become  more 
sensible  of  their  possessions  than  of 
their  losses,  of  the  One  Presence  than 
of  the  absence  of  any.  "  Our  sun 
shall  no  more  go  down,  neither  shall 
our  moon  withdraw  itself,  for  the  Lord 
shall  be  to  us  an  everlasting  light,  and 
the  days  of  our  mourning  shall  be 
ended." 


CHAPTER  VI. 

^ovo  to  Become  £tke  Cbrist 

2  Cor.  iii:  i8. 

Many  are  seeking  the  true  policy  of 
life.  But  in  all  directions  there  is  per- 
plexity and  confusion;  either  men  are 
living  at  haphazard  or  are  adopting 
a  policy  dictated  by  selfishness  and 
worldly  wisdom.  On  all  sides  the  ques- 
tion is  being  asked,  What  is  life  ? 
Whither  is  the  hurrying  current  bear- 
ing us  ?  How  shall  we  make  the  best 
of  the  short  interval  between  the  cradle 
and  the  grave  ?  What  thread  of  all 
the  many  that  offer  themselves  to  our 
hand  will  conduct  us  through  the  laby- 
rinth with  its  darkness  into  the  light  ? 


64  CI?e  ®Iortou$  £or6 

"What  shall  we   do?'*  is  a  question 
often  put. 

The  clue  to  life's  aims;  the  philoso- 
pher's stone  which  will  turn  everything 
into  gold;  the  secret  of  a  blessed  useful 
life  is  to  be  found  much  rather  in  what 
we  are^  than  in  what  we  do.  The 
Beatitudes  with  which  our  Lord  opened 
the  great  programme  of  Christianity  all 
turn  upon  character  rather  than  upon 
action,  and  the  blessedness  which  He 
promises  is  to  the  meek,  the  pure  in 
heart,  the  peacemaker.  The  true  policy 
of  life,  therefore,  is  to  stay  just  where 
we  are;  to  believe  that  to  be  what  and 
where  we  are  is  God's  will  for  us;  and 
to  endeavor  to  be  the  noblest,  sweet- 
est, purest,  strongest  possible.  Not  to 
fret  because  the  sphere  is  obscure;  not 
to  be  jealous  of  the  position  occupied 
by  others;  not  to  allow  the  peace  of 
the  inner  life  to  be  broken  by  the  fever- 
ish  desire  to  be  something   else;   but 


^ott)  to  Become  Cike  (£Ijrtst    65 

to  be  quiet,  evincing  all  that  nobility 
of  disposition  and  character  which  the 
opportunity  and  occasion  call  for.  For 
men  to  be  strong,  thoughtful,  consid- 
erate of  women  and  of  the  weak,  tender 
to  little  children,  self-controlled,  able 
to  command  the  tides  that  sweep 
through  heart  and  thought.  For  women 
to  be  pure  and  devout,  gentle  and 
modest,  adorned  with  the  jewels  of  the 
meek  and  quiet  spirit,  which  in  God's 
sight  is  of  great  price;  and  to  be  this 
constantly,  in  days  of  fog  as  well  as 
of  sunshine,  of  illness  as  of  buoyant 
strength;  this  surely  will  extract  from 
the  roughest  and  most  toilsome  path 
the  largest  amount  of  blessedness  that 
this  world  can  give." 

John  Stuart  Mill  was  accustomed  to 
say  that  whenever  the  path  of  his  life 
was  not  clear,  he  was  accustomed  to 
ask  what  Jesus  of  Nazareth  would 
probably  have  done  under   the   same 


66  Cf?e  (Slortous  £or6 

circumstances,  and  that  the  test  never 
failed  to  indicate  the  true  course  to 
adopt;  and  for  us  there  is  surely  no 
higher  ideal  of  life  than  to  ask  perpetu- 
ally— what  would  Jesus  do  were  He  in 
my  place  ?  Each  one  of  us  must  have 
an  ideal  by  which  to  mould  our  life, 
and  there  is  no  such  ideal  as  that  pre- 
sented to  us  in  the  life  of  our  blessed 
Lord.  To  'be  like  Christ  is  to  know 
something  of  the  joy  and  peace  that 
perennially  filled  His  heart. 

There  is  a  great  necessity  that  we 
should  be  all  this,  because  knowledge 
depends  on  character;  we  know,  only 
when  we  are  willing  to  do  His  will. 
The  light  of  the  morning  will  only 
illumine  our  mind  when  we  have  fol- 
lowed the  narrow  path  of  obedience  up 
the  steep  ascent  of  righteousness  and 
truth.  Many  ask  what  is  the  right 
policy  of  life  with  the  intention  of  being 
nobler  and  purer  so  soon  as  they  clearly 


E}ovo  to  Become  £tke  Christ     67 

see  how  to  live.  Such  are  destined 
to  disappointment.  The  only  solution 
to  life's  many  problems  is  to  begin  at 
once,  just  where  we  are,  to  be  what 
God  demands  of  us,  assured  that 
soon  we  shall  learn  all  that  He  would 
teach  us. 

But  how  can  we  become  Christ-like  ? 
The  answer  is  given  in  a  significant 
text,  which  has  been  illuminated  with 
a  new  beauty  in  the  Revised  Version 
— ."  We  all  with  unveiled  face,  reflect- 
ing as  a  mirror  the  glory  of  the  Lord, 
are  transformed  into  the  same  image, 
from  glory  to  glory." 

We  all.  There  is  no  monopoly  in 
the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ.  Its  doors 
stand  open  for  all  who  will  enter.  No 
inner  circle,  no  privileged  class,  no 
school  of  initiates.  What  was  possible 
for  Moses  in  the  old  dispensation,  and 
for  him  alone,  is  free  to  us  all,  to  the 
rank  and  file  of  the  Church  as  well  as 


68  ^{?e  (Slortous  Sorb 

to  the  Apostles,  to  the  eighteenth  cen- 
tury as  well  as  the  first. 

With  unveiled  face.  We  are  told 
that  Moses  veiled  his  face,  partly  be- 
cause the  people  could  not  stand  its 
dazzling  light,  and  partly  because  he 
wished  to  hide  from  them  its  dwindling 
glory  (verse  13).  And  his  veil  was 
afterwards  spread  upon  the  hearts  of 
the  Jews,  who  could  not  see  the  spirit- 
ual beauty  of  their  own  law,  because 
they  were  hardened.  But  there  must 
be  no  veil  of  prejudice,  or  unbelief,  or 
permitted  sin  upon  the  face  which  is 
turned  towards  the  Son  of  God.  With 
the  clear,  undimmed  gaze  of  purity 
and  truth,  we  must  look  into  His. 

Reflecting  as  a  mirror.  In  the  older 
version,  "Beholding  as  in  a  glass,*' 
which  had  a  helpful  and  deep  signifi- 
cance; but  surely  this  is  even  yet  more 
helpful,  as  it  is  truer  to  the  Apostle*s 
phrase.     We  are  to  reflect  Jesus  as  the 


£}ovo  to  Become  £tke  (Efjrtst    69 

mirror  does  the  face  and  movements  of 
the  person  in  whose  apartment  it 
stands.  Silent  and  unobtrusive;  con- 
stantly and  faithfully,  it  reflects  every 
gesture;  so  the  Christian  heart  should 
live  in  daily,  hourly  fellov^ship  with  the 
face  of  Jesus  Christ.  As  the  eyes  of 
servants  are  to  the  hand  of  their  mas- 
ter, so  our  eyes  should  be  directed 
towards,  and  our  lives  perpetually  re- 
flecting, our  Lord,  whom  the  world 
cannot  see,  but  who  is  ever  present  to 
the  eye  of  our  faith. 

As  Jesus  looks  into  our  lives,  in  their 
pellucid  depths  He  should  see  His  own 
face  reflected.  Yea,  as  God  the  Father 
looks  down  upon  us  *He  should  see  a 
faithful  reflection  of  His  Son.  And  as 
the  giddy  world  around  casts  casual 
glances  at  the  people  of  God  they 
should  be  arrested,  not  so  much  by 
what  they  say  as  by  the  features  of  the 
Master  which   they  present.     Perhaps 


70  d?e  glorious  Corb 

each  unit  in  the  Church  is  needed  to 
mirror,  to  the  world  some  trait  or  feat- 
ure of  Emmanuel.  Each  believer 
should  daily  ask  himself,  "  What  do 
my  companions  and  associates  see  of 
Christ  in  me  ?  "  and  the  supreme  test 
of  every  action  should  be,  "  How  can 
I  so  conduct  myself  as  to  reveal  some 
trait  of  my  Master's  character  ? " 
Whatever  it  may  cost  it  should  be  the 
ambition  of  each  lover  of  Christ  to 
transmit  perpetually  the  beauty  of  the 
Lord,  so  that  others  may  admire  Him 
in  them  that  believe. 

Ask  how  Christ  is  acting;  always  re- 
peat what  He  is  doing;  do  nothing  of 
yourself;  whatsoever  He  doeth,  do  it 
likewise;  make  all  things  of  the  pat- 
tern shown  to  the  eye  of  faith  upon 
the  Mount;  act  thus,  not  because  you 
wish  to,  or  like  to,  or  feel  pleasure  in 
it,  but  because  you  ought,  and  thus  in- 
stinctively, and  unconsciously  you  will 


i^ow  to  Become  £tke  Ctjrtst     71 

really  become  like  Christ.  The  like- 
ness of  Christ  will  pass  from  the  out- 
ward act  and  speech,  in  which  there 
may  be  some  effort,  to  the  inner  tem- 
per and  disposition  of  the  soul.  Put 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  daily  ap- 
propriating the  grace  of  His  character, 
and  that  grace  will  become  indigenous 
to  the  soil  of  your  heart.  We  are 
transformed.  This  is  the  word  used  of 
the  Transfiguration  of  Christ.  We 
too  shall  have  a  transfiguration;  not 
as  His,  a  sudden  and  immediate  change, 
but  one  that  will  grow  on  us  from  day 
to  day,  too  gradual  to  be  noticed  save 
by  comparisons  that  stretch  over  years. 
Act  like  Christ,  and  you  will  increas- 
ingly come  to  think  and  feel  like  Him. 
But  none  of  this  is  possible  save  by 
the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  first 
implants  the  desire  for  the  holy  life, 
and  leads  us  to  live  nearer  Christ,  and 
enables  us  to  resemble  Him,  and  works 


72  C^e  ©lortous  £or5 

in  us  the  the  inward  temper  and  dis- 
position. From  beginning  to  end  the 
grace  of  the  Christian  Hfe  is  due  to 
the  Blessed  Spirit,  and  when  once  He 
takes  the  soul  in  hand,  there  is  no  fear 
that  the  work  will  retrograde  or  be 
dimmed,  as  the  light  that  faded  from 
the  face  of  Moses;  rather  it  will  pro- 
ceed, by  insensible  degrees,  from  glory 
to  glory,  and  we  shall  see  in  each  other 
more  and  more  of  the  character  and 
beauty  of  the  Risen  and  Ascended 
Master. 

But  there  is  something  yet  to  be 
said.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  in  the  heart 
of  each  believer,  by  the  grace  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  perfect  image  may 
be  in  embryo,  wrapped  up  as  a  forest 
tree  in  acorn  or  seed,  but  it  is  certainly 
present.  And  each  time  we  are  called 
upon  to  resemble  Christ,  to  act  or 
speak  as  He  would  have  done,  to  re- 
flect Him  to  men,  we  have  to  deal  not 


£}ow  to  Become  £tke  (Etjrtst     73 

only  with  the  Christ  of  the  throne,  but 
the  Christ  of  the  heart.  Let  us  make 
way,  so  that  the  Christ  in  us  may  speak 
or  act  through  us;  so  that  the  image 
without  may  be  reproduced,  not  simply 
by  reflection,  but  by  indwelling  and 
outshining. 


CHAPTER  VII. 
^I)e  immanence  of  (£I;rtst 

Our  religion  is  deeper  than  is  com- 
monly supposed.  It  is  a  great  loss  in 
every  way  that  we  are  accustomed  to 
speak  of  faith  in  Christ,  forgiveness, 
and  cleansing  from  sin  as  if  they  were 
the  crown  and  climax  of  Christianity, 
instead  of  being  its  outworks,  its  outer- 
courts,  the  staircases  and  corridors  to 
its  throne-room,  its  reparative  pro- 
cesses preparatory  to  its  essential  life 
and  heart.  Christianity  fails  of  its 
chief  end  in  any  life  that  it  affects,  un- 
less it  produces  there,  so  far  as  may  be 
possible,  the  life  of  the  Eternal  God 
Himself,    as    it    is    resident    in    Jesus 


Cf?e  immanence  of  Cf?rtst      75 

Christ  and  communicated  by  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

In  regeneration,  at  whatever  time  it 
takes  place,  and  under  whatever  circum- 
stances, the  principle  of  a  new  life  is 
inserted  in  the  human  spirit.  As  the 
animal  has  a  higher  life  than  the  plant, 
and  as  man,  in  his  moral  nature,  has 
a  higher  life  than  the  animal,  so  the 
man  who  has  been  regenerated  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  has  become  possessed  of 
a  life  to  which  the  ordinary  man  can 
lay  no  claim.  He  has  become,  as  the 
Apostle  Peter  puts  it,  "  a  partaker  of 
the  Divine  nature."  Whatever  be  our 
differences  as  to  creed  or  Church,  they 
are  comparatively  unimportant,  so  long 
as  we  possess  within  our  spirits  this 
Divine  life,  which  is  Christ  in  us,  the 
hope  of  glory.  "  Know  ye  not,"  said 
the  Apostle,  as  though  it  were  an 
anomaly  to  be  ignorant  of  this  primal 


76  Ctje  Glorious  £orb 

fact,  "  that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  you,  ex- 
cept ye  be  reprobates  ? " 

The  whole  scheme  of  redemption, 
the  entire  work  of  Jesus  Christ,  His 
birth  in  which  He  brought  the  Divine 
under  the  conditions  of  the  human,  His 
death  by  which  He  acquired  power  to 
pass  it  on,  His  resurrection  and  ascen- 
sion through  which  He  bor^  it  regnant 
and  triumphant  to  the  throne.  His  gift 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  by  which  He  makes 
it  available  to  all  who  believe — all 
tend  to  this  as  their  flower  and  fruit, 
that  He  should  reproduce  Himself  in 
us.  And  if  year  by  year  we  are  not  be- 
coming more  pure  and  strong  and 
Christ-like,  we  may  gravely  question 
whether  we  have  not  deceived  our- 
selves in  thinking  that  we  have  re- 
ceived Him  into  our  nature. 

The  true  seat  of  the  Divine  indwell- 
ing is  the  spirit.  We  are  rather  lax 
in  our  use  of  terms,  and  fail  to  divide 


C^e  immanence  of  CI?nst      tj 

between  soul  and  spirit.  In  clear  and 
accurate  thinking  on  these  deep  mat- 
ters we  should  conceive  of  the  soul  as 
the  seat  of  the  ego,  of  our  individual- 
ity, and  of  all  the  attributes  of  thought 
and  love,  of  hope  and  imagination, 
with  which  we  are  endowed;  but  the 
spirit  in  man  is  the  Holy  of  Holies  of 
his  nature,  the  inner  shrine,  the  natural 
residence  and  resort  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  with  whom  it  has  a  native  affinity. 
We  worship  God  in  the  spirit.  Prob- 
ably the  heart  is  the  Hebrew  correla- 
tive in  the  Old  Testament  of  the  spirit 
in  the  New. 

There,  in  the  spirit  of  man,  in  depths 
below  the  play  of  self-consciousness 
and  energy  and  emotion,  in  the  temple 
of  the  inner  life,  the  Divine  life  liter- 
ally dwells.  Strengthened  by  might 
through  the  Spirit  in  the  inner  man, 
Christ  dwells  in  our  hearts  by  faith; 
and  as  the  discipline  of  life  proceeds 


78  CI?e  glorious  Corb 

He  is  increasingly  formed  within  us.  It 
is  a  great  moment  in  a  man's  life  when 
this  conception  first  breaks  on  him,  or 
to  adopt  the  Apostle's  phrase,  when 
God  reveals  it  to  him.  He  suddenly 
awakens  to  the  fact  that  he  has  within 
him  that  eternal  life  which  was  in  the 
Father,  and  was  manifested  to  the 
world  in  His  Son,  and  is  now  com- 
municated by  the  Spirit.  Bitter  and 
deep  are  the  regrets  that  he  has  not 
recognized  it  before,  that  he  has  been 
too  monopolized  by  the  play  of  his 
own  life  to  give  way  to  its  holy 
promptings  and  inspirations.  It  is  as 
though  a  man  who  for  years  has 
been  working  some  heavy  machinery 
by  hand-power,  at  great  strain  and 
cost  to  himself,  should  suddenly  awake 
to  find  that  in  his  factory  for  years 
there  has  been  a  handle  which,  had  he 
but  touched  it,  would  have  connected 
his  machine  with  a  powerful  dynamo, 


Ct?e  3mmanence  of  (£t?rtst      79 

and  would  have  saved  him  all  his  ex- 
penditure. 

Wc  must  distinguisJi  between  the 
conception  of  the  Christ-ideal,  or  the 
enthnsiasvi  of  the  Chinst-spirit,  and 
the  literal  indwelling  of  the  Son  of 
God,  through  the  Holy  Spirit,  In  all 
ages  the  minds  of  men  have  been 
sensitive  to  influences  like  these. 
Some  lofty  ideal,  like  that  of  the  Vir- 
gin Mother,  which  inspired  the  knight- 
errants  of  the  Middle  Ages;  some  Di- 
vine enthusiasm,  like  that  which  led 
the  rich  and  high-born  to  abjure  all 
that  they  might  resemble  Christ  in  His 
lowliness  and  poverty — such  lofty  in- 
spirations have  visited  and  possessed 
men,  nerving  them  to  sublime  and 
heroic  lives.  But  these  do  not  fulfill 
the  measure  of  this  conception,  that 
Christ  is  actually  resident  in  the  regen- 
erated soul.  They  may  proceed  from 
that  indwelling,  but  they  have  existed 


8o  Ct/e  Glorious  £or6 

apart  from  it,  and  in  comparison  with 
it  they  are  as  artificial  flowers  to  the 
exquisite  texture  and  fragrance  of  the 
sweet  nurselings  of  spring. 

We  cannot  understand  it.  It  is,  as 
St.  Paul  says,  a  great  mystery.  But 
then  all  life  is  mysterious,  and  what- 
ever is  connected  with  God  is  myste- 
rious to  us.  We  might  well  question 
whether  our  religion  were  of  God,  if 
it  did  not  touch  on  regions  of  mys- 
tery, if  its  paths  did  not  after  a  while 
become  tracks  on  the  illimitable  ex- 
panse of  His  being,  presently  fading 
from  view.  But  we  have  all  learnt 
to  distinguish  between  mysteries  we 
cannot  solve  and  facts  we  gladly  rec- 
ognize and  accept.  We  know  not 
what  life  is.  We  sit  beside  our  dy- 
ing friend  until  the  death-rattle  or 
the  gentle  sigh  announces  that  life  is 
gone,  but  what  is  it  that  goes  out } 
What   is   the   life    which    we   possess 


trt?e  immanence  of  (£t}nst      8i 

when  we  live,  and  lose  when  we  die  ? 
These  are  questions  we  cannot  answer, 
but  we  still  accept  the  fact  of  life 
throbbing  within  ourselves  or  our  fel- 
lows. And  thus  we  think  of  the  mys- 
tery of  Christ's  indwelHng;  it  baffles 
thought  or  speech,  but  we  reverently 
accept  it  as  a  fact,  and  as  we  do  so 
we  find  that  it  explains  many  another 
fact  in  our  own  consciousness,  and  in 
the  history  of  the  Church.  It  should, 
however,  be  our  aim  to  yield  to  this 
life  as  far  as  possible.  We  must  not 
be  content  with  knowing  that  within 
the  chambers  of  our  heart  there  dwells 
this  Mysterious  Guest,  m  whom  all 
wisdom  and  strength  and  love  reside; 
we  must  often  tread  the  corriders  that 
lead  to  His  apartment,  consult  with 
Him,  interchange  ideas  and  thoughts, 
lay  before  Him  our  intentions,  pur- 
poses, and  plans;  nay,  we  must  ask 
Him  to  step  forth  into  the  dwelling  of 


82  Clje  ©lortous  £or6 

the  soul,  tenanting  every  room,  and 
affecting  even  the  members  of  the 
body  with  the  glow^  and  radiance  of 
His  presence. 

Two  things  are  needful  before  we 
can  realize  the  full  benefit  of  this  In- 
dwelling: (i)  We  must  curtail  the 
manifestation  of  our  own  eitergy. 
This  is  by  no  means  easy.  Our  Lord 
spoke  of  it  as  the  daily  cross,  as  lay- 
ing down  our  lives,  as  losing  our  very 
souls,  for  the  word  translated  soul  is 
really  life.  We  fight  hard  to  hold  our 
own;  we  have  planned,  managed, 
wrought  so  long  that  we  are  inapt  in 
reining  in  our  self-life,  so  that  the 
Christ-life  may  become  dominant.  We 
are  willing  enough  to  adopt  any  theory 
of  life  that  gives  foothold  to  the  spirit 
of  self  still  to  keep  the  government  of 
our  lives  in  its  hands,  such  as  the 
rightness  of  strict  obedience  to  the  law 
and  spirit  of  Christ.     We  are  willing 


Ct?e  3mmanence  of  Cljrtst      83 

that  He  should  be  constitutional  mon- 
arch, if  only  a  religious  self  may  be 
His  executive. 

But  whatever  partakes  of  self  is  in- 
imical to  our  true  interests.  We  must 
stand  aside.  There  cannot  be  tw^o 
dominant  principles  w^ithin  us.  One 
must  give  v^ay.  John  the  Baptist  must 
decrease  if  Christ  is  to  increase.  The 
marble  must  be  chipped  off  if  the  fash- 
ion of  the  image  is  to  grow^.  The  first 
Adam,  who  is  but  a  living  soul,  must 
give  place  to  the  second  Adam,  who  is 
a  life-giving  spirit. 

All  this  needs  constant  watchfulness. 
Whenever  we  are  sensible  of  the  forth- 
putting  of  energy,  we  must  be  on  the 
alert  that  its  source  should  not  be  self, 
but  Christ;  and  that  its  one  purpose 
should  be  to  manifest  Him  more  per- 
fectly, and  to  attract  to  Him  more  of 
the  admiration  and  love  of  men.  There 
is  no  merit  in  the  deepest  self-denial, 


84  CI?e  (Slortous  Corb 

We  do  not  lop  off  the  branches,  shoots, 
and  tendrils  of  our  own  life  because  of 
any  virtue  in  the  act,  but  only  to  cur- 
tail anything  that  might  drain  the  ener- 
gies of  our  nature  away  from  the  Christ 
graft,  or  interfere  to  the  least  degree 
with  the  manifestation  of  Christ's  own 
royal  and  glorious  Being. 

(2)  We  must  have  times  of  silence^  of 
waitiitg  only  upon  God,  of  retiring  from 
the  murmur  and  hubbub  of  human 
voices,  that  the  still,  small  voice  may  be 
able  to  make  itself  heard.  Such  hours 
are  not  lost.  We  are  arrested  from  tak- 
ing paths  which  otherwise  we  should 
have  to  retrace  with  slow  and  weary 
steps.  We  escape  the  useless  expendi- 
ture of  energy  which  we  might  better 
conserve.  We  become  conscious  of 
the  rising  up  within  of  that  great  foun- 
tain of  life,  which^  having  come  from 
God,  proceeds  to  God,  and  that  bears  us 
forward,  like  Mary,  to  do  the  one  great 


CI?e  3mmanence  of  Cl^rtst     85 

act  of  self-sacrifice  which  Hves  when  the 
many  things  of  the  busthng  Martha 
hfe  are  forgotten. 

It  may  not  be  necessary  Hterally  to  sit 
still,  or  to  go  apart  from  the  ordinary 
avocations  of  life,  in  order  to  detect 
this  voice.  The  boiler-makers  can  talk 
to  each  other  amid  ceaseless  hammer- 
ings. Those  who  are  accustomed  to 
the  roar  of  Niagara  are  sensitive  to 
noises  that  would  not  be  audible  to  the 
unaccustomed  ear.  So,  when  once  we 
have  caught  the  tone  of  the  voice  of 
God,  we  shall  detect  it  amid  the  rush 
of  daily  business.  We  shall  make  a 
great  stillness  in  our  heart,  enter  the 
inner  temple,  and  wait  there,  until  the 
word  of  the  Lord  shall  come  to  us;  and 
all  the  while  to  the  eyes  of  our  fellows 
we  shall  be  busy  with  the  occupations 
and  amenities  of  life. 

The.  one  aim,  however,  of  existence 
should  be  to  give  an  opportunity  to  the 


86  Cf?e  ©lorious  Corb 

indwelling  Lord  to  assert  Himself,  and 
possess  the  entire  realm  of  spirit,  soul 
and  body,  so  that  we  may  in  our  meas- 
ure be  able  to  say  with  the  Apostle, 
"  Daily  delivered  to  death  for  Jesus' 
sake,  that  the  life  of  Jesus  may  be 
manifest  in  our  mortal  flesh." 


CHAPTER  V 1 1 1. 

tEI?e  ®tl?er  Ctbpocate* 

John  xiv:  i6. 

"  Another  Comforter,"  or  paraclete, 
the  Master  said.  The  Church  has  two 
Advocates— the  one  with  the  Father 
in  heaven,  Jesus  Christ  the  Righteous, 
the  other  in  her  midst,  for  "  we  have 
been  builded  together  as  an  habitation 
of  God  through  the  Spirit/*  "Ye," 
said  the  Apostle,  speaking  of  the 
Church  collectively,  "  are  the  temple 
of  the  Holy  Ghost."  When  the  one 
Advocate  went  up,  the  other  came 
down  to  be  to  each  believer,  and  to 
the  whole  Church,  all  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  would  have  been  had  the  niinis- 


88  Cf?e  (glorious  £orb 

try  of  the  forty  days  been  indefinitely 
prolonged.  This  is  the  secret  of 
prayer;  by  the  Spirit  in  the  heart  we 
are  brought  into  living  sympathy  with 
the  Saviour  on  the  throne,  and  we. 
naturally  ask  those  things  which  it  is 
the  will  of  God  to  give. 

There  is  a  remarkable  parallel  be- 
tween the  Advents  of  the  Second  and 
Third  Persons  of  the  Holy  Trinity, 
The  Lord  Jesus  was,  of  course,  in  ex- 
istence before  His  incarnation;  yea, 
more,  His  delights  were  with  the  sons 
of  men,  and  He  wrought  amongst 
them  as  the  Angel-Jehovah;  but  at 
Bethlehem  He  entered  into  union  with 
our  nature.  So  the  Holy  Spirit 
wrought  in  the  hearts  of  holy  men  be- 
fore the  Day  of  Pentecost,  moving 
them  to  write  the  Scriptures,  and  to 
do  great  deeds  of  holy  courage,  but  at 
Pentecost,  in  an  especial  manner,  Hq 
entered  into  union  with  the  Church, 


Cf?e  ®tf?er  abvocak  89 

What  the  manger-bed  was  to  the  one, 
the  upper  room  was  to  the  other.  And 
now  the  Holy  Spirit  is  as  certainly  im- 
manent in  the  Body  of  which  Christ  is 
Head,  as  Jesus  was  immanent  in  the 
Body  born  of  the  Virgin  Mother. 

Of  course,  as  the  Church  is  made  up 
of  individual  believers,  the  immanence 
of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  the  whole  de- 
pends on  His  immanence  in  each. 
And  His  indwelling  in  any  individual 
spirit  is  necessarily  productive  of  all 
manner  of  Christ-forming,  sin-destroy- 
ing, grace-producing  results.  Holiness 
is  the  inevitable  outcome  of  the  in- 
dwelling of  the  Holy  Ghost  when  He 
is  permitted  entire  and  undisputed 
supremacy.  Of  these  our  space  for- 
bids more  than  this  mere  mention,  as 
we  wish  only  to  enumerate  the  special 
functions  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  re- 
spect of  the  Church's  mission  in  tjie 
world, 


90  Cl?e  ©lortous  Corb 

The  Anointing  Function. 

Here,  too,  there  is  a  remarkable 
parallel  between  the  experiences  of 
Christ  and  of  His  Church.  Not  only 
was  He  conceived  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
but  when  the  long  preparatory  period 
had  passed,  He  was  anointed  for  His 
work  as  the  great  Servant  of  God.  He 
stooped  to  associate  Himself  with  sin- 
ners by  submitting  to  baptism  in  the 
swellings  of  Jordan,  and  immediately 
the  Spirit  of  God,  who  had  been  in 
Him,  descended  upon  Him,  and  He 
was  able  to  say,  "  The  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  is  upon  Me  because  he  hath 
anointed  Me  to  preach."  This  was 
our  Saviour's  Pentecost,  the  hour  in 
which  He  was  indued  with  power, 
and  was  filled  by  the  Spirit,  not  by 
measure,  but  in  inimitable  abundance. 

Similarly,  when  the  Church,  which, 
so  to  speak,  had  been  conceived  of  the 


trf?e  0t(jer  dbvocak  91 

Holy  Ghost,  was  essaying  to  undertake 
her  great  mission  to  the  world,  to 
preach  the  Gospel  to  the  poor,  to  pro- 
claim liberty  to  the  captive,  the  open- 
ing of  the  prison  to  the  bound,  she, 
too,  was  anointed  for  her  work.  Not 
a  step  might  she  stir,  though  the 
world  was  knocking  at  her  doors,  till 
she  had  been  thus  endued  with  power 
from  on  high. 

Ever  since  then  the  Risen  Christ  has 
been  anointing  and  enduing  men.  The 
oil  which  has  been  so  copiously  poured 
on  the  head  of  our  Aaron  descends  to 
each  fragment  of  His  sacred  dress  that 
claims  the  sacred  chrism.  The  Lord 
received  the  Holy  Ghost  as  an  individ- 
ual at  the  Jordan,  but  He  received 
Him  again,  so  Peter  tells  us,  when  He 
ascended  up  on  high,  and  this  time  as 
our  Head  and  Representative  (Acts  ii: 
33).  He  has  been  infilled  that  He 
may    infil;      anointed    that    He    may 


92  Cf?e  glorious  Corb 

anoint;  endued  that  He  may  endue. 
Though  in  all  this  it  must  be  remem- 
bered that  we  are  not  now  touching  on 
His  Divine  Nature,  but  on  His  office 
as  the  High  Priest  of  His  Church.  As 
a  river  pouring  over  a  mountain-side 
fills  the  large  tarns  and  lakes  below,  so 
the  nature  of  God  pours  into  the 
Divine  human  nature  of  the  Son,  and 
so  by  the  Spirit  into  all  hearts  that  by 
faith  claim  His  infilling. 

His  Administering  Function. 

Throughout  the  Book  of  the  Acts, 
we  find  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the 
prime  mover  and  administrator.  He 
said  to  Peter,  "  Three  men  seek  for 
thee,  go  with  them,  I  have  sent  them  "; 
He  said,  "  Separate  me  Barnabus  and 
Saul";  He  controlled  the  movements 
of  the  Apostle,  "  the  Spirit  of  J-esus 
suffered   them  not  ";   He  was  so  evi- 


Ct?e  (Dtl?er  Ctbpocate  93 

dently  present  in  the  Church,  that  the 
first  official  document  ran  thus:  "  It 
seemed  good  to  the  Hoi/  Ghost,  and 
to  us."  He  struck  down  those  that 
lied  against  His  Divine  Majesty.  These 
are  instances  out  of  many.  Indeed, 
there  is  not  a  chapter  in  the  Acts 
which  does  not  contain  some  reference 
to  the  administrative  function  of  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

And  what  was  true  of  the  early 
Church  has  been  true  in  the  history  of 
the  universal  Church  in  every  age,  and 
might  be  true  of  each  separate  one. 
My  beloved  friend,  the  late  Dr.  Gor- 
don, to  long  talks  with  whom  on  this 
subject  I  owe  so  much,  once  told  me 
that  in  his  earlier  ministry  he  was  more 
anxious  to  administer  and  guide  his 
church  than  in  later  years.  He  found 
that  he  was  attempting  work  which 
the  Holy  Spirit  could  do  better.  It 
was  enough,  therefore,  to  preach  per- 


94  ^f?^  ©lorious  £or6 

petually  on  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  to  keep  his  people's  minds 
directed  towards  it,  and  to  believe  that 
the  Spirit  Himself  would  energize 
through  the  church  to  the  perfect  real- 
izing of  all  its  possibilities. 

The  Co-operating  Function. 

A  scientific  lecturer  often  employs 
the  services  of  a  demonstrator,  who, 
by  the  experiments  he  performs,  or 
the  figures  he  chalks  on  the  black- 
board, presents  to  the  eye  what  the 
speaker  is  presenting  to  the  ear.  This 
co-operation  is  like  the  double  lens  of 
the  binocular  glass,  and  the  impression 
of  the  conjoint  witness  is  proportion- 
ately great.  So,  ever  since  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  when  a  servant  of  Christ  has 
stood  up  in  the  right  condition  of  soul 
and  in  believing  fellowship  with  the 
Divine   Spirit,   He  has  been  a  fellow- 


Cf?e  (Dtf?er  abpocate  95 

witness  to  the  Gospel.  "  We  are  wit- 
nesses of  these  things,  and  so  is  also 
the  Holy  Ghost:' 

Whilst  the  servant  of  God  is  elabo- 
rating and  enforcing  the  truth  disclosed 
to  him  through  the  Bible,  at  the  mo- 
ment that  he  is  speaking  the  Spirit  of 
God  is  at  work,  convicting  of  sin, 
righteousness,  and  judgment,  demon- 
strating the  truth  of  what  is  advanced, 
and  driving  the  arrow  home  in  the 
joints  of  the  harness.  It  is  a  mistake, 
therefore,  to  argue  for  the  Gospel;  it  is 
better  far  to  bear  witness  to  it.  This 
is  our  function.  "  Ye  shall  be  wit- 
nesses unto  Me."  But  it  is  highly  im- 
portant that  we  present  Christ  in  His 
Gospel.  The  Spirit  is  not  bound  to 
add  His  testimony  to  aught  else.  Not 
to  bursts  of  eloquence,  nor  to  reams 
of  essays  on  the  last  strike,  nor  to 
philosophy  and  science,  but  to  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus,  is  the  Spirit  responsive. 


96  CI?e  ©lorious  £or6 

If  once  a  man  learns  to  rely  on  this, 
it  makes  him  wonderfully  calm  and 
still.  His  fury  and  passion  will  not 
effect  his  purpose,  but  if  he  really 
knows  "the  communion,"  or  partner- 
ship, "of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  that  will 
answer  all. 

His  Upbuilding  Function. 

Between  the  first  and  second  Advents 
God  is  forming  a  new  humanity.  The 
Head  was  constituted  in  the  incarna- 
tion, but  especially  in  the  death  and  res- 
urrection of  the  Second  Adam.  The 
Body  is  being  added,  soul  by  soul.  It 
is  worth  our  while  to  give  full  meaning 
to  the  phrase,  "  Believers  were  the 
more  added  to  the  Lord''  (Acts  v:  14). 
They  were,  of  course,  added  to  the 
Church,  but  before  that  they  had  been 
added  to  the  Lord.  They  were  added 
to  the  Church  because  they  had  been 
added  to  the  Lord. 


Ctje  0tt?er  Cibvocak  97 

This  is  a  special  function  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  attract  and  draw  men  to  the 
Head.  He  does  this  through  the 
Church.  Thus  the  Body  of  Christ  is 
being  built  up.  In  the  purpose  of  God 
we  may  say,  as  David  did  of  his  natural 
body,  "  In  Thy  book  all  my  members 
were  written,  which  in  continuance 
were  fashioned."  That  is  the  point; 
the  members  of  the  Lord's  mystical 
body  are  being  fashioned  in  continuance : 
and  as  each  new  fragment  is  added,  it 
becomes  the  vehicle  or  channel  through 
which  the  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
passes  to  incorporate  still  more. 

His  Revealing  Function. 

The  one  aim  of  the  Blessed  Spirit  is 
to  glorify  the  Saviour,  as  the  aim  of 
the  Saviour  was  to  glorify  the  Father. 
The  very  expressions  that  were  appli- 
cable in  this  connection  to  the  Lord 


98  CI?e  (Slortous  £or6 

are  equally  so  to  the  Spirit.  Compare, 
for  instance,  these  two  remarkable  sen- 
tences: "  I  have  not  spoken  from  My- 
self/* and  "  He  shall  not  speak  from 
Himself. '* 

If  we  may  so  speak,  the  Holy  Spirit 
shrinks  from  drawing  attention  to  Him- 
self. He  is  gladdest  when  all  the  light 
that  He  can  focus  shines  full  on  the 
face  of  Jesus,  and  men  are  taken  up 
with  Him.  All  that  detracts  from  the 
pre-eminence  of  Christ  in  the  heart- 
life  and  thought-life  of  His  people  is  an 
immense  grief  to  Him  whose  mission  is 
to  glorify  Him  by  taking  of  the  things 
that  are  His,  and  revealing  them  to 
those  who  love.  The  life  which  is 
most  pervaded  by  the  Spirit  of  Jesus 
will  have  most  of  the  beauty  of  His 
character  reflected  in  it.  And  the 
spirit  which  is  really  Spirit-filled  will 
talk  more  of  the  Lord  Jesus  than  of  the 


Ctje  ©tfjer  dbvocah  99 

Gracious  Agent,  whose  joy  is  to  reveal 
Him,  and  to  be  Himself  unseen. 

Our  individual  paracletism  through 
these  priceless  functions  v^ill  be  in  pro- 
portion as  we  learn  the  meaning  of 
Gal.  iii:  14.  "  That  we  might  receive 
the  promise  of  the  Spirit  by  faith,'' 
Not  by  long  vigils,  nor  by  prolonged 
fastings  and  prayers,  nor  with  a  storm 
of  emotion,  and  the  witness  of  sense, 
but  calmly,  quietly,  and  through  faith 
we  may  receive  all  God  intends  in  any 
of  these  directions;  not  once  or  twice, 
but  repeatedly;  not  spasmodically,  but 
continuously;  not  emotionally,  but  by 
the  adjusted  attitude  of  the  conse- 
crated will. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

(Escape  from  t^e  WotWs  Corruption. 

2  Peter. 

In  no  sparing  terms,  the  sacred 
writers  refer  to  the  world  of  their  time. 
And  to  this  rule  the  Epistles  of  Peter 
are  no  exception.  There  is  no  kind 
of  excess  with  which  he  does  not 
charge  it.  The  words  lasciviousness, 
lust,  and  excess  of  riot,  come  with  sad 
monotony  from  his  lips.  Indeed,  the 
conception  of  the  Second  Epistle  likens 
it  to  Sodom,  on  which  the  lawless 
deeds  of  the  wicked  brought  the  swift 
judgment  of  God. 

But  with  equal  clearness  he  defines 
the  position   of   those   whom   he   ad- 


(£scape  from  (Lorruptton      loi 

dressed,  and  who  had  obtained  a  like 
precious  faith  with  himself.  If  the 
world  of  their  time  were  another 
Sodom,  they  at  least  were  as  righteous 
Lot,  distressed  with  the  lascivious  life 
of  the  wicked,  whom  the  Lord  deliv- 
ered. Would  that  he  had  realized  and 
maintained  the  life  to  which  the  Al- 
mighty God  called  him  !  Then  he 
had  enjoyed  the  free,  glad  life  of  the 
uplands,  where  Abraham  walked  with 
God! 

Having  escaped!  (2  Peter  i:  4).  How 
positive  this  assertion  !  There  at  the 
foot  of  the  cliffs  the  waves  of  ink  wel- 
ter, and  yonder  the  bark  is  slowly 
going  to  pieces,  but  the  crew  have 
escaped  safe  to  shore,  and,  climbing 
the  rocky  ledges,  are  standing  far  be- 
yond the  angry  whirl  of  the  waves,  and 
the  furthest  cast  of  the  spray.  Not 
more  absolutely  does  the  Apostle  John 
speak  of  those  who  have  gotten  the 


I02  Cf?e  glorious  £or6 

victory  over  the  beast,  than  does  this 
Apostle  describe  the  escape  from  the 
corruption  of  the  world,  of  those  who 
were  likely  to  survive  him,  and  to 
whom  he  entrusted  words  that  might 
help  them  when  he  had  gone.  They 
stood  in  the  light,  where  darkness 
could  not  include  them  in  its  sable  em- 
pire: they  breathed  air,  in  which  the 
germs  of  contagion  could  not  live:  they 
were  surrounded  as  by  a  cordon  of 
fire,  through  which  temptation  could 
not  pass. 

Just  escaping  {^w  i8,  R.  v.).  In  the 
case  of  some,  the  escape  was  in  pro- 
cess. They  had  heard  the  warning 
cry  of  the  angels,  felt  the  eager  press- 
ure of  their  hastening  hands,  and  had 
arisen  to  flee  from  them  that  were  liv- 
ing in  error,  steeped  in  unconscious- 
ness, solaced  by  the  lullaby  of  a  false 
peace.  It  is  a  great  spectacle  to  behold 
the  awakening  of  a  soul  to  love,   or 


(Escape  from  Corruption       103 

thought,  or  some  noble  conception  of 
the  possibilities  of  life,  but  it  is  a  greater 
one  to  watch  it  just  escaping,  passing 
the  city-gates  in  the  early  dawn,  as  the 
sun  is  rising  on  the  earth,  or  beginning 
to  climb  the  mountain  slopes  to  the 
shelter  of  the  cave. 

After  they  have  escaped  the  defile- 
ments of  the  world  .  .  .  again  entangled 
therein  and  overcome  (ii:  20).  This  is 
a  sad  possibility  that  must  ever  be 
borne  in  mind.  We  are  never  saved 
in  this  world  beyond  the  fear  of  relapse. 
Lot  escaped  Sodom's  doom,  but  he 
was  entangled  again  in  her  sin^,  and 
contracted  eternal  infamy.  Many  have 
emerged  from  the  black  waves,  stood 
for  a  little  on  the  cliffs  of  chrysolite, 
where  the  morning  light  ever  shines, 
but  have  been  sucked  back  into  the  re- 
morseless waters.  Let  him  that  think- 
eth  he  stands  take  heed  lest  he  fall. 
Life  is  full  of  perils,  and  not  least  so 


I04  Ctje  (Slorious  £or6 

for  those  who  vaunt  their  deliverance. 
Our  salvation  depends  on  our  perpet- 
ual reception  of  the  life  and  grace  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  if  there  is  any  in- 
termission here,  there  will  be  inevitable 
decrepitude  and  failure  everywhere, 
and  the  tempter  will  easily  break  into 
the  citadel  of  the  soul. 

The  method  of  escape  is  always  al- 
luded to  in  the  same  phrase.  It  must 
be  through  the  knowledge  of  Him  that 
hath  called  us.  We  must  not  be  idle 
or  unfruitful  in  the  knowledge  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ;  we  can  only  escape 
the  defilements  of  the  world  through  the 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ;  we  must  grow  in  the 
grace  and  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ  (i:  3,  8;  ii:  20;  iii: 
18).  To  know  the  second  Man,  who 
has  undone  the  havoc  of  the  first;  to 
know  Him  as  Jesus,  tempted  in  all 
points  like  as  we  are,  though  without 


(Escape  from  Corruption      105 

sin;  to  know  Him  as  Christ,  the 
Anointed  of  the  Father;  to  know  Him 
as  Lord,  the  enthroned  King  of  the 
heart — these  are  the  conditions  on 
which  to  know  Him  as  Saviour, 
through  whose  grace  the  soul  may  be 
deHvered  from  the  evil  of  sin,  and 
know  the  way  of  righteousness.  Well 
may  we  exclaim  with  Peter's  beloved 
brother  Paul,  that  I  may  know, Him  ! 
The  believing,  adoring,  experimental 
knowledge  of  what  Jesus  is  and  has 
done,  is  the  entire  secret  of  escaping 
from  the  world's  corruption,  and  en- 
tering the  life  in  which  we  may  be  ad- 
dressed, as  in  these  Epistles,  "  elect 
sojourners,"  "  pilgrims  and  strangers.'* 
(i)  We  know  the  Lord  Jesus  in 
His  sinlessness  (i  Peter  ii:  22).  He 
took  our  nature,  not  as  it  was  in 
unfallen  Adam,  but  further  down  the 
stream,  as  it  was  in  the  seed  of  Abra- 
ham,   though   He    was    without    the 


io6  Cfje  (Slorious  £or6 

slightest  taint  of  sin.  He  could  face 
the  strictest  scrutiny,  and  cry,  "  Which 
of  you  convinceth  Me  of  Sin  ?  "  Herod, 
Pilate,  Judas,  searched  His  character 
in  vain  for  what  would  have  justified 
to  their  conscience  their  foul  and 
treacherous  deeds.  "  This  Man  hath 
done  nothing  amiss,"  was  the  perpetual 
verdict  of  men  on  the  Man  Christ  Jesus. 
But  this  spotless  sinlessness  did  not 
diminish  the  perfect  symmetry  of  His 
character.  He  was  every  whit  a  Man. 
All  the  Ages  since  His  death  have  done 
homage  to  the  incomparable  beauty  of 
His  nature,  and  extolled  Him  as  their 
example.  Pilate's  cry  has  rung  down 
the  corridor  of  the  centuries,  caught  up 
by  myriad  lips,  "  Behold  the  Man  !  " 
From  which  we  infer  that  sin  is  not 
indispensable  to  our  nature— it  is  ab- 
normal, not  normal;  accidental,  not 
necessary;  a  disease,  a  parasite  a 
blight,  but  not  a  constituent  part, 


(Escape  from  Corruption      107 

Undoubtedly  sin  is  coextensive  with 
the  range  of  human  life.  Wherever 
we  find  man,  we  encounter  the  same 
sins — lying,  thieving,  adultery,  covet- 
ousness,  murder.  These  vices,  like 
weeds,  are  indigenous  to  every  soil, 
and  flourish  under  every  sky.  But  the 
fact  that  one  perfect  Life  has  been 
lived  without  them,  and  that  those 
who  live  nearest  it  share  that  emanci- 
pation, proves  beyond  doubt  that  sin 
is  no  necessary  part  of  our  nature, 
but  that  a  time  may  come  when  we 
shall  cast  it  aside,  as  the  ailing  child 
the  measles,  whooping-cough,  and 
other  diseases  incidental  to  child- 
hood. 

It  is  a  great  matter  for  us  to  realize 
what  was  God*s  original  ideal,  when 
He  created  us;  because  all  that  is  for- 
eign to  His  original  purpose  must 
awake  His  undying  opposition.     In  our 


io8  Ct?e  (Slortous  £or6 

combat  with  it,  we  may  count  on  His 
ready  and  efficient  aid. 

(2)  We  know  the  Lord  Jesus  has 
SUFFERED  IN  THE  FLESH  (i  Peter  iii:  18; 
iv:  i).  He  suffered  for  us,  and  bare 
our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree. 
He  once  offered  there  a  full,  perfect, 
and  sufficient  sacrifice,  oblation,  and 
satisfaction  for  the  whole  world.  But 
He  did  more.  He  died  unto  sin.  He 
ceased  out  of  the  Time-world,  in  which 
sin  reigned.  In  Him,  the  likeness  of 
our  sinful  flesh  was  nailed  up  to  the 
ignominy  and  shame  of  the  cross, 
beneath  the  curse  of  God.  And  all 
was  done  to  emancipate  us  from  the 
dominion  of  sin,  so  that  we  should  no 
longer  live  the  rest  of  our  time  to  the 
lust  of  men,  but  to  the  will  of  God. 

We  must  understand  this  aspect  of 
the  death  of  Christ,  if  we  would  secure 
all  the  help  the  cross  was  intended  to 
give.     It   is   not    enough  to  think  of 


(Escape  from  Corruption      109 

Christ  as  our  Substitute  and  Sin- 
bearer;  we  must  regard  Him  as  the 
Noah  with  whom,  in  the  purpose  of 
God,  we  crossed  the  waters  of  judg- 
ment between  the  old  world  with  its 
curse,  and  the  new  world  on  which  the 
smile  of  the  Creator  lay  in  benediction 
— the  world  of  resurrection — the  new 
heavens  and  the  new  earth,  arched  by 
the  bow  of  hope. 

"  Arm  yourselves  with  the  same 
mind  "  (or  thought,  R.  v.  marg).  Let 
this  thought  be  deeply  inwrought  by 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Let  it 
be  the  ruling  conception  of  your  soul. 
Muse  on  it  as  steadfastly  as  the  saint 
is  said  to  have  considered  the  stigmata. 
Gird  it  about  you  each  morning,  as  the 
soldier  his  cuirass  before  he  enters 
on  the  fight.  Whenever  the  world 
approaches  with  its  soft  caress,  or 
the  flesh  allures,  or  the  devil  tempts, 
answer    each     unhallowed    suggestion 


no  d?e  Glorious  £orb 

with  the  words,  "  I  cannot  do 
that  now;  I  have  passed  into  a  new 
world,  where  such  things  are  not  ad- 
missible; I  am  seated  in  Christ  Jesus, 
where  all  that  is  unclean  and  defiling 
is  far  down  under  my  feet."  Then 
reckon  on  the  blessed  Spirit  to  make 
your  boasting  good,  and  to  realize  in 
you  all  that  Jesus  accomplished  when 
He  breathed  out  His  Spirit  in  the  last 
throes  of  death.  There  is  no  need  to 
be  overcome  of  sin.  We  are  risen: 
we  have  ascended;  we  are  one  with 
Jesus  in  His  glorious  triumph.  The 
Spirit  that  raised  Jesus  from  the  dead 
dwells  in  us,  and  is  prepared  to  real- 
ize in  us,  as  in  miniature,  all  that  glory 
and  victory  which  He  wrought  in  our 
glorious  Lord.  "  He  that  hath  suffered 
in  the  flesh  (and  we  have  done  that  in 
Jesus)  hath  ceased  from  sin."  Let  us 
ponder  these  deep  and  precious  words. 


(Escape  from  Corruption       iii 
(3)  We  know  that  the  Lord  Jesus 

HAS  PURCHASED  US  FOR  HiMSELF.     ThlS 

thought  is  a  favorite  one  with  the 
Apostle  Peter:  "  Redeemed,  not  with 
silver  and  gold,  but  with  precious 
blood,"  "  A  people  for  God's  own  pos- 
session"; "Denying  even  the  Master 
that  bought  them." 

In  the  wide  market-place  of  the 
world,  we  stood  for  sale;  nay,  rather 
had  become  sold  in  sin,  and  enslaved 
to  the  will  of  the  Prince  of  the  Power 
of  the  air.  But  Jesus  bought  us  for 
Himself.  We  are  His,  not  only  by  the 
gift  of  the  Father,  but  by  the  purchase 
of  His  most  precious  blood. 

Consecration  is  simply  the  restoring 
to  Christ  His  own  property;  recog- 
nizing and  answering  His  rightful 
claims;  saying  gladly  and  reverently, 
"  I  am  Thine,  O  Lord."  When  once 
this  attitude  has  been  thoughtfully  as- 
sumed,   it   answers    all  the    questions 


112  CI?e  ®Iortou5  £orb 

which  arise  in  the  conduct  of  hfe. 
These  hands  are  my  Master's,  they 
may  not  touch  the  unclean  thing;  these 
feet  are  His,  they  may  not  go  in  for- 
bidden paths;  these  senses  and  facul- 
ties are  His,  they  must  not  be  used 
outside  the  circle  of  His  will;  this  body 
is  His,  no  voice  but  His  can  control  or 
direct  it;  these  members  are  His,  they 
may  not  be  presented  as  weapons  of 
unrighteousness  unto  sin.  Reasonings 
like  these  make  us  feel  that  we  dare 
not  sin.  A  holy  fear  forbids  that  we 
shall  grieve  our  Master,  or  injure  His 
reputation  in  the  world.  "  We  cannot 
do  this  wickedness,"  we  cry,  "  for  we 
are  not  our  own;  we  have  been  bought 
with  a  price,  and  we  must  glorify  our 
Master  in  our  body  and  spirit,  which 
are  His."  And  as  we  say  the  words  in 
the  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  lo  !  the 
snare  is  broken,  and  we  are  escaped. 


(Escape  from  Corruption      113 

(4)  We  know  that  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  we  have  become 
partakers  of  the  divine  nature  (2 
Pet.  i  14).  There  is  no  more  potent  wedge 
than  this  text  to  spHt  the  modern  er- 
ror that  all  men  are  equally  the  child- 
ren of  God.  There  is  a  lower  sense 
(that  in  which  the  Apostle  Paul  used 
the  words  on  Mars'  Hill)  in  which  all 
men  are  the  children  of  God,  since 
they  have  sprung  from  His  creative 
hand,  but  this  is  not  the  meaning  in 
which  the  apostles  used  the  words 
when  they  said,  "  Because  ye  are  sons, 
He  hath  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His 
Son  in  our  hearts,"  and  "  Now  are  we 
the  sons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not  yet 
appear  what  we  shall  be." 

Man  may  be  the  offspring  of  God, 
but  he  is  not  the  son  of  God  until  he 
has,  in  regeneration,  received  the  very 
life  of  God  into  his  nature.  The  Spirit 
of  God  begets  in  the  believing  and  re- 


114  ^^^  (Slorious  £or6 

ceptive  spirit  that  very  life  which  was 
in  the  Father  before  the  worlds  were 
made,  and  was  manifested  in  the  Lord 
Jesus.  Thus  we  become  partakers  of 
the  Divine  nature.  As  a  child  partakes 
of  its  mother's  life,  so  do  we  partake  of 
God's.  We  love  what  He  loves,  hate 
as  He  hates,  and  make  His  purposes 
our  own.  There  is,  moreover,  a  per- 
petual communication  and  interchange 
of  life,  as  of  water  between  the  ocean 
and  the  inlets  into  the  land.  As  the 
tide  rises  in  the  one,  it  rises  in  the 
other;  and  the  movements  of  the  one 
are  transmitted  to  the  other. 

This  is  the  secret  of  escaping  from 
the  defilement  around.  We  have  be- 
come possessed  of  a  new  set  of  shuttles 
which  are  ever  weaving  desires  for  pur- 
ity and  righteousness,  and  in  contrast 
to  these,  we  have  no  desire  for  the  old 
sins.  Nay,  more:  Christ  is  within  us, 
and  is  eager  to  reproduce  Himself  in 


(Escape  from  (Corruption       115 

us,  and  as  He  does  so,  we  are  weaned 
from  the  things  of  which  we  are  now 
ashamed,  and  hunger  with  an  insatia- 
ble desire  to  be  partakers  of  the  hoH- 
ness  of  God. 

This  is  even  better  than  an  escape 
. — that  Jesus  Kves  in  us  by  His  Spirit, 
and  seeks  to  manifest  through  our 
yielded  lives  His  own  glorious  charac- 
ter. 


CHAPTER  X 

®tl?er    VOoxlblxmss. 

2  Cor.  vi:  8,  g,  lo. 

By  the  operation  of  that  mysterious 
force  which  matter  exerts  on  matter, 
the  formula  of  which  is  contained  in 
Newton's  definition  of  the  law  of  grav- 
itation, we  are  all  kept  close  to  the 
surface  of  our  earth.  However  swift 
its  motion,  there  is  no  fear  of  our  being 
flung  up  from  the  solid  ground  into  the 
air,  and  away  into  space.  But  we  do 
not  equally  realize  that,  to  a  certain 
extent,  the  sun  also,  millions  of  miles 
distant,  constantly  exercises  an  attrac- 
tive force,  by  virtue  of  which  we  are 
being  inseiasibly  drawn  tov/grd§  it. 


(Dtt^er  XDorlbltness  117 

We  are  incessantly  subject  to  the  oper- 
ation of  two  mighty  forces.  On  the 
one  hand,  attracted  downwards  to  the 
earth,  on  the  other,  upwards  to  the 
sun.  But  we  are  unconscious  of  the 
latter,  because  the  mass  of  our  planet 
is  so  much  nearer.  Suppose,  how- 
ever, that  we  could  begin  to  rise  from 
the  surface  of  our  earth  by  the  exer- 
cise of  our  will,  and  in  the  track  of  the 
Ascension  of  our  Lord,  every  mile  that 
we  left  it,  the  earth  would  attract  us 
less,  and  the  sun  more.  When,  how- 
ever, we  had  traversed  some  consider- 
able distance  across  the  abyss  between 
our  native  home  and  the  source  of 
light,  we  should  come  to  a  point  where 
the  attraction  of  the  earth  would  be 
exactly  balanced  by  that  of  the  sun, 
and  we  should  remain  in  perfect  equi- 
poise, balanced  between  the  drawing 
power  of  the  earth  on  the  one  side, 
and  pf  tha  sirn  on  the  othen    But  when 


ii8  CI?e  ©lorious  £or6 

we  had  passed  a  hair's  breath  beyond 
that  point,  we  should  be  caught  into  a 
swifter  current  of  mystic  power,  and 
begin,  with  ever-increasing  velocity,  to 
rush  towards  the  glowing  surface  of  the 
sun. 

This  illustration  will  help  us  to  un- 
derstand our  relation  to  two  worlds. 
By  our  natural  birth,  we  are  closely 
related  to  the  time-sphere,  the  system 
of  things  around  us,  with  all  its  alter- 
nations of  experience,  its  heat  and 
cold,  its  light  and  shade,  its  joy  and 
sorrow.  We  cannot  dissociate  our- 
selves from  the  century,  the  city,  the 
circle,  to  which  we  belong.  But  by 
our  second  birth  we  become  related  to 
the  unseen  and  eternal,  to  the  world 
that  gathers  around  the  New  Jerusalem 
as  its  metropolis,  and  finds  its  centre 
in  the  person  of  our  Lord. 

In  the  earlier  part  of  our  Christian 
life,    we    are   deeply   and   perpetually 


(Dtifn  IDorlbltness  119 

conscious  of  the  conflicting  forces  that 
contend  for  us.  On  the  one  side, 
habits,  companions,  associations  strive 
strongly  to  keep  their  hold  on  us, 
whilst  Heaven  begins  steadily  to  pull 
us  away.  Presently  we  reach  the 
point  of  equilibrium  and  equipoise. 
Time  and  eternity,  the  worlds  seen 
and  unseen,  exert  an  equal  power;  we 
hover  between  the  two;  now  dipping 
back  into  the  one,  now  borne  swiftly 
towards  the  other.  But  the  more 
blessed  experience  is  yet  to  come, 
wherein  we  are  hardly  aware  of  the 
pull  of  earth,  because  we  are  aban- 
doned to  the  strong  and  blessed  cur- 
rent which  is  bearing  us  nearer  to  our 
true  center  of  bliss  in  God. 

Holy  souls  have  ever  felt  the  momen- 
tum and  energy  of  that  current.  It 
was  this  which  drew  Abraham  from 
Charran,  and  made  the  patriarchs  will- 
ing to  dwell  in  tents.     And  it  is  this 


I20  Cf?e  ©lortous  £or6 

which  has  made  the  saints  pass  through 
the  earth,  as  Christian  and  Faithful 
through  Vanity  Fair,  regardless  of  the 
enticement  that  would  arrest  their 
steps.  "  Our  citizenship  is  in  heaven, 
from  whence  also  we  wait  for  a 
Saviour."  "  We  look  for  and  hasten 
unto  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God.*' 

Other  worldliness  is  the  true  method 
of  unworldliness.  The  lives  of  many 
amongst  us  are  full  of  negations,  with 
very  little  of  the  positive  and  affirma- 
tive. It  is  as  though  we  were  to  take 
one  side  of  the  Apostle's  paradoxes, 
without  the  other.  Unknown,  but  not 
well-known;  dying,  but  not  living;  sor- 
rowful, but  never  rejoicing;  poor,  yet 
never  enriched;  as  having  nothing  in 
this  world,  and  possessing  nothing  in 
the  next.  Miserable,  indeed,  is  such  a 
life  as  this.  It  is  as  if  we  were  to  try 
to  wrench  ourselves  from  the  earth- 
sphere  by  the  forcf  of  oi;r  will,  befgr^ 


©tijer  XDorlbUness  121 

ever  we  had  felt  or  yielded  to  the  beck- 
oning attraction  of  the  sun. 

The  easier  and  better  way  is  to  sur- 
render ourselves  more  entirely  and 
obediently  to  the  tender  constraint  of 
heaven.  Think  less  of  the  world  you 
are  leaving  than  of  that  which  is  at- 
tracting you.  Seek  to  be  heavenly- 
minded  by  the  grace  and  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Lay  up  treasures  in 
heaven  by  the  judicious  administration 
of  all  your  possessions  on  earth.  Set 
your  affections  on  things  above,  not  on 
things  on  the  earth.  Let  the  drift  and 
set  of  your  thoughts  be  towards  the 
movements  of  the  blessed  Lord  as  He 
goes  forth,  followed  by  the  armies  of 
heaven,  to  put  down  all  rule  and 
authority  and  power.  Tread  the  streets 
of  the  heavenly  city,  lave  in  its  fount- 
ain, pluck  the  fruits  from  its  tree  of 
life,  hold  converse  with  its  inhabitants. 
^*  Y§  ar§  Qome  unto  inount  .^ion,  unto 


122  Cf?e  ©lortous  £or6 

the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem,  and  the  spirits  of  just  men 
made  perfect/' 

Then  almost  insensibly  you  will  be- 
come unworldly.  You  will  view  with- 
out heartbreak  the  wreck  of  patterns 
of  things  in  the  heavens,  because  you 
have  found  the  heavenly  things  them- 
selves. You  will  not  scruple  to  part 
with  all  your  sham  jewels,  because  you 
have  found  the  pearl  of  great  price. 
You  will  not  view  with  much  chagrin 
the  fading  of  the  chaplet  of  earthly 
glory,  because  you  have  become  pos- 
sessed of  the  incorruptible  crown  that 
fadeth  not  away. 

Let  lis  reverse  the  Apostle' s  magnifi' 
cent  series  of  paradoxes.  Let  us  be 
true,  transparent,  and  sincere  before 
the  eye  of  God  and  His  holy  angels, 
and  we  shall  not  be  greatly  moved, 
though  all  men  count  us  deceivers. 
Let    us    seek    to   be   well-known    in 


(Dtl?er  JDorlbltness  123 

heaven  as  those  that  pray  and  work  for 
the   coming  of  the  kingdom,    and  we 
shall  be  content  to  live  as  unknown  in 
the  esteem  of  this  babbling  and  vain 
world.      Let  us   be  quick  with   God's 
life  beating  high  within  us,  and  we  shall 
be  willing  to  fall  into  the  ground  to  die. 
Let  us  drink  deep  from  the  chalices 
of    heaven's   gladness,   and    we    shall 
bear  the  stings  of  whips  of  time  with 
patient  composure.      Let  us  amass  the 
treasures    of   a   noble    character,    and 
possess  ourselves   of  the  unsearchable 
riches  of  Christ,  and  we  shall  be  con- 
tent to  be  poor,  and  to  have  nothing. 
Give  us  heaven,  O  God,  and  we  shall 
be  weaned  from  the  breasts  of  conso- 
lation  that  are   everything  to   others. 
Inevitably,  a  life  like  this  will  bring  us 
into  collision  with  men  around  us.      It 
could  not  be  otherwise.     They  are  be- 
ing swept  along  by  the  earth-current, 
we  are  on  the  heaven-current.      They 


124  ^^^  (Slortous  Corb 

are  being  drawn  downward,  we  upward; 
so  there  must  be  antagonism  and  col- 
lision as  we  pass.  "  Marvel  not  if  the 
world  hate  you.  If  ye  were  of  the 
world,  the  world  would  love  its  own; 
but  because  ye  are  not  of  the  world, 
but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world, 
therefore  the  world  hateth  you." 

We  may  gauge  the  directness  and 
swiftness  of  our  course  heavenward  by 
remarking  the  intensity  of  the  world's 
hatred  and  scorn;  yet  we  must  never 
cease  to  pity  it  and  weep  for  it,  and 
exert  ourselves  to  the  uttermost  to  de- 
liver those  who  are  being  swept  to  ruin 
by  its  insidious  streams.  "  He  was  in 
the  world,  and  the  world  was  made  by 
Him,  and  the  world  knew  Him  not.'* 
But  he  so  loved  the  world.  Other- 
worldliness  weans  us  from  that  love  of 
the  world,  which  is  unholy  and  harm- 
ful; and  inspires  a  love  which  is  pure 
and  holy,  self-sacrificing  and  divine. 


(Dtt^er  XDorlbUness  125 

The  world  is  the  inspired  symbol  of 
transcience.  It  passeth  away  like  the 
shows  of  a  theatre.  Permanent  though 
it  appear,  the  scene  is  changing  whilst 
we  gaze,  like  a  dissolving  view.  And 
even  before  it  fades,  its  lust  is  gone 
(i  John  ii:  17).  The  power  to  enjoy 
dies  down  in  satiety.  Woeful,  indeed, 
would  it  be  if  some  day  we  were  to 
wake  up  to  find  the  thirst  of  desire 
burning  within  the  soul,  whilst  the  zest 
of  enjoyment  and  the  source  of  satis- 
faction were  gone  for  ever  !  Is  not  this 
the  worm  that  never  dies,  the  fire  that 
is  never  quenched  ? 

But  thrice  blessed  is  it  to  obey  the 
divine  summons,  and  to  yield  to  the 
attraction  of  the  Unseen  and  Eternal. 
Because  the  power  of  pure  enjoyment 
is  ever  on  the  increase,  and  the  taste 
becomes  more  refined  to  detect  the 
flavor  of  the  best  wine,  kept  to  the 
last,  and  there  is  always  some  sweeter 


126  Cije  Glorious  Corb 

note,  some  more  delicate  hue  of  color, 
some  more  rapturous  experience  of 
bliss.  Though  we  penetrate  into  the 
divine  nature  for  countless  ages,  there 
will  always  be  something  in  God  we 
have  never  explored,  and  always  in- 
creased power  to  appreciate  and  enjoy. 
Let  us  begin  to  yield  ourselves  more 
than  ever  to  the  attractions  and  blessed- 
ness of  that  great  Voice  from  heaven, 
w^hich  calls  us  to  come  up  thither. 
Leaving  what  is  behind,  let  us  walk — 
let  us  run — let  us  mount  up  with  wings 
as  eagles. 


CHAPTER  XI 

"Ct?e  pitcljer  anb  (Sob's  IPeli;' 

John  v:  39. 

In  the  rush  of  the  present  day  there 
has  been  a  great  multiplication  of  Daily 
Text-Books,  and  the  fear  is  lest  many 
may  get  into  the  habit  of  supposing 
that  they  have  done  their  duty  by  their 
Bibles  when  they  have  caught  up  a 
text,  or  glanced  down  a  page  of  care- 
fully prepared  text  mosaic.  But  one 
might  as  well  suppose  that  it  were  pos- 
sible to  sustain  physical  health  by 
eating  all  one's  meals  at  restaurant 
bars,  selecting  a  choice  dainty  here  or 
a  biscuit  there.  Certainly  the  daily 
text  is  better  than  nothing,  but  it  is  a 


128  Ct?e  Glorious  £or6 

poor  substitute  for  deliberate,   careful 
study  of  the  Word  of  God. 

The  whole  Bible  bears  evidence  of 
the  care  with  which  each  generation 
fed  on  the  Scriptures  antecedent  to  it- 
self. The  Psalter  bears  witness  to  the 
value  David  set  on  the  limited  sacred 
library  he  possessed,  for  his  Psalms 
are  strongly  tinctured  and  colored  by 
its  thoughts  and  phrases.  Micah  re- 
appears in  Isaiah,  and  Daniel  in  the 
Apocalypse.  The  Old  Testament  is 
the  perpetual  standard  of  appeal  to  the 
writers  of  the  New,  and  where  they  do 
not  actually  quote  it,  it  is  not  difficult 
to  discover  evidences  of  its  influence 
on  their  modes  of  thought  and  expres- 
sion. The  Old  Testament  is  the  quar- 
ry of  the  New.  It  is  no  exaggeration 
to  say  that  the  aim  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment is  the  unfolding  and  explanation 
of  the  treasures  of  the  Old.  When, 
therefore,  we  turn  to  our  Bibles,  let  us 


"pitcl^et  anb  6o6's  WdV     129 

remember  the  hands  by  which  those 
precious  pages  have  been  turned,  the 
eyes  by  which  each  expression  has  been 
scanned,  and  the  hearts  which  have 
been  taught  and  nourished  by  those 
sacred  words.  In  the  case  of  the  Old 
Testament  this  vast  host  would  of 
course  comprise  all  the  writers  of  the 
New,  and  best  of  all,  the  Son  of  Man 
Himself;  in  the  case  of  the  New,  the 
entire  Church  of  the  redeemed.  Let 
us  read  as  an  Augustine  might  have 
done,  when  the  voice  in  the  gardens  of 
Tagaste  whispered,  To/le^  lege ;  or  as 
Luther  might  have  done,  in  the  Au- 
gustinian  convent;  or  as  Livingstone 
might  have  done,  from  his  worn  Tes- 
tament, in  the  heart  of  Africa.  New 
though  the  page  of  your  Bible  may  ap- 
pear, fresh  from  the  press,  it  is  soiled 
by  the  use  and  wet  with  the  tears  of 
all  the  generations. 

Read  deliberately. — In  order  to  keep 


130  CI?e  ©lorious  £or6 

the  peace  with  their  consciences,  some 
read  standing  bolt  upright  in  their 
rooms,  in  momentary  expectation  of 
the  breakfast  bell;  others  glance  down 
their  portion  when  wearied  out  with 
the  day's  toil  and  about  to  sleep. 
Where  this  is  unavoidable,  it  would  be 
unreasonable  to  complain,  and  without 
doubt,  the  miracle  of  the  manna  is  re- 
peated, by  which,  it  is  said,  "  they 
who  gathered  little  had  no  lack." 

But  for  perhaps  the  majority  of 
those  who  read  this  paper  there  is  leis- 
ure to  eat;  and  it  is  with  the  view  of 
helping  them  that  these  words  are 
penned.  Take  time,  or  make  time.  If 
you  have  to  curtail  your  Bible-reading 
or  your  prayer,  let  it  be  the  latter;  for 
it  is  less  important  for  you  to  speak  to 
God  than  to  hear  what  God  has  to  say 
to  you.  Sit  quietly  down  in  your  most 
comfortable  chair,  prepared  to  have  a 
good  time.     It  seems  to  me  a  mistake 


"pitcljer  anb  (gob's  IDeir'     131 

to  read  the  Bible  in  a  kneeling  or  con- 
strained position,  whilst  you  read  your 
favorite  author  ensconced  in  comfort. 
Enter  into  your  closet,  and  shut  your 
door;  give  time  for  the  world's  glare  to 
pass  from  your  eyes,  and  its  tumult 
from  your  ears.  Imitate  the  listener 
at  the  telephone,  who  shuts  himself  in 
the  little  cupboard,  and  sets  himself 
down  to  talk  with  his  unseen  friend. 

Read  consecutively , — Nothing  is  more 
irreverent  to  the  spirit  of  Scripture 
than  to  read  a  passage  here  or  there  as 
the  Book  falls  open.  By  all  means 
read  the  Bible  through.  Adopt  one  of 
the  many  plans  now  in  vogue.  What- 
ever it  be,  mind  to  read  the  New  Tes- 
tament along  with  the  Old,  and  per- 
haps spending  longer  over  its  deeper 
doctrinal  portions  than  over  its  narra- 
tives. 

Use  the  references, — It  is  of  great 
importance  to  use  a  Bible  with  good 


132  Cf?e  ©lorious  £or6 

marginal  references.  I  owe  more  than 
I  can  tell  to  the  habit  of  turning  to  the 
parallel  passages,  first,  as  suggested  by 
the  Annotated  Paragraph  Bible,  and 
lately  by  the  Treasury  of  Scripture 
Knozvledge,  ^  The  latter  is  especially 
valuable  now  that  I  use  habitually  the 
R.V.,  which,  of  course,  is  destitute  of 
the  marginal  references  of  the  editions 
of  the  A.V.  There  is  so  much  to 
be  said  in  favor  of  the  use  of  the 
R.V.,  its  freshness,  accuracy,  sug- 
gestive marginal  notes,  paragraphing, 
and  absence  of  misleading  headings  to 
chapters  and  pages,  that  it  is  a  great 
loss  to  have  to  supply  the  marginal  ref- 
erences from  elsewhere.  But  this 
lack  may  be  amply  met  by  the  latter 
of  the  books  mentioned  above.  After 
reading  your  portion  carefully  and 
thoughtfully  through,  open  yonv  Treas- 

*  Published  by   Fleming  H,    Revell  Com- 
pany. 


"pitcfjer  anb  ®o6^5  IDell "    133 

u/y  and  go  through  it  again,  turning  to 
the  passages  indicated,  and  you  will 
find  almost  invariably  that  fresh  light 
will  come  to  the  passage  already  read, 
as  flints  struck  together  emit  sparks, 
and  that  some  direct  message  is  fur- 
nished to  the  soul  by  a  passage  in  an- 
other part  of  Scripture. 

It  is,  of  course,  competent  to  pursue 
the  references  of  an  ordinary  Bible 
without  the  use  of  the  special  books 
named;  and  in  time  it  may  be  well  to 
discard  all  such  references,  and  to  make 
your  own.  Some  of  the  most  valuable 
side-lights  to  Scripture  occur  to  oneself 
after  a  course  of  years  devoted  to  this 
careful  comparison  of  scripture  with 
scripture.  At  the  same  time,  we 
should  be  reverently  careful  not  to  con- 
nect passages  on  account  of  their  ver- 
bal or  fanciful  connections.  This  habit 
is  disastrous,  and  diverts  the  mind 
from  the  intelligent  study  and  appreci- 


134  ^f?^  ©lorious  £orb 

ation  of  Scripture.  There  are  so 
many  obvious  and  necessary  quotations 
and  references  that  it  is  needless  and 
wrong  to  import  the  fantastical  and  ex- 
travagant. 

Study  books  as  a  whole. — Permit  me, 
though  at  the  risk  of  being  counted 
egotistical,  to  tell  a  favorite  practice. 
I  like,  especially  when  I  am  on  a  long 
journey,  or  during  my  vacation,  to  take 
an  Epistle  or  Gospel  or  Prophecy,  and 
read  it  over  and  over.  Take,  for  in- 
stance, the  First  Epistle  of  John.  You 
read  it  the  first  day  without  any  special 
hght  striking  you.  You  receive  the  gen- 
eral impression  that  it  is  about  love,  and 
that  is  all.  You  read  it  the  second 
day,  and  the  third,  and  these  impres- 
sions are  confirmed,  but,  in  addition, 
you  become  aware  that  certain  words 
are  constantly  recurring,  which  seem 
like  stepping-stones  across  a  brook. 
After  some  more  readings,   these  ap- 


"pitcl?er  anb  &ob's  IDell"    135 

pear  as  the  nuclei  of  the  treatise;  and 
probably  you  will  underline  them,  each 
with  its  own  color  or  mark,  to  show 
their  relation.  In  this  way  the  object 
of  the  book  is  clearly  defined,  and  the 
details  fall  into  place.  It  is  like  get- 
ting a  plan  of  the  country  before  be- 
ginning to  traverse  it. 

What  new  interest  attaches  to  Bible 
study,  when  we  discover  the  secret  of 
each  book,  in  this  way,  for  ourselves  ! 
To  have  been  told  it  by  another  will 
never  be  of  the  same  value  as  to  find  it 
for  ourselves.  In  this  sense  it  is  true 
that  to  those  who  overcome  their  leth- 
argy and  natural  indolence,  a  white 
stone  is  given,  and  in  the  stone  a  new 
name,  which  only  he  who  receives  it 
knows.  Be  sure  of  this,  that  every 
book  has  its  message,  and  that  all  its 
hard  and  difficult,  rugged  or  stony  bits, 
its  seeming  contradictions  to  the  rest  of 
Scripture,  will  yield  when  the  drift  of 


136  Cf?e  ®loriou5  £or6 

the  whole  is  apprehended.  We  must 
interpret  the  parts  by  the  purpose  of 
the  whole 

Read  the  Bible  topically.  — There  are 
some  who  take  a  word  and  study  it 
throughout  the  Bible,  but  it  is  difficult 
to  do  this  unless  you  are  sure  that  the 
original  word  is  always  rendered  by  the 
same  words  in  the  English  version, 
otherwise  you  will  get  into  endless  con- 
fusion. Take  the  word  perfect,  for 
instance,  which  stands  for  three  or  four 
Greek  words,  one  or  two  of  which 
have  nothing  to  do  with  moral  purity 
and  beauty.  If  you  wish  to  study 
words,  you  must  use  a  Hebrew  or  Greek 
Concordance,  or  its  equivalent  in  Eng- 
lish; then  it  is  extremely  interesting 
and  instructive  to  trace  the  develop- 
jnent  of  the  meaning,  the  increased 
connotation  of  a  word,  like  Faith,  or 
Love,  or  Repentance, 

It  is,  however^  even  t)etter  to  take  a 


"pttcl?er  anb  (gob's  VOdV    137 

subject  and  trace  it  through  the  Bible. 
Nothing  so  convinces  one  of  the  homo- 
geneity of  the  Bible  as  this.  Though 
written  by  so  many  different  authors, 
over  so  great  a  lapse  of  time,  it  is 
essentially  one  Book,  the  product  of 
one  informing  mind,  the  Word  of  God. 
Take,  for  instance,  the  overthrow  of 
Satan,  as  shadowed  forth  in  the  open- 
ing chapters.  There  are  constant  ref- 
erences made  to  the  progress  of  the 
great  fight,  until  we  reach  the  casting 
of  the  devil  into  the  great  pit  of  the 
Apocalypse,  and  these  are  the  staples 
of  the  chain.  The  links  are  found  in 
nearly  every  page,  which  tells  of  the 
perpetual  feud  between  the  seed  of  the 
woman  and  the  seed  of  the  serpent, 
between  the  armies  that  follow  the 
Lamb  on  white  horses  and  the  prin- 
cipalities and  powers  of  darkness. 
Traces  of  it  appear  in  Psalm  xci.,  with 
its  references  to  lion  and  dragon;  in 


138  Cl?e  (glorious  £or6 

Luke  X.,  with  our  Lord's  assurance 
that  His  disciples  should  tread  on  all 
the  power  of  the  enemy;  and  in  Ephes- 
ians  i.  and  vi. ,  where  allusion  is  made 
to  Christ's  triumphant  ascension  above 
all  the  dark  powers.  What  a  flood  of 
light  such  a  study  casts  on  the  whole 
course  of  Revelation  ! 

Read  the  Bible  with  pen  in  hand, — 
Mark  the  words  that  call  to  one  an- 
other in  the  same  chapter,  draw  lines 
of  connection  between  parallel  phrases, 
insert  your  own  references,  underscore 
your  favorite  texts,  put  dates  or  names 
against  verses  which  have  a  history  at- 
tached to  them.  And  when  one  Bible 
is  worn  out,  be  careful  not  to  transfer 
your  markings  to  another,  lest  your 
views  become  stereotyped,  and  you 
always  read  your  Bible  under  the  same 
aspect.  But  begin  to  make  another 
set  of  references  and  markings.  Thus 
we  should  wear  our  Bibles  out  at  least 


"pitcfjer  anb  6o6^s  iDeir'    139 

as  often  as  we  change  our  skins. 
Small  pens  making  but  a  faint  mark 
are  provided  for  this  purpose. 

Read  the  Bible  devotionally. — It  is  a 
bush  in  which  the  Divine  fire  is  burn- 
ing, take  the  shoes  from  off  your  feet. 
It  is  a  shrine  where  the  Ark  of  God  is 
resting,  draw  near  with  reverence. 
There  is  a  great  danger  lest  we  should 
multiply  maps,  and  commentaries,  and 
illustrative  books  of  oriental  travel,  to 
the  loss  of  the  devotional  attitude. 
We  should  approach  the  Bible,  as 
Jesus  must  have  done  in  those  thirty 
years  of  meditation  and  seclusion.  Let 
not  those  meddle  with  criticism  who 
have  not  time  to  give  themselves  to 
the  study  of  the  whole  question.  Our 
best  practical  proof  that  the  Bible  is 
inspired  is  by  its  effect  on  us  in  our 
highest  moods.  Let  us  look  to  it  for 
the  stimulus  and  culture  of  our  best 
life.     This  makes  it  the  god  of  Books 


I40  Ct?e  glorious  Cor6 

to  us.  And  let  us  open  it  with  the 
ancient  prayer,  "  Open  Thou  mine 
eyes,  that  I  may  behold  wondrous 
things  out  of  Thy  law.'' 

Let  me  urge  on  my  readers  the  re- 
peated reading  of  the  longest  Psalm, 
cxix.  It  is  of  inestimable  benefit  in 
inculcating  that  frame  of  mind  which 
is  necessary  when  we  enter  the  thresh- 
old of  this  ancient  fane,  whose  walls 
were  built  by  reverent  hands  long  cold, 
whose  windows  admit  the  light  of  eter- 
nity, whose  storied  heights  ring  ever 
with  the  notes  of  the  Divine  voice. 
Of  that  Psalm,  the  perpetual  refrain  is, 
as  it  should  be  of  our  life.  Teach  me 
Thy  statutes. 

Read  the  Bible  practically. — What- 
ever you  read,  turn  forthwith  to  prac- 
tice. We  have  only  as  much  truth  as 
we  do.  It  is  not  the  hearer,  but  the 
doer,  who  is  blessed.  It  is  one  of  the 
catch-words  of  Deuteronomy,  "  Heark- 


"pttcfjer  anb  &ob's  IDetr'    141 

en  and  Do. "  Only  as  we  hear  the  words 
of  Christ,  and  do  them,  shall  we  be 
like  a  house  founded  on  a  rock  that 
shall  stand  immovable  against  the  burst 
of  the  storm. 

I  have  often  noticed  people  in  a  con- 
vention taking  down  every  word  most 
diligently,  and  at  the  close  saying  com- 
placently, "  I  have  got  it  all  here.** 
What  have  they  got  ?  Only  the  signs, 
the  counters,  the  embodiment  of  truth; 
but  not  the  truth  itself.  That  is  theirs 
only  so  far  as  they  live  up  to  what  they 
have  heard.  And  it  is  better  to  do  one 
thing  for  God  because  He  has  bidden 
us,  than  to  cram  a  hundred  into  our 
minds  as  though  for  a  competitive  ex- 
amination. 

Each  day  read  your  chapter  or  pass- 
age with  the  idea  that  you  are  receiv- 
ing your  marching-orders,  that  there 
is  some  new  service  to  render,  some 
new  duty  to  perform,  some  new  virtue 


142  1XI?e  ©iortous  £or6 

to  acquire.  Let  the  attitude  of  your 
soul  be  indicated  by  Samuers  word, 
"  Speak,  Lord,  for  Thy  servant  hear- 
eth."  When  you  hear,  do.  What 
you  have  been  taught,  embody  in  ac- 
tion. Take  the  precepts  of  the  Bible 
as  requiring  literal  and  immediate  obe- 
dience. Let  the  Spirit  guide  you  into 
all  truth;  the  onward  and  upward  step- 
ping of  obedience,  beneath  His  leading, 
will  be  the  best  commentary  on  what 
is  difficult  and  obscure.  So  shall  you 
climb  to  the  Pisgah  height,  where  all 
the  realms  of  Bible  truth  to  the  utmost 
sea  shall  lie  apparent  to  your  gaze. 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  April  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township,  PA  16066 
(724)779-2111 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS 


0  014  022  374  8 


