V 


Vi 


\^^ 


5;fS?roFPR'S^ 


>/ 


JUN  :^  F  !-?(?; 


"^0fi/CAL8i>^ 


21 


THE  BIBLICAL   ILLUSTRATOR. 

ECCLESIASTES. 


The  Biblical  Illustrator 

BY  JOSEPH 

S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

This  remarkable  work  is 

the  triumph  of  a  life  devoted  to 

Biblical  research  and  study. 

Assisted  by  a  small  army  of  stu- 

dents,  the  editor  has  drawn 

upon  all  the  rich  stores  of  the 

great  minds  since  the  beginning  of  New  Testament  times. 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems  and  Illustrations ;  Expository,  Sci- 

entific, Geographical,  Historical  and  Homiletic,  gathered  from  a  wide 

range  of  Home  and  Foreign  Literature,  on  the  verses  of  the  Bible. 

Old  Testament  Set.— 

-Noiu  complete  in  28  volnmef. 

Each,  8<vo 

,  cloth,  $2.00. 

Genesis,  Vol.  I. 

Proverbs. 

Genesis,  Vol.  11. 

Ecclesiastes  and  the  Song  of 

Exodus. 

Solomon. 

Leviticus  and  Numbers. 

Isaiah,  Vol.  I. 

Deuteronomy. 

Isaiah,  Vol.  IL 

Joshua,  Judges,  Ruth. 

Isaiah,  Vol.  IIL 

I.  Samuel. 

_  eremiah,  Vol.  I. 

IL  Samuel. 

"  eremiah,  Vol.  IL,  and 

I.  Kings. 

Lamentations. 

IL  Kings. 

Ezekiel. 

I.  and  II.  Chronicles,  Ezra 

,    Daniel. 

Nehemiah,  Esther. 

Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  I.    Ho- 

Job. 

sea,  Joel,  Amos,  Obadiah, 

Psalms,  Vol,  I. 

Jonah  and  Micah. 

Psalms,  Vol.  IL 

Minor  Prophets,Vol.  II.  Na- 

Psalms,  Vol.  III. 

hum,     Habakkuk,   Zepha- 

Psalms,  Vol.  IV. 

niah,     Haggai,    Zechariah 

Psalms,  Vol.  V. 

and  Malachi. 

New  Testament  Set. — In  3q 

•volumes.     Each,  8'vo,  cloth,  $2.00. 

St.  Matthew. 

Thessalonians. 

St.  Mark. 

First  Timothy, 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  I. 

Second  Timothy,  Titus  and 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  II. 

Philemon. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  IIL 

Hebrews,  Vol.  I. 

St.  John,  Vol.  I. 

Hebrews,  Vol.  IL 

St.  John,  Vol.  IL 

James. 

St.  John,  Vol.  IIL 

First  Corinthians,  Vol.  I, 

Acts,  Vol.  I. 

First  Corinthians,  Vol,  II. 

Acts,  Vol.  IL 

Second  Corinthians. 

Acts,  Vol.  IIL 

First  and  Second  Peter. 

Romans,  Vol.  I. 

First,  Second  and  Third  John, 

Romans,  Vol.  IL 

and  Jude. 

Galatians. 

Revelation. 

Ephesians. 

Index  Vol.  to  Entire  New 

Philippians  and  Colossians. 

Testament. 

V 


SP  OF  PRJHc^ 


/; 


THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 

Anecdotes,  Simfles,  Emblems,  UlustratJons; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Usrature,   on  the   Verses  of  the    Bible 


n 


Riv.  JOSEPH  S.'^XELL,  M.A. 


ECCLESIASTES 


Nrw  YoRc         Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

London    and    Edinburqh 


INTRODUCTION  TO  EGOLESIASTES. 

Thb  Titlb  and  Dath  of  thb  Boos. — ^The  title  of  this  book  is  derived  from  tha 
Oreek  Septuagint,  vrhere  it  appears  as  the  representative  of  the  Hebrew  "  Eohe- 
leth,"  which  has  been  variously  rendered  preacher  or  debater.  **  Koheleth  "  is 
used  throughout  the  work  as  a  synonym  of  "  the  son  of  David,  king  in  Jerusalem," 
i.  e.  Solomon;  but  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  Solomon  was  not  the  real  author, 
and  that  his  name  was  only  assumed  by  a  well-known  and  legitimate  device  for  a 
literary  purpose.  The  first  to  discern  the  truth  was  Luther,  who  assigned  the 
work  to  the  time  of  the  Maccabees  (circa  150  b.o.).  The  late  date  rests  mainly 
on  the  evidence  of  the  language,  which  is  not  that  of  the  ancient  Hebrew,  but  of 
a  decadent  time,  when  many  Aramaic  words  crept  into  the  Jewish  vocabulary, 
{A.  M.  Mackay,  B.A.)  We  may  mention  three  grounds  for  questioning  the  belief 
that  Solomon  was  the  author.  1.  The  language  shows  traces  of  Hebrew  words 
and  forms  later  than  his  time,  and  occurring  only  in  such  Old  Testament  books  as 
Malachi,  Daniel,  Ezra.  2.  Certain  expressions  and  utterances  cannot  be  attri- 
buted to  Solomon:  (1)  "I,  Koheleth,  was  king  "  (i.  12),  as  though  he  had  now 
ceased  to  be  such;  (2)  '*  all  they  that  have  been  before  me  in  Jerusalem  *'  (i.  16), 
as  if  there  had  been  a  series  of  monarchs  preceding ;  (3)  expressions  relating  to  the 
oppression  of  the  poor,  and  the  perverting  of  judgment,  such  as  Occur  from  time  to 
time  in  the  book  (iv.  1 ;  v.  8 ;  viii.  9 ;  x.  5) ,  and  in  reference  to  which  the  real 
Solomon,  so  far  from  posing  as  a  critic,  would  have  considered  himself  responsible. 
8.  The  tone  of  the  book  and  the  character  of  its  teaching  not  only  suggest  the 
period  when  the  Persian  empire  had  been  overthrown,  and  Alexander  the  Great's 
successors  had  established  Greek  culture  throughout  the  civilized  world,  but  also 
bear  distinct  traces  of  Stoic  and  Epicurean  philosophy.  For  the  former,  sea 
chap.  i.  5-7,  9-11,  17;  ii.  12;  iii.  14,  15;  vii.  25;  viii.  8;  ix.  11;  x.  13;  and  for 
the  latter,  chap.  ii.  24;  iii.  22;  v.  18;  vii.  7;  viii.  9,  14;  ix.  7,  16;  x.  16-18.  We 
may  observe  that  the  claim,  such  as  it  is,  to  personate  the  great  king,  is  mora 
conspicuous  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  book.  Like  Solomon,  Koheleth  had  made 
trial  of  wisdom,  of  wealth,  and  of  the  pleasures  of  art.  But,  whatever  may  have 
been  his  thoughts,  with  respect  to  the  darker  side  of  Solomon's  closing  years,  tha 
great  king  evidently  fades  gradually  from  his  mental  vision,  and  he  proceeds  in 
the  remainder  of  this  treatise  to  give  us  undisguisedly  his  own  attitude  towards 
life  and  its  problems.  Here  we  plainly  have  before  us  in  no  sense  the  Solomon 
of  Jewish  history,  but  a  philosophical  Jew  of  the  later  centuries  before  Christ. 
(A.  W.  Streane,  D.D.)  There  is  general  agreement  among  the  abler  modern 
critics  that  the  book  was  written  somewhere  between  the  later  period  of  Persian 
rule  {circa  340  b.o.)  and  some  date  before  the  Macedonian  supremacy  came  to 
an  end  (say  circa  200  e.g.).  Within  these  limits  it  is  impossible  to  fix  any  data 
with  certainty,  but  there  is  much  probability  in  the  theory  originated  by  Mr.  Tyler 
that  the  author  was  a  wealthy  Jew  who  lived  at  Alexandria,  and  there  in  luxury 
and  philosophical  culture  sought  compensation  for  the  loss  of  national  and  religious 
hopes  which  had  left  his  natin:e  impoverished;  and  who  in  old  age  recorded  how 
vain  his  quest  had  been.  {A.  M.  Mackay,  B.A.)  To  me,  it  seems  impossible 
to  read  verse  after  verse  without  feeling  that  they  have  little  or  no  meaning 
imless  we  look  on  them  as  the  outcome  of  a  time  of  suffering  and  oppression. 
They  seem  to  point  steadily  to  an  age  when  national  freedom  was  gone,  national 
life  extinguished  for  a  time;  the  spuit  of  freedom  dead;  the  high  memories  of  the 
past  forgotten;  the  Messianic  hopes  not  yet  rekindled;  when  the  God  of  Hosts 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ECCLESIASTE8. 


teemed  far  removed;  when  all  around  was  dark  and  gloomy;  in  days,  it  maj  be, 
when  Persian,  or  Syrian,  or  Egyptian  kings  ruled  over  the  land  of  David  aa  a 
province  of  their  kingdom,  and  the  hopes  of  Israel  seemed  dead  and  gone — buried 
and  out  of  sight.    Then,  it  might  well  come  to  pass  that  the  spirit  of  some  son  of 
Israel  was  stirred  within  him  to  try  to  reach  his  people's  heart,  not  by  spoken 
word  or  the  stirring  address  of  a  Jewish  prophet — the  day  of  prophecy  was  over; 
not  by  the  music  of  a  psalm — the  psalmist's  harp  was  silent;  not  by  a  great  poem 
like  the  Book  of  Job—such  poetry  had  died  out  of  the  nation's  heart;  but  by 
putting  forth  in  this  half-articulate  and  ambiguous  form  a  soliloquy  or  discourse, 
call  it  which  you  will,  breathing  the  very  spirit  of  that  later  age — its  sadness,  its 
languor,  its  passive  and  oriental  acquiescence,  almost  lethargy,  under  suffering. 
It  bears  the  stamp,  from  first  to  last,  of  dejection,  if  not  of  despair.    Yet  its  still 
unrelinquished,  pervading  sense  of  the  fear  of  God  as  the  end  of  life;  its  firm 
hold  of  the  inherent  distinction  between  right  and  wrong;  its  refusal,  in  spite  of 
all  that  seems  to  cloud  the  hope,  to  part  with  the  conviction  of  a  judgment,  a 
righteous  judgment,  yet  to  come;  its  counsels  of  activity,  patience,  cheerfulness, 
prudence,  calmness,  sympathy  with  suffering,  stand  out  amidst  the  wreck  and 
decay  of  all  aroimd.     {Dean  Bradley.)     Ewald  has  advanced  a  twofold  argunient 
against  assigning  the  composition  of  this  book  to  the  time  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah, 
and  in  favour  of  "  the  last  century  of  the  Persian  dominion."    The  first  is,  that 
4he  writer  complains,  "  in  an  entirely  new  and  unheard-of  manner,  of  an  excess 
of  bookmaking  and  reading."    It  cannot,  however,  be  shown  that  a  difference 
in  this  respect  existed  between  the  last  century  and  the  last  but  one  of  the  Persian 
rule;  and  to  a  time  subsequent  to  this  it  is  by  no  means  allowable  to  look.    The 
second  reason  urged  is,  that  "  such  harrowing  pain  and  desperate  cries  of  agony 
did  not  characterize  the  earlier  period  of  the  Persian  rule."    It  must  have  become, 
Ewald  thinks,  in  its  last  years,  more  oppressive  smd  violent.     On  this  matter, 
however,  history  furnisaes  no  authentic  information.     {E.  W.  Hengstenberg,  D.D.) 
Professor  Cheyne,  in  agreement  with  Ewald  and  Delitzsoh,  assigns  the  book  to  the 
Persian  period,  though  rightly  and  fairly  admitting  that  "  the  evidence  of  the 
Hebrew  favours  a  later  date  than  that  of  Ewald, — favours,  but  does  not  actually 
require  it."    For  he  views  with  a  well-foxmded  scepticism  the  attempts  that  have 
been  made  to  trace  in  it  the  definite  presence  of  Greek  philosophical  ideas,  and 
even  to  discover  Graecisms  in  the  language.     The  style  of  Ecclesiastes  is  indeed 
almost  that  of  the  Mishnah  (2nd  cent,  a.d.),  and  it  must  be  a  product  of  the  time 
when  that  style  was  in  process  of  formation;  but  the  alleged  Grsecisms  do  not 
appear  to  involve  more  than  a  normal  and  intelligible  extension  of  native  Hebrew 
usage.     (Professor  8.  R.  Driver.) 

Thh  Plan  and  Pubposs  of  thh  Book. — "  Theologians,'*  eays  Herder,  "  have 
taken  great  pains  to  ascertain  the  plan  of  the  book;  but  the  best  course  is  to  make 
as  free  a  use  of  it  as  one  can,  and  for  such  a  purpose  the  individual  parts  will 
serve."  A  connected  and  orderly  argument,  an  elaborate  arrangement  of  parts, 
is  as  little  to  be  looked  for  here  as  in  the  special  portion  of  Proverbs  which  begins 
with  chap,  x.,  or  as  in  the  alphabetical  psalms.  It  is  a  part  of  the  peculiarity 
of  the  book  to  have  no  such  plan;  and  this  characteristic  greatly  conduces  to  the 
breadth  of  its  views  and  the  variety  of  its  modes  of  representation.  The  thread 
which  connects  all  the  parts  together  is  simply  the  pervading  reference  to  the 
circumstances  and  moods,  the  necessities  and  grievances  of  the  time.  This  it  is 
that  gives  it  unity ;  and  its  author  sets  a  good  example  to  all  those  who  are  called 
to  address  the  men  of  oiur  own  generation,  in  that  he  never  soars  away  into  the 
clouds,  nor  wastes  his  time  in  general  reflections  and  commonplaces,  but  keeps 
constantly  in  view  the  very  Jews  who  were  then  groaning  imder  Persian  tyranny, 
to  whose  sick  souls  it  was  his  first  duty  to  administer  the  wholesome  medicine 
with  which  God  had  entrusted  him :  by  ever  fresh  strokes  and  features  he  depicts 
their  condition  to  them,  little  by  little  he  commxmicates  the  wisdom  that  is  from 
above,  and  in  the  varying  turns  of  his  discourse  sets  before  them  constantly  the 
most  important  and  essentially  saving  truths.  To  further  the  fear  of  God  and 
life  in  Him  is  the  great  purpose  of  the  writer  in  all  that  he  advances;  hence  his 
assertion  of  the  vanity  of  all  earthly  things,  for  he  alone  can  fully  appreciate 
what  a  precious  treasure  man  has  in  God,  who  has  learnt  by  living  experience  the 
truth,  "vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity."  (E.  W.  Hengstenberg,  D.D.)  What, 
taken  as  a  whole,  are  we  to  consider  its  moral?  What  was  the  main  lesson  it 
was  designed  to  teach?    Was  the  preacher  whose  experiences  are  set  forth  meant 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ECCLESIA8TES.  vtl 

I  — — 

4o  serve  ae  a  model  to  imitate  or  as  a  warning  to  avoid?  For  such  a  variety  ofl 
eharacter  as  appears  in  the  utterances  of  the  writer  is  almost  without  a  precedent 
in  so  short  a  compass.  Of  coxirse  it  is  always  more  or  less  a  truth  that  by  isolating 
the  utterances  of  a  writer,  by  extracting  single  passages  and  detaching  tham  from 
their  context,  we  may  make  them  appear  to  teach  very  different  truths,  sometimes 
even  contrary  ones.  But  it  ie  not  merely  so  here.  In  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes 
we  pass  rapidly  through  different  strata  of  thought  and  feeling.  We  pass  from 
one  temperature  to  another,  from  something  all  but  of  the  earth,  earthy,  to 
something  almost  heavenly  in  its  sense  of  beauty  and  goodness.  At  one  moment 
we  are  listening  to  the  confessions  of  one  who  bad  tried  pleasure  and  knew  it  was 
vanity,  and  at  another  w«  are  at  the  standpoint  of  the  Stoic.  Again,  we  seem 
very  perilously  near  the  scorn  of  the  cynic.  At  one  moment  we  seem  to  ba 
listening  to  the  hopeless  resignation  of  the  fatalist,  and  then  again  to  the  more 
hopeful  resignation  of  the  Christian.  There  is  what  the  artists  call  a  want  of 
keeping  about  the  confessions  and  conclusions  of  this  writer.  It  is  difficult  to 
imagine  a  man  passing  so  rapidly  from  one  to  another,  or,  stranger  still,  being  in 
all  these  moods  at  once,  combining  so  many  different  men  in  one  single  person- 
ality. But  this  should  not  surprise  us  if  we  thought  more,  still  less  be  a 
stumbling-block  to  us  in  implying  inconsistency  in  the  character  represented.  It 
may  be  that  the  very  inconsistency  of  the  teaching  is  meant  to  read  us  most 
salutary  lessons.  The  phrase  used  by  an  eminent  teacher,  "  the  criticism  of 
life,"  is  very  applicable  to  this  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.  It  is  from  end  to  end  a 
criticism  of  life,  conducted  by  a  critic  who,  having  watched  life's  experiences. 
Slims  up  and  pronounces  a  verdict  on  it  from  the  end  of  the  life  or  from  a  period 
approaching  the  end.  As  to  the  verdict  itself  there  is  no  difference  between  this 
critic  and  all  those  other  critics  of  life  whose  writings  constitute  Holy  Scripture. 
He  holds  his  place  among  those  companions  by  virtue  of  having  arrived  at  the 
same  conclusion  as  they,  though  by  different  paths  of  experience.  That  of  course 
makes  the  value,  the  incalculable  value,  of  such  a  book.  It  represents  the 
testimony  of  those  who  have  discovered  the  truth  of  the  greatest  acts  of  life, 
though  they  have  arrived  at  it  through  failures  and  humiliations,  and  not  through 
success  and  triumph.  It  is  one  of  the  many  eternal  blessings  that  we  owe  to 
the  Bible  that  it  records  in  so  many  different  ways  and  aflBrms  the  testimony  of 
the  world  to  the  things  that  are  not  of  the  world.  We  should  thank  God  for  having 
taught  us  once  more  that  there  is  no  rest  or  satisfaction  for  man  in  the  things  of 
sense.  But  it  is  quite  another  question  whether  the  process  by  which  this  truth 
is  arrived  at  is  either  safe  or  soimd  for  the  spirit  of  man  to  go  through.  The 
criticism  of  life  is  a  wholly  different  thing  from  the  true  use  of  life.  It  is  no 
justification  of  a  man's  existence  when  at  the  end,  when  a  balance  has  to  be  struck 
and  a  conclusion  arrived  at,  that  conclusion  i»  that  most  of  the  life  has  been  a 
mistake  and  therefore  a  failure.  To  Have  learned  the  facts  about  life,  however 
true  and  however  important,  cannot  make  the  life  a  beautiful,  a  sound,  or  a 
profitable  thing.  There  is  no  retrospective  virtue  in  being  able  to  draw  a  sound 
moral.  The  Preacher's  final  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter  is  a  beacon  light  for 
other  men  if  they  are  wise  enough  to  profit  by  it.     {Canon  Ainger.) 

Thb  Contents  op  thb  Book. — The  absence  of  a  clear  literary  plan  makes  it 
difficult  to  arrange  the  contents  of  the  book  systematically.  Facts  are  looked  at 
Irom  different  sides  and  in  various  relations;  the  same  subject  recurs  at  different 
points;  and  the  conclusions  drawn  are  not  always  formally  consistent  with  one 
another.  Hence  some  have  regarded  the  book  as  the  work  of  a  sceptic,  or  the 
expression  of  varying  moods  and  fancies.  Yet  a  closer  examination  shows  that 
this  is  not  the  case :  the  conclusions  the  writer  comes  to  at  various  stages  are 
virtually  the  same,  and  when  he  returns  to  his  subject,  it  is  to  consider  it  on  a 
different  plane,  or  from  another  side.  He  begins  by  stating  his  theme:  All  is 
vanity,  there  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun  (i.  1—11),  i.  e.  human  life  has  no 
substantial  result.  He  then  gives  proof  from  practical  experience.  He  had  tried, 
and  found  that  vain  is  the  quest  for  knowledge  (i.  12-18),  vain  the  pursuit  of 
pleasure  (ii.  1-10),  vain  the  profit  of  labour  and  activity  (ii.  11-23).  The  con- 
clusion is  that  there  is  nothing  better  for  a  man  than  to  eat  and  drink  and  enjoy 
the  fruit  of  his  labour  (ii.  24);  for  all  depends  upon  God,  and  man  can  only 
submit  (ii.  24 — iii.  22).  He  then  takes  a  wider  survey  of  human  lite  and  society 
(iv. — vi.),  interspersing  various  maxims  of  conduct  to  be  followed  in  the  prevailing 
'*  vanity  ";  and  the  question,  "  Who  knoweth  what  is  good  for  man  in  his  life?" 


^a  INTRODUCTION  TO  ECCLESIASTES. 

Buggests  the  praise  of  true  wisdom,  and  oalle  forth  maxims  on  the  way  to  attun 
it  (vii.,  Till.),  leading  on  to  a  consideration  of  political  wisdom  (iz.,  z.).  The  dark 
backgroimd  is  always  the  vanity  or  unprofitableness  of  life;  yet  the  Preacher's 
position  is  not  a  pessimism  nor  a  creed  of  despair.  Life  is  good,  though  neither 
the  best  nor  the  last  good ;  benevolence  is  to  be  practised  (xi.  1-8) ;  and  the  young 
especially  are  exhorted  to  live  joyfully,  yet  with  *  regard  to  a  coming  judgment 
(xi.  9 — xii.  8).     (Jamea  Robertson,  D.D.) 

The  Canonioitt  of  the  Book. — The  collection  of  sacred  writings  which  was  held 
in  reverence  by  the  Jews  of  Palestine  in  the  days  of  our  Lord  and  His  apostles, 
consisted  of  twenty-two  books,  and  these  included  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.  The 
first  preachers  of  Christianity  appear  to  have  been  in  complete  agreement  with 
their  unconverted  brethren  as  to  the  authority  of  their  sacred  books;  and  in  point 
of  fact,  all  the  books  of  the  Jewish  canon  have  always  enjoyed  imquestioned 
authority  in  the  Christian  Church.  It  is  no  disparagement  to  the  authority  of 
the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  that  no  direct  quotation  from  it  is  to  be  found  in  the 
New  Testament.  A  few  coincidences  of  thought  or  expression  have  been  pointed 
out  («.  g.  Eccles.  xi.  6  with  John  iii.  8 ;  Eccles.  ix.  10  with  John  ix.  4) ;  but  none 
of  them  is  decisive  enough  to  warrant  our  asserting  with  any  confidence  that  the 
Old  Testament  passage  was  present  to  the  mind  of  the  New  Testament  writer. 
But  there  is  no  reason  to  imagine  that  any  of  the  apostles  would  have  hesitated 
to  appeal  to  the  authority  of  any  book  of  the  Jewish  canon,  if  his  subject  had 
required  such  a  reference.  Li  the  Jewish  schools  there  was  controversy,  about  the 
end  of  the  first  oentiuy  of  oiu*  era,  whether  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  was  one  of 
those  which  "defile  the  hands";  that  is  to  say,  whether  it  was  affected  by 
certain  ceremonial  ordinances,  devised  in  order  to  guard  the  sacred  books  from 
irreverent  usage.  We  need  not  inquire  what  exact  amount  of  authority  might 
be  conceded  to  the  book  by  those  who  then  placed  it  on  a  lower  level  than  the 
rest;  for  the  view  which  ultimately  prevailed  recognized  it  as  entitled  to  all  the 
prerogatives  of  canonical  Scripture.       (0.  Salmon,  D.D.) 

The  Inspieation  op  the  Book. — The  inspiration  of  Ecclesiastes  is  of  an  indirect 
kind.  We  are  not  to  read  it  as  we  should  a  prophet  or  a  gospel.  The  conclusions 
at  which  the  writer  arrives  are  often  not  Christian  truths;  the  sentiments  he 
expresses  are  not  Christian  sentiments — indeed,  they  are  frequently  the  very 
opposite.  Not,  indeed,  that  his  book  is  quite  without  value  on  the  positive  side. 
*'  His  aphorisms,"  says  Driver,  "  are  often  pregnant  and  just;  they  are  prompted 
by  a  keen  sense  of  right;  and  in  his  satire  upon  society  he  lays  his  finger  upon 
many  a  real  blot,"  and  to  this  extent  his 'teaching  may  have  direct  religious  value. 
Then,  further,  he  has  permanently  voiced  a  mood  of  constant  recurrence  in  human 
history;  his  work,  as  Dean  Plumptre  says,  "meets  the  necessity  of  a  state  of 
mind  from  which,  perhaps,  no  period  of  the  world's  history  has  been  quite  exempt, 
and  to  which  periods,  like  oin*  own,  of  increasing  luxiu-y  and  advancing  know- 
ledge are  especially  liable,"  and  there  is  positive  advantage  in  that.  But,  after 
all,  to  teach  direct  religious  truth  was  not  in  the  commission  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  gave  to  "  Koheleth."  His  work  was  written  to  state  all  the  difficulties  of 
life  rather  than  to  solve  them.  It  is  inspired,  not  merely  in  spite  of,  but  because 
of,  the  fact  that  it  often  rouses  our  whole  natiu-e  to  protest  against  the  conclusion 
at  which  it  arrives.  The  value  of  Ecclesiastes  consists  in  this  :  that  it  shows 
how  little  the  world  can  satisfy  the  soul  of  man  apart  from  God;  that  one  can 
drink  deep  of  every  earthly  pleasure  and  yet  be  left  hungering  and  thirsting;  that 
the  highest  culture  and  the  most  varied  experience  can  do  nothing  to  solve  the 
problem  of  existence  by  their  own  unaided  efforts;  in  a  word,  its  mission  is  to 
render  us  dissatisfied  with  the  merely  sensuous  pleasures  of  earth,  to  sharpen 
our  longing  for  the  unseen  things  of  the  spiritual  life,  and  to  teach  the  soul  there 
is  no  rest  for  it  but  in  God.  It  is  the  thoroughness  with  which  it  performs  this 
function  which  proves  it  a  divinely  inspired  book — a  book  without  which  the  Bible 
would  be  incomplete,  lacking  one  of  its  most  essential  elements.  (A*  M. 
Mackay,  B.A.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR 

ECCLESIASTES. 

CHAPTER   I. 

Veb.  1.  The  words  of  the  Preacher. — The  great  debate: — This  book  has  been 
called  the  sphinx  of  the  Bible,  a  not  unapt  name,  for  the  book  is  grave,  majestic, 
mysterious.  Whatever  its  meaning  be,  it  contradicts  itself  in  the  most  flagrant 
way,  looked  at  from  every  standpoint  but  one.  The  book  is  clearly  the  record  of 
a  debate  either  between  two  men — one  of  them  smitten  with  unbelief  and  despair, 
the  other  filled  with  conviction  and  hope;  or  more  probably  between  two  men  in 
some  one  man — two  parts  of  the  same  soul.  In  this  great  debate  three  things  are 
discussed.  I.  The  vanity  of  human  wishes.  The  first  speaker,  in  order  that  he 
may  illustrate  this  to  the  full,  takes  "  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  "  as  a  chief 
instance.  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  saith  the  debater;  all  is  vanity  1"  What  are  the 
sources  that  feed  this  pessimism?  The  speaker  tells  us — 1.  His  experience  of 
life.  He  was  king  in  Jerusalem,  and  he  resolved  to  give  life  a  fair  trial,  to  sea 
what  it  was  good  for  the  sons  of  men  to  do  under  the  heavens  all  the  days  of  their 
life.  (1)  First  he  tried  wisdom.  He  set  himself  to  seek  and  to  find  the  truth 
that  lies  at  the  heart  of  things — to  read  the  riddle  of  the  world  and  discover  the 
meaning  of  God.  He  studied  men  and  women,  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men, 
yet  he  found  nothing.  (2)  Foiled  in  that  direction  he  went  to  the  other  extreme. 
He  said  in  his  heart,  "  Go  to  now,  I  will  prove  thee  with  mirth,  therefore  enjoy 
pleasure."  A  truce  to  thought!  Shut  out  the  mystery,  forget  all  the  problems 
of  the  world,  let  us  eat  and  drink  and  be  merry  I  But  alas  I  he  found  that 
somehow  he  was  spoilt  for  a  life  of  brutal  sensualism.  He  soon  sickened  of  it. 
"  This  also  was  vanity."  (3)  Next  he  tried  a  combination  of  wisdom  and  plea- 
sure— a  scholarly,  philosophic,  refined  voluptuousness.  He  called  in  the  aid  of  the 
various  arts,  architecture,  painting,  music,  horticulture.  He  gratified  every  desire, 
yet  wisely,  daintily,  carefully  avoiding  all  the  vulgarities  and  grossness  that  breed 
loathing  and  disgust.  Yet  it  was  all  in  vain,  2.  But  perhaps,  we  say,  your 
experience  was  exceptionally  imhappy.  No,  he  answers,  I  have  looked  over  the 
whole  of  life  and  find  it  everywhere  the  same.  There  is,  for  instance,  he  goes  on, 
a  season,  a  marked  fixed  time  for  everything  and  to  every  pin-pose  imder  the 
heavens,  and  he  enumerates  some  twenty-eight  of  these  seasons,  and  the  activities 
for  which  they  are  propitious.  Looked  at  from  one  point  of  view  it  is  very  beautiful, 
no  doubt,  but  under  such  a  fatalism,  in  a  world  where  everything  is  arranged 
beforehand,  what  room  is  there  for  man  to  will  or  act?  Fate  I  Fate  I  everywhere 
fate  and  vanity.  3,  Or  come  again,  says  this  terrible  Debater;  we  may  differ  as 
to  philosophy ,  but  let  us  look  at  the  facts  of  everyday  life  I  In  Nature  I  see  a 
terrible  grim  order,  I  see  forces  that  go  on  their  way  full  of  silent  contempt  for 
man  and  his  schemes  and  dreams.  I  hear  a  voice  that  says  to  him,  "  Don't  fuss 
and  fret,  little  sir!  eat  sind  drink  and  die — for  you  can  do  nothing  else."  In  the 
world  of  human  natvire,  on  the  contrary,  I  see  disorder  of  a  very  terrible  kind. 
Here  men  find  thorns  on  vines  and  thistles  on  fig-trees.  As  I  looked  I  said  to 
myself,  he  continues  (chap.  iii.  16)  :  God  shall  judge  the  righteous  and  the 
wicked,  for  there  is  a  time  there — that  is  in  the  eternal  world,  for  every  purpose 
and  for  every  work.  But  alas  I  is  there  such  a  place  as  there?  Who  knows? 
Looking  then,  he  says,  at  the  oppression  that  men  endure  under  the  sun,  and 

1 


5  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha^.  K 

seeing  no  hope  of  any  comfort,  seeing  no  prospect  of  deliverance  anywhere,  I 
praised  the  dead,  they  who  are  out  of  it  all — after  life's  fever  they  sleep  well- 
more  than  the  living;  yea,  better  than  both  did  I  esteem  him  who  hath  not  yet 
lived  at  all.  4.  But  surely,  some  one  will  say,  this  man  generalizes  too  much. 
He  paints  with  too  black  a  brush.  All  are  not  oppressed  and  do  not  fail.  There 
is  such  a  thing  as  prosperity  in  the  world,  but  this  dyspeptic  debater  never  seems 
to  have  heard  of  it.  Yes,  he  has  heard  of  it,  and  taken  the  measure  of  it  too, 
and  if  one  thing  more  than  another  serves  to  bring  out  the  littleness  and  the 
vanity  of  his  life  it  is,  in  his  mind,  that  which  men  call  its  prosperity.  Let  us 
look,  he  says,  at  the  successful  man.  Idleness  is  of  course  folly,  but  is  not 
success  also  embittered  by  hatred  and  envy?  Does  it  not  separate  a  man  from 
his  fellows?  He  gains  something,  but  does  he  gain  anything  so  good  as  what  ha 
loses — brotherhood  and  love?  Look  again  at  the  isolation  of  the  man  who  loves 
money.  "  He  hath  neither  son  nor  brother,  yet  there  is  no  end  to  his  labours, 
neither  are  his  eyes  satisfied  with  riches."  There  he  is  alone  with  his  money  I 
Nothing  in  all  the  world  is  bo  precious,  so  essential  to  man  as  the  love  and 
eonfidence  of  another  man.  Success  without  comradeship  is  a  poor  thing — ^it  ia 
Tanity;  there  is  nothing  in  it,  and  the  richest  miser  is  literally  miserable  for  want 
of  that  which  he  might  have  had  for  the  asking — love.  Look  for  the  last  time, 
he  says,  at  the  strange  vicissitudes  that  befall  even  the  highest  of  men.  A  king 
on  the  throne  has  many  flatterers,  but  no  friend.  Plots  are  hatched,  disaffection 
grows  to  a  head,  and  he  is  deposed.  His  young  kinsman  whom  he  in  his  jealousy 
has  kept  in  prison,  is  brought  out  with  tumult  of  applause.  All  follow  the  new 
king  I  Yes,  says  this  terrible  pessimist,  but  only  for  a  while.  They  will  tire  of 
him  also, — "  They  that  come  after  shall  not  rejoice  in  him."  He  too  will  be 
deposed  in  favour  of  some  other  popular  idol  of  the  moment.  Surely  all  is  vanity 
and  a  striving  after  wind.  So  far  the  spokesman  of  despair.  II.  But  now  in  the 
fifth  chapter  another  speaker — either  without  or  within  the  man — takes  up  his 
parable  and  champions  the  cause  of  faith  akd  hope.  He  does  not,  cannot 
indeed,  solve  all  the  difficulties,  or  meet  all  the  objections  that  the  other  has 
propounded.  Bather  he  gives  utterance  to  the  calm  precepts  of  old  experience;  ho 
re-affirms  with  conviction  what  the  good  have  said  in  every  age.  Granting  that 
life  is  full  of  mystery  and  has  much  that  is  sad  in  it,  he  lays  emphasis  on  the 
clearness  and  the  urgency  of  duty.  In  doing  right  alone  each  man  shall  find 
refuge  from  despair ;  he  shall  find  God  and  be  able  to  take  refuge  in  God  from  all 
the  pursuing,  harassing  mysteries  of  God's  government.  1.  "  Keep  thy  foot 
when  thou  goeet  to  the  house  of  God."  It  may  be  the  temple,  or  it  may  be  the 
little  rustic  synagogue,  but  it  is  ever  Beth-el,  the  house  of  God.  Go  to  it  rever- 
ently, prayerfully,  expectantly,  dutifully.  2.  Again,  study  to  be  quiet.  Until 
God  vouchsafe  thee  a  revelation,  be  thou  patient  and  obedient,  for  to  draw  nigh 
to  hear  (that  is  to  hear  His  orders — to  obey)  is  better  than  to  offer  the  sacrifice. 
8.  Finally,  be  sober-minded.  Try  to  see  life  steadily,  and  see  it  whole.  One 
Bwallow  does  not  make  a  summer,  nor  one  dead  leaf  a  winter;  nor  do  acts  of 
oppression  prove  that  the  whole  of  human  society  is  rotten.  No  doubt  bad  men 
exist  and  bad  things  are  done.     It  is  hard  to  catch  a  rogue — especially  if  he  be 

6  big  rogue,  but  everywhere  there  is  some  sort  of  government,  an  organized 
justice,  one  official  above  another  right  up  to  the  highest,  and  the  highest  of  all 
on  earth  exists  for  the  sake  of  protecting  the  lowest.  "  The  king  is  servant  to 
the  field."  No  doubt  it  is  often  very  imperfectly  administered,  nevertheless  law 
exists  on  earth,  and  in  the  main  justice  is  done;  and  all  earthly  law  and  earthly 
justice  are  but  dim  troubled  reflections  of  an  eternal  heavenly  law  and  a  divine 
justice  that  rule  over  all  things,  and  by  which  in  time  every  oppressed  one  will 
be  righted,  and  every  oppressor  receive  his  reward.  (/.  M,  Oibbon.)  The  words 
of  the  Preacher: — It  is  not  often  in  the  Bible  that  we  are  challenged  to  hear  the 
words  of  a  great  man,  viewed  from  an  earthly  standpoint.  He  is  represented 
as  "  king  in  Jerusalem  " — a  man  of  the  highest  social  position.  "We  cannot  but 
wonder  what  he  will  say,  seeing  that  he  has  only  seen  the  upper  side  of  life,  and 
can  have  known  nothing  of  what  the  poor  understand  by  want,  homelessness, 
and  all  the  degradation  of  penury  and  an  outcast  condition.  "  Vanity  of  vanities, 
saith  the  Preacher,  vanity  of  vanities;  all  is  vanity"  (ver.  2).  "Vanity," — a 
light  wind,  a  puff,  a  breath  that  passes  away  instantly.  Here  we  have  a  judg- 
ment in  brief.  We  long  to  enter  into  some  detail,  if  not  of  argument  yet  of 
illustration,  especially  as  this  is  one  of  the  short  sentences  which  a  man  might 
speak   hastefully  rather  than  critically   and   experimentally.     We   must  ask  the 


.  1.3  ECCL'ESIASTES. 


Preacher,  therefore,  to  go  somewhat  into  detail,  that  we  may  see  upon  what 
premisea  he  has  constructed  so  large  a  conclusion.  He  says  that  life  is  unprofit- 
able in  the  sense  of  being  unsatisfying.  It  comes  to  nothing.  The  eye  and  the 
ear  want  more  and  more.  The  eye  takes  in  the  whole  sky  at  once,  and  could 
take  in  another  and  another  hour  by  hour, — at  least  so  it  seems;  and  the  ear  is 
like  an  open  highway, — all  voices  pass,  no  music  lingers  so  as  to  exclude  the  next 
appeal.  In  addition  to  all  this,  whatever  we  have  in  the  hand  melts.  Gold  and 
eUver  dissolve,  and  nought  of  our  proud  wealth  remains.  Much  wants  more,  and 
mora  brings  with  it  care  and  pain;  eo  the  wheel  swings  endlessly,  always  going 
to  bring  something  next  time,  but  never  bringing  it.  Goheleth  says  that  there  is 
no  continuance  in  life :  "  One  generation  passeth  away,  and  another  generation 
cometh."  You  no  sooner  know  a  man  than  he  dies.  You  make  your  election 
in  the  human  crowd,  saying.  My  heart  shall  rest  here;  and  whilst  the  flush  of 
joy  is  on  your  cheek,  the  loved  one  is  caught  away,  like  the  dew  of  the  morning. 
People  enough,  and  more  than  enough, — crowds,  throngs,  whole  generations, 
passing  on  as  shadows  pass,  \mtil  death  is  greater  than  life  upon  the  earth. 
Goheleth  says  that  even  nature  itself  became  monotonous  through  its  always 
being  the  same  thing  in  the  same  way,  as  if  incapable  of  originality  and  enter- 
prise. The  wind  was  veering,  veering,  veering, — spending  itself  in  running  round 
and  roimd,  but  never  getting  beyond  a  small  circuit;  if  it  was  not  in  the  north 
it  was  in  the  south,  or  wherever  it  was  it  could  be  found  in  a  moment,  for  it 
"  whirleth  about  continually."  So  with  the  rivers.  They  could  make  no  impres- 
sion upon  the  sea :  they  galloped,  and  surged,  and  foamed,  being  swollen  by  a 
thousand  streams  from  the  hills;  and  yet  the  sea  swallowed  them  up  in  its  thirst, 
and  waited  for  them  day  by  day,  with  room  enough  and  to  spare  for  all  their 
waters.  The  eye,  the  ear,  the  sea,  there  was  no  possibility  of  satisfying, — 
prodigals  and  spendthrifts  I  And  the  sun  was  only  a  repetition,  rising  and  going 
down  evermore.  Goheleth  further  says  that  there  is  no  real  variety  in  life.  "  The 
thing  that  hath  been,  it  is  that  which  shall  be,"  etc.  Man  longs  for  variety, 
and  cannot  secure  it.  The  same  things  are  done  over  and  over  again.  Ghanges 
are  merely  accidental,  not  organic.  All  things  are  getting  to  be  regarded  as  stale 
and  slow.  New  colom-s  are  only  new  mixtures.  New  fashions  are  only  old  ones 
modified.  In  short,  there  is  nothing  new  tmder  the  sxm.  "  Is  there  any  thing 
whereof  it  may  be  said.  See,  this  is  new?  it  hath  been  already  of  old  time,  which 
was  before  tis."  New  things  are  promised  in  the  apocalyptic  day  (Bev.  xxi.  1). 
It  will  be  foimd  in  the  long  run  that  the  only  possible  newness  is  in  character,  in 
the  motive  of  life  and  its  supreme  purpose  (2  Cor.  t.  17).     (/.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Yer.  2.  Vanity  of  yanities,  saitli  the  Preacher,  vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity. — 

The  vaniiy  of  the  toorli:— Gertainly,  he,  who  had  riches  as  plentiful  as  the  stones 
of  the  street  (1  Kings  z.  27),  and  wisdom  as  large  as  the  sand  of  the  sea  (1  Kings 
iv.  29),  could  want  no  advantages,  either  to  try  experiments,  or  draw  conclusions 
from  them  (Eccles.  i.  16,  17).  Now  this  reflection  of  the  same  word  upon  itself 
is  always  used  to  signify  the  height  cmd  greatness  of  the  thing  expressed,  as 
King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  denotes  the  highest  King  and  the  most  absolute 
Lord.  But,  though  this  be  expressed  in  most  general  and  comprehensive  terms, 
yet  it  must  not  be  taken  in  the  utmost  latitude,  as  if  there  were  nothing  at  all 
of  solid  and  real  good  extant.  It  is  enough,  if  we  imderstand  the  words  in  a 
sense  restrained  to  the  subject  matter  whereof  he  here  treats.  For  the  wise  man 
himself  exempts  the  fear  and  service  of  God  (Eccles.  xii.  13)  from  that  vanity  under 
which  he  had  concluded  all  other  things.  When,  therefore,  he  pronounceth  all  to 
be  vanity,  it  must  be  meant  of  all  worldly  and  earthly  things;  for  he  speaks  only 
of  these.  For  these  things,  though  they  make  a  fair  and  gaudy  show,  yet  it  is 
all  but  show  and  appearance.  It  sparkles  with  ten  thousand  glories  :  not  that 
they  are  so  in  themselves;  but  only  they  seem  so  to  us  through  the  false  light,  by 
which  we  look  upon  them.  If  we  come  to  grasp  it,  like  a  thin  film,  it  breaks,  and 
leaves  nothing  but  wind  and  disappointment  in  otir  hands.  The  subject  which  I 
have  propounded  to  discourse  of  is  this  vanity  of  the  world,  and  of  all  things  here 
below.  "Whence  is  it  that  we  are  become  so  degenerate,  that  we,  who  have 
immortal  and  heaven-born  souls,  should  stake  them  down  to  these  perishing 
enjoyments?  I.  I  shall  premise  these  two  or  three  things: — 1.  There  is  nothing 
in  the  world  vain  in  respect  of  its  natural  being.  "Whatsoever  God  hath  made  is, 
in  its  kind,  good  (Gen.  i.  31).  And  therefore  Solomon  must  not  be  here  so 
ioterpreted,  as  if  he  disparaged  the  works  of  God  in  pronouncing  them  all  vanity. 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAf.  i. 


If  we  regard  the  wonderful  artifice  and  wisdom  that  shines  forth  in  the  frame  of 
nature,  we  cannot  have  so  unworthy  a  thought,  either  of  the  world  itself,  or  of 
God  who  made  it.     2.  There  is  nothing  vain  in  respect  of  God  the  Creator.     He 
makes  His  ends  out  of  all ;  for  they  all  glorify  Him  according  to  their  several  ranks 
and  orders ;  and  to  rational  and  considerate  men  are  most  evident  demonstrations 
of  His  infinite  Being,  wisdom,  and  power.     3.  All  the  vanity  that  is  in  worldly 
things  ifl  only  in  respect  of  the  sin  and  folly  of  man.     For  those  things  are  said  to 
be  vain  which  neither  do  nor  can  perform  what  we  expect  from  them.     Our  great 
expectation  is  happiness;  and  our  great  folly  is,  that  we  think  to  obtain  it  by  the 
enjoyments  of  this  world.     They  are  all  of  them  leaky  and  broken  cisterns,  and 
cannot  hold  this  living  water.    This  is  it  which  makes  them  charged  with  vanity. 
There  are  some  things,  as  St.  Austin  and  the  schools  from  him  do  well  distinguish, 
which  must  be  only  enjoyed,  other  things  that  must  be  only  used.     To  enjoy,  is 
to  cleave  to  an  object  by  love,  for  its  own  sake;  and  this  belongs  only  to  God. 
What  we  use,  we  refer  to  the  obtaining  of  what  we  desire  to  enjoy;  and  this 
belongs  to  the  creatures.     So  that  we  ought  to  use  the  creatmres  that  we  may 
arrive  at  the  Creator.     We  may  serve  ourselves  of  them,  but  we  must  alone  enjoy 
Him.     Now  that  which  makes  the  whole  world  become  vanity  is  when  we  break 
this  order  of  use  and  fruition;  when  we  set  up  any  particular  created  good  as  our 
end  and  happiness,  which  ought  only  to  be  used  as  a  means  to  attain  it.     II.  It 
remains,  therefore,  to  display  before  you  this  vanity  of  the  world  in  some  more 
remarkable  particulars.     1.  The  vanity  of  the  world  appears  in  this,  that  all  its 
glory  and  splendour  depends  merely  upon  opinion  and  fancy.     What  were  gold 
and  silver,  had  not  men's  fancy  stamped  upon  them  an  excellency  far  beyond 
their  natural  usefulness?     This  great  idol  of  the  world  was  of  no  value  among 
f  those   barbarous  nations,  where  abundance  made  it  vile.     They   preferred   glass 
■•      and  beads  before  it;   and  made  that  their  treasure  which  we  make  our  scorn. 
■^^^       Should  the  whole  world  conspire  together  to  depose  gold  and  silver  from  that 
j*         sovereignty  they  have  usurped  over  us,  they  might  for  ever  lie  hid  Ln  the  bowels 
of  the  earth  ere  their  true  usefulness  would  entice  any  to  the  pains  and  hazard 
of  digging  them  out  into  the  light.     Indeed,  the  whole  use  of  what  we  so  much 
dote  upon  is  merely  fantastical;  and,  to  make  ourselves  needy,  we  have  invented 
-an  artificial  kind  of  riches;  which  are  no  more  necessary  to  the  service  of  sober 
nature    than    jewels    and    bracelets    were    to    that    plane-tree    which    Xerxes    so 
ridiculously  adorned.     These  precious  trifles,  when  they  are  hung  about  us,  make 
no  more  either  to  the  warmth  or  defence  of  the  body  than,  if  they  were  hung 
upon  a  tree,  they  could  make  its  leaves  more  verdant,  or  its  shade  more  refreshing. 
Doth  any  man  lie  the  softer  because  his  bed-posts  are  gilt?     Doth  his  meat  and 
drink  relish  the  better,  because  served  up  in  gold?     Is  his  house  more  convenient, 
because  better   carved   or  painted?     It  is   nothing   but   conceit  that   makes   the 
difference  between  the  richest  and  the  meanest,   if  both  enjoy  necessaries  :   for 
what  are  all  their  superfluous  riches,  but  a  load  that  men's  covetousness  lays 
upon  them?     Thy  lands,  thy  houses,  and  fair  estate  are  but  pictures  of  things. 
What  are  gold  and  silver  but  diversified  earth,  hard  and  shining  clay?     Think,  O 
worldling  I  when  thou  castest  thy  greedy  eyes  upon  thy  riches,  think,  "  Here  are 
bags  that  only  fancy  hath  filled  with  treasin-e,  which  else  were  filled  with  dirt. 
Here  are  trifles  that  only  fancy  hath  called  jewels,  which  else  were  no  better 
than  common  pebbles.     And  shall  I  lay  the  foundation  of  my  content  and  happi- 
ness upon  a  fancy;  a  thing  more  light  and  wavering  than  the  very  air?"     Nay, 
consider,  that  a  distempered  fancy  can  easily  alter  a  man's  condition,  and  put 
what  shape  it  pleaseth  upon  it.     If  a  black  and  sullen  melancholy  seizeth  the 
spirits,  it  will  make  him  complain  of  poverty  in  the  midst  of  his  abundance;  of 
pain  and  sickness  in  the  midst  of  his  health  and  strength.     Again,  if  the  fancy  be 
more  merrily  perverted,  straight  they  are  nothing  less  than  kings  or  emperors  in 
their  own  conceit.     A  straw  is  as  majestic  as  a   sceptre.     If  then  there  be  so 
great  a  power  in  fancy,  how  vain  must  all  those  things  be  which  you  pursue 
with  eagerness  and  impatience  I  since  a  vain  fancy,  without  them,  can  give  you 
fto  much  satisfaction  as  if  you  enjoyed  them  all;  and  a  vain  fancy  can,  on  the 
other  hand,  in  the  greatest  abundance  of  them,  make  your  lives  as  wearisome 
and  vexatious  as  if  you  enjoyed  nothing.     2.   The  vanity  of  the  world  appears 
in  its  deceitfulness  and  treachery.     It  is  not  only  vanity,  but  a  lying  vanity; 
and  betrays  both  our  hopes  and  our  souls.     (1)  It  betrays  our  hopes,  and  leaves 
us  nothing  but  disappointment,   when   it   promiseth   satisfaction   and   happiness. 
(2)  It  betrays  the  soul  to  guilt  and  eternal  condemnation  :  for,  usually,  the  world 


chap;  l.l  ECCLESIASTES. 


entangles  it  in  strong,  though  secret  and  insensible  snares;  and  insinuates  into 
the  heart  that  love  of  itself  which  is  inconsistent  with  the  love  of  God.  The 
world  is  the  devil's  factor,  and  drives  on  the  designs  of  hell.  And,  because  of 
the  subserviency  of  worldly  enjoyments  to  men's  lusts,  it  is  almost  as  impossible  a 
thing  to  moderate  our  affections  towards  them,  or  to  bound  our  appetites  and 
desires,  as  it  is  to  assuage  the  thirst  of  a  dropsy  by  drinking,  or  to  keep  that  fire 
from  increasing  into  which  we  are  still  casting  new  fuel.  3.  As  all  things  in  the 
world  are  lying  vanities,  so  are  they  all  vexatious — "  uncertain  comforts,  but 
most  certain  crosses."  (1)  There  is  a  great  deal  of  turmoil  and  trouble  in  getting 
them.  Nothing  can  be  acquired  without  it.  (2)  Whether  they  get  them  or  no, 
yet  still  they  are  disappointed  in  their  hopes.  The  truth  is,  the  world  is  much 
better  in  show  than  substance;  and  those  very  things  we  admire  before  we  enjoy 
them,  yet  afterward  we  find  much  less  in  them  than  we  expected.  (3)  They  are 
all  vexation  while  we  enjoy  them.  (4)  They  are  all  vexatious,  as  in  their  enjoy- 
ment, so  especially  in  their  loss.  4.  The  vanity  of  the  world  appears  in  this,  that 
a  little  cross  will  embitter  great  comforts.  One  dead  fly  is  enough  to  corrupt  a 
whole  box  of  the  world's  most  fragrant  ointment.  The  least  cross  accident  is 
enough  to  discompose  all  our  delights.  And,  besides,  we  are  apt  to  slide  off  from 
the  smoother  part  of  our  lives,  as  flies  from  glass,  and  to  stick  only  on  the  rougher 
passages.  5.  The  longer  we  enjoy  any  worldly  thing,  the  more  flat  and  insipid 
doth  it  grow.  We  are  soon  at  the  bottom,  and  find  nothing  but  dregs,  there* 
6.  All  the  pleasure  of  the  world  is  nothing  else  but  a  tedious  repetition  of.  the 
same  things.  Our  life  consists  in  a  round  of  actions;  and  what  can  be  duller 
than  still  to  be  doing  the  same  things  over  and  over  again?  7.  The  vanity  of 
the  world  appears  in  this,  that  it  can  stand  us  in  no  stead  then  when  we  have 
the  greatest  need  of  support  and  comfort.  Now  in  each  of  these  the  world  shows 
itself  to  be  exceeding  vain  and  useless.  (1)  The  world  appears  to  be  vain  when 
we  are  under  trouble  of  conscience.  (2)  The  world  is  a  vain  and  useless  thing 
at  the  hour  of  death.  8.  All  things  in  the  world  are  vain,  because  they  are 
unsuitable.  True,  indeed,  they  are  suited  to  the  necessities  of  the  body,  and 
serve  to  feed  and  clothe  that;  but  he  is  a  beast,  or  worse,  that  reckons  himself 
provided  for,  when  only  his  bodily  wants  are  supplied.  Have  we  not  all  of  us 
precious  and  immortal  souls  capable  and  desirous  of  happiness?  Do  not  these 
crave  to  be  satisfied?  There  is  a  threefold  unsuitableness  between  worldly  things 
and  the  soul.  (1)  The  soul  is  spiritual :  these  are  drossy  and  material.  And 
what  then  hath  a  spiritual  soul  to  do  with  clods  of  earth  or  acres  of  land;  with 
barns  full  of  corn,  or  bags  full  of  gold?  These  are  too  thick  and  gross  to  corre^ 
spond  with  its  refined  nature.  (2)  The  soul  is  immortal;  but  all  worldly  things 
are  perishing,  and  wear  out  in  the  using.  (3)  The  necessities  of  the  soul  are 
altogether  of  another  kind  than  those  which  worldly  things  are  able  to  supply : 
and  therefore  they  are  wholly  unsuitable.  Natural  things  may  well  serve  foB 
natural  wants  :  food  will  satisfy  hunger,  and  raiment  fence  off  the  injuries  of  the 
weather,  and  riches  will  procure  both;  but  the  soul's  necessities  are  spiritual,  and 
these  no  natural  thing  can  reach.  It  wants  a  price  to  redeem  it :  nothing  can 
do  this  but  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  It  wants  pardon  and  forgiveness : 
nothing  can  grant  it  but  the  free  and  abundant  mercy  of  God.  It  wants  sanctifica- 
tion  and  holiness,  comfort  and  assurance  :  nothing  can  effect  these  but  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Here  all  worldly  things  fall  short.  9.  The  vanity  of  the  world  appears 
in  its  inconstancy  and  fickleness.  God's  providence  administers  all  things  here 
below  in  perpetual  vicissitudes.  It  is  in  vain,  therefore,  to  expect  happiness  from 
what  is  so  uncertain.  All  the  comforts  of  it  are  but  like  fading  flowers,  that, 
while  we  are  looking  on  them  and  smelling  to  them,  die  and  wither  in  our  hands. 
Is  it  pleasures  we  seek?  These  must  vary;  for  where  there  is  not  an  intermission, 
it  is  not  pleasure,  but  a  glut  and  surfeit.  And  hence  it  is  that  they  who  are  used 
to  hardships  taste  more  sweetness  in  some  ordinary  pleasures  than  those,  who 
are  accustomed  to  a  voluptuous  life,  do  in  all  their  exquisite  and  Invented  delights. 
Do  you  pursue  honour  and  applause  in  the  world?  This  hangs  upon  the  wavering 
tongues  of  the  multitude.  Is  it  riches  you  desire?  These,  too,  are  uncertain 
(1  Tim.  vi.  17).  Uncertain  they  are  in  getting;  and  uncertain  in  keeping,  when 
got.  All  our  treasures  are  like  quicksilver,  which  strangely  slips  between  oui* 
fingers  when  we  think  we  hold  it  fastest.  10.  The  vanity  of  the  world  appears 
in  this,  that  it  is  altogether  unsatisfactory.  That  must  needs  be  vain  which,  when 
we  enjoy  it  in  its  greatest  abundance,  can  give  us  no  real  nor  solid  content.  Such 
»n  empty  thing  is  the  whole  world.     Now,  the  unsatisfactoriness  of  the   world 


i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbap.  I. 

maj  be  clearly  evinced  by  these  two  things.  (1)  In  that  the  highest  conditioa 
we  can  attain  unto  cannot  free  us  from  cares  and  crosses.  (2)  The  world  appears 
to  be  unsatisfactory,  in  that,  be  our  condition  what  it  will,  yet  still  we  deeira 
change.  And  the  reason  of  this  unsatisfactoriness  in  worldly  things  is,  becausa 
none  of  them  are  so  good  as  the  soul  is.  The  soul,  next  to  angels,  is  the  rery 
top  and  cream  of  the  whole  creation :  other  things  are  but  dregs  and  lees  com- 
pared to  it.  Now  that  which  is  our  happiness  must  be  better  than  ourselves;  foe 
it  must  perfect  us.  But  these  things  being  far  worse  and  inferior,  the  soul,  in 
cleaving  to  them,  is  secretly  conscious  that  it  abaseth  and  disparageth  itself;  and 
therefore  cannot  find  true  satisfaction.  Nothing  can  fill  the  soul  but  that  which 
eminently  contains  in  it  all  good.  III.  But,  whatever  our  observation«  are, 
the  USES  we  may  make  of  them  are  these.  1.  It  should  teach  us  to  admire  and 
adore  the  good  providence  of  God  to  His  children  in  so  ordering  it,  that  the  world 
should  be  thus  vain,  and  deal  so  ill  with  those  who  serve  it.  For,  if  it  were  no* 
BO  infamous  and  deceitful  as  it  is;  if  it  did  not  frustrate  and  disappoint  our 
hopes,  and  pay  us  with  vexation  when  it  promiseth  fruition  and  content,  what 
thinkest  thou,  0  Christian,  would  be  the  end  of  this?  would  any  one  think  ot 
God,  or  remember  heaven  and  the  life  to  come?  2.  If  the  vanity  of  the  world  b« 
such,  and  so  great;  if  it  be  only  an  empty  bubble;  if  it  be  thus  unsuitable, 
uncertain,  and  imsatisfactory,  as  I  have  demonstrated  to  you,  what  gross  folly 
then  are  most  men  guilty  of  in  setting  so  high  a  price  upon  that  which  ia  <rf 
no  worth  nor  substance?  More  particularly — (1)  Is  it  not  extreme  folly  to  lavish 
our  precious  affections  upon  vile  and  vain  objects?  (2)  If  the  world  be  thm 
vain,  what  folly  is  it  to  lay  out  our  most  serious  cares  tmd  contrivances  upon  itt 
(3)  If  the  world  be  thus  vain,  what  extreme  and  prodigious  folly  is  it  to  tak* 
as  much  pains  to  secure  the  poor  and  perishing  concernments  of  it  as  would 
suffice  to  secure  heaven  and  eternal  glory,  were  they  laid  out  that  way  I  (4)  M 
the  things  of  this  world  be  so  vain,  what  inexcusable  folly  is  it  to  part  with  ths 
peace  or  the  purity  of  omr  consciences  for  them  1  (6)  What  desperate  folly  ia  ik 
to  purchase  a  vain  world  with  the  loss  of  our  precious  souls  1  3.  If  the  world  be 
thus  vain  and  empty,  why  then  should  we  pride  ourselves  in  or  prize  ourselves 
by  any  poor  enjoyments  of  it?  4.  If  the  world  and  all  the  enjoyments  of  it  b« 
thus  vain,  this  should  fortify  us  against  the  fear  of  death;  which  can  deprive  os 
of  nothing  but  what  is  both  vain  and  vexatious.  S.  If  the  world  be  so  vain  and 
empty,  we  may  learn  to  be  well  contented  with  our  present  state  and  condition, 
whatsoever  it  be.  (E.  Hopkina,  D.D.)  Vanity  of  vanities: — This  is  the  key-nols 
of  the  book.  The  word  "  vanity  "  means  a  breath  of  wind,  and  thus  it  eome«  to 
mean  something  airy,  fictitious,  and  unsubstantial.  As  the  expression,  "holy  of 
holies  "  conveys  the  meaning  of  that  which  is  holy  beyond  every  other  thing,  so 
this  word  in  the  sense  of  emptiness  beyond  comparison  is  applied  by  the  writsr 
to  the  course  of  nature  and  to  the  work  of  man.  Again  and  again  he  takes  excor^  - 
sions  into  the  natural  world,  and  again  and  again  he  returns  to  the  old  refrain, 
"  Vanity  of  vanities;  all  is  vanity."  The  writer  of  these  words  felt  that  the  order 
of  the  world  was  out  of  joint.  But  language  like  this  has  been  more  often  used 
by  those  who  have  had  bitter  experience  of  life.  Human  nature  is  wont  to  turn 
round  upon  itself,  and  when  it  has  drunk  out  the  eup  of  indulgence  will  express 
disgust  of  gratifications  which  have  ceased  to  please.  "  Vanity  of  vanities  "  was 
the  speech  of  the  great  English  cardinal  as  he  lay  dying  and  reflected  that  he  had 
given  the  best  years  of  his  life  for  the  present  without  care  for  the  future.  This 
was  the  temper  of  the  language  ascribed  to  Prince  Louis  XIV.  of  France  when 
death  was  near  at  hand,  and  his  life  of  pleasantry  was  closing.  Vanity  of  vanities  t 
And  something  like  this  may  be  heard  in  more  than  one  London  household  at  this 
time  of  the  year  at  the  close  of  the  season.  Three  or  four  months  of  fatigue  have 
been  prepared  for  and  submitted  to  as  a  military  campaign  would  be  prepared  for. 
Time,  peace  of  mind,  health,  regular  hours  of  prayer,  have  been  sacrificed  to  tha 
pursuits  of  some  social  will-o'-the-wisp.  To  marry  this  daughter,  to  secure  this 
introduction,  to  achieve  more  distinction  than  others,  have  been  the  objects  before 
the  minds  of  many  And  now,  when  time  and  money,  health  and  temper  have 
been  sacrificed  and  nothing  achieved,  we  hear  in  modern  language  the  words  ol 
the  text  from  numbers  rushing  away  by  express  train  to  bury  their  disappointment 
in  coiintry  villages.  "Vanity  of  vanities  1"  This  earthly  life  cannot  possibly 
satisfy  a  being  like  man  if  it  be  lived  apart  from  God.  Apart  from  God,  wifldcxn 
leads  to  disappointment  and  lands  us  at  death  in  the  sublime  despair  of  philosophy. 
Apart  from  God.  wealth  and  all  that  it  can  command  yields  much  less  satisfaction 


.  I.]  ECCLESIASTES. 


thss  intellectual  achievement,  since  it  is  further  removed  from  the  higher  and 
imperishable  nature  of  man.  Apart  from  God,  Nature,  regarded  as  matter  inter* 
penetrated  by  force,  presents  nothing  on  which  man's  inmost  being  can  rest.  Hera 
we  have  only  cycles  of  laws  repeating  themselves  through  the  ages  with  » 
momentum  which  mocks  our  intellects.  Vanity,  emptiness,  and  disappointment 
are  traced  on  Nature,  on  wealth  and  thought.  As  a  matter  of  fact  man  does  no* 
find  in  either  real  satisfaction.  He  finds  only  a  wasting  fever  of  the  heart, 
nothing  which  makes  him  strong  for  life,  or  in  the  hour  of  approaching  death. . 
The  reason  is  plain.  All  that  belongs  to  earth  has  failure  in  it,  and  man's  life 
has  come  under  this  failure  as  well  as  Nature.  All  we  may  see  is  not  as  it  should 
be.  The  best  of  men  are  conscious  of  this.  The  telling  of  circumstance  against 
him,  the  tendency  downwards  of  which  he  is  conscious,  the  precautions  which  he 
takes  against  himself  in  the  shape  of  rule  and  law — all  these  things  tell,  and  tell 
truly,  of  some  big  catastrophe  from  which  human  life  has  suffered  in  its  deepest 
recesses.  Nature,  too,  with  its  weird  mysteries  speaks  to  the  same  effect.  Anid 
here  the  apostle  comes  to  our  aid  when  he  tells  us  that  '*  the  creature  was  made 
subject  to  vanity,  not  willingly,  but  by  reason  of  Him  who  hath  subjected  the 
same  in  hope."  He  also  says,  *'  The  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth 
together  in  pain  until  now."  Nature  has  on  it  this  certificate  of  failure.  Besidw 
this,  wealth  and  Nature  are  finite,  so  that  they  must  fail  to  satisfy  a  being  like 
man.  The  human  soul,  itself  finite,  is  made  for  the  Infinite.  The  soul  cannot 
comprehend  the  Infinite,  but  it  can  apprehend  the  Infinite.  In  the  inmost  source 
and  heart  of  man  God  has  placed  a  vast,  unfathomable  capacity  for  understanding 
Himself.  Man  can  think  of  a  Being  who  has  "  neither  beginning  of  days  nor  end 
of  years,"  who  "  inhabits  eternity,"  and  is  Himself  eternal.  And  as  man 
struggles  more  and  more  perfectly  to  apprehend  this  Being,  to  reach  Him,  to  enjoj 
Him,  to  possess  Him,  he  feels  that  the  counterpart  of  all  that  is  deepest  and 
most  mysterious  in  himself  is  the  eternal  world,  and  that  he  can  only  really 
be  satisfied  with  that,  and  with  nothing  else  or  less.  "  Thou  hast  made  us  foe 
Thyself,"  says  Augustine,  "  and  our  hearts  are  restless  \mtil  they  rest  in  Thee." 
Man  is  like  those  captives  of  whom  we  read  who,  once  having  believed  a  throne  to 
be  within  their  grasp,  have  never  settled  down  as  contented  subjects.  He  s 
predestined  for  an  unseen  magnificence;  and  therefore  when  he  turns  to  survey 
the  grandest  objects  that  woo  his  heart  in  this  earthly  life  he  can  exclaim,  not 
indeed  in  scorn,  but  in  a  spirit  of  religious  and  strictest  accuracy,  *'  Vanity  of 
'Vanities  1"  Once  more;  all  that  belongs  to  created  life  passes  quickly  away.  All 
around  is  vanishing.  "  One  generation  passeth  away  and  another  cometh,"  so 
says  the  Preacher.  "  Man  fades  away  like  the  grass,"  so  sings  the  psalmist. 
"  The  earthly  house  of  our  tabernacle  shall  be  dissolved,"  so  adds  one  apostle. 
"  The  heavens  shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise,  and  the  elements  shall  melt 
with  fervent  heat,"  so  proclaims  another  apostle.  Tea,  all  is  passing,  even  th« 
choice  fiuniture  of  the  human  mind  itself,  all  but  the  imperishable.  Personalitj 
with  its  moral  history  in  the  past  survives;  all  else  goes,  and  is  forgotten.  And 
therefore  it  is  because  Natiue  and  the  outer  husks  of  life  do  not  satisfy  that  they 
cannot  afford  a  stay  for  the  imperishable  soul  of  man.  "  Vanity  of  vanities!" 
be  exclaims  as  he  discovers  their  real  character.  But  to  this  way  of  regarding  the 
matter  there  is  an  objection.  Is  it  a  healthy  one?  Is  it  calculated  to  make  man 
do  his  duty  in  that  state  of  life  in  which  it  has  pleased  God  to  call  him?  Will  it 
help  him  to  do  his  duty  enthusiastically  and  thoroughly?  Is  he  not  likely  to 
fail,  and  to  make  life  responsible  for  the  failure?  To  this  I  say  that  human  effort 
is  only  vanity  when  it  is  pursued  without  reference  to  God.  Man's  capacities  are 
given  to  lead  him  to  God,  and  all  that  leads  to  Him,  so  far  from  being  vanity, 
is  lasting  and  substantial.  The  man  who  is  living  for  another  world  is  not  less 
ative  to  his  duties  here.  His  heart  has  followed  his  treasure;  his  citizenship 
is  already  in  heaven;  he  looks  at  "the  things  which  are  not  seen  ";  he  lives  nM 
"  a  stranger  and  pilgrim  " ;  he  is  but  a  soldier  on  campaign  duty.  All  that  comes 
in  bis  way  is  precious,  as  enabling  him  to  conquer  tne  enemy  and  to  reach  hi« 
borne.  (Canon  Liddon.)  The  vanity  of  earthly  things: — These  are  the  words 
of  a  wise  and  a  bold  preacher.  He  was  wise  in  seeing  that  which  men  in  general 
did  not  see;  and  he  was  bold  in  speaking  so  plainly  that  which  was  contrary 
to  the  general  opinion.  I.  The  vanity  of  earthly  things.  "All  is  vanity;" 
that  is,  all  things  are  so  in  themselves,  when  not  used  aright,  when  not  employed 
to  God's  glory,  or  to  the  benefit  of  those  aroimd  us,  or  in  reference  to  our  future 
and  everlasting  welfare.     We  may  proceed  to  a  practical  illustration  and  use  ci 


9  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i» 

this  declaration.  1.  Let  us  suppose  the  case  of  riches,  as  being  the  main  object  of 
a  man's  desire,  and  the  acquirement  of  them  the  great  business  of  his  life.  Nay, 
let  us  suppose  him  to  succeed — to  acquire  great  wealth — to  establish  his  house. 
But  if  this  man  be  without  religion,  what  is  it  all  more  than  vanity?  It  is  possible 
that  all  this  time  he  may  never  have  thought  about  his  soul;  his  soul  which  is 
more  valuable  than  all  the  world.  To  what  purpose  will  it  be  when  his  end  shall 
come?  What  will  his  wealth  do  for  him  in  the  day  of  account?  "  Ye  have  heaped 
treasure  together  for  the  last  days,"  and  what  is  it?  It  is  vanity,  a  vapour, 
emptiness  1  And  what  is  to  become  of  his  wealth?  He  must  "  leave  it  unto  the 
man  that  shall  be  after  him;  and  who  knoweth  whether  he  shall  be  a  wise  man  or 
a  fool?"  2.  As  to  human  learning.  It  is  true  that  learning,  and  ingenuity,  and 
wit  may  be  made  very  subservient  to  many  important  purposes ;  but  if  it  be  apart 
from  true  religion,  what  doth  it  profit?  Let  us  suppose  a  man  to  be  stored  with 
all  science,  and  philosophy,  with  the  knowledge  of  all  history,  and  of  every  art. 
But  if  he  have  not  the  knowledge  of  Christ;  if,  withal,  he  is  "  sensual  not  having 
the  spirit,"  what  matters  it?  We  have  seen  men  endowed  with  extraordinary 
talents,  great  in  research,  quick  in  understanding,  penetrating  in  intellect,  rich 
in  all  the  stores  of  recondite  wisdom,  versed  in  history,  and  as  far  as  we  can 
judge,  possessing  all  knowledge;  but  where  is  the  meekness  of  the  Christian?  where 
is  docility,  gentleness,  and  love?  3.  As  to  the  pleasures  of  life.  Let  a  man  have 
all  the  pleasure  arising  from  intercourse  with  polished  society,  from  rational 
conversation,  from  good  and  instructive  books,  from  travelling  at  home  and 
abroad,  from  various  domestic  recreations,  according  to  his  own  peculiar  turn  of 
mind;  yet,  what  does  all  this  profit  if  he  be  destitute  of  true  religion;  if  he  be 
living  to  himself  rather  than  to  God?  But  we  say,  what  will  all  this  avail,  if  its 
votary  or  possessor  be  destitute  of  true  religion  here,  and  miserable  and  undone 
in  another  world  I  4.  We  might  go  on  to  consider  eminence  of  station,  and 
elevated  rank,  and  reputation,  and  extensive  power,  and  commanding  influence, 
and  all  beside  that  men  are  accustomed  to  seek  after,  and  which  they  make  so 
many  sacrifices  to  obtain;  and  what  are  they  all  apart  from  true  religion? 
'*  Vanity  of  vanities."  Suppose  a  man  to  have  gained  all  the  reputation  and 
dignity  in  the  world,  what  will  it  avail  if  he  be  destitute  of  the  "  one  thing 
needful,"  if  he  have  not  sought  the  honour  that  cometh  from  God?  II.  What  is 
OUR  CHIEF  GOOD?  1.  I  would  direct  your  attention  to  those  true  riches,  the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.  2.  I  would  recommend  to  you  that  heavenly 
wisdom  by  which  you  will  be  made  wise  unto  salvation,  which  will  teach  you 
to  discharge  your  social  duties  aright,  and  which  will  conduct  you  in  safety  through 
all  the  difiBculties  of  life.  8.  I  would  all\u-e  you  to  those  pleasures  which  are 
for  evermore.  4.  I  would  lead  you  to  that  honour  and  praise  which  cometh  from 
God,  and  which  fadeth  not  away.  {J.  Maude.)  The  trial  of  vanity: — This  book 
begins  with,  "  All  is  vanity,"  and  ends  with,  "  Fear  God,  and  keep  His  com- 
mandments." From  that  to  this  should  be  every  man's  pilgrimage  in  this  world; 
we  begin  at  vanity,  and  never  know  perfectly  that  we  are  vain,  until  we  repent 
with  Solomon.  "  Fear  God,  and  keep  His  commandments  :  for  this  is  the  whole 
duty  of  man."  As  though  he  were  exceeding  glad,  that  after  so  many  dangers 
through  the  route  of  vanity,  yet  God  let  him  see  the  haven  of  rest.  The  whole 
narration  doth  show  that  Solomon  wrote  this  book  after  his  fall.  When  he  had 
the  experience  of  vanities,  and  seen  the  folly  of  the  world,  what  evil  comes  of 
pleasure,  and  what  fruit  groweth  of  sin,  he  was  bold  to  say,  "  Vanity  of  vanities," 
etc.;  which  he  avoucheth  with  such  a  protestation,  as  though  he  would  justify 
it  against  many  adversaries ;  for  all  the  world  is  in  love  with  that  which  he  calls 
vanity.  To  testify  his  hearty  conversion  unto  God,  he  calls  himself  a  preacher, 
in  the  witness  of  his  unfeigned  repentance;  as  if  God  had  said  unto  him,  "  Thou 
being  converted,  convert  thy  brethren,"  and  be  a  preacher,  as  thou  art  a  king. 
So  when  we  are  converted,  we  should  become  preachers  imto  others,  and  show 
some  fruits  of  our  calling,  as  Solomon  left  this  book  for  a  monument  to  all  ages 
of  his  conversion.  Thus  having  foimd  as  it  were  the  mine,  now  let  us  dig  for 
the  treasure,  "  Vanity  of  vanities,"  etc.  This  is  Solomon's  conclusion  :  when  he 
had  gone  through  the  whole  world,  and  tried  all  things,  like  a  spy  sent  into  a 
strange  country,  as  if  he  were  now  come  home  from  his  pilgrimage,  they  gather 
about  him  to  inquire  what  he  hath  heard  and  seen  abroad,  and  what  he  thinks  of 
the  world,  and  these  things  which  are  so  loved  among  men,  like  a  man  in  admira- 
tion of  that  which  he  had  seen,  and  not  able  to  express  particularly  one  after 
another,  he  contracts  his  news  into  a  word.     You  ask  me  what  I  have  seen,  and 


CHAP.  I.]  ECCLESTASTES. 


-what  I  have  kaar^.   "  Tanity,"  saith   Solomon.     And  what  ^tamf     "  Vanity  ti 

vanities."  And  what  else?  "  All  is  vanity."  This  is  the  history  of  my  voyage: 
I  have  seen  nothing  but  vanity  over  the  world.  So  the  fiu'ther  he  did  go,  the 
more  vanity  he  did  see,  and  the  nearer  he  looked  the  greater  it  seemed,  till  at 
last  he  could  see  nothing  but  vanity.  So  his  drift  is  to  show  that  man's  happiness 
is  not  in  these  things  which  we  count  of,  but  in  those  which  we  defer.  His  reason 
is,  they  are  all  vanity;  his  proof  is  because  there  ia  no  stability  in  them,  not 
contentation  of  mind;  his  concltision  is  therefore.  Contemn  the  world,  and  look  up 
to  heaven  from  whence  ye  came,  and  whither  ye  shall  go.  This  is  the  scope  which 
Solomon  aims  at,  as  though  we  did  all  seek  happiness,  but  we  go  a  wrong  way 
xmto  it;  therefore  he  soimd"*  a  retreat,  showing  that  if  we  hold  on  our  course, 
and  go  forwards  as  we  have  begun,  we  shall  not  find  happiness,  but  great  misery, 
because  we  go  by  vanity.  Now  Solomon,  full  of  wisdom,  and  schooled  with 
experience,  is  licensed  to  give  his  sentence  of  the  whole  world.  This  is  no 
reproach  to  the  things,  but  shame  to  him  which  so  abused  them,  that  all  things 
should  be  called  vanity  for  him.  If  he  did  not  things  vainly,  nothing  should  be 
vain  in  the  world;  whereas  now,  by  abuse,  we  may  see  sometimes  as  great  vanity 
in  the  best  things  as  in  the  worst.  For  are  not  many  vain  in  their  knowledge, 
vain  in  their  policies,  vain  in  their  learning,  as  others  are  vain  in  their  ignorance? 
A  spiritual  eye  doth  see  some  vanity  or  other  in  everything,  as  appeareth  betwixt 
Christ  and  His  disciples  at  Jerusalem  (Luke  xxi.  6;  Matt.  xxiv.  1).  They  gazed 
upon  the  building  of  the  temple  as  a  brave  thing,  and  would  have  Christ  to  behold 
it  with  them;  but  He  did  see  that  it  was  but  vanity,  and  therefore  said,  "Are 
these  the  things  that  ye  look  upon?"  As  if  He  should  say.  How  vain  are  you  to 
gaze  upon  this  I  If  Christ  thought  the  beauty  of  His  temple  a  vain  thing,  and 
not  worth  the  sight,  which  yet  was  beautified  and  built  by  His  own  prescription, 
how  should  Solomon  express  all  the  vanity  of  the  world,  to  which  all  men  have 
ftdded  more  and  more  since  the  beginning  I  Therefore  when  Solomon  beheld  such 
s  plurality,  and  tot  quot  of  vanities,  like  surges  coming  one  upon  another  in  plaits 
and  folds,  he  spake  as  though  he  would  show  us  vanity  hatching  vanities :  "  Vanity 
of  vanities,  all  is  vanity."  The  first  saying  doth  pass  without  let;  but  the  last 
rubs  and  sinks  not  into  the  hearts  of  men  so  easily  as  it  is  spoken.  Methinks  I 
hear  some  men  dispute  for  Baal,  and  bid  Solomon  stay  before  he  comes  to  "  all 
is  vanity."  It  may  be  that  sin  is  vanity,  and  pleasure  is  vanity;  but  shall  we 
condemn  tJl  for  sin  and  pleasure?  What  say  you  to  beauty,  which  is  nature's 
dowry,  and  cheereth  the  eye,  as  sweet  meat  doth  the  taste?  Beauty  is  like  a 
fair  picture;  take  away  the  colour,  and  there  is  nothing  left.  Beauty  indeed  is 
both  a  colour  and  a  temptation,  the  colour  fadeth  and  the  temptation  snareth. 
But  what  say  you  to  riches,  which  make  men  lords  over  the  rest,  and  allow  them 
to  go  brave,  and  lie  soft,  and  fare  daintily,  and  have  what  they  list?  Biches  are 
like  painted  grapes,  which  look  as  though  they  would  satisfy  a  man,  but  do  not 
slake  his  hunger,  nor  quench  his  thirst.  Biches  indeed  do  make  a  man  covet 
more,  and  get  envy,  and  keep  the  mind  in  care.  You  shall  hear  them  say  often* 
times,  It  is  a  vain  world,  a  wicked  world,  a  naughty  world,  yet  they  will  not 
forsake  it,  to  die;  like  dastard  soldiers,  who  rail  against  the  enemy,  but  dare  not 
fight  against  him.  "All  is  vanity;"  but  this  is  "vanity  of  vanities,"  that  men 
will  follow  that  which  they  condemn.  Oh  that  here  were  a  full  end  or  conclusion 
of  vanities;  but, behold  a  greater  vanity  is  behind;  for  our  religion  is  vanity,  like 
the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  having  a  bare  show  of  holiness,  and  scarce  that.  What 
then?  "  Turn  away  mine  eyes,"  and  my  ears  and  my  heart  too,  "  from  vanity." 
Try  and  prove  thou  no  longer,  for  Solomon  hath  proved  for  thee;  it  is  better 
to  believe  him  than  try  with  him.  (H.  Smith.)  The  folly  of  Solomon: — ^This  is 
the  substance  of  this  great  man's  last  estimate  of  life.  Tou  read  it,  and,  as  you 
read,  you  watch  the  writer  trying  to  fight  down  the  black  shadows  as  they  rise. 
Here  and  there  too,  all  through  his  sermon,  he  will  say  a  noble  thing  on  the  right 
side;  as  if  the  old  power  of  piety  was  strong  enough  yet  to  burn  through,  and  force 
its  way  to  the  parchment.  But,  when  the  beet  is  said  and  done,  the  result  is  a 
belief  in  a  God  who  exacts  more  than  He  gives,  and  pimishes  more  readily  than 
He  blesses.  And  so  it  is  that  this  woeful  estimate  of  life  has  made  this  book  by 
far  the  most  difficult  to  understand  in  the  whole  range  of  the  Scriptures.  Tha 
statements  in  it  are  as  positive  as  any  other.  Solomon  is  as  clear  when  he  says, 
"  Man  has  no  pre-eminence  over  a  beast,"  as  John  is  when  he  says,  "  Beloved, 
now  are  we  the  sons  of  God."  So  it  comes  to  pass,  that,  if  you  take  this  book 
»B  it  stands,  and  imdertake  to  believe  it,  the  result  is  very  lad.     It  chilli  all  pietj. 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

paralyzes  all  effort,  hushes  all  prayer.    If  there  is  grief  in  wisdom,  had  I  not 
better  be  a  fool?    It  cannot  be  denied,  again,  that  the  booli  is  but  the  vocal  utter- 
ance of  many  a  silent  sermon  in  many  a  lonely  heart.     It  was  this,  no  doubt,  that 
made  it  the  text-book  of  Voltaire  and  the  bosom  friend  of  Frederick  the  Great. 
Its  monotones  of  despair  are  echoed  out  of  a  thousand  experiences.     When  a  friend 
wished  a  great  English  statesman  a  happy  new  year,  "Happy  I"  he  said;   "it 
had  need  be  happier  than  the  last,  for  in  that  I  never  knew  one  happy  day." 
When  an  English  lawyer,  whose  life  had  seemed  to  be  one  long  range  of  success, 
mounted  the  last  step  in  his  profession,  he  wrote,  "  I  in  a  few  weeks  shall  retire 
to  dear  Encombe,  as  a  short  resting-place  between  vexation  and  the  grave."    When 
one  said  to  the  great  Eothschild,  "  You  must  be  a  happy  man,"  he  replied,  "  I 
sleep  with  pistols   under  my  pillow."     The  most  brilliant  man  of  the  world  in 
the  eighteenth  century  said,  "  I  have  enjoyed  all  the  pleasures  of  life,  and  I  do  not 
regret  their  loss;  I  have  been  behind  the  scenes,  and  seen  the  coarse  pulleys  and 
ropes  and  tallow-candles."     And  the  most  brilliant  poet  of  the  last   generation 
said,  "  The  lapse  of  ages  changes  all  but  man,  who  ever  has  been,  and  will  be,  an 
unlucky  rascal."     Now,   then,   for  all  this,  I   have  but  one  answer.     I  cannot 
believe  it.     In  the  deepest  meaning  of  the  truth  and  the  life,  this  assertion  that 
all  is  vanity   is  utterly   untrue.     God  never   meant  life   to   be   vanity;   and  life 
is  not  vanity.     And  that  we  are  right  and  all  such  men  wrong  can  be  proven, 
I    tlnkik,    outside    our    own    experience,    on    several    different    counts,     1.  For, 
first    of    all,    this    Solomon    is    not    the    right    man    to    testify.     When    he    said 
this  of  life,  he  was  in  no  condition  to  tell  the  truth  about  it,  and  he  did  not  tell 
the  truth.     Universal  testimony  makes  this  sermon  the  fruit  of  his  old  age.     If 
his  book  was  the  work  of  Solomon's  old  age,  the  fact  of  itself  supplies  the  "first 
reason  why  we  have  such  a  sermon;  for  the  man  who  wrote  this  sermon,  and  the 
youth  who  offered  that  noble  prayer  at  the  dedication  of  the  temple,  are  not  the 
same  man.     The  young  king  knelt  down  in  the  bloom  of  his  youth,  when  the 
fountains  of  life  were  pure  and  clean;  when  through  and  through  his  soul  great 
floods  of  power  and  grace  rose  to  springtide  every  day;  when  the  processions  o£ 
nature  and  providence,  the  numbers  of  the  poet,  the  wisdom  of  the  sage,  the 
labours  of  the  reformer,  and  the  sacrifices  of  the  patriot,  were  steeped  for  him  in 
their  rarest  beauty,   endowed   with  their  loftiest   meaning,  and  filled  with  their 
uttermost  power.     But  that  old  king  in  the  palace,  writing  his  sermon,  is  weary 
and  worn;  and,  worst  of  all,  the  clear  fountains  of  his  nature  are  changed  to 
puddles;  the  fresh,  strong  life  has  been  squandered  away;  the  delicate,  divine 
perception  blunted,  clogged,   and  at  last  smothered  to  death.     Can   we  wonder 
that  such  a  man  should  write  "all  is  vanity,"   when  he  had  come  to  be  the 
vanity  he  wrote?     Believe  me,  we  cannot  form  the  true  estimate  when  the  life 
is  ruined.     What  he  said  when  he  was  his  best  self,  before  his  ruin,  was  true; 
and  the  estimate  he  made,  when  he  was  a  lower  man,  was  as  much  out  of  true 
as  the  man  was.     2.  Then  there  was  an  error  in  this  man's  method  of  testing 
life,  that  I  suspect  to  be  at  the  root  of  much  of  the  weariness  that  is  still  felt; 
and  that  is,  the  man  does  not  seem  to  have  tried  to  be  happy,  in  making  others 
happy,  in  bringing  one  gleam  more  of  gladness,  or  one  pulse  more  of  life,  into 
any  soul   save  his  own.     In  the  sad  days  recorded  here,  nature,   books,   men, 
women,  were  worth  to  him  just  what  they  could  do  for  him.     He  gave  up  the 
present  sense  of  God  in  the  soul;  the  high  uses  of  worship;  the  inspiration  hidden 
in  great  books;  the  deep  blessedness  of  being  father,  husband,  friend,  teacher, 
patriot,  and  reformer;  buried  himself  in  his  harem;  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  all  the 
pleadings  of  his  better  angel;  and,  when  he  had  come  to  this,  who  can  wonder 
that  all  was  vanity?    3.  But  now  I  must  state  the  reason,  that  to  me  is  greatest 
of  all,  why  I  know  all  is  not  vanity.    A  thousand  years  after  this  sad  sermon  was 
written,  there  was  born  of  the  same  great  line  another  little  Child.     He  had  no 
royal  training,  no  waiting  sceptre,  no  kingly  palace,  but  the  tender  nurture  of  a 
noble  mother,  and,  from  the  first,  a  wonderful  nearness  to  God, — and  that  was 
all.     He  grew  up  in  a  coiontry  town  that  had  become  a  proverb  of  worthlessness. 
The  good  He  knew,  and  the  bad  He  knew,  as  I  suppose  it  was  never  known  before. 
The  hwasn  heart  was  laid  bare  before  Him  down  to  its  deepest  recesses.     None 
ever  felt,  as  He  did,  the  curse  of  sin,  or  had  such  a  perfect  loyalty  and  love  for 
holiness.     Nature,   Providence,   Heaven,   and   Hell   were   actual   presences,   solid 
certainties  to  His  deep,  true  sight.    Listen  while  I  try  the  ring  of  a  few  sentences 
from  each  of  them.     "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity,"  cries  the  first  preacher. 
**  Blessed  are  the  poor,  blessed  are  the  mourners,  blessed  are  the  quiet,  blessed 


CHIP.  1.]  ECCLESIASTES.  iV 

— — \ 

are  the  hungry  for  the  right,  blessed  are  the  giving  and  forgiving,  blessed  are  tha 
pure-hearted,  blessed  are  the  peace-makers,  and  blessed  are  the  siiSerers  for  tha 
right,"  cries  the  second.  "  Be  not  righteous  overmuch,"  cries  the  first.  *'  Ba 
ye  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect,"  cries  the  second.  **  That 
which  befalleth  a  beast,  befalleth  a  man,"  cries  the  first.  "The  very  hairs  of 
your  head  are  numbered,"  cries  the  second.  "  There  is  no  knowledge,  nor  wisdom, 
nor  device  in  the  grave,"  cries  the  first.  "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you;  and 
I  will  come  again,  and  take  you  to  Myself,  that  where  I  am  there  ye  may  be 
also,"  cries  the  second.  This  last  preacher  tested  life  also.  Whatever  can  be 
done  to  prove  all  is  vanity,  was  done  to  Him.  Giving  out  blessing,  getting  back 
ciursing.  Surely,  if  ever  man  would  write  "  Vanity  of  vanities  "  over  life,  this 
was  the  man  to  do  it.  God  was  to  Him  the  Father.  The  future  life  was  more  of 
a  reality  than  the  present.  He  saw  Tesurgam  written  over  every  grave,  and  could 
see  past  sorrow  and  pain,  the  perfect  end,  and  say,  "Of  all  that  My  Father  has 
given  Me,  I  have  lost  nothing:  He  will  raise  it  up  at  the  last  day."  Then,  if  I 
cannot  see  heaven  of  myself,  let  me  look  at  it  through  His  eyes.  If  earth  grows 
empty  and  worthless  to  me,  let  me  believe  in  what  it  was  to  Him,  and  be  suro 
that  He  is  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life;  so,  holding  fast  by  faith  in  Him, 
I  may  come  at  last  to  a  faith  in  earth,  and  heaven,  and  life,  and  the  life  to  come, 
and  all  that  is  most  indispensable  to  the  soul.  If  I  cannot  pray  because  I  see  no 
reason,  then  that  bended  figure  on  Olivet  is  my  reason.  If  I  cannot  distinguish 
between  fate  and  providence,  let  me  rejoice  that  He  can,  and  that  my  blindness 
can  make  no  difference  to  His  blessing.     {R,   Collyer.)     All   i$   vanity: — I.  Im 

WHAT    SENSE    WE    ARE    TO    UNDERSTAND    THAT    ALL    IS    VANITT.      The    Preacher    is    UOt 

speaking  of  religious  practices,  or  of  any  actions  immediately  commanded  of  God, 
or  directly  referred  to  Him;  but  of  such  employments  as  we  pursue  by  choice, 
and  such  works  as  we  perform  in  hopes  of  a  recompense  in  the  present  life;  such 
as  fiatter  the  imagination  with  pleasing  scenes,  and  probable  increase  of  temporal 
felicity;  of  this  he  determines  that  all  is  vanity,  and  every  hour  confirms  hia 
determination.  The  event  of  all  human  endeavours  is  uncertain.  He  that  plants  i 
may  gather  no  fruit;  he  that  sows  may  reap  no  harvest.  Even  the  most  simple 
operations  are  liable  to  miscarriage,  from  causes  which  we  cannot  foresee;  and 
if  we  could  foresee  them,  cannot  prevent.  The  rain  and  the  wind  he  cannot 
command;  the  caterpillar  he  cannot  destroy,  and  the  locust  he  cannot  drive 
away.  But  these  eSects,  which  require  only  the  concurrence  of  natural  causes, 
though  they  depend  little  upon  human  power,  are  yet  made  by  Providence  regulaw 
and  certain,  in  comparison  with  those  extensive  and  complicated  imdertaklngs, 
which  must  be  brought  to  pass  by  the  agency  of  man,  and  which  require  the  union 
of  many  understandings,  and  the  co-operations  of  many  hands.  The  history  of 
mankind  is  little  else  than  a  narrative  of  designs  which  have  failed,  and  hopes 
that  have  been  disappointed.  To  find  examples  of  disappointment  and  uncer* 
tainty,  we  need  not  raise  our  thoughts  to  the  interests  of  nations,  nor  follow  tha 
warrior  to  the  field,  or  the  statesman  to  the  coimcil.  The  little  transactions  of 
private  families  are  entangled  with  perplexities;  and  the  hovirly  occurrences  of 
common  life  are  filling  the  world  with  discontent  and  complaint.  The  labours  of 
man  are  not  only  uncertain,  but  imperfect.  If  we  perform  what  we  designed, 
we  yet  do  not  obtain  what  we  expected.  II.  How  pab  the  conviction  that  all 
18  VANITY  OUGHT  TO  INFLUENCE  THE  CONDUCT  OP  LIFE.  Human  actiouB  may  be 
distinguished  into  various  classes.  Some  are  actions  of  duty,  which  can  never 
be  vain,  because  God  will  reward  them.  Yet  these  actions,  considered  as  terminat- 
ing in  this  world,  will  often  produce  vexation.  There  are  likewise  actions  of 
necessity ;  these  are  often  vain  and  vexatious ;  but  such  is  the  order  of  the  world, 
that  they  cannot  be  omitted.  He  that  will  eat  bread  must  plough  and  sow. 
What  then  is  the  influence  which  the  conviction  of  this  unwelcome  truth  ought  to 
have  upon  our  conduct?  It  ought  to  teach  us  humility,  patience,  and  diffidence. 
The  consideration  of  the  vanity  of  all  human  purposes  and  projects,  deeply 
impressed  upon  the  mind,  necessarily  produces  that  diflBdence  in  all  worldly  good, 
which  is  necessary  to  the  regulation  of  our  passions,  and  the  security  of  our 
innocence.  He  does  not  rashly  treat  another  with  contempt  who  doubts  tha 
duration  of  his  own  superiority :  he  will  not  refuse  assistance  to  the  distressed 
who  supposes  that  he  may  quickly  need  it  himself.  He  will  not  fix  his  fond 
hopes  upon  things  which  he  knows  to  be  vanity,  but  will  enjoy  this  world  as  one 
who  knows  that  he  does  not  possess  it.     III.  What  consequences  the  serious 

AND   KBUOIOUI    HIND    UAT   DRAW    FROM   THB   POSITION,   THAT   ALL   IS    TANITT.      When, 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  %, 

the  present  state  of  man  is  considered,  when  an  estimate  is  made  of  his  hopes^ 
his  pleasures,  and  his  possessions;  when  his  hopes  appear  to  be  deceitful,  his 
labours  inefEectual,  his  pleasures  unsatisfactory,  and  his  possessions  fugitive,  it  is 
natural  to  wish  for  an  abiding  city,  for  a  state  more  constant  and  permanent,  of 
which  the  objects  may  be  more  proportioned  to  our  wishes,  and  the  enjoyments 
to  our  capacities;  and  fiom  this  wish  it  is  reasonable  to  infer  that  such  a  state 
is  designed  for  us  by  that  Infinite  Wisdom,  which,  as  it  does  nothing  in  vain,  has 
not  created  minds  with  comprehensions  never  to  be  filled.  (John  Taylor,  LL.D.) 
It  all  vanity  1 — ^How  are  we  to  regard  this  utterance  as  to  the  "  vanity  "  of  all 
things,  the  "  profitless  "  character  of  human  labour,  the  wearisome  monotony 
of  the  world?  Must  we  indorse  it,  because  we  find  it  here  in  the  Bible?  Or, 
must  we,  on  the  other  hand,  condemn  it  and  denounce  it,  as  if  it  contained  no 
truth  whatever?  I  submit  that  we  need  do  neither.  We  may  believe  that 
Ecclesiastes  had  been  taught  by  his  own  experience  some  valuable  lessons  as  to 
the  practical  conduct  of  life,  and  that  he  was  able  to  give  some  very  wise  counsel 
to  those  younger  than  himself;  and  yet  we  may  also  believe  that  this  wisdom  was 
dearly  bought,  and  that  his  outlook  on  the  world,  when  he  became  "  a  sadder 
and  a  wiser  man,"  was  largely  coloured  by  his  own  past  conduct.  A  msm  who 
outgrows  his  sins  and  follies  may  not  always  outgrow,  in  this  world,  all  their 
consequences.  A  penitent  profligate  may  be  able  to  give  us  very  sound  advice; 
but  it  does  not  follow  that  his  estimate  of  human  a^airs  is  altogether  accurate 
and  healthful.  We  are  not  boimd  to  indorse  the  view  which  regards  all  things 
"  under  the  sun  "  as  simply  presenting  the  aspect  of  a  vain  and  wearisome 
monotony;  but  we  may  learn  wisdom  from  the  fact  that  even  the  outlook  of  a 
religious  man  may  be  coloured  by  a  long  oourse  of  previous  irreligion  and  worldli- 
ness.  Whilst,  however,  we  are  not  bound  to  indorse  this  melancholy  estimate  of 
Ecclesiastes,  and  whilst  we  may  regard  it  as  coloured  and  exaggerated  by  the 
weariness  begotten  of  his  former  life,  we  need  not  denoimce  or  condenm  it  as  if  it 
were  simply  the  utterance  of  a  morose  pessimism  or  a  sated  worldliness.  There 
is  an  element  of  profouiid  truth  in  this  estimate  of  the  things  "  seen  and 
temporal."  A  Christian  apostle  tells  us  that  "the  creature  was  made  subject  to 
vanity,"  and  to  "  the  bondage  of  corruption."  Another  Christian  apostle  reminds 
us  that  "  the  world  passeth  away  and  the  lust  thereof  " — "  the  lust  of  the  flesh, 
the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life."  Thomas  &  Eempis,  in  his  "  Imitation 
of  Christ,"  tells  us  that  "all  is  vanity,  except  to  love  God  and  to  serve  Him 
only."  One  of  our  own  novelists,  in  his  "  Vanity  Fair,"  has  torn  aside  the  mask 
which  hides  from  view  the  hoUowness  of  that  glitter  and  show  which  are  so  apt 
to  fascinate  the  inexperienced.  Few  thoughtful  men  reach  even  middle  life — not 
to  speak  of  old  age — without  being  at  times  oppressed  by  the  thought  of  life's 
sameness,  or  without  being  at  times  impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  unsubstantial 
and  unsatisfying  nature  of  earthly  things.  Human  life  may  vary  from  age  to  age 
in  some  of  its  details;  but,  in  its  great  broad  features,  it  is  unchanging.  Birth, 
death,  work,  rest,  health,  sickness,  pain,  pleasure,  hope,  fear,  loss,  gain,  friend- 
ship, love,  marriage,  parenthood,  bereavement,  virtue,  vice,  temptation,  remorse — 
these  things  were  all  familiar  to  the  generations  that  have  gone  before  us;  they 
are  familiar  to  us;  they  will  be  familiar  to  those  who  are  coming  after  us.  And, 
as  to  the  transient,  uncertain,  perishable,  and  unsatisfying  nature  of  mere  earthly 
happiness — of  happiness  due  to  mere  earthly  pleasures,  pursuits,  and  considera- 
tion— this  has  been  the  trite  theme  of  all  the  ages.  Looking  at  human  life  apart 
from  God  and  immortality — ^looking  at  the  things  "  seen  and  temporal  "  apart 
from  the  things  "  unseen  and  eternal  " — we  perceive  that  there  is  a  profound 
element  of  truth  in  the  utterance,  "  All  is  vanity."  Lastly  here,  we  must  not 
forget  that  this  book  was  written  at  least  two  thousand  years  ago.  Since  Ecclesi- 
astes meditated  on  the  problems  of  human  life,  one  really  "  new  thing  "  has  been 
seen.  The  "  Sun  of  Eighteovisness  "  has  risen  upon  the  world  "  with  healing  in 
His  wings."     (T.  C.  Finlayson.) 

Vers.  4-10.  One  generation  passeth  away,  and  another  generation  oometh.— 
The  law  of  circularity,  or  retrogreasion,  an  essential  element  of  progress:— 
The  cirole  is  the  archetype  of  all  forms,  physically  as  well  as  mathematically. 
!  It  is  the  most  complete  figure,  the  most  stable  under  violence,  the  most  econo* 
[mioal  of  material;  its  proportions  are  the  most  perfect  and  harmonious;  and 
I  therefore  it  admits  of  the  utmost  variety  consistent  with  unity  of  effect.  Tht 
[universe  has  apparently  been  framed  according  to  this  type.    Natura  attain*  hat 


<^AP.  1.3  ECCLESIASTES.  IS 

ends,  not  in  a  series  of  st>raight  lines,  but  in  a  series  of  circles;  not  in  the  most 
direct,  but  in  the  most  roundabout  way.  All  her  objects,  organic  and  inorganic, 
have  a  tendency  to  assume  the  circular  form,  and  in  the  attainment  of  this  form 
consists  their  highest  perfection.  The  lowly  lichen  on  the  wall  spreads  itself  out 
io  a  circle;  the  mushroom  in  the  meadow,  with  its  round  cap  and  stem,  grows  in 
iairy  rings;  the  moss-tuft  on  the  tree — the  clump  of  fern  in  the  shady  bank — the 
plot  of  wild-flowers  in  the  wood — the  trees  in  the  forest,  alike  in  their  individual 
and  social  state,  exhibit  this  form  in  endless  and  graceful  diversity.  The  cell, 
which  is  the  ultimate  germ  of  all  life,  is  round,  and  every  increase  which  it 
makes  by  growth  or  reproduction,  preserves  the  same  shape.  The  leaf,  with  all 
its  varied  modifications  in  the  different  parts  of  the  plant — the  stem,  the  flower, 
the  fruit,  the  seed — are  all  more  or  less  circular.  So  also  are  the  different  parts 
and  organs  of  animals,  from  the  simple  primary  cell  of  the  animalcule,  barely 
visible  under  the  microscope,  up  through  increasingly  complex  structures,  to  the 
highly-organized  and  wonderfully-formed  head  of  man — the  apex  of  creation;  and 
though  dead,  inert  minerals  may  seem  to  offer  an  exception  to  the  law,  crystalliz* 
ing,  or,  in  other  words,  attaining  the  highest  perfection  of  which  they  are 
capable,  not  in  circles  but  in  straight  lines,  yet,  when  exposed  to  the  influence  ofl 
natural  agencies,  they  speedily  assume  the  circular  form.  The  various  forces  of 
nature,  and  the  properties  of  the  matter  upon  which  they  act,  are  so  arranged 
and  balanced,  that  they  invariably  bring  out  ciurved  lines  in  the  surface  of  the 
earth.  The  winds  and  the  waters  produce  undulating  surfaces  wherever  they 
operate.  The  sea  and  the  lake  flow  in  curving  waves  and  ripples  to  the  shore; 
the  rivers  and  streams  meander  in  silvery  links  through  the  landscape;  th« 
clouds  float  in  ever- varying  curves  of  magical  loveliness  along  the  sky;  the  very 
winds — emblems  of  fickleness  and  change — obey  fixed  laws,  and  blow  over  the 
earth  in  cyclones  and  rotatory  currents.  The  same  law  of  circularity  may  be 
observed  in  the  alternations  of  day  and  night,  and  in  the  vicissitudes  of  the 
seasons.  Each  bright  blue  day  of  sunshine,  with  all  its  work  and  enjoyment,  ia 
folded  and  shrouded  up  in  its  grave  of  darkness.  Night  comes,  as  it  were,  to 
undo  the  work  of  the  day — to  reverse  the  processes  and  functions  of  life — to 
restore  the  molecules  of  matter  which  the  sunlight  had  kept  in  incessant  motion 
and  change  to  their  previous  condition,  and  by  this  recoil  and  rest  to  qualify  for 
greater  exertions  and  further  advancement  on  the  morrow;  and  thus,  with  alterna- 
tions of  darkness  and  light,  the  year  progresses  to  its  close.  Spring  clothes  the 
earth  with  verdure;  siunmer  develops  this  verdure  into  its  highest  beauty  and 
luxuriance,  and  autumn  crowns  it  with  ripeness  and  f ruitf ulness ;  but  winter 
comes  with  its  storms  and  frosts  to  mar  and  destroy  the  fair  fabric  which  it  had 
taken  so  many  months  to  perfect.  And  yet  this  apparently  wanton  destruction, 
this  retrograde  movement,  tends  more  to  advance  the  progress  of  nature  than  if 
summer  were  perpetual.  The  exhausted  soil  is  permitted  to  rest,  in  order  that 
it  may  acquire  new  elements  for  increased  production,  and  the  forces  of  vitality 
are  suspended  that  they  may  burst  forth  again  with  more  exuberant  energy. 
Flowers  die  down  to  their  roots,  yet  it  is  no  grave  into  which  they  have  retired, 
but  the  hiding-place  of  power,  from  whence  they  shall  start  into  greater  beauty 
and  luxuriance  when  stimulated  by  the  showers  and  the  sunbeams  of  spring. 
Life  is  a  ceaseless  vortex,  a  perpetual  whirlpool,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end- 
ing, and  from  the  ending  to  the  beginning.  Every  death  is  a  new  birth, 
every  grave  a  cradle.  Ascending  beyond  our  earth,  to  the  regions  of  the 
astronomer,  we  find  the  same  law  in  operation  there  also.  We  know 
nothing  of  the  forms  and  attributes  of  extra-terrestrial  existence;  but  we 
know  at  least  that  all  the  heavenly  bodies  are  more  or  less  circular,  and 
move  in  more  or  less  circular  orbits.  The  sun,  the  moon,  the  planets  have  this 
shape  :  and  we  know  that  our  earth  revolves  on  its  own  axis,  and  moves  round 
the  sun;  that  the  solar  system  advances  in  space,  not  in  a  straight  line,  but  in  a 
series  of  mighty  revolutions  round  a  central  sun.  Passing  from  the  physical  world 
to  the  domain  of  man,  we  find  there  also  innumerable  traces  of  the  law  of 
•circularity.  "  One  generation  passeth  away,  and  another  generation  cometh," 
The  circulation  of  blood  in  the  veins,  the  circulation  of  matter  in  the  body,  the 
circulation  of  impressions  in  the  nerves  and  impulses  in  the  muscles,  are  all 
helps  and  means  of  physical  growth;  while  the  vicissitudes  of  circumstances,  the 
opposite  conditions  of  prosperity  and  adversity,  health  and  sickness,  joy  and 
sorrow,  tend  to  develop  the  mental  and  moral  character.  Action  and  reaction  it 
ihe  law  of  man's  life.    A  season  of  misfortune  is  usually  followed  by  a  season 


14  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chip,  i, 

of  success;  and  when  circumstances  are  most  prosperous,  a  time  of  reverses  is 
not  far  off.  Nowhere,  either  in  science  or  in  morals,  has  a  straight  Line  ever 
been  drawn.  There  is  no  distinct,  definite  line  of  demarcation  between  pain  and 
pleasure,  between  joy  and  sorrow,  between  relative  evil  and  good.  "  Thus  far 
and  no  further,"  is  said  to  all  moral  operative  causes,  as  well  as  to  the  waters 
of  the  ocean ;  but  the  line  along  the  coast  is  not  uniformly  straight  and  unbending ; 
on  the  contrary,  it  winds  in  and  out,  in  gulfs  and  promontories,  in  capes  and 
bays,  in  the  most  charming  and  picturesque  irregularity.  It  is  a  fact  of  the 
deepest  significance  in  the  philosophy  of  human  progress,  that  no  great  step  can 
^  be  taken  in  the  intellectual  or  moral  advancement  of  oiu-  race  except  by  the 
sacrifice  of  at  least  one  generation.  There  is  not  a  single  great  truth  that  has 
influenced  mankind  but  has  passed  through  a  process  of  contempt  and  injustice 
before  it  was  established  upon  a  firm  and  lasting  foundation  of  popular  favour; 
the  invention  or  discovery  that  one  generation  despised  is  turned  to  profitable 
account  by  the  next;  the  scientific  creed  that  is  persecuted  in  one  age  forms  an 
undoubted  and  essential  part  of  the  faith  of  the  succeeding  age.  The  general 
progress  of  the  human  race  has  been  marked  by  strange  fluctuations.  Civilization 
after  civilization  advances  from  the  dim  horizon,  reaches  the  zenith  of  its  pros* 
perity,  blazes  for  a  while  with  unexampled  splendour,  then  sets  in  darkest 
midnight.  Such  facts  as  these  show  us  how  hopeless  is  the  boasted  gospel  ol 
natural  progress;  how  vain  it  is  to  expect  that  humanity  can  develop  itself  by  its 
own  unaided  powers;  that  any  race  or  country  is  capable  of  carrying  on  the 
process  of  improvement  uninterruptedly  and  continuously,  by  the  simple  mother* 
hood  of  nature.  Man  is,  indeed,  naturally  progressive  to  the  fullest  extent  of  bis 
capacities;  and  whatever  he  is  capable  of  becoming,  the  aspirations  of  his  soul 
are  in  themselves  proofs  and  pledges,  that  he  will  ultimately  become.  In  the 
progress  and  revolutions  of  time  he  has  steadily  advanced  to  a  nobler  dignity. 
Each  civilization  that  appeared  on  the  stage  of  history  borrowed  from  its  prede- 
cessors materials  for  a  higher  range  of  advancement.  The  Boman  civilization  was 
a  propagation  of  the  Greek,  and  the  Greek  of  the  Egyptian  and  the  Hebrew. 
But  this  progressive  elevation  was  not  attained  by  a  natural  process  of  develop- 
ment, carried  on  in  a  uniform,  undeviating,  straight  line.  On  the  contrary, 
wherever  humanity  was  left  to  its  own  unaided  powers,  unassisted  by  super- 
natural means  and  influences,  it  has  everywhere  in  the  end  degenerated  and 
declined,  however  long  and  glorious  may  have  been  its  heroic  age.  And  analogy 
would  lead  us  to  conclude,  that  as  it  has  been  in  the  past,  so  it  may  be  in  the 
future,  that  again  and  again  may  be  exhibited  the  solemn  spectacle  of  civilizations 
"  advancing  in  charmed  circles,"  races  passing  from  hardihood  to  courage,  from 
eourage  to  conquest,  from  conquest  to  power,  from  power  to  wealth,  from  wealth 
to  luxury  and  effeminacy,  and  from  thence  to  the  last  stages  in  the  melancholy 
drama — corruption,  decline,  and  extinction.  History  is  given  to  repeating  itself. 
The  persistency  with  which  forms  of  faith  and  aspects  of  society  appear  age  after 
age  is  truly  marvellous.  Fashions  of  dress,  schools  of  art  and  philosophy,  theories 
and  speculations  of  science  and  theology,  seem  to  have  the  same  kind  of  periodicity 
which  marks  the  phenomena  of  nature.  As  regularly  as  the  same  primroses  bloom 
on  the  woodland  bank  spring  after  spring,  and  the  same  roses  blush  by  the 
wayside  summer  after  summer,  so  regularly  and  uniformly  do  the  same  modes 
of  thought,  and  the  same  types  of  manners,  appear  and  reappear.  Phases  of 
human  error  and  folly  are  found  occurring  again  and  again,  after  long  intervals. 
In  every  department  of  human  affairs  such  instances  are  easy  to  find,  proving 
the  truth  of  the  trite  aphorism,  that  "there  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun"; 
that  the  moral  world,  as  well  as  the  physical,  revolves  in  a  circle,  and  thus 
necessarily  often  comes  back  to  the  point  from  which  it  started.  These  examples 
of  retrogression  appear  melancholy  and  disheartening  to  those  who  believe  in  the 
uninterrupted  development  of  mankind  in  straight  lines;  but,  rightly  considered, 
they  are  far  from  being  perplexing  and  unintelligible.  The  law  of  circularity  is 
also  a  law  of  conservation;  and  every  instance  of  retrogression  may  be  regarded 
as  a  brake  upon  the  wheels  of  the  car  of  progress,  absolutely  necessary  for  its 
safe  and  steady  motion.  The  Bible  affords  so  many  illustrations  of  this  doctrine, 
that  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  make  a  selection.  Almost  the  first  event  in  the 
spiritual  history  of  the  human  race  was  an  act  of  degradation,  a  retrograde  move- 
ment. "  God  created  man  upright,  but  he  has  sought  out  many  inventions." 
And  yet,  by  a  wonderful  interposition  of  Divine  love,  this  retrograde  step,  which 
issued  in  so  much  disaster,  has  raised  man  to  a  higher  position  than  he  could  have 


CHAP.  I.]  ECCLESIASTES.  IS 


attained,  even  had  he  continued  pure  and  sinless  as  at  the  fixat.  ^  He  is  not 
merely  brought  forward  to  the  point  from  which  he  retrograded :  he  is  advanced 
greatly  beyond  it.  Schiller  boldly  says,  "  the  Fall  was  a  giant  stride  in  the 
history  of  the  human  race."  The  Deluge  affords  another  illustration  of  the 
law  we  are  considering.  It  was  a  terrible  remedy  for  a  terrible  disease.  Another 
retrograde  movement,  of  scturcely  less  importance,  occurred  very  speedily  after 
this  event.  The  confusion  of  languages,  and  the  consequent  dispersion  of  man- 
kind, and  their  separation  into  distinct  nations  and  races,  seems  at  first  sight 
an  unaccountable  procedure — hostile  to  the  best  interests  and  wisest  processes  of 
civilization;  and  yet,  on  the  contrary,  it  has  proved  eminently  helpful  in  forwarding 
the  progress  of  the  human  race  by  the  formation  of  national  feeling,  or  patriotism, 
and  the  full,  harmonious  development  of  the  "  many-sidedness "  of  human 
nature.  Descending  the  stream  of  Scripture  narrative,  we  find  that  Joseph  was 
sold  into  slavery  as  the  path  to  the  highest  honours  of  Egypt;  and  that  the 
latter  end  of  Job,  after  he  had  been  stripped  of  everything,  was  more  prosperous 
than  the  beginning.  When  the  children  of  Israel  had  reached  the  borders  of 
Canaan,  after  their  long  and  toilsome  wanderings  in  the  wilderness,  and  the 
enterprise  which  had  been  attended  with  so  much  trouble  and  hardship,  and  from 
which  they  had  hoped  to  reap  the  richest  result,  was  on  the  eve  of  being  accom> 
plished,  the  Divine  command  was  given  them  to  return  to  the  very  point  in  the 
wilderness  from  which  they  started.  The  immediate  cause  of  this  ignominious 
failure  and  retreat  was,  no  doubt,  their  own  obstinacy  and  unbelief.  A  wise  and 
benevolent  purpose  lay  hid  under  the  apparently  harsh  and  severe  judgment, 
which  subsequent  events  unfolded  and  explained.  The  children  of  Israel,  as  their 
eonduct  too  plainly  proved,  were  not  as  yet  in  a  fit  state  to  occupy  the  land,  and 
oarry  out  God's  intention  of  supplanting  its  wicked  and  idolatrous  tribes  by  "  a 
peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works."  In  the  New  Testament  we  also  find 
several  striking  examples  of  this  law.  The  salvation  of  the  world  is  accomplished 
through  treachery,  false  witness,  and  a  cross.  We  are  told  by  the  evangelists 
that  the  disciples,  after  the  resurrection,  went  back  by  the  express  command  of 
Christ  to  Galilee,  to  the  scenes  and  pursuits  in  which  they  were  engaged  when 
first  called  to  follow  Him.  The  same  circumstances  were  repeated,  the  same 
miracles  performed,  as  on  the  first  occasion.  This  retrogression  seems  to  have 
been  wisely  ordered  as  a  preparatory  discipline  for  reinstating  them  in  that 
office  from  which,  by  their  shameful  desertion  and  denial  of  Christ,  they  had 
fallen  at  His  death.  By  bringing  them  back  to  the  old  life,  to  the  beginning  of 
their  course.  He  not  only  gave  them  a  significant  symbol  of  His  willingness  to 
overlook  and  forget  all  that  had  occurred  diudng  the  interval,  but  also  placed  them 
in  more  favourable  circumstances  for  the  fulfilment  of  their  noble  mission  as 
Christ's  witnesses  and  apostles  to  the  world.  The  careful  reader  will  observe  a 
close  similarity  between  the  closing  chapters  of  Bevelation  and  the  commencement 
of  Genesis.  The  first  and  most  prominent  doctrine  which  Christianity  teaches  ia 
the  doctrine  of  retrogression  as  an  essential  element  of  progress.  "  Repent,  for 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand,"  was  its  watchword  when  it  first  raised  its 
voice  amid  the  deserts  and  moimtains  of  Judea.  Bepentance  is  the  germinal 
bud  of  living  Christianity.  "  Except  ye  be  converted,  and  become  as  little  chil- 
dren,  ye  cannot  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  And  the  beautiful  profound  truth 
hidden  under  this  paradox  is  that  not  only  are  the  spirit  of  childhood  and  the 
spirit  of  manhood  not  inconsistent  with  each  other,  but  their  union  is  essential 
to  the  highest  spiritual  culture.  The  afflictions  and  trials  that  bring  the  Christian 
low  contribute  in  the  end  to  raise  him  to  a  higher  condition  of  heavenly-minded* 
ness.  They  may  be  regarded  as  a  complication  of  inverse  aids  and  assistances,  by 
•  right  use  of  which  the  force  of  spiritual  character  may  be  more  successfully 
displayed.  And  just  as  the  earthquake  that  fills  a  wide  tract  of  country  with 
ruins,  and  the  storm  that  strews  our  coast  with  wrecks,  or  tears  down  omi  forests, 
or  destroys  life,  are  links  in  the  chain  of  the  weather  which  purifies  our  atmo* 
sphere,  and  supplies  the  materials  of  health  and  vigour  to  all  animated  nature, 
■o  are  suffering  and  trials  the  iron  links  in  that  golden  chain  which  connects  earth 
with  heaven.  It  is  not  suffering  then  glory,  but  suffering  therefore  glory.  Our 
light  affliction  worketh  out  an  exceeding  great  and  eternal  weight  of  glory. 
Death  seems  to  the  eye  of  sense  the  saddest  and  most  mysterious  of  all  retro- 
gressions. "  Dust  thou  art,  and  unto  dust  shalt  thou  retiurn,"  is  the  beginning 
and  end,  the  source  and  destiny  of  the  material  part  of  our  being.  Death  despoils 
|U  ol  all  with  which  we  were  invested,  terminates  all  the  functions  and  feelings 


le  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


of  life,  resolves  the  body  into  its  original  particles,  and  scatters  them  over  the 
face  of  the  earth.     But  though  to  the  eye  of  sense  appearing  a  great  loss,  an 
unaccountable  retrogression,  it  appears  to  the  eye  of  faith,  gifted  with  a  keener 
and  farther-reaching  vision,  a  great,  an  immeasurable  gain.     The  day  of  death 
is  better  than  the  day  of  birth,  because  death  is  a  higher  and  nobler  birth.     Nay, 
the  continuity  of  the  path  will  not  be  broken.     It  ie  no  strange  and  unknown 
scene  upon  which  the  just  are  ushered  at  death.     The  sacred  employments  of  life 
will  continue  without  pause  or  interruption  amid  circumstances  the  most  favour- 
able and  congenial.    The  river  that  hides  itself  for  a  time  in  the  earth,  and  breaks 
forth  at  a  distance  with  a  greater  volume  and  a  wider  channel,  does  not  sever 
its  connection  with  the  former  part  of  its  course.     One  more  vision  of  retrogres- 
sion, the  sublimest  and  the  most  awful,  reveals  itself  in  dim  outlines  to  our  gaze 
from  the  pages  of  Revelation.     When  the  earth  shall  have  served  the  purpose  for 
which  it  was  created,  as  a  scene  of  circumstances  and  temptations  for  the  educa- 
tion of  the  immortal  spirit,  it  will  be  reduced,  we  are  told,  to  the  state  of  chaos 
from  which  it  sprung.     *'  The  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat,   and  the 
earth,  and  all  the  works  therein,  shall  be  burnt  up."     And  yet  this  sublime  retro- 
gression will  be  necessary  to  bring  in  a  better  world,  where  sin  and  sorrow  shall 
be  unknown.     The   scene  of  probation  passing  through   this  terrible   ordeal   will 
become  the  scene  of  enjoyment;  and  earth,  purified  by  the  baptism  of  fire,  shall 
be  transformed  into  heaven.     (H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)     The  passing  of  humanity: — 
It  is  profitable,  as  well  as  sometimes  pleasant,  for  a  traveller,  as  he  advances, 
by  different  stages  of  his  journey,  to  look  back  on  the  scenes  through  which  he 
has  passed.     It  is  pleasant  to  him  to  call  to  his  recollection  scenes  which  he  for- 
merly enjoyed;  there  is  a  pleasure  also  in  remembering  the  rough  and  stormy 
passages  of  his  journey,  when  he  considers  how  he  was  helped  through  them,  how 
he  has  been  delivered  out  of  danger,  and  brought  thus  far  on  his  journey.     We  are 
all  pilgrims.     Some  of  you  have  lately  set  out  on  your  journey;  some  of  you 
have  advanced  many  stages  towards  the  last.     We  shall,  after  a  few  more  stages, 
all  of  us  arrive  at  the  end  of  our  journey  :  how  near  we  are  to  our  end  is  uncertain. 
I.  Consider  the  ebpresentation  the  text  gives  tjs  of  the  generations  of  men. 
For  what  is  here  spoken  is  not  concerning  one  man,  or  one  family  of  the  human 
race,  or  one  city,  or  a  particular  nation,  or  a  certain  age.     It  is  true  of  all  nations, 
of  all  generations,  from  the  time  of  Adam  and  Noah  to  the  present.     1.  "  One 
generation  passeth  away."     (1)  Look  back  to  the  past.     Many  generations  that 
once  existed  in  this  world  are  gone.     Men,  famous  for  their  various  exploits,  are 
now  no  more.     In  the  past  generations,  some  rose  from  mean  and  low  stations 
to  the  highest  rank;  while  others  fell  from  posts  of  dignity  to  a  state  of  poverty 
and  depression.     All  of  them — high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  learned  and  ignorant, 
kings  and  their  people — all  are  swept  away.    In  former  ages,  immense  armies  of 
men;  one  army  is  said  to  have  consisted  of  a  million;  but  they  have  all  passed 
away,    and   nothing   is   known   of   any   one    of   them,    except   their   commander. 
Nations  once  great  and  flourishing  are  now  almost  forgotten  :  even  Babylon  can 
scarce  be  found.     "  One  generation  passeth  away."     (2)  This  is  true  also  of  the 
present.     The  generation  to  which  we  belong  is  moving  off  the  world.     There  is 
no  continuance,  no  abiding  here.     Our  old  friends  and  acquaintances  are  gone, 
and  we  all  feel  that  we  live  in  a  dying  generation.     Yes,  great  and  useful  men 
are  taken  away;  parents  are  taken  from  children.     There  is  no  standing  still,  even 
if  you  live.     "  One   generation   passeth   away."     (3)  This   is   true   of   all   future 
generations.     They  all  will  pass  away,  and  all  in  the  same  manner.     2.  As  one 
generation  passeth  away,  another  cometh.     This  implies  that  it  is  the  design  of 
the  great  Author  of  our  being  that,  though  death  has  entered  the  world  by  sin, 
the  world  shall  not  be  depopulated.     What  a  wonderful  idea  does  this  give  us 
of  the  almighty  power  and  infinite  wisdom  of  God  I     Of  His  almighty  power. — We 
admire  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God  in  the  creation.     But  is  the  power  of  the 
Preserver  less  than  that  of  the  Creator?     Think  of  the  creatures  that  swarm  on  the 
face  of  the  earth,  going  away  one  generation  after  another,  yet  all  preserved  from 
the  time  of  Noah  until  now — millions  consumed,  yet  continually  replenished.     The 
wisdom  of  God,  too,  is  apparent  in  this.     For  is  it  not  observable  that  race  has 
BO  succeeded  race,  that  the  world  has  never  been  depopulated.     Labourers  have 
never  been  wanting  to  till  the  ground;  men  endowed  with   talents   of  various 
descriptions  have  sprung  up  from  time  to  time  to  carry  on  the  various  purposes 
of  society.     So  in  the  Church  of  Christ.    The  designs  of  God  have  been  compared 
lo  those  of  s  great  builder.    0ns  man  comes  and  fells  •  tree,  and  retires ;  another 


CHAP.  1.]  ECCLESTASTES.  IT 

goes  to  8  pit,  and  collects  a  few  stones,  and  he  is  gone;  a  third  rears  some  pillars, 
and  you  see  no  more  of  him;  a  fourth  lays  rafters  and  beams,  and  goes  his  way; 
these  men  retire  one  after  another;  still  the  building  goes  on.  Is  it  not  evident 
that  some  one  is  at  the  head  of  all  this,  who  has  formed  a  plan,  and  who  has 
skill  to  contrive?  II.  Deduce  some  infeeences  from  this  subject — to  promoth 
A  PERSONAL  IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE  WHOLE.  1.  Are  all  that  have  been  before  passed 
away?  and  are  all  that  are  now  present,  and  all  that  will  be  in  future,  passing? 
What  will  be  your  state  if  you  were  to  die  now?  2.  Then  let  us  be  concerned 
to  do  with  diligence  the  work  which  God  requires  of  us  while  in  the  present 
world.  Now,  the  first  thing  which  God  requires  of  us  is  that  we  believe  on  the 
name  of  the  Son  of  God :  without  this,  nothing  else  will  avail.  8.  Then  we  who 
are  pious,  and  active,  and  useful,  in  the  present  generation,  should  be  concerned 
to  do  what  we  can  that  the  succeeding  generation  which  is  to  follow  us  may  be 
wiser,  holier,  and  better  able  to  do  good  than  we  are.  It  should  be  our  aim 
as  parents  in  our  families,  as  teachers  in  Sabbath  and  other  schools,  to  train 
children  up  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  the  generation  to  come  may  be  a  seed 
to  serve  Him,  We  have  great  reason  to  rejoice  that  we  were  born  in  such  a 
generation  as  this.  We  might  have  lived  at  the  time  when  our  ancestors  bowed 
down  to  stocks  and  stones,  and  practised  the  most  horrid  abominations.  4.  Has 
the  grave  been  filling  for  thousands  of  years,  and  will  the  present  and  future 
generations  of  men  descend  thither  also?  What  an  awful  and  sublime  idea  does 
this  give  us  of  the  last  day  1  6.  Let  us  rejoice  that  there  is  another  state  of 
society  in  which  there  will  be  no  such  changes  and  passing  away.  In  passing 
through  this  world,  let  us  fix  our  eyes  of  faith  on  that  "  inheritance  which  is 
incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in  heaven  for  those 
who  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God,  through  faith  unto  salvation."  (S.  HillyaTd.) 
IFfcot  passes  and  what  abides  (with  1  John  ii.  17) : — The  antithesis  is  not  really 
BO  complete  as  it  sounds  at  first  hearing,  because  what  the  Preacher  means  by 
*'  the  earth  "  that  "  abideth  for  ever  "  is  not  quite  the  same  as  what  the  apostle 
means  by  the  "  world  "  that  "  passes,"  and  the  "  generations  "  that  come  and 
go  are  not  the  same  exactly  as  the  men  that  "  abide  for  ever."  But  still  the  antl- 
thesis  is  real  and  impressive.  The  bitter  melancholy  of  the  Preacher  saw  but  the 
aurface;  the  joyous  faith  of  the  apostle  went  a  great  deal  deeper,  and  putting  tha 
two  sets  of  thoughts  and  ways  of  looking  at  man  and  his  dwelling-place  together, 
we  get  lessons  that  may  well  shape  our  individual  lives.  I.  The  sad  and  super- 
PioiAL  TEACHING  OF  THE  PREACHER.  The  Preacher  says  '*  All  is  vanity."  That 
conviction  had  been  set  vibrating  in  his  heart,  as  it  is  set  vibrating  in  the  heart 
of  every  man  who  does  as  he  did,  viz.  seeks  for  solid  good  away  from  God.  That 
is  his  starting-point.  It  is  not  true.  All  is  not  vanity,  except  to  some  blasi 
cynic,  made  cynical  by  the  failure  of  his  voluptuousness,  and  to  whom  all  things 
here  are  out  of  joint,  and  everything  looks  yellow  because  hie  own  biliary  system 
is  out  of  order.  He  looks  out  upon  humanity,  and  sees  that  in  one  aspect  the 
world  is  full  of  births,  and  in  another  full  of  deaths.  Coffins  and  cradles  seem 
the  main  fiurniture,  and  he  hears  the  tramp !  tramp  I  tramp  I  of  the  generations 
passing  over  a  soil  honeycombed  with  tombs,  and,  therefore,  ringing  hollow  to 
their  tread.  All  depends  on  the  point  of  view.  This  strange  history  of  humanity 
is  like  a  piece  of  shot  silk :  hold  it  at  one  angle,  and  you  see  the  dark  ptirple;  hold 
at  another,  and  you  see  the  bright  golden  tints.  Look  from  one  point  of  view, 
and  it  seems  a  long  history  of  vanishing  generations.  Look  to  the  rear  of  tha 
procession,  and  it  seems  a  buoyant  spectacle  of  eager  young  faces  pressing  for* 
wards  on  the  march,  and  of  strong  feet  treading  the  new  road.  But  yet  tha 
total  effect  of  that  endless  procession  is  to  impress  on  the  observer  the  transiency 
of  humanity.  Man  is  the  lord  of  earth,  and  can  mould  it  to  bis  purpose,  but  it 
remains  and  be  passes.  He  is  but  a  lodger  in  an  old  house  that  has  had 
generations  of  tenants,  each  of  whom  has  said  for  a  while,  "It  is  mine,"  and 
then  they  all  have  drifted  away,  and  the  house  stands.  "  One  generation  cometh 
and  another  goeth,"  and  the  tragedy  is  made  more  tragical  because  the  stage 
stands  unaltered,  and  the  earth  abides  for  ever.  That  is  what  sense  has  to  say — 
"  the  foolish  senses  " — and  that  is  all  that  sense  has  to  say.  Is  it  all  that  caa 
be  said?  If  it  is,  then  the  Preacher's  bitter  oonoliision  is  true,  and  "all  is 
vanity,"  and  chasing  after  wind.  He  immediately  proceeds  to  draw  from  this 
undeniable,  but,  as  I  maintain,  partial  fact,  the  broad  conclusion  which  cannot 
be  rebutted,  if  you  accept  what  he  has  said  in  my  text  as  being  the  sufficient  and 
oomplete  account  of  man  and  his  dwelling-place.    There  is  immense  activity,  and 

2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

there  is  no  progress;  it  is  all  rotatory  motion  round  and  round  and  round,  and  the 
tame  objects  come  round  duly  and  punctually,  as  the  wheel  revolves,  and  life  \% 
futile.  Yes;  so  it  is  unless  there  is  something  more  to  be  said.  If  all  that  you 
have  to  say  of  him  is(  "  dust  thou  art,  and  unto  dust  shalt  thou  return,"  then 
life  is  futile,  and  God  is  not  vindicated  for  having  produced  it.  And  there  is 
another  consequence  that  follows,  if  this  is  all  that  we  have  got  to  say.  If  the 
cynical  wisdom  of  Ecclesiastes  is  the  ultimate  word,  then  I  do  not  assert  that  you 
destroy  morality,  because  right  and  wrong  are  not  dependent  either  upon  the 
belief  in  a  God  or  the  belief  in  immortality.  But  I  do  say  that  to  declare  that 
the  fleeting,  transient  life  of  earth  is  all  is  to  strike  a  staggering  blow  at  all  noble 
ethics.  The  man  whose  creed  is  only  *'  to-morrow  we  die  "  will  very  speedily 
draw  the  conclusion  "  let  us  eat  and  drink,"  and  sensuous  delights  and  the  lower 
side  of  his  nature  will  become  dominant.  There  is  more  to  be  said;  the  sad,  super- 
ficial teaching  of  the  Preacher  needs  to  be  supplemented.  II.  The  joyous  and 
PBOFODNOEB  TEACHING  OP  THE  APOSTLE.  The  cynic  never  sees  the  depths;  that  ia 
reserved  for  the  mystical  eye  of  the  lover,  so  John  says:  "  No,  no;  that  is  not 
all.  Here  is  the  true  state  of  affairs :  '  The  world  passeth  away,  and  the  lust 
thereof,  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever.*  "  And  what  of  the 
man  whose  life  has  been  devoted  to  the  things  seen  and  temporal,  when  he  finda 
himself  in  a  condition  of  being  where  none  of  these  have  accompanied  him? 
Nothing  to  slake  his  lusts,  if  he  be  a  sensualist!  No  money-bags,  ledgers,  or 
eheque-books,  if  he  be  a  plutocrat  or  a  capitalist  or  a  miser  I  No  books  or  diction* 
•ries  if  he  be  a  mere  student.  Nothing  of  his  vocations  if  he  lived  for  "  the 
world"!  And  yet  the  appetite  is  abiding;  will  that  not  be  a  thirst  that  cannot 
be  slaked?  The  world  is  passing,  and  the  lust  thereof,  and  all  that  is  antagonism 
to  God,  or  separated  from  Him,  is  essentially  as  "  a  vapour  that  appeareth  for  a 
little  time,  and  then  vanishes  away,"  whereas  the  man  who  does  the  will  of  God 
abideth  for  ever  in  that  he  is  steadfast  in  the  midst  of  change.  He  shall  "  abide 
for  ever,"  in  the  sense  that  his  work  is  perpetual.  In  one  very  deep  and  solemn 
sense,  nothing  himian  ever  dies,  but  in  another  all  that  is  not  running  in  the 
same  direction  as,  and  borne  along  by  the  impulse  of,  the  will  of  God,  is  destined 
to  be  neutralized  and  brought  to  nothing  at  last.  There  may  be  a  row  of  figures 
as  long  as  to  reach  from  here  to  the  fixed  stars,  but  if  there  is  not  in  front  of 
them  the  significant  digit,  which  comes  from  obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  all  is 
but  a  string  of  cyphers,  and  their  net  result  is  nothing.  And  he  "  abideth  for 
ever,"  in  the  most  blessed  and  profound  sense  in  that  through  his  faith,  which  hat 
kindled  his  love,  and  his  love  which  has  set  in  motion  his  practical  obedience,  ha 
becomes  participant  of  the  very  eternity  of  the  living  God.  "  This  is  eternal 
life,"  not  merely  *'  to  know,"  but  to  do  the  will  of  our  Father.  Nothing  else 
will  last,  and  nothing  else  will  prosper  any  more  than  a  bit  of  drift-wood  can  stem 
Niagara.     Unite  yourself  with  the  will  of  God,  and  you  abide.     III.  The  plain 

PSACTICAL  LESSONS  THAT  COME  FEOM  BOTH  THESE  TEXTS.   May  I  Say,  without 

seeming  to  be  morbid  or  unpractical,  one  lesson  is  that  we  should  cultivate  a 
tense  of  the  transiency  of  this  outward  life?  One  of  our  old  authors  says  some* 
where,  that  it  is  wholesome  to  smell  at  a  piece  of  turf  from  a  churchyard.  The 
remembrance  of  death  present  in  our  lives  will  often  lay  a  cool  hand  upon  a 
throbbing  brow;  and,  like  a  bit  of  ice  used  by  a  skilful  physician,  will  bring  down 
the  temperature,  and  stay  the  too  tumultuous  beating  of  the  heart.  Let  me  say 
•gain,  a  very  plain,  practical  lesson  is  to  dig  deep  down  for  our  foundations  below 
the  rubbish  that  has  accumulated.  If  a  man  wishes  to  build  a  house  in  Boma 
or  in  Jerusalem  he  has  to  go  fifty  or  sixty  feet  down,  through  potsherds  and 
broken  tiles  and  triturated  marbles,  and  the  dust  of  ancient  palaces  and  temples. 
We  have  to  drive  a  shaft  clear  down  through  all  the  superficial  strata,  and  to  lay 
the  first  stones  on  the  Rock  of  Ages.  Do  not  build  on  that  which  quivers  and 
shakes  beneath  you.  Build  on  God.  And  the  last  lesson  is,  let  us  see  to  it 
that  our  wills  are  in  harmony  with  His,  and  the  work  of  our  hands  His  work. 
We  can  do  that  will  in  all  the  secularities  of  our  daily  life.  The  difierence 
between  the  work  that  shrivels  up  and  disappears  and  the  work  that  abides  is  not 
so  much  in  its  external  character  or  in  the  materials  on  which  it  is  expended,  as 
in  the  motive  from  which  it  comes.  (^4.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  But  the  earth  abideth 
for  ever. — The  abiding  earth: — ^We  may  look  at  the  durability  of  the  earth — I.  As 
A  OONTBAST.  It  abides  in  contrast  with  very  much  whose  only  constancy  is  the 
eonstanoy  of  change.  1.  The  earth  abideth  in  contrast  with  its  own  ever- varying 
appearances.     Every  year  tells   of   the  change   of   the   seasons   in   which    earth 


CHAP.  I.]  ECCLESIASTES.  19 

changes  her  raiment,  and  what  does  not  geology  tell  of  cycles  in  which  the  earth 
has  changed  her  countenance  and  form  beyond  all  that  we  can  describe.  2.  Tha 
earth  abideth  in  contrast  with  human  structures.  Houses,  villages,  cities,  citadels, 
where  are  they?  Some  utterly  swept  away  :  some  in  ruins  :  all  destined  to  decay. 
8.  The  earth  abideth  in  contract  with  the  lives  of  individual  men.  4.  The  earth 
abideth  in  contrast  with  the  existence  of  nations.  II.  As  A  type.  It  is  a  type 
of  much  that  will  outlast  itself.  1.  Of  man.  His  animal  nature  may  pass;  his 
mental  and  spiritual  being  shall  continue.  2.  Of  truth.  Here,  again,  like  man's 
body,  like  the  moods  of  the  seasons,  the  forms  of  truth  may  change.  But  truth 
is  eternal.  8.  Of  God.  "  They  shall  perish,  but  Thou  remainest."  ([7.  B. 
ThomaB.)  The  earth  permanent,  man  transitory: — Permanence,  then,  character- 
izes the  material  world,  while  man,  viewing  him  apart  from  his  immortal  hopes, 
lives  a  mere  transitory  life.  There  is,  indeed,  a  sense  in  which  even  the  material 
world  suffers  change.  Of  all  outward  things  none  are  so  associated  with  our  con- 
ceptions of  durability  as  "  the  everlasting  hills."  And  yet  we  know  that  the 
hills,  in  scientific  strictness,  are  not  everlasting:  that  rain  and  sun  and  storm 
are  leaving  their  traces  upon  the  scarred  and  seamed  precipices,  and  that  what 
the  globe  is  at  the  present  moment  is  the  result  of  agencies  irresistible  and 
Tinceasing,  though  carried  on  through  periods  of  time  quite  inconceivable.  But  tha 
writer  of  Ecclesiastes  is  not  viewing  the  world  from  a  scientific,  but  from  a 
practical  point  of  view.  Everlasting  indeed  is  the  material  world  in  relation  to 
the  sixty,  seventy,  or  eighty  years  allotted  to  human  beings.  And  what  makes 
the  permanence  of  the  material  world  as  compared  with  the  briefness  of  human 
life  so  oppressive  is  this  :  that  man,  thus  hemmed  in  by  outward  limitations,  com- 
pelled to  do  all  which  his  hand  finds  to  do  within  quite  a  moment  of  time,  is  yet 
conscious  of  views,  feelings,  longings,  immeasurably  too  large  for  a  creature  whose 
life  here  is  evanescent.  There  is  no  imputation  upon  the  lovingkindness  of  the 
Creator  in  the  fact  that  He  has  created,  let  us  say,  a  may-fly  to  be  born  in  the 
morning  and  to  die  in  the  afternoon.  It  has  no  anticipation  of  a  future.  There 
is  nothing  startling  in  the  fact  that  to  a  fly  is  assigned  only  the  life  of  a  fly.  Am 
I  putting  contempt  on  the  present  life?  Far  from  it.  It  is  good,  but  yet  as 
connected  with  another  and  higher  life.  It  is  bright  with  a  light  thrown  back 
upon  it  from  immortality.  But  view  it  without  reference  to  that  life.  Withdraw 
the  radiance  which  everlasting  hopes  throw  around  it;  think  of  it  as  the  kindling 
of  ideas  which  are  merely  to  be  quenched;  of  cravings  which  are  never  to  ba 
satisfied;  of  high  anticipations  which  never,  never  are  to  be  fulfilled;  and  then 
must  you  not  allow  that  this  being,  so  strangely  constituted,  walking  in  a  vain 
shadow  and  disquieting  himself  in  vain,  is  really  worse  off  than  the  may-fly,  and 
that  his  existence  is  absolutely  irreconcilable  with  faith  in  a  wise  and  good  Creator? 
I  know  not  what  amount  of  evidence  would  satisfy  me,  if  I  saw  a  bird  of  newly- 
discovered  species  with  powerful  wings,  that  it  never  was  intended  to  fly  and  never 
in  fact  did  fly.  That  it  was  capable  of  flying  would  be  to  me  conclusive  proof 
that  it  was  intended  to  do  so ;  and  by  analogy  the  existence  of  faculties  and  capaci- 
ties unnecessary  for  a  brief  life  here,  out  of  proportion  with  such  a  life,  and 
demanding  eternity  for  their  exercise,  would  convince  me  that  man  was  made  for 
immortality,  and  that  his  troubled  and  sin-stained  life  here  was  but  the  prelude 
to  an  endless  existence,  untroubled  and  unstained,  under  the  eye  of  Him  who  has 
abolished  death  and  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light.  I  own  that  I  could 
see  no  reasonableness  in  urging  the  truth  contained  in  my  text,  if  I  were  unable 
to  supplement  it  with  this  latter  truth.  What  call  would  there  be  to  meditate  on 
the  brevity  of  my  life  here,  if  it  was  not  to  be  followed  by  another  with  which 
it  is  connected  in  a  very  momentous  way?  The  creed  of  the  Epicurean  is  odious 
and  degrading;  but  the  question  is,  Is  it  not  the  legitimate  inference  from  a 
denial  of  man's  immortality?  If  man's  death  is  but  as  the  death  of  an  animal, 
how  can  his  life  be  anything  more  than  an  animal  life?  But  once  accept  the 
thought  that  his  existence  here  is  but  a  brief  introduction  to  a  diviner  existence, 
and,  while  you  ennoble  this  life,  you  make  it  a  reasonable  thing  to  dwell  on  its 
transiency,  not  to  suggest  merely  lugubrious  thoughts,  nor  to  inspire  an  unprac- 
tical dejection  of  feeling,  but  because,  short  as  it  is,  it  is  the  seedtime  of  immor- 
tality, and  because  into  this  little  space  assigned  us  here  below  are  crowded 
duties,  responsibilities,  opportunities,  having  the  most  intimate  relation  to  our 
undying  life  beyond  the  grave.  "  One  generation  passeth  away  and  another 
Cometh."  There  is  something  within  us  which  makes  it  difficult  to  conceive  this 
in  it>  simple  truth.     Only  by  thought  and  training  do  we  lay  hold  of  the  fact 


so  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  fc 

that  the  men  of  the  past  were  not  shadows.  I  am  aware  that  those  who  hart 
no  trust  that  we  shall  live  hereafter  speak  nevertheless  of  a  continuity  which 
belongs  to  the  human  race,  and  remind  us  truly  enough  that  though  the  indi- 
vidual passes  away,  the  race  continues,  and  moves  forward  to  a  better  destiny ; 
and  that  even  if  we  as  individuals  are  to  be  blotted  out  from  God's  universe,  w« 
ought  to  work  with  energy  in  the  faith  that  posterity  will  be  blessed  by  our 
efforts,  when  we  are  ourselves  forgotten.  There  is  doubtless  an  element  of  truth 
in  this,  and  also  an  element  of  disinterestedness  which  is  valuable;  but  after  all 
we  shrink  from  the  thought  of  being  forgotten.  Still  more,  there  is  sxn-ely  some- 
thing unspeakably  dreary  in  the  prospect,  when  we  have  striven  hard  for  others, 
of  passing  into  nothingness,  and  missing  the  result  of  oiy  strivings.  It  is  not  in 
human  nature  to  rouse  itself  to  energy  under  such  an  absence  or  feebleness  ol 
motive.  It  is  not  alone  the  thought  of  being  forgotten.  An  unselfish  man, 
though  he  might  be  better  pleased  to  be  remembered,  will  bear  even  being  for- 
gotten if  he  may  have  some  assurance  that  his  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord; 
but  to  work  without  this  assurance  were  dismal  indeed — we  may  well  say  impos- 
sible. To  work  and  wait  is  the  lot  of  the  Christian.  It  is  small  consolation  to 
us  that  the  material  earth  abideth  for  ever,  if  the  things  we  care  for  most  are 
daily  passing  away,  and  we  and  they  are  hurrying  to  annihilation.  Take  away 
the  immortality  of  man,  and  the  continuity  of  the  race  is  practically  an  unreality. 
It  is  not  this  poor  negation  which  has  done  such  mighty  things  in  the  world.  I 
would  dwell  on  the  transiency  of  this  life,  not  to  depress,  but  to  awake  you  to  a 
profounder  conviction  of  the  value  of  the  present  moment,  of  the  greatness  of  tho 
issues  which  must  be  determined  within  this  short  life,  by  vast  numbers  bo 
grievously  misemployed,  by  vast  numbers  so  utterly  frittered  away.  We  are  to 
•*  number  our  days,"  not  so  as  to  embitter  life  by  the  thought  how  few  they  are, 
but  so  as  to  *'  apply  our  hearts  unto  wisdom."  Much  indeed  that  is  said  about 
the  shortness  of  life  is  sadly  unpractical.  Perhaps  it  is  best  to  think  much  mora 
of  life  than  of  death,  much  more  of  living  unto  God  without  a  moment's  delay, 
than  of  conjuring  up  anticipations  of  our  last  moments.  There  is  comparatively 
little  in  the  New  Testament  about  death.  Life,  the  new  life  in  Christ,  so  glorious 
as  to  make  the  dissolution  of  the  body  comparatively  unimportant — this  was  the 
thought  which  filled  the  foreground  of  the  Christian  prospect.  Dwell,  then,  on 
the  thought  of  death  mainly  as  a  motive  to  newness  of  life.  The  commencement 
of  a  year  is  a  memento  to  us  that  one  generation  is  passing  away  and  another 
coming.  There  are  other  mementoes  which  God  often  sends.  He  sends  the  failing 
health,  the  waning  strength,  the  disappointment  of  life's  most  cherished  hopes, 
the  gathering  of  clouds  round  the  eventide  of  life.  Thus  God  often  painfully 
reminds  us  how  time  is  passing.  True  religion  is  not  the  putting  ourselves  right 
by  some  clever  expedient  which  enables  us  to  combine  a  worthless  life  with  a 
Christian's  death.  It  is  the  making  the  life  right.  It  is  the  regarding  our  exist- 
ence here  as  an  anticipation  of  the  rest  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God. 
The  one  condition  of  a  Christian  death  is  a  Christian  life.  (J.  A.  Jacob,  M.A.) 
The  durability  of  the  earth  contrasted  with  human  mortality: — This  place  of  our 
sojourn,  this  earth,  has  many  things  tending  to  beguile  us  out  of  reflection,  to  lull 
us  into  unconcern.  But  it  has  some  things  fitted  to  awaken  us  to  thought  and 
apprehension.  This  should,  in  all  reason,  be  the  e£Eect  of  such  circumstances,  and 
facts,  as  force  on  our  attention  the  contrast  between  the  duration  of  the  earth 
itself  and  that  of  our  abode  on  it.  There  are  many  things  to  illustrate  this  com- 
parison, and  force  our  thoughts  upon  it.  History  itself; — why  is  history,  but 
because  the  generations  of  men  are  gone?  We  want  to  know  something  of  them, 
and  to  converse  with  them,  as  a  former  world  of  men.  And  history  tells  us  of 
one  generation,  and  of  another,  that  has  passed  away,  leaving  not  a  living  "  rack 
behind."  It  ie  obviously  suggested  here,  that  we  have  another  illustration  of  the 
text  in  places  of  interment,  that  have  been  such  for  ages.  The  earliest  of  the 
generations  that  have  terminated  their  earthly  existence,  are  gone  beyond  memory 
or  tradition.  In  greater  number  there  are  dates  of  a  later  generation,  still  far 
gone  in  the  past.  And  so  you  come  down,  at  last,  to  the  recent  grave  and 
tomb.  But  not  only  the  abodes  of  the  dead, — those  of  the  living  also,  may  yield 
illustration  of  the  contrast,  those  of  them  which  were  built  in  a  former  age;  or, 
take  them  collectively,  in  a  village,  town,  or  city.  How  many  successions  of  the 
inhabitants,  since  it  became  a  populous  city  I  Would  it  be  an  extravagant  con- 
jecture that  seven  or  eight  times  as  many  persons  have  died  in  it,  as  are  at  this 
hour  living  in  it?    But  think,  now,  of  the  whole  population  baring  been  so  man/. 


CJHAP.  r]  ECCLESIASTES.  O. 


times  changed  I     It  requires  thought;  because  the  change,  being  gradual,  is  at 
no  one  time  presented  in  its  full  magnitude.     Were  it  in  the  nature  of  things 
that  there  should  be,  at  one  grand  sweep,  the  removal  of  so  vast  a  number, 
repeated  at  the  average  period  of  an  age  of  man,  the  event,  and  the  succession  of 
such  events,  would  have  an  overwhelming  awfulness.     But  what  is  in  effect  equal 
to  this  takes  place,  and  but  feebly  excites  attention.     There  may  be  many  things 
incidentally  suggesting  themselves  to  reflecting  minds  that  will  strongly  enforce 
the  consideration  of  the  brevity  of  life  as  contrasted  with  the  permanence  of  the 
scene  in  which  it  is  passed.     Keflections  of  this  character  may  occur  under  occa- 
sional and  transient  states  of  feeling, — excited  at  one  time  by  objects  that  would 
not  excite  them  at  another.     But  we  should  think  it  must  have  happened  to  many, 
or  to  most  men,  to  have  this  reflection  excited  at  the  view  of  some  object  or 
other, — "  How   much   longer  this   has   been — or   shall   be — than   I — or   any    now 
living  man."     There  are,  as  we  said,  occasional  states  of  feeling  in  which  the 
reflection,  so  suggested,  comes  with  vivid  impression.     And  it  were  well  to  culti- 
vate that  reflective  habitude  through  which  the  mind  should  be  susceptible  of 
instructive  and  solemn  suggestions  and  impressions  from  any  and  all  objects.     To 
a  mind  so  habituated,  the  transiency  of  life,  the  "  passing  away  of  the  genera- 
tions,"  will   be  forcibly  suggested   by   the   view   of   such   things    as   mountains, 
massive  rocks,  ancient  trees,  the  never-tiring,  never-ending,   action  of  the  sea, 
and  the  solid  structures  of  human  labour.     Well  may  such  objects  make  an  im- 
pression of  contrast  with  man,  when  we  find  them  in  Scripture  taken  as  emblems 
to  represent  the  unchangeableness  and  eternity  of  God.    And  we  may  observe,  it  ia 
the  manifest  intention  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  as  shown  in  the  sacred  writings,  that 
we  should  be  taught  to  find  emblems,  in  the  world  we  are  placed  in,  to  enforce 
solemn  instructions  upon  us.     The  reflection  may   include  the  ideas   of  all  the 
various   personal   qualities — states   of   mind   and   character, — and   condition   alto- 
gether, of  this  unknown  long  succession.     '*  Depravity   has   been   here,   in   how 
many  forms  1     Misery,  of  how  many  kinds  and  degrees  1     Visions  of  anticipation — 
deeply   pondered    schemes — fluctuations    of   hope    and    fear — thoughtlessness    and 
consideration — practical    atheism    and    devout    sentiment!     All    this    has    passed 
away — and  here  is  the  object  still,  to  which  all  this  was,  once,  present  I"     And 
then  to  think  there  is  yet  to  come  more  of  all  this,  to  be  present  to  it — after  we 
shall  see  it  no  more.     What  a  train  of  sinners  yet,  but  also,  we  trust,  of  saints, 
are  to  reside,  or  pass  and  repass,  within  sight  of  that  pile  of  rocks.     In  a  solitary 
and  contemplative  state  of  the  mind,  the  permanent  objects  give  the  impression 
as  if  they  rejected  and  scorned  all  connection  with  our  transitory  existence — as  ii 
we  were  accounted  but  as  shadows  passing  over  them.     They  strike  the  thoughtful 
beholder  with  a  character  of  gloomy  and  sublime  dissociation  and  estrangement 
from  him.     It  is  true  that  the  altering  effect  of  time  is  visible  on  many  of  the 
objects  thus  contrasted  with  us  by  their  permanence.     But  the  extreme  slowness 
of  that  alteration  serves  to  display  again  that  contrast,  and  to  enforce  the  instruc- 
tion.    For  example,  the  gradual  decay  of  some  mighty,  ancient  structure, — or  of 
some  magnificent  cedtir  or  oak, — the  working  away  of  the  very  rocks  on  the  sea- 
coast.     The  effect  has  been  wrought,  but  so  slowly  and  imperceptibly  that  no 
man  can  say  that  he  has  seen  its  progress.     The  man  that  has  looked  on  the 
objects  in  his  childhood  can  hardly,  in  his  most  advanced  age,  say  that  he  per- 
ceives any  difference.    But  then  let  him  turn  and  look  at  his  fellow-mortals,  such 
of  them  as  remain  alive  1     He  can  recall  the  image  of  the  childhood  of  even  the 
oldest  of  them.     The  great  general  instruction  from  all  this  is, — how  little  hold — 
how  little  absolute  occupancy  we  have  of  this  world.     When  all  the  scene  is 
evidently  fixed  to  remain,  we  are  under  the  compulsion  to  go.     We  have  nothing 
to  do  with  it,  but  as  passing  from  it.     The  generation  "  comes  "  but  to  "  pass 
away,"  seeing  another  following  it  closely  under  the  same  destination.     Men  may 
strive  to  cling — to  seize  a  firm  possession — to  make  good  their  establishment — 
resolve  and  vow  that  the  world  shall  be  theirs.     But  it  disowns  them, — stands 
aloof; — it  will  stay,  but  they  must  go.     It  signifies  to  us,  that  equally  to  all  it 
will  yield  one  matter  of  permanence — just  one,  and  no  more,  and  that  is — a  grave. 
If  that  enduring  possession  of  the  earth  will  content  us,  that  is  secure.     In  all 
other  senses  of  possession  it  will  eject  us.     Men,  in  their  earnest  adhesion  to  it, 
may  raise  mighty   works   of   enduring  stability — towers,   palaces,   strong^ly    built 
houses,  as  if  they  absolutely  would  connect  themselves   with   the   world's   own 
prolonged  duration.     Weill  they  may  do  so;  and  the  earth  will  retain  these,  but 
will  expel  them.    But  should  not  the  final  lesson  be,  that  the  only  essential  good 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 


that  can  be  gained  from  the  world  is  that  which  can  be  carried  away  from  it? 
Alas  I  that  mere  sojournerB  doom  themselves  to  depart  in  utter  deprivation — when 
their  inquisitive  glance  over  the  scene  should  be  after  any  good  that  may  go 
with  them, — something  that  is  not  fixed  in  the  soil,  the  rocks,  or  the  walls.     Let 
us  look  on  the  earth  in  the  spirit  of  this  inquiry,  "  What  has  the  bounteous  Creator 
placed  here? — what  has  the  glorious  Redeemer  left  here,   that  I  may,  by  His 
grace,  seize  and  take  with  me,  and  find  it  invaluable  in  another  world?"     It  will 
then  be  delightful  to  look  back,  with  the  reflection,  "  I  could  not  stay  on  that 
earth.     I  saw  but  a  little  while  its  enduring  objects, — its  grand  solidities, — I  saw 
them  but  to  be  admonished  that  I  should  remove.     I  have  left  them  maintaining 
their  unchanging  aspects;  but  in  my  passage  I  descried,  by  the  aid  of  the  Divine 
Spirit,  something  better  than  all  that  they  signified  to  me  was  no  possession  for 
me — ^I  seized  the  pearl  of  great  price,  and  have  brought  it  away."     {J.  Fo$ter.) 
Th9  tun  also  ariseth,  and   the   sun  goeth  down. — Oppo$it6  id»a$  of  life:  the 
materialistic  and  the  spiritual: — There  are  at  least  two  very  opposite  ideas  of 
human  life  working  in  men;  and  these  ideas  make  life  to  man  virtuous  and 
blessed,  or  vile  and  miserable.     Materialism  propounds  the  one,  spiritual  Chris- 
tianity the  other.     Solomon  speaks  what  material  philosophers  teach,  and  what  all 
mere  worldly  men  feel  life  to  be;  Christ  and  His  apostles  reveal  the  experience 
of  all  genuine  disciples  of  spiritual  Christianity.     I.  The  one  idea  represents  life  as 
a   TRANSIENT   APFBABANOB,   the   Other   as   a   PEBMANBNT   REALITY.     Solomon   says, 
speaking  out  the  philosophy  of  Materialism,  **  One  generation  passeth  away  and 
another  generation  cometh."     "  All  is  vanity,  all  is  vanity  " — a  mere  pageant, 
an  empty  show.     Men,  what  are  they?     They  rise  from  the  dust  and  to  the  dust 
they  go.     A  whole  generation  is  but  a  troop  of  pilgrims,  pursuing  their  journey 
from  dust  to  dust.     They  soon  reach  their  destination  and  disappear,  but  the 
earth,  the  old  road  over  which  they  trod  their  way,  "  abidebh  for  ever."     *'  Let  ui 
eat  and  drink,  then,  for  to-morrow  we  die."     Ephemerous  as  we  are,  let  us  sport 
in  the  sunbeam  while  we  have  it;  the  starless  night  of  eternal  extinction  will 
Boon  spread  over  ue.     So  say  the  Materialists;  their  philosophy  has  no  higher 
idea  of  life.     In  sublime  contrast  with  this  is  the  idea  propounded  in  the  New 
Testament.     **  He  that  doeth  the  will   of  God   abideth   for   ever."     "  He   that 
believeth  in  Me,"  says  Christ,  "  shall  never  die."     II.  The  one  idea  represents 
life  as  an  endless  bodtinb,  the  other  as  constant  proobess.     Solomon  saw  in 
nattire  what  modern  philosophers  call  the  law  of  circularity  everywhere.     He  saw 
the  sun,  the  wind,  the  rivers,  moving  in  an  invariable  circle,  returning  ever  to  the 
point  whence  they  set  out.     He  compares  this  to  human  life,  a  mere  endless 
routine.     The  motion  of  all  organic  life  is  from  dust  to  dust.     This  is,  says  the 
Materialist,  but  a  figure  of  man's  moral  history;  there  is  no  progress, — it  is  an 
eternal  round.     Mankind,  in  all  their  efforts  to  improve  themselves,   are  only 
like  Sisyphus  of  ancient  fable,  rolling  a  heavy  stone  up  a  steep  hill;  the  moment 
the  hand  is  withdrawn  it  rushes  to  the  valley  again.     This  is  a  crushing  idea  of 
life;  it  comes  over  the  soul  like  a  black,  ray  less  cloud  of  ice.     There  is  some  truth 
in  it,  but  thank  Ood  it  is  not  the  whole  truth.     The  true  path  of  the  soul  is  not 
a  circle, — it  is  a  ladder,  like  Jacob's  ladder,  reaching  from  earth  to  the  throne  of 
the  Eternal.     Every  golden  rundle  it  climbs,  it  pierces  a  new  cloud,  gets  new  light; 
it  hears  new  voices,  sees  new  heavens,  and  thus  passes  '*  from  glory  to  glory." 
"  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be,  but  we  know  that  when  He  does 
appear  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."    III.  The  one  idea  represents  life  as  tjnsatii- 
fying  LAB0B10D8NB8S,  the  other  as  a  blessed  activity.     "  All  things  are  full  of 
labour;  man  cannot  utter  it;  the  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  seeing,  nor  the  ear  filled 
with   hearing,"   etc.      Voltaire,   the   brilliant   wit,    the   literary   idol   of   France, 
expressed   his   experience   of   life   in   one    word,    "  Ennui."     The    man    who    has 
laboured  most,  and  laboured  in  the  highest  departments  of  labour  with  a  worldly 
spirit,   must   ever   experience   dissatisfaction   of   soul.     Worldly   labour  can   never 
satisfy  the  human  soul.     You  may  as  well  endeavour  to  empty  the  ocean  with 
your  bucket,  or  quench  Etna  with  your  tears,  as  to  get  happiness  out  of  any 
amount  or  kind  of  labour  wrought  in  a  worldly  spirit.     The  idea  of  labour,  how- 
ever,  propounded  by  Christianity  is  the  opposite  of  this.     Labour  need  not  be, 
and  ought  not  to  be  unsatisfying.     A  good  man  is  "  blessed  in  his  deed."     Thii 
idea  is  the  true  one.     All  labour  should  be   inspired   with  the  spirit  of  love  to 
God,  and  trust  in  His  paternal  care.     Such  labour  will  be  ever  satisfying,  ever 
blessed.     The  labour  of  love  is  the  melody  of  life.     Every  true  deed  beats  heavenly 
music  into  the  soul.     IV.  The  one  idea  represents  life  as  doomed  to  oblition— • 


CHAP.  1.]  ECCLESIASTES. 


the  other  as  imperishablt  eemembeeable.  The  past  is  forgotten,  the  present  will 
soon  be  in  oblivion.  Men  and  their  doings  are  speedily  lost  in  forgetfulness. 
Such  is  the  gloomy  idea  of  Materialism — an  idea  under  whose  dark  and  chilling 
shadow  men  may  well  weep  and  wail.  But  is  it  true?  "  The  righteous  shall  be 
had  in  everlasting  remembrance."  The  good  man,  "being  dead,  yet  speaketh." 
Thank  God  1  Christianity  tells  us  that  man  will  never  be  forgotten.  He  will  live 
for  ever  in  the  memory  of  those  who  love  him.  The  genuine  disciple  of  Christ 
has  his  name  written  in  an  imperishable  book — "the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life." 
{Homili$i.) 

Vat.  7.  All  the  rlTers  run  into  the  sea,  yet  the  sea  is  not  fall. — The  turn  of 

the  year: — There  is  a  truth  underlying  the  old  conceit  which  pictured  the  universe 
as  moving  in  cycles.  History  repeats  itself.  Our  individual  experience — which 
is  only  history  in  its  minuter  detail — shows  us  how  little  of  originality  there  is  in 
any  one  of  us,  and  how  like  to  one  another  are  the  multifarious  incidents  of  our 
daily  life.  I.  Thb  tear  has  reached  its  prime  through  stages  differinq 
LITTLE  FROM  THOSB  OF  FORMER  YEARS.  Every  now  and  then  some  meteorologist, 
careful  day  by  day  to  register  the  markings  of  his  rain-gauges,  his  thermometers, 
and  such  other  apparatus  as  may  enable  him  to  compare  the  weather  of  to-day 
with  that  of  yesterday,  comes  out  of  his  observatory  to  tell  us  of  extreme  heat 
or  cold,  of  excessive  rains  or  "drought,  or  of  some  other  phenomena  which  mark  the 
year  as  exceptional  since — well,  since  some  other  year,  not  so  very  long  ago,  after 
all,  when  he  or  his  predecessors  had  a  like  tale  to  tell,  which  even  then  was  not 
new,  but  old  as  the  hills.  Now,  how  true  all  this  is  in  relation  to  human  life. 
Some  historians  never  tire  as  they  tell  us  of  the  changes  wrought  from  one  age  to 
another.  They  point  out,  and  very  truly,  how  the  age  of  Victoria  differs  from 
that  of  Elizabeth;  and  in  eloquent  periods  they  describe  how  the  face  of  society 
has  changed,  say,  from  the  seventeenth  century  to  the  nineteenth.  But  they 
forget  that  the  face  of  society  may  have  changed  a  very  great  deal,  while  the 
heart  of  it  may  have  changed  but  slightly.  Shakespeare's  master  hand  has  left  us 
the  widest  range  of  human  character  ever  sketched  by  one  pen;  and  that  we  so 
quickly  recognize  the  truthfulness  of  every  picture  in  that  vast  gallery  of  portraits 
arises  from  the  fact  that,  being  true  to  nature  then,  they  are  true  to  nature  now. 

II.    BCT    though    the    year    has     reached     ITS    PRIME,    IT    HAS     NOT    ATTAINED     ITS 

MATURITY.  It  is  uot  the  midsummer,  but  the  autumn  that  brings  us  the  season 
of  harvest.  It  is  not  when  the  days  are  longest,  nor  when  the  earth  is  covered 
with  the  brightest  flowers,  nor  when  the  trees  of  the  forest  wear  their  richesb 
green,  that  men  thrust  in  the  sickle  and  reap.  It  is  rather  when  the  prime,  and, 
in  some  sense,  the  beauty  of  the  year  is  past.  Nor,  happily,  does  human  life 
attain  matiurity  at  its  meridian.  There  is  a  sense,  indeed,  in  which  the  earlier 
manhood  possesses  a  freshness  and  a  vigour  in  which  the  later  years  of  life  must 
necessarily  be  wanting,  and  those  who  have  thrown  away  the  glorious  opportunities 
of  youth  have  lost  what  can  never  be  recalled.  But  they  who  have  lived  half 
the  allotted  span  of  life,  have,  humanly  speaking,  their  richest  and  noblest  days 
still  before  them.  The  promises  of  youth  have  now  to  be  followed  by  the  ripa 
performances  of  manhood.     Each  season  has  its  appointed  work.     III.  The  turn 

OF   THB    YEAR   IB    INDICATED    BY    APPEARANCES    MOST    FITTING    TO    THE    TIME.      Year    by 

year,  in  spite  of  human  forebodings,  the  summer  comes,  and  "  the  earth  is  satisfied 
with  the  fruit  of  God's  works."  With  Him,  stability  is  not  dependent  upon 
uniformity;  nor  is  diversity  of  operation  inimical  to  the  unity  of  His  plans. 
Hence  it  comes  to  pass  that  while  the  seasons  of  succeeding  years  afford  us  the 
never-ending  variety  which  ministers  to  our  pleasure  at  the  same  time  that  it 
excites  our  admiration,  our  delight  and  wonder  are  not  less  excited  by  the  unfailing 
unity  which  marks  all  the  operations  of  the  Divine  hand.  So,  too,  in  the  still  more 
complex  workings  of  human  life.  Take,  for  example,  that  period  of  which  we 
have  already  spoken  as  the  "  turn  of  life,"  the  age  when  the  last  tie  that  bound 
us  to  the  days  of  youth  has  been  snapped,  and  when,  standing  on  the  broad 
plateau  of  middle  age,  we  can  look  forward  only  to  such  changes  as  shall  prepare 
the  way  slowly  but  surely  for  the  end.  It  is  at  this  time  we  begin  to  realize  most 
clearly  how  distinct  are  the  successive  generations  of  mankind.  In  earlier  life 
there  were  about  us  many  upon  whom,  in  various  ways,  we  were  more  or  less 
dependent.  But  one  by  one  they  have  gone;  and  so  far  at  least  as  the  past  is 
concerned,  we  begin  to  stand  alone.  In  later  life,  too,  those  about  us  will  be 
found  to  belong  to  another  generation — a  generation  younger  than  we,  and  destined 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i. 

to  take  our  place  when  we  have  passed  away.     Some  of  us  need,  perhaps,  to 
learn  more  thoroughly  how  little  the  world  is  dependent  for  its  life  upon  us  who 
dwell  in  it  but  for  a  little  time.     Creatures  of  a  day,  we  are  so  apt  to  live  as  if 
assured  of  an  eternal  stay.     It  is  thus  we  fail  to  regard  the  fitness  of  things,  and 
forget  that  advancing  age  demands  thoughts  and  words  and  deeds  more  becoming 
to  it  than  would  be  those  of  our  earlier  life.     IV.  The  turn  of  the  year  reminds 
D8  HOW  SLOW  RIPENING  IS  SUCCEEDED  BT  A  BWiFT  HARVEST.     For  months  the  grain 
has  been  growing  slowly,  and  though  the  midsummer  is  past,  it  will  yet  be  long 
before  the  fields  will  be  generally  "  white  unto  the  harvest."     "  Behold  the  hus- 
bandman waiteth  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth,  and  hath  long  patience  for  it 
until  he  receive  the  early  and  the  latter  rain."     Not  less  varied  and  protracted 
is  the  discipline  by  which  our  Father  seeks  to  produce  in  us  the  fruits  of  His 
heavenly  husbandry.     The  restraints  of  childhood,  the  education  of  youth,  and 
the  cares  of  manhood  are  but  so  many  processes  by  which  He  would  lead  us 
onward  towards  that  perfection  which  is  His  ultimate  object  concerning  every  one. 
As  the  steady  warmth  of  July  days  will  prepare  for  the  harvest  the  corn-blades 
produced  by  the  months  just  past,  so  may  the  discipline  of  a  life  that  has  out- 
grown the  inexperience  of  youth  be  expected  to  bring  into  fuller  and  more  perfect 
maturity  those  graces  of  which  but  the  germs  have  yet  been  formed.     Anyhow, 
let  us  never  suppose  that,  having  left  behind  us  the  days  of  youth  which  were  so 
fittingly  emblemed  by  the  changeful  shine  and  shower  of  the  early  summer,  we 
have  lost  our  best  opportunities  for  growth.     It  may  be  hard  to  form  new  habits 
now;  but  those  we  have  formed  may  become  more  consolidated,  and  so  our  after 
lives,  by  stability  of  growth,  may  go  somewhat  to  compensate  for  the  shortcomings 
and  waywardness  of  youth.     V.  The  turn  op  the  yeah  reminds  us  that  nature 
PBOVIDES  FOR  THE  FBUiTFULNBSS  OF  EVEN  SHORT-LIVED  GROWTHS.     Very  early  in  the 
springtime  there  were  buds  and  blossoms  that  were  none  the  less  beautiful  because 
their  stay  with  us  was  short.     The  snowdrop  never  drank  in  the  glory   of  the 
summer  sunshine;  yet  the  world  would  not  have  been  complete  without  it.     There 
•rtt  other  plants  that  have  a  lesson  for  us  beside  the  corn  that  ripens  slowly,  and, 
so  to  speak,  centres  upon   itself  the  labours   of  the   year.     There   is    but   one 
standard  by  which  we  may  infallibly  judge  of  the  products  of  the  earth,  a  standard 
applicable  alike  to  the  plant  that  blossoms  and  fades  in  one  summer  day  and  to 
the  aloe  blooming  but  once  in  its  century,  and  to  the  oak  tree  that  outlives  many 
generations  of  men.     That  standard  is  the  testing  quesbion:  Is  its  Maker's  purpose 
served?     To  live  to  Him  and  grow  like  Him — here  is  the  great  end  of  our  being, 
by   the   serving  or   failing   which   we   shall   be   approved   or   stand   condemned. 
(F.  Wagttaff.)     View$  of  life  r  falte  and  true : — What  outward  things  are  to  us, 
depends  very  much  on  what  we  are  ourselves.     Take  a  landscape  for  instance. 
What  various  thoughts  it  suggests  to  different  people.     To  the  farmer  it  suggests 
land  for  pasture,  the  sportsman  looks  at  it  from  another  point  of  view,  the  artist 
sees  in  it  the  varying  lights  and  shadows.     It  suggests  to  the  poet  great  thoughts 
or  feelings,  to  the  devout  man  the  power  and  love  of  God,  and  so  forth.     The 
writer  of  this  book  from  which  our  text  is  taken  is  in  one  of  his  bad  moods;  he 
is  disheartened  and  weary  of  life;  nature  seems  to  reflect  the  sadness  of  his  soul. 
Bivers  running  into  the  sea,  and  not  accomplishing  anything,  all  seem  to  proclaim 
the  vanity  of  life,  the  emptiness  of  life.     "All  the  rivers  run  into  the  sea;  yet 
the  sea  is  not  full."     As  a  statement  of  fact,  it  is  correct.     And  what  is  the  sea 
better  for  them?     They  make  no  visible  change  in  it,  they  do  not  even  make  it 
less  salt;  as  far  as  an  unthinking  person  goes,  it  seems  sheer  loss.     "  But  the  sea 
is  never  full."     And  so  we  might  think  it  is  with  man.     Humanity,  struggling 
and  suffering,  only  to  pass  into  the  sea  of  nothingness.     Egypt  was  a  great  nation 
at  the  time  of  Moses,  what  remains  now?     Some  pyramids  and  a  few  mummies. 
In  our  sadder  moments  we  are  inclined  to  cry,  "  Wherefore  hast  Thou  made  all 
men  in  vain?"     After  all,  this  is  not  the  true  lesson  of  "  All  the  rivers  run  into 
the  sea."     The  joy  of  mere  living  is  worth  the  labour  and  is  reward  enough. 
Every   little  brook  expresses  gladness,   irrespective  of   the  end   it   accomplishes. 
Life  is  worth  living  and  full  of  joy.     In  moments  of  health  and  activity  we  feel 
like  that,  but  this  will  not  always  satisfy.     Here  is  where  the  true  lesson  of  the 
*'  Bivers  run  into  the  sea;  yet  the  sea  is  not  full  "  comes  in.     Why  is  the  sea 
not  full?    The  remainder  of  the  verse  answers  the  question.     "  Unto  the  place 
from  whence  the  rivers  come,  thither  they  return  again."     Solomon  accepted  the 
explanation  of  the  mystery  given  in  bis  day.    We  know  the  true  reason.    It  is 
because  the  water  is  continually  evaporating,  the  sun  drawing  the  water  up  into 


CUAT.  t."]  ECCLESIASTE8.  25 

the  clouds,  deeoending  again,  and  giving  beauty  and  fertility  all  around.    Thui 
the  rivers  fulfil  their  true  end.     They  lose  life  to  find  it  again  in  new  and  more 
beautiful  forms — not  one  drop  is  lost;  every  brooklet  has  its  share  in  the  beauty 
of  the  earth.     Nothing  is  spent  in  vain  in  God's  universe;  He  is  a  workman  who 
never  wastes  a  particle  of  force  or  matter.     This  thought  is  comforting  and  helpful. 
"Life  is  a  brief  span — ^trivial  and  vain,"  nay;  no  life  is  lost — its  effect  remains. 
No  self-sacrifice,  no  deed  of  kindness  is  ever  utterly  lost.     All  goodness — every 
deed  done,  adds  to  the  permanent  stock  on  earth.     It  increases  the  heritage  of 
truth  and  right  which  we  hand  on  to  remote  ages.     Thousands  of  years  ago  a  man 
left  his  home  and  went  to  live  among  strangers,  he  gave  up  his  country  and 
his  kindred.      His  life  was  not  lost,  he   became  Abraham,  the   Father   of  the 
Faithful.     Yes;  the  rivers  of  life  run  into  the  sea,  but  they  are  not  lost.     No  life 
lived  faithfully  is  utterly  lost.     It  must  be  so,  for  Christ  is  at  once  the  great 
explanation  and  pledge  of  this  truth.    His  Gross  seemed  the  end  of  all  hope;  yet 
the  Cross  was  the  triumph  of  His  life — the  beginning  of  everything.     Without  it 
there  would  have  been  no  Besurrection,  no  Ascension.     Qod  brings  gain  out  of 
loss.     Christ  has  given  us  the  assurance  we  shall  live  for  ever;  living  to-day  we 
■hall  live  on  for  ever.     The  little  rivers  of  life  run  into  the  sea  of  eternity,  but 
they  stfe  not  lost.     Towards  what  sea  is  the  river  of  our  life  flowing  on  unceasingly? 
In  every  continent  the  rivers  are  flowing  on.     There  is  a  watershed  in  life,  down 
either  side  our  life  may  run.     In  which  direction  does  our  life  run?    Towardi 
God — or  away  from  Him,  into  darkness.     (J.  A,  Campbell,  M,A.)    Purtuit  of 
happine$$: — '*  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity."     Now,  this  view  of  the  monotony 
of  things  has  a  great  deal  of  truth  in  it.     If  you  look  at  the  matter  in  one  aspect, 
there  is  a  striking  lack  of  originality  displayed  in  creation.     Everything  material 
goes  through  the  same  process  of  birth,  maturity,  decay  and  death,  whether  it 
be  a  star  or  a  universe,  or  the  humblest  insect  that  crawls.     Our  own  lives,  too, 
what  a  sameness  there  is  about  them,  looked  at  from  this  old  writer's  point  of 
▼lew,  which  is  very  often  our  own.     What  a  monotony  there  is  about  it  all — 
what  a  lack  of  originality.     We  all  go  through  the  same  programme  in  the  main. 
We  are  each  of  us,  as  it  were,  given  the  main  outlines  of  our  little  drama,  and 
we  are  at  liberty  to  fill  in  the  scanty  details  for  ourselves,  all  the  plots  are  on 
the  same  model,  and  we  seldom  strike  out  any  original  line  in  the  details.    But 
M  there  not  something  more  to  be  said  on  the  matter?    It  is  true  that  all  things 
go  through  the  same  process  of  birth,  maturity,  decay  and  death;  that  in  some 
aspects  there  is  a  deadly  sameness  throughout  all  creation  from  top  to  bottom. 
But  there  is  also  infinite  variety,  endless  difference,  nothing  is  precisely  like  any* 
thing  else  in  the  world.     Examine  as  many  as  you  like  of  any  species  of  plants 
or  animals,  and  no  one  will  be  found  to  be  precisely  like  any  other.     Every  dawn 
is  different,  and  no  two  sunsets  are  alike;  and  though  day  succeeds  day  in  orderly 
procession,  yet  no  two  days  are  alike  in  their  combination  of  cold  and  heat,  sunshine 
and  shower,  hiurricane  or  sultry  calm.    Nor  are  the  events  they  witness  ever  exactly 
reduplicated.     And  so  with  our  daily  lives  and  experiences.     It  is  true  that  the 
plots  of  our  little  dramas  are  much  alike,  that  the  main  outline  is  sketched  in  for 
us,  and  that  we  may  only  fill  in  the  details  of  our  lives.     But  it  is  those  very 
details  that  we  are  apt  to  contemptuously  pass  by,  that  make  our  lives  what  they 
are,  for  better  or  for  worse.    It  is  in  the  details  that  individuality  is  shown — not 
in  the  main  outline.     There  is  no  such  thing  ae  "  mere  detail  "-—detail  is  every- 
thing in  this  world.     No  two  lives  are  alike,  every  existence  is  different,  there  is 
infinite  variety  in  these  very  things  that  make  our  lives  what  they  are.     And  the 
assertion  that  all  things  are  full  of  weariness,  because  of  their  eternal  sameness,  is 
without  foundation  in  fact.    If  the  world  seems  full  of  weariness,  the  fault  is  in 
you,  not  in  a  world  of  infinite  variety.     This  miserable  plaint  of  the  weariness  of 
all  things,  then,  is  nothing  new,  and  it  is  a  cry  that  is  still  repeated  in  our  ears 
only  too  often  in  the  present  day.     What  was  the  reason  of  it  in  the  case  of  this 
philosophic  grumbler  of  old?   What  was  the  reason  of  this  unhappiness,  in  one  who 
nsd  everything  that  is  conunonly  supposed  to  make  life  worth  living — is  the  moral 
of  the  book  that  riches,  power  of  intellect,  artistic  taste,  refinement,  learning,  are 
•U  without  value,  and  are  powerless  to  give  any  pleasure  to  their  possessor?    By 
no  means.     All  these  things  are  good  in  themselves,  may  confer  vast  pleasure  on 
those  who  have  them,  so  long  ae  they  are  not  the  end  and  aim  of  existence. 
Happiness  is  not  the  one  aim  and  end  of  existence — it  is  the  result  of  a  well-lived 
life.    If  you  make  the  attainment  of  happiness  and  pleasure  the  one  object  of 
miiteooe  at  the  Pxeaoher  did,  then  it  will  always  elude  you  even  as  it  did 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

him.  The  Preacher  waa  essentially  an  egoist,  a  selfish  man.  "  How  can  I  obtain 
happiness  for  myself?"  was  the  cry  of  his  soul,  and  although  he  tried  every 
method,  he  never  did  obtain  it.  Just  compare,  for  an  instant,  the  life  of  this 
writer  with  its  comfort,  ease  and  luxury,  to  that  of  Jesus  with  its  hardships,  dis- 
appointments and  sufferings.  Both  see  the  misery  in  the  world,  but  while  one 
sets  to  work  to  remedy  it,  the  other  sits  and  looks  at  it,  and  wrings  his  hands 
over  it.  Jesus  saw  the  crookedness  in  life  just  as  plainly  as  Ecclesiastes  did,  but 
instead  of  crooning  a  coronach  over  all  human  hopes  and  aspirations  and  en- 
deavours, He  set  to  work  to  make  the  crooked  etraight,  bind  up  the  broken- 
hearted, preach  good  tidings  to  the  prisoners  in  the  bonds  of  sin,  and  give  a 
gospel  of  hope  and  encouragement  to  all;  and  in  losing  Himself  in  the  service  of 
others.  He  found  a  joy  and  peace  that  never  left  Him.  It  has  ever  been  so,  and  it 
is  so  now.  It  is  not  from  the  toilers  of  earth  that  the  cry  of  the  weariness  of  all 
things  goes  up.  It  is  not  those  who  have  to  work  from  morning  till  night,  and 
who  are  found  day  after  day  drudging  away  their  lives  at  the  same  employment — 
it  is  not  from  these,  as  a  rule,  that  the  cry  of  the  Preacher  goes  up.  It  is  those 
who  have  nothing  better  to  do  with  their  time  than  to  sit  and  brood  over  their  little 
petty  ailments  or  misfortunes,  whose  time  hangs  heavy  on  their  hands,  because 
of  want  of  occupation,  who  have  no  conception  of  there  being  anything  better  in 
life  than  to  pass  through  it  as  easily  as  possible — these  are  the  people  who  are 
bored  with  existence.  The  men,  however,  who  do  the  world's  work,  who  try  to 
right  the  wrong,  straighten  the  crooked,  raise  the  fallen,  and  improve  the  world, 
are  not  so;  they  have  no  time  in  which  to  indulge  in  the  luxury  of  "  the  blues." 
They  always  find  too  much  to  do  in  the  world,  and  in  doing  something  for  others 
they  find  a  happiness  that  nothing  else  can  bestow.     (E.  8.  Hicka,  M.A.) 

Ver.  8.  The  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  seeing. — The  unaatiafied  eye : — This  fact  ia 
■elected  as  an  instance  of  man's  profitless  curiosity,  as  a  symbol  of  the  insatiable- 
ness  of  the  human  mind.  My  remarks  will,  I  think,  prove  applicable  to  two 
cases, — to  the  dreary  doctrine  that  man  is  virtually  nothing,  and  all  his  efforts  are 
unavailing;  and  also  to  the  Christian's  aflSrmation,  that  there  is  something  better 
and  more  lasting  than  the  objects  of  our  sensuous  vision.  I.  I  direct  yoiur  atten- 
tion  to   THE    THING    ITSELF    WHICH    IN    THE    TEXT    IS    SAID    NOT    TO    BE    SATISFIED    WITH 

SEEING.  Consider  what  instances  of  skill  we  gaze  at  with  admiration,  and  cross 
oceans  to  behold,  and  yet  how  imperfect  and  clumsy  they  are  compared  with  this 
little  compact  organ  set  in  its  bony  cup,  with  its  lenses  and  regulators  and  pulleys 
and  screws,  its  curtaining  iris  and  its  crystal  deep,  its  inner  chamber  of  imagery 
on  which  are  flung  the  pictures  of  the  universe, — the  aspects  of  nature,  the  shapes 
of  art,  the  symbols  of  knowledge,  the  faces  of  love;  this  magic  glass,  both  telescope 
and  microscope,  filled  with  the  splendours  of  an  insect's  wing,  yet  taking  in  the 
scenery  of  heaven;  this  sentinel  of  the  passions;  this  signal  of  the  conscious  soul, 
kindled  by  a  light  within  more  glorious  than  the  light  without,  and  never  satisfied 
with  seeing.  Such  is  the  human  eye.  And  from  the  lowest  creatures,  whose 
visual  apparatus  is  a  mere  nervous  speck,  up  to  the  most  complex  organisms,  there 
is  nothing  that  has  the  range  of  this  organ.  In  certain  specialties  of  vision  man 
may  not  be  equal  to  some  animals  or  insects.  The  shark  and  the  spider,  the 
hawk  and  the  cat,  may  see  better  on  some  particular  plane  of  sight;  but  in  that 
general  power  which  far  transcends  any  special  capacity,  in  scope,  in  possibility, 
in  educated  faculty,  in  expressiveness,  the  human  eye  excels  all  others.  If,  then, 
superior  qualifications  are  to  be  taken  as  proof  of  superior  purpose,  this  fact  of 
itself  is  significant  as  to  the  dignity  and  the  destiny  of  man.  But  in  this  line  of 
argument  nothing  seems  more  suggestive  than  the  very  statement  of  the  text : 
"  The  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  seeing."  Now,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  the  merely 
animal  eye  is  satisfied  with  seeing.  The  brute  does  not  shift  about  to  get  better 
views  of  nature.  He  does  not  search  the  landscape  for  objects  of  beauty  and  sub- 
limity. It  is  man  only  who  finds  in  the  opportunities  of  vision  the  inspiration  of 
action,  and  in  all  that  lies  under  the  sun  secures  employment  for  a  restiesa 
curiosity.  He  ponders  unfathomable  problems  in  the  pebble  and  the  weed,  and 
eagerly  searches  the  secrets  of  the  universe.  How  much  of  human  enterprise  ia 
■imply  the  result  of  a  longing  for  vision, — the  desire  to  see  strange  lands,  and 
look  upon  memorable  faces,  to  watch  the  evolution  of  facts,  and  detect  hidden 
causes  I  No  man  is  satisfied  with  that  which  he  sees  right  around  him.  The 
ofaild  longs  to  know  what  lies  beyond  the  hills  that  bound  his  familiar  valley,  into 
what  strange  country  the  sun  goes  down,  and  upon  what  marvellous  region  tha 


CBAP.  1.]  ECCLESIASTES.  87 

rainbow  rests.  The  eye,  however,  is  not  satisfied  with  its  own  natural  limits,  buli 
seeks  the  aid  of  instruments.  As,  in  its  aspects,  it  is  the  most  striking  of  all  the 
organs  of  sense,  so  does  it  transcend  them  all  in  its  scope,  both  of  space  and  time. 
This  little  orb  of  observation,  turning  on  its  minute  axis,  sweeps  the  splendid 
theatre  of  suns  and  systems,  comprehending  millions  of  miles  in  a  glance,  and 
visited  by  rays  of  light  that  have  been  travelling  downwards  for  thousands  of 
years.  II.  What  is  it  that  is  not  satisfied  with  seeing?  In  no  scale  of  created 
being, — not  even  the  lowest, — is  it  the  eye  itself  that  sees.  It  is  the  instinct,  or 
consciousness,  back  of  the  eye.  Examine  the  dead  organ  in  man  or  animal,  and 
all  its  wondrous  mechanism  is  there.  Lift  the  fallen  lid,  and  the  light  of  the 
outward  world  flickers  upon  its  surface.  But  the  faculty  of  sight  is  not  there. 
Whatever  that  faculty  may  be  in  the  brute,  we  have  seen  that  in  man  it  is  a 
peculiar  and  distinctive  faculty.  We  have  seen  that  to  him  belongs  this  desire  for 
vision, — this  pushing  inquisitiveness  that  is  never  satisfied.  Such,  then,  must  be 
the  inner  and  conscious  nature  of  man.  Such  must  be  the  mysterious  power 
behind  the  eye, — the  thing  that  really  sees.  Therefore  the  eye  that  is  not  satisfied 
with  seeing  is  the  spirit  within  us.  The  mind  of  man  is  the  eye  of  man.  And 
here  opens  an  argument  that  rebukes  materialistic  disparagement  and  confirms 
Christian  hope.  It  is  because  of  the  limitless  nature  of  the  human  soul,  that  tha 
eye  of  man  never  rests,  but  perpetually  wanders  over  all  the  visible  world,  over 
all  the  regions  of  possible  truth  and  beauty.  Surely,  if  this  were  merely  a  mortal 
and  limited  nature,  this  would  not  be.  Man  would  be  satisfied  with  seeing.  1.  In 
the  first  place,  consider  what  it  is  that  the  physical  eye  itself  implies.  An  examina* 
tion  of  this  mechanism  alone, — these  cups,  these  tissues,  these  muscles,  the«d 
elastic  veils, — shows  at  least  that  the  eye  is  adjusted  to  the  conditions  of  tha 
external  world,  and  that  there  are  external  things  for  it  to  behold.  But,  this  being 
so,  I  ask,  What  is  implied  by  that  consciousness  which  acts  behind  the  physical 
organ, — that  faculty  which  really  sees,  and  is  never  satisfied?  What  does  thab 
restless  mind  itself,  with  its  capacities  and  instincts,  imply?  Surely  it  implies 
the  existence  of  objects  fitted  to  those  capacities  and  instincts, — the  existence  of 
unlimited  truth  and  beauty  and  goodness,  and  a  field  of  deathless  activity  for  that 
faculty  which  is  never  satisfied.  Back  of  iris  and  retina  there  are  other  lenses. 
There  is  a  lens  of  instinct,  a  lens  of  reason,  a  lens  of  faith,  through  which  coma 
reflections  far  beyond  the  visible  veil  of  earth  and  heaven,  images  of  ideal  majesty 
and  loveliness,  and  "  a  light  that  never  was  on  land  or  sea."  Are  these  mere 
fantasies  engendered  from  within?  If  so,  I  ask.  What  do  these  interior  lenses 
imply?  And  why  do  they  exist  at  all?  What  can  we  infer,  but  that  in  the  wide 
realm  of  actual  being  there  are  spiritual  objects  which  answer  to  its  function? 
For  the  mind,  and  not  the  body,  being  the  real  eye,  the  faculty  of  looking  ou6 
upon  material  forms  is  only  one  of  its  functions.  This  faith- vision,  this  perception 
of  reason,  is  just  as  truly  an  original  faculty,  although  now  its  objects  may  be 
seen  only  as  "through  a  glass  darkly,"  You  never  really  saw  the  most  familiar 
object.  Yet  we  do  not  distrust  these  transmitted  images.  We  live  in  their  light, 
and  rejoice  in  their  communion.  Why,  then,  distrust  these  other  conceptions, 
though  they  are  but  images  also,  and  we  may  behold  them  only  in  that  transparent 
world  where  the  material  lens  shall  be  shattered,  and  we  shall  see  as  we  never 
do  here, — "  face  to  face  "?  Why  suppose  these  to  be  fantasies,  any  more  than 
the  mountains,  the  stars?  This  apprehension  of  God  as  an  inscrutable  Essence, 
yet  also  a  veritable  Presence;  this  impression  on  the  retina  of  the  soul  of  those 
who  have  vanished  from  our  material  sight, — are  these  but  mists  of  fancy,  or 
dreams  of  mortal  sleep?  I  answer  that  they  are  as  legitimate  as  any  transcript 
of  the  outward  world,  only  more  indefinite,  as  all  facts  involved  with  the  infinite 
and  the  immortal  necessarily  must  be.  There  are  diseased  eyes,  and  there  are 
defective  eyes,  by  which  the  optic  nerve  brings  false  reports,  upon  which  the 
outward  world  looks  grim  and  obscure,  to  which  all  external  things  are  a  blank. 
So,  too,  there  may  be  diseased  and  defective  souls,  whose  images  of  spiritual 
things  are  fantastic  and  exaggerated,  or  whose  vision  is  sealed  altogether  by  sad, 
interior  blindness.  But  these  do  not  impeach  the  legitimate  function  of  the  eye, 
nor  refute  the  general  convictions  of  men.  Moreover,  as  this  faculty  of  vision  that 
permits  no  limit  to  its  material  discoveries,  and  looks  beyond  these  sensuous  veils, 
ia  never  satisfied  with  seeing,  I  ask,  What  does  this  fact  itself  imply?  Surely  it 
suggests  boundless  opportunities  of  action.  The  desire  to  see  is  never  quenched  : 
nevertheless  the  mere  physical  organ  of  sight  grows  weary,  and  gladly  retreats 
under  its  drowsy  lids.     The  dew  of  sleep  is  required  for  its  refreshment,  and  th» 


28  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i, 

periods  of  darkness  indicate  a  necessary  suspension  of  its  work.  Age  draws  over 
it  a  filmy  curtain.  And  so  comes  Death,  shutting  up  the  worn-out  casements^ 
•nd  bringing  on  the  final  night  when  all  this  curious  mechanism  is  resolved  into 
its  elements.  But  the  actual  eye  is  not  yet  satisfied  with  seeing,  and  the  forces 
that  shatter  its  material  instruments  do  not  quench  its  capacity  or  its  yearning. 
But  no  capacity  is  without  its  sphere,  no  instinct  is  for  ever  baulked.  The  unBatis- 
fied  eye  demonstrates  the  deathless  and  ever-unfolding  mind.  III.  Therefore  io 
perfect  consistency  with  what  has  been  said,  I  also  urge  this  truth, — that  the  etr 

SEES    MORE    AND    MORE,    AND    MORE    AND    MORE    SHOWS    ITS    OAPACITT    FOR    SEEING,    IN 

j^ROPORTiON  AS  IT  BECOMES  ACCUSTOMED  TO  WORTHY  OBJECTS.  There  may  be  diversitiea 
of  spiritual,  as  there  are  diversities  of  physical  faculty.  Consider  what  some  men 
will  train  their  natural  eyes  to  behold, — the  sailor  at  the  masthead,  the  Indian  in 
the  woods,  the  Esquimaux  among  the  snows.  And  so  there  are  diversities  of 
spiritual  sight,  some  of  them  perhaps  resulting  from  original  differences  in  power. 
But  the  spiritual  vision  of  any  man  may  be  educated  to  still  better  results.  One 
reason  why  men  have  not  this  spiritual  discernment  is  because  they  will  not  see, 
because  they  neglect  the  faculty  of  seeing.  It  has  been  truly  said  that  "  the  eye 
flees  only  that  which  it  brings  the  power  to  see."  It  does  not  create  the  thing  to 
be  seen,  any  more  than  the  microscope  creates  the  pomp  of  an  insect's  wing,  or 
Bosse's  tube  the  splendours  of  Orion.  But  we  see  just  what  we  exercise  the  power 
to  see;  and  no  external  revelations,  however  urged  upon  us,  will  make  up  for  the 
lack  of  spiritual  refinement.  Educate  the  physical  eye  if  you  would  see  more  of 
the  natural  world.  But,  even  then,  the  mind  must  be  educated,  if  we  would 
discern  the  glory  and  the  beauty  everywhere,  and  live  in  a  world  of  perpeitual 
delight,  detecting  a  rarer  loveliness  in  the  daisy,  and  pictures  of  wondrous 
grandeur  in  the  shadows  that  drift  along  the  mountain.  It  is  not  merely  far 
travelling  that  enlarges  and  enriches  the  vision.  The  observant  philosopher  dis- 
covers a  world  of  wonders  in  "  a  tour  around  his  garden."  Let  the  eye  of  the  soul 
be  educated  if  you  would  see  the  world  in  new  relations,  if  you  would  detect  the 
true  significance  of  life,  if  you  would  discern  the  real  blessedness  of  every  joy  and 
the  right  look  of  every  affliction,  if  you  would  stand  consciously  in  the  presence 
of  God,  and  gaze  upon  spiritual  things.  What  we  really  need  is  not  more  things 
but  better  eyesight.  And  is  it  not  this  eye  of  the  soul  that  we  must  mainly  rely 
upon?  How  far  will  physical  sight  guide  us?  How  long  will  it  last  us?  How 
much  will  it  enable  us  to  see?  At  best  it  gives  us  only  appearances,  and  itself 
fades  and  grows  dim  ere  long.  Think,  then,  of  the  desolation  of  those  who  have 
no  interior  vision.  How  light,  comparatively,  has  been  the  affliction  of  physical 
blindness  to  men  like  Niebuhr,  who,  when  the  veil  had  fallen  upon  present  things, 
could  cheer  the  darkness  of  his  closing  years  by  retracing  in  the  luminous  track 
of  memory  the  scenes  of  early  travel;  or  to  Milton,  who,  "  with  that  inner  eye 
which  no  calamity  could  darken,"  saw  "  those  ethereal  virtues  flinging  down  on 
the  jasper  pavement  their  crowns  of  amaranth  and  gold."     (E.  H.  Chapin.) 

Ver.  9.  The  thing  that  hath  been,  it  is  that  which  shall  be. — Old  things  in  new 
time: — One  of  the  things  which  strike  an  observer  of  human  beings  is  the  dis- 
position they  perpetually  betray  to  imagine  and  expect  something  in  the  future, 
different  from  all  that  has  been  in  the  past.  We  not  only  anticipate  futurity,  but 
anticipate  it  as  bearing  a  character,  and  doing  a  work,  peculiar  to  itself.  This 
habit  is  seen  in  all,  and  is  revealed  in  nearly  every  way.  Futurity  is  to  do 
wonders.  It  is  to  cure  all  diseases,  to  correct  all  mistakes,  to  purge  from  all 
vices.  To  realize  our  conception,  it  must  possess  the  mysterious  powers  of  magic. 
The  past  is  not  permitted  to  afford  any  guidance  in  our  mental  wanderings  into 
time  to  come.  It  will  be  affected  by  no  euch  vulgar  laws  as  have  been  used  to 
operate.  It  will  have  a  sphere  and  dominion  of  its  own.  It  will  present 
an  improved  series  of  life  and  providence.  We  speak  of  it  as  "  doing," 
*'  bringing,"  "  making "  things,  often  forgetting  that  it  is  only  the  duration 
in  which  they  are  done,  and  brought,  and  made,  by  God  and  men.  I. 
The  first  application  we  make  of  the  sentiment  is  to  Life.  Who  does  not 
entertain  a  vague  notion  that  some  considerable  variety  will  be  introduced  into  his 
future  life,  some  great  change  in  the  mode  and  manner  of  his  outward  existence? 
Tet  this  is  a  notion  which  a  little  reflection  and  a  little  memory  may  serve  to 
rebuke.  There  is,  perhaps,  no  solid  ground  on  which  to  hope  that  in  respect  to 
circumstances  this  year  will  not  be,  to  you,  as  the  last.  There  is  no  reasonable 
^obflbility,  perhaps,  that  you  will  go  into  a  different  way  of  business,  a  different 


chAP.  1.]  ECCLESIASTES.  ^ 

sphere,  a  difierent  station.  And  as  to  more  directly  personal  matters,  it  is  certain 
that  the  common  processes  and  ways  of  life  will  continue  the  same.  Eating  and 
drinking,  sleeping  and  waking,  thinking  and  speaking,  weeping  and  rejoicing,  will 
continue  to  be  the  daily  experiences  and  occupations  of  all.  There  is  something 
appalling  in  all  this,  when  considered  alone.  This  monotony  of  life  is  very 
solemn,  and  very  sad.  And  it  is  because  men  feel  it  to  be  so  dismal  and  dis- 
tressing,  that  they  constantly  do  violence  to  all  sense  and  fact  in  fancying  that 
the  future  will  afford,  they  know  not  how,  a  different  kind  of  being  and  of  occupa* 
tion.  Hope  is  the  safety-valve  of  tribulation  and  satiety :  but  for  it,  verily  thers 
would  be  more  suicides.  What  are  we  but,  in  a  figure,  drivers  over  the  samv 
ground  of  life,  with  little  variety  but  that  of  a  fine  or  a  wet  day,  a  summer  or  a 
winter  season,  good  or  bad  roads?  And  what  is  the  remedy?  As  to  hoping,  that 
10  a  poor  and  an  insufficient  one.  It  is  rather  an  excuse  than  a  reason  for  peace 
and  contentment.  When  men  take  no  interest  in  food,  what  is  the  cure?  We  seek 
to  create  an  appetite,  by  rectifying  the  system,  giving  the  powers  health  and 
tone.  And  this  must  be  the  cure  here.  Men  are  miserable;  they  complain  of  the 
world,  of  their  fellows,  of  their  lot;  this  dish  is  bad,  that  is  badly  dressed,  and  so 
on.  The  fault  is  in  the  men.  They  want  an  appetite  for  life.  Let  there  be  that, 
and  however  common  and  plain  the  provision,  there  will  be  no  lack  of  relish. 
But  while  that  is  wanted,  the  costliest  delicacies  and  nicest  preparations  will  imparl 
but  a  mean  and  meagre  gratification.  A  fictitious  taste  will  always  be  a  fickle 
one.  Men  tire  of  that  for  which  they  have  no  strong  and  healthy  craving.  Even 
stimulants  lose  their  power,  and  to  sustain  the  effect  you  must  increase  the  con- 
sumption. The  greater  part  of  men  have  no  serious  purpose  in  life.  They  are' 
destitute  of  great  and  abiding  purposes,  towards  which  to  direct  their  energies, 
and  which  may  give  importance  and  continuity  to  their  existence.  Their  history 
is  not  one  united  whole,  but  is  made  up  of  scraps;  it  is  not  a  stream  flowing  on 
to  one  specific  point,  but  so  many  unconnected  pools.  They  labour  not  in  con- 
tinuous service,  but  chance-work.  They  are  not  filled  with  a  solemn  and  spiritual 
idea,  not  engrossed  by  a  momentous  truth,  not  moved  by  an  all-absorbing  passion. 
Be  assured  that  nothing  can  give  nest  and  vivacity  to  life  but  a  deep  interest  in 
the  soul,  and  that  nothing  can  secure  that  like  the  minding  of  the  things  of  the 
Spirit.  The  only  way  to  realize  the  charm,  and  fulness,  and  power  of  your  being, 
is  to  live  yourselves,  in  the  Bible  sense  of  the  expression;  to  live  spiritually,  to 
live  for  Christ,  to  live  toward  God.  This  is  the  life  that  you  were  made  for,  and 
redeemed  for;  and,  without  it,  the  end  of  your  being  cannot  be  attained,  its  large 
capacity  cannot  be  filled,  its  rich  privilege  cannot  be  enjoyed.  Having  this,  you 
will  not  complain  of  the  littleness  of  events  and  lots,  for  everything  is  great  to 
him  who  connects  it  with  responsibility,  eternity,  and  God;  or  of  their  meanness, 
for  everything  is  glorious  to  him  who  regards  it  as  the  occasion  and  the  instrument 
of  a  Divine  service  and  a  spiritual  salvation;  or  of  their  staleness,  for  everything 
is  new  to  him  who  brings  to  it  an  eager  will,  a  full  purpose,  and  affections  renewed 
and  stimulated  by  the  love  of  Jesus  and  the  love  of  men.  "  Newness  of  life  " 
must  be  sought  for,  not  in  strangeness  of  condition,  but  ever-quickened  spirituality 
of  soul.  And  let  me,  in  this  connection,  press  home  to  you  the  thought,  that  you 
have  before  you  an  everlasting  future.  The  provision  you  have  to  make  is  not 
for  time,  but  for  eternity.  Even  if  a  skilful  management  of  yom*  materials 
could  infuse  something  like  freshness  into  your  existence  here,  what  is  your  resource 
for  the  endless  hereafter?  The  mistake  you  are  making  now,  even  did  not  more 
solemn  considerations  interpose,  would  be  a  mistake  in  the  world  to  come.  It  is 
a  solemn  business  to  provide  for  the  immortal  interest  of  souls  like  yours,  to 
secure  them  against  the  oppressive  monotony  of  changeless  being.  All  external 
expedients  must  of  necessity  fail,  and  the  only  hope  remains  in  an  intellect  ever 
opening  upon  some  fresh  view  of  the  truth  of  God,  and  a  heart  ever  growing  into 
a  closer  likeness  to  His  holiness,  and  a  fuller  fellowship  in  the  eternal  Spirit.  II. 
We  apply  the  sentiment  to  Responsibilitt.  Every  one  who  has  noticed  his  own 
heart  or  the  hearts  of  others  must  have  perceived  how  prone  is  man  to  rely  on 
time  for  the  production  of  mental,  moral  and  spiritual  changes  in  himself.  They 
know  there  are  intellectual  defects,  but  they  expect  them  to  be  supplied;  they 
know  there  are  improper  habits,  but  they  expect  them  to  be  corrected;  they  know 
there  are  sinful  principles,  but  they  expect  them  to  be  removed.  They  do  not 
intend  to  continue  ignorant,  or  irregular,  or  imgodly.  Now,  it  is  of  the  first 
importance  to  remember  and  possess,  as  a  practical  conviction,  that  time  does 
nothing,  in  the  ease  of  any  of  the  changes  that  take  place  in  men's  minds  and 


80  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOH.  IcKkr.  t 

hearts  and  lives,  besides  the  affording  a  season  in  which  thej  maj  be  effected. 
He  who  expects  to  be  mended  merely  by  time,  whatever  the  nature  or  measure 
of  his  defects,  will  find  himself  in  as  poor  a  plight  as  he  who  should  stand  by  the 
■tream  till  all  the  waters  have  passed  along.  Time  will  not  change  the  nature 
of  the  seed  sown,  but  only  afford  opportunity  for  its  growth.  Men  will  never  be 
learned  without  study;  will  never  be  purged  of  bad  habits  without  self-denial  and 
decision  and  perseverance;  will  never  become  Christians,  or,  as  Christians,  abound 
in  grace,  without  repentance,  earnest  faith,  mortification  of  the  flesh,  crucifixion 
of  the  members,  the  entire  and  unconditional  conversion  of  the  heart  to  God  and 
godliness.  Is  it  not,  after  all,  the  moral  pains,  the  effort  of  will,  the  self- 
sacrifice  required,  that  let  and  hinder  you?  Is  not  your  case  exactly  like  that  of 
a  man  who  begrudges  the  toil  and  trouble  of  clearing  a  field  that  is  overrun  with 
wreeds,  and  postpones  them,  in  hope  that  hereafter  the  labour  needed  may  be  less? 
Vie  implore  you  to  take  counsel  of  past  experience.  The  hope  of  this  present 
lime  was  the  hope  of  years  ago.  As  you  think  or  rather  dream  now,  you  used  to 
dream.  With  what  result?  You  have  not  attained  the  expected  change.  Will 
not  holiness  and  duty  involve  renewal,  a  labour,  a  fight?  Will  it  not  always 
require  the  utmost  unity  of  heart,  and  strength  of  will,  and  application  of  power? 
••  Ah,"  say  you,  "  but  there  is  the  Holy  Spirit."  But  does  He  dispense  with 
■orrow  for  sin,  and  subjection  to  Christ,  and  strenuous  exertion?  Will  He  weep 
lor  you,  repent  for  you,  believe  for  you,  obey  for  you?  Does  He  work  without 
means  and  motives?  The  question  then  returns,  What  do  you  now?  No  reason- 
able man  can  look  into  the  future  with  any  confidence,  while  he  is  going  on  in 
■in;  and  he  who  says,  "  Time  works  wonders,  I  shall  be  wise,  though  now  a  fool, 
I  shall  be  correct  and  consistent,  though  now  far  from  being  so,  I  shall  be  holy 
though  now  cherishing  worldliness,"  only  postpones,  but  thereby  augments,  not 
diminishes,  the  labour.  III.  We  apply  the  sentiment  to  Pbovidencb.  The  term 
"  providence  "  is  used  here,  of  course,  in  a  restricted  sense,  to  denote  the  course 
of  events  taking  place  upon  the  globe.  All  events  are  under  the  control  and 
direction  of  God;  and  all  are  connected,  directly  or  indirectly,  with  the  establish- 
ment and  extension  of  His  spiritual  kingdom.  We  know  of  no  distinction  between 
ecclesiastical  and  worldly  providence.  All  things  are  given  into  the  hand  of 
Christ,  and  He  orders  and  governs  all  for  the  sake  of  His  Body,  the  Church.  The 
principles  of  spiritual  providence  will  remain  the  same.  Sometimes  we  fear.  The 
question  is  suggested,  "  If  the  foundations  be  destroyed,  what  shall  the  righteous 
do?  "  It  is  highly  probable  that  we  are  fast  entering  upon  scenes  to  try  the  faith 
and  fortitude  even  of  "  the  elect."  It  would,  however,  be  a  grievous  error  to 
suppose  that,  whatever  the  materials  and  outward  forms  of  providence  may  be, 
its  principles  and  purposes  are  not  abiding  and  immutable.  The  laws  which 
govern  all  physical  and  spiritual  things  "  change  not."  To  fulfil  the  blessed 
designs  of  the  Gospel  is  still  His  end.  Christianity  is  the  reason  and  the  rule  of 
all  things.  Whatever  happens  is  a  step  towards  the  final  and  full  attainment  of 
the  highest,  holiest  and  most  gracious  purposes.  That  which  seems  to  hinder  is 
made  to  help.  The  path  may  be  strange,  but  the  Guide  will  bring  them  home. 
The  prescription  may  be  in  an  unknown  tongue,  but  the  Physician  will  complete 
their  cure.  God's  dispensations  may  be  hidden,  but  God  is  not;  and  "  all  things 
are  yours,  for  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."  Are  you  Christ's?  The 
scenes  and  processes  of  Providence  are  more  alike  in  every  age  than  many,  at 
first  sight,  may  suppose.  Sometimes  the  past,  especially  the  ancient  ages  of  the 
world,  seem  to  have  been  very  different  from  our  own.  And,  doubtless,  in  some 
respects,  thank  God,  they  were.  But  when  their  spirit  is  separated  from  their 
form,  and  allowance  is  made  for  the  fact  that  they  are  ancient,  that  we  have, 
therefore,  their  great  and  prominent  events  and  features,  without  the  filling  up  of 
things  minor  and  multitudinous,  they  are  not  so  peculiar  after  all.  What  a 
different  earth  would  ours  appear  to  him  who  saw  nothing  but  its  mountains  I 
God  does  not  work  so  much  by  sudden  and  violent  operations  as  in  a  gradual  and 
silent  way.  The  most  important  processes  in  Nature  and  in  Providence  are  the 
most  silent.  The  moral  instrument  of  God's  providence  is  the  same.  Whatever 
change  may  take  place  in  the  human  mind,  in  social  customs  and  relations,  in 
outward  and  material  circumstances,  truth  will  still  be  the  means  of  advancing 
the  Divine  designs  respecting  our  world.  Our  duty  is  therefore  as  plain  as  it  is 
important,  to  study,  to  feel,  to  speak,  to  act,  to  spread  the  truth;  in  particular, 
the  living  and  abiding  truth  of  Christianity.  Let  us  not,  then,  spend  our  time 
and  waste  our  powers  in  a  vain  attempt  to  comprehend  or  predict  events,  but  let 


CHA».  1.]  ECCLESIASTES.  31 

us  set  about  wholesome  and  unchanging  duty.  We  are  not  called  to  be  moral 
astrologers  but  moral  husbandmen,  and  a  miserable  thing  it  would  be  for  us  to 
cast  nativities  and — die.  {A.  J.  Morris.)  On  the  resemblance  between  the  futur0 
and  the  past: — The  prerogative  of  imagining  and  looking  into  the  future  is  on* 
of  which  men  avail  themselves  with  the  least  moderation.  How  much  time  is 
spent  in  conjectiu'es  1  See  this  illustrated  in  the  flattering  expectations  of  youth ; 
the  sad  forecastings  of  the  sorrowful ;  our  conjectures  about  political  complications ; 
the  Bchemings  of  enthusiasts  and  partisans;  and  even  in  the  musings  of  men  who, 
rising  above  what  is  merely  pleasant  or  useful,  have  the  Good  in  view.  This  ia 
certainly  not  the  most  profitable  couree.  Else,  why  nothing  but  a  bitter  after- 
taste left  of  extravagant  expectations  when  these  are  disappointed?  This  is  com- 
monly thought  to  be  the  language  of  satiety.  If  it  be  regarded  as  a  complaint, 
springing  out  of  a  longing  for  novelty,  and  adducing  as  its  grievance  that  there 
is  none  to  be  found,  then  auch  a  mental  condition  must  be  inferred;  for  when  the 
mind  in  its  hankering  after  new  impressions  fails  to  gain  any,  there  sensibility 
must  have  become  wholly  dead.  But  these  words  stand  here  without  reference 
to  a  personal  experience,  as  a  deliberate  observation,  followed  by  a  steady  and 
many-sided  contemplation  of  the   world.     I.  "  Nothing   nbw   17noeb  thb   sun  " 

UOST  NATUBALLT  EXPRXSSES  THE  ASPECT  OF  THB  WORLD  TO  THB  ETE  OF  THB  HAN  WHO 

BVEBTWHBBB  IN  THB  WORLD  8EBK8  THB  LoBD.  1.  We  must  have  regard,  not  at  all 
to  the  exterior,  but  to  the  interior  of  events,  both  in  the  material  and  in  the 
spiritual  world.  The  exterior  is  ever  varying,  the  interior  is  ever  the  same.  What 
of  the  ever-changing  situations  of  the  heavenly  bodies?  The  same  laws  hav» 
determined  them  from  the  beginning.  What  of  the  changes  that  appear  in  my 
body,  in  the  plant  world?  The  same  powers  and  their  laws  are  ever  at  work 
there  to  produce  essentially  the  same  forms.  The  Unchangeable  is  everywhere 
impressed  upon  His  works!  ...  So  in  what  concerns  you  more  closely,  into 
which  you  may  fathom  still  more  deeply — the  spiritual  world.  Why  wonder  at 
a  fellow-creature  who  furnishes  you  with  an  unusual  eight  by  extraordinary 
yirtuas  or  vices,  wisdom  or  folly,  skill  in  thought  and  action  or  unaccountable 
peculiarity  in  these?  Look  into  his  soul!  There  are  the  same  faculties  as  in 
yourself,  and  the  operations  of  the  same  laws.  Consider  the  great  mystery  how 
the  two  worlds  to  which  you  belong  are  united;  how  mind  is  ever  gaining  fresh 
dominion  over  matter,  and  thereby  advancing  human  fellowship,  and  education, 
and  convenience.  See  in  this  nothing  novel.  They  are  all  but  evolutions  of  the 
same  Divine  thoughts,  advances  toward  the  same  goal  of  His  grace,  according  to 
the  same  plan  of  His  wisdom;  in  short,  "there  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun." 
2.  To  him  who  everywhere  in  the  world  seeks  the  Lord,  there  is  no  distinction 
between  Great  and  Little.  If  the  Lord  does  everything,  and  is  active  in  every- 
thing, then  everything  must  be  worthy  of  Him,  and  no  one  thing  will  rise  superior 
to  another,  as  He  is  always  equal  to  Himself.  With  Him  in  view,  therefore, 
every  event  will  reveal  the  same  power  or  principle.  This  may  appear  strange  to 
those  who  consider  only  the  outside  of  things,  and  judge  by  the  impressions  which 
it  produces  on  their  sense  and  feeling.  They  overlook  the  greatness  and  glory  of 
the  Little;  hence  they  deem  great  events  to  spring  from  trifling  causes,  and  see 
novelty  in  quick,  unexpected  revolutions;  hence  the  wondering  gaze  of  folly  here, 
and  their  stupid  blindness  before  God's  revelation  there.  They  see  not  the  same 
elements  and  laws  in  the  desolating  storm  as  in  the  morning  breese;  in  the 
sudden  death  as  in  the  steadily-maintained  warfare  of  life  and  death.  A  new 
light  of  truth  flames  high  in  some  quarter,  and  errors  vanish.  Now,  what  astonish- 
ment seizes  men,  and  what  congratulations  abound  I  This,  because  they  see  not 
the  heralding  sparks  of  that,  and  the  secret  decay  of  these.    II.  Such  sbntihentb 

ABB  OONNBOTBD  WITH  THIS   TIEW   AS  BELONG  TO  THE  EXCLCTSITB  ENDOWMENTS  OF  THB 

PIO08.  1.  Every  one  holding  this  view  finds  so  much  the  more  cause  to  be  con- 
tented with  the  post  which  God  has  assigned  to  him  in  the  world.  To  him 
nothing  is  vain,  and  every  position  in  the  world  may  be  fraught  with  benefit. 
2.  With  such  a  view  of  the  world,  a  man  will  use  even  in  little  and  common 
things  far  greater  diligence  than  others.  Herein  we  see  the  humility  of  the 
pious  man,  which  is  a  source  of  much  good  both  to  himself  and  to  the  world. 
Negtectore  of  the  Little  are  sorry  promoters  of  the  good  cause,  and  never  come  by 
fair  means  to  the  Great.  8.  It  hence  follows  that,  more  than  any  other,  this 
mode  of  looking  at  the  world  is  connected  with  the  assured  hope  that  we  shall 
succeed  from  time  to  time  in  becoming  better.  This  is  one  of  the  first  character- 
istics of  the  future  to  be  perceived.     Not  so  to  the  man  who  is  waiting  for  some* 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

what  outwardly  great  and  extraordinary.  He  ie  doomed  to  much  anxiety  and 
disappointment.  By  looking,  then,  through  the  surface  of  earthly  things  into 
their  inner  essence,  we  see  the  true  connection  of  the  Divine  government;  are 
able  to  greet  the  future  as  a  friend,  of  whose  thoughts  we  are  sure,  however 
changed  his  demeanour;  and  in  modesty  and  humility  may  calm  ourselves  with 
the  conviction  that  we  shall  receive  from  oiu-  Heavenly  Father  henceforth  nothing 
different  from  what  His  love  has  already  bestowed  upon  us  in  the  past.  {F,  D.  E. 
Schleiermacher.)  The  helpful  past: — There  are  conclusions  in  science  which  are 
inevitable  and  independent  of  the  student,  except  so  far  as  his  intellect  is  clear 
enough  to  understand  them;  but  the  moral  conclusions,  and  the  conclusions  of 
the  practical  conduct  which  a  man  shall  try  from  certain  data  or  propositions 
upon  which  he  or  others  shall  be  agreed — those  vary  with  his  immediate  state  ol 
conscience  or  spirit.  Now,  with  regard  to  this  principle  that  Solomon  found  to 
be  a  great  weariness.  The  conclusions  that  a  man  shall  draw  from  it  are  very 
much  dependent  upon  the  man  himself.  There  is  a  desire  in  man  for  that  which 
is  best.  As  long  as  the  river  ran  into  an  eternity,  it  seemed  to  be  lovely,  but 
when  we  find  that  has  got  into  a  circle  too,  and  that  the  water  will  come  down 
in  rain  back  again,  that  becomes  a  weariness.  Man  has  a  passion  for  something 
new;  fairy  tales,  and  many  romances  are  built  upon  a  desire  that  there  should 
be  something  that  has  not  been,  and  this  spirit  in  a  child  is  no  doubt  a  greafe 
element  of  joy.  Now,  whether  this  weariness  is  yours,  I  know  not;  that  it  has 
been  a  passing  feeling — judging  from  myself — I  conclude,  but  as  it  is  the  fate  to 
be  BO,  it  is  the  wisest  thing  to  see  what  good  it  has,  and  to  rejoice  that  this  year 
will  bring  nothing  new  at  all,  that  it  will  be  the  old  story  again,  which  will  at 
times  be  a  weariness,  but  also  at  times  a  joy;  for  remember  that  human  life  is 
based  upon  this  great  postulate — "  The  thing  that  hath  been,  it  is  that  which  shall 
be;  and  that  which  is  done,  is  that  which  shall  be  done:  and  there  is  no  new 
thing  under  the  sun."  Men  try  many  ways  to  find  out  something  new,  but  it  is 
in  vain.  They  travel  sometimes  for  a  change,  and  they  go  to  the  East,  but  they 
find  that  there  are  people  there  the  same  as  elsewhere,  and  even  travelling  some- 
times gets  a  weariness.  What  has  been  will  be.  Humanity  is  the  same.  Others 
try  visiting.  You  get  new  people  to  come  and  see  you,  and  you  find  out  the  old 
tune  in  new  mouths.  There  are  no  new  people  scarcely.  It  is  the  old  story; 
there  is  a  little  difference  in  the  instrument  perhaps,  but  you  hear  the  old  tunes, 
the  commonplace  talk,  the  same  things  over  again,  and  why  not?  That  is  the 
way  of  life — let  a  wise  man  accept  it.  Now,  see  why  it  is  the  way.  We  have 
all  to  start  from  the  beginning.  We  have  all  to  build  up,  not  what  many  of  you 
love  to  build  up — a  house  made  with  hands,  but  the  end  of  life  is  to  build  up 
**  a  house  not  made  with  hands,"  to  be  hereafter  "  eternal  in  the  heavens." 
When  a  man  sees  clearly  that  to  build  his  character  is  of  more  consequence  than 
to  build  his  fame  and  fortune,  then  he  is  wise,  for  instead  of  he — a  poor  weakling — 
having  to  face  the  unknown,  he  knows  what  is  coming,  he  learns  to  rejoice  that 
he  can  consult  the  fathers,  for  what  happened  yesterday  is  a  future  precedent, 
and  finding  the  thing  that  has  been  is  that  which  shall  be,  the  elements  of  uncer- 
tainty— fear  and  terror — are  removed.  If  then  I  forget  for  a  moment  that  the 
building  of  a  character  is  the  only  wise  thing  for  which  I  came  into  the  world, 
and  for  which  all  other  things  exist,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  then  this  glorious 
repetition,  this  wonderful  monotony,  this  constant  changeableness,  is  an  element 
of  my  success.  I  know  pretty  much  what  duties  and  circumstances  life  can 
bring,  I  know  its  utmost,  I  have  seen  its  worst  and  its  best,  and  I  know  what 
I  am  about;  I  can  go  forth  to  build,  knowing  the  materials  I  have  at  my  disposal, 
what  the  dangers  and  difficulties  I  have  to  encounter,  and  the  issues  that  will 
come  to  pass,  and  so  for  to-morrow  I  am  prepared.  For  remember  that  of  all  a 
man's  possessions,  the  past  is  the  surest,  greatest,  and  most  useful.  The  past  is 
man's  storehouse,  it  is  his  volume  to  which  he  goes  again  and  again  for  advice  as 
to  the  future.  He  turns  it  over,  as  we  turn  over  the  pages  of  a  book  of  law  or  a 
dictionary.  He  knows  where  to  find  each  thing  he  wants.  So  when  to-morrow 
comes,  and  brings  me  a  difficulty,  I  go  to  yesterday,  and,  turning  the  volume 
over,  I  look  for  bodily  pain  perhaps,  and  I  find  that  in  a  certain  month  of  a 
certain  year  I  suffered  bodily  pain  to  a  degree  to  make  sleep  impossible,  and  life 
•  despair.  But  it  says  at  the  end — "  Got  through  it,  not  so  bad  as  I  thought." 
'And  so  the  past  is  my  dictionary,  I  know  the  meaning;  it  is  my  book  of  precedents, 
I  know  what  will  happen.  Some  man  speaks  evil  of  you,  and,  when  you  are 
young,  it  disturbs  you  much.     It  is  like  a  scratch  on  the  skin,  it  does  not  go 


CHAP.  1.]  ECCLESIASTE8.  8S 

deep,  but  it  gives  you  an  amazing  pain  while  it  lasts.  But  one  fool  saying  another 
is  a  fool  is  simply  a  statement  that  he  is  a  fool,  and  thus  to  the  wise  man  the 
past  is  a  great  hope  for  the  future.  It  contains  balm,  consolation  and  comfort. 
It  is  the  history  of  difSculties  that  turned  out  not  to  be  so  difficult.  It 
is  the  history  of  struggles  that  came  to  an  end.  It  is  the  history  ol 
long  nights  that  were  always  followed  by  morning.  Therefore  to  the  wise 
man  it  is  a  joy  to  say  with  Solomon :  "  The  thing  that  hath  been,  it 
is  that  which  shall  be;  and  that  which  is.  done  is  that  which  shall  be 
done;  and  there  is  no  new  thing  under  the  sun."  We  have  character  to  build 
up,  and  we  require  the  old  circumstances,  ways,  results,  the  inevitable  methods 
of  God,  in  order  that  we  may  surely  and  safely  build.  Then  as  we  have  to  learn 
things,  and  follow  them  for  ourselves,  it  is  needful  that  the  same  old  story  be 
applied  to  each  of  us,  for  were  the  circumstances  of  a  man's  life  greatly  to  vary, 
the  character  that  would  result  must  vary  too.  I  am  content.  I  look  forward 
to  this  year,  I  confess,  with  no  great  enthusiasm,  because  I  have  ceased  to  be 
an  enthusiast,  and  am  simply  a  workman  now.  Life  will  bring  me  nothing  new. 
Therefore  if  you  expect  me  to  be  eager — excuse  me — I  have  seen  the  show 
b^ore.  But  no  terror  is  possible,  no  cowardice,  and  no  fear.  I  go  forth  with  a 
grave  heart,  and  the  reason  of  it  is  this — "  What  has  been,  will  be."  Old  deliver- 
ances are  the  deliverances  of  the  future.  The  thing  that  has  been  shall  be,  God 
who  did  deliver  in  the  olden  time,  will  deliver  now,  and  the  fixity  of  God,  and 
the  uniformity  of  human  experience,  then,  instead  of  being  (as  they  were  to 
Solomon)  a  weariness  and  vexation,  shall  become  at  last  a  comfort  and  joy.  So 
that,  beginning  a  new  year,  we  begin  it  with  courage  and  quiet  confidence.  The 
chances  are,  not  one  of  us  will  find  the  year  too  much  for  us,  because  we  have 
tried  a  great  many  years,  and  have  got  the  better  of  them.  "  The  Lord  that 
delivered  me  out  of  the  paw  of  the  lion,  and  out  of  the  paw  of  the  bear,  He  will 
deliver  me  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Philistine."  Thus  then  I  rejoice,  and  look 
forward  to  the  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  days  with  all  their  monotony — the  sun 
rising  and  setting  at  the  same  time  and  place,  knowing  that  through  the  same 
pane  of  glass  the  sun  will  shine  (if  it  shines  at  all),  with  a  quiet  faith  and  con* 
fidence.  For  if  the  sun  should  rise  in  a  different  way  I  should  not  be  ready  for 
it.  If  the  sea  should  take  to  going  up-hill,  there  would  be  very  sad  changes  with 
regard  to  human  nature.  If  the  law  of  gravity  should  take  another  change  in 
consequence  of  the  millennium,  it  would  be  a  very  sorry  thing  for  himian  life.  But 
human  life  is  built  up,  all  churches  are  erected,  all  institutions  are  founded,  all 
coal  pits  sunk,  tdl  candles  lighted,  all  the  steps  of  men  move  according  to  one 
great  proposition — what  has  been  shall  be.  (G.  Dawson.)  Imaginary  schemes  of 
happiness: — There  are  few  people  who  do  not  form  in  their  minds  agreeable  plant 
of  happiness,  made  up  of  future  flattering  prospects,  which  have  no  foundation 
except  in  their  own  fancies.  This  disposition,  so  general  among  mankind,  is  also 
one  of  the  principal  causes  of  theix  immoderate  desire  to  live.  A  child  fancies 
that  as  soon  as  he  shall  arrive  at  a  certain  stature,  he  shall  enjoy  more  pleasure 
than  he  hath  enjoyed  in  his  childhood,  and  this  is  pardonable  in  a  child.  The 
youth  persuades  himself  that  men,  who  are  what  they  call  settled  in  the  world, 
are  incomparably  more  happy  than  young  people  can  be  at  his  age.  Thus  we  go 
on  from  fancy  to  fancy,  and  from  one  chimera  to  another,  till  death  arrives, 
subverts  all  our  imaginary  projects  of  happiness,  and  makes  us  know  by  our  own 
experience  what  the  experience  of  others  might  have  fully  taught  us  long  before, 
that  is,  that  the  whole  world  is  vanity.  Of  this  vanity  I  would  endeavour  to 
convince  you,  and  I  dedicate  this  discoiu"se  to  the  destruction  of  imaginary  schemes 
of  happiness.  All  the  past  hath  been  vanity,  and  all  the  future  will  be  vanity  to 
the  end  of  the  world.  The  thing  that  hath  been,  is  that  which  shall  be :  and  that 
which  is  done,  is  that  which  shall  be  done;  and  there  is  no  new  thing  under  the 
sun.  I.  Let  us  first  of  all  determine  the  sense  of  the  text,  and  examine  what 
EBBOB  THE  WISE  MAN  ATTACKS.  1.  When  the  wise  man  says  that  which  hath  been, 
is  that  which  shall  be,  he  doth  not  mean  to  attribute  a  character  of  firmness  and 
consistency  to  such  events  as  concern  us.  A  spectator  young  in  his  observations, 
and  distant  from  the  central  point,  is  amazed  at  the  rapid  changes,  which  he 
beholds  suddenly  take  place  like  the  creation  of  new  worlds;  he  supposed  whole 
ages  must  pass  in  removing  those  enormous  masses,  public  bodies,  and  in  turning 
the  current  of  prosperity  and  victory.  But  should  he  penetrate  into  the  spring 
of  events,  he  would  soon  find  that  a  very  small  and  inconsiderable  point  gave 
motion  to  that  wheel,  on  which  turned  public  prosperity,  and  public  adversity^, 

8 


34  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chip.  I, 

and  which  gave  a  whole  nation  a  new  and  diSerent  appearance.  Sometimefi  tha 
rare  qualities  of  one  single  general  animate  a  whole  army,  and  assign  to  each 
member  of  it  his  proper  work,  to  the  prudent  a  station  which  requires  prudence, 
to  the  intrepid  a  station  which  requires  courage,  and  even  to  an  idiot  a  place 
where  folly  and  absurdity  have  their  use.  From  theee  rare  qualities  a  state 
derives  the  glory  of  rapid  marches,  bold  sieges,  desperate  attacks,  complete  vic- 
tories and  shouts  of  triumph.  The  general  finishes  his  life  by  his  own  folly,  or  ia 
supplanted  by  a  party  cabal,  or  sinks  into  inaction  on  the  soft  down  of  his  own 
panegyrics,  or  a  fatal  bullet,  shot  at  random  and  without  design,  penetrates  tha 
heart  of  this  noble  and  generous  man.  Instantly  a  new  world  appears,  and  that 
which  was  is  no  more ;  for  with  this  general  victory  and  songs  of  triumph  expired. 
It  would  be  easy  to  repeat  of  individuals  what  we  have  affirmed  of  public  bodies, 
that  is,  that  the  world  is  a  theatre  in  perpetual  motion,  and  always  varying;  that 
every  day,  and  in  a  manner,  every  moment  exhibits  some  new  scene,  soma 
change  of  decoration.  It  is,  then,  clear  that  the  proposition  in  the  text  ought 
to  be  restrained  to  the  nature  of  the  subject  spoken  of.  2.  But  these  indeterminate 
words,  *'  that  which  hath  been  shall  be,  and  there  is  no  new  thing  under  the 
Bun,"  must  be  explained  by  the  place  they  occupy.  Without  quoting  other 
examples,  we  observe  that  the  words  under  consideration  occur  twice  in  this 
book,  once  in  the  text,  and  again  in  the  fifteenth  verse  of  the  third  chapter,  where 
we  are  told,  that  which  hath  been  is  now,  and  that  which  is  to  be  hath  already 
been.  However,  it  is  certain  that  these  two  sentences,  so  much  alike  in  sound, 
have  a  very  different  meaning.  The  design  of  Solomon  in  the  latter  passage  is  to 
inform  such  persons,  as  tremble  at  the  least  temptation,  that  they  were  mis* 
taken.  But  in  our  text  the  same  words,  the  thing  that  hath  been  is  that  which 
ehall  be,  have  a  different  meaning.  It  is  evident  by  the  place  in  which  the  wise 
man  put  them  that  he  intended  to  decry  the  good  things  of  this  life,  to  make  the 
vanity  of  them  appear,  and  to  convince  mankind  that  no  revolutions  can  change 
the  character  of  vanity  essential  to  their  condition.  We  often  declaim  on  the 
Tanity  of  the  world;  but  our  declamations  are  not  unfrequently  more  intended  to 
indemnify  pride  than  to  express  the  genuine  feelings  of  a  heart  disabused.  We 
love  to  declaim  against  advantages  out  of  our  reach,  and  we  take  vengeance  on 
them  for  not  coming  within  our  grasp  by  exclaiming  against  them.  A  man  waiting 
on  the  coast  to  go  abroad  wishes  for  nothing  but  a  fair  wind,  and  he  does  not 
think  that  he  shall  find  other,  and  perhaps  greater,  calamities  in  another  climate 
than  those  which  compelled  him  to  quit  his  native  soil.  This  is  an  image  of  ut 
all.  Our  minds  are  limited,  and  when  an  object  presents  itself  to  us  we  consider 
it  only  in  one  point  of  view,  in  other  lights  we  are  not  competent  to  the  examine- 
tion  of  it.  Hence  the  interest  we  take  in  some  events,  in  the  revolutions  of  states, 
the  phenomena  of  nature,  and  the  change  of  seasons;  hence  that  perpetual  desire 
of  change.  Eyes  never  satisfied  with  seeing,  and  ears  never  filled  with  hearing. 
Poor  mortals,  will  you  always  run  after  phantoms  I  No,  it  is  not  any  of  the 
revolutions  you  so  earnestly  desire  can  alter  the  vanity  essential  to  human  things : 
with  all  the  advantages  which  you  so  earnestly  desire,  you  would  find  yourself  at 
void,  and  as  discontented  as  you  are  now.  11.  Let  ds  bndeavodr  to  admit  thbsb 
TBDTH8  WITH  ALL  THEIR  EFFECTS.  Let  US  attempt  the  work,  though  we  have  so 
many  reasons  to  fear  a  want  of  success.  There  are  four  barriers  against  imaginary 
projects;  four  proofs,  or  rather  four  forces  of  demonstrations  in  evidence  of  the 
truth  of  the  text.  1.  Let  us  first  observe  the  appointment  of  man,  and  let  us  not 
form  schemes  opposite  to  that  of  our  Creator.  When  He  placed  us  in  this  world. 
He  did  not  intend  to  confine  us  to  it :  but  when  He  formed  us  capable  of  happi- 
ness, He  intended  we  should  seek  it  in  an  economy  different  from  this.  Without 
this  principle  man  is  an  inexplicable  enigma :  his  faculties  and  his  wishes,  his 
afflictions  and  his  conscience,  his  life  and  his  death,  everything  that  concerns 
man  is  obscure,  and  beyond  all  elucidation.  His  faculties  are  enigmatical.  Tell 
us,  what  is  the  end  and  design  of  the  faculties  of  man?  Why  hath  he  the  faculty 
of  knowing?  What,  is  it  only  to  arrange  a  few  words  in  his  memory?  Only  to 
know  the  sounds  or  the  pictures  to  which  divers  nations  of  the  world  have  associated 
their  ideas?  Hath  man  intelligence  only  for  the  purpose  of  racking  his  brain, 
and  losing  himself  in  a  world  of  abstractions,  in  order  to  disentangle  a  few  questions 
from  metaphysical  labyrinths,  what  is  the  origin  of  ideas,  what  are  the  properties, 
and  what  is  the  nature  of  spirit?  Glorious  object  of  knowledge  for  an  intelligent 
being !  An  object  in  general  more  likely  to  produce  scepticism  than  demonstration 
of  a  Bcienoe  properly  so  called.    Let  us  reason  in  like  manner  on  the  other  facul- 


CHAP.  I.]  ECCLESIASTES.  8S 

ties  of  mankind.  His  desires  are  problematical.  What  power  can  eradicate,  what 
power  can  moderate  hie  desire  to  extend  and  perpetuate  his  duration?  The  human 
heart  includes  in  it«  wish  the  past,  the  present,  the  future — ^yea,  eternity  itself. 
Explain  to  us  what  proportion  there  can  be  between  the  desires  of  man  and  the 
wealth  which  he  accumulates,  the  honours  he  piu:sues,  the  sceptre  in  his  hand,  and 
the  crown  on  his  head?  His  miseries  are  enigmatical.  Who  can  reconcile  the 
doctrine  of  a  good  Ood  with  that  of  a  miserable  man,  with  the  doubts  that  divide 
hie  mind,  with  the  remorse  that  gnaws  his  heart,  with  the  uncertainties  that 
torment  him.  His  life  is  a  mystery.  What  part,  poor  man,  what  part  are  you 
•cting  in  this  world?  Who  misplaced  you  thus?  His  death  is  enigmatical.  This 
is  the  greatest  mystery  of  all  enigmas.  Lay  down  the  principle,  which  we  have 
advanced,  grant  that  the  great  design  of  the  Creator,  by  placing  man  amidst  the 
objects  of  thifl  present  world,  was  to  draw  out  and  extend  his  desires  after 
another  world,  and  then  all  these  clouds  vanish,  all  these  veils  are  drawn  asida, 
all  these  enigmas  explained,  nothing  is  obscure,  nothing  is  problematical  in  man. 
His  faculties  are  not  enigmatical ;  the  faculty  of  knowing  is  not  confined  to  such 
Tain  science  as  he  can  acquire  in  this  world.  He  is  not  placed  here  to  acquire 
knowledge,  but  virtue.  If  he  acquire  virtue,  he  will  be  admitted  into  another 
world,  where  his  utmost  desire  of  knowledge  will  be  gratified.  His  desires  are 
cot  mysterious.  When  the  laws  of  order  require  him  to  check  and  control  his 
wishes,  let  him  restrain  them.  When  the  profession  of  religion  requires  it,  let 
him  deny  himself  agreeable  sensations,  and  let  him  patiently  suffer  the  cross, 
tribulations  and  persecutions.  After  he  shall  have  thus  submitted  to  the  laws  of 
his  Creator,  he  may  expect  another  period,  in  which  his  desire  to  be  great  will  be 
satisfied.  His  miseries  are  no  more  enigmatical;  they  exercise  his  virtue,  and  will 
be  rewarded  with  glory.  His  life  ceases  to  be  mysterious.  It  is  a  state  of  proba- 
tion,  a  time  of  trial,  a  period  given  him  to  make  choice  of  an  eternity  of  happiness, 
or  an  eternity  of  misery.  His  death  is  no  longer  a  mystery,  and  it  is  impossible 
that  either  his  life  or  his  death  should  be  enigmas,  for  the  one  unfolds  the  other. 
We  conclude,  then,  that  the  destination  of  man  is  one  great  barrier  against 
imaginary  schemes  of  happiness.  Change  the  face  of  society;  subvert  the  order 
of  the  world :  put  despotical  government  in  the  place  of  a  democracy ;  peace  in 
the  place  of  war,  plenty  in  the  place  of  scarcity,  and  you  will  alter  nothing  but 
the  surface  of  human  things,  the  substance  will  always  continue  the  same.  The 
thing  that  hath  been,  is  that  which  shall  be;  and  that  which  is  done,  is  that 
which  shall  be  done :  and  there  is  no  new  thing  under  the  sun.  2.  The  school  of 
the  world  opens  to  us  a  second  source  of  demonstrations.  Enter  this  school,  and 
you  will  renounce  all  vain  schemes  of  felicity.  There  you  will  learn  that  the 
greatest  part  of  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  of  which  you  entertain  such  fine 
notions,  are  only  phantoms.  There  you  will  find  that  those  passions,  which  men 
of  high  rank  have  the  power  of  fully  gratifying,  are  sources  of  trouble  and  remorse, 
and  that  all  the  pleasure  of  gratification  is  nothing  in  comparison  of  the  pain  of 
one  regret  caused  by  the  remembrance  of  it.  In  a  word,  you  will  there  understand 
that  what  may  seem  the  most  fortunate  events  in  your  favour  will  contribute  very 
little  to  your  happiness.  8.  But  if  the  school  of  the  world  is  capable  of  teaching 
us  to  renounce  our  fanciful  projects  of  felicity,  Solomon  is  the  man  in  the  world 
the  most  learned  in  this  school,  and  the  most  able  to  give  us  intelligence.  Accord- 
ingly we  have  made  his  declaration  the  third  source  of  our  demonstrations.  I 
know  no  one  more  proper  to  teach  us  a  good  coiurse  of  morality  than  an  old 
reformed  courtier,  who  chooses  to  retire  after  he  hath  spent  the  prime  of  his  life 
in  dissipation.  On  this  principle,  what  an  impression  ought  the  declaration  of 
Solomon  to  make  on  our  minds  I  Few  men  are  so  fascinated  with  the  world  as  not 
to  know  that  some  things  in  it  are  vain  and  vexatious.  Most  men  say  of  some 
particular  object,  This  is  vanity :  but  very  few  are  so  rational  as  to  comprehend 
all  the  good  things  of  this  life  in  the  same  class,  and  to  say  of  each,  as  Solomon 
did,  This  also  is  vanity.  A  poor  peasant,  whose  ruinous  cottage  doth  not  keep  out 
the  weather,  will  readily  say.  My  cottage  is  vanity :  but  he  imagines  there  is  a 
great  deal  of  solidity  in  the  happiness  of  him  who  sleeps  in  a  superb  palace. 
Solomon  knew  all  these  conditions  of  life,  and  it  was  because  he  knew  them  all 
that  he  declaimed  against  them;  and  had  you,  like  him,  known  them  all  by 
•xperience,  you  would  form  such  an  idea  as  he  did  of  the  whole.  4.  To  reflections 
on  the  experience  of  Solomon  add  your  own,  and  to  this  purpose  recollect  the 
liistory  of  your  life.  Kemember  the  time  when  sighing  and  wishing  for  the 
•ondition,  in  which  Providence  hath  since  placed  you,  you  considered  it  as  the 


36^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.  ' 

centre  of  felicity,  and  verily  thought  could  you  obtain  that  state  you  should  wish 
for  nothing  more.  You  have  obtained  it.  Do  you  think  now  as  you  did  then? 
III.  From  all  these  reflections  what  consequences  shall  we  deaw?  That  all 
conditions  are  absolutely  equal?  That  as  they,  who  actually  enjoy  the  most 
desirable  advantages  of  life,  ought  to  consider  them  with  sovereign  contempt,  so 
people,  who  are  deprived  of  them,  ought  not  to  take  any  pains  to  acquire  them, 
and  to  better  their  condition?  No,  God  forbid  we  should  preach  a  morality  so 
austere,  and  so  likely  to  disgrace  religion.  On  the  one  hand,  they,  to  whom  Ood 
hath  granted  the  good  things  of  this  life,  ought  to  know  the  value  of  them,  and 
to  observe  with  gratitude  the  difference  which  Providence  hath  made  between  them 
and  others.  Do  you  enjoy  liberty?  Liberty  is  a  great  good:  feel  the  pleasure 
of  liberty.  Are  you  rich?  Wealth  is  a  great  good:  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  being 
rich.  Behold  the  man  loaded  with  debts,  destitute  of  friends,  pursued  by  inexor* 
able  creditors,  having  indeed  just  enough  to  keep  himself  alive  to-day,  but  nob 
knowing  how  he  shall  support  life  to-morrow,  and  bless  Ood  you  are  not  in  the 
condition  of  that  man.  Do  you  enjoy  your  health?  Health  is  a  great  good: 
relish  the  pleasure  of  being  well.  Nothing  but  a  fund  of  stupidity  or  ingratitude 
can  render  us  insensible  to  temporal  blessings,  when  it  pleases  God  to  bestow 
them  on  us.  As  they,  to  whom  Providence  hath  granted  the  comforts  of  life, 
ought  to  know  the  value  of  them,  and  to  enjoy  them  with  gratitude,  so  it  is  allow- 
able— ^yea,  it  is  the  duty  of  such  as  are  deprived  of  them  to  endeavour  to  acquire 
them,  to  meliorate  their  condition,  and  to  procure  in  future  a  condition  more 
happy  than  that  to  which  they  have  hitherto  been  condemned,  and  which  hath 
caused  them  so  many  difiBculties  and  tears.  Self-love  is  the  most  natural  and 
lawful  of  all  our  passions.  The  more  riches  you  have  the  more  able  will  you  be 
to  assist  the  indigent.  The  higher  you  are  elevated  in  society,  the  more  you  will 
have  it  in  your  power  to  succour  the  oppressed.  Our  design,  in  restraining  your 
projects,  is  to  engage  you  patiently  to  bear  the  inconveniences  of  your  presenfc 
condition,  when  you  cannot  remedy  them :  because  whatever  difference  there  may 
seem  to  be  between  the  most  happy  and  the  most  miserable  mortal  in  this  world, 
there  is  much  leas,  all  things  considered,  than  our  misguided  passions  imagine. 
Oiur  design,  in  checking  the  immoderate  inclination  we  have  to  contrive  fanciful 
schemes  of  happiness,  is  to  make  you  enjoy  with  tranquillity  such  blessings  as  you 
have.  Most  men  render  themselves  insensible  to  their  present  advantages  by  an 
extravagant  passion  for  future  acquisitions.  Above  all,  the  design,  the  chie£ 
design  we  have  in  denouncing  a  vain  and  unsatisfactory  being  in  this  world,  is 
to  engage  you  to  seek  after  a  happy  futurity  in  the  presence  of  God;  to  engage 
you  to  expect  from  the  blessings  of  a  future  state  what  you  cannot  promise  your- 
self in  this.  But  if  all  mankind  ought  to  preserve  themselves  from  the  disorder 
of  fanciful  schemes  of  future  pleasure,  they  above  all  are  bound  to  do  so,  who  ara 
arrived  at  old  age,  when  years  accumulated  bring  us  near  the  infirmities  ol 
declining  life,  or  a  dying  bed.  What  advantage  could  I  derive  from  a  well-fur- 
nished table,  I,  whose  palate  hath  lost  the  faculty  of  tasting  and  relishing  food? 
What  advantage  could  I  derive  from  a  numerous  lev^e,  I,  to  whom  company  is 
become  a  burden,  and  who  am  in  a  manner  a  burden  to  myself?  In  one  word, 
what  benefit  can  I  reap  from  a  concurrence  of  all  the  advantages  of  life,  I,  who 
am  within  a  few  steps  of  the  gates  of  death  ?  Happy  I  When  my  life  comea 
to  an  end,  to  be  able  to  incorporate  my  existence  with  that  of  the  immortal  Godt 
Happy  I  When  I  feel  this  earthly  tabernacle  sink,  to  be  able  to  exercise  that 
faith,  which  is  an  evidence  of  things  not  seen!  Happy  to  ascend  to  that  city 
which  bath  foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  Godt  (Heb.  xi.  1,  10). 
(J.  Saurin.)  There  is  no  new  thing  under  the  sun. — Two  standpointt  (with  2  Cor. 
V.  17) : — These  words  bring  before  us  two  opposite  standpoints  which  perhaps  may 
be  best  described  as  the  world's  standpoint  and  Christ's  standpoint.  The  one 
represents  the  Old  Testament,  the  other  the  New.  Solomon  and  Paul  are  the 
two  types  of  these  two  different  tendencies  which  are  here  brought  before  us— 
the  world's  standpoint  and  Christ's  standpoint.  Now,  on  the  very  threshold  ofl 
the  subject,  we  are  arrested  by  a  mighty  paradox.  If  one  had  been  asked  before- 
hand to  decide  what  would  have  been  the  origin  of  these  two  passages  he  should 
certainly,  I  think,  have  said  that  it  would  have  been  exactly  the  reverse.  Ifl 
there  ever  was  a  man  in  this  world  who  ought  to  have  felt  the  freshness  and  the 
joy  and  the  glow  of  morning's  dawn,  of  the  thing  called  existence,  that  man  was 
Solomon.  If  there  ever  was  a  man  who  ought  to  have  felt  the  extreme  jadedness, 
eommonplaeenestt  disjointedneas  of  the  thing  called  life*  that  man  wai  Paul,  i 


CBAT.  1.]  ECCZESIASTES.  8T 

And  yet,  strange  and  wondrous  paradox,  Solomon  found  life  to  be  flat,  stale,  and 
unprofitable — a  thing  with  all  the  glow  and  glory  superseded  and  washed  out. 
Paul  felt  life  to  be  absolutely  ringing  with  novelty.     If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he 
ie  not  only  new,  but  a  new  creation,  "  Old  things  are  passed  away  ";  and  "  behold 
all  things  are  become  new."     Now,  which  of  these  views  is  the  true  one?     They 
are  both  true  I     That  is  the  mystery,  that  is  the  problem  to  be  solved  to-day — 
how  two  such  different  estimates  of  men  can  both  at  one  and  the  same  moment 
be  true.     Now,  I  think,  if  you  look  at  these  passages,  you  will  find  that  the  two 
passages  themselves  give  two  decided  hints  as  to  the  reason  of  the  paradox — 
suggest  two  causes  why  two  such  opposite  statements  are  each  of  them  true  of  the 
men  whom  they  represent;  why  the  one  man  found  life  to  be  all  novelty,  and 
the  other  man  a  scene  of  commonplaceness.     Let  us  consider  these,  in  the  first 
instance,  as  an  explanation  of  the  reason  of  the  difference  of  these  two  views, 
that  Solomon  was  under  the  delusion  that  novelty  was  to  be  found  in  things,  in 
outward  objects — "  There  is  no  new  thing  under  the  sun."     Paul,  on  the  other 
band,  has  taken  his  stand  on  a  totally  different  principle;  he  says  that  novelty 
lies,  and  must  always  lie,  not  in  things,  but  in  men — "  If  any  man  be  in  Chrisb 
he  is  a  new  creature,"  or  a  new  creation  :  "old  things  are  passed  away;  behold, 
all  things  are  become  new."     It  was  no  change  in  the  outward  creation  that  made 
Paul  feel  the  sense  of  novelty  in  passing  into  Christianity.     How  could  it?     The 
mirror  cannot  reveal  anything  that  is  not  already  in  the  room.     You  may  put  a 
new  glass  into  the  mirror,  you  may  polish  the  old  glass  a  hundred  times,  but 
unless  you  change  the  furniture  beforehand  the  impression  carried  to  the  eye  will 
be  exactly  the  same.     Now,  let  us  take  the  opposite.     Let  us  say,  instead  of 
beginning  with  polishing  the  mirror,  or  putting  new  glass  into  the  mirror,  we  shall 
begin  by  changing  the  furniture  of  the  room — in  other  words,  by  renewing  the 
man.     You  find  in  everyday  life,  you  and  I  find  in  this  world,  that  a  change  in 
inward  experience  actually  produces  an  absolutely  new  picture  on  a  perfectly  old 
mirror.     You  entered,  e.g.  some  time  ago  into  a  picture  gallery,  your  eye  rested 
there  incidentally  upon  something  classical,  say  the  battle  of  Lake  Regulus  or  the 
Three  Hundred  that  fought  at  Thermopylae ;  it  rested  there,  but  glanced  immediately 
away.    What  was  Thermopylae  to  you,  with  no  knowledge  of  classical  history?    la 
five  minutes  that  sight  had  no  more  impression  on  your  organism  than  if  it  had  never 
existed ;  you  had  forgotten  its  existence.      Years  pass  away  :   you  had  begun  to  study 
classical  studies,  without  reference  to  this  picture.    One  day,  incidentally,  again  you 
entered  the  same  picture  gallery  :  suddenly  your  eye  was  fastened,  riveted.    What 
•  beautiful  picture  that  is  1     How  classical ;  how  it  makes  the  past  live  and  breathe 
and  glow  I     I  never  saw  anything  that  expressed  to  my  mind  so  vividly  the  old 
features  of  the  Attic  race.     And  yet  that  picture  is  not  altered  in  outward  linea- 
ment or  feature :  it  is  worse  than  better  of  the  wear.     It  is  the  old  glass  in  the 
mirror,  but  you  have  caught  the  glow  of  another  scene — *'  Old  things  have  passed 
away;  and,  behold,  all  things  have  become  new."     And  now,  perhaps,  you  can 
understand  what  it  was  that  gave  to  this  man  of  Tarsus  such  a  thrill  and  glow 
in  beholding  this  aspect  of  nature  and  of  life.     He,  too,  as  much  as  you  on  these 
occasions,  had  been  experiencing  the  hollowness,  the  barrenness,  the  nothingness 
of  human  existence.     Suddenly,  suddenly  there  flashed   before  him  an  ideal,   a 
present,  a  beauty  before  which  the  heavens  fled  away.     There  came  to  him  the 
sight  of  an  ideal  perfect  beauty,  and  before  that  ideal  of  beauty  the  world  burst 
anew  into  bloom;  and  was  not  Nature,  too,  glad  in  mood  that  half-hour?     In 
very  truth  the  beauty  of  that  idea  filled  all  things — it  put  out  the  sun  and  moon; 
it  put  out  the  stars ;  it  put  out  the  glory  of  the  landscape ;  it  extinguished  the  forms 
of  Nature  and  sat  upon  them ;  it  occupied  the  place  of  all  things  that  had  occupied 
his  senses  before;  it  made  common  things  precious;  it  made  little  things  large 
and  grand ;  it  turned  the  water  into  wine ;  it  lightened  the  long  and  weary  marches 
in    Macedonia,    Thessalonica,   Attica,   Achaia;   it   lightened   the   long   and   weary 
drudgery  of  commonplace  life — of  tent-making,  the  buying,  the  selling,  the  jabber- 
ing of  everyday  talk  about  things  of  no  interest  at  all.     This  round  earth  every- 
where was  bound  with  gold  chains  about  the  feet  of  God.     Say — in  sight  of  such 
a  transformation  as  this,  in  sight  of  a  transformation  that  came,  not  from  a  new 
glass  in  Nature's  mirror,  but  from  a  new  impulse  imparted  to  the  innermost  soul — 
can  you  wonder  that  the  great  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  should  have  thus  prescribed, 
inscribed,  and  stereotyped  for  ever  his  experience  of  the  source  of  novelty — "  If 
any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creatiu*e;  old  things  are  passed  away;  behold, 
•11  things  are  become  new  "?    I  come  now  to  the  second  of  the  great  principles 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


by  which  the  passage  explains  its  own  paradox;  the  reason  why  Solomon  failed  to 
find  that  novelty  in  the  things  in  which  Paul  expressed  himself  to  have  met  with 
what  was  fresh  and  new.     The  second  reason  I  take  to  be  this  :  Solomon  was  under 
a  second  delusion,  he  not  only  thought  that  novelty  lay  in  things,  but  he  thought 
that  novelty  was  to  be  reached  by  a  change  of  the  present,  by  a  doing  away  with 
the   present.     Paul,   then,   has  made   the   great   discovery   that  in   order   to   get 
novelty  we  do  not  require  a  change  at  all :  it  is  the  past — "  If  any  man  is  in  Christ 
he  is  a  new  creature,"  because  "  old  things  are  passed  away,"  therefore  '*  all 
things  are  become  new."     Solomon  had  sown  his  wild  oats  and  passed  from  the 
far  country  into  his  father's  house,  he  had  become  a  highly  respectable  member 
of  society,  but  he  was  very  much  astonished  to  find  that  the  seeds  he  had  sown 
in  the  far  country — he  had  finished  the  sowing  of  his  wild  seeds — were  attending 
him  in  his  father's  house.     It  was  the  past  that  troubled  Solomon.     There  is  a 
saying  common  in  this  world,  "  It  will  be  all  the  same  a  hundred  years  hence."     A 
more  foolish  saying,  perhaps,  never  existed.     The  weight  that  presses  upon  you 
and  me  is  nob  of  the  present,  but  a  weight  of  former  years.     He  must  be  a  poor- 
minded  man,  even  if  he  has  passed  from  the  far  country  into  his  father's  house, 
even  if  he  has  sown  the  wild  oats,  and  is  at  what  we  call  a  staid  and  sober  period 
of  life — he  must,  I  say,  be  a  poor-minded  man  that  never  says  to  himself  :  "  Have 
I  left  no  cross  on  the  wayside?     I  am  safe  now;  I  have  planted  my  feet  upon  a 
rock,  but  have  I  left  no  record,  no  cross  over  which  my  brother  man  shall  fall?" 
Is  there  nothing  which  can  comfort  a  man  under  these  circumstances — supposing 
you  and  I  have  got  this  fever  of  the  past,  this  sense  of  old  things  present  upon 
U8 — is  there  anything  which  can  be  to  you  and  me  a  source  of  possible  comfort? 
Yes,  there  is  one.     Provided  now  it  were  revealed  to  you  and  me  by  faith,  revealed 
in  such  a  way  that  my  faith  could  accept  it,  that  all  this  time  when  I  thought  I 
was  travelling,  leaving  crosses  by  the  wayside,  there  was  a  Being,  a  mysterious 
Power,  coming  up  behind  me  and  taking  up  every  cross  that  I  had  planted  down 
and  transmuting — not  cancelling  it,  that  would  be  impossible,  the  past  can  never 
be  restored — bub  in  the  literal  sense  of  the  word  atoning  for  it,  in  the  sense  of  a 
ladder  by  which  my  brother,  instead  of  falling,  may  rise.     If,  for  example,  you 
saw  Joseph,  that  you  put  last  year  into  the  dungeon,  step  on  to  the  throne  of 
Egypt,  not  in  spite  of  that,  but  by  reason  of  it;  for  that  dungeon  which  you  meant 
to  be  his  destruction  had  become  the  first  necessary  step  to  his  throne.     Say,  in 
such  a  sense  as  that,  in  such  a  sense  of  transmuted  energy  as  that,  would  not  the 
regenerated  man  feel  a  sense  of  freedom  which  would  make  life  bright,  happy,  and 
new?     Now,  that  was  the  case  with  this  man  Paul;  he  had  been  regenerated, 
sown  his  wild  oats  in  the  far  country — although  different  from  Solomon's,  they 
had  been  very  wild  seeds  indeed — and  so  he  had  still  remaining  the  memory  of 
those  seeds.     His  life  was  very  unhappy,  for  the  old  things  had  prevented  the 
new  things  from  appearing  new.     It  was  no  mere  sense  of  the  abstract  horror 
of  sins  that  weighed  him  down,  that  made  him  cry,  "0,  wretched  man  that  I  am  I 
who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death?"     Paul  had  killed  a  man — 
killed  a  man  in  his  youth;  the  blood  of  the  martyr  Stephen  lay  upon  him.     That 
concrete,  that  personal  thing,  that  thing  which  continued  to  meet  him  at  every 
turn  of  life,  again  and  again,  with  odious,  horrid  touch,  it  was  that  which  weighed 
him  down,  and  it  was  that  against  which  he  prayed  time  after  time  that  it  might 
be  removed.     "  All  the  perfumes  of  Arabia  would  not  cleanse  that  little  hand," 
all  the  freedom  from  punishment,  all  the  regeneration  would  not  blot  out  this 
dark  deed,  this  murder  of  Stephen,  and  he  prayed  if  by  any  means  this  cup  might 
pass  from  him.     One  day  he  heard  a  voice  saying  to  him,  "  My  strength  is  per- 
fected in  your  weakness,  My  strength  is  perfected  in  your  weakness,"  and  he 
looked  up  and  suddenly  there  met  him  an  awful,  nay,  a  glorious  apparition;  he 
seemed  to  see  before  him  the  same  form  that  had  stood  by  him  at  the  last,  and 
now  it  was  carrying  his  cross,  that  awful  deed  of  shame,  the  murder  of  Stephen; 
but  as  he  gazed,  suddenly  the  brazen  oroes  became  gold,  it  became  lighted  to  all 
the  rays  of  sunshine;  and  suddenly,  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye, 
there  flashed  upon  Paul  a  new  thought,  revelation — he  had  unconsciously  been 
making   Christ's  kingdom;  he  had  not  only  made   Stephen,   but  he   had   made 
Christianity;  he  had  planted  in  that  blood  the  first  seed  of  a  Church  which  will 
never  die,  and  the  worn-out  man  of  Tarsus  cried,  "  I  am  free  I  I  am  free  I     Old 
things  are  passed  away;  behold,  all  things  are  become  new."    {Q.  Matheson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  Ii  there  anytMng  whereof  it  may  be  laid,  See,  thii  ia  new  1—5om«- 


CHAP.  1.]  ECCLESIASTES. 


thing  new: — You  remember  that  when  Paul  visited  Athens  his  attention  seema 
to  have  been  especially  attracted  by  two  things  :  that  the  city  was  so  full  of  idols ; 
that  the  people  who  dwelt  there  were  so  given  to  change  and  novelty.  "  For  all 
the  Athenians  and  strangers  which  were  there  spent  their  time  in  nothing  else  but 
either  to  tell  or  to  hear  some  new  thing."  When  we  read  these  words  we  are 
ready  at  first  to  exclaim,  What  a  remarkable  people  these  ancient  Athenians  must 
have  been  I  Surely  we  have  in  them  man's  desire  for  novelty  exemplified  in  a 
strangely  exaggerated  and  quite  exceptional  form.  But  who  can  read  these  words 
without  feeling  that  they  describe  the  prevailing  habit  and  attitude  of  the  human 
mind?  Go  to  those  places  where  men  and  women  "mostly  congregate  " — where 
they  meet  or  work,  or  walk  in  friendly  intercourse,  and  what  do  we  see?  Why, 
the  same  spectacle  which  engaged  the  attention  of  Paul  at  Athens — some  telling, 
others  hearing,  some  new  thing.  Human  nature  is  unchanged  by  the  lapse  of 
centuries;  it  cherishes  the  same  desires.  Anything  new,  while  the  charm  of 
novelty  remains,  will  awaken  a  degree  of  interest  which  is  quite  out  of  proportion 
to  the  intrinsic  worth  of  the  thing  itself.  I.  Man's  hopeless  inquiry,  "  Is  there 
anything  whereof  it  may  be  said.  See,  this  is  new?"  This  is  evidently  the  inquiry 
of  some  one  who  has  long  been  engaged  in  a  fruitless  and  unsatisfactory  search 
after  some  new  thing.  Of  course,  there  is  very  much  which  is  circumstantially 
new — relatively  new — new  in  form — new  in  use.  We  have  new  machinery,  new 
modes  of  locomotion,  new  houses,  new  furniture,  new  methods  of  preparing  food; 
indeed,  in  one  sense,  the  world  seems  filled  with  novelties.  But  all  this  does  nofc 
seem  to  touch  upon,  or  noticeably  to  lessen,  what  some  one  has  called  "  the 
miserable  monotony  of  human  life."  There  is  something  very  wonderful  and  very 
solemn  in  the  sameness  of  human  life,  in  the  fact  that  there  is  nothing  new; 
that  there  is,  with  all  superficial  differences,  a  substantial  uniformity  and  monotony 
in  human  character  and  experience.  If  we  look  upon  the  family  of  man,  in  its 
present  condition  or  in  its  past  history,  we  are  at  first  almost  bewildered  by  the 
endless  diversity  of  appearances.  We  find  age  differ  from  age,  country  from 
country,  race  from  race,  class  from  class,  individual  from  individual.  And  yet, 
if  we  disregard  the  accidents  of  human  life,  its  mere  circumstances,  and  confine 
our  attention  to  its  essentials — to  life  itself,  what  do  we  find?  We  can  distinguish 
through  successive  generations,  not  only  the  same  leading  types,  but  also  the 
minute  varieties  of  human  character.  The  same  feelings,  motives,  desires,  prin- 
ciples of  action,  are  operating  now  as  powerfully  and  distinctly  as  before  the 
flood;  then  and  now  might  we  see  the  glow  of  love,  the  elation  of  hope,  the  out-  ■ 
pouring  of  gratitude.  And  we  find  that  the  ambition,  the  avarice,  the  pride,  the  : 
sensuality  of  the  nineteenth  century  after  Christ,  correspond  in  character  and  ' 
action  with  those  same  evil  principles  as  they  were  displayed  in  the  nineteenth 
century  before  Christ.  All  the  cardinal  sins  are  existing  as  veritably  now  as  in  ' 
any  previous  age.  There  is  very  little  originality  in  sin.  We  are  called  to  contend  ' 
with,  and,  if  may  be,  vanquish  "  old  foes  with  new  faces."  It  is  because  we  are 
men  of  like  passion  with  those  that  have  preceded  us,  that  the  history  of  the  past 
is  intelligible.  We  find  that  the  sins  which  called  down  the  curses  of  Heaven  ages 
and  generations  ago  are  still  being  perpetrated  in  our  midst.  Do  you  think  thafc 
Eli's  were  the  only  disobedient  children,  who  have  brought  their  parents  to  grief? 
I  might  easily  enlarge  on  this  subject.  I  will  confine  myself  to  one  illustration — 
Man's  vain  and  fruitless  inquiry  after  some  new  thing,  an  inquiry,  the  prosecution 
of  which,  in  some  form  or  another,  has  distinguished  man  in  every  age  of  the 
world.  Take  the  case  of  Solomon.  In  this  quest  he  spent  a  considerable  portion 
of  his  life;  and  he  left  off  with  a  sigh  of  disappointment,  and  with  an  inquiry 
expressive  of  utter  hopelessness.  Instead  of  dwelling  on  the  mere  fact,  I  would 
point  out  its  significance.  I  would  remind  you  that  the  fact  of  your  inquiring, 
with  all  this  feverish  anxiety  after  "  something  new,"  reveals  to  us  in  a  very 
clear,  though  sad  and  humiliating  manner,  the  hollow,  monotonous,  unsatisfying 
nature  of  your  past  lives.  What  is  the  secret  of  your  desire  for  something  new 
in  the  future?  Is  it  not,  to  a  great  extent,  your  dissatisfaction  with  the  past? 
Now,  without  knowing  anything  about  your  lives  individually,  I  am  able  to  say 
something  concerning  them,  the  truth  of  which  you  will  all  readily  admit — thafc 
they  do  not  present  to  you  at  this  moment  a  very  satisfactory  appearance.  Let 
us  take  the  most  favourable  example  we  can  find.  We  speak  of  youth  as  a  season 
of  happiness.  But  are  we  correct  in  our  estimate?  There  is  a  certain  exemption 
from  the  cares  of  maturity — there  is  a  certain  buoyancy  and  elation  of  spirit, 
which  we  do  not,  to  the  full  extent,  retain.     But,  my  young  friends,  tell  me.  Has 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «. 

the  world  made  you  happy?     The  old  man  is  so  dissatisfied,  that  he  believes  that 
he  must  have  been  more  happy  in  some  previous  period  of  life  than  he  is  now. 
The  young  man,  not  less  dissatisfied,  believes  that  a  hitherto  undiscovered  happi- 
ness is  waiting  for  him  in  the  future.     What,  then,  is  the  fact  which  demands 
our  attention?     It  is  this.     You  have  always  been  going  on  from  point  to  point, 
inquiring  after  "  something  new  ";  and  your  inquiry  for  the  new  is  a  confession 
as  to  the  insufficiency  of  the  old.     As  you  pressed  on  in  your  way  you  have  seen 
fruit  hanging  in  the  richest  and  most  tempting  clusters.     You  have  plucked  and 
tasted,  and  they  have  been  as  the  apples  of  Sodom.     What  a  spectacle  does  our 
world  at  this  moment  present !     You  see  men  everywhere  seeking  for  happiness 
and  rest,  and  finding  them  not.     But  this   unceasing  search   after   "  something 
new,"  not  merely  reveals  the  unsatisfactory  natiu-e  of  the  past — it  ought  also  to 
suggest  an  important  caution  as  to  the  future.     Is  it  not  reasonable  that  you  should 
pause  in  your  pursuit,  and  inquire  if  it  is  likely  that  you  will  find,  in  the  direction 
in  which  you  have  hitherto  gone,  anything  which  will  really  satisfy  you?     Is  it 
reasonable  for  a  man  to  go  grovelling  along,  hugging  a  delusion  like  this?     As 
long  as  you  continue  to  indulge  the  hope  of  finding  happiness  and  satisfaction  in 
this  world,  you  will  never  look  above  or  beyond  this  world  for  them.     Let  us 
admit  that  in  the  future  everything  will  turn  out  as  you  propose — as  you  desire. 
What  then?     Why,  that  the  future  will  be  as  the  past.     You  are  seeking  happi- 
ness, you  are  seeking  contentment  in  the  wrong  way;  your  faces  are  set  in  the 
wrong  direction.     We  see,  then,  where  the  mistake  is.     We  want  some  new  thing, 
but  it  is  within,  and  not  without  ourselves.     II.  God's  gracious  and  satisfaotoet 
BEPLT.     To  all  these  dissatisfied  searchers  after  novelty,  we  can  hear  God  say, 
*' If  any  man  be  in  Christ  he  is  a  new  creature;  old  things  are  passed  away, 
behold  all  things  are  become  new."     Yes,  this  is  our  great  necessity,  to  become 
new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus;  then  shall  we  find  old  things  pass  away,  and  all 
things  become  new.     Do  you  want  a  new  experience?     You  may  have  it  in  com- 
munion  and   fellowship    with    Christ.     Do  you,    wearied    with    the   familiar    and 
unsatisfying  objects  of  the  world,  want  new  sources  of  enjoyment  and  new  objects 
■of  contemplation  and   pursuit?     All   these  you   will   realize  in   a   life   in   Christ. 
!  (T.  M.  MoTria.)     Life  in  the  light  of  Christ: — Since  Ecclesiastes  meditated  on  the 
problems  of  human  life,  one  really  "  new  thing  "  has  been  seen.     The  "  Sun  of 
Eighteousness  "  has  risen  upon  the  world  "  with  healing  in  His  wings."    The  Word 
of  God  took  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  men.     The  Only-begotten  Son  has  revealed 
the  Eternal  Father,  and  has  *'  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the 
Gospel."     This  new  manifestation  of  God — this  new  and  fuller  revelation  of  His 
redeeming  purpose  for  mankind — has  entered  as  a  modifying  factor  into  human 
experience.     The  cardinal  features  of  life  remain  as  before;  but  they  take  on  a 
new  aspect  when  they  are  seen  in  the  light  of  our  Father's  love,  and  of  that 
glorious   immortality   for   which   He   is   seeking   to  train    us.     What  may   be   as 
••  vanity,"  when  it  is  considered  as  an  end,  may  be  anything  but  "  vain  "  when  it 
is  considered  as  a  means.     A  scaffolding  may  be  a  poor  affair;  but  what  if  a 
beautiful  and  substantial  temple  is  being  reared  within  it?     A  schoolroom,  with 
its  appropriate  furniture,  might  not  be  a  satisfying  home;  nevertheless  it  may  well 
fulfil  the  purposes  of  education  and  discipline.     The  perishable  may  minister  to 
the  everlasting.     The  unprofitable  may  lead  to  higher  gains.     The  unsatisfying  may 
awaken  a  craving  for  that  which  will  truly  fill  the  soul.     From  this  point  of  view 
the  essential  sameness  of  life  through  the  ages  bears  its  testimony  to  the  persistent 
purpose   of   God   and   the   constant   needs   of   humanity.     Why    should    not    the 
schoolroom  remain  the  same,  if  it  has  been  adapted  by  Infinite  Wisdom  for  the 
training  and  discipline  of  immortal  souls?     Human  life,   viewed  in   itself,   as  a 
brief  span  of  existence  bounded  by  death,  may  be  as  "  vanity  ";  but  human  life, 
viewed  in  the  light  of  Christ  and  immortality,  is  an  arena  of  education  by  proba- 
tion— a  sphere  for  the  formation  of  spiritual  and  enduring  character,  and  foe  tha 
service  of  a  living  and  loving  Father.     {T.  C.  Finlay$on.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  I  gave  my  heart  to  seek  and  search  oat  by  wisdom  concerning  all 
things  that  are  done  under  heaven. — The  mysteries  of  human  life: — Now,  there  has 
never  been  any  book  which  can  be  compared  to  this  marvellous  book  of  Ecclesiastes. 
It  is  the  laboratory  in  which  the  penitent  gathers  bitter  herbs,  the  garden  in 
which  the  wise  man  gathers  sweet  flowers.  It  is  the  laboratory  to  which  the 
greatest  sage  of  old  times  deliberately  puts  his  hand  and  his  head  to  try  experi* 
ments,  in  order  to  get  a  little  acquaintance  with  the  mysteries  of  human  life. 


CHAP.  I.]  ECCLESIASTES.  41 ' 

The  scale  upon  which  he  experimented  ie  as  vast  as  the  power  of  man ;  as  we  may 
Bee  when  we  consider  the  discoveries  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  the  speculations  of 
Priestley,  the  anatomists  among  the  bones,  and  the  geologists  among  the  stones, 
as  also  that  most  sublime  of  men,  full  of  animal  life,  sensual  desire,  and  full  of 
wisdom,  who  obtained  a  knowledge  of  all  times.  "What  was  the  object  of  his 
experiments?  They  were  deliberately  entered  upon  to  try  what  life  could  do  for 
his  soul,  and  he  tried  it  in  the  most  philosophical  way.  How  splendid  to  read  his 
experiment.  "  I  builded  me  a  house."  How  many  men  thus  see  if  they  can 
satisfy  the  desires  of  their  souls.  I  know  of  one  man  who  built  one  of  the  greatest 
houses  of  modern  times,  and  when  he  had  finished  it  he  said,  "  If  I  could  find  as 
much  pleasure  in  pulling  it  down  as  I  have  done  in  rearing,  I  would  begin  to  pull 
it  down."  The  charm  was  in  the  experiment,  and  not  in  the  thing  which  was  got. 
So  Solomon  tried  houses ;  and  we  know  the  style  in  which  he  built.  The  very 
cedars  of  Lebanon  trembled,  for  there  was  to  be  an  axe  among  them;  the  far-oSf 
stones  were  to  be  brought,  for  there  was  a  king  building.  He  tried  gardening 
also — the  loveliest  of  all  human  pleasures,  the  sweetest  and  most  innocent,  the 
most  lasting,  and  one  from  which  men  get  more  pure  pleasure  than  anything 
else.  Then  he  tried  society.  "  I  gathered  me  also  silver  and  gold,  and  the 
peculiar  treasure  of  kings  and  of  the  provinces."  And  then  he  came  to  the  result 
of  all  his  experiments  :  "  It  is  all  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit."  Now,  it  is  a 
subject  worth  pondering  upon,  what  is  meant  by  this  endless  search;  whether 
there  be  a  remedy  for  this  perpetual  discontent,  and  where  it  is  to  be  found.  We 
never  do  meet  with  a  contented  people.  The  more  cultivated  they  are,  the  more 
real  will  be  the  discontent.  In  which  country  of  Europe  do  you  suppose  are 
there  the  most  suicides — the  stupidest  or  the  most  cultivated?  You  will  say  in 
the  former,  of  course;  but  you  are  entirely  wrong.  The  most  elevated  districts 
are  more  disturbed  than  others.  Solomon  also  tried  whether  books  and  study 
would  give  him  what  he  sought;  and  he  came  down  with  a  great  library  and 
among  his  parchments,  but  eventually  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  "  much  study 
is  a  weariness  to  the  flesh."  Now,  it  will  be  found  that  there  are  more  suicides 
in  Prussia  than  in  Spain;  for  these  reasons,  that  in  one  country  they  think,  and 
in  the  other  they  drink;  in  one  country  they  lead,  and  in  the  other  they  are 
driven.  Wherever  there  is  but  a  little  looking  into  its  problems,  according  to  the 
ability  they  have  for  making  experiments,  there  is  the  same  result.  I  envy  the 
souls  that  never  are  weary.  Is  there  anything  much  more  touching  than  this 
great  desire  which  is  upon  me,  this  impatience  of  the  dull  routine  of  things,  this 
great  element  of  weariness,  of  always  seeing  the  same  things  over  and  over  again  1 
It  is  so  wonderful  1  Solomon  had  seen  all  the  wonderful  things  that  were  to  bs 
Been,  and  come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun.  Ask 
a  man  who  is  perpetually  reading  and  studying,  and  he  will  tell  you  he  gets 
fearfully  weary  :  he  finds  the  same  stereotyped  state  of  things.  We  toil  and  fever 
after  wealth,  and  leave  it  to  somebody,  we  know  not  what  sort  of  person  he  may 
be — whether  a  fool  or  not.  We  put  by  a  little,  and  know  not  what  manner  of 
person  will  have  it.  We  rejoice  in  building  up  something  beautiful  and  command- 
ing, and  know  not  what  kind  of  creatxire  will  inhabit  it.  We  erect  a  house,  per- 
haps, to  be  occupied  by  beggars;  we  leave  an  orchard  to  be  used  by  fools,  gather 
books  to  be  scattered  over  the  world  :  or,  perhaps,  we  collect  a  magnificent  gallery 
of  pictures,  and  leave  them  to  a  progeny  who  cannot  understand  them.  Looking 
at  his  own  work,  and  of  the  labour  which  his  hand  had  wrought,  Solomon  said,  as 
he  walked  through  his  palaces,  "  This  is  a  weariness  to  the  flesh."  He  was 
conscious  of  understanding  the  infinite  forms  of  human  weariness;  such  was  the 
result  of  his  analysis  of  the  experiments  he  made  in  Jerusalem,  and  he  ends  by 
showing  that  nothing  would  satisfy  him.  In  the  effort  to  get  quit  of  this  fearful 
discontent,  men  are  always  trying  to  get  something  new,  to  get  something  that 
will  satisfy  them.  One  man  says  he  will  retire,  and  fancies  for  himself  some  little 
island  in  the  sweet  Mediterranean  Sea,  where  the  scene  is  ever  fair,  the  sky  ever 
blue — where  the  women  are  beautiful  and  never  commonplace,  and  the  men 
classical  in  contour,  and  the  children  sweet  little  cherubs,  never  growing  vulgar.  He 
dreams  of  some  sweet  paradise,  and  he  goes  to  find  it.  But  he  finds  that  black 
care,  all  haunting  care,  in  the  saddle  behind  the  horseman.  The  man  carries 
himself  wheresoever  he  goes.  How  touching  to  read  of  the  humble  experiment 
of  poor  Charles  Lamb,  longing  for  the  day  when  he  should  have  nothing  to  do,  no 
longer  confined  to  the  hateful  India  House,  sitting  and  working  sadly  and  weary- 
ingly  at  those  ledgers,  "  The  thing  that  has  been  will  be,"  when  I  have  stood  at 


42  TBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

the  banks  and  other  places  and  seen  the  marble-like  figures  who  have  toiled  thero : 
such  fearful  repetition,  the  manner  in  which  they  spend  their  lives,  in  adding  up 
the  day-books,  counting  up  the  figures,  with  a  view  to  the  dividends  1  What 
would  poor  Lamb  have  given  to  get  out  of  this  condition?  What  a  tragedy  that 
was  when  he  went  down  to  Brighton  to  enjoy  himself,  and  lay  down  the  burden 
of  his  daily  routine  for  a  little  while;  when  the  coach  got  half-way  and  met  the 
one  coming  in  the  opposite  direction,  he  got  out  of  the  one  he  was  in  and  stepped 
into  the  other  I  That  was  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit.  What  was  the  secret 
of  Byron,  of  the  strange  opinions  of  that  spoiled  child  of  fashion?  Now,  all  this 
weariness  comes  very  much  out  of  the  impatience  of  the  condition  by  which  we  are 
surrounded.  Then  the  majority  of  people  are  so  fond  of  the  proprieties  of  life, 
asking  the  ordinary  questions  and  receiving  the  eternal  answers.  Where  have  you 
been?  Where  are  you  going?  What  has  happened?  So  that  everything  even  in 
friendship  gets  tiresome.  (G.  Dawaon.)  The  purtuit  of  wiedom  and  knowledge : — 
1.  This  wisdom  and  knowledge,  if  a  man  is  determined  to  go  far  beyond  his 
fellows  in  the  acquisition  of  it,  must  be  discovered,  and  examined,  and  appropri- 
ated, by  "  much  study  ";  and  this,  as  Solomon  observes,  is  "  a  weariness  of  the 
flesh."  The  incessant  stretch  of  the  mind's  faculties,  frequent  harassing  and 
anxious  perplexity,  studious  days  and  sleepless  nights,  must  be  his  portion,  who 
Bets  his  heart  on  the  attainment  of  unusual  eminence,  in  science  in  general,  or 
in  any  of  its  various  departments.  2.  In  this  pursuit,  as  in  others,  there  are 
many  disappointments  to  be  expected,  to  fret,  and  mortify,  and  irritate  the 
spirit: — such  as,  experiments  failing,  some  of  them  perhaps  long-continued,  pro- 
mising, and  costly; — facts  turning  out  contradictory,  and  unsettling  or  overturning 
favoiurite  theories; — the  means  of  prosecuting  a  train  of  discovery  falling  short, 
at  the  very  moment,  it  may  be,  when  they  are  most  desirable; — trifling  and  worth- 
less results  arising,  after  much  labour,  long-tried  patience,  and  sanguine  expecta- 
tion;— the  anticipated  honour  and  pleasure  of  introducing  a  new  and  important 
invention  or  discovery,  the  product  of  the  experiments  and  investigations  of  years, 
lost  on  the  very  eve  of  arrival,  by  the  priority  of  an  unknown  competitor.  8. 
There  are  some  parts  of  knowledge  which  are,  in  their  very  nature,  painful  and 
distressing.  In  a  world  where  sin  reigns,  many  must  be  the  scenes  of  misery, 
many  the  aflflicting  occurrences  and  facts,  which  present  themselves  to  the  observ- 
ant and  investigating  mind,  that  is  in  quest  of  general  and  extensive  information. 
They  abound  both  in  the  past  and  present  history  of  mankind.  They  are  fitted  to 
fill  the  heart  with  "grief"  and  "sorrow";  and  the  more  a  man's  knowledge 
extends, — the  more  he  reads,  and  hears,  and  observes,  the  more  copious  will  this 
source  of  bitterness  become.  4.  There  is  to  be  taken  into  account  the  mortifica- 
tion of  pride  that  must  be  experienced,  in  consequence  of  the  limited  nature  of 
the  human  faculties.  5.  There  is  a  similar  feeling  of  mortification,  arising  from 
the  very  circumstance,  that,  with  all  the  knowledge  and  wisdom  that  are  acquired, 
there  is  still  a  blank, — still  a  consciousness  of  want  and  deficiency,  in  regard  to 
true  happiness.  6.  The  man  of  "  much  wisdom  "  and  "  increased  knowledge," 
generally,  if  not  universally,  becomes  the  marked  object  of  the  scorn  of  some,  and 
the  envy  of  others.  Some  depreciate  his  studies  and  all  their  results,  laugh  at 
them,  and  hold  them  up  to  contempt  and  ridicule.  Others  are  stung  with  secret 
jealousy;  which  is  the  odious  parent  of  all  the  hidden  arts  of  detraction  and 
calumny,  and  of  injurious  and  unworthy  attempts  to  deprive  him  of  his  well- 
earned  honoiu'S,  and  to  "  cast  him  down  from  his  excellency."  7.  The  man  who 
occupies  his  powers  in  the  pursuit  and  acquisition  of  human  wisdom  alone,  careless 
of  God,  «nd  uninfluenced  by  regard  to  His  authority  and  to  His  glory,  is  leaving 
eternity  a  wretched  blank;  has  no  solid  and  satisfactory  support  in  the  anticipation 
of  it,  when  the  thought  intrudes  itself  upon  his  mind;  and  is  treasuring  up  grief 
and  sorrow  for  the  close  of  his  career.     (B.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  All  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit. — The  vanity  of  a  worldly  life : — 
The  tone  of  these  words  is  intensely  sad,  and  perhaps  some  of  us  are  inclined  to 
think  that  they  embody  a  morbid  conception  of  human  life,  for  they  seem  to  lack 
the  healthy  inspiration  of  hope.  However,  we  shall  understand  this  declaration 
by  considering  it,  not  as  a  Divine  assertion,  but  as  the  expression  of  a  particular 
human  experience.  God  does  not  condemn  all  earthly  good  as  vanity,  but  man  in 
one  of  his  moods  utters  this  bitter  cry, — it  is  the  wail  of  disappointment.  Life  is 
s  very  different  thing  to  different  persons  in  different  positions,  just  as  our  view 
of  the  landscape  changes  with  our  standpoint  and  the  varying  state  of  the  elements. 


CHAP.  I.]  ECCLESIASTES.  43 

The  hills  and  valleys,  how  different  is  their  appearance  when  veiled  in  dim 
twilight  or  mantled  in  thick  darkness  to  what  it  is  when  flooded  with  the  glorious 
sunlight.  So  is  our  view  of  life  affected  by  our  fluctuating  feelings  and  changeful 
circumstances.  To  the  boy  life  is  a  promise,  a  beautiful  flower  in  the  bud;  to 
the  old  man  it  is  a  closing  day,  a  solemn  sunset;  to  the  man  in  prosperity  it  is  a 
quiet  lake,  with  only  the  gentlest  zephyrs  rippling  its  surface;  to  the  man  in 
adverse  circumstances  it  is  a  stormy  sea  kept  in  perpetual  disquiet  by  the  rude 
and  boisterous  breezes;  to  the  satiated  pleasure-seeker,  the  worn-out  sensualist, 
the  disappointed  voluptuary,  "  all  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit."  But  while 
human  life  has  many  phases  corresponding  to  the  many  moods  of  the  soul,  each 
life  is  developing  into  something  real,  and  what  that  something  shall  be  depends 
upon  how  the  life  is  lived.  In  changing  circumstances  we  are  forming  a  per- 
manent character,  transitory  experiences  are  creating  in  us  settled  dispositions; 
and  we  must  decide  whether  our  life  shall  culminate  in  the  joy  of  satisfaction  or 
the  agony  of  despair.  I.  A  life  spending  itself  in  search  of  pleasure  is  k 
VEXATIOUS  experience.  Here  we  have  the  representation  of  a  man  seeking  every- 
where for  pleasure;  yet,  completely  baffled  in  his  search,  the  phantom  constantly 
eludes  his  grasp.  This  man  was  not  limited  to  a  very  narrow  sphere  in  his 
endeavours  after  happiness;  he  had  a  kingdom  at  his  command;  he  made  its  vast 
resources  subservient  to  his  amusement.  He  ransacked  the  treasures  o!  earth  to 
find  some  new  source  of  delight,  and  was  determined,  if  possible,  to  discover 
pleasurable  excitements.  He  seems  almost  to  have  exhausted  the  science  of 
pleasure,  and  he  sums  up  the  result  of  his  experiments  in  these  words,  "  I  have 
seen  all  the  works  that  are  done  under  the  sun,  and  behold,  all  is  vanity  and 
vexation  of  spirit."  From  this  we  learn  that  pleasure  sought  for  itself  has  no 
reality;  it  is  a  vain  imagination,  a  deceitful  fancy.  Selfishness  defeats  and 
torments  itself  imtil  it  becomes  the  victim  of  a  perpetual  discontent.  Or,  in  other 
words,  to  seek  happiness  for  its  own  sake  is  not  the  way  to  find  it;  it  comes  con- 
stantly to  pure  and  healthful  activity;  it  dwells  ever  in  the  hearts  of  the  good; 
but  it  does  not  reveal  itself  to  the  mere  devotee  of  pleasure.  This  is  true  of 
every  kind  of  pleasure  of  which  our  nature  is  capable.  1.  The  natural  and 
moderate  gratification  of  our  appetites  yields  satisfaction,  and  so  God  has  ordained 
that  a  healthy  human  life  shall  be  sweet  and  enjoyable.  But  when  a  man  makes 
this  sensuous  gratification  his  god,  and  hopes  to  find  in  it  an  unfailing  source  of 
joy,  he  deceives  himself.  Even  natural  indulgence  exalted  so  as  to  become  the 
chief  end  of  life  soon  loses  its  power  to  please.  The  sensibilities  are  dulled,  the 
palate  fails  to  relish  luxuries  which  once  ravished  it  with  delight,  the  eye  tires 
of  splendid  artificial  sights,  and  the  ear  grows  weary  of  sound  in  its  most  pleasing 
combinations.  The  system  is  thrown  out  of  tune,  and  that  which  should  produce 
sweet  harmony  makes  only  annoying  discord.  2.  Wo  are  susceptible  of  still  purer 
and  deeper  delights  through  the  medium  of  the  intellect.  The  arts  and  sciences 
may  contribute  largely  to  ovur  enjoyment  if  we  possess  the  power  to  appreciate 
them.  The  man  who  seeks  pleasure  in  philosophy  will  find  more  problems  to 
perplex  than  ideas  to  amuse;  whereas  the  man  who  strives  after  truth  will  always 
discern  some  heavenly  thoughts  capable  of  stimulating  him  amid  the  uncertainties 
of  his  investigation.  The  man  who  ransacks  the  treasures  of  literature  with  no 
higher  aim  than  entertainment  will  have  no  continuity  of  joy,  for  he  will  be  the 
victim  of  inclination,  the  sport  of  passion;  he  will  not  see  the  beauties  which  have 
charmed  men  of  nobler  motive.  When  we  learn  that  life  is  not  a  selfish  search, 
but  an  unselfish  service;  not  the  sacrifice  of  everything  to  self,  but  the  subordina- 
tion of  self  to  God;  then  we  receive  a  spiritual  joy.  The  man  who  has  spent  his 
life  like  a  butterfly  flitting  from  flower  to  flower  in  search  of  sweets  at  last  whines 
out  the  melancholy  cry,  "  All  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit."  But  the  noble 
Boul  who  has  used  himself  in  the  service  of  God  and  humanity  goes  to  his  heaven 
exclaiming,  "  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at 
hand,"  etc.  II.  An  eabthlt  life  separated  from  the  future  is  a  perplexing 
MYSTERY.  To  the  mind  of  the  disappointed  pleasure-seeker  all  is  vanity,  because 
the  future  is  left  completely  out  of  eight.  This  view  of  life  is  secularistic.  It 
regards  only  one  world,  and  in  this  world  seeks  the  highest  good,  but  does  not 
find  it.  This  worldly  view  of  human  existence  transforms  our  life  into  a  dark 
mystery,  and  shuts  out  every  ray  of  Divine  light.  This  world  is  incomplete,  it 
needs  another  to  explain  it;  this  life  requires  another  for  its  interpretation.  The 
first  paradox  that  meets  us  is — 1.  If  this  be  the  only  world,  earthly  enjoyment  is 
the  highest  good,  but  the  struggle  for  it  brings  vexation.     Banish  the  belief  in  an 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I^ 

eternal  future,  and  the  first  reflection  is,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow 
we  die."  Let  us  regulate  our  life  so  as  to  secure  the  largest  share  of  earthly 
good,  even  though  we  thus  destroy  our  finer  feelings.  Being  convinced  that  there 
is  no  future  life,  we  must  value  things  by  their  power  to  fill  up  our  measure  of 
present  gratification.  Why  should  thoughts  of  morality  or  retribution  be  allowed 
to  bridle  our  inclinations  if  morality  is  a  delusion,  and  judgment  simply  a  dream? 
But  this  conception  of  human  life  is  a  glaring  contradiction.  The  life  which  it  sets 
before  us  leads  to  sorrow,  and  ends  in  pain.  Indulgence  induces  weariness,  self- 
ishness creates  disquietude,  and  passionate  pleasures  bring  forth  death.  2.  When 
the  future  is  left  out  of  sight  the  godly  life  loses  one  of  its  most  powerful  motives. 
The  culture  of  manhood  is  at  a  discount  in  a  world  where  men  are  estimated  by 
what  they  have,  and  not  by  what  they  are.  The  devout  and  thoughtful  man  finds 
himself  in  possession  of  truths  which  the  world  is  not  prepared  to  receive,  the 
utterance  of  which  will  call  forth  the  opposition  of  prejudice  and  pride.  The 
honest  man  must  suffer  if  he  will  carry  his  convictions  into  the  realm  of  daily 
business  life.  True,  some  modern  teachers  say  that  we  should  be  strong  enough 
to  live  a  Christly  life  without  the  hope  of  personal  immortality,  consoling  ourselves 
with  the  sublime  idea  that  we  shall  live  on  in  the  influences  which  we  transmit 
to  posterity.  This  doctrine  may  possess  charms  for  the  select  few,  it  is  scarcely 
suited  to  the  multitude  of  disciples.  III.  A  life  which  does  not  acknowledge 
God  is  a  hopeless  disappointment.  This  is  the  root  of  the  matter  :  man  is  restless 
and  dissatisfied  so  long  as  he  puts  selfish  pleasure  in  the  place  of  God.  It  iB 
taught  in  the  Bible,  engraven  on  our  constitution,  and  attested  by  experience  that 
every  attempt  to  find  a  substitute  for  God  is  vain.  We  owe  our  supreme  love  to 
Him,  and  can  only  be  really  happy  when  we  render  it  cheerfully.  1.  Faith  in  God 
reveals  an  inexhaustible  source  of  bliss.  Of  every  other  fountain  Christ  has  said, 
"  He  that  drinketh  of  this  water  shall  thirst  again,  but  he  that  drinketh  of  the 
water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  never  thirst,  but  it  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of 
water  springing  up  into  eternal  life."  Here  we  have  an  unfailing  spring  of  joy,  a 
sun  always  shining.  2.  Faith  in  God  exerts  its  highest  influence  when  earthly 
joys  are  fading.  In  sorrow,  when  worldly  joys  are  distasteful,  faith  illumines  the 
darkness  and  gently  dissipates  our  fear.  In  pain,  when  pleasures  have  fled  and 
human  consolations  are  feeble,  God  is  manifest  as  the  God  of  all  comfort. 
Oppressed  by  the  thought  of  having  grieved  our  God,  Christ  appears  as  the  Par- 
doner of  our  sins  and  the  Healer  of  broken  hearts.  And  at  last,  when  this  world 
is  passing  from  our  gaze  and  we  enter  the  thick  gloom  of  death,  we  shall  hear 
the  Divine  Voice  saying,  "  Fear  not,  for  I  am  with  thee."  Then,  when  we 
tremble  before  the  portals  of  the  mysterious  future,  and  pass  through  the  last 
trying  storm,  inspired  by  heavenly  love,  we  may  cry,  not  "  All  is  vanity  and 
vexation  of  spirit  1"  but  "  0  grave,  where  is  thy  victory?  O  death,  where  is  thy 
sting?"  {W.  0.  Jordan,  B.A.)  Peaiimism  (with  Gen.  i.  31) : — What  could  be 
more  different  than  the  tempers  of  mind  which  uttered  sayings  like  these?  Creation 
and  life  very  good.  Creation  and  life,  vanity,  delusion,  hollowness,  and  vexation 
of  spirit.  Both  cannot  be  right.  But  statements  so  diverse  are  easily  enough 
explained  if  we  remember  that  in  the  Bible  we  are  dealing,  not  with  a  book,  but 
with  a  library;  not  with  a  literary  work,  but  with  a  nation's  literature.  It  is  not 
a  pure  revelation  we  have,  but  the  strange  eventful  history  of  one.  We  may 
expect,  therefore,  to  find  in  it  great  variety,  and  almost  hopeless  difference  of 
view.  The  present  form  of  that  chapter  of  Genesis  may  be  regarded  roughly  as 
bearing  the  impress  of  the  eighth  or  ninth  century  B.C.,  the  sanguine  stamp  of  a 
great  prophetic  time.  The  Book  of  Ecclesiastes,  on  the  other  hand,  is  not  earlier 
than  the  third  century,  when  the  disruption  of  the  two  kingdoms,  the  insecurity 
of  an  absolute  and  semipagan  monarchy,  the  captivity  of  the  nation,  the  setting 
up  of  the  hierarchy,  and  the  conquest  by  both  Greek  thought  and  Greek  arms  had 
deeply  changed  and  saddened  the  spirit  of  Hebrew  dream.  Our  own  generation 
findfl  a  special  attraction  in  this  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.  We  too  have  fallen  on  an 
age  when  the  first  free  fearless  vigour  of  our  Elizabethan  time  has  gone  by,  when 
even  the  John  Biill  view  of  England  is  collapsing,  when  the  condition  and  pros- 
pects of  our  crowded  society  are  raising  questions  which  only  the  stupid  can  face 
with  a  light  heart,  or  treat  with  the  old  answers.  The  old  pharmacopoeia  of  politics 
I  has  no  medicine  for  the  new  disease.  We  in  England  doubt  and  fear.  Abroad 
j  they  deny  and  destroy.  In  this  country  we  are  not  as  yet  seriously  troubled 
I  with  the  more  thoroughgoing  forms  of  pessimism ;  but  I  do  not  think  ^e  have 
I  escaped  it,  for  the  reason  that  we  have  not  yet  come  to  it.     We  are  as  yet  oalj 


.CHAF.  I.]  ECCLESIASTES.  45 

in  the  Agnostic  stage,  but  we  are  fairly  well  through  that,  and  are  beginning  to 
get  dissatisfied  with  it.  From  that  stage  we  must  go  either  up  or  down.  We 
may  go  up.  A  truer  philosophy  (not  even  now  without  a  witness)  may  restore  the 
vigour  of  a  nobler  faith.  Or  we  may  go  down.  We  may  descend  to  the  next 
level  of  unbelief,  to  the  lower  cycle  in  the  mind's  inferno.  The  next  level  is 
pessimism.  To  deal  with  pessimism  and  to  prevent  pessimism  we  must  have  an 
ideal  which  is  something  more  than  an  idea  of  ours,  something  more  than  an 
ambition  of  ours.  We  must  have  an  ideal  which  is  the  fountain  head  of  our  ideas 
and  ambitions,  one  which  is  working  incessantly  to  bring  us  to  its  own  image; 
one  in  whose  presence  we  feel  inspiration  and  attainment;  one  last  and  surely 
blended;  one  that  is  gradually  filling  up  the  abyss  of  pessimism  by  drawing 
together  its  edges  and  reconciling  what  we  are  with  what  we  long  to  be.  We 
must  have  a  God,  in  brief,  who  is  at  once  our  Mighty  One  and  our  Bedeemer. 
The  solution  of  life  is  not  to  be  found  in  grappling  with  pain,  but  in  the  conflict 
with  sin.  The  strongest  soul  that  ever  lived  was  crushed  by  sins  rather  than 
pains,  by  sins  not  His  own,  not  by  the  pains  which  were.  Here  lies  the  centre 
and  secret  of  Christianity,  not  in  the  miracles  of  healing,  but  in  the  miracles  of 
forgiveness,  and  in  the  Cross,  the  greatest  of  them  all.  And  here  lies  the  key  and 
reason  why  Christianity,  with  all  its  melancholy,  with  all  its  Divine  sadness,  can 
never  be  pessimist.  It  is  not  simply  and  generally  that,  being  a  religion  of  faith 
and  hope,  it  cannot  give  way  to  despair.  But  it  is  here,  in  this  principle,  viz. 
that  in  Christianity  we  never  become  aware  of  the  worst  till  we  are  in  possession 
of  the  best.  The  deepest  sense  of  evil  is  possible  only  to  a  believer  in  redemption 
— not  a  redemption  that  shall  be  one  day,  but  that  is  now  going  on.  How  could 
we  bear  to  see  the  worst  and  utmost  evil  and  sorrow,  but  for  the  sense  and  cer- 
tainty that  it  has  in  it  the  sentence  of  its  own  death?  How  could  we,  as  a  race, 
face  death  successfully — death,  the  great  ravager  of  love — except  in  the  loving 
faith  that  death  itself  is  wounded  unto  death?  The  best,  in  revealing  to  us  the 
worst,  abolishes  it,  and  the  light  of  God,  which  maketh  all  things  manifest,  brings 
sin  out  only  that  it  may  die  in  the  great  and  terrible  daylight  of  the  Lord. 
(P.  T.  FoTsyth,  M.A.)  Insatisf action : — Various  explanations  have  been  offered  of 
this  strange  restlessness  and  insatisf action.  1.  One  set  of  observers  see  in  thia 
the  mainspring  of  activity,  progress,  and  improvement.  If  man,  say  they,  found 
happiness  at  any  point  of  his  life,  he  would  cease  to  aim  at  a  higher  state.  The 
most  contented  people  are  ever  the  most  barbarous,  and  the  beast  of  the  field  is 
more  contented  than  the  lowest  classes  of  men.  With  animals  and  men  of  the 
lowest  grade  there  is  stagnation.  Not  until  you  produce  insatisf  action,  not, 
rather,  till  you  give  the  mind  ability  to  conceive  the  higher  state,  and  aim  at 
elevation  from  the  lower,  will  the  world  be  improved.  Without  insatisfaction  the 
arts  would  be  impossible,  and  all  higher  enjoyments  unknown.  2.  A  second  and 
higher  view  is  that  which,  while  admitting  that  insatisfaction  is  the  mainspring 
of  activity  and  progress,  still  further  afiBrms  that  it  is  indicative  of  a  nature  in  man 
to  be  satisfied,  not  with  the  terrestrial,  but  with  the  heavenly, — not  with  the 
things  of  sense,  but  with  the  things  of  faith, — not  with  the  creature,  but  with 
God.  This  is  surely  the  true  explanation  of  that  unrest  of  the  soul  which  still, 
after  each  new  conquest,  whether  of  truth  or  means  of  enjoyment,  feels  unsatisfied. 
It  is  the  higher  nature  in  us  that  is  still  ungratified.  We  want  to  know  truth 
and  beauty — all  truth  and  beauty;  not  merely  their  outward  shadows,  but  them- 
selves. 3.  But,  further,  we  have  to  take  into  account  the  fact  of  depravity  and 
sinfulness.  I  rather  think  that  this  fact,  however,  is  not  to  be  considered  aa 
explanatory  of  our  insatisfaction  so  much  as  of  dissatisfaction.  Insatisfaction  ia 
right ;  dissatisfaction  is  wrong.  God  intended  that  the  soul  should  not  be  satisfied ; 
but  He  wants  that  we  shall  not  be  dissatisfied.  Much  light  is  yours,  which 
Solomon,  wise  as  he  was,  had  not.  He  probably  had  glimpses  of  the  depravity 
of  his  own  heart,  and  generally  of  the  human  heart,  yet  hardly  with  the  demon- 
strative clearness  with  which  it  comes  home  to  our  convictions;  and  he  seems  to 
have  been  greatly  in  the  dark  relative  to  that  future  life  which  hath  been  brought 
to  light  through  Christ,  to  which  is  reserved  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  soul.  He 
said,  All  is  vanity,  because  he  did  not  know  the  all.  His  eye  ranged  only  over 
time.  Eternity  was  all  darkness.  4.  And  this  summons  before  us  another  view 
explanatory  of  the  insatisfaction  of  man.  We  are  here  preparing,  conning  our 
lesson,  forming  our  character — a  character  which  is  to  last  with  us  for  ever.  Ws 
were  not  sent  here  that  we  might  enjoy,  but  that  we  might  learn,  that  we  might 
grow  ap  strong  men  fit  to  live  through  the  everlasting  ages.     The  Christian  life  is 


46  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.i. 


a  race,  a  battle,  a  work,  a  crucifixion.    Through  the  portals  of  death  alone  w« 
gain  the  Elysian  fields.     (J.  Bennet.) 

Ver.  15.  That  which  is  crooked  cannot  he  made  straight. — Making  the  erooked 
Btraight  (with  Isa.  xl.  4) : — Both  these  men  gaze  upon  the  affairs  of  human  kind, 
and  are  afflicted  with  the  sense  of  crookedness.  It  does  not  require  much  insight 
to  perceive  that  much  in  human  nature  is  marred  and  crooked,  and  life  is  gnarled 
and  twisted.  The  world  is  a  place  of  grand  plans  and  poor  executions,  a  realm 
of  broken  columns,  snapped  friendships,  strained  relationships.  It  abounds  in 
crooked  things.  Both  men  pronounced  the  things  crooked,  but  one  said  it  in  a 
despondency,  the  other  said  it  in  hope.  One  man's  heart  shrinks  up  in  despair, 
the  other  man's  expands  in  the  strength  of  a  great  assurance.  The  two  types 
belong  to  every  age.  They  rub  shoulders  in  common  life.  We  meet  them  every- 
where, the  prophets  of  melancholy  and  the  cheery  bearers  of  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy.  There  are  always  those  who  behold  the  crooked  and  see  no  prospect  of 
rectification;  and  there  are  always  those  who  see  the  crooked  and  also  behold  its 
ultimate  correction.  How  do  these  contradictory  conclusions  arise?  How  can  we 
explain  the  despondent  judgment  which  anticipates  no  day  of  renewal?  We  are 
always  very  much  inclined  to  seek  our  explanation  in  our  natiu'al  temperaments. 
How  frequently  we  hear  this  word  in  common  life,  "  I  am  naturally  of  a  despondent 
turn  of  mind."  There  is  certainly  some  truth  in  these  explanations,  but  when 
we  seek  for  an  excuse  in  our  temperament,  we  are  attended  by  grave  and  serious 
perils.  It  is  possible  to  regulate  our  powers,  by  observing  the  law  of  balance. 
If  a  man's  constitution  has  some  ingredient  in  excess,  he  can  restrain  and  control 
it  by  developing  another  ingredient.  It  is  by  the  balance  and  antagonisms  of  our 
faculties  that  we  ehape  our  characters.  Let  us  cultivate  the  opposite  to  our 
excesses.  Or,  let  us  exercise  ourselves  in  some  grace  which  will  act  as  guardian 
upon  our  natiu'al  bias.  I  have  said  that  both  men  saw  the  crooked  things.  Is 
that  quite  true?  To  a  certain  degree  it  is  true,  but  the  half  remains  unsaid.  To 
see  anything  clearly  in  all  its  vivid  relationships  we  must  believe  strongly.  The 
Word  of  God  proclaims  that  believing  is  seeing.  **  Said  I  not  unto  thee,  that,  if 
thou  wouldst  believe,  thou  shouldst  see?"  "  Your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to 
see  My  day."  He  saw  it  through  the  lens  of  faith.  If  we  would  have  clear 
sight,  we  must  have  firm  belief.  If  we  desire  to  see  things  clearly  in  their  far- 
reaching  relationships,  we  must  come  to  them  with  a  confident  faith.  Eoheleth 
had  no  faith,  and  therefore  his  sight  was  only  partial.  He  beheld  the  crookedness; 
he  did  not  see  itfi  infinite  relationships.  Isaiah  believed  in  God,  and  with  his 
faith-washed  eyes  he  looked  at  the  crookednesses  of  men  with  the  vision  of  an 
optimist.  (J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  crooked  things  straightened: — It  is  easy 
enough  to  straighten  some  crooked  things.  Here,  for  instance,  is  a  piece  of  paper. 
I  can  take  it  in  my  hand,  and  squeeze  and  crumple  it  all  up  till  there  is  not  one 
straight  piece  in  it  as  big  as  yoiur  little-finger  nail.  And  then  I  can  spread  it  out 
on  the  table,  and  smooth  it  down,  and  make  it  just  as  straight  again  as  ever  it 
was.  And  just  so,  if  I  take  a  tender  willow  twig,  I  can  wind  it  round  my  finger 
like  a  thread;  then  I  can  unwind  it  again,  and  it  will  come  out  as  straight  as 
ever.  But  let  that  willow  twig  remain  crooked  while  it  is  growing  for  five  or  ten 
years,  and  then  you  may  write  on  it  the  words  of  our  text;  for  *'  that  which  is 
crooked  cannot  be  made  straight."  I.  Wb  abk  all  born  with  crooked  hearts. 
II.  Like  the  tree  or  the  clay,  our  hearts  are  having  something  done  to  theu 

WHICH  will  make  IT  MUCH  HARDER  TO  STRAIGHTEN  WHAT  IS  CROOKED  IN  THEM.      With 

the  tree,  it  is  its  growth  that  will  make  its  crookedness  hard  to  straighten.  With 
the  clay,  it  is  the  baking  or  burning  of  it.  With  ourselves,  it  is  the  exercising  or 
practising  of  what  is  sinful  in  our  hearts  that  will  make  it  hard  to  straighten 
them.  This  world  is  God's  school.  All  the  time  spent  in  it  is  time  spent  at 
school.  We  are  getting  educated  here  for  eternity.  And  when  we  form  a  wrong 
habit  of  thinking,  or  feeling,  or  acting,  we  are  hardening  a  crooked  point  and 
fastening  it  upon  our  characters.  And  when  we  go  out  of  the  school  of  life, — ^that 
is,  when  we  come  to  die  and  go  into  eternity, — then  it  will  be  true  that  "  that 
which  is  crooked  cannot  be  made  straight."  And  so  it  is  with  the  gardener  and 
his  trees.  While  they  are  young  and  tender  it  is  very  easy  to  straighten  them 
when  they  get  crooked.  But  let  them  only  grow  crooked,  and  then  what  can  he 
do  with  them?  III.  The  importance  of  keeping  straight  while  we  are  getting 
EDUCATED.  Did  you  ever  know  a  person  who  had  charge  of  a  nursery  of  young 
trees?    If  you  did,  you  might  learn  some  very  useful  leesons  from  his  example. 


CHAP.  I.]  ECCLESIASTES.  4!t 

The  great  object  with  him  is  to  keep  his  trees  in  proper  shape  while  they  are 

f rowing.  He  walks  about  among  them  very  often,  and  watches  them  closely, 
f  he  seee  one  getting  crooked,  he  tries  to  straighten  it.  If  merely  bending  it  with 
his  hands  will  not  keep  it  straight,  then  he  puts  a  stake  in  the  ground,  and  ties 
the  young  tree  to  it,  so  as  to  keep  it  in  a  right  position  all  the  time  it  is  growing. 
And  if  the  gardener  thinks  it  worth  his  while  to  take  so  much  care  and  pains  with 
the  education  of  a  mere  tree,  which,  after  all,  will  only  last  a  few  years,  how  much 
more  careful  should  we  be  in  educating  our  souls,  which  are  to  live  for  ever  and 
ever  I  Did  you  ever  go  to  a  photographer's  to  have  your  likeness  taken?  If  you 
did,  you  remember  how  very  careful  he  was  to  have  you  seated  properly  before  he 
began  to  take  it.  Then,  when  everything  was  arranged  juet  to  suit  him,  he  said, 
"  There  now;  keep  just  so  for  a  little  while,  and  we'll  get  a  nice  picture."  Sup- 
pose, now,  you  had  shut  one  eye  just  at  that  moment,  and  kept  it  shut  for  two 
or  three  minutes:  what  then?  Why,  you  would  have  had  the  likeness  of  a  one- 
eyed  boy  or  girl.  Or  suppose  you  had  twisted  yom-  face,  or  screwed  up  your 
mouth :  why,  you  would  have  had  a  picture  of  yourself  with  a  screwed-up  mouth 
or  a  twisted  face.  Nothing  in  the  world  could  prevent  it.  Now,  this  world  is 
Ood's  photograph  office;  and  we  are  all  staying  here  to  have  our  likeness  taken. 
While  we  are  young  the  likeness  is  being  taken  of  what  we  are  to  be  as  men  and 
women.  And  all  the  time  we  are  living  here  the  likeness  is  being  taken  of  what 
we  shall  be  hereafter  for  ever.  IV.  How  can  wb  get  stbaight  and  keep  stbaioht 
TILL  OUB  LIKENESS  IS  FINISHED?  This  is  the  most  important  question.  Bemember 
we  are  not  straight,  to  begin  with.  Becollect  that  we  are  all  born  with  crooked  or 
sinful  hearts.  They  must  be  made  straight  before  they  can  be  kept  straight. 
How,  then,  can  a  crooked,  sinful  heart  be  made  straight  or  good?  We  must  take 
it  to  Jesus,  and  pray  for  Him  to  take  away  all  that  is  wicked  in  it.  Jesus  is  able 
to  do  this.  But  no  one  else  besides  Him  can  do  it  for  us.  But  when  our  hearts 
are  made  straight,  how  are  we  to  keep  them  straight?  Two  things  are  necessary 
for  this : — we  must  get  Jesus  to  help  us,  and  we  must  help  ourselves.  We  must 
get  JesuB  to  help  us.  Without  His  help  we  can  do  nothing  at  all  in  this  matter. 
But  how  will  God  help  us  here?  By  giving  us  His  grace  and  His  Holy  Spirit. 
These  are  just  the  kind  of  help  to  us,  in  trying  to  keep  our  hearts  straight,  that 
the  sun  and  rain  are  to  the  farmer  in  making  his  crops  grow.  But  how  are  we  to 
get  this  help  from  God?    By  earnest  prayer.     (R,  Newton,  D,D.) 

Yer.  16.  I  eommnned  with  mine  own  heart. — The  witdom  of  $elf-eommunion: — 
"I  communed  with  mine  own  heart."  Solomon,  by  self-communion,  by  quei* 
tioning  his  own  consciousness,  and  by  contemplating  the  facts  of  bis  career, 
guided  by  the  Spirit  of  his  God,  evolved  a  theory  of  morals  concerning  the  highest 
good  for  man.  This  royal  genius,  and  genius  royal,  gives  us  a  list  of  all  hia 
experiences  imdertaken  in  the  search  after  "  What  was  that  good  for  the  sons  of 
men  which  they  should  do."  "I  communed  with  mine  own  heart."  Yes,  and 
be  communicated  the  result  of  his  self-communings  for  the  benefit  of  mankind. 
Like  all  who  approach  him  nearest  in  genius  he  was  communicative  and  not 
secretive.  A  cunning  man  would  have  bidden  his  experiences  as  the  hypocrite 
hides  his  sin;  but  this  man  was  too  wise  to  be  cunning.  Solomon's  self -com- 
muning was  not  of  the  sort  of  one  of  your  hermit  philosophers,  who  write  about 
a  world  with  which  they  have  little  consorted,  and  whose  throbbing  life-pulse 
they  have  seldom  felt;  who  are  busy  dissecting  the  body  of  its  dead  past  while 
the  living  present  is  dying  before  them.  His  self-communing  was  not  the  brood- 
ing pessimism  and  acrid  egotism  of  the  lonely,  self-isolated  cynic :  his  chair  of 
study  was  the  seat  of  judgment;  his  college,  the  thronged  courts  of  royalty;  his 
books,  the  men  and  women  of  his  time.  He  was  a  philosopher  who  was  a  man 
of  affairs  and  busy,  not  with  theories  and  truisms  alone,  but  with  the  political  and 
social  commerce  of  his  epoch.  He  stood  in  the  eye  of  the  world,  and  the  world 
Uy  open  to  his  eye;  and  this  man,  who  with  largest  outsight  could  look  abroad 
upon  the  world,  could  also  look  with  keenest  insight  upon  the  world  within  him- 
self. These  powers  of  prospection  and  introspection  lifted  him,  and  according  to 
the  degree  in  which  we  possess  them,  lift  us  out  of  the  dust  of  mere  animal  exist- 
enee:  they  are  the  motor  of  our  will's  responsibility.  Self- introspection,  self-com- 
munion, is  as  a  mirror,  wherein  the  ego  beholds  the  reflection  of  itself,  and  plays 
the  spy  upon  the  secret  movements  of  the  soul ;  it  is  the  keenest  detector  of  furtive 
faults,  and  the  severest  monitor  of  sly  sins.  Commune  with  your  own  heart  fre- 
quently, if  you  would  learn  to  know  your  own  self  truly.     Commune  with  youe 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


own  heart,  and  you  will  learn  the  necessity  of  its  closer  communion  with  God,  in 
order  that  you  may  gain  from  Him  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  necessary  to  reform 
and  renew  its  sad  estate.     Do  you  ever  commune  with  your  own  hearts,  saying, 
Lo,  I  am  come  to  great  estate  in  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ ; — lo,  that  kingdom 
which,  if  it  be  not,  should  be  within  you?     Are  you  able  to  say,  in  the  words  of 
the  text,  "  Yea,  my  heart  hath  great  experience  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  " — 
experience  of  Him  who  is  the  Wisdom  of  God  and  the  First  Fruits  of  knowledge? 
Have  your  hearts  this  experience,  this  knowledge?     If  you  have,  you  shall  obtain 
your  allotted  part  in  the  freehold  of  a  spiritual  estate  unencumbered  by  vanity 
and  vexation  of  spirit,  to  which  you  are  called  to  be  heirs  in  the  everlasting  king- 
dom of  Jesus  Christ.     (C.  R.  Panter,  LL.D.)     My  heart  had  great  experience  of 
wisdom  and  knowledge. — The  experience  of  wisdom  and  knowledge: — In  order  to 
realize  the  goodness  or  badness  of  a  thing,  there  is  nothing  like  experience  :  not 
simply  under  favourable  circumstances  alone,  but  under  unfavourable  ones;  not 
now  and  then,  by  mere  fits  and  starts,  but  uniformly  so.     Now,  we  do  not  hesitate 
to  afiSrm  that  the  general  experience  of  a  careless  and  sinfully-disposed  person  is, 
on  the  whole,  one  of  a  most  unsatisfactory  character  :  for,  while  such  an  individual 
may  appear  to  the  eye  of  others  free  from  all  alarm  of  danger,  and  under  the 
most   pleasurable  excitements,  yet,  as  long  as  the  conscience  is  not  absolutely 
deadened,  and  there  is  any  impressive  idea  of  God's  existence  and  power,  and  an 
apprehension  of  a  future  retribution,  the  soul  of  such  an   individual  cannot  be 
otherwise  than  restless,  and  far  from  peaceful.     On  the  other  hand,  the  upright,  . 
honest,  sincere,  and  trustful  Christian,  although  struggling  against  his  own  corrupt 
tendencies,  and  daily  striving  to  obtain  a  mastery  over  himself,  experiences  within 
his  own  heart  the  unspeakable  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  he  is  on  the  path  of 
duty  and  of  safety.     That  path,  we  all  know,  is  sometimes  a  troubled  one:  yet, 
withal,  the  Christian  is  more  substantially  and  lastingly  happy  than  the  ungodly 
and  reckless,  be  their  outward  circumstances  ever  so  flourishing,  and  their  aspect 
ever  so  imposing.     And  this  fact  is  palpably  and  unmistakably  so,  when  the  test 
of  experience  is  brought  to  the  bar  of  death.     I.  The  experimental  knowledge  of 
THE  LIFE  WHICH  IS  TEMPORAL.     1.  With  respect  to  wisdom,  the  word  has  various 
meanings  in  Scripture.     Thus  it  is  put  for  prudence  and  discretion,  which  enables 
us  to  perceive  what  is  fit  to  be  done,  at  the  right  time,  in  the  right  place,  and  by 
the  right  person.     The  word  "  wisdom  "  is  taken  for  the  faculty  of  invention, 
skill,  and  ingenuity,  as  when  God  told  Moses  He  had  filled  with  wisdom,  and  under- 
standing, and  knowledge,  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab,  to  invent  several  sorts  of  work  for 
completing    the    tabernacle.      Wisdom    is    used    for    craft    or    subtilty — as    when 
Pharaoh  said,  "  Come  on,  let  us  deal  wisely  with  the  Israelites."     It  is  also  taken 
for  doctrine,  learning,  and  experience.     There  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  excellency 
of  this  wisdom,  when  judiciously,  or  rather  legitimately  employed.     We  do  not 
blame  the  artisan  for  his  skill,  the  man  of  science  for  his  discoveries,  the  politician 
for  his  conscientious  part  in  legislation,  the  tradesman  for  his  forethought,  industry 
and  skill  of  management,  and  the  housewife  for  her  careful  economy.     No;  but  the 
evil  of  worldly  wisdom  is  when  it  is  exercised  in  the  pursuit  of  worthless  objects ; 
when  it  schemes  and  plans  for  the  mere  gratification  of  some  fleshly  passion ; 
when  it  wraps  itself  up  in  disguise,  in  order  to  lead  astray  the  innocent,  and  to 
entrap  wickedly  the  virtuous;  when  it  plans  only  for  time,  without  a  due  reference 
to  eternity  :   when  all  its  superstructures  bear  the  character  of  earth,  and  have 
written  upon  their  portals,  "  Ichabod  ";  their  glory  vain,  perishable,  and  passing 
away.     2.  And  then,   with   respect  to  the  knowledge  of  Solomon  :    he   was   well 
acquainted  with  the  various   principles,  and  passions,  and  objects,  and  pursuits, 
and  tendencies  of  human  nature.    This  royal  king,  gifted  with  a  large  and  capacious 
intellect,  well  versed  in  the  affairs  of  human  life,  as  they  apply  to  human  char- 
acter and  station,  raised  to  a  throne  in  his  day  among  the  greatest  seats  of  royal 
power,  fed  with  every  dainty  the  earth  could  produce,  and  constantly   encircled 
with  the  charms  of  beauty,  and  all  the  enchanting  glory  of  a  rich  and  prosperous 
princedom,  was  nevertheless  a  stranger  to  the  sweet  peace  of  the  humble-minded, 
of  the  Divinely  trustful  and  obedient — a  peace  which  sometimes  passes  by  the 
couch  of  the  palace,  and  rests  softly  and  sweetly   upon  the  hard  pillow  of  the 
cottage.     II.  Consider   experience   as   it   applies   itself   to   the   wisdom   and 
KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN.     1.  Here  also  is  a  knowledge  which  is  experimental, 
that  is  to  say,  not  a  mere  thing  of  hearsay  or  of  theory,  but  something  which  is 
felt;  realized  as  a  daily  matter-of-fact  truth.     It  is  not  altogether  a  knowledge 
gathered  from  books,  or  from  intercourse  with  man,  but  it  is  a  Divinely  communi- 


CHAP.  I.]  ECCLESIASTES.  49 

cated  knowledge.  It  ie  a  light  from  above,  revealing  new  and  striking  aspects  of 
God,  as  He  stands  related  to  us  under  the  titles  of  Father,  Saviour,  Friend. 
2  The  experinaental  fact  of  Christian  wisdom  is  very  strikingly  illustrated  in  the 
conduct  01  the  five  wise  virgins  waiting  at  midnight  for  the  coming  of  the  bride- 
groom ;  and  it  is  practically  exemplified  in  the  daily  life  and  character  of  the  man 
who  acts  in  strict  accordance  with  the  laws  of  God,  and  with  the  dictates  of 
conscience.  Wisdom,  in  this  instance,  is  the  very  opposite  of  folly.  It  is  not 
seen  to  build  upon  the  sand  of  earthly  trust,  but  upon  the  rock  of  Divine  faith. 
It  is  not  seen  in  the  midst  of  widely  built  up  barns,  but  in  the  calm  of  patieDce, 
and  in  the  endurance  of  hope.     (W.  D.  Horwood.) 

Ver.  18.  And  he  that  inoreaseth  knowledge  increaseth  sorrow. — The  heritage 
of  knowledge: — I.  How  is  the  increase  of  knowledge  also  an  increase  op 
SORROW?  The  affirmation  of  the  text  is  not  that  knowledge  is  not  intended  for 
men,  but  that  the  highest  intention  and  the  greatest  gift  carry  with  them  also  a 
corresponding  sorrow.  Greater  the  boon,  more  the  sorrow  to  acquire  it;  higher 
the  price,  greater  the  difficulties  to  obtain  it.  Sorrow  is  not  sin.  It  may  be  in 
some  cases  that  it  is  the  result  of  sin;  but  not  in  all  cases,  and  not  necessarily  so 
in  any.  It  is  possible  that  sorrow  accompanies  many  other  things  as  well  as  that 
of  knowledge.  He  that  increases  friends  increases  grief,  for  they  tiu:n  faithless 
possibly,  or  they  leave  or  die,  and  grief  is  the  result.  He  who  increases  in  wealth 
increases  also  in  sorrow,  for  fear  of  loss  or  sense  of  responsibility,  or  some  other 
perplexity  ever  accompanies  the  acquisition  of  possession.  He  who  gains  a  high 
position  increases  sorrow,  for  it  brings  with  it  care  and  responsibility,  extra  toil  and 
numerous  trials.  As  there  are  different  forms  of  sorrow,  a  thing  may  be  accompanied 
with  sorrow  in  various  ways.  1.  Knowledge  alone,  as  an  intellectual  possession,  not 
only  satisfies  not,  but  may  even  increase  sorrow.  The  more  persons  know,  the  more 
dissatisfied  they  become  with  their  own  ignorance;  so  knowledge  can  never  satisfy 
the  craving  of  the  intellect  it  feeds.  But  there  is  a  moral  emptiness  felt  in  the 
heart  and  conscience  which  knowledge  cannot  satisfy.  To  know  the  good  without 
enjoying  it  is  an  increase  of  sorrow;  to  see  life  without  being  able  to  avail  our- 
selves of  it  is  more  distressing  than  if  we  had  known  nothing  of  it.  It  is  not 
unfrequent  that  we  hear  persons  attributing  this  only  to  speculative  knowledge, 
meaning  by  it,  I  suppose,  things  above  sense  and  the  common  transactions  of 
every  day's  life.  It  would  appear  from  such  view  that  ordinary  knowledge  satisfies 
its  possessors,  and  never  gives  any  sense  of  pain  or  sorrow;  so  in  this  it  is  superior, 
and  to  be  preferred  before  the  speculative.  The  fact  is,  the  knowledge  of  things 
common,  as  that  of  sense  and  experience,  does  not  satisfy  more  than  the  other — 
if  anything,  it  does  it  in  less  degree.  The  limited  knowledge  of  sense  or  experience 
surely  cannot  satisfy;  its  limit  and  commonality  make  it  weary.  There  is  some- 
thing in  every  object  beyond  our  knowledge,  so  the  most  common  object  is  sur- 
rounded with  mystery,  and  leads  to  the  speculative.  If  any  kind  of  knowledge 
could  satisfy,  it  would  appear  that  the  speculative  has  the  advantage  in  its  favour. 
The  speculative  is  the  kind  of  knowledge  that  transcends  sense,  and  has  God  and 
the  invisible,  the  causes  and  laws  of  the  universe,  and  the  infinite  and  absolute 
as  its  object-matter,  which  are  more  likely  to  satisfy  than  the  small  everyday 
transactions  of  earth.  Another  thing,  it  cannot  satisfy  the  moral  conditions  and 
relations  of  man's  nature,  which  makes  knowledge  as  a  matter  of  intellectual 
apprehension,  incomplete  to  supply  all  the  need  of  man  as  a  moral  being.  For 
these  reasons  and  others,  it  may,  with  its  increase,  be  the  indirect  means  of 
Borrow.  2.  Knowledge  of  evil,  in  the  absence  of  that  of  goodness,  increases 
sorrow  in  the  degree  it  is  possessed.  A  knowledge  of  the  evil  of  our  hearts  and 
actions  gives  sorrow,  and  if  it  were  greater  I  doubt  not  but  our  sorrow  would  be 
increased  by  it.  The  more  we  know  of  the  evil  policy,  the  treachery,  the  cor- 
ruption, and  all  the  moral  evil  of  society  in  all  its  forms  and  relations,  the  heavier 
is  our  sorrow.  Such  a  sorrow  is  right;  it  proceeds  from  our  dislike  of  the  bad  and 
the  thing  which  gives  pain,  and  our  sympathy  with  the  good  and  happy.  3.  The 
increase  of  knowledge  without  faith  is  another  condition  that  tends  to  the  increase 
of  sorrow.  The  knowledge  of  sin  and  evil  as  they  are,  without  faith  in  God'a 
order  of  grace  and  mercy,  assuredly  produces  anything  but  happy  emotions  in  our 
minds;  and  if  our  knowledge  were  more  extensive,  our  sorrow  would  be  enhanced 
accordingly.  The  knowledge  of  the  laws  and  resources  of  the  universe,  without 
faith  in  God;  of  wants,  sufferings,  danger,  and  afflictions  and  death,  without  faith 
in  the  great  Lord  of  life  as  a  Friend  and  Father;  the  knowledge  of  sin  withoufc 

4 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

faith  in  a  Saviour;  the  knowledge  that  we  die  to-night  or  to-morrow,  without  hope 
of  a  happier  existence  beyond — little  of  such  knowledge  gives  pain,  and  if  it  were 
increased,  our  sorrow  would  also  increase  in  the  same  ratio.  4.  Apart  from  truth, 
the  increase  of  knowledge  is  also  that  of  sorrow.  When  not  governed  by  truth, 
everything  we  do  increases  our  guilt,  and  becomes  means  of  corruption  and  danger 
in  our  hand.  Thus  the  thing  which  was  intended  to  be  a  blessing  becomes  a 
curse,  and  knowledge,  which  is  needed  and  adapted  to  advance  the  interests  of 
society,  becomes  means  of  sorrow.  Knowledge  is  a  blessing,  connected  with  other 
things;  in  the  hand  of  a  wicked  man,  it  may  be  a  cause  of  endless  sorrow.  5.  The 
increase  of  knowledge  without  love  is  also  an  increase  of  sorrow.  Love  is  possible 
by  us  towards  others,  or  by  others  towards  ourselves;  in  the  first,  we  are  the 
agents,  in  the  second,  we  are  the  objects.  Suppose  our  knowledge  increases  of  all 
Around  us,  without  love  to  God  or  man,  would  this  not  be  an  increase  of  sorrow 
to  ourselves  and  others?  6.  The  increase  of  knowledge  viewed  as  an  end  in  itself 
is  also  an  increase  of  sorrow.  A  man  knowing  all  relative  to  all  matters  of  life 
and  godliness,  yet  doing  nothing,  gets  none  the  better,  none  the  happier.  Would 
this  be  an  increase  of  joy,  or  sorrow?  II.  Why  an  increase  of  knowledge  is  also 
AN  iNOBEASE  OF  SORROW.  1.  The  increase  of  knowledge  of  ourselves  increases 
sorrow,  because  we  have  become  more  familiar  with  the  fact  of  our  frailty  and 
sin.  2.  It  proceeds  from  the  character  of  the  knowledge  itself.  To  know  the 
bad  gives  sorrow  to  the  good ;  to  know  the  calamities  which  happen  to  our  friends 
and  people  generally,  increases  the  sorrow  of  oui*  social  feeling.  3.  The  path  to 
knowledge  is  not  an  easy  one,  it  is  one  of  toil  and  trial,  thus  the  increase  of  it  is 
also  an  increase  of  sorrow.  Whether  we  make  reflection,  experiment,  or  reading, 
the  paths  of  knowledge,  none  of  these  can  be  pursued  earnestly  without  a  feeling 
of  weariness,  sorrow,  or  toil;  they  exhaust  and  weary  both  the  physical  and  mental 
powers  when  they  are  pursued  long  and  earnestly.  4.  The  more  knowledge  people 
have  the  more  they  deplore  their  ignorance.  Their  insight  is  so  keen  and  their 
ambition  so  great,  their  plans  so  comprehensive  and  their  thirst  so  intense,  that 
they  almost  despise  what  they  possess  by  reason  of  the  great  portion  outside  their 
possession.  They  are  awakened  to  the  greatness  and  grandeur  of  God  and  His 
universe  in  belief  and  perception,  so  that  their  present  store  appears  but  a  small 
star  in  the  vastness  of  space,  or  just  the  beginning  of  the  alphabet  of  the  endless 
career  of  truth  and  knowledge  outside  and  above  them.  In  this  sense  the  increase 
of  knowledge  is  not  the  way  to  immediate  happiness,  but  to  sorrow.  5.  The 
increase  of  knowledge  produces  in  the  mind  of  its  possessors  an  anxious  thirst  for 
more.  If  this  desire  is  cultivated  to  a  high  degree,  it  becomes  an  intense  feeling, 
almost  too  much  for  our  nature  to  bear;  and  the  danger  is  that  it  will  lead  those 
governed  by  it  too  far  and  intensely  on,  until  they  injure  themselves.  6.  It 
increases  sorrow,  because  it  shows  more  clearly  the  unsatisfactory  character  of  all 
things  earthly.  In  the  light  of  knowledge  we  become  conscious  of  our  imperfec- 
tion; by  its  aid  we  become  familiar  with  sin  and  deformity  everywhere;  the  more 
we  increase  in  it,  the  greater  is  our  reason  of  sorrow  for  those  deformities  every- 
where found  in  life.  7.  The  character  of  knowledge  is  to  excite,  and  not  allay. 
It  never  satisfies,  but  always  excites  its  subjects  to  higher  effort,  sacrifice,  and 
ambition.  III.  The  lessons  of  instruction  and  application  which  the  subject 
IMPARTS  to  all.  1.  Sorrow  in  some  way  or  other  is  connected  with  the  best  and 
greatest  things  in  this  life.  2.  It  is  not  the  end  of  life  to  get  free  from  sorrow. 
It  is  not  intended  that  we  should  be  without  knowledge,  but  rather  that  we 
should  pursue  and  possess  it;  but  it  will  entail  sorrow  upon  us;  it  is  not  less  our 
duty  on  that  account,  indeed  it  cannot  be  found  without.  The  end  of  life  is  to 
do  the  work  given  us  faithfully  in  the  fire  and  in  the  midst  of  sorrow,  and  make 
sorrow  subordinate  to  the  doing  of  our  work  better,  and  the  fitting  of  us  more 
perfect  and  complete  for  our  future  heaven  and  home.  3.  The  more  superior  we 
become  in  anything,  the  more  conscious  we  become  of  our  own  imperfection  and 
that  of  others  in  the  thing  we  excel  in.  4.  Everything  true  and  right  has  its 
sacrifice,  and  no  one  will  exceed,  and  is  a  true  disciple,  except  he  is  prepared  to 
offer  what  is  required  in  the  order  of  truth  and  law.  5.  Everything,  even  tha 
highest  and  the  best,  denies  to  us  undistiirbed  rest  and  unalloyed  happiness  in  this 
life.  Prickly  thistles  grow  among  wheat,  pointed  thorns  are  found  with  flowers, 
dross  is  mixed  with  the  best  gold;  there  is  something  to  convince  us  everywhere 
that  there  are  no  objects  that  can  satisfy  us  all  in  all ;  there  is  a  deficiency  or 
something  to  lead  us  to  seek  something  higher,  purer,  nobler,  and  more  compre- 
lisnsive  than  we  see  and  know  here.    Everywhere  we  are  led  from  the  created 


CHAP.  I,]  ECCZESIASTES.  M 

to  some  One  above  the  creature;  in  everything  we  are  reminded  that  the  object 
of  our  want  is  not  in  the  limited  and  partial,  but  in  some  One  infinite  and  all- 
comprehensive  of  the  good  and  pure.  (T.  Hughes.)  Increase  of  knowledgs 
attended  with  sorrow: — I.  KNOWLEnoE  is  the  parent  of  sorrow  from  its  vert 
NATURE,  as  being  the  instrument  and  means  by  which  the  afiflicting  quality  of 
the  object  is  conveyed  to  the  mind;  for  as  nothing  delights,  so  nothing  troublea 
till  it  is  known.  The  merchant  is  not  troubled  as  soon  as  his  ship  is  cast  away, 
but  as  soon  as  he  hears  it  is.  The  affairs  and  objects  that  we  converse  with  have 
most  of  them  a  fitness  to  afflict  and  disturb  the  mind.  And  as  the  colours  lie 
dormant,  and  strike  not  the  eye,  till  the  light  actuates  them  into  a  visibility,  so 
those  afflictive  qualities  never  exert  their  sting,  nor  affect  the  mind,  till  knowledge 
displays  them,  and  slides  them  into  the  apprehension.  It  is  the  empty  vessel  thab 
makes  the  merry  sound.  It  is  the  philosopher  that  is  pensive,  that  looks  down- 
wards in  the  posture  of  the  mourner.  It  is  the  open  eye  that  weeps.  Aristotle 
affirms  that  there  was  never  a  great  scholar  in  the  world  but  had  in  his  temper 
a  dash  and  mixture  of  melancholy;  and  if  melancholy  be  the  temper  of  knowledge, 
we  know  that  it  is  also  the  complexion  of  sorrow,  the  scene  of  mourning  and 
affliction.  "We  are  first  taught  our  knowledge  with  the  rod,  and  with  the  severities 
of  discipline.  We  get  it  with  some  smart,  but  improve  it  with  more.  The  world 
is  full  of  objects  of  sorrow,  and  knowledge  enlarges  our  capacities  to  take  them  in. 
I  might  now,  from  the  nature  of  knowledge,  pass  to  the  properties  of  it,  and 
show  its  uncertainty,  its  poorness,  and  utter  inability  to  contribute  anything  to  the 
solid  enjoyments  of  life.  But  before  I  enter  upon  this,  there  may  be  a  question 
started,  whether  or  no  there  be  indeed  any  such  thing  as  true  knowledge  in  the 
world?  for  there  want  not  reasons  that  seem  to  insinuate  that  there   is  none. 

1.  As  first:  because  knowledge,  if  true,  is  upon  that  score  certain  and  infallible; 
but  the  certainty  of  the  knowledge  cannot  be  greater  than  the  certainty  of  the 
faculty,  or  medium,  by  which  it  is  acquired:  now,  all  knowledge  is  conveyed 
through  sense,  and  sense  is  subject  to  fallacy,  to  err,  and  to  be  imposed  upon. 

2.  Knowledge  is  properly  the  apprehension  of  a  thing  by  its  cause;  but  the  causes 
of  things  are  not  certainly  known  :  this  by  most  is  confessed.  3.  To  know  a  thing 
is  to  apprehend  it  as  really  it  is,  but  we  apprehend  things  only  as  they  appear; 
BO  that  all  our  knowledge  may  properly  be  defined  the  apprehension  of  appear- 
ances.  And  though  I  will  not  say  that  these  arguments  prove  that  there  is  no 
such  thing  as  knowledge,  yet  thus  much,  at  least,  they  seem  to  prove,  that  we 
cannot  be  assured  that  there  is  any  such  thing.  But  you  will  reply  that  this 
overthrows  the  hypothesis  of  the  text,  which  supposes  and  takes  for  granted  that 
there  is  such  a  thing  as  knowledge.  I  answer,  it  does  not :  for  the  arguments 
proceed  against  knowledge,  strictly  and  accurately  so  taken;  but  the  text  speaks 
of  it  in  a  popular  way,  of  that  which  the  world  commonly  calls  and  esteems  know- 
ledge. And  that  this  is  but  a  poor,  worthless  thing,  and  of  no  efficacy  to  advance 
the  real  concerns  of  human  happiness,  might  be  made  most  evident.  For,  first, 
it  is  certain  that  knowledge  does  not  either  constitute  or  alter  the  condition  of 
things,  but  only  transcribe  and  represent  the  face  of  nature  as  it  finds  it;  and 
therefore  is  but  a  low  ignoble  thing,  and  differs  as  much  from  nature  itself,  as  he 
that  only  reports  great  things  from  him  that  does  them.  "What  is  it  to  me 
whether  the  will  has  a  power  to  determine  itself,  or  is  determined  by  objects  from 
without?  when  it  is  certain  that  those  here  that  hold  a  different  opinion,  yet 
continue  in  the  same  coxirse  and  way  of  action.  Or  am  I  anyways  advantaged, 
whether  the  soul  wills,  understands,  and  performs  the  rest  of  its  actions,  by 
faculties  distinct  from  itself,  or  immediately  by  its  own  substance?  Is  it  of  any 
moment  whether  the  soul  of  man  comes  into  the  world  with  carnal  notions,  or 
whether  it  comes  bare,  and  receives  all  from  the  after  reports  of  sense?  "What 
am  I  benefited  whether  the  sun  moves  about  the  earth,  or  whether  the  sun  is  the 
centre  of  the  world,  and  the  earth  is  indeed  a  planet,  and  wheels  about  that? 
"Whether  it  be  one  or  the  other,  I  see  no  change  in  the  course  of  nature.  "Who  in 
the  world  finds  any  change  in  his  affairs  whether  there  be  little  vacuities  and 
empty  spaces  in  the  air ;  or  whether  there  is  no  space  but  what  is  filled  and  taken 
up  with  body?  I  could  reckon  up  a  hundred  more  such  problems  as  these,  about 
an  inquiry  into  which  men  are  so  laborious,  and  in  a  supposed  resolution  of 
which  they  so  much  boast ;  which  shows  that  that  which  passes  with  the  world 
for  knowledge  is  but  a  slight  trivial  thing;  and  that  men's  being  so  eager  and 
industrious  in  the  quest  of  it  is  like  sweeping  the  house,  raising  the  dust,  and 
keeping  a  great  do  only  to  find  pins.    II.  Knowledge  is  thb  oaubb  of  sokbow,  im 


S2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 


RESPECT  OF  THE  LABORIOUS   AND  TROUBLESOME   ACQUISITION   OF  IT.      For  18  there   any 

labour  comparable  to  that  of  the  brain?  any  toil  like  a  continual  digging  in  the 
mines  of  knowledge?  any  pursuit  so  dubious  and  difficult  as  that  of  truth?  any 
attempt  so  sublime  as  to  give  a  reason  of  things?  The  soldier,  it  is  confessed, 
converses  with  dangers,  and  looks  death  in  the  face;  but  then  he  bleeds  with 
honour,  he  grows  pale  gloriously,  and  dies  with  the  same  heat  and  fervour  that 
gives  life  to  others.  But  he  does  not,  like  the  scholar,  kill  himself  in  cold  blood; 
sit  up  and  watch  when  there  is  no  enemy;  and,  like  a  silly  fly,  buzz  about  his  own 
candle  till  he  has  consumed  himself.  Then  again;  the  husbandman,  who  has  the 
toil  of  sowing  and  reaping,  he  has  his  reward  in  his  very  labour;  and  the  same 
corn  that  employs,  also  fills  his  hand.  He  who  labours  in  the  field  indeed  wearies, 
but  then  he  also  helps  and  preserves  his  body.  But  study,  it  is  a  weariness 
without  exercise,  a  laborious  sitting  still,  that  racks  the  inward,  and  destroys  tha 
outward  man  of  the  body;  and,  like  a  stronger  blast  of  lightning,  not  only  melts 
the  sword,  but  also  consumes  the  scabbard.  Nature  allows  men  a  great  freedom, 
and  never  gave  an  appetite  but  to  be  an  instrument  of  enjoyment;  nor  made  a 
desire,  but  in  order  to  the  pleasure  of  its  satisfaction.  But  he  that  will  increase 
knowledge,  must  be  content  not  to  enjoy;  and  not  only  to  cut  off  the  extrava- 
gancies of  luxury,  but  also  to  deny  the  lawful  demands  of  convenience,  to  forswear 
delight,  and  look  upon  pleasure  as  his  mortal  enemy.  He  must  be  willing  to  be 
weak,  sickly,  and  consumptive;  even  to  forget  when  he  is  hungry,  and  to  digest 
nothing  but  what  he  reads.  He  must  read  much,  and  perhaps  meet  with  little; 
turn  oVer  much  trash  for  one  grain  of  truth;  study  antiquity  till  he  feels  tha 
effects  of  it.  We  may  take  a  view  of  all  those  callings  to  which  learning  ia 
necessary,  and  we  shall  find  that  labour  and  misery  attends  them  all.  And  firpt 
for  the  study  of  physic :  do  not  many  lose  their  own  health  while  they  are 
learning  to  restore  it  to  others?  Then  for  the  law  :  are  not  many  called  to  the 
grave,  while  they  are  preparing  for  a  call  to  the  bar?     III.  Knowledge  increases 

SORROW,     IN     RESPECT    OF     ITS     EFFECTS     AND     CONSEQUENTS.       1.    The     first     effect     o£ 

the  increase  of  knowledge  is  an  increase  of  the  desire  of  knowledge.  It  is  the 
covetousness  of  the  understanding,  the  dropsy  of  the  soul,  that  drinks  itself  athirst, 
and  grows  hungry  with  surfeit  and  satisfaction.  Now,  an  endless  desire  does  ot 
necessity  vex  and  torment  the  person  that  has  it.  For  misery  and  vexation  ia 
properly  nothing  else  but  an  eager  appetite  not  satisfied.  In  fine,  happiness  ia 
fruition;  but  there  is  no  fruition  where  there  is  a  constant  desire.  For  enjoyment 
swallows  up  desire,  and  that  which  fulfils  the  expectation  also  ends  it.  The 
bottomless  appetite  of  knowledge  will  not  be  satisfied,  and  then  we  know  that 
sorrow  is  the  certain  result  and  inseparable  companion  of  dissatisfaction.  2.  The 
second  unhappy  effect  of  knowledge  is  that  it  rewards  its  followers  with  the 
miseries  of  poverty,  and  clothes  them  with  rags.  Beading  of  books  consumes  tha 
body,  and  buying  of  them  the  estate.  The  mind  of  man  is  a  narrow  thing,  and 
cannot  master  several  employments.  A  scholar  without  a  patron  is  insignificant : 
he  must  have  something  to  lean  upon :  he  is  like  an  unhappy  cause,  always 
depending.  As  for  instance,  he  that  follows  chemistry  must  have  riches  to  throw 
away  upon  the  study  of  it;  whatever  he  gets  by  it,  those  furnaces  must  be  fed 
with  gold.  In  short,  I  will  not  say  that  the  study  of  knowledge  always  finds  men 
poor,  but  sure  it  is  that  it  is  seldom  or  never  but  it  leaves  them  so.  3.  The  third 
fatal  effect  of  knowledge  is  that  it  makes  the  person  who  has  it  the  butt  of  envy, 
the  mark  of  obloquy  and  contention.  How  are  Galileo  and  Copernicus  persecuted, 
and  Descartes  worried  by  almost  every  pen  I  And  now,  if  this  be  our  lot,  what 
remains  for  us  to  determine  upon?  Is  there  no  way  to  get  out  of  this  unhappy 
dilemma,  but  that  we  must  needs  either  dash  upon  the  sorrows  of  knowledge,  or 
the  baseness  of  ignorance?  Why  yes,  there  is  a  fair  escape  left  us;  for  God  has 
not  placed  mankind  under  a  necessity  either  of  sin  or  misery.  And  therefore,  as 
to  the  matter  in  hand,  it  is  only  to  continue  our  labour,  but  to  alter  the  scene  of 
it;  and  to  make  Him,  that  is  the  great  Author,  also  the  subject  of  our  knowledge. 
(B.  South,  D.D.)  The  acquisition  of  knowledge  attended  with  sorrow: — It  ia 
highly  important  that  we  should  keep  in  mind,  as  well  in  respect  of  the  declara- 
tions'of  Scripture,  as  of  the  maxims  of  mere  temporal  and  secular  concernment, 
that  many  things  which,  in  one  point  of  their  application,  are  altogether  un- 
deniable, may  in  another  point  be  contrary  to  reason  and  experience.  The  words 
of  the  text  may  serve  as  an  illustration  of  this  principle.  There  is  wisdom  which 
bringeth  no  grief;  and  there  is  knowledge  whose  increase  implies  no  increase  ol 
Borrow.     We  shall  find  in  the  Bible  no  plea  for  ignorance.     "  That  the  eoul  b* 


CHAP.  1.}  ECCLE8IASTES.  J» 

•without  knowledge  it  is  not  good,"  is  the  declaration  of  Scripture.  Of  all  the  gifts 
which  the  Lord  has  bestowed  upon  His  creatures,  none  ranks  higher,  or  involves 
weightier  responsibility  than  the  gift  of  intellect.  The  talent  must  be  used,  not 
laid  by;  it  must  be  put  out  to  interest,  not  hidden  in  a  napkin,  nor  buried  in  the 
earth.  It  is  indeed  a  high  and  noble  thing  to  consecrate  our  minds,  with  all  their 
best  and  brightest  faculties,  to  Him  who  bestowed  them  for  His  own  service. 
There  is  no  finer  spectacle  than  that  which  is  presented  by  the  man  of  science, 
who  searches  the  records  of  creation,  written  in  characters  which  no  time  can 
obliterate,  and  on  a  page  which  no  changes  can  efface;  and  fetches  in  from  them 
proofs  of  the  character,  and  illustrations  of  the  dealings,  and  doings  of  Deity. 
I.  Some  of  the  cases  in  which  the  application  of  the  text  is  undeniable.  We 
may  say  in  general  terms  that  the  text  applies  to  all  the  acquisitions  of  know- 
ledge, which  are  independent  of  God,  and  from  which  considerations  of  the  soul 
and  of  eternity  are  excluded.  The  limitation  of  the  sphere  of  human  science 
must  necessarily  produce  dissatisfaction  and  disappointment.  When  it  has  been 
urged  to  its  farthest  extent,  its  discoveries  are  but  mean  and  ignoble  in  comparison 
of  what  remains  yet  unknown;  its  acquisitions  are  little  worth,  when  contrasted 
with  the  extent  of  the  field  which  can  never  be  brought  within  its  grasp  and 
compass.  And  if  science  be  applied  to  trace  out  the  machinery  and  operations  of 
our  own  minds,  the  result  is  still  less  satisfactory.  One  generation  of  meta- 
physicians builds  up  a  system,  which  another  generation  employs  itself  to  pull 
down  and  to  destroy.  Human  knowledge  is,  moreover,  confined  within  as  nwrow 
limits  in  point  of  time.  The  present  is  that  which  it  can  alone  claim.  The  annals 
of  past  ages  convey  falsehoods  intermingled  with  truth;  so  that  the  most  patient 
research  cannot  distinguish  between  fact  and  fiction ;  and  infinitely  the  larger 
portion  of  the  transactions,  which  have  occupied  the  millions  of  mankind,  have 
obtained  no  record,  and  have  left  no  memorial.  Of  the  mighty  future  which  lies 
beyond  the  boundary  of  time,  of  that  inconceivably  long  existence  to  which  the 
present  life  forms  but  the  commencement  and  the  vestibule,  unassisted  reason 
can  make  no  discovery.  But  there  are  circumstances  in  which  sorrow  more  directly 
tracks  the  footprints  of  that  wisdom  which  is  of  the  earth.  The  annals  of  human 
science,  the  history  of  students  in  human  learning,  might  furnish  forth  many  a 
heart-rending  page.  We  might  read  of  many  an  one,  who  having  ardently  pur- 
sued the  object  which  seemed  to  promise  most  of  reputation  and  advancement, 
has  derived  from  his  pursuit  only  the  keenness  of  disappointment,  and  the  bitter- 
ness of  a  broken  heart.  You  might  see  the  sad  spectacle  of  such  an  one  sinking 
to  an  untimely  tomb,  because  he  followed  his  one  object  too  intently  and  too 
devotedly.  And  while  he  is  sacrificing  so  much  for  intellectual  distinction,  he  is 
keenly  and  painfully  sensible  of  neglect.  He  feels  himself  a  lonely  and  forsaken 
oreatiure.  The  world  is  too  busy  to  mark  his  doings.  Human  knowledge,  while 
it  is  unsanctified  by  grace,  tends  to  lead  us  away  from  God.  We  may  become 
BO  absorbed  in  the  contemplation  of  the  Creator's  works;  in  tracing  the  various 
processes  through  which  they  pass,  and  the  various  laws  to  which  they  are  sub- 
ject, as  to  forget  the  high  attributes  of  the  Creator  Himself.  To  be  thus  turned 
aside  from  Him  who  is  the  source  of  present  blessing  and  eternal  hope,  will  sooner 
or  later  be  felt  to  be  an  evil  and  a  bitter  thing.  It  issues  not  unfrequently  in  yet 
more  disastrous  effects.  The  mind  which  has  been  so  deeply  engaged  in  following 
the  discoveries  of  science  and  gathering  stores  of  intellectual  treasure,  in  ways 
which  it  has  shaped  out  independently  of  God,  may  at  length,  in  the  uncurbed 
nride  of  reason,  reject  the  evidence  for  the  truth  of  His  revealed  Word;  may  deny 
His  providential  interference  in  the  transactions  of  the  earth;  and  plunging  yet 
deeper  in  the  abyss  of  unbelief,  may  join  the  fool  of  old,  in  denying  His  very 
existence.  He  will  feel,  at  length,  that,  in  his  much  wisdom  hath  been  much 
grief,  and  in  the  increase  of  his  knowledge  hath  been  increase  of  sorrow.  He  has 
treasured  up  evil  for  the  latter  day,  and  has  laid  upon  his  own  soul  the  bitterness 
of  anguish,  which  found  him  out  at  the  last.  And  that  which  is  true  of  individuals 
is  not  less  true  of  communities.  If  it  be  a  dangerous  thing  for  a  man  to  cultivate 
intellectual  accomplishments,  at  the  expense  of  personal  piety;  no  less  is  it 
hazardous  that  religion  should  be  dissociated  from  knowledge,  in  the  prevailing 
schemes  for  the  instruction  of  a  people.  II.  Some  of  the  cases  in  which  no 
application  of  the  text  can  be  made.  1.  It  cannot  be  applied  to  the  knowledge 
of  ourselves,  and  of  the  condition  to  which  our  nature  has  fallen.  No  acquisition 
is  more  important,  for  it  lies  at  the  threshold  of  all  spiritual  advancement;  none 
more  difiBcult,  for  the  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  as  well  as  desperately 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

wicked.  The  declaration  of  the  text  cannot  be  applied  to  the  knowledge  of  God. 
No  subject  on  which  the  intellectual  faculties  can  spend  themselves  is  so  elevating 
and  ennobling  as  the  character  of  Him  who  bestowed  them.  To  know  God,  ai 
He  is  revealed  in  the  Gospel  record  of  His  love  to  a  ruined  world,  is  to  open  the 
inlets  of  comfort  to  the  soul.  But  if  Scripture  knowledge  is  to  produce  such 
effects,  it  must  never  be  separated  from  grace.  This  separation  is  one  of  the 
dangers  which  specially  belong  to  a  period  of  so  much  religious  profession  as  the 
present.  There  are  many  persons  who  pore  on  the  pages  of  the  Bible,  and  have 
become  familiar  with  its  statements,  over  whose  lives,  and  conversation,  its 
principles  have  never  exercised  any  perceptible  control.  There  is  no  necessary 
connection  between  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  attainments  of  human  learning; 
no  confinement  of  the  blessings  of  spiritual  knowledge  to  men  whose  minds  are 
furnished  with  other  stores.  God  often  hides  these  things  from  the  wise  and 
prudent,  and  reveals  them  unto  babes.  Such  knowledge  continually  increases. 
Ab  the  believer  goes  on  his  way,  be  gradually  discovers  more  of  the  will  and  the 
dealings  of  his  Father.  At  first  there  might  have  been  much  of  zeal,  and  less  of 
knowledge;  but  while  the  former  biu-ns  as  brightly  as  when  it  was  first  kindled  in 
his  bosom,  the  latter  is  increased  by  continual  accessions.  This  knowledge  shall 
not  only  form  the  staple  of  our  earthly  happiness,  but  shall  outlast  the  span  of  our 
present  existence,  and  reach  forward  into  the  outlying  region  of  eternity.  And 
God  shall  advance  His  glorified  saints,  by  continual  revelations  of  Himself. 
Increasing  knowledge  shall  be  an  element  of  that  blessedness,  which  for  aught 
we  know  may  increase  in  the  same  proportion  for  ever.  (8.  Robins.)  Knowledge 
and  Borrow: — We  will,  in  the  first  place,  confine  our  attention  to  the  present  life; 
in  the  second  place,  extend  it  to  the  futiure  life;  and  in  both  cases  endeavour  to 
show  you  with  how  great  truth  it  may  be  said,  "  In  much  wisdom  is  much  grief: 
and  he  that  increaseth  knowledge  increaseth  sorrow."  Now,  it  is  a  common 
observation,  and  one  borne  out  by  the  experience  of  all  who  are  qualified  to  give 
witness,  that  it  is  the  property  of  knowledge  to  humble  a  man,  and  not  to  puff 
him  up  or  to  make  him  arrogant.  We  may  take  it  as  a  rule  that  you  will  seldom 
find  falsified,  that  where  there  is  conceit  there  is  shallowness,  and  that  the  man 
who  has  palpably  a  high  opinion  of  his  attainments,  and  who  moves  through  a 
circle  in  all  the  pride  of  a  presumed  intellectual  superiority,  is  indebted  to  his  not 
being  well  dissected  and  well  sifted,  for  the  reputation  he  enjoys  and  the  attention 
he  commands.  There  is  nothing  which,  however  hard  of  acquisition,  shrinks  into 
so  small  a  space  as  knowledge  when  acquired.  A  library  would  seem  an  atom 
when  the  bookcase  is  the  mind.  So  that  vce  may  lay  it  down  as  an  ascertained 
fact  that  the  acquiring  of  knowledge  is  a  humiliating  thing.  Each  step  only 
shows  us  that  the  plain  is  broader  and  longer  than  we  had  thought,  and  the 
further  we  advance  the  further  off  seems  the  boundary.  Thus,  self-complacency 
at  our  progress  is  inconsistent  with  progress;  for  if  it  be  progress  to  discover  that 
we  are  no  nearer  the  end,  what  cause  of  exultation  can  making  progress  furnish? 
It  is  with  the  sphere  of  knowledge  as  it  is  with  the  sphere  of  light;  enlarging  it 
you  enlarge  equally  the  circimiscribing  sphere  of  darkness.  But  if  it  be  thus 
certain  that  the  increase  of  knowledge  is  accompanied  by,  if  not  identical  with  a 
growing  sense  of  absolute  ignorance,  what  can  be  clearer  than  that  "  he  that 
increaseth  knowledge  increaseth  sorrow  "?  We  think,  for  example,  that  when  the 
telescope  and  microscope  were  first  put  into  the  hands  of  the  philosopher,  then  was 
increase  of  knowledge  hardly  to  be  measured,  but  at  the  same  time  a  consequent 
increase  of  sorrow.  There  was  increase  of  knowledge :  distant  worlds  were  brought 
near,  whilst  worlds  were  found  in  every  atom  and  in  every  waterdrop;  and  en- 
larging the  field  of  contemplation  man  only  learned  that  the  workmanship  of  God, 
like  God  Himself,  could  never  be  explored.  And  if  such  are  the  lessons  taught 
man  by  the  telescope,  surely  the  very  apparatus  which  must  increase  his  know- 
ledge must  show  him  his  ignorance.  He  was  not  only  taught  how  little  he  knew 
before,  but  how  little  he  would  be  able  to  know  after.  Would  not  then  the 
increase  of  knowledge  be  attended  by  an  increase  of  sorrow?  Would  not  the  very 
boundlessness  of  creation  which  he  gathered  from  the  disclosures  of  the  telescope, 
and  the  fact  made  known  to  him  by  the  microscope  that  in  the  minutest  sub- 
divisions of  space  there  was  the  furniture  and  population  of  the  universe — would 
not  these,  whilst  filling  him  with  admiration  for  the  workings  of  Omnipotence, 
have  filled  him  also  with  regret  at  the  feebleness  of  his  own  powers?  Would  they 
not  have  conveyed  to  him  an  idea  such  as  he  could  not  have  otherwise  obtained  ot 
the  utter  vanity  of  the  hope  of  embracing  within  the  range  of  his  investigation 


CHAP.  1.]  ECCLESIASTES.  65 

all  the  marvel  and  grandeur  of  nature;  and  what  motto,  therefore,  oould  he  have 
felt  disposed  to  grave  on  an  apparatus  which  amplified  indeed  vastly  the  sphere  of 
his  contemplation,  but  which  taught  him  that  when  amplified  the  sphere  was  but 
a  sand  grain  which,  assisting  him  to  be  a  learner,  told  him  he  could  never  be  a 
proficient — what  motto,  if  not  the  motto  of  our  text,  "  For  in  much  wisdom  is 
much  grief:  and  he  that  increaseth  knowledge  increaseth  sorrow"?  And  in 
matter  of  fact,  the  earliest  and  at  the  same  time  the  most  wonderful  lesson  ever 
given  to  this  creation  was,  that  he  that  increased  knowledge  should  increase 
sorrow.  It  was  the  tree  of  knowledge  on  which  grew  the  forbidden  fruit,  by  the 
eating  of  which  our  first  parents  forfeited  immortality.  It  was  the  hope  of  an 
increase  of  knowledge  which  moved  Eve  to  the  act  of  disobedience,  Satan  telling 
her,  "  Ye  shall  be  as  gode,  knowing  good  and  evil,"  and  the  woman  perceived 
"  that  the  tree  was  to  be  desired  to  make  one  wise  ";  and  thus  moved  ate  of  the 
irwt,  and  gave  to  her  husband,  and  he  did  eat  also.  The  hope  was  realized;  the 
eyes  of  them  both  were  opened,  and  they  knew  good  and  evil;  but  oh,  it  was  a 
fatal  knowledge!  There  is  not  a  woe  in  the  long,  dark  catalogue  of  mortal 
afflictions,  there  has  not  been  the  tear  shed,  nor  the  sigh  heaved,  nor  the  shroud 
woven,  nor  the  grave  dug,  which  must  not  be  referred  to  the  acquisition  of  know- 
ledge as  its  producing  cause.  What,  then,  is  there  no  exception?  None,  wa 
believe.  It  holds  good  of  religious  knowledge  as  well  as  of  worldly  knowledge,  that 
to  increase  it  is  to  increase  sorrow.  Religious  knowledge  may  be  resolved  into 
knowledge  of  oneself  and  knowledge  of  God  in  Christ.  No  man  knows  anything 
of  himself,  but  the  man  who  is  enabled  to  examine  himself  by  the  light  of  the 
Holy  Scripture;  and  as  self-knowledge  increases,  must  not  sorrow  also  increase? 
What  is  this  knowledge  but  the  knowledge  of  our  own  corruption,  the  knowledge  of 
the  deceitfulness  of  the  heart,  the  knowledge  of  one's  own  depravity?  He  who  is 
increasing  knowledge  of  himself,  is  he  not  possessed  of  a  growing  sense  of  his  own 
weakness,  his  own  depravity,  his  own  obduracy,  his  own  ingratitude?  He  will 
not  seem  to  himself  to  be  growing  better.  The  proof  that  he  grows  better  is  that 
he  seems  to  himself  to  grow  worse ;  and  day  by  day  the  Holy  Spirit  will  show  him 
some  new  and  foul  chamber  of  imagery  in  the  heart;  day  by  day  this  Celestial 
Agent  will  unveil  some  fresh  dormitory  and  lay  bare  some  cherished  and  unsus- 
pected evil.  And  though  it  be  most  wholesome  and  most  necessary  that  we  ba 
thus  taught  oiu:selves,  can  it  be  denied  that  there  is  something  painful  and 
grievous  in  the  lessons  which  are  furnished?  In  like  manner,  with  respect  to  a 
knowledge  of  Christ,  there  will  be  just  that  contemporaneous  increase  which  we 
are  setting  ourselves  to  discover.  I  must  know,  experimentally  know,  that  Jesus 
died  for  me,  before  I  can  know  anything  of  the  hatefulness  of  sin;  and  when  a 
man  is  enabled  to  look  by  faith  on  the  Lamb  of  God,  bearing  his  sins  in  His  own 
body  on  the  tree  (and  this  it  is  to  know  God  in  Christ),  then  alone  will  he  entertain 
a  genuine  and  heartfelt  sorrow  for  sin.  And  the  more  earnestly  he  gazes,  the 
more  he  contemplates  the  dignity  and  innocence  of  the  Victim,  the  more  he 
ponders  the  mystery,  that  the  Being  who  was  One  with  the  Father  should  have 
been  given  up  to  execration  and  sacrifice,  the  more  disposed  will  he  be  to  abhor 
and  reproach  himself,  and  the  more  will  he  bewail  his  own  guiltiness,  which 
demanded  so  awful  an  expiation.  Yea,  and  will  it  not  continually  happen,  that 
as  his  soul  is  most  elevated  with  the  contemplations  of  Christ,  and  he  has  the 
fullest  assurance  of  interest  in  the  saving  work  of  the  atonement — will  it  not 
continually  happen,  that  at  moments  such  as  these,  when  knowledge  is  at  the 
highest,  contrition  for  sin  will  be  most  bitter  and  deep?  And  will  there  not 
thus  be  given  a  proof  uttered  in  sighs  and  written  in  tears,  that  even  when  know- 
ledge is  the  knowledge  of  God  in  Christ,  "  in  much  wisdom  is  much  grief;  and  ba 
that  increaseth  knowledge  increaseth  sorrow  "?  Now,  we  may,  perhaps,  illustrate 
our  text  by  another  kind  of  knowledge.  Just  take  the  knowledge  of  history.  We 
will  suppose  a  man  studying  diligently  every  record  of  antiquity,  thus  possessing 
himself  of  the  events  and  transactions  of  which  this  earth  has  been  the  scene. 
We  are  clear  that  he  who  increases  his  knowledge  of  history  must  have  deadened 
himself  to  impressions,  if  he  did  not  thereby  increase  sorrow.  What  is  history 
but  a  record  of  crime  and  calamity,  a  melancholy  summary  of  the  woe  and  the 
wickedness  with  which  our  globe  has  been  burdened?  Here  and  there  we  have  a 
bright  light,  some  noble  instance  of  the  struggle  and  the  triumph  of  virtue,  but 
on  the  whole,  feuds  and  wrongs  and  rivalries,  the  oppression  of  the  innocent, 
the  struggles  of  ambition,  the  earth  reeking  with  blood,  polluted  with  guilt,  and 
bathed  with  tears;  these  are  ordinarily  the  features  of  the  historic  pictxire.     Who 


50  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


that  calls  himself  a  man  can  gaze  on  these  and  not  be  sorrowful?     If  it  be  true 
that  to  read  history  is  to  read  the  proofs  of  human  apostasy,  and  the  curse  which 
it  entailed — if  it  be  true  that  the  knowledge  of  what  has  befallen  our   race   in 
successive  ages  is  the  knowledge  of  a  long  series  of  evidence  of  the  total  corruption 
and  the  consequent  misery   of   man,  then   assuredly   whatever  the  pleasure  and 
whatever  the  profit  of  storing  the  mind  with  the  facts,  the  material  of  melancholy 
reflection  will  be  forced  on  us  by  every  page  of  the  record ;  and  we  must  either 
profess  ourselves  insensible  to  the  sufferings  with  which  guilt  has  endowed  human 
nature,  or  we  must  assent  to  it  as  a  truth,  that  when  history  is  concerned,  to 
increase  knowledge  is  to  increase  sorrow.     And  even  if  the  increase  of  knowledge 
be  a  knowledge  of  the  character  and  happiness  of  the  excellent  of  the  earth,  it 
etill  brings  with  it  the  material  of  sorrow.     Who  can  read  the  biography  of  sainte 
without  having  two  feelings  excited  in  his  mind :  first,  the  feeling  "  how  imperfect 
are  the  best  I"  and  secondly,  "how  much  nearer  have  others  gone  to  perfection 
than  myself?"     The  telescope  and  microscope  ministered  gladness  to  the  philo- 
Bopher,  and  they  helped  him  to  explore  a  thousand  before-hidden  wonders,  though 
all  the  while  teaching  him  the  dwarfishness  of  his  highest  possible  attainments; 
they  made  him  sorrowful  by  showing  him  that  perfection  would  be  always  out  of 
reach.     And  when  the  spiritual  telescope  is  put  into  our  hands,  and  we  direct  it 
to  the  home  of  the  justified,  and  lovely  things,  and  rich  and  sparkling  cross  the 
field  of  vision;  or  when  we  are  equipped  with  the  spiritual  microscope,  and  can 
look  into  ourselves  and  see  a  world  of  iniquity  in  the  tiniest  motes  that  float  in 
the  mind's  recesses,  do  we  say  that  it  is  other  than  delightful  to  catch  glimpses 
of  the  land  of  promise,  or  other  than  profitable  to  be  helped  to  the  scrutiny  and 
anatomy  of  the  heart?     Each  kind  of  knowledge  is  delightful,  and  each  is  profit- 
able; at  the  same  time  each  furnishes  material  for  sorrow.     It  is  delightful  to  hold 
the  telescope  and  to  see  by  the  lenses  of  faith  the  domes  and  pinnacles  of  the 
heavenly  city;  and  it  is  also  profitable  thus  to  have  the  vision  of  the  saints' 
inheritance,  for  looking  on  the  recompense  we  shall  be  animated  to  the  toil.     But 
who  ever  surveyed  the  palaces  of  the  faithful  without  self-reproach  at  the  little 
influence  which  things  eternal  have  upon  him,  when  compared  with  things  tem- 
poral, and  without  a  painful  consciousness  that,  though  a  king  and  an  heir  of 
glory,  his  deportment  is  often  such  as  if  slavery  were  his  choice  and  corruption  hii 
element?     Nothing  so  shows  man  his  own  coldness,  his  own  backwardness,  his 
own  insensibility  to  the  high  destinies  of  the  redeemed,  as  a  glimpse  of  heaven. 
He  cannot  behold  the  reserved  joys  without  feeling  that  he  deserves  to  lose  them 
for  the  slight  hold  which,  after  all,  they  have  on  his  affections.     The  closer  the 
view,  the  stronger  will  be  this  feeling;  so  that  whilst  he  is  enraptured  at  the  dis- 
closures of  the  telescope,  yea,  and  excited  by  them  to  exertion,  he  will  be  covered 
with  shame  at  his  own  lukewarmness  in  the  pursuit  of  what  is  infinitely  desii'able. 
And  thus  it  will  come  to  pass,  that  though  there  is  joy,  and  though  there  is  profit 
in  increasing  knowledge,  he  will  increase  also  sorrow.     And  if,  laying  down  the 
telescope,  he  take  up  the  microscope,  and  subject  his  own  heart  to  the  magnifying 
power,  then  we  need  not  tell  you  that  it  is  profitable  for  him  to  be  informed  of  the 
depth  and  extent  of  the  corruption,  and  we  need  not  tell  you  that  it  is  delightful 
for  him  to  be  thus  informed,  seeing  that  the  nature  of  the  instruction  proves  God's 
Spirit  to  be  the  Instructor,  and  any  proof  that  we  are  taught  of  the  Spirit  ie  too 
precious  to  be  bartered  for  the  universe.     But  neither,  at  the  same  time,  need  we 
tell  you  that  it  is  a  saddening  thing  to  be  shown  one's  own  vileness — vileness 
resisting  all  processes  of  sanctification ;  and  thus,  though  with  the  moral  micro- 
scope, as  with  the  natural,  joy  and  profit  are  gained  from  its  showings,  it  remains 
true  of  both,  that  in  increasing  knowledge,  they  increase  also  sorrow.     (H.  Melvill, 
B.D.)     Increase  of  knowledge,  increase  of  sorrow: — I.  Mere  earthly  knowledge 
18  UN  SATISFACTORY  IN  ITS  NATURE.     Take  as  an  illustration   of  this  the  field  of 
creation.     The  knowledge  of  facts  and  laws  can  employ  man's   reason,   but   it 
cannot  ultimately  satisfy  it,  and  still  less  can  it  soothe  his  soul,  or  meet  the 
longings  of  his  spirit.     Law  everywhere  cannot  permanently  satisfy  man  without 
a  Lawgiver;  order,  without  a  primordial  reason;  forms  of  skill  and  beauty,  without 
a  great  Thinker,  from  whom  they  are  emanations,  and  whom  our  own  thoughts 
can  touch,  as  they  touch  kindred  souls,  till  we  can  say,  "  How  precious  are  Thy 
thoughts  unto  me,  O  God  I"    11.  Merb  earthly  knowledge  is  painful  in  its 
CONTENTS.     For  an  illustration  of  this,  we  may  go  from  creation  to  history,  from 
■pace  to  time.     Take  away  our  hope  in  God,  and  history  becomes  a  sea  of  tumbling 
billows,  dark  and  shoreless ;  nations  rising  only  to  fall  {  great  souls  shooting  across 


CSAP.  i.l  ECCLESIASTES.  57 

the  horizon  like  dying  meteors;  and  all  the  spiritual  longings  of  the  past  vvritten 
down  but  to  tell  us  of  the  vanity  of  our  own  efforts.  History  would  be  a  dreary 
study  when  it  had  lost  all  the  higher  ends  it  might  serve  as  a  school  of  training 
for  immortal  souls,  and  as  the  steps  of  a  Divine  Architect  through  the  broken 
scaffolding  and  scattered  stone-wreck  upward  to  a  finished  structure.     "Kb*  verr 

Jlimpse  of  this  is  reviving,  but  to  give  up  at  once  Architect  and  end,  and  sba 
uman  lives  shattered  and  strewn  across  weary  ages,  and  human  hearts  torn  and 
bleeding,  with  no  abiding  result,  this  surely  would  fill  a  thoughtful  mind  with 
pain.  The  more  of  such  history,  the  more  of  sorrow.  III.  Mebs  earthly  know- 
UDOS  18  HOPELESS  IN  ITS  ISSUE.  For  an  illustration  of  this  we  may  take  the  field 
of  abstract  thought.  The  ultimate  object  of  man's  search  is  to  find  the  centre  of 
knowledge  which  commands  the  whole  field.  The  man  who  begins  the  search 
sfter  truth  is  generally  more  satisfied  with  his  progress  than  he  who  has  been  long 
in  the  course.  Those  things  which,  like  the  stem  of  a  tree,  seem  simple  and  easily 
grasped,  spread  away  beneath  into  interminable  roots,  where  we  can  never  count 
them  all  nor  reach  the  end  of  any  one.  Let  a  man  try  to  master  a  single  subject, 
and  he  will  find  it  so.  The  road  becomes  longer  and  the  field  wider  as  he  proceeds. 
And  if  a  man  should  feel  impelled  to  go  beyond  the  surface  of  things,  and  to 
inquire  into  the  origin  of  being  and  the  end  of  all  things,  without  accepting  a 
God,  doubt  and  darkness  would  only  gather  at  every  step.  With  no  lamp  in  the 
soul  there  is  no  light  in  the  world.  His  own  being  and  end  become  an  increasing 
perplexity.  He  grows  in  unquietness  and  irresolution,  which  men  do  not  feel  who 
save  not  entered  on  such  a  search.  As  he  enlarges  the  circumference  of  know> 
ledge  he  enlarges  the  encircling  darkness,  and  even  the  knowledge  yields  no  ray  of 
true  satisfaction.  IV.  Mbbb  eabthly  knowledob  is  disoodbaoino  in  its  pebsonal 
BBSULTS.  We  may  consider  here  the  moral  nature  of  man.  Earthly  science  can 
do  very  much  to  improve  man's  external  circumstances.  It  can  occupy  his  reason, 
it  can  refine  and  gratify  his  taste;  but  there  are  greater  wants  that  remain.  If 
tha  man  seeks  something  to  fill  and  warm  his  heart,  all  the  wisdom  of  this  world 
is  only  a  cold  phosphorescence.  He  pursues  its  waters  like  thirsty  Tantalus,  and 
they  touch  his  lips  and  flee  from  them.  He  must  say  with  Ooethe,  "  Alas  that 
ths  yonder  is  never  herel"  The  tree  of  knowledge  never  becomes  the  tree  of  life. 
If  the  man  is  desirous  to  have  his  own  moral  nature  rise  to  a  noble  elevation,  he 
must  be  equally  disappointed  with  the  result  of  bare  knowledge;  not  merely  with 
what  is  accomplished  by  it,  for  here  we  may  all  be  sad  enough,  but  with  what  is 
promised  by  it.  It  may  have  its  negative  value  in  ocoupjring  thought  and  time, 
which  might  be  devoted  to  ignoble  uses ;  but  it  cannot  conquer  passion,  nor  renew 
•  nature  that  has  felt  the  degradation  of  sin.  The  great  heights  of  holiness  may 
sometimes  rise  before  such  a  man,  and  the  sublime  form  of  duty  may  gleam  out 
and  beckon  him  to  the  sun-lit  summit  of  perfection;  but  there  is  no  power,  out 
of  God,  to  help  him  to  it, — "  The  depth  said,  It  is  not  in  me,"  and  such  an  ideal, 
rising  without  the  power  or  hope  to  reach  it,  can  only  fill  the  man  with  a  more 
profound  sadness.  V.  Mebe  babthlt  knowledob  has  so  bbief  a  dubation.  Hera 
we  may  contemplate  life  as  a  whole.  If  the  thought  of  God  be  admitted,  all  real 
knowledge  has  the  stamp  of  immortality.  The  happy  seeker  of  truth  is  he  who 
leels  that  in  gaining  it  he  is  taking  possession  of  a  perpetual  treasure,  and  beginning 
a  quest  which  is  to  be  enlarged  by  a  new  life  in  new  worlds.  But  if  there  be 
nothing  of  this,  "  in  one  day  all  man's  thoughts  perish," — "  The  wise  man  dieth 
and  the  fool  also."  The  sweeter  truth  is  to  the  taste,  the  more  bitter  must  be 
the  thought  of  leaving  the  pursuit  of  it  for  ever.  After  all,  it  is  a  question  which 
the  head  cannot  answer  without  inquiring  at  the  heart.  It  is  this,  can  any 
progress  of  earthly  science  reconcile  us  to  the  loss  of  God  and  of  the  hope  of 
immortality?  and  we  feel  assured  that,  with  the  immense  mass  of  men,  when 
their  inner  nature  is  truly  consulted,  the  answer  would  be  found  here, — "  Tha 
increase  of  knowledge  is  the  increase  of  sorrow."  Whatever  we  may  come  to 
know,  if  God  be  not,  and  earth  be  all,  "  Vanity  of  vanities  "  is  the  epitaph  of 
life.  {John  K»r,  D.D.)  The  punuit  of  knowledge: — ^Ecolesiastes  is  here  speaking 
simply  of  that  knowledge  of  earthly  things  and  human  affairs  which  a  man  may 
acquire  by  intellectual  study  and  observation.  And  what  he  says  is  that  the 
amassing  of  mere  earthly  knowledge,  as  if  this  were  the  chief  good,  is  a  delusion — 
that  such  knowledge  is  full  of  disappointments  and  sorrows,  and  cannot  really 
satisfy  the  soul  of  man.  Now,  it  is  indeed  true  that  our  minds  have  been  so  con. 
stitutsd  that  the  pursuit  and  acquisition  of  knowledge,  simply  as  knowledge,  is 
:  naturally  aoeompanied  with  pleasure.    And  to  a  young  and  eager  student  rejoicing 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

in  the  wider  views  and  tbe  fresh  discoveries  which  his  increase  of  Iinowledge 
brings,  it  may  sometimes  seem  as  if  a  life  spent  in  study  and  research  would  give 
him  the  fullest  satisfaction.  But  he  is  apt  to  forget  that  a  wider  view  of 
things  is  not  always  a  more  pleasant  view.  Knowledge  often  destroys  illusions. 
Knowledge  often  makes  us  more  sensible  of  our  ignorance,  and  more  conscious  of 
the  limits  of  our  powers.  Knowledge  often  confronts  us  with  problems  which 
cause  us  perplexing  and  painful  thought,  and  which  had  not  previously  come 
within  the  range  of  our  vision.  Tbe  most  learned  philosopher  or  the  most 
brilliant  student  of  natural  science  often  finds  that  all  his  knowledge  is  utterly 
unavailing  in  the  presence  of  some  practical  difiBculty — something  "  crooked  " 
which  he  cannot  straighten,  something  "  wanting  "  which  he  cannot  supply. 
How  often  the  very  knowledge  of  a  skilful  physician  gives  him  a  sadder  because 
deeper  insight  into  the  malady  which  he  knows  to  be  incurable !  And  how  often 
we  can  see  a  tinge  of  melancholy  in  some  of  the  world's  greatest  thinkers  I  This 
is  indeed  no  argument  for  indorsing  the  words  of  the  poet,  "  Where  ignorance  is 
bliss,  'tis  folly  to  be  wise*';  for  even  the  knowledge  which  brings  sorrow  may 
have  some  advantages  over  the  ignorance  which  preserves  happiness.  But  it  is 
an  argument  for  the  conclusion  of  Ecclesiaetes,  that  the  mere  possession  of  earthly 
wisdom  is  not  the  supreme  good  of  human  life,  and  that  the  attempt  to  satisfy 
ooe's  soul  with  such  knowledge  ia  a  "feeding  on  windl"     (T.  C.  Finlayaon.) 


CHAPTER  n. 

Vbbs.  1-26.  CFo  to  now,  I  will  prove  thee  with  mirth. — The  threefold  view  of 
human  life: — Three  views  of  human  life  are  given  in  this  remarkable  chapter. 
I.  Thb  thbatbioal  view  op  life  (vers.  1-11).  The  writer  seeks  to  prove  his 
heart  with  mirth  and  laughter;  he  treats  his  flesh  with  wine;  he  gathers  peculiar 
treasure;  he  is  enamoured  of  greatness,  magnificence,  and  abundance;  he  delights 
in  architecture,  scenery,  literature,  music,  song.  Everything  is  spectacular, 
dazzling,  wonderful.  This  is  a  very  misleading  idea  of  the  world  in  which  we  find 
ourselves.  1.  It  is  partial.  Nothing  whatever  is  said  here  of  the  problems  which 
challenge  us — of  duty,  enterprise,  discipline,  work,  sacrifice,  suffering;  nothing 
about  character  or  conduct.  It  really  leaves  out  two-thirds  of  life,  and  the  noblest 
two-thirds.  2.  It  is  exaggerated.  It  contemplates  great  works,  great  possessions, 
and  great  fame.  Life  is  largely  made  up  of  commonplace  tasks,  homely  faces, 
uneventful  days,  monotonous  experiences.  3.  It  is  selfish.  You  see  throughout 
how  prominent  the  individual  is.  It  is  all  "  I."  The  writer  never  thinks  of  other 
people  except  as  they  may  enhance  his  pleasure,  or  be  spectators  of  his  glory. 
4.  It  is  superficial.  "There  is  not  a  word  about  conscience,  righteousness,  responsi- 
bility. Now  beware  of  the  theatrical  view  of  life — of  the  great,  the  gaudy,  the 
glistering.  True  life,  as  a  rule,  is  simple,  sober,  and  severe.  Beware  of  com- 
panions who  would  represent  life  to  you  in  a  gay  and  voluptuous  light.  Beware 
also  of  your  reading,  and  see  that  it  does  not  give  a  false  and  delusive  idea  of 
the  life  that  awaits  you.  The  world  is  not  a  theatre,  not  a  magician's  cave,  not  a 
carnival;  it  is  a  temple  where  all  things  are  serious  and  sacred.  II.  The 
8BPUL0HRAL  VIEW  OF  LIFE  (vers.  12-23).  Men  usually  start  with  the  rosy  ideal 
of  life,  and  then  finding  its  falsity — that  there  are  tears  as  well  as  laughter — they 
sink  into  vexation  and  despair,  and  paint  all  things  black  as  night.  But  the  world 
is  not  emptiness;  it  is  a  cup  deep  and  large,  delightful  and  overflowing.  Fulness, 
not  emptiness,  is  the  sign  of  the  world.  There  ie  the  fulness  of  nature — of  intel- 
lectual life — of  society — of  practical  life — the  manifold  and  enduring  unfolding  of 
the  interests  and  movements  and  fortunes  of  humanity.  There  is  the  fulness  of 
religious  life.  A  true  man  never  feels  the  world  to  be  limited,  meagre,  shallow. 
God  is  no  mockery,  and  He  will  not  mock  us.  III.  The  religiocs  view  of  life 
(vers.  24-26).  1.  The  purification  and  strengthening  of  the  soul  will  secure  to 
UB  all  the  brightness  and  sweetness  of  life.  2.  And  as  the  Spirit  of  Christ  leads 
to  the  realization  of  the  bright  side  of  the  world,  so  shall  it  fortify  you  against 


CHAP.  II.]  ECCLESIASTES.  W 

the  dark  side.  Carry  the  Spirit  of  Christ  into  this  dark  side,  and  you  shall  rejoice 
in  tribulation  also.  In  one  of  the  illustrated  magazines  I  noticed  a  picture  of  the 
flower-market  of  Madrid  in  a  snowstorm.  The  golden  and  purple  glories  were 
mixed  with  the  winter's  snow.  And  in  a  true  Christian  life  sorrow  is  strangely 
mingled  with  joy.  Winter  in  Siberia  is  one  thing,  winter  in  the  flower-market  of 
the  South  is  another  thing;  and  so  the  power  of  sorrow  is  broken  and  softened 
in  the  Christian  life  by  great  convictions,  consolations,  and  hopes.  Do  not  accept 
the  theatrical  view  of  life;  life  is  not  all  beer  and  skittles,  operas,  banquets,  galas, 
and  burlesques.  Do  not  accept  the  sepulchral  theory  of  life;  it  is  absolutely  false. 
Tocqueville  said  to  Sumner,  "  Life  is  neither  a  pain  nor  a  pleasure,  but  serious 
business,  which  it  is  our  duty  to  carry  through  and  conclude  with  honour."  This 
is  a  true  and  noble  conception  of  life,  and  it  can  be  fulfilled  only  as  Christ  renews 
and  strengthens  us.  {W .  L.  Watkinaon.)  The  pleasures  of  sin  and  the  pleasures 
of  Christ's  service  contrasted: — ^I.  What  are  the  pleasures  of  sin?  1.  They 
are  present  pleasures;  now  and  here;  not  in  the  dim  distance;  not  in  the  next 
world,  but  in  this.  2.  They  are  varied  and  many  :  adapted  to  every  taste,  capacity, 
age,  condition.  3.  They  fall  in  with  the  desires  and  cravings  of  our  carnal  nature. 
4.  They  possess  the  power  to  excite  in  a  wonderful  degree, — the  fancy,  the  mind, 
the  passions, — ambition,  lust,  pride,  etc.  II.  What  are  the  pleasures  ob 
REWARDS  OF  Christ's  SERVICE?  1.  They  are  real  and  substantial,  not  fictitious 
and  imaginary  or  deceptive.  (1)  A  good  conscience.  (2)  A  contented  mind. 
(3)  Rational  enjoyment  and  satisfaction.  (4)  Elevation  of  being.  (5)  A  quiet, 
growing  consciousness  of  God's  approval.  (6)  A  sweet  sense  of  living  and  breath* 
ing  in  a  sphere  of  sanctified  thought  and  life,  illumined  by  the  sunlight  of  Heaven, 
and  vocal  with  the  joys  and  harmonies  which  proceed  from  Calvary.  2.  They  ara 
not  all  in  the  future.  No  small  part  of  them  are  here,  and  enjoyed  day  by  day. 
Heaven  is  the  ultimate  state  of  blessedness,  the  final  reward  in  Christ's  service. 
But  heaven  is  begun  in  every  reconciled,  sanctified  soul  at  once  and  progresses 
to  the  consummation.  3.  Christ's  service  is  soul-satisfying.  It  touches,  elevates, 
expands,  gives  dignity  to,  and  harmonizes  and  gladdens  man's  highest  nature. 
4.  The  pleasure,  the  reward  of  Christ's  service  is  enduring.  It  fears  no  death, 
knows  no  end.  It  is  perpetual,  everlasting,  ever  augmenting.  (J.  M.  Sherwood, 
D.D.)  A  strange  experiment : — He  now  resolves  to  abandon  the  "  studious 
cloisters."  For  their  quiet  he  will  substitute  the  excitement  of  feverish  pleasure. 
But  this  tremendous  reaction  from  the  joys  of  the  philosopher  to  coarser  animal 
pleasiu-e  is  not  easy.  He  has  to  goad  his  mind  before  it  is  ready  for  this  new 
and  low  direction.  He  has  to  say  to  his  heart,  "  Go  to  now,  I  will  prove  thee 
with  mirth."  What  a  fall  is  here,  from  the  contemplation  of  high  themes  of 
truth,  the  works  of  God  and  man,  to  merely  sensual  pleasure  I  But  the  experi- 
ment is  brief.  It  would  be.  For  a  man  of  wisdom  could  not  be  long  in  discover- 
ing the  utter  worthlessness  of  sensual  gratification;  sharp  and  swift  comes  the 
conclusion  :  "I  said  of  laughter,  It  is  mad,  and  of  mirth.  What  doeth  it?"  It 
has  sometimes  been  the  question  of  thoughtful  people  how  the  wise  man  could 
bring  himself  to  try  this  second  experiment,  the  effort  to  find  happiness  in  "  the 
lust  of  the  flesh  "  and  "  the  lust  of  the  eye."  This,  it  is  usually  thought,  is  the 
delight  of  fools.  But  that  a  man  who  could  say  he  "  had  seen  the  works  that  are 
done  under  the  sun,"  whose  philosophy  had  ranged  over  new  things  until  they 
were  seen  to  be  the  old  things  recurrent,  who  could  truly  say  that  he  had  "  gotten 
more  wisdom  than  all  they  that  had  been  before  him  in  Jerusalem," — for  such 
an  one  to  fly  from  philosophy  to  pleasure,  from  meditation  to  mirth,  is  accounted 
phenomenally  strange.  But  it  is  not.  Across  just  such  extremes  does  the  restless 
spirit  fly  that  has  not  yet  learned  that  happiness  is  not  the  creature  of  circum- 
stance, but  the  outgrowth  of  the  life.  And  how  it  magnifies  this  inner  character 
of  happiness  to  reflect  that  even  wisdom  pursued  for  its  own  sake  may  be  seen 
to  be  so  hollow  that  the  soul  will  fly  to  the  farthest  distance  from  it,  inferring  that 
even  sensual  folly  may  be  a  relief  from  the  emptiness  of  knowledge  I  (C.  L. 
Thompson,  D.D.) 

Vet.  2.  I  said  of  laughter,  It  is  mad. — The  wH  and  the  madman: — If  you  were 
asked  who  had  sat  for  the  portrait  of  a  madman,  you  would  be  disposed  to  look 
out  for  some  monster,  some  scoiu-ge  of  our  race,  in  whom  vast  powers  had  been 
at  the  disposal  of  ungoverned  passions,  and  who  had  covered  a  country  with  weep- 
ing and  with  desolate  families ;  and  at  first  we  might  be  readily  tempted  to  conclude 
that  Solomon  employed  somewhat  exaggerated  terms  when  he  identified  laughter 


«6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap. n. 

with  madness.  Neither  need  we  suppose  that  all  laughter  is  indiscriminately 
condemned;  as  though  gloom  marked  a  sane  person,  and  cheerfulness  an  insane. 
*'  Rejoice  evermore  "  is  a  scriptural  direction,  and  blithe-heartedness  ought  to  ba 
both  felt  and  displayed  by  those  who  know  that  they  have  God  for  their  Guardian, 
and  Christ  for  their  Surety.  But  it  is  the  laughter  of  the  world  which  the  wise 
man  calls  madness;  and  there  will  be  no  difficulty  in  showing  you,  in  two  or 
three  Instances,  how  close  is  the  parallel  between  the  maniac  and  the  man  by 
whom  this  laughter  is  excited.  We  would  first  point  out  to  you  how  that  conflict^ 
of  which  this  creation  is  the  scene,  and  the  leading  antagonists  in  which  are  Satan 
and  God,  is  a  conflict  between  falsehood  and  truth.  The  entrance  of  evil  wa» 
effected  through  a  lie;  and  when  Christ  promised  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
whose  special  office  it  was  to  be  to  regenerate  human  kind,  to  restore  their  lost 
piu-ity,  and  therewith  their  lost  happiness.  He  promised  it  imder  the  character  of 
the  Spirit  of  truth ;  as  though  truth  were  all  that  was  needed  to  the  making  of  this 
earth  once  more  a  paradise.  And  it  is  in  accordance  with  this  representation  of 
that  great  struggle,  which  fixes  the  regards  of  higher  orders  of  intelligence,  as 
being  a  struggle  between  falsehood  and  truth,  that  so  much  criminality  is  every- 
where in  Scripture  attached  to  a  lie,  and  that  those  on  whom  a  lie  may  b» 
charged,  are  represented  as  thereby  more  especially  obnoxious  to  the  anger  of  God. 
"  A  lying  tongue,"  says  the  wise  man,  "  is  but  for  a  moment  ";  as  though  sudden 
vengeance  might  be  expected  to  descend  upon  the  liar,  and  sweep  him  away  ere 
he  could  reiterate  the  falsehood.  And  if  there  be  thus,  as  it  were,  a  kind  of  awful 
majesty  in  truth,  so  that  the  swerving  from  it  is  emphatically  treason  against  God 
and  the  soul,  it  follows  that  whatever  is  calculated  to  diminish  reverence  for  truth, 
or  to  palliate  falsehood,  is  likely  to  work  as  wide  mischief  as  may  well  be  imagined. 
You  are  all  ready  without  hesitation  to  admit  that  nothing  would  go  further 
towards  loosening  the  bonds  of  society  than  the  destroying  the  shame  which  now 
attaches  to  a  lie;  and  accordingly  you  would  rise  up  as  by  one  common  impulse  to 
withstand  any  man  or  any  authority  which  should  propose  to  shield  the  liar,  or  to 
make  his  offence  comparatively  unimportant.  But  whilst  the  bold  and  direct 
falsehood  thus  gains  for  itself  the  general  execration,  mainly  perhaps  because  felt 
to  militate  against  the  general  interest,  there  is  a  ready  indulgence  in  the  more 
sportive  falsehood,  which  is  rather  the  playing  with  truth  than  the  making  a  lie. 
Here  it  is  that  we  shall  find  laughter  which  is  madness,  and  identify  with  a 
madman  him  by  whom  the  laughter  is  raised.  There  is  very  frequently  a  departure 
from  truth  in  that  mirthful  discourse  to  which  Solomon  refers.  In  amusing  a 
table,  and  causing  light-heartedness  and  gaiety  to  go  round  the  company,  men 
may  be  teaching  others  to  view  with  less  abhorrence  a  lie,  or  diminishing  in  them 
that  sanctity  of  truth  which  is  at  once  an  admirable  virtue  and  essential  to  the 
existence  of  any  other.  I  do  not  fear  the  influence  of  one  whom  the  world 
denounces  as  a  liar;  but  I  do  of  one  whom  it  applauds  as  a  wit.    I  fear  it  in  regard 

I  of  reverence  for  truth — a  reverence  which,  if  it  do  not  of  itself  make  a  great 
character,  must  be  strong  wheresoever  the  character  is  great.  The  man  who 
passes  off  a  clever  fiction,  or  amusingly  distorts  an  occurrence,  or  dextrously 
misrepresents  a  fact,  may  say  that  he  only  means  to  be  amusing,  and  that  nothing 
is  further  from  his  thoughts  than  the  doing  an  injury;  but  nevertheless,  forasmuch 
as  it  can  hardly  fail  but  that  he  will  lower  the  majesty  of  truth  in  the  eyes  of  his 
neighbour,  there  may  be  equally  ample  reason  for  assenting  to  the  wise  man's 
decision — "  I  said  of  laughter.  It  is  mad  :  and  of  mirth,  What  doeth  it?"  But  we 
have  not  yet  given  the  worst  case  of  that  laughter  which  may  be  identified  with 
madness.  It  is  very  true,  that  whatever  tends  to  diminish  men's  abhorrence  of  a 
lie,  tends  equally  to  the  spreading  confusion  aud  wretchedness,  and  may  therefore 
be  justly  classed  amongst  things  which  resemble  the  actings  of  a  maniac.  It  is 
also  true  that  this  tendency  exists  in  much  of  that  admired  conversation  whose 
excellence  virtually  lies  in  its  falseness ;  so  that  the  correspondence  is  clear  between 
the  wit  and  the  madman.  But  it  is  not  perhaps  till  the  laughter  is  turned  upon 
sacred  things  that  we  have  before  us  the  madness  in  all  its  wildness  and  in  all 
its  injuriousness.  The  man  who  in  any  way  exercises  his  wit  upon  the  Bible 
conveys  undoubtedly  an  impression,  whether  he  intend  it  or  not,  that  he  is  not  a 
believer  in  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible;  for  it  is  altogether  insupposable  that  a 
man  who  really  recognized  in  the  Bible  the  Word  of  the  living  God,  who  felt  that 
its  pages  had  been  traced  by  the  very  hand  which  spread  out  the  firmament,  should 
select  from  it  passages  to  parody,  or  expressions  which  might  be  thrown  into  a 

.  ludicrous  form.     It  may  be  true  that  he  does  this  only  in  joke,  and  with  no  evil 


CHAP,  n-i  ECCLESIJSTES.  61 

design;  he  never  meant,  he  may  tell  you,  when  he  introduced  Scripture  ridicu* 
lously,  or  amused  his  companions  by  sarcastic  allusions  to  the  peculiarities  of  th« 
pious — he  never  meant  to  recommend  a  contempt  for  religion,  or  to  insinuate  a 
disbelief  in  the  Bible,  and  perhaps  he  never  did;  but  nevertheless,  even  if  you 
acquit  him  of  harmful  intention,  and  suppose  him  utterly  unconscious  that  he  it 
working  a  moral  injury,  he  who  frames  jokes  on  sacred  things,  or  points  his  wil 
with  scriptural  allusions,  may  do  far  more  mischief  to  the  souls  of  his  fellow- 
men  than  if  he  engaged  openly  in  assaulting  the  great  truths  of  Christianity., 
If  you  have  heard  a  text  quoted  in  a  ridiculous  sense,  or  applied  to  some  laughabltt 
occurrence,  you  will  hardly  be  able  to  separate  the  text  from  that  occurrence;  the 
association  will  be  permanent;  and  when  you  hear  the  text  again,  though  it  maj 
be  in  the  house  of  God,  or  under  circumstances  which  make  you  wish  for  the 
most  thorough  concentration  of  thought  on  the  most  awful  things,  yet  will  thera 
come  back  upon  you  all  the  joke  and  all  the  parody,  so  that  the  mind  will  be 
dissipated  and  the  very  sanctuary  profaned.  And  hence  the  justice  of  identifying 
with  madness  the  laughter  excited  by  reference  to  sacred  things.  Now,  the  upshot 
of  the  whole  matter  is,  that  we  ought  to  set  a  watch  upon  our  tongues,  to  pray 
Ood  to  keep  the  door  of  our  lips.  "  Death  and  life  are  in  the  power  of  the 
tongue."  Of  all  the  gifts  with  which  we  have  been  entrusted,  the  gift  of  speech 
is  perhaps  that  through  which  we  may  work  most  of  evil  or  of  good,  and  never- 
theless  it  is  that  of  whose  right  exercise  we  seem  to  make  least  account.  Ik 
appears  to  us  a  hard  saying,  that  for  every  idle  word  which  they  speak  men  shall 
give  an  account  at  the  last,  and  we  scarcely  discern  any  proportion  between  a  few 
syllables  uttered  without  thought  and  those  retributive  judgments  which  must  be 
looked  for  hereafter;  but  if  you  observe  how  we  have  been  able  to  vindicate  the 
correctness  of  the  assertion  of  our  text,  though  it  be  only  the  idle  talker  whose 
laughter  is  declared  to  be  madness,  effecting  the  same  results,  and  producing  the 
same  evils  as  the  fury  of  the  uncontrolled  maniac,  you  will  see  that  a  word  may 
be  no  insignificant  thing— that  its  consequences  may  be  widely  disastrous,  and 
certainly  the  speaker  is  answerable  for  the  consequences  which  may  possibly  ensue, 
however  God  may  prevent  their  actual  occurrence.  The  fiction  may  not  make  • 
liar,  and  the  jest  may  not  make  an  infidel,  but  since  it  is  the  tendency  of  the 
fiction  to  make  liars,  and  the  tendency  of  the  jest  to  make  infidels,  he  who  invents 
the  one,  or  utters  the  other,  is  as  criminal  as  though  the  result  had  been  the  sam* 
as  the  tendency.     (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Ver.  11.  I  looked  on  all  the  works  that  my  hands  had  wrought,  and  on  the 
labour  that  I  had  laboured  to  do. — The  review : — Our  Lord  pronoimced  the  children 
of  this  world  "  wise  in  their  generation  ";  and  who  can  doubt  that  thousands  who 
are  lost  would,  with  God's  blessing,  be  saved,  did  they  bring  the  same  prudence, 
and  diligence,  and  energy  to  their  eternal,  as  they  do  to  their  temporal  interests? 
Some  years  ago  a  man  was  called  to  decide  between  preserving  his  life,  and  parting 
with  the  gains  of  his  lifetime.  A  gold-digger,  he  stood  on  the  deck  of  a  ship  that, 
coming  from  Australian  shores,  had — as  some  all  but  reach  heaven — all  bul 
reached  her  harbour  in  safety.  But,  as  the  proverb  runs,  there  is  much  between 
the  cup  and  the  lip.  Night  came  lowering  down;  and  with  the  night  a  storm 
that  wrecked  ship,  tmd  hopes,  and  fortunes,  all  together.  The  dawning  light 
but  revealed  a  scene  of  horror— death  staring  them  in  the  face.  The  sea,  lashed 
into  fiury,  ran  mountains  high;  no  boat  could  live  in  her.  One  chance  still 
remained.  Pale  women,  weeping  children,  feeble  and  timid  men,  must  die;  but 
a  stout,  brave  swimmer,  with  trust  in  God,  and  disencumbered  of  all  impedi- 
ments, might  reach  the  shore,  where  hundreds  stood  ready  to  dash  into  the 
boiling  surf,  and,  seizing,  save  him.  One  man  was  observed  to  go  below.  He 
bound  around  his  waist  a  heavy  belt,  filled  with  gold,  the  hard  gains  of  his  life; 
and  returned  to  the  deck.  One  after  another,  he  saw  his  fellow-passengers  leap 
overboard.  After  a  brief  but  terrible  struggle,  head  after  head  went  down — simk 
by  the  gold  they  had  fought  hard  to  gain,  and  were  loath  to  lose.  Slowly  he  was 
seen  to  unbuckle  his  belt.  If  he  parts  with  it,  he  is  a  beggar;  but  then  if  he 
keeps  it,  he  dies.  He  poised  it  in  his  hand;  balanced  it  for  a  while;  took  a  long, 
sad  look  at  it;  and  then  with  one  strong,  desperate  effort,  flung  it  far  out  into  the 
roaring  sea.  Wise  man  I  It  sinks  with  a  sullen  plunge ;  and  now  he  follows  it — • 
not  to  sink,  but,  disencumbered  of  its  weight,  to  swim;  to  beat  the  billows 
manfully;  and,  riding  on  the  foaming  surge,  to  reach  the  shore.  Well  done, 
brave  gold-digger  I    Aye,  well  done,  and  well  chosen ;  but  if  "  a  man  will  give  all 


«S  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

th&t  he  hath  for  his  life,"  how  much  more  should  he  give  all  he  hath  for  his  soul  I 
Better  to  part  with  gold  than  with  Ood;  to  bear  the  heaviest  cross  than  miss  a 
heavenly  crown.  I.  Inquire  what  we  have  done  fob  God.  We  have  had  many, 
daily,  innumerable,  opportunities  of  serving  Him,  speaking  for  Him,  working  for 
Him,  not  sparing  ourselves  for  Him  who  spared  not  His  own  Son  for  us.  Yet, 
how  little  have  we  attempted;  and  how  much  less  have  we  done  in  the  spirit  of 
our  Saviour's  words,  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  my  Father's  business?" 
There  is  no  moor  in  our  country  so  barren  as  our  hearts.  They  drink  up  God's 
blessings  as  the  sands  of  the  Sahara  heaven's  rain.  II.  Inqcibe  what  we  have 
DONE  FOB  odbselves.  No  profit?  Do  you  reply,  I  have  made  large  profits — 
my  business  has  paid  me,  and  yielded  large  returns — I  have  added  acres  to  my 
lands.  But,  let  me  say  that  that,  perhaps,  is  not  all  you  have  added.  What  if 
by  every  day  you  have  lived  without  God  and  for  the  world,  you  have  added 
difficulties  to  your  salvation;  shackles  to  your  limbs;  bars  to  your  prison;  guilt 
to  your  soul;  sins  to  your  debt;  thorns  to  your  dying  pillow?  Let  no  man  be 
cast  down;  give  way  to  despair  I  Years  are  lost;  but  the  soul  is  not  yet  lost. 
There  is  still  time  to  be  saved.  Haste,  then,  and  away.  III.  Inquire  what  we 
HAVE  DONE  FOB  OTHERS.  Supposo  that  OUT  blessed  Lord,  sitting  down  on  Olivet 
to  review  the  years  of  His  busy  life,  had  looked  on  all  the  works  which  His  hands 
had  wrought, — what  a  crowd,  a  long  procession  of  miracles  and  mercies  had  passed 
before  Him  I  I  believe  there  were  more  good  works  crowded  into  one  single  day 
of  Christ's  life  than  you  will  find  spread  over  the  lifelong  history  of  any  Christian. 
Trying  our  piety  by  this  test,  what  testimony  does  our  past  life  bear  to  its 
character?  The  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits.  In  conclusion — 1.  This  review,  God's 
Spirit  blessing  it,  should  awaken  careless  sinners.  2.  This  review  should  stir  up 
God's  people.  (T.  Quthrie,  D.D.)  Love  not  the  world: — I.  The  habit  of  men  in 
PDBSDiNO  woELDLT  OBJECTS.  1.  By  worldly  objects  we  mean  those  which 
terminate  entirely  on  the  earth,  and  which  occupy  human  thought  and  pursuit 
without  any  connection  with  spiritual  and  eternal  things.  2.  The  cause  to  which 
the  piu^uit  of  worldly  objects  is  to  be  ascribed  it  is  of  course  of  immense  import- 
ance to  assign  and  to  remember;  and  that  cause  is  to  be  found  only  in  the  moral 
corruption  or  depravity  of  human  nature.  (1)  Men  from  their  depravity  are  prone 
to  indulge  in  inordinate  attachment  to  immediate  and  visible  things.  (2)  Men 
from  their  depravity  are  apt  to  indulge  an  entire  and  practical  disbelief  in  the 
existence  of  eternal  realities.  11.  The  evils  by  which  the  pursuit  of  worldly 
objects  is  invaeiably  attended.  1.  The  pursuit  of  worldly  objects  is  associated 
with  much  disappointment  and  sorrow  in  the  present  state.  (1)  Notice  the  dis- 
satisfaction and  sorrow  connected  with  the  attainment  of  worldly  objects.  When 
the  imagined  good  is  grasped,  it  leaves  "  an  aching  void,"  a  still  unsatiated 
craving,  revealing  itself  at  the  last  but  as  a  detected  imposture,  which  only  excited 
that  it  might  exhaust,  which  only  promised  that  it  might  betray,  and  which  only 
attracted  that  it  might  sting.  (2)  Observe  the  disappointment  and  sorrow  con- 
nected with  the  actual  or  threatened  loss  of  worldly  objects.  How  often  has  it 
been,  that  what  man  has  painfully  and  laboriously  acquired,  has  been  torn 
suddenly  and  rapidly  away  I  The  fountains  of  pleasure,  honour,  and  power  are 
dried  up  and  exhaled,  like  the  dew-drop  before  the  sunbeam;  and  those  who  have 
had  them  are  left  at  last  in  disgrace,  beggary,  and  penury  emphatically  as  being 
the  very  bankrupts  and  paupers  of  the  world.  Ajid  then,  while  worldly  objects 
»re  actually  held  within  the  grasp,  how  much  of  anxiety  arises  from  the  thought 
that  they  may  be  lost,  from  the  complicated  contingency  to  which  human  affairs 
are  liable;  and  especially  from  the  reflection  that  they  must  at  last  be  lost  by  the 
arrival  of  death  1  (8)  Again :  we  remind  you  of  the  disappointment  and  sorrow 
connected  with  the  remembrance  of  sins  committed  for  the  sake  of  worldly  objects. 
Take  especially  the  cases  which  have  occurred  in  the  pursuit,  for  instance,  of 
wealth,  pleasure,  or  power.  There  has  been  the  flagrant  violation  of  moral  prin- 
ciple, the  perpetration  of  fraud  in  the  pursuit  of  wealth,  the  perpetration  of 
lewdness  in  the  pursuit  of  pleasure,  the  perpetration  of  oppression  and  cruelty  in 
the  ptirsuit  of  power.  2.  The  pursuit  of  worldly  objects  places  in  jeopardy  the 
final  and  immortal  happiness  of  the  soul.  III.  The  vast  importance  of  turning 
OUR  attention  feom  worldly  objects,  and  of  seeking  the  attainment  of  fab 
higher  blessings.  1.  As  we  are  devoted  to  religion,  in  the  present  world  we 
obtain  solid  satisfaction  and  peace.  There  is  no  disappointment  in  religion;  all 
that  it  confers  is  solid  and  lasting;  nor  is  there  one  who  xmder  Divine  grace  has 
been  led  to  yield  his  heart  to  its  power,  who  does  not  at  once,  aooordkig  to  its 


CHAP,  n.]  ECCLE8IASTES.  83 

legitimate  operation,  find  the  storms  and  tempests  of  the  spirit  subside  into  one 
placid  and  beautiful  calm.  2.  As  we  are  devoted  to  religion,  we  secure,  beyond 
the  present  state,  the  salvation  and  immortal  happiness  of  the  soul.  {J .  Partont.) 
The  failure  of  pleasures: — I.  The  pleasdkes  of  obeat  and  good  men  mat  be  vanity 
AND  VEOATiON  OF  SFiBiT.  Solomon  was  great,  and  he  was  good.  This  is  the 
inspired  judgment  of  him  (Neh.  xiii.  26).  But  he  had  for  the  time  declined  from 
greatness,  swerved  from  goodness,  and  it  was  in  this  search  for  pleasure.  Here 
we  see  how  degraded  a  man  of  high  rank,  splendid  genius,  rich  character,  may 
become.     Truly  "  the  pinnacle  overhangs  the  precipice."     II.  The  pleasures  of 

SKILL  AND  TOIL  MAT  BECOME  VANITY  AND   VEXATION   OF    SFIBIT.      Those  that   SolomOQ 

found  80  utterly  dissatisfying  were  not  alone  pleasures  of  appetite  and  of  indulg- 
ence. There  were  thought,  contrivance,  taste,  effort  involved.  So  pleasures  along 
the  lines  even  of  art,  and  science,  and  literature  may,  as  Dundas,  and  David 
Scott,  and  Chesterfield  all  prove,  become  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit.     III.  Plea- 

BDEE8    IN    THEMSELVES    FITTED    TO    DELIGHT    MAY    BECOME    VANITY    AND    VEXATION    OF 

8PIBIT.  The  abundance  of  life,  the  hues  of  the  fiowers,  the  fragrance  and  melodies 
and  shade,  all  make  "  gardens  "  sources  of  exquisite  delight,  and  it  may  be  of 
innocent  and  high  delight,  for  Go'd  planted  a  garden  for  unfallen  man.  Tet  these 
gardens  gave  no  satisfaction  to  Solomon;  and  similarly  many  real  pleasures  give 
so  joy  to  men.  So  it  has  with  many  become  an  adage,  that  "  Life  would  be 
very  tolerable  if  it  were  not  for  its  amusements."     IV.  In  all  these  cases  th« 

SELFISH    SEABCH    FOB    PLEASUBE    HAS    MiDE    IT    VANITY   AND    VEXATION    OF    SPIBIT.       Ill 

was  thus  with  Solomon :  it  will  be  thus  with  all.  Selfishness  is  the  cankerworm 
in  the  flower  of  such  pleasures,  the  alloy  that  the  laboratory  of  such  experiences 
M  Solomon  discovers  in  such  would-be  delights.  (B.  Thomas.)  The  vanity  of 
worldly  happiness: — There  is  no  man  living  can  ever  expect  to  be  in  more  happy 
outward  circumstances  than  Solomon  was,  or  to  enjoy  more  of  this  world's  good 
than  Solomon  did.  And  if  he,  after  all,  found  nothing  but  labour  and  trouble, 
and  dissatisfaction  and  emptiness,  no  real  profit,  no  advantage  in  any  worldly 
thing,  what  must  we  expect  to  find?  Certainly  no  better  fortune  than  he  did. 
And  if  this  be  the  case  of  mankind,  how  unaccountable  is  it  that  any  of  us  should 
fix  our  thoughts  and  designs,  our  comforts  and  expectancies  upon  anything  imder 
the  sun.  It  is  just  the  same  folly  that  those  men  are  guilty  of,  that  being  tossed 
up  and  down  at  sea,  yet  nevertheless  desire  to  be  still  there,  and  cannot  endure  to 
think  of  coming  to  a  port.  It  is  the  madness  of  those,  that  being  condemned  to 
dig  in  the  mines,  are  so  much  in  love  with  toil  and  labour,  with  chains  and 
darkness,  that  they  despise  a  life  above  ground,  a  life  of  light  and  liberty.  In 
a  word,  it  is  the  fantastic  punishment  of  Tantalus  in  the  poets  that  these  men 
wish  for  themselves  :  they  desire  to  spend  their  time  for  ever  in  gaping  after  those 
lovely  pleasant  fruits  which  (they  fancy)  seem  almost  to  touch  their  mouths. 
Yet  all  their  labour  is  in  vain;  and  as  they  never  did,  so  they  never  shall  ba 
able  to  come  at  them.  1.  Let  us  consider  the  continual  toil  and  labour  that 
mankind  in  this  world  are  exposed  to.  The  despatching  of  one  business  is  but 
the  making  room  for  some  other,  and  possibly  more  troublesome  one,  that  is 
presently  to  follow  after.  We  toil  till  we  are  weary,  and  have  exhausted  our 
strength  and  spirits,  and  then  we  think  to  refresh  and  recruit  ourselves;  but, 
alas !  that  refreshment  is  only  to  prepare  and  enable  us  for  the  bearing  the  next 
hour's  burthen,  which  will  inevitably  come  upon  us.  2.  But  this  is  not  all :  we 
might,  possibly,  find  some  comfort  in  that  pains  and  labour  we  take  in  this  world, 
at  least  they  would  be  much  more  supportable  if  we  were  sure  our  designs  would 
always  succeed;  if  we  were  sure  to  attain  that  which  we  labour  for;  but,  alas  I  it  is 
oftentimes  quite  otherwise.  We  meet  with  frequent  disappointments  in  our 
endeavours;  nay,  we  cannot  say  beforehand  of  anything  we  undertake  that  it 
shall  certainly  come  to  pass  as  we  would  have  it.  And  this  is  a  matter  that 
renders  the  world  a  place  of  still  more  restlessness  and  disquiet.  8.  Supposing, 
after  several  disappointments,  and  with  much  difficulty,  we  do  attain  our  ends, 
and  get  what  our  souls  desired,  yet  doth  the  thing  answer  our  expectation?  Do 
we  find  that  it  is  fit,  and  good,  £md  convenient  for  us?  If  so,  then  we  seem  to 
have  laboured  to  some  purpose.  But  if  not,  then  we  are  but  still  where  we  were; 
nay,  we  had  better  never  have  troubled  our  heads  about  it.  In  all  our  labours 
we  either  hit,  or  miss;  we  either  succeed,  or  are  disappointed.  If  we  be  dis- 
appointed,  we  are  certainly  troubled;  and  if  we  do  succeed,  for  anything  we  know, 
that  very  success  may  prove  our  greatest  tmhappiness.  4.  But  let  us  suppose 
that  we  have  brought  no  inconvenience  upon  ourselves  by  our  choice.     Let  u* 


ei  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it 


suppose  our  designs  were  reasonable,  and  they  rightly  succeeded,  and  the  circum- 
stances of  our  condition  are  every  way  fit  and  proper  for  us;  yet,  is  this  sufficient 
to  procure  us  content?  Alas  1  there  is  too  much  reason  to  fear  the  contrary; 
for  such  is  the  constitution  of  this  world,  that  let  us  be  in  what  circumstances 
we  will,  yet  we  shall  meet  with  many  troubles  and  inconveniencies  that  do  neces- 
sarily flow  from  the  nature  of  that  condition  which  we  are  in,  though  otherwise 
it  may  be  the  fittest  for  us  of  all  others.  There  is  no  sincere  unmingled  good  to 
be  met  with.  Every  state  of  life,  as  it  hath  something  of  good  in  it,  so  the  best 
hath  some  evil  displeasing  appendages  inseparable  adhering  to  it.  Nay,  perhaps,  in 
true  speaking,  the  worldly  happiness  of  any  man's  condition  is  not  to  be  measured 
by  the  multitude  of  goods  he  enjoyeth  in  it,  but  rather  by  the  fewness  of  the  evils 
it  brings  upon  him.  6.  But  let  us  suppose  we  find  no  inconvenience  in  the  circum- 
stances of  our  lives :  we  will  suppose  we  are  possessed  of  many  goods  from  the 
enjoyment  of  which  we  may  promise  to  ourselves  solid  contentment  and  satisfac- 
tion. These  are  our  present  thoughts.  But  are  we  sure  we  shall  always  continue 
in  the  same  mind?  Are  we  sure  that  that  which  is  now  very  grateful  and  agree- 
able, and  affects  us  with  a  sensible  pleasure  and  delight,  will  continue  always  to 
do  so?  On  the  contrary,  have  we  not  much  reason  to  fear,  that,  in  a  little  time, 
it  will  grow  dull  and  unaffeoting;  nay,  possibly,  very  irksome  and  displeasing? 

6.  To  all  these  things  let  us  add  the  numberless  daily  troubles  and  discomposures 
of  mind,  not  peculiar  to  any  condition,  as  those  I  spoke  of  before,  but  common 
to  all,  arising  from  men's  minds  and  tempers,  and  the  things  and  persons  they 
converse  with  in  the  world.  It  is  a  melancholy  consideration;  but  I  believe  the 
experience  of  mankind  will  make  it  good,  that  there  is  scarce  a  day  in  our  lives 
that  we  pass  in  perfect  uninterrupted  peace  and  content,  but  something  or  other 
every  day   happens  that   gives  us  trouble,   and  makes   us   uneasy  to  ourselves. 

7.  But  what  must  we  say  of  the  many  sad  accidents  and  more  grievous  and 
weighty  afflictions  that  do  frequently  exercise  the  patience  of  mankind?  If  in 
the  best  condition  of  human  llie  men  are  not  happy,  but  everything  is  able  to 
ruffle  and  disorder  them ;  0  how  miserable  are  they  in  the  worst  I  So  long  as 
we  have  mortal  bodies  exposed  to  sickness  and  diseases,  to  sad  accidents  and 
casualties;  so  long  as  we  have  a  frail  nature  that  betrays  us  to  a  thousand 
follies  and  sins;  so  long  as  we  have  dear  friends  and  relations,  or  children,  that 
we  may  be  deprived  of;  so  long  as  we  may  prove  xmfortunate  in  our  marriage,  or 
in  our  posterity,  or  in  the  condition  of  life  we  have  chosen;  so  long  as  there  are 
men  to  slander  us,  or  to  rob  us,  or  to  imdermine  us;  so  long  as  there  are  storms 
at  sea,  or  fire  upon  land;  so  long  as  there  are  enemies  abroad,  or  tumults, 
seditions,  and  turns  of  state  at  home:  I  say,  so  long  as  we  are  exposed  to  these 
things,  we  must,  every  one  of  us,  expect,  in  some  degree  or  other,  to  bear  a  share 
in  the  miseries  of  the  world.  And  now,  all  these  things  considered,  judge  ya 
whether  this  world  doth  look  like  a  place  of  rest;  whether  it  is  not  rather  a  stage 
of  calamities  and  sad  events.  Judge  ye  whether  the  best  of  human  things  ba 
not  "  vanity  ";  but  the  worst  of  them  intolerable  "  vexation  of  spirit."  8.  Which 
will  still  appear  the  more  evident  if  we  add  this,  that  though  all  we  have  hitherto 
said  did  go  for  nothing;  though  we  could  be  supposed  to  be  exempted  from  all 
those  inconveniencies  and  mischiefs  I  have  mentioned;  though  we  could  be 
supposed  to  be  capable  of  an  uninterrupted  enjoyment  of  the  good  things  of  this 
life  as  long  as  we  live;  yet  even  this  would  not  satisfy  much  to  the  making 
our  state  in  this  world  easy  and  happy;  for  there  is  one  thing  still  would  spoil 
all  such  hopes  and  pretences,  and  that  is,  the  fear  of  death,  which  hath  made 
mankind  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage  (Heb.  ii.  15).  O  what  a  dismal 
reflection  must  this  needs  be  to  a  man  who  bath  set  up  his  rest  in  this  world, 
and  dreams  of  no  other  happiness  but  what  he  hath  here  I  To  think  that  in  a 
lew  years  at  the  farthest,  but  possibly  in  a  few  months  or  days,  he  shall  lie  down 
in  the  dust,  and  then  all  that  he  hath  here  possessed  and  enjoyed  is  lost  and 
gone,  irrecoverably  gone  I  0  that  we  would  seriously  think  upon  these  things  I 
We  should  certainly  have  this  advantage  by  it,  that  we  should  not  any  longer  ba 
cheated  with  the  gaudy  appearances  of  this  world,  but  look  after  something  mora 
solid,  more  substantial,  than  anything  we  find  here  to  live  for,  to  set  our  hearts 
and  affections  upon.  (4bp.  Sharp.)  The  vanity  of  Ufa: — Consider  the  vanity  of 
the  present  state  of  being,  considered  as  our  only  state.  Suppose,  first,  that  a 
decree  were  to  go  forth  perpetuating  your  present  condition — pronouncing  that 
you  should  remain  eternally  just  as  you  are  now.  How  would  you  receive  such 
•  decree?    Is  there  ona  of  you  who  would  be  willing  to  stop  the  wheel  of  fortun* 


CHAP,  n.]  ECCLESIASTES.  65 

now  and  for  ever?  If  you  will  look  into  your  own  hearts  you  will  find  that  you 
are  living  more  in  the  future  than  in  the  present,  more  in  your  plans  than  in 
your  possessions, — that  you  depend  more  on  what  you  think  that  you  are  laying 
up  for  time  to  come  than  on  any  means  of  enjoyment  actually  in  hand.  But 
what  will  this  future  on  which  you  are  building  bring  to  you?  Incompleteness, 
vexation,  disappointment,  bereavement,  sorrow.  Few  of  your  blossoms  will  ripen 
into  fruit;  few  of  your  plans  will  be  realized;  very  little  of  what  you  now  clearly 
see  in  the  futiu-e  will  shape  itself  as  you  see  it.  The  farther  you  go  on  in  life, 
the  more  blighted  hopes  will  lie  behind  you,  the  more  vacant  places  will  there  be 
in  the  circle  of  your  kindred  and  friendship,  the  more  will  there  be  in  your  outward 
condition  to  make  you  feel  that  there  is  no  rest  or  home  for  you  on  this  side  of 
the  grave.  Again,  if  you  would  look  into  your  hearts,  in  the  gayest  and  most 
gladsome  moments  of  earthly  enjoyment,  you  will  perceive  much  of  this  samo 
emptiness  and  vanity.  Who  has  not  at  such  times  been  conscious,  as  it  were,  of 
a  double  self,  of  an  uneasiness  in  the  midst  of  gratification,  of  a  restless  feeling 
in  the  very  fulness  of  seeming  joy,  of  a  voice  that  whispers,  '*  Up  and  be  doing," 
while  many  voices  bid  us  stay,  and  drown  all  other  thoughts  in  the  scene  before 
us?  But  though  at  these  seasons  such  thoughts  will  come  over  us,  we  crowd  them 
out.  There  are,  however,  times  when  they  are  forced  upon  us,  and  we  cannot 
expel  them.  There  are  times  of  sudden  and  overwhelming  grief,  when  calamity 
breaks  in  upon  us  like  a  swift  flood,  and  seems  to  wash  away  the  very  ground 
on  which  we  stand — that  earth's  fairest  mansions  are  but  whited  sepulchres, 
her  choicest  fruit  but  dust  and  ashes.  We  are  then  conscious  of  the  frailty  of 
what  remains  to  us,  no  less  than  of  what  has  been  taken  from  us,  and  can  say 
from  the  heart  that  there  is  nothing  here  below  on  which  we  can  place  the  least 
dependence, — ^nothing  which  we  dare  to  love  as  we  have  loved,  or  to  trust  as  we 
have  trusted.  Then,  were  it  not  for  the  words  of  eternal  life,  we  could  say  in 
intense  anguish, — "  All  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit,  and  there  is  no  profit 
under  the  sun."  But  after  all,  though  we  walk  in  a  vain  show,  there  is  enjoyment 
in  life, — in  our  mere  earthly  life.  Yet  from  what  does  it  flow?  Not  from  the 
ever-changing  scene,  not  from  the  winter-frozen  and  summer-dried  foimtaina 
around  us,  but  from  the  xmchanging  love  of  God,  the  bow  of  whose  promise 
remains  fixed  over  the  stream  of  time  and  the  waves  of  unceasing  vicissitude. 
He  who  gives  the  ravens  their  food  feeds  also  His  human  children,  and  by  filling 
all  things  with  His  love  makes  us  happy.  And,  blessed  be  God,  there  is  that  La 
life  which  is  not  vanity  or  vexation.  The  outer  man  may  perish,  the  desire  of 
eyes  and  the  pride  of  life  may  fail;  but  the  signature  of  God's  spirit  on  the 
inner  man  time  cannot  efface,  or  the  waves  of  death  wash  away.  The  soul, 
character,  virtue,  piety,  remain,  amidst  the  reverses  of  fortime,  the  desolation 
of  our  households,  the  wasting  of  disease,  and  the  thunder-blast  of  death. 
(A.  P.  Peabody.) 

Yer.  14.  The  wise  man's  eyea  are  in  his  head;  but  the  fool  walketh  in  dark* 
ness. — The  advantage  of  wiedom  over  folly: — Wisdom  possesses  the  same  advan- 
tage over  folly  that  sight  does  over  blindiess.  The  man  of  wisdom,  having  all 
his  wits  about  him,  in  the  full  possession  and  the  appropriate  exercise  of  all  his 
faculties,  "  guides  his  affairs  with  discretion,"  looks  before  him,  thinks  maturely 
of  what  he  is  doing,  and  by  his  knowledge  of  men  and  things,  is  directed  to  the 
adoption  of  plans  which  promise  to  be  profitable,  and  to  the  prudent  and  successful 
prosecution  of  them.  He  **  foreseeth  the  evil,  and  hideth  himself."  He  aims  at 
worthy  ends,  and  employs  suitable  means  for  their  accomplishment.  But  the 
fool — the  ignorant,  and  inconsiderate,  and  improvident  man — is  continually  in 
danger  of  stumbling,  or  of  going  astray,  like  a  person  overtaken  by  darkness, 
who  "  knoweth  not  whither  he  goeth."  He  is  ever  prone  to  run  blindly  and 
heedlessly  into  absurd  and  injurious  projects,  or  to  destroy  such  as  are  in  them- 
selves good,  by  blundering  in  the  execution  of  them.  The  fool's  eyes,  it  is  else- 
where said,  are  "  in  the  ends  of  the  earth,"  roaming  vainly  and  idly  abroad, 
without  serving  his  present  and  needful  purposes;  gazing,  as  the  organs  of  a 
vacant  mind,  on  far-off  objects,  and  allowing  him  to  stumble  over  what  is 
immediately  in  his  way.  Without  foresight  to  anticipate  probable  evils,  without 
even  sagacity  to  avoid  such  as  are  present,  the  fool  is  in  perpetual  hazard  of 
injuring  and  ruining  both  himself  and  all  who  are  so  unfortunate  as  to  stand 
connected  with  him,  or  to  be  exposed  to  his  influence.  (B.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  The 
vritdom  of  the  eye: — ^I.  To  understand  this  proverb,  notice,  first,  the  conteastb 

6 


69  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 


WHICH  IT  SCGOESTS.     One  of  these  is  expressed  in  the  context;  the  other  is  to  be 
readily  and  clearly  inferred.     1.  First,  there  is  a  contrast  between  persons.     We 
have  before  us  the  believer  in  God  and  the  unbeliever,  the  child  of  light  and  the 
child   of   darkness,   the  converted   and   the   unconverted,   the   spiritual   and   the 
natural.     Whatever  may   be  their  relative  state  of  knowledge  or  ignorance,  of 
wealth  or  poverty,  in  the  sense  of  the  Bible  of  truth,  and  in  the  judgment  of 
the  God  of  truth,  the  one  is  wise  and  the  other  a  fool.     2.  Secondly,  there  is  a 
contrast  implied :  "  The  wise  man's  eyes  are  in  his  head,  but  the  fool  walketh 
in   darkness."    And   why   is   his   path   in   darkness?    Because,   unlike   the   wise 
man,  his  eyes  are  not  in  his  head;  if  they  had  been  there,  he  would  have  walked 
in  light,  surely,  safely.     But  they  are  in  his  heart,  and  so  he  walks  foolishly, 
erringly,  darkly.     The  eye  in  the  head — the  wise  man's  eye,  sees  under  the  direc- 
tion of  reason,  and  faith,  and  of  right  understanding.     The  eye  in  the  heart — the 
fool's  eye,  sees  tmder  the  direction  of  the  affections,  the  disposition  and  the  feel- 
ings.    And  so,  while  the  one  man  walks  in  light,  the  other  man  walks  in  darkness. 
II.  But  now  let  me  more  pointedly  and  practically  set  out  thb  MEAKiNa  of  this 
TEBSE.     Let  us  take  by  itself  each  part  of  this  proverb  and  consider  it.    1.  First, 
then,  it  is  implied  that  the  fool's  eyes  are  in  his  heart.     He  sees  all  things  through 
the  medium  of  his  own  wishes  and  inclinations;  his  reason  and  conscience  do  not 
control,  but  they  are  possessed  by  bis  inclinations.     (1)  Hence  I  believe,  because 
the  eye  of  many  is  in  the  heart,  the  scepticism  which  obtains  in  our  day,  especially 
the  scepticism  which  obtains  in  the  minds  of  young  men.     No  man,  I  believe, 
ever  became  an  infidel  against  his   will.      Inclination,  not  evidence,   has   been 
deficient  to  the  man.     The  evil  heart  of  unbelief  is  at  the  root  of  scepticism. 
(2)  Hence  I  believe  the  prejudice  with  which  many  professed  Christians  turn  away 
from  the  doctrines  of  evangelical  religion.     They  do  not  question  their  reality, 
but  they  just  dislike  their  practical  consequences.     (3)  A  fool's  eyes  are  in  his 
heart,  because  his  bondage  is  to  things  present  and  temporal,  and  he  is  indifferent 
to  thinks  unseen  and  eternal.     The  Bible,  though  not  a  fable,  is  as  another  book 
to  him,  and  nothing  more.    Truth,  if  not  a  fiction,  is  not  a  fact.    Earth  is  a  loved 
present,  possessed;  heaven  is  a  forgotten,  distant  future.    2.  But  "  the  wise  man's 
eyes  are  in  his  head."    The  light  of  a  holy  knowledge  shines  upon  them,  and  in 
this  light  the  eye  of  reason  and  of  faith,  the  eye,  not  of  blind  inclination,  but  of 
Christian  consciousness  and  confidence,  sees  light.     (1)  Hence  a  Christian  man 
feels  the  right  and  the  responsibility  of  private  judgment  on  the  truth  and  the 
service  of  God.     The  authority  of  Christ  is  supreme  authority  unto  him.    He  will 
allow  no  interference  with  it ;  he  will  allow  no  usurper  to  take  its  place.    (2)  Hence 
the  Christian  man  prays  for  the  light  of  Divine  teaching.     The  possession  of  truth 
has  taught  him  the  possibility  and  the  peril  of  error.     He  woiUd  be  found  never 
trusting  in  man,  but  he  would  always  pray — "  That  which  I  know  not.  Lord,  teach 
Thou  mel"     (8)  Hence  the  impression  which  he  receives  of  the  things  around  him 
and  before  him.     The  rule  of  duty,  read  by  the  eyes  in  his  head,  is  just  this — 
his  Father's  will.     The  measure  of  goodness,  admired  by  the  eye  in  his  head,  is 
just  this — his  Saviour's  image.     (4)  Lastly,  when  our  eyes  are  in  our  head,  under 
the  government  of  an  enlightened  reason  and  a  Christian  faith,  they  will  always 
be  doing  a  holy  and  a  godly  service  to  our  souls — ^never  an  injtirious  one.     They 
will  not,  then,  wander  lustfully  where  they  should  not  even  steal  a  glance;  they 
will  be  turned  away  from  all  vanities.     Looking  ever,  will  they  be  foimd,  unto 
Jesus;  ever,  will  they  be  foimd,  setting  the  Lord  before  them;  single  will  they 
ever  be,  full  of  light,  tiirning  the  whole  body  into  light  also.     (J.  Eyre,  M.A.) 
One  event  happeneth  to  them  all. — Wisdom  and  jolly  compared: — ^Looking  simply 
at  knowledge   as  such,  and  looking  merely  at  the  brief  span  of  our   existence 
"  under  the  sun,"  we  must  confess  that  the  wise  man  is  sometimes  as  powerless 
as  the  fool.     Two  men  take  their  seats  in  a  railway  train.     The  one  man  is  an 
accomplished  scholar,  or  mathematician,  or  philosopher.     He  has  disciplined  his 
mental  powers,  and  has  amassed  large  stores  of  knowledge.    He  has  even  acquired, 
it  may  be  a  certain  reputation  as  a  man  of  learning,  or  as  a  leader  of  the  thoughts 
of   others.     The   man   who  is   sitting   beside  him   cares   nothing   for   intellectual 
culture.     Animal  enjoyment  is  his  ideal.     Give  him  a  good  dinner,  and  you  may 
keep  your  books  to  yourself  I     He  could  never  see  any  good  in  racking  his  .brains 
over  hard  problems.     There  sit  these  two  men  in  the  railway  carriage,  side  by 
side:   the  one,  perhaps,  reading  the  latest  book  of  science;  the  other,  perhaps, 
glancing   through    some    "  Sporting    Gazette."     Suddenly,    in    a    moment,    there 
comes  the  collision  which  it  was  utterly  impossible  for  either  of  them  to  foresee: 


OHAi".  n.]  ECCLESIASTES.  n 

the  train  is  a  wreck;  and  these  two  lie  together,  crushed,  mangled,  and  dead! 
"One  event,  one  chance,  has  happened  to  them  bothl"  Now,  shut  out  the 
thought  of  God,  and  the  thought  of  immortality,  and  what  "  advantage  "  has  the 
one  man  over  the  other?  The  student  has  had  his  intellectual  enjoyments  :  the 
votary  of  pleasure  has  had  his  enjoyments  also.  The  scholar,  along  with  his 
enjoyment,  has  had  much  fatiguing  toil,  and,  it  may  be,  painful  thought;  the 
pleasure-seeker  also  has  doubtless,  on  his  part  experienced  some  of  the  penalties 
of  self-indulgence.  The  lover  of  knowledge  has,  indeed,  had  this  advantage, 
that  his  "  eyes  "  have  been  "  in  his  head  " :  he  has  had  a  wider  and  clearer 
vision;  and  he  has  lived  a  higher  kind  of  life.  But  to  what  purpose?  Where  is 
the  permanent  advantage  ?  These  two  men  have  lived  their  short  span  :  and 
here  has  come  Death,  as  the  great  leveller  I  For  a  few  years,  perhaps,  the  scholar 
may  be  spoken  of;  his  name  may  even  get  into  some  "  biographical  dictionary  " : 
but,  unless  he  is  one  of  a  very  select  few,  it  will  be  little  more  than  a  name,  and, 
in  the  ages  to  eome,  he  will  be  altogether  forgotten.  To  what  purpose,  then,  has 
he  "  scorned  delights,  and  lived  laborious  days  "?  Can  he  be  said  to  have  made 
the  best  use  of  human  life,  if  he  has  simply  spent  it  in  acquiring  a  "  wisdom  " 
which  leaves  him,  in  the  end,  indistinguishable  from  the  fool?  Thus,  then,  we 
seem  to  be  driven  to  the  same  conclusion  as  Ecclesiastes.  Whatever  advantages 
earthly  wisdom  has,  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  chief  good  for  man.  The 
amassing  of  knowledge  as  the  one  supreme  object  of  human  existence  is  a  vain 
delusion :  it  is  a  "  feeding  on  wind  " :  it  fails  to  satisfy  the  deepest  cravings  of  tho 
human  soul.     (T.  C.  FinlayBon.) 

Ver.  17.  Therefore  I  hated  life. — 1$  life  worth  living  f — ^"Is  life  worth  living?" 
is  a  question  that  is  continually  coming  before  the  public  mind  in  one  form  or 
another.  When  Mr.  Haddock's  book  appeared,  as  many  of  you  may  remember, 
there  was  an  attempt  to  make  light  of  it  by  the  pun  contained  in  the  supposed 
doctor's  answer,  "  It  depends  on  the  liver."  This  has  been  capped  by  "  Punch's  *' 
clergyman,  who  replies,  "  It  depends  on  the  living."  One  must,  however, 
approach  the  matter  with  the  utmost  seriousness,  as  it  touches  upon  the  deep 
basal  truths  and  principles  of  existence,  and  is  too  solemn  a  subject  to  admit  of 
any  flippancy  in  our  treatment  of  it.  The  problem  would  be  met  by  an  unqualified 
affirmative  wherever  life  is  young,  healthy,  and  active,  and  the  environment 
favourable  to  a  rich,  varied,  and  exuberant  form  of  existence.  In  some  respects, 
therefore,  the  doctor  is  right;  it  does  depend  upon  the  state  of  the  health  and  the 
physical  condition.  I  wonder  what  a  happy  schoolboy,  rushing  out  with  the  football 
under  his  arm,  would  say  if  he  were  asked,  "  Is  life  worth  living?"  His  expression 
would  be  a  curious  study  as  he  gave  his  reply,  and  would  itself  convey  deep 
significance.  What  a  happy  thing  it  would  be  if  that  schoolboy  aspect  of  life 
were  only  exchanged  for  a  deeper  conviction  of  its  fuller  value  and  noble  possi- 
bilities,  and  that  it  should  never  occur  to  us  to  ask  whether  this  breath  of  life 
might  not  as  well  cease,  and  that  perhaps  the  whole  had  been  a  hideous  mistake  I 
The  words  of  the  Eoheleth  express  the  sentiment  of  those  who  thus  pass  an 
adverse  sentence  upon  the  value  of  life,  condemning  both  the  career  of  the  wise 
man  and  the  fool,  and  who  have  come  to  hate  life,  for  "  all  is  vanity  and  vexation 
of  spirit  "  or  "  a  striving  after  wind."  The  grand  old  Greeks,  with  their  highly- 
refined  conditions  of  life,  and  life  itself  full  of  richness  and  variety,  end  ennobled 
by  the  splendid  idealism  of  the  fine  arts,  now  and  then  fell  into  this  sad  vein. 
Eyen  the  ancient  poet,  the  *'  sunny-browed  "  Homer,  sang — 

"  For  there  is  nothing  whatever  more  wretched  than  man 
Of  all  things  that  breathe  and  that  move  o'er  the  earth." 

We  have,  ttirther,  in  Theognis,  "  It  would  be  best  for  the  children  of  the  earth 
not  to  be  born  .  .  .  next  best  for  them,  when  born,  to  pass  through  the  gates  of 
Hades  as  soon  as  possible."  Can  anything  be  more  touching  than  the  words  of 
Cassandra  in  *'  Agamemnon  "  by  iEschylus :  '*  Alas  for  the  conditions  of  mortals  I 
When  prosperous,  a  shadow  may  overturn  them;  if,  however,  they  be  in  adversity, 
a  moistened  sponge  blots  out  the  picture."  Then  we  find  Seneca,  one  of  the  best 
of  the  Romjm  Stoics,  whose  maxims  came  so  near  to  many  of  the  sayings  of 
Bt.  Paul,  praising  death  as  the  "  best  invention  of  nature,"  and  Marcus  Aurelius, 
'•  a  seeker  after  God,"  expressing  his  disgust  at  human  life,  with  the  apostrophe, 
**  0  death,  delay  not  thy  coming."  There  is  much  the  same  in  the  literature  of 
Persia,  and  in  the  sphere  of  the  religion  of  "the  light."     The  pure-souled  and 


08  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

seraphic  Suddhs  considers  that  "  True  wisdom  is  a  desire  to  be  nothing,  to  be 
blown  out,  to  enter  into  Nirvana,  i.e.  extinction."  Coming  to  modern  times  we 
find  in  French  literature  of  the  Pompadour  period  the  same  strain  of  melancholy. 
Diderot  wrote,  "  To  be,  amid  pain  and  weeping,  the  plaything  of  uncertainty, 
of  error,  of  want,  of  sickness,  and  of  passions — every  step,  from  the  moment 
when  we  learn  to  lisp,  to  the  time  of  departure,  when  our  voice  falters — this  is 
called  the  most  important  gift  of  our  parents  and  of  nature — life."  This  is  more 
than  equalled  by  the  words  of  Schelling,  "  The  death's  head  never  fails  behind 
the  ogling  mask,  and  life  is  only  the  cap  and  bells  which  the  nonentity  has 
donned  just  to  make  a  jingle,  and  afterwards  to  tear  it  to  pieces  and  cast  it 
away."  These  instances  will  suffice  to  indicate  the  strongly  marked  pessimistic 
tendency  amongst  some  of  the  finest  thinkers,  and  would  lead  those  who  are 
predisposed  to  this  kind  of  philosophizing  to  the  inevitable  conviction  that,  on  tha 
whole,  life  is  not  worth  living.  1.  The  value  of  life,  if  judged  from  the  point  of 
view  of  happiness,  depends  upon  the  s\un  of  its  functional  activities  and  interests. 
Our  pessimistic  views  concerning  life  are  largely  the  result  of  our  mistaken  ideas 
of  happiness.  We  are  apt  to  imagine  that  health,  leisure,  and  a  splendid  income 
are  absolutely  necessary  to  our  happiness;  and  when  there  is  a  prospect  of  losing 
these  permanently,  life  is  no  longer  desirable.  No  man  is  really  imhappy  who 
realizes  that  he  has  work  to  do  and  sets  himself  in  earnest  to  do  it.  The  utmost 
of  pain  and  sorrow  can  be  borne  if  only  one  has  an  object  in  life.  Men  who  throw 
up  all  for  lost  are  those  who  have  abandoned,  if  they  ever  had  it,  their  object  in 
life.  Let  a  person  once  set  his  mind  upon  some  worthy  aim,  and  allow  his  interest 
to  centre  in  that,  and  let  it  absorb  his  energies,  and  never  will  he  think  of  laying 
violent  hands  upon  himself.  When  the  Christians  assembled  in  the  catacombs  we 
discover  none  of  those  traces  of  pessimism  that  are  so  characteristic  of  the  poems 
of  Horace.  Their  interest  was  centred  in  their  Lord  and  Master,  and  His  royal 
will.  We  can  understand,  then,  how  a  truly  Christian  man,  following  in  the 
experiences  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  would  apprehend  Christ  to  be  the  true  object  of 
existence.  *'  To  live  is  Christ,"  to  learn  about  Christ,  to  live  for  Christ,  to  gain 
Christ,  and  to  realize  the  life  and  character  of  Christ  within  oneself,  so  that  the 
very  principle  of  the  within,  is  Christ.  Such  realization  gives  life  its  value. 
2.  The  value  of  life  further  depends  upon  its  extrinsic  utilities  in  the  service  of 
our  fellows.  We  owe  a  debt  of  gratitude  to  the  pa«t,  which  can  only  be  paid 
to  the/utur«,  for  this,  and  it  is  a  point  of  honour,  that  every  man  should  acknow- 
ledge, to  make  his  life  valuable  to  others  to  those  who  shall  come  after  him.  It 
would  be  ignoble  to  slight  that  which  has  cost  so  much  to  develop,  and  especially 
since  every  life  is  capable  of  being  made  useful  in  a  greater  or  less  degree.  8,  If 
we  are  men  of  faith  we  shall  value  life  for  the  sake  of  its  higher  development 
beyond  the  grave.  Even  though  this  life  were  spent  in  a  purgatory  of  torture,  or 
a  hell  of  pain,  which  life  need  never  be,  no  one  who  believes  in  the  Christ  can 
deny  that  the  great  hereafter  will  more  than  obliterate  the  traces  of  this  sorrowful 
world  in  the  glorious  activities  of  the  heavenly  state  and  all  its  grand  developments. 
Cheer  up,  brothers,  and  brace  yourselves  for  manly  effort.  There  are  no  sorrows 
or  difficulties  that  a  brave-hearted  man,  who  trusts  in  God,  need  fear  to 
encounter.  Whatever  straits  one  may  find  oneself  in,  there  is  no  lot  so  painful, 
so  bitter,  or  so  trying  that  it  may  not  be  sweetened  and  ennobled  by  effort — 
and  that  effort  will  be  ova  joy.  (J-.  G.  Jamet,  B.A.)  Peasimism  and  optimism 
(with  Ps.  xivii.  1) : — We  all  of  us  are  by  turns  followers  of  the  laughing 
philosopher  and  of  the  weeping  philosopher.  Life  sometimes  appears  full 
of  joy,  at  other  times  full  of  sorrow.  Hence  the  folly  of  labelling  the  souls  of 
our  fellow-men  is  manifest,  of  calling  one  man  an  optimist  and  another  a  pessimist. 
Deep  souls  are  both  at  different  periods  of  their  development.  We  are  all 
pilgrims;  and  so  we  pass  through  many  widely  different  countries  during  our 
journey.  And  it  is  much  to  be  wished  that  men  would  not  be  so  precipitate  in 
guessing  at  the  goal  or  terminus,  to  which  the  spirits  of  their  brethren  are  going. 
To  all  of  us  that  really  think,  there  has  been  given  a  new  commandment :  and  it 
is  this.  Thou  shalt  not  label  thy  brother's  soul.  Pessimism  is  often  like  the 
moulting  of  birds,  a  thing  not  pleasing  in  itself,  but  still  a  necessary  process.  A 
moulting  eagle  is  grander  far  than  a  well-conditioned  sparrow.  Pessimism  is  often 
only  a  sort  of  prolonged  moulting  of  the  divine  eagle  wings  of  the  most  soaring 
faith  and  the  noblest  compassion  and  love.  1.  Christianity  has  obviously  very 
much  in  common  with  pessimism.  It  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  fantastio 
optimism  ol  Emerson,  which  deliberately  chooses  to  ignore  the  darker  side  oi 


CHAP,  n.]  ECCLESIASTES, 


human  life.  It  plainly  teaches  that  the  present  condition  of  the  world  is  abnormal, 
and  in  many  respects  evil.  Our  religion  fully  recognizes  the  fact  that  we  are 
pilgrims  and  strangers  here,  and  that  our  life  is  essentially  a  warfare.  It  doe« 
not  require  us  to  be  always  in  a  triumphant  mood.  It  knows  that  many  of  th© 
very  greatest  of  the  elect  are  destined  to  pass  long  years  in  the  dark  valley  of 
the  shadow  of  death.  It  blesses  those  that  mourn.  2.  Christianity  nowhere 
teaches  that  pleasure,  or  even  happiness,  is  the  end  or  object  of  life.  On  the 
contrary,  our  religion  teaches  that  progress  through  suffering  is  the  real  end  and 
object  of  our  life.  The  doctrine  of  the  Cross,  with  its  divine  amplitude  of  meaning, 
is  to  use  a  precious  rock-hewn  path  of  safety  between  the  deceptive  quagmire  of  a 
flimsy  Emersonian  optimism  and  the  hideous  abysses  of  a  despairing  pessimism. 
The  very  fact  that  God  has  brought  the  human  race  so  far  in  its  spiritual 
pilgrimage  forbids  any  reasonable  despair.  The  old,  sacred,  guiding  fire  of  the 
Eternal  still  leads  us  on.  The  burning  and  unearthly  splendours  of  the  mighty 
Ideal  from  time  to  time  disperse  the  thick  clouds  of  the  actual.  The  far-off  goal 
of  the  human  race  gleams  fitfully  on  our  worn  eyes;  even  amidst  the  heart- 
breaking sorrow  of  prolonged  moral  failure,  an  angel  of  the  Divine  pity  sometimes 
"  carries  us  away  in  the  spirit  to  a  great  and  high  mountain,  and  shows  us  that 
great  city,  the  holy  Jerusalem,  descending  out  of  heaven  from  God."  There,  in 
God's  nearer  presence,  the  ailing  soul  knows  that  it  shall  one  day  grow  well  and 
strong.  {A.  Crawford,  M.A.)  Tired  of  life: — What  are  the  causes  of  suicide? 
The  general  impression  is,  insanity :  this  is  for  the  most  part  the  verdict  of  juries 
over  the  corpse  of  the  self-slain  man.  But  insanity  is  not  always  the  cause.  In 
most  cases  of  suicide  there  have  been  displayed  on  the  part  of  the  perpetrator 
forethought,  deliberation,  plan.  What  then  can  prompt  a  man  who  is  not  actually 
mad  to  this  terrible  deed?  I.  Severe  tbials.  The  feeling  that  Solomon  had, 
rushes  into  the  soul  of  not  a  few  at  times.  The  children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness 
had  it  when  they  said,  "  Would  God  that  we  had  died  in  the  land  of  Egypt." 
Elijah  had  it  when  he  said,  "  It  is  enough  now,  0  Lord  I  take  away  my  life." 
Job  had  it  when  he  said,  "  I  loathe  it:  I  would  not  live  alway."  II.  Sickeninq 
SATIETY.  The  men  of  leisure  and  aflSuence,  who  are  freed  from  the  necessity  of 
work,  enterprise,  and  business,  who  fare  sumptuously  every  day,  and  run  the 
round  of  fashionable  life  and  sensuous  enjoyment,  have  always  shown  the  greatest 
susceptibility  to  this  disgust  with  life.  Over-indulgence  in  worldly  pleasures  seldom 
fails  to  produce  a  moral  nausea.  There  is  what  the  French  call  the  ennui  that 
comes  out  of  it,  "that  awful  yawn,"  says  Byron,  "that  sleep  cannot  abate." 
As  a  proof  of  this,  in  the  countries  where  luxuries  most  abound,  suicides  are  the 
most  numerous.  Whilst  in  Sweden  there  is  only  one  suicide  to  every  ninety-two 
thousand  people,  in  Paris  there  is  one  to  every  three  thousand.  III.  Spiritual 
DiSGDST.  Men  whose  moral  susceptibilities  are  exquisitely  tender,  whose  intel- 
lectual eye  is  keen  and  strong  enough  to  penetrate  into  the  motives  that  govern 
society,  and  whose  sympathies  run  strongly  with  the  right,  the  true,  and  the 
divine,  often  experience  such  an  inexpressible  revulsion  at  certain  popular  develop- 
ments of  character  and  phases  of  society,  as  to  lead  them  to  say  with  Solomon, 
' '  I  hated  life ;  because  the  work  that  is  wrought  under  the  sun  is  grievous  unto 
me."  IV.  Temperamental  melancholy.  So  oppressive  does  the  dark  atmosphere 
of  their  irritable  tempers  become,  that  they  are  ready  to  seize  the  rope  or  the 
razor,  or  to  plunge  into  the  river.  V.  Inordinate  emotionality.  There  are  those 
whose  emotional  natures  seem  stronger  than  their  intellectual  force.  The  winds 
and  the  waves  of  passion  are  too  strong  for  the  helmsman.  Their  emotional  nature 
is  like  a  deep  and  tumultuous  sea,  whose  billows  are  ever  breaking  over  the  walls 
of  their  understanding.  Sometimes,  for  example,  revenge  is  a  passion  that  prompts 
the  deed.  Samson  was  an  example  of  this.  Sometimes  humiliation  prompts  the 
deed.  Something  occurs  which  overwhelms  the  man  with  shame.  Ahithophel 
is  an  example  of  this.  Sometimes  desperation  prompts  the  deed.  Sometimes  fear 
overwhelms  the  man,  and  prompts  the  deed.  It  was  thus  with  the  Philippian 
jailor.  Sometimes  remorse  prompts  the  self-destroying  deed.  No  passion  that 
can  seize  the  soul  is  so  unbearable  as  this;  "A  wounded  spirit,  who  can  bear?" 
Thus  Judas,  when  he  saw  that  Christ,  whom  he  had  betrayed,  was  condemned 
to  death,  his  guilty  conscience  made  life  so  intolerable  that  he  went  out  and 
hanged  himself.  Other  passions  may  be  mentioned,  such  as  jealousy,  which  per- 
haps is  the  most  prolific  parent  of  suicides  of  all  the  passions.  I  learn  from  this 
subject — ^1.  That  the  poor  need  not  envy  the  condition  of  the  rich.  2.  That  all 
men  hsTS  not  an  equal  love  of  life.    8.  That  confidanoa  in  the  redemptive  Provi- 


70  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

dence  that  is  over  us  is  the  only  security  for  a  happy  life.  The  voice  of  Provi- 
dence to  every  man  is,  not  only  "  Do  thyself  no  harm  ";  but  free  thyself  from  all 
anxious  cares,  and  trust  in  the  love  and  guidance  of  the  great  Father  King. 
(Homiliat.)  Di$gu$t  with  life: — The  connection  of  our  text  with  preceding  and 
following  verses,  and  its  perfect  harmony  with  the  design  of  the  wise  man,  which 
was  to  decry  the  world  and  its  pleasures,  and  by  his  own  experience  to  undeceive 
such  as  made  idols  of  them,  authorize  us  to  consider  the  words  as  proceeding  from 
the  mouth  of  Solomon  himself,  expressive  of  his  own  sentiments  and  not  those  of 
others,  and  what  he  thought  after  his  reconversion,  and  not  what  his  opinion  was 
during  his  dissipation.     I.  On  this  principle  we  will  first  bid  the  text  of  skvebal 

FALSE  UEANIKGS,  WHICH  IT  MAT   SEEM  AT  FIRST   SIGHT  TO  COUNTENANCE;  for  aS  there 

is  a  disgust  with  the  world,  and  a  contempt  of  life,  which  wisdom  Inspires,  so 
there  is  a  hatred  of  the  world,  that  ariseth  from  evil  dispositions.  1.  We  may 
hate  life  because  we  are  melancholy.  Only  he  whose  ideas  are  disconcerted  by  a 
dark  and  gloomy  temper  can  say  fully  and  without  qualification,  "  I  hate  life." 
To  attribute  such  a  disposition  to  the  wise  man  is  to  insult  the  Holy  Spirit  who 
animated  him.  2.  Some  are  disgusted  with  life  from  a  principle  of  misanthropy. 
What  is  a  misanthrope,  or  a  hater  of  mankind?  He  is  a  man  who  avoids  society 
only  to  free  himself  from  the  trouble  of  being  useful  to  it.  He  is  a  man  who 
considers  his  neighbours  only  on  the  side  of  their  defects,  not  knowing  the  art 
of  combining  their  virtues  with  their  vices,  and  of  rendering  the  imperfections  of 
other  people  tolerable  by  reflecting  on  his  own.  What  a  society  would  that  bo 
which  should  be  composed  of  people  without  charity,  without  patience,  without 
condescension  I  My  text  doth  not  inculcate  such  sentiments  as  these.  The  wise 
man  had  met  with  a  great  many  disagreeable  events  in  society  which  had  given 
him  a  great  deal  of  pain,  but,  far  from  being  driven  out  of  it,  he  continued  to 
reside  in  the  world,  and  to  amend  and  improve  it  by  his  wise  counsel  and  good 
example.  3.  Sometimes  a  spirit  of  discontent  produces  disgust  with  the  world, 
and  contempt  of  life.  To  hear  the  people  I  mean,  one  would  think  it  was  impos- 
sible that  this  world  should  be  governed  by  a  wise  being,  because,  forsooth,  they 
are  doomed  with  the  rest  of  mankind  to  live  in  a  valley  of  trouble.  But  who 
art  thou,  thou  miserable  man,  to  conceive  ideas  so  false,  and  to  form  opinions  so 
rash  I  4.  We  are  sometimes  disgusted  with  the  world  through  an  excess  of 
fondness  for  the  world,  and  hate  life  through  an  over- valuation  of  it.  Man  enter* 
the  world  as  an  enchanted  place.  While  the  charm  lasts,  the  man  I  speak  of 
is  in  raptures,  and  thinks  he  hath  found  the  supreme  good.  He  imagines  that 
riches  have  no  wings,  that  splendid  fortune  hath  no  reverse,  that  the  great  have 
no  caprice,  that  friends  have  no  levity,  that  health  and  youth  are  eternal;  but  as 
it  is  not  long  before  he  recovers  his  senses,  he  becomes  disgusted  with  the  world 
in  the  same  proportion  as  he  had  been  infatuated  with  it,  and  his  hatred  of  life  is 
exactly  as  extravagant  as  his  love  of  it  had  been.  5.  It  is  not  in  any  of  these 
senses  that  the  wise  man  saith,  "  I  hated  life."  He  would  have  us  understand 
that  the  earth  hath  more  thorns  than  flowers — that  our  condition  here,  though 
incomparably  better  than  we  deserve,  is,  however,  inadequate  to  our  just  and 
constitutional  desires — that  our  inconveniences  in  this  life  would  seem  intolerable 
unless  we  were  wise  enough  to  direct  them  to  the  same  end  that  God  proposed 
by  exposing  us  to  suffer  them — in  a  word,  that  nothing  but  hope  in  a  future 
state  formed  on  another  plan  can  render  the  disorders  of  this  world  tolerable.  So 
much  may  serve  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the  wise  man.  II.  Let  us  now  proceed 
TO  JUSTIFY  THE  SENSE  GIVEN.  The  phantoms  that  seduced  Solomon  during  his 
dissipation  may  be  reduced  to  two  classes.  The  first  suppose  in  the  dissipated 
man  very  little  knowledge,  and  very  little  taste;  and  it  is  astonishing  that  a  man 
so  eminently  endowed  with  knowledge  could  set  his  heart  upon  them.  The  second 
may  more  easily  impose  on  an  enlightened  and  generous  mind.  I  put  these  into 
three  classes.  In  the  first  I  put  the  advantages  of  science — in  the  second  the 
pleasures  of  friendship — in  the  third  the  privileges,  I  mean  the  temporal  privileges, 
of  virtue  and  heroism.  I  will  endeavour  to  unmask  these  three  figures,  and  to 
prove  that  the  very  dispositions  which  should  contribute  most  to  the  pleasure 
of  life,  mental  abilities,  tenderness  of  heart,  rectitude  and  delicacy  of  conscience, 
are  actually  dispositions  which  contribute  most  of  all  to  embitter  life.  1.  If  ever 
possessions  could  make  man  happy,  Solomon  must  certainly  have  been  the 
happiest  of  mankind.  Imagine  the  most  proper  and  the  most  effectual  means  of 
acquiring  knowledge,  joined  to  an  avidity  to  obtain  it,  both  were  united  in  the 
person  of  this  prince.     Now  what  saith  this  great  man  concerning  science?    Ha 


CHAP.  11.]  ECCLESIASTES.  71 

ackcowledgeth  indeed  that  it  was  preferable  to  ignorance,  the  wise  man's  eyea, 
saith  he,  are  in  his  head,  that  is,  a  man  of  education  is  in  possession  of  soma 
prudential  maxims  to  regulate  his  life,  whereas  an  illiterate  man  walketh  in  dark- 
ness; but  yet  saith  he,  "  it  happeneth  even  to  me,  as  it  happcneth  to  the  fool, 
and  why  was  I  then  wise?"     (1)  Observe  first  the  little  progress  made  in  science 
by  those  who  pursue  it  to  the  highest  pitch.     As  they  advance  in  this  immense 
field   they   discover,  shall  I  say  new   extents,  or  new   abysses,   which  they  can 
never  fathom.     The  more  they  nourish  themselves   with   this  rich   pasture,  the 
more  keen  do  their  appetites  become.     (2)  Remark  next  the  little  justice  done  in 
the  world  to  such  as  excel  most  in  science.     2.  The  second  disposition,  which 
seems  as  if  it  would  contribute  much  to  the  pleasure  of  life,  but  which  often 
embitters  it,  ifi  tenderness  of  heart.     It  is  clear  by  the  writings  of  Solomon,  and 
more  so  by  the  history  of  his  life,  that  his  heart  was  very  accessible  to  this  kind 
of   pleasure.     How   often   doth   he   write   encomiums   on   faithful   friends    (Prov. 
xvii.  17;  xviii.  24).     But  where  is  this  friend  who  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother? 
"Where  is  this  friend  who  loveth  at  all  times?    What  an  airy  phantom  is  human 
friendship  I     3.  If  anything  seem  capable  to  render  life  agreeable,  and  if  anything 
in  general  render  it  disagreeable,  it  is  rectitude,  and  delicacy  of  conscience.     I 
know   Solomon  seems  here  to  contradict  himself,  and  the  author  of  the  Book 
of    Proverbs    seems    to   refute    the    author    of    the   Book    of    Ecclesiastes.     The 
author  of  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  informs  us  that  virtue  is  generally  useless  and 
sometimes  hurtful   in  this  world;  but  according  to  the  author  of  the  Book  of 
Proverbs  virtue  is  most  useful  in  this  world.     How  shall  we  reconcile  these  things? 
To  say,  as  some  do,  that  the  author  of  Proverbs  speaks  of  the  spiritual  rewards  ol 
virtue,  and  the  author  of  Ecolesiastea  of  the  temporal  state  of  it,  is  to  cut  the 
knot  instead  of  untying  it.     Of  many   solutions  there  is  one  that  bids  fair  to 
remove  the  difBculty;  that  is,  that  when  the  author  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs  make* 
temporal  advantages  of  the  rewards  of  virtue,  he  speaka  of  some  rare  periods  of 
society,  whereas  the  author  of  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  describes  the  common 
general  state  of  things.     Perhaps  the  former  refers  to  the  happy  time  in  which 
the  example  of  the  piety  of  David  being  yet  recent,  and  the  prosperity  of  his 
successor  not  having  then  infected  either  the  heart  of  the  king  or  the  morals  of 
his  subjects,  reputation,  riches  and  honours  were  bestowed  on  good  men;  but  the 
second,  probably,  speaks  of  what  came  to  pass  soon  after.     In  the  first  period 
life  was  amiable,  and  living  in  the  world  delicious;  but  of  the  second  the  wise 
man  saith,  "  I  hated  life  because  the  work  that  is  wrought  under  the  sun  is 
grievous  unto  me."    'To  which  of  the  two  periods  doth  the  age  in  which  we  live 
belong?    Judge  by  the  description  given  by  the  Preacher,  as  he  calls  himself. 
Then  mankind  were  ungrateful,  the  public  did  not  remember  the  benefits  conferred 
on  them  by  individuals,  and  their  services  were  unrewarded  (Eccles.  ix.  14,  15). 
Then  courtiers  mean  and  ungrateful  basely  forsook  their  old  master,  and  paid 
their  court  to  the  heir  apparent  (Eccles.  iv.  15).    Then  the  strong  oppressed  the 
weak  (Eccles.  iv.  1).    Then  the  courts  of  justice  were  corrupt  (Eccles.  iii.  16).    Such 
is  the  idea  the  wise  man  gives  us  of  the  world.     Yet  these  vain  and  precarious 
objects,  this  world  so  proper  to  inspire  a  rational  mind  with  disgust,  this  life  so 
proper  to  excite  hatred  in  such  as  know  what  is  worthy  of  esteem,  this  is  that 
which  hath  always  fascinated,  end  which  yet  continues  to  fascinate  the  bulk  of 
mankind.      (/.  Saurin.)     Life  with  and  without  Ood: — Contrast  this  verdict  of 
the  Preacher  with  that  calm,  clear,  victorious  utterance  of  the  great  apostle,  ring- 
ing like  a  clarion,  as  he  utters  the  words,  "  Lay  hold  on  the  life  that  is  life 
indeed,"  and  you  will  have  the  subject  of  my  sermon — life  without  God,  and  life 
with  God — the  misery  and  disappointment  of  the  one,  the  fulness  and  satisfaction 
of  the  other;  the  one  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit,  the  other  life  which  is  life 
indeed.     I.  Let  us  look  at  un  without  God.    Let  me  frankly  acknowledge  that 
there  are  some  things  in  life  even  without  God  which  are  pleasant,  and  delightful 
and  beautiful.    First  of  all  we  begin  life  as  little  children,  and  to  children  the 
next  pleasure  is  quite  enough  to  make  life  worth  living ;  their  little  hearts  are  not 
troubled  with  the  deep  problems  of  life,  and  God  forbid  they  should  be.     And  then 
I  do  not  deny  that  there  is  some  real  satisfaction  and  pleasiure,  as  every  one 
knows,  in  all  healthy  activity.    Then,  too,  no  one  can  doubt  that  there  is  very  much 
that  is  very  beautiful  in  human  love.   Some  young  people  in  the  golden  days  of  their 
early  married  life,  when  love  is  very  beautiful,  and  real,  and  fresh,  bright  as 
a  spring  morning,  may  be  tempted  to  think  that  is  enough.     "  We  want  no  other 
Uf*t  this  satisfies  us."     Now,  I  admit  of  this  freely  and  frankly;  but  oh,  it  does 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «. 


not  settle  the  question.     The  question  comes  back,  "  Does  it  satisfy?"     There 
are  very  many  indications  in  this  present  day  that  the  world  is  finding  out  what 
this  old  preacher  found  out,  that  life  without  God  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  the 
spirit.     Let  me  just  give  you  one  of  them.      Have  you  ever  noticed  the   very 
remarkable  fact  that  much  of  our  higher  poetry  is  unutterably  sad?     Take,  for 
example,  the  poems  of  Matthew  Arnold:  they  are  Greek  Ln  perfection  of  form  and 
in  their  faultless  beauty,  but  how  sad  they  are  I     That  deep  sadness  that  lay  over 
the  world  of  which   he  so  pathetically   sings   broods  like  a  cloud  over  his   own 
poetry.     And  when  you  come  to  examine  the  reason  why  he  so  depresses  you, 
the  answer  is  because  there  is  no  living  personal  God  in  it — it  is  the  loss  of  God 
which  explains  it  all.     Do  not  misunderstand  me.     I  am  not  imagining  that  life  is 
to  be  lived  solely   with  religious   aims   and  religious  objects.     I   do  not   take  a 
narrow  view,  I  trust,  of  human  life.     God  has  given  us  various  and  ample  powers, 
and  each  one  of  them  has  to  find  its  own  appropriate  satisfaction.      I   do  not 
condemn  any  of  the  generous  ambitions  of  youth.     I  would  not  even  forbid  the 
less  noble  ambitions  of  life  so  long  as  they  are  kept  subordinate  to  the  will  of 
God.     Let  a  man  earn  knowledge  or  fame,  or  distinction,  or  wealth,  or  influence, 
and  if  he  earn  them  honestly,  well;  but  I  do  desire  to  impress  upon  you  this 
one  lesson — that  it  does  not  matter  what  the  end  you  set  before  yourselves  in 
life  may  be,  whether  it  be  pleasure,  or  intellectual  eminence,  or  wealth,  if  you 
leave  God  out  it  will  so  disappoint  you,  miserably  disappoint  you,  and  you  will 
have  a  time,  in  yoiu:  own  experience,  when  you  will  turn  from  it  with  the  muttered 
ourse,  "  All  ia  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit."     II.  Let  ds  ask  what  life  with 
God  means.     **  Lay  hold  on  the  life  which  is  life  indeed."     Shall  I  tell  you  what 
it  is?     "  This  is  life  eternal  to  know  Thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ, 
whom  Thou  hast  sent."     Those  are  the  words  of  Jesus:   that  is  Christ's  own 
definition  of  the  life  indeed — to  know  God,  the  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom 
He  hath  sent.     No  man  requires  demonstration  that  this  is  life  indeed.    It  needs 
none  :  the  mere  statement  of  the  truth  is  its  proof.     If  there  be  an  eternal  and 
infinite  God  on  whom  I  depend  for  all  things,  if  He  has  created  me  and  loves 
me  with  unspeakable  love,  if  He  has  spent  all  the  riches  of  His  love  to  redeem 
me  from  sin,  if  I  am  to  live  with  Him  through  eternity  a  life  removed  from  all 
the  conditions  of  time  and  space — then,  of  all  the  self-evident  propositions  you  can 
put  into  words,  this  is  the  most  self-evident  and  certain,  that  I  am  created  and 
redeemed  solely  to  find  my  life  in  God,  I  am  too  great  to  find  my  life  in  anything 
less  than  God.     Ah,  *'  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life,  he  that  hath  not  the  Son 
hath  not  life."     This  is  the  life  indeed.     And  now  you  see  the  meaning  of  what 
we  are  so  apt  to  call  the  mystery  of  sorrow,  the  mystery  of  pain.     The  other  day 
I  was  reading  the  diary  of  a  life  which  in  many  respects  is  most  instructive  and 
pathetic.     It  was  the  story  of  a  man  who  had  had  unusual  prosperity,  and  in 
looking  through  this  diary  I  came  across  these  words :  "  God  has  broken  silence 
with  me."     Great  crushing  sorrow  had  fallen  on  him,  and  that  man   who  had 
lived  many  years  in  the  sunshine  of  prosperity  without  God,  without  ever  speaking 
of  God  or  hearing  God  speaking  to  him,  suddenly  in  the  darkness  awoke  to  the 
fact  that  God  was  near  to  him,  and  that  God  had  come  to  him  in  the  great  trouble 
of  his  life;  and  then  he  wrote  these  words,  "  God  has  broken  silence  with  me." 
Ah,  life  indeed  1     That  is  its  designation.     I  do  not  say  it  will  not  have  its  troubles, 
its  disappointments,  perhaps  even  its  failures;  but  the  troubles  and  disappoint- 
ments of  that  life  as  little  affect  it  as  the  storms  that  sweep  across  the  Atlantic 
touch  the  deep  calm  of  the  ocean  beneath.     It  is  life  indeed  1     Nothing  disturbs 
its  central  peace,  for  it  is  founded  upon  God.     And  then,  when  the  end  comes — 
as  it  will  come  to  us  all — and  friends  stand  round  the  bed,  and  the  last  farewells 
are  spoken,  and  the  eyes  are  closed  in  death,  and  we  make  the  last  journey  to 
that  "  bourne  from  which  no  traveller  returns,"  and  our  feet  touch  the  waters 
of  the  cold  river — in  that  supreme  and  awful  hour  will  the  life  indeed  fill  us 
then?     Listen!     The  man  who  wrote  these  words,  "  Lay  hold  of  the  life  which 
is  life  indeed,"  tells  us  what  he  felt  on  the  verge  of  eternity :  *'  I  am  now  ready 
to  be  offered."     (G.  S.  Barrett,  D.D.) 

Yen.  18,  19.  Yea,  I  hatad  all  my  labour  wMch  I  had  taken  under  the  sun: 
1»ecause  I  should  leave  it  nnto  the  man  that  shall  be  after  me. — The  dirge  of  the 
dead  hand: — Solomon's  life  was  complete  from  the  naturalistic  standpoint.  He 
•ought  pleasure  with  a  zest  we  should  condemn  as  licence  nowadays,  but  which 
the  spirit  of  those  times  was  accustomed  to  count  lawful,  at  least  for  kings.    And 


CHAP.  II.]  ECCLESIASTES.  73 

more  than  that,  he  gave  himself  to  great  and  imposing  enterprises,  diligently 
seeking  the  welfare  of  his  people  as  well  as  his  own  personal  and  family  aggrandize- 
ment. And  yet  work  upon  an  unspiritual  plane  of  ideas  could  not  altogether 
satisfy  him.  He  had  an  unhappy  forecast  of  pending  changes,  for  Kehoboam  was 
not  an  ideal  youth.  He  already  seems  to  be  hearing  the  cry,  "  The  king  is  dead : 
long  live  the  kingl"  And  how  sick  at  heart  he  feels  as  all  the  signs  seem  to 
show  that  the  new  king  will  be  an  iconoclast,  a  reactionary,  a  fool,  or  at  least 
a  man  who  does  not  think  in  the  same  groove  as  his  predecessor  1  But  this  heart- 
sick pessimism,  like  the  same  temper  everywhere,  was  misjudging.  That  which 
was  ignoble  in  his  work  perished,  and  deserved  to  perish.  His  heart-ache,  as  he 
thought  of  how  much  in  the  schemes  he  had  tried  to  carry  out  would  be  altered 
by  his  successors,  was  relevant  only  to  the  lower  ranges  of  his  work.  But  the 
royal  preacher  was  thinking  not  so  much  of  his  work  as  of  himself.  He  wanted  to 
invest  his  own  dead  hand  with  perpetual  power;  but  that  ia  not  permitted  to  th© 
best  of  the  children  of  men.  Iii  this  lament  we  can  find  traces  of  self-idolatry, 
and  self-idolatry  is  allied  with  contempt  of  our  fellows  and  disbelief  of  the  living 
God.    I.  This  tempeb  bepbesents  the  mood  of  one  who  is  doing  much  of  his 

WOBE    CNDBB    THB    UNWHOLESOME    STIMULUS    OF    PBIDB    AND    AMBITION.      Why    should 

even  Solomon  flatter  himself  that  all  his  works  were  so  perfect  that  they  were 
beyond  the  need  of  modification  and  readjustment?  There  were  wise  men  before 
him,  and  wise  men  were  destined  to  come  after  him,  and  he  had  contemporaries 
who,  if  not  equalling  him  in  the  range  of  his  knowledge,  had  at  least  kept  them- 
selves from  plunging  into  the  same  abysses  of  folly  and  self-indulgence;  and  yet 
the  great  king  was  under  the  impression  that  he  was  probably  the  last  of  the 
sages,  and  that  the  distinguished  race  would  vanish  at  his  own  funeral.  We  know 
now  how  groimdless  his  assumption  was;  for  in  every  age  the  world  has  had  in  it 
men  whose  gifts,  acquisitions,  and  practical  sagacity  have  far  outmatched  those 
of  this  muoh-bepraised  king,  who  was  sybarite  as  well  as  sage,  and  who,  through 
untempered  success,  over-deep  draughts  of  intoxicating  flattery,  and  polygamistio 
animalism,  was  spoiled  into  an  ignoble  old  age.  The  man  who  looks  upon  life 
from  Solomon's  standpoint  has  obviously  set  his  heart  upon  achieving  what  will  be 
an  enduring  monument  of  his  own  reputation,  and,  like  the  Pyramids,  which 
defend  nothing,  shelter  nothing,  protect  nothing,  teach  nothing,  will  immortalize, 
in  an  indestructible  edifice  of  colossal  barrenness,  the  faded  empire  of  a  royal 
mummy.  The  vain  man  wants  to  do  something  that  will  be  sacred  from  the 
hands  of  the  would-be  reformer,  or  it  will  be  no  true  tribute  to  his  infallibility. 
Why  should  posterity,  out  of  mere  respect  for  us,  refrain  from  trying  to  improve 
upon  our  work?  Men  are  sent  into  the  world  in  ever  fresh  tides  of  young  hope 
and  vitality  to  help  the  common  good  of  the  race,  and  not  to  be  our  minions  and 
satellites.  Others  may  succeed  in  cultivating  finer  blooms  to  put  into  our  gardens, 
trees  of  nobler  stature  to  adorn  our  parks,  herbs  of  more  medicinal  virtue  to  plant 
in  our  fields :  in  substituting  rarer  and  more  translucent  stones  for  the  crude  and 
unwrought  material  with  which  we  reared  temples  and  palaces.     11.  This  utteb- 

ANOB    IMPLIED    AN    UNGBAOIOUS    DISDAIN    OF    THB    MEN    WHO    WEBB    SHOBTLT    TO    BTBP 

INTO  POWEB.  Of  all  men  in  the  world  Solomon  ought  not  to  have  been  hard 
upon  the  fools.  He  had  not  uniformly  set  the  wisest  example  in  his  own  person, 
and  the  luxurious  harems  he  had  acclimatized  upon  Jewish  soil  were  not  likely  to 
be  schools  of  the  sublimest  philosophy  and  breeding-places  of  the  most  stalwart 
virtue.  And  in  a  lukewarm  and  unspiritual  state  of  society  an  evil  prophecy  of 
this  sort  always  tends  to  fulfil  itself.  Not  to  trust  those  who  are  around  us,  and 
who  expect  to  take  up  our  work,  is  just  the  way  to  corrupt  and  demoralize  them. 
The  effect  is  the  same  as  that  produced  by  the  suspicious  head  of  a  household  who 
keeps  every  cheap  trifle  under  lock  and  key.  The  mistrust  of  posterity  is,  perhaps, 
a  meaner  and  a  more  wicked  thing  than  the  mistrust  of  our  contemporaries,  for 
posterity  cannot  speak  for  itself  and  lift  up  its  voice  in  protest  against  this  imjust 
and  wholesale  condemnation.  We  do  our  utmost  to  imperil  our  own  work,  when 
we  Msume  that  no  one  will  be  fit  to  carry  it  on  after  the  sceptre  has  fallen  from 
our  lifeless  grasp.  III.  This  tempeb  of  soul  implies  a  gloomy  view  of  thb 
FUTUEB  OF  THE  HUMAN  BACB.  The  wise  man  lacked  faith  in  humanity  and  its 
unknown  possibUities,  lacked  that  faith  which  it  was  the  specific  intention  of  the 
promise  made  to  his  forefathers  to  produce.  To  his  own  complacent  estimate  it 
seemed  that  the  race  had  touched  the  high-water  mark  of  intelligence  and  char- 
acter in  himself,  and  that  now  the  inevitable  decline  must  begin.  How  inferior 
in  faith  to  Samuel,  and  Elijah,  and  Elisha,  who  nurtured  schools  for  the  future 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

prophets,  and  who,  in  spite  of  the  stern  work  they  had  to  do,  turned  an  undespair- 
ing  outlook  upon  the  future.  Jesus  and  His  apostles  expected  unbroken  files  of 
sowers  and  reapers  to  co-operate  with  each  other  and  to  carry  on  the  victorious 
work  of  the  kingdom  to  the  end  of  time.  The  Church  could  not  fail,  although 
the  gates  of  hell  might  send  forth  red-hot  torrents  of  rage  and  opposition;  and  the 
lineage  of  godly  and  discerning  workers  would  never  be  cut  oS  root  and  branch, 
like  the  house  of  Eli.  If  we  think,  and  speak,  and  act  as  though  future  workers 
would  spring  up  and  worthily  carry  on  our  modest  beginnings,  unborn  and  ungrown 
generations  will  respond  to  our  confidence,  and  we  shall  not  lack  men  to  stand 
before  the  Lord  in  our  room  for  ever.  The  man  is  both  an  atheist  and  a  hater 
of  his  kind  who  asserts  that  the  world  is  moving  backward  into  the  abyss  of 
barbarism  and  folly.  IV.  This  temper  indicates  a  deep  and  ominods  lack  op 
EELiGious  FAITH.  He  who  speaks  in  any  such  strain  has  for  the  time  being  lost 
faith  in  the  providential  sovereignty  of  God.  There  is  a  touch  of  Manichseism  in 
this  heart-sick  pessimism.  It  sees  a  mere  Puck  installed  over  the  imiverse  and 
clothed  with  infinite  attributes,  satisfying  his  soul  with  mischief,  and  encouraging 
the  fools  who  make  havoc  with  the  achievements  of  the  wise.  All  such  vapour inga 
show  that  there  is  a  heathen  or  an  infidel  half  in  our  personalities,  sadly  needing 
to  be  exorcised  so  that  we  may  become  sane,  and  useful,  and  happy  men.  Faith 
in  God  is  one  with  the  gift  of  prophecy ;  and  if  this  royal  preacher  had  always 
stirred  up  the  gift  which  was  in  him,  he  would  have  felt  how  all  that  was  best 
in  his  work  would  be  preserved  through  apparent  decline  and  reaction,  till  at  last 
one  wiser  and  greater  than  Solomon  had  appeared,  to  gather  up  into  His  plans  all 
the  true  and  unselfish  work  of  the  past,  and  to  fulfil  the  fair  and  holy  dreams  of 
the  world's  ardent  youth.     V.  This  unhappy,  coerosive  temper  may  eat  into  our 

HEARTS,  NOT  SO  MUCH  BECAUSE  WE  REPUDIATE  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  GOD'S  PROVIDENTIAL 
SOVEREIGNTY,    BUT    BECAUSE    WE    ARE    NOT    LIVING    AND    WORKING    IN    HIGH    HARMONY 

WITH  His  counsels.  In  catering  so  lavishly  for  his  own  lusts  and  luxuries,  this 
king  was  doing  his  own  will  and  work,  rather  than  God's,  and  it  may  have  been 
the  appointed  penalty  of  his  ornate  selfishness  that  fools  should  make  havoc  of  his 
accomplished  dreams  just  as  soon  as  he  had  passed  away.  He  speaks  of  parks, 
pleasure  gardens,  fountains,  artificial  lakes,  palace  orchestras,  fortune  making, 
personal  enrichment,  material  aggression.  It  is  true  there  was  a  point  at  which 
he  became  patriotic,  and  sought  his  people's  prosperity;  but  that  seems  to  have 
been  his  second  thought  rather  than  his  first.  And  this  policy  of  self-aggrandize- 
ment was  identified  with  foreign  marriages  and  heathen  coalitions,  which  had 
Buch  a  demoralizing  effect  upon  his  own  successors  and  the  nation  at  large,  and 
which  prepared  the  way  for  the  schisms  and  tragic  apostasies  of  the  coming  times. 
If  we  cherish  no  higher  views  of  life,  we  cannot  fairly  count  upon  the  good  offices 
of  Divine  Providence  in  protecting  our  enterprise  from  the  pranks  of  fools.  What 
right  has  that  man  to  look  for  the  enduring  blessing  of  God  who  chooses  his 
tasks  in  selfishness  and  pride?  Let  our  work  be  holy,  unselfish,  spiritual,  and  God 
will  accept  it  as  a  sacrifice  for  Himself,  and  preserve  it  in  the  unknown  future 
from  violation;  for  the  sons  of  light,  seen  by  the  seer  of  Patmos,  who  compaso 
the  divine  altar  in  heaven,  hover  in  their  strong  ministries  about  every  altar  upon 
earth  where  lies  the  accepted  oblation  of  unselfish  toil.     {Thomas  G.  Selby.) 

Vers.  24-26.  There  is  nothing  better  for  a  man,  than  that  he  should  eat  and 
drink,  and  that  he  should  make  his  soul  enjoy  good  in  his  labour. — The  simple  joys 
of  godly  industry: — We  are  not  to  regard  these  words  as  at  all  akin  to  the  utter- 
ance of  the  baser  Epicureanism,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  diel" 
We  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  Jewish  philosopher,  looking  around  him,  and  find- 
ing all  to  be  "  vanity  and  feeding  on  wind,"  concludes  that  the  best  thing  a  man 
can  do,  under  the  circumstances,  is  to  give  himself  up  to  a  life  of  sensuous  enjoy- 
ment. This  cannot  possibly  be  his  meaning  here;  for  he  has  already  shown  the 
emptiness  of  a  life  of  sensuous  gratification,  and  he  has  also  recorded  it  as  his 
conviction  that  "  wisdom  is  better  than  folly."  Moreover,  the  words  themselves 
do  not  point  to  mere  idle  self-indulgence;  for  they  speak  of  a  man's  "  enjoying 
good  in  his  labour."  Ecclesiastes  seems  to  have  before  his  mind  a  life  in  which 
hearty  and  honest  toil  is  blended  with  a  contented  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  toil. 
In  the  maxim,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die,"  eating  and  drinking 
stand  for  all  kinds  of  sensuous  gratification,  and  even  of  sensual  excess.  But  here, 
to  "  eat  and  drink  "  seems  to  stand  rather  for  the  simpler  forms  of  living,  as 
contrasted  with  luxurious  and  excessive  self-indulgence.     That  this  is  the  meaning 


CHAP.  II.]  ECCLESIASTES.  75 

of  Ecclesiastes  here  is  further  evident  from  the  manner  in  which  he  goes  on  to 
speak  of  the  conditions  of  this  contented  and  cheerful  enjoyment  of  life.  "  This 
also  I  saw,  that  it  is  from  the  hand  of  God."  This  introduction  of  the  thought  of 
God  is  itself  sufficient  to  show  that  Ecclesiastes  is  not  here  speaking  as  a  sensualist, 
or  as  a  mere  pleasure-seeker.  Amidst  the  many  anomalies  of  life,  Ecclesiastes 
clings  to  the  assurance  that  there  is  a  moral  government  of  God  in  this  world. 
There  are  indeed  perplexing  problems  in  relation  to  this  moral  government,  which 
he  felt  he  could  not  solve,  and  which  led  him  to  look  forward  to  a  world  beyond 
death  where  the  dealings  of  God  with  men  would  be  completed  and  vindicated. 
But  still,  looking  at  the  broad  facts  of  human  life,  and  excluding  cases  apparently 
exceptional  and  perplexing,  he  saw  that  God  does  make  a  distinction,  even  here 
and  now,  between  the  "  sinner  "  and  the  "  man  who  pleaseth  Him."  The  virtuous 
and  godly  man  has  an  advantage,  even  in  this  world,  over  the  wicked.  He  receives 
from  God  a  "  wisdom  and  knowledge  "  which  are  associated  with  "  joy."  He 
finds  a  pleasure  in  his  work,  and  is  contented  to  eat  the  simple  fruits  of  his  toil. 
He  may  be  a  poor  man,  labouring  for  daily  bread;  and  yet  he  may  receive  from 
God  this  gift  of  thankful  enjoyment.  Whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  Ecclesiastes 
eaw  that  the  "  sinner  " — the  man  who  has  no  thought  of  God's  commandments 
— may  "  gather  together  "  and  "  heap  up  "  riches,  and  yet  have  no  heart  to 
enjoy  his  own  wealth.  Now,  the  lesson  which  Ecclesiastes  here  sets  before  us  is 
one  of  which  we  all  need  to  be  continually  reminded.  Patent  as  the  fact  may  be 
to  us  that  the  higher  happiness  of  life  is  far  more  closely  associated  with  unanxious 
labour,  simple  habits,  and  cheerful  contentment,  than  with  wealth  or  luxury,  we 
are  all  more  or  less  apt  to  live  in  forgetfulness  of  it.  The  social  atmosphere  which 
we  breathe  is  too  feverish  and  restless.  We  are  apt  to  lose  the  blessings  of  to-day 
through  over-anxiety  about  the  morrow.  We  are  apt  to  miss  the  enjoyment  which 
God  has  put  for  us  into  the  simple,  common  blessings  of  life,  through  our  eager 
pursuit  of  something  more  which  may  not  really  be  anything  better.  It  might  be 
a  desirable  thing  for  some  men  who  are  spoiling  their  lives  through  selfish  ambition 
or  sordid  Mammonism,  to  sit  for  a  little  while  even  at  the  feet  of  Epicurus  I 
But  far  better  for  all  of  us  to  sit  at  the  feet  of  Christ.  All  that  was  really  true 
and  valuable  in  the  higher  Epicureanism  is  to  be  foimd,  in  a  more  exalted  form, 
in  Christianity.  It  does  not  bid  us  proudly  trample  on  either  pleasure  or  pain; 
but  it  bids  us  cultivate  an  inner  peace  and  strength  which  shall  prevent  us  from 
becoming  the  mere  victims  and  slaves  of  circumstance.  Without  despising  any 
"  creature  of  God,"  it  nevertheless  teaches  us  to  estimate  things  according  to  their 
relative  importance.  And  if  only  our  hearts  were  set  more  steadfastly  on  higher 
things,  if  only  we  were  more  bent  on  "  pleasing  God,"  we  would  be  the  better 
able  to  "  eat  and  drink  and  enjoy  good  in  our  labom*  " — to  enjoy  with  a  mora 
serene  and  contented  spirit  the  simple,  ordinary  blessings  which  are  common  to 
humanity.     (T.  C.  Finlaynon.) 

Ver.  26.  For  God  giveth  to  a  man  that  is  good  in  His  sight. — True  goodness: — 
I.  He  who  18  GOOD  BEFORE  GoD  IS  GOOD.     1.  A  man  may  be  good  in  his  own 

esteem,  and  yet  not  be  really  so.  The  way  in  which  we  sometimes  mistake  our- 
selves is  altogether  pitiable.  2.  A  man  may  be  good  in  the  estimate  of  society, 
and  yet  not  be  really  so.  Dr.  Bushnell  relates  how  he  was  much  struck  by  the 
remark  of  an  elderly  gentleman  touching  hero-worship  :  "  From  the  moment  of 
my  leaving  college  to  this  present  hoiu'  I  have  been  gradually  losing  my  respect 
for  great  names."  3.  A  man  may  be  accepted  as  good  by  the  Church,  and  yet 
not  be  really  so.  The  diamond  fields  of  South  Africa  produce  large  numbers  of 
diamonds  whose  yellow  colour  lessens  immensely  the  value  of  the  gem,  and  rogues 
have  hit  on  an  ingenious  method  for  the  falsification  of  these  jewels;  they  are  put 
into  some  chemical  solution,  and  for  a  while  after  the  bath  the  yellow  diamond 
appears  perfectly  white,  deceiving  the  very  elect.  Character  also  is  capable  of 
falsification;  we  may  appear  to  ourselves  and  to  others  brighter  and  costlier  than 
we  intrinsically  are.  4.  But  they  who  are  good  before  God  are  good.  He  who 
has  the  testimony  that  he  pleases  God  needs  no  more.  II.  Who  is  thus  good 
BEFORE  God?  Who  is  this  man,  this  woman,  this  child?  The  goodness  that  is 
good  before  God  is  the  goodness  that  God  inspires,  and  that  He  maintains  in  our 
heart  and  life  by  His  Holy  Spirit.  Whatever  is  truly  good  is  made  so  by  its 
motive,  its  principle,  its  aim;  and  he  who  is  truly  good  acts  from  the  purest 
motive,  obeys  the  loftiest  rule,  aspires  to  the  supremest  end.  Well  then,  the 
purest  motive  is  the  love  of  God ;  the  loftiest  rule  is  the  will  of  God ;  the  supremest 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  laoAf.  n. 

end  IB  the  glory  of  God.  In  a  word,  the  essence  of  goodness  is  godliness;  and 
where  there  is  no  godliness  there  is  no  goodness  in  the  deep  scriptural  signification 
of  that  word.  But  the  goodness  that  comes  from  God,  that  lives  through  Him, 
that  gives,  acts,  sufiers,  hopes  for  His  name's  sake — that  is  goodness  indeed. 
(W.  L.  Watkinaon.)  Wisdom,  and  knowledge,  and  joy. — Joy  in  religion: — I  wish 
to  call  your  attention  to  the  last  gift  here  mentioned — joy.  To  have  goodness 
is  by  many  supposed  to  inherit  grief  in  proportion.  The  bestowment  of  wisdom 
and  knowledge  is  considered  to  carry  with  it  the  addition  of  many  troubles.  The 
text  teUs  us  that  God  gives  to  those  who  have  found  favoiu:  in  His  sight  "  wisdom 
and  knowledge  " — *'  joy,"  or  the  sense  of  enjoyment,  the  pleasant  appreciation 
of  the  delights  of  true  wisdom  and  knowledge,  is  added  to  counteract  and  enliven 
the  weariness  and  depression  which  ever  accompany  the  possession  of  great  learn- 
ing. Joy  comes  after,  not  before,  wisdom  and  knowledge — as  we  have  it  in  the 
text.  It  is  the  rapturous  outcome  of  acquired  wisdom — the  balance  given,  the 
beauty  bestowed,  the  relish  awarded  to  dissipate  the  despondent  gloom  which  is 
too  often  the  result  of  mental  activity.  Now,  what  is  true  in  secular  things  is 
clearly  and  even  more  true  in  spiritual  matters.  When  Christ  is  made  to  ub 
wisdom  and  true  knowledge  He  gives  the  soul  joy — His  joy ;  and  the  real  Chrifltian 
not  only  rejoices  in  the  Lord,  but  he  will  rejoice  in  every  good  thing  which  the 
Lord  his  God  hath  given  unto  him.  He  will  have  a  joyous,  buoyant,  glad  nature, 
exulting  in  God's  favour,  and  opening  his  mouth  to  sing  and  laugh  and  be  merry; 
and  in  this  and  other  ways  he  will  strive  to  show  forth  his  Lord's  praises  before 
the  world.  There  are  some  who  are  wont  to  urge  that  the  Christian  believer  must 
necessarily,  from  the  condition  of  things,  be  a  shrinking,  grave,  and  even  melan- 
choly being;  that  in  bearing,  and  oast  of  countenance,  and  conduct  he  must  b© 
the  very  reverse  of  a  joyous,  light-hearted,  laughter-loving  creature  of  the  world. 
With  his  own  sins,  past  and  present,  to  mourn  over,  the  ever-recurring  short- 
comings of  duty,  the  never-ending  slips  of  temper,  the  coldness  of  feeling  and  the 
too  slow  approach  of  the  new  life  to  the  fixed  standard  of  that  perfection  which  is 
the  Father's  in  heaven,  how  can  that  man,  it  is  often  asked,  be  otherwise  than 
tearful  in  word  and  look?  Truly  this  is  all  wrong,  producing  results  of  a  most 
painful  kind,  and  life  runs  with  slow,  unvaried,  saddening  sound,  till  all  presented 
to  the  eye  or  ear  fills  the  lone  soul  with  misery,  and  grief,  and  fear.  I  believe  that 
this  is  a  true  picture  of  some  who,  being  morbidly  and  ghastly  grief -struck  by 
some  deep  and  immedicable  woimd,  are  ever  looking  with  melancholy  eyes  upon 
the  night  side  of  things  until  the  sense  of  present  evils  never  ceases  to  annoy 
them.  Fretful,  feverish,  gloomy,  excusing  nothing  and  accusing  every  one,  the 
tired  brain  never  gets  relief  from  the  heavy  heart.  Now  this  ought  not  so  to  be  in 
the  Christian  character,  and  when  they  exist  the  most  strenuous  exertions  ought 
to  be  made,  the  most  determined  efforts  of  the  will,  to  get  rid  of  them.  He  who 
made  us  made  us  capable  of  joy.  It  is  a  holy  necessity  of  man's  nature.  If  God 
had  meant  us  to  be  always  grave,  and  serious,  and  down-looking,  He  might  have 
constituted  ufl  bo  that  we  could  have  been  nothing  else :  He  would  not  have 
chosen  as  the  emblem  and  image  of  His  chief  est  blessing,  even  the  blessing  of 
redeeming  love,  the  glad  symbol  of  the  festive  scene,  that  His  Son  would  give 
us  "  beauty  for  ashes,  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  and  the  garment  of  praise  for 
the  spirit  of  heaviness."  The  truly  Christian  mind,  filled  with  the  love  of  the 
Saviour,  will  sanctify  everything  lawful  by  the  presence  of  a  holy,  kindly  feeling, 
and  will  derive  benefit  from  such  allowance,  consciously  or  lonconsciously.  But 
the  indulgence  of  our  susceptibilities  to  pleasurable  impressions  is  itself  an  end 
which,  in  due  mode  and  measiu*e.  Christian  men  may  seek  and  the  happy  God  of 
love  not  disapprove.  God  giveth  joy.  He  not  only  re-bestows  the  gift  in  Christ, 
but  He  made  us  originally  susceptible  of  the  keenest  enjoyment.  The  gift  Is  to  be 
cherished;  the  susceptibility  is  to  be  encouraged  and  strengthened;  but  it  is  most 
important  that  a  cheerful  and  chastened  exercise  of  the  gift  should  vindicate  the 
joyfulness  of  saints,  and  present  a  safe  and  suitable  example  to  the  world.  One 
of  the  strongest  prejudices  felt  against  religion  is  because  of  its  supposed  gloomy 
character.  Those  who  are  destitute  of  a  religious  spirit  can  find  little  or  no  enjoy- 
ment in  religious  occupation,  and  are  naturally  disposed  to  think  that  others  must 
be  like  themselves.  It  has  been  too  often  the  fault  or  the  misfortune  of  Christians 
to  confirm  this  erroneous  impression;  and  it  behoves  them,  by  every  lawful  method, 
to  endeavour  to  remove  it.  If  we  are  Christ's,  let  us  pray  and  strive  that  our 
religion  may  be  one  of  sunshine — a  religion  of  happiness,  a  rejoioing  religion. 
(O.  H.  Oonnott  Mji). 


CHAP.  111.]  ECCLESIASTES.  7T 


CHAPTER   in. 

Vbbs.  1-8.  To  everything  there  is  a  seaBon. — Tima  and  sea$on$  in  ih$ 
Church: — The  principle  which  Solomon  asserts,  and  which  is  of  extreme  importance 
in  all  matters  connected  with  our  practical  life  in  this  world,  ia  also  of  equal 
importance  in  religious  matters.  It  is  true  of  religion  as  of  all  other  things,  that 
in  it  too  there  is  a  time  for  all  things,  a  time  to  be  merry  and  a  time  to  be  sad; 
and  moreover  that  true  wisdom  consists  in  regulating  these  times,  not  in  leaving 
them  to  take  their  chance  (so  to  speak),  but  in  fixing  seasons  and  periods  as  aids 
to  the  various  religious  feelings.  Let  me  then  bring  under  jour  notice  a  few  points 
illustrative  of  the  method  which  the  Church  adopts,  a  method  which  is  the  carrying 
into  religion  the  principle  of  the  text,  cutting  out  our  time,  allotting  to  each 
portion  its  proper  work,  and  so  economizing  the  whole  and  guarding  against  wasta 
and  misuse.  The  first  instance  I  shall  take  will  be  that  of  omr  observance  of  th« 
Sunday.  I  ask  myself — why  is  this  day  set  apart  as  it  is?  and  looking  upon  it 
not  merely  as  a  day  of  animal  rest,  but  as  a  day  of  religious  service,  the  reply  ii 
ready,  that  although  men  ought  to  serve  God  every  day,  yet  they  are  more  likely 
to  remember  their  duty  if  a  special  day  be  set  apart  for  the  purpose;  the  Simday, 
in  fact,  iiB  a  great  practical  call  to  worship  God;  the  most  thoughtless  person 
cannot  fail  to  have  the  duty  of  worship  brought  before  him;  no  man  can  by  possi- 
bility live  in  this  country,  and  not  know  that  prayer  and  praise  are  a  duty;  few 
men  can  have  failed  to  have  heard  of  Christ's  Sacraments,  however  much  they 
may  have  neglected  them.  The  great  truth  also  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord, 
the  great  truth  upon  which  all  our  own  hopes  of  a  resurrection  depend,  how 
completely  and  powerfully  is  that  preached  by  this  same  institution  1  for  Sunday 
ia  emphatically  the  feast  of  Christ's  Besurrection.  It  in  in  strict  accordance  with 
this  principle  that  the  Church  has  attached  a  peculiar  solemnity  to  the  Friday. 
As  Easter  Day  throws  a  light  of  joy  upon  all  the  Sundays  in  the  year,  so  is  il 
deemed  right  that  the  awful  event  of  Good  Friday  should  throw  a  shade  of 
sadness  upon  all  other  Fridays ;  accordingly  you  will  find  the  Friday  marked  in  th« 
Prayer-book  as  a  day  of  fasting  and  abstinence.  Is  this  a  vain  rule,  a  relic  o£ 
Popery,  a  remnant  of  the  Dark  Ages?  I  think  that  sober,  thoughtful  Christians 
will  not  say  so ;  for  indeed  there  is  nothing  which  will  tend  so  much  to  Christianiza 
the  mind,  if  I  may  so  speak,  as  to  meditate  upon  the  Passion  of  the  Lord  Christ. 
On  the  same  principle  we  have  certain  days  set  apart  for  the  commemoration  ol 
saints.  The  first  founders  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  those  to  whose  zeal  and 
faithfulness  we  owe  the  preservation  of  the  precious  deposit  of  faith,  are  men 
to  be  kept  ever  in  our  minds  as  the  great  champions  of  God's  noble  army,  whose 
faith  we  may  well  follow.  It  may  be  said  that  every  Christian  will  have  a  grateful 
sense  of  the  debt  he  owes  to  the  apostles  and  martyrs  of  Christ;  yes,  but  the 
question  is  whether  the  debt  will  not  be  discharged  more  pimctually  and  mora 
completely,  if  the  work  be  arranged  upon  system,  if  a  day  be  set  apart  for  con- 
sideration of  the  character  and  works  of  this  apostle,  and  another  for  that ;  in  fact, 
if  a  person  throws  himself  into  the  Church  system  and  follows  her  mode  ol 
commemorating  the  saints,  is  it  not  to  be  expected  that  he  will  take  a  mora 
complete  view  of  the  various  characters  and  excellences  of  the  apostles,  than  a 
man  who  acknowledged  their  excellence  in  general,  but  does  not  thus  study  them 
in  detail?  Take  the  Ember  weeks  as  another  example  of  the  same  principle.  It 
is  desirable  that  God's  blessing  should  be  invoked  by  the  Church  at  large  upon 
those  who  are  ordained  to  the  ministry,  and  upon  whose  faith  and  pure  conversa- 
tion so  much  of  the  prosperity  of  the  Church  depends;  how  can  this  great  end 
be  best  secured?  by  appointing  to  the  work  its  proper  time.  Once  more,  take  tha 
round  of  great  festivals,  which,  beginning  with  Advent,  terminate  in  Trinity 
Sunday.  You  cannot  have  failed  to  observe  the  manner  in  which  the  round  of 
feasts  brings  before  us  all  the  great  Christian  doctrines;  how  the  Church,  preparing 
at  first  for  the  advent  of  Christ,  exhibits  Him  to  us  as  a  babe  in  swaddling-clothes, 
then  carries  us  up  to  His  betrayal  and  death.  His  burial,  His  rising  again,  His 
ascension  into  heaven,  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  then  exhibits  to  us 
the  full  mystery  of  Godhead,  the  incomprehensible  Three  Persons  in  One  God. 
Lastly,  I  will  take  as  an  example  of  the  Church  system  the  season  of  Lent.  Its 
meaning  may  be  briefly  stated  thus,  it  is  the  season  of  penitence.  Season  of 
panitenoe?  a  person  may  say,  ought  not  all  seasons  to  be  seasons  of  penitence?! 


78  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in. 


Truly;  but  as  there  is  a  time  for  all  things,  so  has  penitence  its  special  tinie;  and 
the  Church  requires  of  us  that  for  forty  days  before  the  Passion  of  Christ,  we 
should  meditate  upon  and  grieve  over  the  sins  which  caused  His  death.  I  think  I 
need  not  say  much  to  convince  you  of  the  wisdom  of  this  appointment;  if  you 
were  perfect,  like  the  angels,  you  would  not  require  such  a  season;  there  is  no 
change  of  season  in  heaven,  because  the  blessed  spirits  around  God's  throne 
have  but  one  occupation,  and  that  is  to  sing  His  praise;  but  in  like  manner 
"  there  is  no  night  there,"  because,  being  freed  from  the  burden  of  the  flesh,  there 
is  to  them  no  weariness;  and  just  as  in  this  world  night  is  necessary  for  us, 
which  has  no  existence  in  heaven,  so  on  earth  we  may  find  help  to  our  souls  from 
those  aids  to  oiu-  infirmity,  which  the  Church  on  earth  requires,  but  which  the 
Church  triumphant  knows  not.  (B-p.  Harvey  Goodwin.)  The  realities  of  life  (with 
ver.  10): — There  are  many  falsehoods  written  over  the  ashes  of  the  dead;  but 
none  more  flagrant  and  profane  than  that  inscribed  on  the  monument  erected 
in  Westminster  Abbey,  by  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Queensberry,  to  the  memory 
of  the  poet  Gay.    It  was  written  by  Gay  himself,  and  reads  thus — 

*'  Life  is  a  jest,  and  all  things  show  it; 
I  thought  so  once,  but  now  I  know  it." 

What  a  miserable  estimate  of  the  grand  existence  of  maa  on  earth  I  What  a  gross 
misrepresentation  of  the  lessons  taught  by  God's  works  and  ways  I  What  a  libel 
on  the  momentous  revelations  of  the  future  world  I  What  a  noble  answer  to 
Gay's  wretched  falsehood  Longfellow  supplies  in  his  "  Psalm  of  Life  "  1  How  many 
souls  have  been  stirred  to  action  by  its  trumpet-call !  How  many  true  and  brave 
lives  have  been  lived  in  response  to  its  appeal  I  I.  The  eealities  of  life  sdr- 
BOtJND  us  ALL.  There  are  the  realities  of  your  calling;  the  duties  connected  with 
it,  which  you  feel  must  be  discharged  in  the  most  efficient  manner  possible;  the 
responsibilities  attaching  to  it,  which  perhaps  in  several  ways  are  heavy;  the 
temptations  to  swerve  from  the  line  of  rectitude,  and  practise  that  which  is  mean 
and  sinful;  the  worry  and  anxiety  arising  out  of  the  keenness  of  competition,  the 
sharp  dealing  and  fraud  of  your  fellow-men,  and  the  uncertainties  of  all  secular 
life.  We  are  not  to  be  slothful  in  our  secular  pursuits;  if  we  are,  we  may  as 
well  give  them  up  altogether;  yet,  at  the  same  time,  we  should  see  that  we  have 
them  all  in  subordination  to  our  spiritual  interests,  and  the  life  to  come.  Often 
the  realities  of  life  thicken  around  men  while  they  are  destitute  of  all  preparation. 
They  have  failed  to  exercise  forethought — neglected  to  make  provision  for  the 
future.  All  previous  periods  of  life  have  seen  them  unfaithful  to  themselves, 
to  their  opportunities,  to  their  calling.  You  can  never  redeem  what  you  have 
lost;  but  you  may  avoid  losing  more.  It  is  of  no  use  bemoaning  the  past.  ''  Let 
the  dead  past  bury  its  deadl"  At  once  embrace  the  opportunities  of  the  "  living 
present."  Forget  the  things  which  are  behind,  and  reach  towards  the  things 
which  are  before.     II.  Hearken  to  the  word  of  counsel,  as  to  the  way  in 

WHICH   YOU   should   MEET  THE   REALITIES   OF  LIFE  AND   TURN   THEM  TO    GOOD   ACCOUNT. 

Cultivate  earnestness  of  character.  History  furnishes  us  with  some  rare  instances 
of  earnest  purpose  and  endeavour — vigorous  grappling  with  the  realities  of  life, 
that  should  inspire  us  with  enthusiasm.  "I  am  doing  a  great  work,"  said 
Nehemiah,  while  rebuilding  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  "  so  that  I  cannot  come 
down."  "  This  one  thing  I  do,"  exclaims  the  Apostle  Paul.  Minutius  Aldus,  a 
famous  printer  at  Venice  in  the  sixteenth  century,  had  this  significant  inscription 
placed  over  the  door  of  his  office — "  Whoever  thou  art,  Aldus  entreats  thee  again 
and  again,  if  thou  hast  business  with  him,  to  conclude  it  briefly,  and  hasten  thy 
departure:  unless,  like  Hercules  to  the  weary  Atlas,  thou  come  to  put  thy 
shoulder  to  the  work,  then  will  there  ever  be  sufficient  occupation  for  thee  and 
all  others  who  may  come."  In  the  diary  of  Dr.  Chalmers,  under  the  date  of 
March  12th,  1812,  there  occurs  this  entry — "  I  am  reading  the  life  of  Dr. 
Doddridge,  and  am  greatly  struck  with  the  quantity  of  business  which  he  put 
through  his  hands.  0  God,  impress  upon  me  the  value  of  time,  and  give  regula- 
tion to  all  my  thoughts  and  to  all  my  movements.  May  I  be  strong  in  faith, 
instant  in  prayer,  high  in  my  sense  of  duty,  and  vigorous  in  the  occupation  of  it! 
When  I  detect  myself  in  unprofitable  reverie,  let  me  make  an  instant  transition 
from  dreaming  to  doing."  I  think  it  was  Sir  James  Mackintosh  who  said  that 
whenever  he  died,  he  should  die  with  a  host  of  unaccomplished  purposes  and 
unfinished  plans  in  his  brain.  So  every  earnest  man  will  leave  behind  him  many 
a  half-finished,  and  even  many  an  unattempted  work.     Nevertheless,  with  a  true 


CHAP.  III.]  ECCLESIASTES.  79 

and  earnest  heart  we  may  complete  some  things — we  may  weave  the  threads  of 
life  into  a  fabric  of  varied  use  and  beauty — and,  like  David  of  old,  serve  our 
generation  by  the  will  of  God  before  we  fall  on  sleep,  and  are  laid  among  our 
fathers.  Once  more,  nothing  will  so  help  you  to  deal  with  the  realities  of  life 
ae  true  religion.  Do  you  possess  it,  and  are  you  living  imder  its  influence? 
(TF.  Waltera.)  The  fall  of  the  leaf: — At  no  period  of  the  year  are  the  sunsets 
■o  varied  and  beautiful  as  in  autumn.  The  many-coloured  woods  of  the  year's 
eventide  correspond  to  the  many-coloured  clouds  of  the  simset  sky;  and  as  the 
heavens  burst  into  their  brightest  hues,  and  exhibit  their  loveliest  transfigurations 
when  the  daylight  is  fading  into  the  gloom  of  night,  so  the  year  unfolds  its  richest 
tints  and  its  fairest  charms  when  it  is  about  to  sink  into  the  darkness  and  desola- 
tion of  winter.  The  beauty  of  the  autumnal  tint«  is  commonly  supposed  to 
be  confined  to  the  fading  foliage  of  the  trees.  This  is  indeed  the  most  obvious 
feature  of  the  season — that  which  appeals  to  every  eye,  and  reads  its  lesson  to 
every  heart.  But  nature  here,  as  everywhere  else,  loves  to  reproduce  in  her 
smallest  things  the  peculiarities  of  her  greatest.  It  was  a  beautiful  myth,  created 
by  the  glowing  imagination  of  the  Greek  poets,  that  the  great  god  Pan,  the 
impersonation  of  nature,  wedded  the  nymph  Echo;  so  that  every  note  which  he 
blew  from  his  pipe  of  reeds  awakened  a  harmonious  response  in  her  tender 
bosom.  Most  truly  does  this  bright  fancy  represent  the  real  design  of  nature, 
according  to  which  we  hear  on  every  hand  some  curious  reverberation  of  some 
familiar  soimd,  and  see  all  things  delighting  to  wear  each  other's  robes.  The 
fading  trees  pipe  their  many-coloured  music  aloft  on  the  calm  blue  October  air — 
for  the  chromatic  scale  is  the  harmonious  counterpart  of  the  musical — and  the 
lowly  plants  that  grow  beneath  their  shadow  dance  to  the  music.  The  weeds  by 
the  wayside  are  gifted  with  a  beauty  in  the  decline  of  life  equal  to  that  of  the 
proudest  oaks  &nd  beeches.  Each  season  partakes  to  some  extent  of  the  char- 
acteristics of  all  the  other  seasons,  and  shares  in  all  the  varied  beauties  of  the 
year.  Thus  we  find  an  autumn  in  each  spring  in  the  death  of  the  primroses 
and  lilies,  and  a  harvest  in  each  summer  in  the  ripe  hay-fields;  and  every  one 
has  noticed  that  the  sky  of  September  possesses  much  of  the  fickleness  of  spring 
in  the  rapid  change  of  its  clouds  and  the  variableness  of  its  weather.  Very 
strikingly  is  this  mutual  repetition  by  the  seasons  of  each  other's  characteristio 
features  seen  in  the  resemblance  between  the  tints  of  the  woods  in  spring  and  in 
autimm.  The  first  leaves  of  the  oak  expand  from  the  bud  in  a  pale  tender 
crimson;  the  yoimg  leaves  of  the  maple  tree,  and  all  the  leaves  that  appear  on 
a  maple  stump,  are  of  a  remarkable  copper  colotir;  the  immature  foliage  of  the 
hazel  and  alder  is  marked  by  a  dark  purple  tinge,  singularly  rich  and  velvety- 
looking.  Not  more  varied  is  the  tinting  of  the  autumnal  woods  than  that  of  the 
spring  woods.  And  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  colour  into  which  any  tree 
fades  in  autumn  is  the  same  as  it  wears  when  it  bursts  the  cerements  of  spring, 
and  imfolds  to  the  stmny  air.  Its  birth  is  a  prophecy  of  its  death,  and  its  death 
of  its  birth.  Nature's  cradles  have  not  more  of  beginning  in  them  than  of 
ending;  and  nature's  graves  have  not  more  of  ending  in  them  than  of  beginning. 
No  one  can  take  a  walk  in  the  melancholy  woodland  in  the  calm  October  days 
without  being  deeply  impressed  by  the  thought  of  the  great  waste  of  beauty  and 
creative  skill  seen  in  the  faded  leaves  which  rustle  beneath  his  feet.  Take  up 
and  examine  one  of  these  leaves  attentively,  and  you  are  astonished  at  the  wealth 
of  ingenuity  displayed  in  it.  It  is  a  miracle  of  design,  elaborately  formed  and 
richly  coloured — in  reality  more  precious  than  any  jewel;  and  yet  it  is  dropped 
oft  the  bough  ae  if  it  had  no  value,  and  rots  away  imheeded  in  the  depths  of  the 
forest.  Myriads  of  similar  gems  are  heaped  beneath  the  leafless  trees,  to  moulder 
away  in  the  rains  of  November.  It  saddens  us  to  think  of  this  continual  lavish 
production  and  careless  discarding  of  forms  of  beauty  and  wonder,  which  we  see 
everywhere  throughout  nature.  Could  not  the  foliage  be  so  contrived  as  to 
remain  permanently  on  the  trees,  and  only  suffer  such  a  periodical  change  as  the 
evergreen  ivy  imdergoes?  Must  the  web  of  natm-e's  fairest  embroidery  be  taken 
down  every  year,  and  every  year  woven  back  again  to  its  old  completeness  and 
beauty?  Is  nature  waiting  for  some  great  compensation,  as  Penelope  of  old 
waited  for  her  absent  husband,  when  she  unravelled  each  evening  the  work  of 
each  day,  and  thus  deluded  her  eager  lovers  with  vain  promises?  Yes  I  she 
weaves  and  unweaves  her  web  of  loveliness  each  season — not  in  order  to  mock 
us  with  delusive  hopes,  but  to  wean  us  from  all  false  loves,  and  teach  us  to  wait 
and  prepare  for  the  true  love  of  our  souls,  which  is  found,  not  in  the  passing 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 


things  of  earth,  but  in  the  abiding  realities  of  heaven.     This  is  the  secret  of  all 
her    lavish    wastefulness.     For    this    she    perpetually    sacrifices    and    perpetually 
renews  her  beauty;  for  this  she  countis  all  her  most  precious  things  but  as  dross. 
By  the  pathos  of  her  autumn  loveliness  she  is  appealing  to  all  that  is  deepest 
and   truest    in    our    spiritual   nature;    and    through    her   fading    flowers    and   her 
withering  grass,  and  all  her  fleeting  glories,  ehe  is  speaking  to  us  words  of  eternal 
life,  whereby  our  souls  may  be  enriched  and  beautified  for  ever.     (H.  Macmillan, 
D.D.)     The  clock  of  destiny: — "  Destiny  1"     What  a  word  I     Orthographically  it 
is  composed  of  seven  parts,  as  if,  in  the  use  of  the  sacred  number,  "  seven,"  it 
was  intended,  by  its  very  structure,  to  express,  to  all  ages,  its  profound  signifi- 
cance— viz.    sufiBciency,    fulness,    completion,    perfection!     Such,    indeed,    is    the 
sweeping  import  of  the   word   "  destiny."     It   means   a   state  of  things  that   is 
complete,  perfect.     It  signifies   that   this  world — with  its  empires  that  rise  and 
fall — its  marvellous  incidents  that  are  enacted  by  human  wisdom,  courage,  strife 
and    ambition — its   generations   that   are   born,   that   live   and   die — its   joys   and 
sorrows — its  shifting  seasons  and  rolling  years  :   this  earth,  as  it  now  exists,  is 
under  a  management  that  is  suflBcient,  perfect  I — a  management  of  which  it  can 
be  said:  "  A  sparrow  cannot  fall  to  the  ground  without  notice  " — that  is,  without 
permission  and  purpose  1     Destiny  has  a  "Clock" — "a  huge  timepiece"  which 
measures  off  the  events  in  this  fixed  order  of  things.     On  its  dial-plate  is  inscribed 
this  world-wide  truth  :    "To  everything  there  is  a  season  and  a  time  to  every 
purpose  under  the  heaven."     By   what   "Hand"   is  this   "Clock   of  Destiny" 
wound  up  and  managed  in  all  its  complicated  machinery?     In  other  words  :  What 
is  the  superintending  power  of  this  fixed  order  of  things?     One   answer  says  : 
"  Fatalism  makes  the  pendulum  oscillate,  fitting  cog  to  cog  and  wheel  to  wheel, 
controlling  all  the  movements  of  the  dial-gnomon."     God  is  here  given  the  go-by, 
while  absolute  necessity  and  fixed,  cold,  unconscious  law  are  delegated  with  all 
power.    Fatalism  annihilates  intelligence  and  free-will  in  the  world's  government. 
It  declares  that  "Everything  from  a  star  to  a  thought;  from  the  growth  of  a 
tree  to  a  spasm  of  sorrow;  from  the  coronation  of  a  king  to  the  falling  of  a  sparrow 
is  connected  with  and  under  the  positive  control  of  molecular  force."     In  short, 
destiny's  timepiece  is  wound  up  and  kept  in  running  order  by  a  "  hand  " — not 
divine  I     The  third   chapter   of  Ecclesiastes   was   written   in   the  interest   of  the 
Divine  Hand  managing  the  "  Clock  of  Destiny  " — in  other  words,  to  teach  the 
glorious    doctrine   of    special    providence.     0    y©   priests    "  of    science    falsely    so 
called,"  ye   prophets   of  the   "  Unknowable,"   ye  "  wise  men  "   who   make  law 
supreme  and  deify  force — let  the  Hebrew  sage  teach  you  a  better  creed  I     Yea,  ye, 
doubters,  ye  of  unbelief,  as  to  the  doctrine  of  special  providence  in  things  great 
and  small — listen  to  this  :  "  God  doethl"  not  fate.     His  acts  "  shall  be  for  ever," 
not  of  short  duration  but  of  eternal  import.     He  is  independent  of  all  contingency 
— the  wicked  cannot  frustrate  the  Almighty's  purposes  :  "  Nothing  can  be  put  to 
it  and  nothing  can  be  taken  from  it."     His  government  is  for  man's  highest  good 
— ^by  each  swing  of  the  pendultun  the  Divine  Father  would  move  the  race  nearer 
to  Himself :  "  And  God  doeth  it  that  they  should  fear  before  Him."     He  is  never 
surprised — nothing  is  new  to  Him,  nothing  old.     He  acts  in  the  eternal  Now. 
All    things — past,    present,    future — are    ever   under   His    all-seeing    eye:    "That 
which  hath  been  is  now,  and  that  which  is  to  be  hath  already  been."     It  is, 
however,  impossible  for  us  now  to  understand  all  about  the  management  of  this 
"  huge  timepiece,"  which  measiures  oft  the  events  great  and  small,  in  the  fixed 
covirse  of  things.     So  says  the  author  of  my  text  in  verse  11 :  "  No  man  can  find 
out  the  work  that  God  maketh  from  the  beginning  to  the  end."     But  this  short- 
sightedness, on  our  part,  is  no  reason  why  we  should  question  the  wisdom  of 
what  is  being  done,  or,  in  any  way,  withhold  our  confidence  and  love  from  God 
as  a  Father — who  is  ever  doing  for  us  "  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we 
ask  or  think."     And,  now,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  "  the  Lord  reigneth  " — that 
the  "  Clock  of  Destiny  "  is  God's  machine,  ever  running  in  the  interest  of  man's 
highest  good — what  should  be  our  daily  conduct  and  highest  ambition?     Let  this 
third  chapter  of  Ecclesiastes  give  us,  in  closing,  an  exhortation,  as  it  has  already 
imparted  to  us  profound  instruction.    In  ver.  12  let  us  read  that  it  is  our  mission 
here  "  to  do  good  " — in  ver.  13,  "  to  enjoy  the  good  of  all  our  labour,"  seeing 
that  this  is  "  the  gift  of  Ood  " — in  vers.  16,  17,  not  to  fret  ourselves  because  of 
eyil-doers,  "  for  God  shall  judge  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  " — ^in  vers.  18-21, 
not  to  be  disheartened  or  over-moiu-nful  because  of  death,  for  though  "  that  which 
befalleth  th«  son*  of  men  befalleth  beasts  " — all  eoming  from  and  going  to  tha 


CBHAP.  111.]  ECCLESIA8TES.  81 


same  place — "dust  ":  yet  "there  is  a  spirit  in  man  that  goeth  upwards."  He 
ifl  immortal,  and  hence  can  say:  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  0  grave,  where 
is  thy  victory?"  Finally,  vers.  22,  "  Wherefore  I  perceive  that  there  is  nothing 
better  than  that  a  man  should  rejoice  in  all  his  works."  Do  good  and  rejoice  in 
that  good — this  is  man's  duty  1  Scatter  simbeams  to  expel  darkness — build  up 
blazing  fires  to  warm  and  cheer  the  cold,  weary  and  worn  1  Be  kind — be  charitable 
— save  your  neighbour  from  tears,  groans,  heartaches  1  Swell  the  refrain  of  merry 
Christmas  carols  I  Ring  out  the  bells  of  New  Tear  greeting  I  "  Eejoice  evei- 
more  J"     (A.  H.  Moment,  D.D.) 

Ver,  2.  A  time  to  be  born,  and  a  time  to  die.— How  to  make  the  moat  of  lift 
(with  chap.  vii.  17) : — The  verse  has  two  parts :  "  There  is  a  time  to  be  born;  and 
a  time  to  die  ";  and  it  seems  as  if  man  had  as  little  control  over  the  one  as  over 
the  other — over  the  day  of  his  death  as  over  the  day  of  his  birth.  These  are  the 
two  milestones  between  which  is  included  the  whole  of  man's  life  on  earth.  Here 
is  no  place  for  free-will.  All  is  blind,  remorseless  destiny.  And  yet  the  corre- 
lative text,  "Why  shouldest  thou  die  before  thy  time?"  seems  to  imply  that  life 
and  death  are  in  a  man's  own  power.  And  in  a  plain  sense  this  also  is  true,  so 
that  the  two  are  only  the  opposite  poles  of  one  great  truth,  which  in  its  com- 
pleteness embraces  a  whole  philosophy  of  life.  That  philosophy  is  summed  up 
in  this  :  That  life  is  a  gift  of  God — a  sacred  gift — to  be  wisely  used  and  soberly 
enjoyed,  and  not  to  be  trifled  with,  nor  thrown  away.  But  life  on  earth  is  not 
immortal :  "  There  is  a  time  to  die."  Nor  is  this  a  harsh  decree.  If  only  the  end 
for  which  life  was  given  be  attained,  man  may  surrender  it,  at  the  last,  not  only 
without  regret,  but  in  perfect  peace.  The  only  thing  he  has  to  fear  is  that  he  be 
called  out  of  life  before  his  time,  with  all  his  plans  vmfulfiUed,  his  hopes 
disappointed,  and  his  great  destiny  unattained.  The  latter  half  of  our  text, 
"  why  shouldest  thou  die  before  thy  time?"  teaches  us  this  practical  lesson : 
That  we  are  to  make  the  most  of  lite  by  a  prudent  economy  of  it — ^not  a  petty 
economy  of  money  (which  is  often  but  the  smallest  element  in  the  total  of  influ- 
ences which  make  up  the  being  that  we  are),  but  an  economy  of  life  itself,  of  all 
the  vital  forces,  of  health  and  reason  and  the  elements  of  happiness.  All  this  is 
embraced  in  the  one  great  word.  Life.  This  is  the  prize  which  the  Creator  offers 
to  every  being  to  whom  He  gives  a  living  body  and  a  reasonable  soul.  "  Why 
shouldest  thou  die  before  thy  time?"  In  one  sense  no  man  can  die  before  his 
time,  for  is  not  the  day  of  death  fixed?  Hath  not  God  appointed  His  bound 
that  he  cannot  pass?  Yet,  in  another  sense,  it  is  quite  possible  to  cut  short  the 
term  of  life.  That  is  the  evident  meaning  here.  By  a  mtm's  "  time  "  is  meant 
the  natural  limit  to  which  one  of  his  vitality  and  strength,  living  a  sober, 
temperate  life,  might  attain.  Anything  short  of  that  may  be  ascribed  to  his  own 
folly  or  guilt.  Thus,  all  will  admit  that  a  man  dies  before  his  time  who  takes  hia 
own  life,  which  he  has  no  more  right  to  take  than  that  of  his  neighbour.  Even 
though  the  existence  that  is  left  to  him  have  to  be  endured  rather  than  enjoyed 
a  man  must  stand  like  a  sentinel  at  his  post,  keeping  watch  through  the  long 
night  hours,  and  waiting  for  the  breaking  of  the  day.  But  the  wretched  suicide 
is  not  the  only  man  who  is  guilty  of  taking  his  own  life.  There  are  other  ways  of 
ending  one's  existence  than  by  violence.  The  drunkard.  The  number  of  those 
who  thus  untimely  perish  is  beyond  all  coimting.  Vice  has  slain  its  thousands, 
and  drunkenness  its  ten  thousands.  And  now  turn  and  look  at  another  picture. 
If  it  be  a  shame  so  to  die,  on  the  other  hand  what  a  glorious  thing  it  is  to  live — 
to  enjoy  a  rational,  intelligent,  and  moral  existence  I  Even  as  a  matter  of  selfish 
calculation,  the  purely  intellectual  enjoyment  of  a  man  of  science  far  transcends 
the  vulgar  delights  of  a  life  of  pleasure.  What  a  life  must  have  been  that  of 
Eepler  or  Galileo  I  Who  would  throw  away  an  existence  that  contains  such 
possibilities  of  knowledge?  Make  it,  then,  your  resolve  to  live  a  life  of  the 
strictest  temperance,  purity  and  virtue,  that  your  days  may  be  long  in  the  land 
which  the  Lord  your  God  giveth  you.  But  this  is  only  half  the  truth  of  my  text. 
"  Why  shouldest  thou  die  before  thy  time?"  But  at  the  last  "  there  is  a  time 
to  die."  0  God,  I  thank  Thee  for  that  wordl  "There  is  a  tune  to  die  I" 
And  religion,  while  it  condemns  the  reckless  throwing  away  of  life,  equally  con- 
demns the  cowardly  clinging  to  life  when  duty  requires  it  to  be  sacrificed.  Dear 
as  life  is,  there  are  things  which  are  a  thousand  times  dearer — truth,  honour, 
justice,  and  liberty,  one's  country  and  religion;  and  it  may  become  a  duty  to 
Marifioe  the  lesser  interest  to  the  greater.    It  does  not  follow  that  a  man  dies 

C 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

before  his  time  because  he  dies  young.     "  That  life  is  long  which  answers  life's 
great   end;"   and  though  one  may  finish  his   course  on   the  very   threshold   of 
manhood,  that  end  may  be  gloriously  fulfilled.     (H.  M.  Field,  D.D.)     A  time  to 
plant,  and  a  time  to  pluck  up  that  which  is  planted. — The  peTiodicitie$  of  the 
religiouB  world: — The  seasons  succeed  each  other,  and  each  has  its  own  uae  and 
purpose.     The  spring  with  its  fresh  loveliness  comes  first  on  the  stage,  and  then, 
after  a  due  interval,  follows  autumn  with  its  sad  decay.     The  sower  takes  posses- 
sion of  the  field  in  the  bright  days  of  April,  and  he  is  the  most  appropriate  figure 
in  the  landscape,  while  he  is  scattering  the  seeds  of  promise  over  the  bare,  brown 
furrows.     He  departs,  and  his  place  is  taken  by  the  reapers,  who  form  a  pleasant 
company  on  the  golden  harvest  field,  and  gather  in  the  sheaves  under  the  bright 
smile  of  the  blue  September  day.     The  time  of  planting  is  associated  with  all  that 
is  fresh  and  animated  and  hopeful.     But  the  time  of  plucking  up  that  which  was 
planted  is  associated   with   failure  and  disappointment,   with   vanity   and  death. 
And  Nature  makes  her  work  of  decay  particularly  unsightly,  in  order  to  force 
its  moral  lesson  more  emphatically  upon  our  notice.    We  cannot  help  feeling  how 
disconsolate  the  apple-tree  looks  after  its  rosy-white  petals  have  fallen  and  when 
the  small  green  fruit  is  setting,  how  dim  the  much  fine  gold  of  the  laburnum 
tresses  become  in  fading,  and  how  the  hawthorn  blossoms  in  their  withering  leave 
a  dirty-brown  stain  upon  the  country  hedges  like  the  parched  bed  of  a  belated 
snow-wreath  that  has  melted  away  beneath  the  summer  sun.    While  we  are  thus 
impressively   reminded   of   the   periodicity  of   Nature,   the   ebb    and   flow   of   her 
seasons  and  productions,  we  can  apply  the  lesson  to  our  human  affairs.    There  are 
periods  in  human  history  that  are  analogous  to  the  season  of  spring  when  we  sow 
and  plant  with  a  bright  enthusiasm   and  a  large  hopefulness.     Our  minds  ara 
ardent  and  vigorous.     Everything  is  fresh  and  full  of  interest.     It  seems  as  if  wa 
had  only  newly  awakened  to  the  beauty  and  glory  of  the  world.     Looking  but 
upon  the  past  we  can  recall  ages  of  creative  genius  when  man  conceived  and 
executed  great  things  in  art  and  literature,  when  every  work  had  on  it  the  hall- 
mark of  original  iuspiration.     Such  an  age  was  that  of  Pericles  in  Greece,  and  of 
Queen  Elizabeth  in  England.     Such  periods  were  times  of  planting,  and  they  had 
all  the  glory  and  freshness  of  spring.     But  they  were  followed  by  ages  in  which  a 
woeful  reaction  of  weariness  and  decay  took  place.     Rules  and  precedents  were 
followed  instead  of  the  fresh  insight,  freedom  and  spontaneity  of  nature;  criticism 
assumed  the  function  of  inspiration;  and  everywhere  might  be  seen  the  slavish 
conventionality  of  exhausted  capacity.     They  were  ages  in  which  whatever  intel- 
lectual energies  men  had  left  to  them  were  expended  in  plucking  up  that  which 
nobler  ages  had  planted.     The  commencement  of  the  Victorian  epoch  was  a  period 
of  remarkable  creative  power,  a  springtime  of  exuberant  mental  fertility.    But  the 
close  of  it  seems  to  be  characterized  by  a  kind  of  listless  decay.     Like  the  fruit- 
tree  that  has  one  season  been  too  productive,  and  must  rest  till  it  recover  and 
accumulate  fresh  stores  of  vitality,  so  this  age  seems  to  be  suffering  from  the 
reaction  of  over-production.     The  largest  proportion  of  our  literature  is  given  up 
to  criticism  or  imitation.     It  is  a  time  to  pluck  up  that  which  was  planted.     And 
the    same   periodicity    that   distinguishes    the    intellectual    also   characterizes    the 
religious  world.     It  has  its  ages  of  faith  and  its  ages  of  doubt;  a  time  to  plant  and 
a  time  to  pluck  up  that  which  was  planted.     We  seem  to  have  reached  at  the 
present  day  a  period  of  listlessness  and  analytical  indifference  in  regard  to  religious 
things.     On  every  side  we  see,  instead  of  a  noble  enthusiasm  in  the  highest  of 
all  studies,  a  carping  finical  criticism  on  the  most  sacred  subjects.    However  much 
we  may  deplore  this  state  of  things,  we  cannot  say  that  it  is  absolutely  evil.     It 
has,  indeed,  a  good  purpose  to  serve.    Winter  periods  are  necessary  in  the  spiritual 
world  as  testing  times,  to  find  out  what  is  merely  superficial  and  transient,  and 
what  is   substantial   and  has  in   it  the  elements  of  endurance.     It   is   a   winter 
desolation  to  make  ready  for  a  spring  of  revival;  and  many  of  its  evils  are  caused 
by   the   quickening   of   new   life.     The   best   thing,   therefore,    to   do   during    the 
disquietude  of  a  time  of  plucking  up  in  the  religious  world  is  to  dwell  much  in 
thought  upon  the   ages  of  faith   when   men  lived  heroic  lives   and  died   blessjed 
deaths  in  the  heartfelt  belief  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.     The  criticism  and 
analysis   of   the   present   time   can   best   be   counteracted   by    the   synthesis    and 
construction  of  a  nobler  time  when  men  created  instead  of  destroyed,  built  up 
instead  of  cast   down,   planted   instead  of  plucked   up   the  springtime  of   divine 
grace.     And  this  synthesis  is  practically  always  possible  to  the  meek  in  spirit  to 
whom  God  will  teach  His  way.     (H.  Macmillan,  D.D.) 


CHAP.  III.]  ECCLESIASTES. 


Vers.  3,  4.  A  time  to  kill,  and  a  time  to  heal. — Spiritual  time$  and  aeasona: — > 

The  work  of  grace  upon  the  soul  may  be  divided  into  two  distinct  operations  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  upon  the  heart;  the  one  is  to  break  down  the  creature  into  nothing, 
ness  and  self-abasement  before  God ;  the  other  is  to  exalt  the  crucified  Jesus  aa 
"  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever  "  upon  the  wreck  and  ruin  of  the  creature.  And  these 
two  lessons  the  blessed  Spirit  writes  with  power  upon  every  quickened  vessel  of  mercy. 

1.  There  is,  then,  "  a  time  to  kill  " — that  is,  there  is  an  appointed  season  in  God's 
eternal  counsels  when  the  sentence  of  death  is  to  be  known  and  felt  in  the  con- 
sciences of  all  His  elect.  That  time  cannot  be  hiorried,  or  delayed.  The  hands  of 
that  clock,  of  which  the  will  of  God  is  the  spring,  and  His  decrees  the  pendulum, 
are  beyond  the  reach  of  human  fingers  to  move  on  or  put  back.  The  killing 
precedes  the  healing,  and  the  breaking  down  goes  before  the  building  up; 
the  elect  weep  before  they  laugh,  and  mourn  before  they  dance.  In  this  track 
does  the  Holy  Spirit  move;  in  this  channel  do  His  blessed  waters  flow.  The  first 
"  time,"  then,  of  which  the  text  speaks  is  that  season  when  the  Holy  Ghost  takes 
them  in  hand  in  order  to  kill  them.  And  how  does  He  kill  them?  By  applying 
with  power  to  their  consciences  the  spirituality  of  God's  holy  law,  and  thus 
bringing  the  sentence  of  death  into  their  souls — the  Spirit  of  God  employing  the 
law    as    a    ministration    of    condemnation    to    cut    up    all    creature-righteousness. 

2.  But  it  is  not  all  killing  work.  If  God  kills  His  people,  it  is  to  make  them 
alive  (1  Sam.  ii.  6);  if  He  wounds  them,  it  is  that  He  may  heal;  if  He  brings 
down,  it  is  that  He  may  lift  up.  There  is,  then,  "  a  time  to  heal."  And  how  is 
that  healing  effected?  By  some  sweet  discovery  of  mercy  to  the  soul,  by  the 
eyes  of  the  understanding  being  enlightened  to  see  Jesus,  and  by  the  Holy  Ghoslj 
raising  up  a  measure  of  faith  in  the  heart  whereby  Christ  is  laid  hold  of,  embraced 
in  the  affections,  testified  to  by  the  Spirit,  and  enthroned  within,  as  "  the  hope 
of  glory."  3.  But  we  pass  on  to  another  time — "  a  time  to  break  down."  This 
implies  that  there  is  a  building  to  be  overthrown.  What  building  is  this?  It  ia 
that  proud  edifice  which  Satan  and  the  flesh  have  combined  to  erect  in  opposition 
to  God,  the  Babel  which  is  built  up  with  bricks  and  lime  to  reach  the  topmost 
heaven.  But  there  is  a  time  in  God's  hand  to  break  down  this  Babel  which  has 
been  set  up  by  the  combined  efforts  of  Satan  and  our  own  hearts.  4.  There  is  "  a 
time  to  build  up."  This  building  up  is  wholly  and  solely  in  Christ,  under  the 
blessed  Spirit's  operations.  But  what  building  up  can  there  be  in  Christ,  except 
the  creature  is  laid  low?  What  has  Jesus  as  an  all-sufficient  Saviour  to  do  with 
one  who  can  stand  in  his  own  strength  and  his  own  righteousness?  5.  But  there 
is  "  a  time  to  weep,  and  a  time  to  laugh;  a  time  to  mourn,  and  a  time  to  dance." 
Does  a  man  only  weep  once  in  his  life?  Does  not  the  time  of  weeping  run,  more 
or  less,  through  a  Christian's  life?  Does  not  mourning  run  parallel  with  his 
existence  in  this  tabernacle  of  clay?  for  "man  is  born  to  trouble  as  the  sparks 
fly  upwards."  Then  "  a  time  to  kill,  and  a  time  to  heal;  a  time  to  break  down, 
and  a  time  to  build  up,"  must  run  parallel  with  a  Christian's  life,  just  as  much 
as  "  a  time  to  weep,  and  a  time  to  laugh;  a  time  to  mourn,  and  a  time  to  dance." 
But  these  times  and  seasons  are  in  the  Father's  hand;  and,  "  what  God  has 
joined  together,  let  no  man  put  asunder."  Never  talk  of  healing  till  you  can 
talk  of  killing;  never  think  of  being  built  up,  until  you  have  been  broken  down; 
never  expect  to  laugh,  until  you  have  been  taught  to  weep;  and  never  hope  to 
dance,  until  you  have  learned  to  mourn.  Such  only  as  are  taught  of  God  can 
enter  into  the  real  experience  of  these  things;  and  into  them,  sooner  or  later, 
each  according  to  his  measure,  does  God  the  Holy  Spirit  lead  all  the  ransomed 
family  of  Zion.  (J.  G,  Philpot.)  A  time  to  weep,  and  a  time  to  laugh. — Amuse- 
menta: — The  play  impulse  is,  I  verily  believe,  as  sacred  in  the  Divine  intention 
as  the  work  impulse.  Indeed,  Dr.  Bushnell  has  undertaken  to  show  how  what 
he  calls  the  state  of  play  is  the  ultimate  state  of  redeemed  and  regenerated 
humanity,  up  to  which  it  climbs  through  previous  discipline  in  the  working  state; 
and  though  in  his  argument  he  has  not  actually  done  so,  yet  I  presume  he  would 
regard  that  prophetic  picture  of  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  wherein 
Zechariah  declares  that  "  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  shall  be  full  of  boys  and  girls 
playing  in  the  streets  thereof  "  as  only  a  poetic  description  of  the  heavenly 
employments  of  children  of  a  larger  growth.  For,  when  we  come  to  look  a  little 
deeper  than  the  surface,  what  do  we  mean  by  play?  Coming  home  at  the  end 
of  the  day,  weary  and  worn  and  fretted,  you  open  the  door  upon  your  little  one 
rolling  and  tumbling  upon  the  floor  with  a  kitten.  It  is  certainly  not  a  very 
classical  nor  a  very  dignified  scene,  and  yet,  somehow,  your  heart  straightway 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 


Boftens  to  it,  and  you  sit  down  and  watch  the  romp  with  a  sense  of  sympathy  and 
refreshment  that  you  have  not  had  through  all  the  dull  and  plodding  day.  Why 
ia  it?  Why,  but  because  after  all  that  is  life  without  effort  or  care  or  burden,  joy 
without  labour  or  rivalry  or  tedium,  bounding  motion  and  bubbling  glee  without 
anxiety  and  without  remorse  1  And  what  is  such  a  life,  disengaged  from  ita 
animal  characteristics  and  ennobled  by  a  spiritual  insight,  but  the  true  idea  of 
heaven,  where,  if  there  be  activity,  there  will  be  no  effort,  but  where  all  that  we 
do  and  are  will  be  the  free  spontaneous  outburst  of  the  overflowing  joy  and 
gladness  that  are  in  us.  I.  Mebb  amdsembnt  ought  not  to  be,  and  cannot 
HEALTHILY  BE,  THB  BND  OF  ANY  LIFE.  We  Speak  of  child-life  as  tho  play  period  of 
a  human  existence.  And  yet,  have  you  never  noticed  that  even  the  child  cannot 
play,  unless  he  has  climbed  up  into  the  sphere  of  play  through  the  toilsome 
vestibule  of  work?  We  see  him  careering  over  the  ground  in  the  wild  joy  of  his 
yoimg  freedom,  climbing  the  trees,  scaling  the  hillsides,  racing  through  the 
fields,  or  gambolling  on  the  grass,  and  we  say,  "  what  glad  s\u:render  to  pure 
impulse  J"  But  do  we  remember  how  he  has  come  to  that  free  command  of 
himself,  his  limbs  and  lungs  and  muscles;  how  he  has  tottered  first  of  all  on  his 
tiny  feet,  and  fallen,  and  risen,  only  to  fall  again;  how  by  slow  gradation*  he  haa 
taught  his  muscles  to  obey  his  will,  and  his  feet  to  do  the  bidding  of  his  thought, 
and  his  hands  to  grasp  and  hold  the  things  he  reaches  after?  Not  without  effort, 
surely,  has  he  come  into  that  larger  freedom  of  the  first  play  state;  and  not 
without  work,  as  his  best  qualification  for  the  really  sacred  privilege  of  amuse- 
ment, has  God  meant  that  any  one  of  us  should  come  to  oiu-  playing  moments  1 
n.  What  abb  the  peinciples  that  ought  to  ebgulatb  cue  amusements?  Those 
principles  are  threefold.  Our  amusements  ought  to  be  genuine,  uinocent  and 
moderate.  1.  Let  me  explain  what  I  mean  by  a  genuine  amusement.  If  amuse- 
ment has,  as  we  have  seen,  a  definite  and  recognizable  place  in  every  healthful 
and  well-ordered  life,  then  we  must  at  least  require  of  it  that  it  shall  honestly 
■erve  its  purpose — that  it  shall  really  and  veritably  recreate,  re-create  us.  Kow, 
viewed  in  this  light,  I  did  not,  e.g.  call  a  ball  a  genuine  amusement.  0\a 
amusements  ought  to  leave  us  fresher  and  brighter  than  they  found  us,  not 
jaded  and  irritable  and  lack-lustre-eyed  when  the  next  day's  duties  roll  back 
upon  us.  And  therefore,  I  do  not  wonder  that  a  great  many  young  persons 
especially,  who  seek  their  amusements  (Heaven  save  the  mark!)  in  such  channels, 
are  constrained  to  "  key  themselves  up  "  to  work  by  the  artificial  means  of 
unhealthy  stimulants.  2.  If  amusement  is  not  something  outside  but  inside  the 
sanctions  of  an  earnest  and  Christian  life,  then  our  amusements  ought  also  to 
be  innocent.  The  concern  of  one  who  is  deciding  the  question  between  amuse- 
ments that  are  innocent  and  those  that  are  not  innocent,  is  with  the  drama  as  he 
actually  and  ordinarily  finds  it;  and  this  includes  the  drama  whether  classio  or 
tragic  or  comic,  or  seminude  and  spectacular;  and  if  any  complain  that  the  Chiu*ch 
of  God  frowns  upon  innocent  amusements,  and  if  it  utters  no  downright  con- 
demnation, at  least  withholds  its  approval  from  innocent  forms  of  amusement, 
let  them  remember  that  it  is  because  ordinarily  those  who  have  onoe  crossed  a 
certain  line  in  this  matter,  no  matter  what  may  be  their  professions  of  decorum 
or  religion,  are  far  too  commonly  wont  to  cast  all  restrictions  utterly  and  absolutely 
behind  them.  For  there  is  in  fact  almost  absolutely  no  pretence  of  discrimination 
in  these  things,  and  persons  of  pure  lives  and  unspotted  name  are  seen,  in  our  day, 
gazing  upon  spectacles  or  hearkening  to  dialogue,  which,  whether  spoken  or  sung, 
ought  to  bring  a  blush  of  shame  to  any  decent  cheek.  8.  But,  let  us  also 
remember,  amusement  may  be  thoroughly  innocent  in  its  nature,  and  yet  very 
easily  be  excessive  or  immoderate  in  its  measiure.  (Bp.  H.  C.  Potter.)  A  Chris- 
tian  view  of  recreation : — Human  life  is  made  up  of  summers  and  winters — it  may 
be,  in  most  cases,  with  a  larger  proportion  of  winters  than  summers,  but  seldom, 
indeed,  without  some  days  of  bright  sunshine  and  joyous  hope.  Each  season,  too, 
ought,  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  to  meet  with  a  fitting  response  in  the  experi- 
ences of  the  soul.  When  the  darkness  is  round  about  our  path,  circumstancee 
all  adverse,  when  sorrow  saddens  the  heart,  or  death  impoverishes  the  life,  then 
is  a  "  time  to  weep."  But  when  the  cloud  is  lifted,  and  the  brightness  of  the 
sunshine  once  more  inspires  us  with  hope  and  fills  us  with  joy;  when  our  enter- 
prises prosper,  and  oiu*  homes  are  scenes  of  love  and  peaceful  happiness;  when 
present  success  not  only  yields  pleasure,  but  gives  the  earnest  of  a  still  richer 
blessing,  then  is  the  "  time  to  laugh."  Both  of  these  seasons  are  of  God.  Am 
He  has  ordained  summer  and  winter  for  the  earth,  so  has  He  ordained  tha(i 


CBAP.  m.]  ECCLE8IA8TES.  85 

human  life  should  have  these  alternating  experiences,  cmd  in  both  alike  we  are 
to  remember  that  we  are  His,  and  even  in  our  lighter  hours  do  all  to  the  glory 
of  God.  There  are  some  to  be  found  who  think  recreation,  even  of  the  mos6 
harmless  character,  a  waste  of  time  which,  if  not  positively  sinful,  b,  at  all 
events,  a  sign  of  spiritual  weakness.  Beasons  in  favour  of  such  a  course  are  not 
difficult  to  seek.  There  is  the  solemn  responsibility  with  which  life  is  invested 
in  virtue  of  the  great  work  to  be  done,  and  the  hindrances  in  face  of  which  it  has 
to  be  prosecuted.  Here,  it  may  be  argued,  is  the  battle  between  good  and  evil, 
prosecuted  under  conditions  so  unequal  that  the  servants  of  God  must  be  bound 
to  give  all  diligence  in  order  to  maintain  His  cause.  With  temptations  so  subtle, 
so  numerous,  so  widespread,  and  so  skilfully  adapted  to  all  varieties  of  taste 
and  circumstance;  with  such  mighty  forces  all  actively  engaged  for  the  dishonour 
of  God  and  ruin  of  human  souls,  there  cannot  be  any  opening  for  mere  enjoyment. 
Nay,  the  very  feeling  is  out  of  harmony  with  all  the  circumstances  of  the  conflict. 
While  souls  are  perishing,  how  can  we  have  the  heart  to  be  glad,  or  find  the  time 
to  enter  even  into  the  most  refined  and  elevating  pleasures  of  social  life?  The 
first  answer  to  this  must  surely  be  that  the  theory  breaks  down  under  the  weight 
of  its  own  conclusions.  It  is  an  impossible  standard  of  duty  which  it  endeavours 
to  set  up,  and  it  collapses  imder  its  own  extravagance.  Here  and  there  a  man 
may  really  detach  himself  from  these  human  interest's,  and  there  may  be  oircum- 
stances  which  mark  him  out  for  a  special  position  in  which  he  is  absorbed  by  the 
one  thought  of  the  deliverance  of  human  souls.  It  may  be  even  that  there  are 
exceptional  times  in  which  like  the  prophet  Jeremiah  the  servant  of  the  Lord 
is  ready  to  cry,  "  Oh,  that  mine  head  were  waters,  and  mine  eyes  a  fountain  of 
tears,  that  I  might  weep  day  and  night  for  the  slain  of  the  daughter  of  my  people  I" 
But  this  cannot  be  the  normal  experience  even  of  the  most  earnest  Christians.  AH 
are  not  prophets;  all  prophets  are  not  Jeremiah;  Jeremiah  was  not  always  in  a 
state  of  mind  like  this;  in  short,  men  must  have  a  different  nature  before  they 
can  attain  to  this  complete  suppression  of  human  sympathies  and  interests.  But 
the  moment  it  ceases  to  be  real  and  becomes  a  mere  piece  of  assumed  Christian 
devotion,  that  moment  it  loses,  not  only  its  power,  but  everything  which  gives  it 
a  religious  quality  at  all.  But  there  is  this  further  objection  to  it.  It  is  not 
proved  to  be  the  best  method  of  securing  the  particular  object  in  view.  In  the 
struggle  against  evil  a  wise  man  will  surely  look  round  and  study  the  defences  by 
which  it  is  sustained.  In  the  attack  on  a  strong  citadel  the  attention  of  the 
skilful  strategist  is  first  directed  to  the  outlying  forts  which  guard  its  approaches. 
The  same  law  applies  to  our  Christian  work.  Individual  souls  are  affected  by 
the  society  to  which  they  belong,  and  the  influence  of  society  must  depend  largely 
upon  the  institutions — including  even  those  which  have  to  do  with  the  amusements 
of  life — which  exist  in  its  midst.  The  perversions  which  mislead  the  minds  of 
men  have  to  be  got  rid  of  before  the  truth  can  reach  them.  In  this  work,  even 
in  a  land  which  calls  itself  Christian,  there  is  need  for  the  ploughshare  before  the 
ground  can  be  made  ready  for  the  scattering  of  the  seed  of  the  kingdom.  The 
argument,  then,  is  twofold.  We  have  to  assert  the  rule  of  Christ  over  all  the 
scenes  of  human  life,  seeking  so  to  purify  its  pleasures  that  they  shall  not  be 
hindrances  to  the  spiritual  life.  But  we  have  also  to  give  a  true  representation 
of  the  Christian  spirit,  and  we  fail  in  this  if  we  convey  the  impression  that  in  our 
religion  there  is  no  time  for  recreation.  Has  not  our  Father  given  us  the  capacity 
for  joy,  and  does  He  not  mean  us  to  profit  by  it?     {J.  O.  Rogers,  B.A.) 

Ver.  6.  A  time  to  cast  away  stones,  and  a  time  to  gather  stones  together.— 
DeciBion  and  perseverance  needed  by  the  Christian: — Perhaps  the  primary  mean- 
ing may  refer  to  the  method  in  which  an  Eastern  husbandman  prepares  to  till  his 
vineyard.  These  vineyards  were  often  cultivated  on  the  steep  sides  of  the  vales, 
and  the  traveller  wonders  to  see  under  what  difficult  circumstances  he  toils, 
gathering  up  the  stones  which  lie  thickly  on  the  ground,  and  carrying  up  soil  and 
building  up  terraces  in  which  to  plant  the  vines.  Here  the  husbandman  finds  a 
season  wherein  he  must  cast  away  stones  and  pebbles,  and  clear  the  soil,  and 
another  time  when  it  is  needful  to  use  these  stones  in  raising  up  the  walls  and 
terraces  of  his  vineyard.  1.  If  we  regard  our  souls  as  possible  vineyards  and 
gardens,  wherein  may  be  grown  "  the  fruits  of  a  good  life,"  to  the  glory  of  God, 
how  must  we  begin?  We  must  east  away  every  obstacle,  we  must  clear  away 
anything  which  stands  in  the  way  and  hinders  us  from  truly  serving  God.  One 
great  obstacle  which  lies  in  the  way  of  many  is  indolence  in  religious  matters. 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

The  old  fable  described  the  vampire  bat,  in  tropical  countries,  as  hovering  abova 
its  victims,  and  drinking  their  life-blood,  whilst  it  soothes  them  to  sleep  on,  by 
fanning  them  with  its  wings  all  the  while.  So  the  devil  soothes  souls  into  a  fatal 
Bleep.  Again,  another  terrible  obstacle  is  when  there  exists  some  favourite  sin, 
Bome  evil  habit.  We  would  give  up  much,  but  this  one  thing  we  cannot  bear 
to  part  with.  Our  soul  is  like  a  captive  bird,  fastened  by  a  string — it  flies  a 
little  way,  and  then  it  is  pulled  back.  But  the  Christian  must  summon  up  his 
courage,  and  with  a  strong  effort  break  the  chain  that  binds  him  down.  Paint 
to  yoiu"self  a  prisoner  seeking  to  escape  from  a  gloomy  dungeon.  He  has  climbed 
up  to  the  window  of  his  cell.  If  only  one  bar  was  removed  from  the  grated 
aperture,  he  could  escape.  Oh,  with  what  determination  he  would  grasp  that  rusty 
bar,  how  he  would  exert  his  utmost  strength.  Freedom,  liberty,  hopes,  all 
before  him,  and  but  one  bar  between.  And  so  with  many  a  soul — one  strong 
eSort,  and  we  might  cut  away  that  which  holds  ua  back.  2.  A  different  picture 
now  rises  before  our  mind's  eye;  as  we  before  painted  to  ourselves  the  busy 
peasants  casting  away  the  stones  to  form  the  good  ground  for  their  vineyard, 
now  we  think  of  them  "  gathering  stones  " — how  they  pile  them  up  in  terraces, 
build  them  up  with  busy  hands.  Perhaps  it  is  the  surrounding  walls,  or  the 
foundations  of  the  wine- vat,  or  the  "  tower  "  of  those  that  watch  the  vineyard, 
that  is  being  raised.  But  whatever  be  the  object  of  those  "  that  gather  stones 
together,"  to  build  a  wall,  or  erect  a  pier,  or  form  a  road,  there  is  implied  toil 
and  patience.  He  who  "  gathers  stones  "  must  stoop,  and  stoop  often.  He  who 
would  grow  in  the  Christian  life  must  be  humble,  and  as  he  who  "  gathers  stones." 
Habits  of  piety,  humility,  and  patient  well-doing  take  much  watchfulness  and 
constant  prayer  ere  they  can  be  formed.  How  slow  is  the  process  of  "  gathering 
together  stones  1"  Yet  it  is  only  by  constant  daily  efforts  that  we  can  build  up 
the  fabric  of  the  Christian  life,  etone  by  stone,  effort  by  effort.  {J.  W. 
Hardman,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  7.  A  time  to  keep  silence. — Silences: — There  is  a  proverb  which  says. 
Speech  is  silvern,  silence  la  golden.  Like  all  proverbs,  this  admits  of  qualification. 
There  is  a  silence  that  means  cowardice,  sulkiness,  and  stupidity;  and  there  is  a 
epeech  that  is  more  precious  than  any  gold,  triumphant  over  error  and  wrong, 
quickening  and  beneficent  as  the  simbeam.  Notice  two  or  three  kinds  of  silences. 
I.  There  is  the  silence  of  emotional  fulness.  It  is  a  physiological  fact  that  great 
emotions  choke  the  utterance.  1.  Great  painful  emotions  do  this  (Matt.  xxii.  12). 
WUl  not  all  the  wicked  who  stand  at  the  bar  of  their  Maker  at  the  last  day  be 
struck  with  this  silence?  Emotions  of  surprise,  remorse,  despair,  will  rush  with 
Buch  tumultuousness  upon  them  as  to  paralyze  all  articulating  power.  2.  Great 
joyous  emotions  do  this.  When  the  father  embraced  his  prodigal  son,  his  heart 
was  so  full  of  joyous  feelings  that  he  could  not  speak.  It  has  been  said  that 
superficial  emotions  chatter,  deep  emotions  are  mute :  there  are  joys  that  are 
unutterable.  II.  There  is  the  silence  of  piods  resignation.  It  is  said  that 
Aaron  held  his  peace,  and  the  psalmist  said,  '*  I  was  dumb  and  opened  not  my 
mouth  because  Thou  didst  it."  This  indeed  is  a  golden  silence:  it  implies 
unbovmded  confidence  in  the  character  and  procedure  of  our  Heavenly  Father.  It 
is  a  loving,  loyal  acquiescence  Ln  the  will  of  Him  who  is  all-loving,  all-wise,  and 
all-good.  This  silence  reveals — 1.  The  highest  reason.  Is  there  a  sublimer  phQo- 
Bophy  than  this?  2.  The  highest  faith.  Faith  in  the  immutable  realities  of  love 
and  right.  III.  There  is  the  silence  of  holy  self-respect.  This  was  the  silence 
which  Christ  displayed  before  His  judges.  He  seemed  to  feel  that  to  speak  to 
Buch  virulently  prejudiced  creatures  woiild  be  a  degradation.  The  man  who  can 
stand  and  listen  to  the  language  of  stolid  ignorance,  venomous  bigotry,  and 
personal  insult  addressed  to  him  in  an  offensive  spirit,  and  offer  no  reply,  exerts 
a  far  greater  power  upon  the  minds  of  his  assailants  than  he  could  by  words, 
however  forceful.  His  silence  reflects  a  moral  majesty,  before  which  the  heart 
of  his  assailants  will  scarcely  fail  to  cower.  (Homiliat.)  A  time  of  war,  and  a 
time  of  peace. — The  Christian  view  of  war: — There  are  those,  among  the  most 
conscientious  of  men,  who  maintain  that  war  is  never  permissible,  that  it  has 
always  the  nature  of  sin.  Among  Englishmen  the  Quakers  have  climg  to  the 
doctrine  of  non-resistance  as  one  of  their  most  distinctive  tenets;  among  modern 
thinkers  Count  Tolstoi  has  restated  it  with  considerable  force.  They  have  based 
their  argument  not  so  much  upon  the  general  tenor  of  Christ's  teaching  as  upon 
misinterpretations  of  isolated  texts — e.  g.  "  Resist  not  evil,"  "  All  they  that  take 
the  sword  shall  perish  with  the  sword."    It  is  to  their  honour  that  they  hav* 


CHAP.  Ill,]  ECCLESIASTES.  8T 

been  consistent  in  their  interpretation  of  such  passages,  often  to  their  own  loss, 
and  have  applied  them  both  to  individual  and  to  national  conduct.  Yet  it  is 
strange  that  they  have  not  seen  how  far  their  argument  carries  them,  and  how 
by  exaggerating  one  counsel  of  the  Gospel  they  have  made  other  of  its  precepts 
of  none  eSect.  Toleration  of  personal  injury,  to  the  point  of  self-effacement,  is 
indeed  enjoined  upon  Christians,  but  only  so  far  as  it  does  not  conflict  with  other 
laws  of  justice  and  the  like.  Non-resistance,  tolerance  of  evil  and  injustice  from 
an  individual,  may  often  be  most  dangerous  to  society,  as  an  encouragement  to 
crime;  and  to  let  an  offender  go  free  may  be  to  do  him  no  kindness,  but  the 
crudest  of  injuries.  As  with  individuals,  so  with  nations.  National  injustice, 
greed,  insolence,  is  to  be  resisted  as  a  danger  to  humanity.  And  those  who  make 
their  appeal  to  isolated  passages  of  Holy  Scripture  may  be  answered  by  other 
considerations.  To  take  one  only,  it  may  justly  be  argued  that  if  it  were  unlawful 
to  wage  war,  as  they  assert,  it  would  be  unlawful  for  the  Christian  to  bear  arms, 
and  that  the  soldier's  calling  would  be  reprobated  in  the  New  Testament.  But  the 
exact  opposite  is  the  case.  The  soldier's  calling  is  treated  as  of  equal  honour  with 
others,  a  vocation  in  which  God  may  be  well  and  truly  served.  The  Christian 
life  is  itself  compared  to  a  warfare,  in  which  the  soldier  of  Christ  m  exhorted  to 
fidelity  by  the  example  of  the  Koman  soldier.  The  soldiers  who  inquire  their  duty 
of  St.  John  the  Baptist  are  not  told  to  forsake  their  calling,  but  to  exercise  it  with 
justice  and  mercy.  And  from  Cornelius,  the  devout  man  whose  prayers  and 
alms  wore  accepted  of  God,  to  St.  Martin  and  General  Gordon,  a  long  line  of 
soldier-saints  bears  eloquent  witness  to  the  fact  that  the  grace  of  God  may  ba 
looked  for,  and  will  bear  fruit,  in  that  vocation  as  in  others.  We  may  even  go 
further,  and  say  that  war  and  the  military  vocation  undoubtedly  develop  in 
nations  and  in  individuals  certain  of  the  simpler  virtues.  It  is  often  through  war, 
as  Mr.  Euskin  has  told  us,  that  "  truth  of  word  and  strength  of  thought  "  are 
learnt  by  nations.  "  Peace  and  the  vices  of  civil  life  only  flourish  together.  We 
talk  of  peace  and  learning,  and  of  peace  and  plenty,  and  of  peace  and  civilization; 
but  I  foimd  that  these  were  not  the  words  which  the  muse  of  history  coupled 
together :  and  that  on  her  lips  the  words  were — peace,  and  sensuality — ^peace,  and 
selfishness — peace,  and  death."  No  less  marked  are  its  bracing  effects  upon  tbe 
individual.  "  On  the  whole,  the  habit  of  living  lightly  hearted  in  daily  presence 
of  death,  always  has  had,  and  always  must  have,  power  both  in  the  making  and 
testing  of  honest  men."  Many  a  man  by  losing  himself  has  found  himself,  and 
through  the  stern  discipline  of  the  soldier's  life  has  gained  the  self-control  which 
otherwise  he  would  have  lost.  In  war  men  have  the  opportunity  of  rising  to 
higher  levels  of  virtue  than  they  would  have  thought  possible  of  attainment. 
From  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  dying  in  agony  on  the  field  of  Zutphen,  and  refusing 
the  water  which  another  seemed  to  need  more,  to  the  trooper  in  Matabeleland 
who  gave  his  horse — and  with  it  his  life — for  a  wounded  comrade,  there  are  count- 
less instances  of  noble  unselfishness  developed  under  the  stress  of  sudden  decision, 
sometimes  in  the  most  unexpected  characters.  Nor,  if  we  be  wise,  shall  we  com- 
plain that  the  cost  is  too  great.  We  cannot  know  that  those  who  have  died  nobly 
would  have  lived  nobly.  And  so  we  cannot  refuse  the  conclusion  that  warfare 
is  not  necessarily  wrong  in  itself;  that  it  is  lawful  "  for  Christian  men,  at  the 
command  of  the  magistrate,  to  wear  weapons  and  to  serve  in  the  wars  ";  that 
war  is  even  in  some  oases  a  gain  in  that  it  tends  to  the  development  of  national 
and  individual  virtues.  But  of  course  when  this  is  conceded  we  are  still  very 
far  from  admitting  that  it  is  ever  to  be  undertaken  "  with  a  light  heart,"  as  the 
French  declared  war  upon  Prussia.  The  amount  of  direct  and  indirect  suffering 
which  it  causes,  immeasurable  as  that  is,  is  not  the  greatest  of  the  evils  which  war 
brings  inevitably  in  its  train.  The  racial  hatreds  which  it  engenders  often  linger 
on  for  scores  of  years,  smouldering  fires  which  a  chance  gust  of  passion  may  easily 
fan  again  into  flame.  Nor  can  we  regard  it  in  any  sense  as  an  appeal  to  the 
Divine  justice,  as  oixr  forefathers  regarded  it.  War  is  infinitely  the  most  wasteful, 
crudest,  and  least  just  way  of  settling  international  quarrels.  And  above  all,  for 
all  its  indirect  gains,  it  is  to  be  avoided  by  Christian  nations  to  the  very  limits  of 
forbearance,  because  it  hinders  the  progress  of  mankind  towards  the  ideals  of 
peace  and  brotherhood  which  the  Incarnation  revealed.  War,  however  just,  is 
an  acknowledgment  that  Christian  methods  and  Christian  love  have  so  far  failed 
to  be  effective.  We  Inquire,  lastly,  on  what  conditions  warfare  may  be  pronounced 
justifiable.  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  defines  the  conditions  as  three  in  number — the 
command  of  the  prince,  a  just  cause,  and  a  good  intention.  The  Christian  will 
not  hesitate  to  justify  wars  morally  safeguarded  by  regard  to  these  conditions. 


TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 


And  yet  for  all  that  may  be  said  in  justification  of  warfare,  war  will  ever  remain 
a  thing  grievous  to  the  Christian,  ranking  with  the  famine  and  the  pestilence  as 
scourges  of  God.     Upon  all  Chrietians  there  is  laid  the  supreme  duty  of  striving 
continually  for  peaoa,  and  in  these  days  of  democracy  no  one  is  without  his  share 
of  responsibility  for  national  acts.     Christians  will  not  shrink  from  just  wars;  at 
the  same  time  they  will  denounce  wars  of  aggression  for  material  gain.     They 
will  endeavour  to  emphasize  the  overwhelming  responsibility  of  those  in  whose 
power  it  is  to  declare  war,  and  of  those  who  may  influence  their  decfsion.     They 
will   lose  no   opportimity   of   dissociating   themselves   from   those    who   wantonly 
disturb  the  peace  of  nations,  by  fostering  race-hatreds,  magnifying  disagreements, 
offering  petty  insults,  whether  in  the  columna  of  an  intemperate  Press,  or  in  any 
other    way.      They   will   promote   the  principles   of  arbitration;   for   though   the 
arbitrators  between  nations  are  not  backed  by  force,  and  cannot  compel  submia- 
eion  to  their  decisions,  and  though  long  centuries  may  pass  before  arbitration  can 
supersede  war,  yet  there  is  among  nations  a  growing  desire  to  settle  differences 
by  that  method — an  increasing  disposition  to  submit  to  arbitration,  because  the 
justice  of  the  principle  is  acknowledged.     Above  all,  they  will  not  be  ashamed 
to  assert  their  belief  in  the  eflBcacy  of  prayer  to  the  Lord  mighty  in  battle,  who 
is  also  the  Prince  of  peace,  that  He  would  direct  aright  the  counsels  of  the 
nations,   and   would   give  peace   in  our   time.      Who  can   doubt   that   wars,   in 
Christendom  at  least,  would  soon  become  rare  if  all  Christians  were  continually 
to  pray  from  their  inmost  heart  that  God  would  give  to  all  nations  unity,  peace, 
and  ooncord?     (£>.  H.  Day,  M.A.) 

Vers.  0-11.  What  profit  hatli  lie  that  worketh  in  that  wherein  he  laboorethT 
—Autumn   mu$inga: — ^Autiunn   is   a   time   which   has   its   meaning,   as    well    aa 
its    appropriate    duties.     Its    deep   suggestiveness    is    written    upon    the    sombre 
grandeur  of  its  sunsets,  upon  the  awful  death  with  which  it  smites  the  foliage 
and  blasta  the  flowers,  is  borne  in  upon  us  by  the  dreariness  and  waste  it  spreads 
around.     Its  duty  of  ingathering,  of  estimating  results,  is  written  upon  its  harvests 
and  fruition.     "  The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand,"  it  seems  to  say;  for  it  is  the 
time  of  retribution  and  reward.     The  day  of  autumn  is  an  anticipative  day  of 
judgment,  its  clouds  foreshadowing  heavier  clouds,  and  bidding  us  prepare  to  meet 
that  God  of  whom  it  is  said,  "  Clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  Him,"  etc. 
I.  Thb  DisQUiBTiNa  QUESTION  OF  AUTUMN.     Tet,  after  all  these  useful  thoughts, 
there  comes  to  us,  as  to  Ecclesiastes  in  ver.  9,  the  question  asked  in  every  great 
age,  by  every  great  mind — the  question  which  meet*  us  continually  in  the  life 
and  thought  of  the  present  age:  "  "What  is  the  good?    What  is  the  real  purpose 
of   things?    What   do   they   matter?"     That   is   pre-eminently   the   question   of 
autumn — late  autumn,  not  of  the  falling  corn,  but  of  the  falling  leaf.     Full  as 
our  lives  may  be  of  Interest  and  labour,  there  comes  to  us  from  time  to  time 
the  inevitable  question,  "  What  profit  hath  he  that  worketh  in  that  wherein  he 
laboureth?" — since  we,  too,  must  fade  and  fall.     The  suggestion,   however,   is 
not  merely  that  of  physical  death,  but  of  the  death  of  hope,  the  defeat  of  honest 
purpose,  the  fruitlessnees  of  unselfish  effort.     To  religious  people  what  is  still 
more  unsettling  is  the  failure  of  religious  effort.     We  witness  in  our  time  the 
decay  of  certain  forms  of  piety.     Among  the  lumber  in  the  long  and  dusty  gallery 
of  some  ancestral  hall  you  come  upon  an  old  spinet.     You  take  the  quills  and 
strike  the  Treys :  the  soiinds  that  come  forth  are  unfamiliar,  distant ;  the  music 
is  dreamlike,  weird;  the  instrument  is  spirit-haunted;  there  is  something  reproach- 
ful in  the  faint  melodiousness  of  the  long  untouched  wires.     So  it  is  with  the  old 
hymns,  the  old  forms  of  piety;  for  it  is  never  given  to  one  age  to  reproduce  the 
spirit  of  another  in  the  self-same  forms,     "  I  have  seen  the  travail  which  God 
hath   given  to  the  sons  of   men  to  be  exercised  therewith,"  says   Ecclesiastes 
musingly.    Is  it  all  useless?     Political  enthusiasm,  religious  ardour,  the  strenuous 
labour  of  the  world's  workers,  the  lofty  ideals  and  high  imaginings  of  the  world's 
great  thinkers, — are  they  swept  down   the  stream  of  time  like  rotten  leaves? 
II.   Musing  on  thb  answee.     That  is  the  question  which  the  ancient  Jewish 
thinker  to  whom  we  owe  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  is  turning  over  in  his  naind. 
Ho  does  not  answer  it;  he  muses  upon  it,  and  suggests  consoling  considerations. 
Ym,  indeed  I  Ood  hath  given  to  the  sons  of  men  to  be  exercised  in  travail,  to  be 

"  inured  to  pain, 
To  hardship,  grief,  and  loss." 


CHAP,  ni.]  ECCLESIASTES.  W- 

But  "He  hath  made  everythmg  beautiful  in  its  time:  also  He  hath  set  the 
world  in  their  heart."  So,  with  Ecclesiastes,  let  us  rest  for  a  time  in  this  supreme 
effort  of  nature  to  do  us  pleasure;  in  the  Stoio  thought  that  the  world  is  a 
Divine  system,  a  cosmos  of  order  and  of  beauty,  and  that,  according  to  the 
ancient  faith  of  Israel,  all  things  were  created  "  very  good."  Yet  we  are  not  quite 
satisfied.  Man  is  restless  among  the  beauties  of  the  world  because  his  life  is 
larger,  deeper  than  the  world's.  God  "hath  made  everything  beautiful:  .  .  . 
also  He  hatli  set  the  world  in  their  heart."  What  German  writers  call  the 
Welt-Bchmerz — the  sorrow  of  the  world — is  an  ever-preeent  burden  to  those  whose 
hearts  are  tenderest  and  whose  characters  have  reached  the  highest  levels.  Hence 
Wordsworth,  who  so  revelled  in  the  beauties  of  nature,  was  ever  hearing 

"  Humanity  in  fields  and  groves 
Pipe  solitary  anguish." 

What  Thomas  Hardy  calls  "  the  general  grimnees  of  the  htunan  situation  *'  haa 
been  rather  increased  than  lessened  by  the  discovery  of  our  time,  that  man  haa 
reached  his  present  level  by  means  of  a  terrible  struggle,  lasting  through  countlesa 
millenniums,  and  is  what  he  is  as  much  by  virtue  of  the  pains  he  has  endured  aa 
by  the  perseverance  and  courage  with  which  he  has  set  himself  to  overcome  the 
difficulties  of  his  life.  III.  The  qusstion  of  autumn  answebed.  Ecclesiastes  can 
help  us  no  further;  for  his  "  I  know  that  there  is  no  good  in  them,  but  for  a  man 
to  rejoice,  and  to  do  good  in  his  life,"  probably  means  little  more  than  "  keep  up 
your  heart  and  do  your  best."  Not  even  St.  Paul,  not  even  Christ  Hunselff 
answers  all  our  questions;  but  Christianity  does  give  us  the  certainty  that  all  ia 
well  with  those  who  trust  in  God  and  do  right,  and  the  last  word  of  wisdom  aa 
well  as  of  faith  is,  "All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God." 

"  They  also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait." 

God  is  with  us  as  He  was  with  our  fathers,  and  our  ways  of  serving  Him  are  aa 
acceptable  as  theirs,  if  oiu:  hearts  are  true  and  our  lives  pure  and  earnest.  For 
the  changes  which  pass  over  society  and  the  Churches  are  in  reality  manifesta- 
tions of  the  wisdom  of  God;  the  touch  of  His  finger  gives  to  them  their  meaning 
and  beauty;  and  the  devout  observer  is  as  much  thrilled  by  their  significance  and 
enthralled  by  their  interest  as  the  artistic  soul  is  enraptured  by  the  tints  of  autunm. 
Further,  Christianity  teaches  us  to  look  forward,  not  backward,  for  the  revelation 
of  the  real  meaning  of  God's  dealings  with  us.  Christ  never  despaired  of  humanity* 
or  of  His  own  cause;  and  why  should  we?     (W.  Burkiit  Dalby.) 

Yer.  11.  He  hath  made  everything  beaatifal  in  His  time. — Btauty! — ^How  rich 
are  the  traits  and  manifestations  of  man's  creative  genius  I  Think  of  the  vast 
number  and  diversity  of  gorgeous  and  attractive  forms,  with  which  descriptive 
and  imaginative  talent  has  enriched  the  literature  of  all  ages.  And  the  fruits  of 
mental  toil  in  all  times,  from  the  rude  lyric  of  the  savage  to  the  roimded  and 
polished  productions  of  the  most  advanced  culture,  how  redolent  of  beauty, — how 
thickly  studded  with  gems  of  the  purest  lustre  and  trsinscending  magnificence  I 
Art,  too,  how  endlessly  varied  in  its  embodiments  of  all  that  is  fair,  and  grand, 
and  glorious  I  How  numberless,  also,  are  the  combinations  of  blended  or  inter* 
changing  majesty  and  beauty  which  rise  and  are  yet  to  rise  in  the  simple  and  the 
complex,  the  lowly  and  the  lofty  forms  of  architecture — in  columm,  tower,  and 
dome — in  eottage,  temple,  and  cathedral!  But  whence  this  power  in  man?  What 
are  his  creations  but  copies  of  the  thoughts  of  God?  That  they  are  nothing  else 
is  implied  in  the  fundamental  canons  of  literature,  art,  and  taste.  Truth  to 
nature  is  the  sole  test  of  beauty.  Do  we  admire  the  partial  copies  that  man  has 
made?  Do  we  bow  down  to  the  genius  that  can  see  and  hear  a  little  portion  ol 
the  Divine  idea?  Shall  not,  then,  our  thoughts  go  up  with  unspeakably  loftier 
reverence  and  more  fervent  adoration  to  Him  who  "  haa  made  everything  beau< 
tiful  "?  Befieot  for  a  moment  on  beauty  as  an  attribute  of  the  Supreme  Intelli* 
genoe.  Reflect  on  God  as  the  Originator  of  all  that  delights  the  eye  and  charms 
the  fancy.  What  an  inconceivable  wealth  of  beauty  must  reside  in  the  mind, 
which,  without  a  copy,  first  called  forth  these  numberless  hues  and  shades  that 
relieve  each  other  and  melt  into  each  other  in  the  vast  whole  of  nature, — which 
devised  these  eountlees  forms  of  vegetable  life,  from  the  wayside  flower  that 
blooms  to-day  and  withers  to-morrow,  to  the  forest  giant  that  outlasts  the  rise 
#uid  fall  el  nations  and  of  empires, — which  meted  out  the  heavens,  measured  the 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  ni. 

courses  and  arranged  the  harmonies  of  the  stars,  spread  the  ocean,  poured  the 
river,  torrent,  and  waterfall !  What  an  infinity  of  resources  do  we  behold  in  the 
alternate  phases  of  the  outward  universe,  each  of  which  seems  too  beautiful  to  be 
replaced  by  one  of  equal  loveliness,  and  yet  yields  at  once  its  fancied  pre-eminence 
to  its  successor  I  The  depths  of  the  Divine  Intelligence  we  indeed  cannot  fathom ; 
but  there  are  some  views  of  practical  interest  to  be  derived  from  these  thoughts. 
1.  First,  they  suggest  one  mode  of  worship,  which  must  always  make  us  better, — 
that  of  the  devout  contemplation  of  the  visible  works  of  God.  "  To  enjoy  is  to 
adore."  There  can  be  no  full  and  true  enjoyment  of  nature,  except  by  those 
who  see  the  hand  and  hear  the  voice  of  the  Eternal  in  His  works.  To  enter  into 
the  heart  of  nature  is  to  talk  face  to  face  with  its  Author.  2.  The  thoughts 
which  I  have  suggested  lend,  also,  a  motive  to  our  conversance  with  the  monu- 
ments of  human  art,  taste,  and  genius.  The  genuine  poet  or  artist  stands 
between  us  and  God's  world  of  beauty,  in  the  same  relation  in  which  the  seer  or 
the  evangelist  stands  between  us  and  his  realm  of  truth.  But  most  of  all  does 
the  devout  mind  love  to  commune  with  truth  and  beauty  in  those  forms  of  liter- 
ature, in  which  they  have  been  blended  by  Divine  inspiration.  It  finds  no  poetry 
BO  sublime  as  that  of  psalmist,  prophet,  and  apostle, — that  which  connects  the 
image  of  the  heavenly  Shepherd  with  the  green  pastures  and  still  waters,  draws 
lessons  of  a  paternal  Providence  from  the  courses  of  Orion  and  Arctiu-us,  names 
for  the  rain  and  for  the  drops  of  dew  their  Father,  and  resorts  to  every  kingdom 
of  nature,  and  gathers  in  materials  from  every  portion  of  the  visible  universe,  to 
portray  the  New  Jerusalem,  the  golden  city  of  our  God,  the  gates  within  which 
the  sun  goe«  not  down,  for  "  the  glory  of  God  doth  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is 
the  light  thereof."  3.  Again,  beauty,  though  distinct  from  love,  is  the  minister 
of  love.  Its  every  ray  is  edged  and  fringed  with  mercy.  Its  every  form  bears  the 
inscription,  "  God  is  love."  When  it  beams  upon  us  from  the  heavens,  it  reveals 
His  benignity.  When  it  glows  on  the  earth,  or  gleams  from  the  ocean,  it  reflects 
His  smile.  When  it  stretches  its  many-coloured  bow  on  the  cloud  or  the  water- 
fall, it  utters  His  thoughts  of  peace.  Have  not  all  these  scenes  a  voice  of  tender 
sympathy  and  consolation  for  the  grief -stricken?  In  a  world  thus  full  of  beauty, 
thus  suffused  by  the  smile  of  the  Universal  Father,  there  can  be  no  sorrow  sent  aa 
Borrow.  It  can  be  only  those  whom  God  loves  that  he  chastens.  Not  to  blight 
the  harvest  of  human  hope  and  joy,  but  to  bring  forth  in  fresh  luxuriance  every 
plant  of  our  Heavenly  Father's  planting,  do  the  rains  descend  and  the  floods  come 
upon  the  afiflicted  heart.  Not  to  destroy  or  hopelessly  bow  down  the  soul,  but  to 
dispel  the  suffocating  mist  of  worldliness,  to  open  a  clearer,  higher  range  of 
vision  for  the  inward  eye,  to  make  the  upper  heavens  look  serene  and  beautiful, 
falls  the  bolt  that  sends  alarm  and  agony  to  our  homes  and  hearts.  Let  us,  then. 
in  our  sorrows,  welcome  the  revelation  of  Divine  love,  with  which  the  heavens  are 
dropping  and  the  earth  teeming,  which  day  utters  to  day  and  night  rehearses  to 
night.  {A,  P.  Peabody.)  Everything  beautiful: — The  Creator,  when  He  formed 
the  world,  had  the  loveliness  of  things  before  Him  as  an  end  and  object,  as  well 
as  the  \iBefulnes8  of  things.  And  so,  wherever  we  walk,  we  see  reflected  the  love 
of  beauty  in  the  Divine  mind.  And  the  more  minutely  we  examine  the  works  of 
God,  the  more  exquisite  is  their  beauty.  How  unlike  the  works  of  man  I  Take 
•  finely  polished  needle,  and  place  it  under  a  powerful  microscope,  and  it  becomes 
a  huge,  rough  bar  of  steel,  with  miniature  caverns  and  ravines  of  black  "  clinker." 
Take  again  some  common  insect,  a  wasp,  for  instance;  and  under  the  same 
microscope  it  grows  into  a  miracle  of  sheeny  scales  of  semi-transparent  gauze  of 
gold,  each  scale  geometrically  perfect.  Or  take  that  buttercup  and  look  down  into 
its  heart,  and  you  will  look  into  an  enchanted  fairy  chamber  of  flashing  lights  that 
flhames  all  the  extravagances  of  the  **  Arabian  Nights."  God  loves  to  have  things 
beautiful :  and  it  is  wise  for  us  to  fofiter  in  ourselves  the  love  of  beauty.  No 
doubt  business  rivalries  are  so  intense  and  keen  that  men  are  obliged  to  consider 
chiefly  utility.  What  can  I  make  or  get  out  of  it?  is  the  primary  question. 
Bread,  not  beauty,  is  their  principal  concern.  Trade  is  "  sowing  oities  like  sheila 
along  the  shore  ";  and  the  things  of  the  mart  and  the  street  are  in  danger  of 
crowding  nature  and  God  out  of  men's  minds  and  freezing  their  hearts.  But  let 
ua  hope  that  the  fight  for  the  front  places  in  all  the  callings  which  is  the 
prevailing  ambition  at  present  will  never  become  so  severe  as  to  absorb  all  thought 
and  time,  and  destroy  all  care  for  the  cultivation  of  this  joyous  side  of  life. 
Indeed,  the  fiercer  the  struggle  for  life  becomes,  the  greater  the  need  for  tha 
•weet  alleviations   which  admiration  of  nature  brings.      Nor  can  we  doubt  that 


CEAT.  m.]  ECCLESIASTES.  91 

when  the  Creator  lavished,  and  still  lavishes  so  much  beauty  in  the  natural  world, 
He  had  and  has  in  view  the  highest  usefulness;  for  surely  it  is  as  serviceable  a 
thing  to  give  refreshment  and  tone  and  elevation  to  the  soul,  as  to  provide  wheat 
for  bread,  or  wool  for  clothing.  Let  ub  lift  our  thoughts  from  the  loveliness  of 
nature  to  Him,  who  is  the  Rose  of  Sharon  all  glowing  with  the  wealth  of  heavenly 
love,  and  the  Lily  of  the  Valley,  "  holy,  harmless,  imdefiled,"  and  the  True  Vina 
laden  with  ripe  clusters  for  the  famishing  souls  of  men — yes,  to  Him,  who  is 
unique  in  His  splendour  of  "  very  "  Godhead  and  perfect  manhood.  One  of  th« 
most  patent  wants  of  our  Churches  to-day  is  that  of  spiritual  beauty  of  character; 
beauty  of  spiritual  character.  Not  the  surface  beauty  of  morality  unvitalized  by 
personal  love  to  the  Saviour.  This  is  but  the  crystal,  symmetrical,  clean-cut  in 
exactness  of  outline,  cold  as  the  snow,  dead  as  the  stone.  Our  want  is  the  beauty 
of  the  living  soul,  of  the  holy  life.  Not  any  mimicry  of  it,  however  successful, 
however  unconscious;  not  any  simulation  of  its  life;  not  painted  blooms  and 
waxen  fruit.  But  actual  conformity  to  the  image  of  "  the  man  Christ  Jesus  "  :  a 
life  of  prayer  and  self -renouncing  faith,  of  surrender  to  the  rule  of  our  King,  and 
leal-hearted  service.  This  is  the  beauty  of  holiness  of  which  all  fair  things 
beneath  the  sun  are  faint  pictures;  and  by  which  Christ  is  made  manifest  to 
men.  {R.  C.  Cowell.)  The  beauty  of  the  world: — I.  The  beauty  of  life's  out- 
ward SCENES  AND  CIRCUMSTANCES.  We  need  not  linger  to  determine  what  is  tho 
philosophy  of  beauty;  how  far  it  depends  on  the  things  we  behold,  how  far  on  the 
eyes  which  behold  them,  or  rather  on  the  so\il  of  intelligence  and  emotion  which 
looks  through  the  eyes.  The  beautiful  is  beautiful  in  the  measiire  of  our  discern- 
ment; that  ie  true.  Still,  beauty  is  not  determined  exclusively  by  our  perception; 
that  also  is  true.  Beyond  what  any  single  individual  has  seen  or  has  power  to 
see  lie  a  myriad  things,  the  fruit  of  the  Creator's  wonderful  and  multitudinous 
thoughts.  Treasures  of  beauty  fill  the  depths  of  the  sea,  and  there  are  unvisited 
nooke  and  corners  of  the  earth  thronged  with  lovely  forms.  Not  only  in  the  broad 
effects,  but  in  the  minute  detail,  of  nature  there  is  to  be  found  beauty.  Men 
need  not  go  into  strange  lands  to  learn  that  "  the  Lord  hath  made  all  things  beau- 
tiful in  His  time."  Pleasure  in  the  beauty  of  the  world  may  become  a  mere  lust 
of  the  eye,  rather  than  the  glow  of  the  soul.  An  lesthetic  taste  is  not  a  sanctifying 
faith.  Discerning  the  beauty  crowding  earth  and  heaven,  we  are  to  remember 
that  the  Lord  hath  made  it.  We  are  to  think  of  Him;  see  everywhere  the  signs 
of  His  wisdom,  the  images  of  His  loveliness  and  tenderness,  the  outgoing  of  His 
glory,  the  suggestions  of  His  infinity.  II.  The  orderliness  of  this  beauty. 
Everything  ie  beautiful  in  its  appointed  time.  The  fulness  and  harmony  of  things 
is  largely  an  element  of  beauty.  The  order,  the  perfect  sequence,  of  nature's  law 
is  as  wonderful  as  the  varied  beauty  of  her  forms.  "Every  winter  turns  to 
spring."  The  seed,  the  blade,  the  ear,  the  full  corn  in  the  ear,  each  has  its 
beauty.  There  are  here  in  the  world's  order  and  beauty  familiar  analogies  of 
spiritual  things.  The  complex  beauty  of  a  perfected  character  is  not  wrought 
except  by  preparations  and  processes.  Men  come  to  perfectness  in  their  season. 
The  great  Worker  works  most  surely  in  unbroken  order,  in  grand,  calm  patiencSt 
and  brings  His  work  to  its  perfect  issue  at  the  appointed  time.  III.  The  tsansi- 
toriness  of  thb  world's  beautt.  All  the  beauty  of  outward  scene  and  circum- 
stance is  but  for  a  time.  This  fair  world,  though  it  holds  us  sometimes  with  th« 
spell  of  its  enchantment,  is  not  our  rest;  its  beauties  are  fiowers  upon  a  pilgrim's 
path.  We  pluck  fair  flowers,  but  in  a  little  while,  such  a  little  while,  the  soft 
petals  are  worn  and  crumpled  and  ready  to  die  I  The  worlds  and  the  treasures 
that  are  in  them  God  carries  in  His  hand;  but  those  that  love  Him  He  carries  in 
His  heart — the  dear  children  of  His  love;  and  that  love  is  round  about  them,  a 
light  from  heaven,  fairer  and  surer  than  the  beauty  of  the  morning.  (W.  8. 
Davig.)  Religion  and  the  beautiful: — I.  There  is  an  essential  unity  in  all 
forms  of  the  beautiful.  It  will  not  do  to  object  to  art,  to  embellishment  of 
dress  and  furniture,  and  yet  to  say  that  in  speech  and  in  manners  and  in  moral 
elements  the  beautiful  is  right.  For  the  beautiful  is  an  element  that  is  meant  to 
go  out  in  every  part  of  the  mind,  and  to  lend  its  light  and  peculiar  influence  in 
every  direction  in  which  the  mind  develops  itself.  Now  it  is  admitted,  the  world 
over,  by  those  who  object  to  art  in  dress,  in  furniture,  or  in  the  embellishment  of 
grounds,  that  beauty  of  speech,  and  manners,  and  social  and  moral  elements,  is 
right.  Now,  why  is  beauty  consistent  with  self-denial  and  the  example  of  Christ 
in  these  things,  and  inconsistent  with  self-denial  and  the  example  of  Christ  in 
tboee  other  things?     II.  There  is  a  moral  function  belonqinq  to  the  biautifuu 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 


which  redeems  it  from  the  objections  which  men  raise  against  it.    It  is  true  that 
beauty  is  employed  to  build  up  vice.     Did  you  ever  stop  to  analyze  that  statement, 
and  see  what  it  meant?     The  moral  function  of  the  beautiful  is  used  to  lead  men 
to  sin;  but  this  fact  reveals  the  power  that  is  in  the  beautiful  to  raise  the  enjoy- 
ment of  any  faculty  on  which  it  is  employed  from  lower  to  higher  forms.     Beauty 
always  tends  upward.     If  you  introduce  it  to  the  thinking  power,  it  draws  the 
intellect  upward;  if  you  introduce  it  to  the  conscience,  it  draws  the  conscience 
upward;  if  you  introduce  it  into  morals,  it  elevates  those  morals;  if  you  introduce 
it  into  dress,  it  refines  and  lifts  it  up.    III.  If,  then,  there  is  a  moral  function  in 
the  beautiful,  its  foll  benefit  cannot  be  expected  until  it  develops  itself 
HABMONiousLT  IN  ALL  PAETs  OF  THE  MIND.     It  must  be  applied  to  the  understand- 
ing, to  the  moral  faculties,  to  the  social  elements,  to  the  animal  instincts,  and  to 
all  the  relations  of  physical  life  in  the  family   and  in  society.      It   is  not   the 
beautiful  in  too  great  a  measure  that  leads  to  excess  of  mischief  and  aelfishnesB. 
It  is  because  it  is  cultivated  but  partially,  or  only  on  one  side  of  the  mind,  that  it 
produces  mischiefs.     With  this  statement  of  the  moral  function  of  the  beautiful, 
I  proceed  to  apply  it  more  particularly  to  the  individual  and  the  household.     How 
can  a  man  consent  to  indulge  in  the  beautiful  while  the  world  is  lying  in  wicked- 
ness?    I  say,  the  world  being  in  wickedness,  I  am  going  to  educate  myself  in 
beauty,  that  I  may  be  the  better  fitted  to  elevate  it  out  of  that  wickedness.    The 
beautiful  is  one  of  the  elements  with  which  I  am  to  familiarize  myself,  in  order 
that  I  may  the  more  successfully  engage  in  this  work.     Ood  educates  men  for 
labouring  in  His  kingdom  on  earth  by  spreading  out  before  them  the  beauties 
which  Ho  has  created  in  the  natural  world.     The  beautiful,  therefore,  may  be 
made  a  moral  instructor,  and  it  may  make  the  soul  of  man  powerful ;  so  that 
indulgence  in  it,  instead  of  being  selfish,  is  a  part  of   one's   lawful   education. 
The  same  Mgument  is  applicable  to  the  household.     The  question  arises  in  the 
minds  of  many  persons,  "  How  much  time  ought  I  to  expend  for  my  family,  and 
how  much  for  God?"     You  split  your  ship  on  a  rock  at  the  outset,  by  putting 
God  in  one  balance  and  your  family  in  the  other.     Your  family  must  never  be 
•eparated  from  God.     Your  idea  of  religion  and  of  consecration  must  be  such  that 
you  shall  consider  everything  that  is  given  to  your  cradle  or  to  your  family  as 
being  given  to  God.     Now,  how  much  may  a  man  give  to  build  up  a  family,  and 
make  it  powerful  for  God?     If  it  is  necessary  that  a  man's  children  should  have 
Bhoes  smd  clothes,  and  he  gives  them  to  them,  he  gives  them  to  God.     If  it  is 
necessary  that  they  should  have  intelligence,  and  he  sends  them  to  costly  schools, 
he  sends  them  for  God's  sake.     But  remember  that  you  must  carry  such  a  heart 
into  this  work  that  every  child  shall  feel  that  every  picture  and  every  book  has 
a  moral  purpose  in  it,  and  realize  that  there  is  a  life  to  come,  and  understand  the 
relations  of  God's  kingdom  on  earth  to  immortality.     And  then  every  flower  that 
blossoms  will  have  a  meaning.     But  it  is  said,   "  How  can  you  reconcile  these 
indulgences  with  the  example  of  our  Saviour?  He  did  not  indulge  in  the  beautiful." 
Our  Saviour  set  the  example  to  us  of  moral  qualities,  but  not  of  social  conditions. 
He  had  not  a  place  to  lay  His  head :  do  you  seriously  think  that  it  would  be  best 
for  every  man  to  be  a  vagabond?     Do  you  think  it  would  be  best  for  civilization 
that  the  family  should  be  broken  up,  and  that  men  should  have  no  property  and 
no  regular  occupation,  in  order  that  they  might  follow  Christ?     Still  further,  it  is 
asked,  "  How  can  we  imitate  Christ  in  the  self-denial  which  He  practised,  and 
yet  indulge  in  the  beautiful?"     Nowhere  else  in  the  world  can  a  man  be  more 
self -denying  than  in  taking  a  nature  thoroughly  refined  and  cultured,  and  with 
that  nature  going  to  the  poor  and  needy.     Christ  laid  aside  the  glory  that  He 
had   before   the   world   was,   and   came    upon    earth,   and   lived    without    it,   and 
ascended,  and  retook  it;  and  now,  having  taken  it  again,  He  lives  to  legislate  with 
all  this  plenitude;  and  He  is  self-denying  still,  making  His  life  a  perpetual  living 
for  others.     If,  then,  God  has  endowed  any  man  with  wealth,  let  him  use  it  for 
himself,  for  his  children,  and  for  his  fi-iends,  and  so  use  it  for  the  world.    If  God 
has  given  a  man  power  to  read  literature  in  every  language,  let  him  read  it,  that 
he  may  be  the  better  able  to  defend  the  ignorant  and  instruct  them.    If  God  has 
given  a  man  the  element  of  beauty,  let  him  employ  it,  not  for  the  sake  of  self- 
indulgence,  but  that  he  may  lift  up,  and  refine,  and  civilize  those  that  are  low, 
and  rude,  and  gross.     In  the  hands  of  all  who  follow  these  directions,  the  elements 
of  the  beautiful  are  entirely  in  consonance  with  the  Divine  will.    (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
The  miseion  of  beauty: — ^Beauty  is  a  term  of  varied  and  extensive  import.    What- 
ever excites  the  emotion,  be  it  a  statue  fresh  from  the  ehisel  of  the  toulptor,  a 


CBAP.  m.]  ECCLESIASTES.  98" 

flower  by  the  wayside,  ohronioling  some  old  buried  memory,  or  a  glorious  sunset 
among  the  hills,  a  speech,  a  poem,  a  virtue,  a  deed  or  a  song,  that  is  beautiful. 
I.  Beadty  and  its  mission  as  seen  in  nature.  There  is  afiBuence  of  beauty  in  the 
broad,  blue  heavens  and  on  the  green  earth;  in  the  stars  that  look  so  gently  and 
kindly  upon  us;  in  the  orchards,  groves  and  forest  trees;  in  the  plumage  and 
eong  of  birds;  in  the  modest  flower  that  blooms  in  the  hedge;  in  the  sturdy  oak 
which  has  wrestled  with  the  storms  and  the  winds  of  a  thousand  years;  in  the  tall 
and  stately  cedar  of  Lebanon,  in  the  pendent  branches  of  the  willow,  sighing  like 
a  mourner  by  the  silent  stream.  There  is  beauty  in  the  morning  dew,  shining 
like  diamond  points  all  over  field  and  meadow;  in  drops  of  water  as  they  hang  like 
costly  pearls  on  treee  and  telegraph  wires  after  a  refreshing  shower.  There  is 
beauty  in  the  little  rill  which  bursts  away  from  some  sequestered  nook  in  the  hill- 
side, like  a  truant  child,  and  runs — now  glancing  out  in  the  light  and  then  hiding 
itself  in  entangled  shrubbery  till  it  seems  to  find  its  playfellows  in  the  babbling 
brook.  There  is  beauty  in  the  majestic  river  as  it  rolls,  strengthened  by  innumer- 
able tributaries,  proudly  into  the  broad  sea.  There  is  beauty  in  the  alternations 
of  day  and  night,  in  the  still  evening,  when  the  shadows  deepen  over  the  plain 
and  the  veil  of  mist  rises  slowly  over  the  valley,  and  the  sombre  woods  which  skirt 
the  distant  horizon  grow  more  indistinct,  and  the  sun  sinks  to  rest,  leaving  the 
douds  above  all  aglow  with  his  setting  radiance.  There  is  beauty  in  the  seasons; 
in  the  spring  arrayed  in  verdure;  in  the  summer  teeming  with  luxuriance;  in 
autumn  loaded  with  golden  harvests.  And  winter,  too,  has  its  charms,  covering 
the  earth  with  its  robe  of  purity  and  adorning  the  forests  with  gems  of  dazzling 
and  enchanting  brilliancy.  It  is  no  wonder  that  Solomon,  in  his  wisdom,  should 
have  said,  "  God  hath  made  everything  beautiful  in  His  time,"  because  everything 
is  adapted  to  some  end  or  use.  Nothing  is  made  in  vain.  Whatever  is  beautifiJ 
in  nature  has  its  use,  to  secure  harmony  in  the  great  orchestra  of  all  created 
things,  or  reflect  the  superlative  glory  of  the  uncreated  God.  II.  Artificial 
BEAUTY,  or  those  forms  of  beauty  which  may  be  regarded  as  copies  of  nature — the 
creations  of  genius  and  art.  These,  too,  may  exalt  our  conceptions  of  the  Divine 
Being,  as  all  the  beautiful  forms  from  the  chisel  of  the  sculptor,  from  the  pencil 
of  the  artist,  exist  as  types  or  models  in  the  great  gallery  of  Nature,  of  which  God 
is  the  Author.  Art  is  the  shadow  of  Nature,  the  photograph  of  external  beauty, 
the  pictured  diagrams  of  a  higher  and  more  exalted  finish.  Art  may  be  the  hand- 
maid of  religion,  an  auxiliary  to  worship.  The  old  Hebrew  temple,  in  its  form  and 
finish,  in  its  utensils  of  gold,  in  its  altars  of  ivory,  in  its  outer  and  inner  coiu^, 
was  the  very  perfection  of  art,  and  all  was  designed  as  an  aid  to  worship  and  an 
emblem  of  heaven.  The  magnificent  cathedrals  of  the  Old  World  and  the  costly 
pictures  with  which  they  are  adorned  have  a  higher  purpose  than  simply  to  attract 
the  vulgar  eye  or  awaken  a  temporary  admiration.  They  are  designed  as  helps, 
acting  through  the  senses  to  lead  the  worshippers  on  to  a  proper  conception  of  that 
uncreated  beauty  that  dwelleth  not  in  temples  built  with  hands.  III.  Intel- 
lectual BEAUTY.  We  speak  of  the  canvas  or  the  sculptured  marble  as  uttering 
"thoughts  that  breathe  and  words  that  burn";  but  when  we  thus  figuratively 
speak,  we  speak  in  praise  of  the  creative  mind  of  the  artist  and  the  sculptor. 
These  are  only  the  outward  and  visible  expression  of  the  ideal  beauty  that  was 
in  his  own  thought.  Knowledge,  genius,  wisdom,  taste,  whenever,  wherever 
perceived  are  beautiful.  Mind  is  the  measure  not  only,  but  the  chief  attraction 
either  of  woman  or  man.  A  well-stored,  a  highly-educated  mind  is  to  me  the 
most  attractive  thing  in  the  universe;  and  to  see  such  a  mind  at  work  solving  the 
problems  of  science,  analyzing  'the  most  diflBcult  subjects,  charming  by  its 
eloquence  or  song,  raising  the  heavy  burdens  from  the  groaning  heart  of  humanity, 
cannot  fail  to  awaken  the  highest  emotions  of  admiration  and  of  beauty.  God, 
whose  intellect  is  infinite,  and  always  devising  for  the  good  of  His  creatures,  must 
ever  be  regarded,  when  properly  perceived,  as  the  most  beautiful  Being  in  the 
universe,  shedding  His  light  and  beauty  over  all  the  works  of  His  hands;  and  we 
can  offer  no  more  appropriate  prayer  and  join  with  the  psalmist  and  say,  "  Let  the 
beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon  us."  IV.  Moral  beauty  and  its  mission. 
Right  is  always  beautiful;  truth,  honour,  integrity  are  beautiful;  magnanimity, 
justice  and  benevolence  are  as  really  beautiful  as  the  most  lovely  of  material 
forms.  If  we  contemplate  the  act  of  the  Good  Samaritan  dismounting  from  his 
beast  at  the  risk  of  his  own  life  and  affording  the  needed  aid  to  a  wounded  Jew, 
we  feel  in  our  inmost  soul  that  compassion  is  beautiful.  There  is  beauty  in  purity. 
If  the  lily  bending  on  its  stem  is  beautiful  to  the  eye,  so  is  purity,  of  which  the 


94  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cwap.  m. 

lily  U  a  favourite  and  impressive  emblem.  In  an  age  of  general  licantiousneu, 
to  see  a  youthful  captive  break  away  from  the  solicitations  of  his  royal  mistreM 
is  a  spectacle  that  commands  admiration  of  every  mind  not  absolutely  brutalized 
by  lust.  Illustrations  of  moral  beauty  are  not  wanting  in  our  age  and  time.  The 
family  united  in  a  loving  fellowship,  where  heart  responds  in  cordial  sympathy 
to  heart,  is  certainly  one  of  the  most  beautiful  sights  on  earth,  and  the  most 
impressive  type  of  heaven.  Thus  the  Church,  as  the  Bride  of  Christ,  all-glorious 
within  and  without,  humble  yet  active,  conservative  yet  aggressive,  clad  in  the 
■eamless  robe  of  a  Redeemer's  righteousness,  adorned  with  all  the  graces  of  the 
Spirit,  and  charity  crowning  the  whole,  is  the  very  climax  of  beauty,  more  gorgeous 
to  behold  than  all  the  glory  and  riches  of  Solomon.  Remember  the  words  of  our 
text,  "  Everything  is  beautiful  in  His  time  " — beautiful,  because  useful  and  answer- 
ing fully  the  end  of  its  being;  and  nothing  can  be  more  beautiful  than  woman 
intellectually  and  morally  educated  and  working  in  her  sphere  for  the  benefit  of 
her  race.  This  is  the  highest  type  and  style  of  beauty,  outliving  the  physical, 
surpassing  that  of  art,  over  which  death  and  the  grave  have  no  power.  Arrayed 
in  this  imperishable  robe,  the  spirit  only  grows  yoimger  as  the  body  decays ;  and 
when  released  from  the  tenement  of  clay  shall  ascend  to  mingle  with  forms 
celestial  on  a  mission  still,  through  endless  years  of  beauty  and  of  love.  (iS.  D, 
Burchard,  D.D.)  The  Author  of  beauty: — I  have  no  very  definite  conception  of 
what  these  words  mean.  I  do  not  intend  to  use  them  for  purposes  of  instruction, 
but  for  purposes  of  suggestion  and  inspiration.  This  is  poetry.  The  aim  of  poetry 
is  to  exalt  the  feelings,  to  kindle  the  imagination.  A  statement  not  sharply  defined 
to  thought  may  yet  by  suggestion  carry  and  inspire  one  more  energetically  and 
penetratingly  than  any  clearly  defined  proposition.  This  text  contaios  several 
intimations  which  may  prove  valuable  to  us.  "  He  hath  made  everything  beau- 
tiful in  its  time."  Here  is  a  distinct  annoimcement  that  beauty  is  a  prime  object 
in  this  world,  and  that  beauty  is  very  extensively  sought  by  the  Creator.  He  has 
not  only  made  beautiful  objects,  but  has  made  everything  beautiful  in  its  own 
time  and  manner.  We  must  bear  in  mind  that  beauty  is  a  distinct  appeal  to  us 
over  and  above  all  the  utilities  and  economies.  A  world  that  met  all  the  needs  of 
its  creatures  and  nothing  more  would  be  standing  proof  that  those  creatures  were 
simply  in  the  animal  order.  When  you  build  a  stall  for  a  horse,  you  plan  for 
nothing  beyond  animal  needs — warmth,  ventilation,  food,  cleanliness,  rest.  Any 
touch  of  beauty  beyond  these  is  for  your  own  eye.  If  you  added  beauty  for  the 
eye  of  your  horse,  you  would  thereby  recognize  in  him  an  aesthetic  nature  like 
your  own.  So  a  world  devoted  to  grey  and  angular  utilities  would  be  proof  positive 
that  we  were  a  race  of  creatures  which  needed  good  housing  and  feeding  and 
nothing  more.  But  what  shall  we  say  of  that  knot  of  blue  violets  in  the  grass? 
They  do  not  catch  the  eye  of  the  grazing  ox.  The  dog  leaps  over  them  in  pursuit 
of  game,  or  in  wanton  play.  But  when  you,  the  Divine  child,  come,  this  utterance 
from  the  heart  of  your  Father  stops  you  as  imperatively  as  a  command.  You  drop 
on  your  knees  beside  the  exquisite  token  from  the  heavens,  and  with  full  heart 
and  suffused  eyes  read  His  loving  thought  as  from  an  illuminated  missal.  Some- 
thing has  been  said  to  you  from  on  high  that  no  other  eye  or  ear  on  earth  can 
interpret.  And  when  you  lift  up  your  eyes  upon  the  green  and  spacious  earth, 
with  its  endlessly  varied  beauties  of  tint  and  form  and  grouping,  and  over  all  the 
deep  and  wide  heavens  with  their  imbearable  glory  of  light  and  their  flying 
cloud-forms  or  spaces  of  fadeless  blue,  the  voice  that  speaks  in  your  heart  of 
hearts  is  from  the  depths  within  to  the  deeps  of  God  without — deep  calling  unto 
deep  :  "  This  is  my  Father's  house,  my  home,  the  very  gate  of  heaven."  Beauty 
in  our  world — "  Everything  made  beautiful  in  its  season  " — is  the  divine,  omni- 
present witness  that  we  are  something  more  than  physical  beings,  fit  only  for  a 
world  of  stark  utilities  and  necessities;  we  are  the  children  of  the  supreme  Intelli- 
gence and  Imagination  and  Love.  We  follow  Him  with  clear  eye  and  responsive 
heart  through  the  heights  and  depths  of  Hie  creative  work.  Not  a  curve  is  added 
to  leaf  or  petal,  not  a  point  of  gold-dust  on  an  insect's  wing,  but  is  there  for  your 
eye  and  mine,  and  has  answered  its  purpose  when  we  lift  oin"  hearts  in  grateful 
recognition  to  Him  who  is  the  eternal  fountain  and  source  of  beauty.  Our  text 
declares  that  "  also  He  hath  set  the  world  in  their  hearts."  I  do  not  care  much 
what  the  poet's  precise  thought  is  here.  I  get  this  impression :  We  are  so  vitally 
joined  to  the  world  that  it  somehow  gets  immense  power  over  us.  It  somehow 
gets  in  there  to  some  central  depths  of  us,  with  its  overshadowing  truths  and 
great,  overmastering  moods.     This  is  why  I  believe  that  it  is  salutary,  actually 


CHAP,  in.]  ECCLESIASTE8.  95 

medicinal,  for  ub  to  get  away  from  our  artificial  life  as  often  as  possible,  and  to 
be  alone  with  the  ancient,  unperverted  powers  of  the  world.  I,  for  one,  can  testify 
that  no  chapters  of  judgment,  no  penitential  psalms,  have  «ver  searched  and 
winnowed  my  soul  like  the  living,  awful  presence  of  the  primeval  forest.  The 
purity  of  the  vast  deep  life  there,  stretched  in  unaffected  sincerity  to  the  heavens; 
the  majesty  of  the  great  brotherhood  of  trees,  the  tranquillity,  the  chaste  beauty, 
the  solemnity,  have  enwrapped  the  soul  and  penetrated  it,  till  one  could  only  cover 
the  face,  as  in  the  Divine  presence,  and  cry,  "Unclean,  unclean  I  God  bo 
merciful  to  me,  a  sinner  I"  Oh,  the  awful  purity  of  this  great  life  about  us  t 
Crimes  and  degradation  multiply  just  in  proportion  as  men  crowd  together  and 
forget  the  imstained  life  of  the  physical  world,  which,  in  normal  conditions,  holds 
Buoh  purifying  uplifting  influence  over  us  as  the  life  of  a  mother.  The  power  of 
Nature  has  likewise  a  salutary  ministry  for  us.  Have  you  never  felt  that  it  is 
good  for  you  to  have  the  personal  equation  reduced  to  zero? — to  have  your  indi- 
viduality stripped  of  all  the  little  conceits,  all  the  factious  importance,  which  by 
degrees  attach  to  us  in  our  relations  to  men?  You  have  doubtless  felt  this  whole- 
some reduction  to  your  original  quantity  in  presence  of  the  power  of  Nature  as 
nowhere  else.  We  may  also  well  consider  how  the  stability  and  unchangeablenees 
of  Nature  hold  us  to  truth.  The  same  great  truths  from  age  to  age  are  reiterated 
in  precisely  the  same  terms,  until  our  slow  hearts  are  compelled  to  learn.  When 
we  see  men  so  careful  and  fearful  respecting  their  little  theories  and  notions  one 
can  hardly  repress  a  smile  of  pity.  As  if  the  heavens  and  the  earth  were  not 
keeping  faith  with  God,  their  Creator,  and  would,  sooner  or  later,  bring  all  our 
little  systems  to  terms  1  We  make  a  little  scheme  of  the  heavenly  bodies ,  and 
build  •  queer  little  religious  doctrine  respecting  the  earth,  and  read  our  Bibles 
and  say  our  prayers  accordingly,  and  fight  among  ourselves  over  ovu-  petty  theory. 
But  the  stars  hold  on  their  courses;  the  earth  swings  in  its  orbit,  turns  on  its  axis. 
The  truth  is  beaten  in  and  in,  age  after  age,  imtil  we  get  something  like  a  rational 
astronomy.  Then  we  have  to  begin  to  retranslate  oiu:  Bibles,  reconstruct  our 
theologies,  and  adjust  our  thinking  to  the  illimitable  imiverse,  and  enlarge  our 
thoughts  of  God  by  the  same  great  measiu-e.  The  last  suggestion  of  our  poet  is 
mystery.  **  Man  caimot  find  out  the  work  that  God  hath  done  from  the  beginning, 
aven  unto  the  end."  And  we  praise  Him  for  it  1  For  what  could  equal  the 
misery  of  living  even  for  a  year  in  an  exhausted  world  I  It  would  be  to  mind  and 
soul  a  strait-jacket  and  a  darkened  cell.  {J.  H.  Ecob,  D.D.)  All  things  beautiful 
in  their  teafon: — The  sentiment  of  the  beautiful  is  imiversal.  We  lavish  money, 
we  expend  strength,  we  incur  dangers,  we  submit  to  inconveniences  to  gratify  it. 
Now,  what  is  the  significance  of  this?  What  are  the  part  and  power  of  beauty  in 
human  life?  Of  course,  the  beautiful — like  any  other  gift  of  life,  like  genius  or 
wealth — ^may  be  used  unspiritually,  perverted  so  as  even  to  minister  to  sensuous- 
cess  and  sin.  In  its  art-forms  no  people  ever  worshipped  the  beautiful  like  the 
Greeks,  and  few  peoples  developed  greater  sensuousness.  Every  gift  is  a  possi- 
bility of  corresponding  evil;  no  lights  lead  astray  like  lights  from  heaven.  The 
real  question  is,  whether  in  the  right  and  purposed  use  of  it,  whether  as  inter- 
preted and  used  by  religious  feeling,  the  beautiful  has  not  a  high  and  potent 
ministry  in  life;  and  whether,  therefore,  it  is  not  a  religious  obligation  so  to  use  it, 
to  nurture  the  sense  of  it,  to  seek  gratifications  for  it,  and  to  make  it  a  minister 
of  devout  thought  and  feeling.  The  beautiful  is  much  more  than  a  mere  gratifica- 
tion of  the  senses;  although  even  this  were  not  an  unworthy  ministry.  One  of 
the  materialistic  theories  of  our  day  is,  that  uses  and  fitnesses  of  things  are  not 
the  result  of  creative  design,  but  of  natural  selection,  or  of  practical  necessity. 
Natiure  produces  the  eye  because  man  needs  to  see,  and  teeth  because  he  needs 
to  eat.  But  what  is  the  causation  of  beauty?  What  principle  of  natural  selec- 
tion, what  necessity  of  use,  produces  the  plumage  of  the  bird,  the  pencilling  of 
the  leaf?  Is  not  beauty  the  absolute  creation  of  God,  and  has  it  not  a  special 
religious  ministry?  Beauty,  if  I  may  reverently  say  so,  is  God's  taste,  God's  art, 
God's  manner  of  workmanship.  Beauty  is  the  necessary  conception  of  the 
Creator's  thought,  the  necessary  product  of  His  hand;  variety  in  beauty  is  the 
necessary  expression  of  His  infiinite  mind.  It  is  part  of  the  perfection  of  God's 
works,  part  of  the  perfection  of  God  Himself;  like  truth,  like  holiness,  like  bene* 
ficence,  like  graoiousness.  We  infer,  therefore,  that  beauty  is  part  of  our  human 
perfection  also;  that  tmbeautiful  things  are  defective  things.  Beauty  is  not 
intended  to  minister  to  a  mere  idle  sentiment.  It  is  a  minister  to  our  moral 
nature.     It  is  part  oi  our  religious  culture  and  responsibility;  so  far  as  we  can 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

control  them,  we  are  as  responsible  for  ideas  and  things  of  beauty  as  for  ideas  and 
things  of  truth   and  purity.     In  corroboration  of  all  this   we  might  adduce  the 
recognitions  and  inculcations  of  the  beautiful  which  we  find  in  Scripture.     Even 
in  the  physical  beauty  of  nature  the  writers  of  the  Bible  have  a  rejoicing  apprecia- 
tion which  we  find  in  no  other  ancient  literature.     It  is  not  difference  of  race  that 
accoimts  for  it,  it  is  difference  of  culture.     It  is  the  deeper,  more  pervading  sense 
of   God;   it   is   the  religious   sentiment   of   the  soul.     Unlovely   passions,   morbid 
tempers,    hard   goodness,   ascetic   forms   of  religious   life,   are  repugnant   to   the 
sentiment  of  the  Bible.      In   everything  it   inculcates   beauty   and  joy;   so  that 
beauty   has   a   moral  basis,   moral   elements   enter  into  it.     How,  then,  does   it 
minister  to  goodness  in  practical  life?     May  not  we  say  that  there  is  a  natural 
congruity  between  beauty  and  moral  goodness?     All  sin,  all  wrong,  are  imbeau- 
tiful,  even  to  the  instinctive  sense.     It  is  vain  to  ask  why.     God  has  so  made  us. 
And  because  we  are  so  made,  vice,  wrong,  moral  pollution,  can  never  be  mada 
beautiful,  can  never  satisfy  our  feeling,  produce  in  us  complacency  and  rest.     On 
the  other  hand,  we  are  equally  constrained  to  deem  all  good  things  beautiful.    Wo 
may  not  do  them;  we  may  not  like  them;  our  evil  passion  may  disparage  them; 
but  we  are  compelled  to  admire  them.    The  truth  of  things  is  too  strong  for  even 
evil  passion.     Moral  feeling  will  admire  what  passion  dislikes;  the  most  vicious 
never  call  goodness  hideous.     In  this  way,  then,  through  the  constitution  that 
God  has  given  us,  through  the  moral  order  that  He  has  established,  the  beautiful 
is  a  minister  to  goodness;  the  wrong  thing  that  we  do  does  violence  to  our  sense 
of  the  beautiful.     And  the  nearer  to  perfection  men  get,  the  more  they  are  affected 
by  the  beautiful.     In  nature,  in  art,  in  poetry,  in  music,  in  social  surroundings, 
the  man  of  largest  culture  has  the  keenest  sense  of  the  beautiful;  the  man  whose 
sense  of  God  is  deepest,  whose  holiness  is  highest,  whose  spiritual  sensibilities 
are  keenest,  has  the  greatest   appreciation  of  both   physical  and  moral   beauty. 
Nothing  excites  so  much  admiration  as  noble  character,  and  the  virtues  that  con- 
stitute it.    It  follows  that  the  highest  attainment  of  beauty  is  possible  only  to  the 
good.    What  influence  character  has  upon  personal  beauty !     Mere  features  do  not 
constitute  the  beauty  of  a  face.     An  unbeautiful  soul  will  make  the  finest  face 
repellent.     Beautiful  expression  irradiates  the  plainest  features,  so  that  the  sense 
of  plainness  shall  be  altogether  lost.     Some  faces  charm  you  like  a  picture,  hold 
you  spellbound  like  a  talisman.     It  is  the  beautiful  soul  that  irradiates  them — the 
purity,  the  unselfishness,  the  nobleness,  the  love.      The  artistic  sense  is  over- 
powered by  the  instinctive  moral  admiration.     The  ministries  of  beauty  are  mani- 
fold.    It  ministers  to  goodness.     I  could  not,  I  think,  so  love  God  if  His  works 
were  repellent  by  their  ugliness,  instead  of  attractive  by  their  beauty.     To  how 
much  in  both  mind  and  heart  they  appeal  I     I  yearn  for  a  greater  knowledge,  a 
closer  communion  with  Him,  who  adorns  with  so  much  beauty  even  His  lowliest 
works.     The  religiousness  of  the  Bible  is  more  to  us  because  of  its  eloquence  and 
imaginative  beauty,  its  glorious  Psalms,  its  exciting  and  pathetic  histories,  its 
sublime  prophecies.      How  the   New  Jerusalem   fascinates   and   wins   us   by   its 
pictured  glories  1     Beauty  ministers  to  love.     When  I  look  upon  the  countenance 
of  wife  or  child,  of  friend  or  even  stranger,  inspired  and  made  beautiful  by  some 
noble  sentiment  of  virtue,  piety,  personal  affection,  patriotism,  philanthropy,  self- 
sacrifice,  how  easy  it  is  to  excite  love  I     Thus  beauty  is  one  of  the  ministries — 
ordained   bj   God — of   religion,    virtue,   affection,   amiability.     Beauty,    therefore, 
is  to  be  cultured;  as  gentleness  is,  as  tenderness  is,  as  unselfishness  is.     It  is  a 
vital  part  of  our  being,  and  cannot  be  neglected  without  injury  to  the  rest.    Social 
life  is  to  be  filled  with  amenities;  family  life  is  to  be  made  gentle  and  graceful 
by  courteous  manners,  by  warm  sympathies,  by  varied  culture  of  literature  and 
art,  by  bright  and  gladdening  pleasures,  as  well  as  by  rudimentary  virtues  and 
pieties.    Church  life  is  to  be  made  gracious  and  joyous,  by  refined  modes  of  fellow- 
ship and  service,  by  culture  of  worship,  and  by  gentle,  loving,  helpful  charities 
of  feeling  and  speech.     In   all  relations  personal  goodness  is  to  be  adorned  by 
gracious  feeling  and  by  divining  love,  by  "  things  that  are  lovely  and  of  good 
report,"  by  "  the  gentleness  of  Christ,"  by  "  the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet 
spirit,"  by  the  crowning  graces  of  the  beatitudes.     In  every  possible  enumeration 
and  array  of  the  beatitudes  of  a  holy  life,  "the  greatest  of  these  is  charity." 
(H.  Allon,  D.D.)     The  beauty  of  change  and  glory  of  permanence : — I  prefer  the 
reading  of  the  margin  of  the  B.V. :  "  He  hath  made  everything  beautiful  in  its 
time;  also  He  hath  set  eternity  in  their  heart."    1.  That  the  world  as  God  has 
made  it,  and  life  as  He  has  ordained  it,  have  the  eharm  of  variety.    "  He  hath 


CPAT.  111.]  ECCLESIASTES.  97 

made  everything  beautiful  in  its  time."  It  is  a  part  of  the  Divine  order  of  things 
that  there  should  be  seasons ;  for  instance,  that  there  should  be  seasons  of  the 
year.  "  God  made  summer,"  said  the  inspired  writer,  but  he  also  said  that  "  God 
made  winter."  Apart  from  the  latter  assurance,  some  men  might  have  doubted 
it.  Everybody  can  accept  that.  God  made  light.  But  it  required  an  inspired 
assurance  to  convince  men  that  He  also  "  made  darkness,  and  it  was  night." 
Each  of  these  is  beautiful  in  its  time;  but  out  of  its  time  it  would  lose  its  beauty. 
You  men  who  go  to  London  find  that  out  in  November.  You  go  up  in  the  morning, 
and  at  midday  you  have  a  night  coming  on.  I  have  never  yet  seen  a  man  who 
has  said  that  anything  that  brings  on  night  when  there  should  be  day  is  beautiful. 
In  all  that  there  is  a  sense  of  incongruity.  If  there  be  darkness,  let  it  come  at  the 
proper  hour :  it  will  then  bring  soothing  and  restfulnees  beneath  its  sable  wings. 
This  teaches  us  a  collateral  truth  which  perhaps  we  are  too  apt  to  overlook.  The 
curse  of  the  world  and  of  life  is  in  its  dislocation.  Above  all,  man  has  lost  his 
position.  Now  it  is  wonderful  what  mischief  a  little  thing  can  do  when  it  is  out  of 
its  place.  The  other  day  I  saw  that  a  beautiful  block  had  been  battered.  What 
was  the  matter?  Oh,  a  little  piece  of  type  had  been  sucked  up  by  the  rollers  in 
printing,  and  drawn  to  the  surface  of  the  block,  and  the  cylinder  passed  over  it, 
and  thus  marred  its  delicate  beauty.  That  bit  of  type  was  beautiful  in  its  place. 
It  had  a  distinct  meaning  and  mission  of  its  own;  but  once  out  of  its  place,  it 
not  only  lost  its  own  beauty,  but  marred  the  beauty  of  something  nobler  than 
itself.  If  our  organist  were  to  play  a  wrong  note,  we  should  all  feel  it :  a  cold 
shudder  would  go  through  us.  Why?  It  is  true  that  even  that  note  is  in  the 
organ ;  it  has  its  place  in  there :  but  it  was  not  meant  to  come  in  just  where  he  in 
such  a  case  put  it;  and  that  would  make  all  the  difference  between  harmony  and 
discord.  All  the  other  notes  would  share  its  ignominy,  and  become  apparently 
discordant  with  it;  and  even  men  like  myself,  who  know  little  or  nothing  aboufc 
music,  would  feel  a  cold  shudder,  when  we  should  have  felt  the  glow  of  response 
if  that  note  had  not  come  in  at  the  wrong  place.  Further,  the  secret  of  the  world's 
discords  is  in  its  sin.  When  man  sinned,  he  lost  his  position;  he  no  longer 
occupied  the  place  God  intended  him  to  occupy;  and  when  he  fell  from  his  position, 
the  whole  creation  fell  with  him.  "  The  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth 
together  in  pain  until  now."  What  is  it  waiting  for?  "For  the  manifestation 
of  the  sons  of  God."  When  man  is  brought  back  into  his  proper  place,  harmony 
shall  be  restored,  not  before.  You  see,  therefore,  the  folly  of  visiting  God  with 
rebukes  because  of  the  miseries  that  abound  on  every  hand.  God  never  made 
these  miseries.  Everything  was  beautiful  in  its  time  according  to  the  Divine  order; 
but  man  has  leapt  out  of  his  place,  and  when  the  greatest  creature  on  God's  earth 
has  lost  his  position,  what  must  follow?  Astronomers  tell  us  that  if  one  of  those 
worlds  that  rush  along  their  orbits  were  to  lose  its  course,  it  would  go  on  blimder- 
ing  through  space  and  bringing  discord  with  it  wherever  it  went.  Supposing  such 
a  world  had  the  volition  that  man  has,  and  wittingly  and  persistently  departed 
from  the  course  that  God  intended  for  it,  and  brought  discord  with  it,  would  you 
find  a  difficulty  in  bringing  home  to  the  right  quarter  the  responsibility  of  that 
discord?  2.  That  in  the  midst  of  life's  changes  God  has  endued  man  with  eternal 
attributes  and  longings.  "  He  hath  set  eternity  in  their  heart."  When  men  tell 
me  that  man  is  not  immortal  by  nature,  my  own  nature  protests  against  it.  I 
know  that  I  am  to  live  for  ever,  for  good  or  ill.  There  are  immortal  yearnings  in 
me  which  tell  of  powerful  affinities  for  eternity  which  God  has  implanted  there. 
It  is  this  consciousness  of  eternity  in  man  that  is  the  compensating  grace  for  all 
that  would  otherwise  be  distracting  and  discouraging  in  change  and  transiency. 
But  there  is  also  another  aspect  of  this  truth.  3.  God,  in  putting  eternal  yearn- 
ings into  men's  hearts,  has  made  it  impossible  for  them  to  satisfy  themselves  with 
the  joys  which  this  world  can  supply.  (D.  Daviei.)  He  hath  set  the  world  in 
their  heart. — Eternity  in  man: — God  has  set  eternity  in  the  heart  of  man.  This 
explains — I.  Its  sense  of  the  emptiness  of  all  mundane  things.  No  more  can 
the  world  satisfy  what  is  in  man  than  a  dewdrop  can  quench  the  burning  thirst 
of  a  lion.  Its  unbroken  and  unsilenceable  cry  after  it  has  received  all  the  world 
can  give,  is,  "  More,  more."  II.  Its  consciousness  of  the  unstability  of  all 
THINGS  connected  WITH  CUE  EARTHLY  LIFE.  The  Sense  of  mutation  rests  con- 
stantly and  heavily  on  the  soul.  But  this  sense  could  not  exist  if  there  was  not 
something  in  us  that  is  imchanged  and  unchanging.  As  that  rock,  which  lifts 
its  majestic  head  above  the  ocean,  and  alone  remains  unmoved  amidst  the  restless 
waves,  and  the  passing  fleets,  is  the  only  measure  to  the  voyager  of  all  that 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  ni. 

moTes  on  the  great  world  of  waters,  so  the  sense  of  the  immutable,  which  Heaven 
has  planted  in  our  souls,  is  the  standard  by  which  alone  we  become  conscious  of 
the  mutation  of  our  earthly  life.  III.  Its  yeaening  to  look  into  the  invisible. 
Inquiry  into  the  reason  of  things  is  a  deep  and  resistless  instinct.  In  the  child  it 
is  called  curiosity,  in  the  man,  the  philosophic  spirit.  But  the  reason  of  things 
is  behind  this  sense,  it  is  in  the  region  of  the  invisible,  and  the  invisible  is  the 
eternal.  I  see  not  my  soul,  and  that  is  eternal,  and  its  inquiries  are  after  the 
eternal.  IV.  Its  constant  anticipations  of  the  fctcke.  Its  pMt  is  gone,  how- 
ever long  and  eventful  it  might  have  been.  Gone  as  a  vision  of  the  night.  To  the 
future  it  looks,  onward  is  its  anxious  glance.  It  '*  never  is,  but  always  to  be 
blessed."  V.  Its  inexhaustibility  bt  its  proddctions.  The  more  the  fruitful 
tree  produces,  the  less  it  will  produce  in  the  future,  and  it  will  at  last  exhaust 
itself  by  its  productions.  Not  so  with  the  soul.  The  more  fruit  it  yields,  the 
more  fecundant  it  becomes.  The  more  a  man  thinks,  the  more  capable  he  is  of 
thinking;  the  more  he  loves,  the  deeper  becomes  the  fountains  of  afiection  within 
him.  VI.  Its  UNIVERSAL  teabnino  fob  a  God.  "  Man  as  a  race,"  says  Liddon, 
"  is  like  those  captains  of  whom  we  read,  more  than  once,  in  history,  that  once 
having  believed  a  throne  to  be  within  their  grasp,  they  never  could  settle  down 
again  quietly  as  contented  subjects.  Man  as  man  has  a  profound,  an  ineradicable 
instinct  of  his  splendid  destiny.  He  knows  that  the  objects  which  meet  his  eye, 
that  the  average  words  which  fall  upon  his  ear,  that  the  common  thoughts  and 
purposes  and  passions  which  haunt  his  heart  and  his  brain,  are  very  far  indeed 
from  being  adequate  to  his  real  capacity."  He  wants  God,  nothing  l&sa  than 
God  Himself.  VII.  Its  abiding  sense  of  personal  identity.  The  old  man  who 
has  passed  through  a  long  life  of  great  changes,  and  whose  bodily  frame,  too,  has 
been  several  times  exchanged,  has,  notwithstanding,  an  ineradicable  belief  that  he 
is  the  same  person  as  when  a  boy  at  school.  He  has  no  doubt  of  it.  Bodies  may 
be  lost  in  bodies,  but  souls  never  lost  in  souls.  Why  this?  It  is  because  there 
is  eternity  in  us.  {Homiliat.)  Eternity  in  the  heart: — "  He  hath  set  eternity  in 
their  heart."  Then  perhaps  if  we  look  carefully  we  may  find  it.  I  look  into  the 
primitive  heart  of  man,  into  the  childlike  and  unsophisticated  heart.  What  do  I 
find?  Do  I  find  any  traces  of  eternity?  I  find  an  instinct,  which,  being  inter- 
preted, seems  to  say:  "I'm  but  a  stranger  here,  heaven  is  my  home."  "  Here 
we  have  no  continuing  city;  we  seek  one  to  come."  "  I  nightly  pitch  my  moving 
tent  a  day's  march  nearer  home."  In  the  heart  of  man,  in  Christendom  and  in 
savagedom,  there  is  an  instinct  that  time  is  not  our  home,  that  here  we  are  only 
in  tents,  that  here  we  sojourn,  but  do  not  abide,  and  the  instinct  is  not  born  of 
fear  nor  of  selfishness :  the  explanation  is  in  my  text,  "  God  hath  set  eternity  "  in 
our  hearts.  Have  we  any  further  evidences  of  this  Implanting  of  eternity  within 
us?  When  I  go  into  my  heart  and  listen,  I  hear  a  voice  saying  to  me:  "  This 
thou  must  do;  this  thou  must  not  do."  The  voice  does  not  speak  in  mere  sugges- 
tion, offering  friendly  counsel.  It  speaks  like  a  monarch  in  tones  of  command. 
It  tells  me  that  all  things  are  not  of  one  moral  colour.  Some  things  are  morally 
black  and  some  morally  white,  and  I  have  to  observe  the  distinction.  Of  the 
black,  the  voice  says  :  "  Thou  must  not."  Of  the  white,  which  it  calls  the  right, 
the  voice  says  :  *'  Thou  must  I"  I  ask  my  fellow-man  if  he  hears  the  same  voice, 
and  he  answers  :  "  Yes,  it  speaks  to  me."  I  find  that  the  voice  speaks  in  every 
life.  What  is  the  voice?  We  call  it  conscience.  But  conscience  has  no  birth  in 
time.  All  the  temporal  explanations  which  have  been  attempted  are  painfully 
inadequate  and  futile.  "  The  voice  of  the  Great  Eternal  speaks  in  that  mighty 
tone."  That  secret  voice  which  speaks  to  us  of  the  eternal  distinction  between 
right  and  wrong  finds  its  explanation  in  my  text :  "  God  hath  set  eternity  in  their 
hearts."  Can  wo  find  any  further  evidence?  Look  again  into  the  heart  of  man. 
May  we  not  say  that  in  every  heart  there  is  a  strange  feeling  after  God?  I  know 
it  may  be  numbed  and  blunted,  but  I  don't  think  it  can  be  altogether  destroyed. 
Let  me  try  to  illvistrate  this.  You  know  that  hydrogen  gas  is  considerably  lighter 
than  the  atmosphere  that  is  round  about  us.  When  you  fill  a  substance  with  the 
gas,  say  the  silk  that  forms  a  balloon,  it  seeks  to  rise  above  the  heavier  atmosphere 
around,  just  as  a  cork  rises  through  water  and  rests  upon  its  surface.  The  lighter 
element  tugs  and  tugs,  and  seeks  to  get  away  into  the  finer  and  rarer  regions 
above.  Well,  it  seems  as  though  our  God  had  put  into  the  make-up  of  a  human 
being  ethereal  elements,  spiritual  longings  and  hungers,  which  seek  to  rise  above 
the  groesness  of  flesh  and  time,  to  find  their  home  in  piirer  regions  beyond.  A 
light  gas  must  reach  an  atmosphere  of  its  own  rarity  before  it  can  be  at  rest. 


CKAP.  m.]  ECCLESIASTES.  90 

And  these  ethereal,  spiritual  elements  within  us,  these  implanted  feelings,  must 
rise  into  their  own  appropriate  atmosphere,  into  communion  with  the  great  Spirit, 
before  they  can  be  at  rest.  Meanwhile,  they  tug  at  us,  and  we  have  all  felt  their 
tuggings  I  We  have  felt  some  good  impulse  tugging  at  us,  tugging  in  the  direction 
of  God.  When  we  have  been  walking  with  open  eyes  into  gross  and  deliberate 
sin,  we  have  felt  the  tugging  of  the  lighter  element  within  us,  the  spiritual  feeling, 
seeking  to  lift  us  out  of  our  grossnees  nearer  to  Ood.  Call  it  by  what  name  you 
will,  thers  is  something  in  every  heart  which  makes  for  Ood,  and  will  never  be 
satisfied  until  it  gets  there.  God  has  put  a  mouth  in  oiur  hearts,  a  spiritual 
hunger,  that  He  may  draw  us  to  seek  satisfaction  and  rest  where  alone  it  can  be 
found,  in  the  presence  and  communion  of  the  Eternal  Spirit.  "  Ha  has  put 
eternity  in  thair  heart."  Now  what  are  the  consequences  of  this  implanting? 
If  eternity  has  been  set  within  us  as  part  of  our  very  being,  what  must  surely 
follow?  The  Eternal  within  us  seeks  the  Eternal,  and  nothing  but  the  Eternal 
will  feed  it.  That  mouth  in  the  heart,  that  hunger  of  the  spirit,  can  only  be  fed 
with  one  kind  of  bread,  and  that  the  Bread  of  Life.  Now,  what  kind  of  efforts 
are  men  making  to  satisfy  the  eternity  in  their  heart?  Along  what  particular 
lines  are  they  searching  for  bread?  There  was  s  book  published  some  three  or 
four  years  ago  of  extraordinary  literary  brilliancy  and  power.  It  speedily  passed 
into  many  editions,  it  was  'most  favourably  reviewed,  and  appeared  to  make  a 
great  impression  upon  all  who  read  it.  I  want  to  read  you  two  or  three  lines 
from  the  preface,  in  which  the  author  sums  up  the  whole  burden  of  the  counsel 
which  he  desires  to  give  to  hie  coimtrymen  :  "  Stick  to  your  work,  and  when  your 
day  is  done,  amuse  and  refresh  yourselves."  And  he  adds  in  the  next  sentence 
that  "this  is  wholesome  doctrine."  Wholesome  doctrine  I  What  are  its  ingredi- 
ents? Two  things — labour  and  pleasure.  Follow  those  two  and  you  are  all  right. 
But  what  about  the  eternity  in  my  heart?  I  am  not  unmindful  that  labour  is  a 
glorious  means  of  grace.  A  man  can  get  rid  of  many  a  vicious  humovir  by  applying 
himself  to  work.  But  work  may  be  altogether  atheistic  or  temporal,  and  work 
that  is  atheistic  or  altogether  temporal  will  leave  a  man  full  of  hunger;  it  will 
not  feed  the  eternity  that  God  has  set  in  his  .heart.  If  our  work  is  to  feed  the 
eternity  within  us,  the  thought  of  the  Eternal  must  be  in  our  work.  As  it  is  with 
work  so  it  is  with  pleasure.  Pleasure  of  itself  cannot  feed  the  soul,  but  gaiety 
often  goes  hand  in  hand  with  spiritual  leanness.  If  you  take  a  low  thought  with 
you,  then  the  pleasure  which  gratifies  your  body  will  starve  your  soul.  But  if  you 
take  into  yomr  pleasure  the  thought  of  the  Eternal,  then  your  pleasure  is  trans- 
formed into  a  soul-feeding  joy.  The  thought  of  the  Eternal  in  your  pleasure  feeds 
the  eternity  in  your  heart,  but  without  that  thought  a  life  of  gaiety  is  a  life  of 
emptiness,  and  will  leave  you  at  last  with  "  leanness  for  your  soul,"  and  with 
the  mouth  in  yoiur  heart  still  hungering  for  the  bread  which  has  been  so  long  ^^ 
denied.  (J.  H.  Joweti,  M.A.)  The  world  in  the  soul: — I.  The  wobld  is  in  bvbet 
van's  beabt  as  a  mbntal  imaoe.  The  men  of  the  world  whom  we  have  known; 
the  villages,  towns,  cities,  which  we  have  visited;  the  landscapes  we  have 
observed — in  truth,  all  outside  of  us  that  have  ever  come  imder  our  notice  have 
stamped  their  image  on  the  heart.  The  photographs  of  all  are  within.  Thus  we 
carry  within  us  all  those  parts  and  phases  of  the  world  that  have  ever  come  within 
the  sweep  of  our  observation.  II.  The  world  is  in  evebt  man's  heabt  as  a 
NEOESSART  INPLDBNCE.  So  many  and  so  close  are  the  ties  with  which  the  Creator 
has  boimd  us  to  this  world,  that  it  comes  into  us  as  a  mighty  and  constantly  acting 
force.  There  are  many  affections  planted  in  the  heart  that  must  bring  the  world 
into  it  as  an  active  power.  There  is  self-preservation.  Our  very  subsistence  so 
depends  upon  the  cultivation  of  the  fields,  the  exploration  of  the  minerals,  the 
navigating  of  the  seas,  the  transactions  of  the  market,  and  in  working,  in  some 
way  or  other,  in  the  outward  world,  that  it  necessarily  absorbs  such  an  amount 
of  o\ir  attention,  ae  to  bring  it  into  us  as  a  most  powerful  force  of  action.  There 
is  social  affection.  There  are  boys  and  girls,  men  and  women,  on  whom  our 
affections  are  set — brothers,  sisters,  husbands,  wives,  father,  mother,  friends  who 
are  so  near  to  our  sympathies,  that,  without  figure,  we  bring  them  into  us.  They 
live  in  us,  and  exert  no  small  amount  of  influence  upon  the  activities  of  our  life. 
Had  we  the  philanthropy  of  Christ,  we  should  bear,  as  He  did,  the  whole  human 
world  upon  q\xr  hearts.  There  is  the  love  of  beauty.  Man's  instinct  for  the 
beautiful  is  deep  and  strong.  This  instinct  not  only  brings  the  world  near  to 
him,  but  into  him.  The  craving  of  the  soul  for  the  beautiful  in  form  and  colour 
and  the  grand  in  aspect  gives  this  world,  which  abounds  with  the  beautiful  and 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

sublime,  a  mighty  power  in  the  soul.     III.  The  world  is  in  evert  man's  heart 
AS  A  GREAT  BEALITT.     The  world  is  to  evBTy  man  according  to  the  state  of  his  soul; 
great  or  small ,  according  to  his  conceptions ;  overspread  with  sadness  or  radiant 
with  joy,  according  to  his  feelings;  a  scene  of  temptation  to  contaminate,  or  of 
discipline  to  refine,  according  to  the  ruling  principles  of  the  heart.     1.  The  char- 
acter of  the  material  world  is  to  a  man  what  he  makes  it.     The  world  of  tha 
untutored  rustic  is  very  different  from  that  of  the  man  of  science.    What  has  mad» 
the  difference — the  difference  in  the  state  of  intellect?     The  man  of  science  has 
read  and  thought  and  investigated;  and  as  he  has  done  so,  the  world  has  growa 
in  magnitude — in  splendoxir,  and  in  interest.     Moreover,  what  a  difference  there  ia 
between  the  world  of  a  cheerful  and  that  of  a  gloomy  man  I     2.  The  character  of 
the  human  world  is  to  man  what  he  makes  of  it.    To  the  selfish  all  men  are  selfish ; 
to  the  dishonest  all  men  are  dishonest;  to  the  false  all  men  are  false;  to  the 
generous  all  men  are  generous.    8.  The  character  of  the  God  of  the  world  is  to  man 
what  he  makes  it.     Polytheism  is  not  confined  to  heathen  lands  where  idols  are 
made  and  worshipped.     There  is  a  certain  kind  of  polytheism  everywhere.     The 
God  the  man   worships   is  the   God  he  has   imaged  to  himself,   and   men   have 
different  images,  according  to  the  state  of  their  own  hearts.      Hence,  even  in 
Christian  theology,  what  different  views  we  have  of  God  I      All  go  to  the  New 
Testament  for  arguments  to  support  their  views,  and  they  succeed  in  getting  them, 
for  we  can  get  from  that  Holy  Book  what  we  bring  to  it.    Thus,  even  the  God  of  the 
world  is  according  to  oiu:  hearts.    "  To  the  piure  Thou  wilt  show  Thyself  piu-e;  and 
with  the  froward  Thou  wilt  show  Thyself  f reward."    Lessons  : — 1.  The  greatness  of 
the  human  soul.    It  has  the  capacity  to  receive,  retain,  reflect  all  outward  things. 
2.  The  duty  of  mental  modesty.    No  man  has  absolute  truths  in  him.    All  that  he 
has  are  opinions  formed  by  himself  concerning  those  truths.     3.  The  necessity  of 
soul  oultiure.     If  you  want  a  bright  and  lovely  world — a  world  that  you  will  enjoy 
SB  a  paradise,  you  must  endeavour  to  make  the  heart  right.     4.  The  nature  of  the 
millennial  glory.     Change  the  world's  heart,  fill  it  with  truth,  and  love,  and  God, 
and  it  will  have  a  new  heaven  and  new  earth — a  new  universe  to  live  in.     6.  The 
need  of  Divine  influence.     Who  shall  make  these  hearts  right?     Who  shall  repair 
and  clean  this  beclouded  mirror?     Ah,  who?     We  cannot  do  it  ourselves.    Nor  can 
our  fellow-men  do  it  for  us.    This  is  God's  work.    It  ie  He  who  gives  a  new  heart 
and  a  new  spirit,  and  with  that  a  new  universe.     {Homilist.)     Eternity: — The 
difference  between  the  splendid  world  of  vegetation,  with  its  myriad  colours  and 
its  ever-changing  life;  between  the  animal  world,  with  its  studied  gradations  of 
form  and  of  development — and  man,  is  this  :  God  hath  set  eternity  in  oiu:  hearts. 
All  creation  around  us  is  satisfied  with  its  sustenance,  we  alone  have  a  thirst  and 
a  hunger  for  which  the  circumstances  of  owi  life  have  no  meat  and  drink.    In  the 
burning  noonday  of  life's  labour  man  sits — as  the  Son  of  Man  once  sat — by  well- 
sides  weary,  and  while  others  can  slake  their  thirst  with  that,  he  needs  a  living 
water;  while  others  go  into  cities  to  buy  meat,  he  has  need  of  and  finds  a  suste- 
nance that  they  know  not  of.     Is  not  the  strange,  sad  contrast,  which  is  brought 
out  before  us  here,  true?    Is  not  man  a  striking  anomaly?    He  dwells  amid  the 
finite ;  he  longs  for  the  infinite.     All  the  rest  of  creation  can  find  enough  to  satisfy 
its  wants — he  carmot.     He  is  like  the  bird  that  wings  its  way  over  the  surging 
waters,  seeking  rest,  and  finding  none,  while  the  coarser  thing  can  satisfy  itself 
on  the  floating  garbage.     The  truer  and  the  nobler  man  is,  the  more  certainly 
he  feels  all  this,  the  more  keenly  he  realizes  eternity  in  his  heart.    There  is  none 
of  us,  however,  who  do  not  feel  it  sometimes.     As  you  gaze  on  some  setting  sun, 
and  its  burning  rays  of  gold  seem  to  you  like  the  very  light  of  heaven  across  the 
glowing  hinges  of  her  closing  doors — as  you  stand  amid  some  mountain  solitude 
that  rises  like  heaven's  ramparts  against  the  sounds  and  strifes  of  earth — as  some 
note  of  music  seems  "  to  come  from  the  soul  of  the  organ  and  enter  into  thine  " — 
as  some  deep  sorrow,  or  some  deeper  joy  falls  upon  your  life — in  these,  or  other 
kindred  experiences,  the  eternity  which  God  has  set  in  your  heart  will  assert  itself; 
you  will  feel  in  yoiu-  soul  the  thirst  of  a  life  which  cannot  be  satisfied,  and  which 
caimot  end  here.    And  why?    Because  God  hath  set  eternity  in  our  hearts.    Ho 
has  given  us  a  hunger  which  can  be  satisfied  only  with  the  Bread  of  Life,  a  thirst 
which  can  be  quenched  only  by  the  living  water  from 'the  Rock  of  Ages.     Well, 
granting  the  universal  desire ;  granting  the  universal  capacity ;  granting  the  almost 
universal  conviction  that  there  is  such  a  life,  may  we  not  be  deceived?    That  is  the 
triumphant  answer  of  some  philosophers.     Deceived  1     By  whom  ?    It  is  God  who 
hath  Bet  eternity  in  oar  heairta.    Do  you  mean  we  have  been  deceived  by  Himf. 


CHAP,  m.]  ECCLE8IASTE8.  101 

Are,  we,  then,  to  believe  that  Ood  eeot  the  noblest,  purest,  best  Teacher  that 

ever  visited  this  earth,  and  gave  Him  the  moral  illumination  and  power  to  dispel 
a  thousand  errors,  and  explode  a  hundred  fallacies  which  ignorance  had  invented 
or  superstition  had  nurtured,  but  left  Him  so  ignorant  upon  this  point — the  one 
universal  error — that  it  was  the  supreme  sustenance  of  His  own  life  and  the  very 
lever  by  which  He  did  raise  the  world?  Can  you  believe  that?  All  that  is  best, 
truest,  noblest  in  your  souls  rebels  against  the  thought.  O  God,  we  trust  Thee  1 
We  bow  our  heads  before  Thee  in  reverence  for  even  daring  to  speak  of  it.  We 
trust  the  word  of  Thy  Incarnate  Son  1  0  Christ,  we  know  Thy  words  were  true 
when  Thou  saidst : — "  If  it  were  not  bo  I  would  have  told  you."  Thou  didst  not 
tell  us,  and  it  is  tbue  I  God  hath  set  eternity  in  our  hearts.  Are  we  living 
worthy  of  it?  Are  we  living  as  if  we  really  believed  it?  The  only  way  of  doing 
so  is  by  clinging  close  to  Him,  by  dying  with  Him  to  all  that  He  died  to  save  ua 
from,  and  living  worthy  of  that  life  and  immortality  which  He  hath  brought 
from  out  of  the  mists  of  speculation  into  the  light  of  truth  by  His  Gospel.  Instead 
of  the  "  perhaps  "  of  philosophic  speculation,  we  have,  thank  God,  the  "  Credo  " 
of  Christianity.  (T.  T.  Shore,  M.A.)  The  hope  of  immortality: — 1.  Let  us  first 
take  this  text  as  it  is  given  in  our  old  Bible — "  He  hath  set  the  world  in  their 
heart."  That  is,  the  Creator  hath  set  the  world  in  the  hearts  of  the  children  of 
men.  This  correspondence  between  the  world  without  and  the  mind  within  is 
one  of  the  most  striking  evidences  of  wisdom  and  the  beneficence  of  the  Creator. 
You  see  it  in  those  outworks  of  the  mind — those  five  senses.  Between  them  and 
the  qualities  of  the  world  outside  there  is  a  correspondence  on  which  all  the  activity 
and  movement  of  life  depend.  All  the  senses  are  inlets  by  which  the  forms  and 
the  glory  of  the  world  pass  inwards  to  be  set  in  the  heart  of  man.  But  it  is  when 
you  go  a  little  further  into  the  mind  itself  that  you  fully  see  the  beneficence  of  the 
Creator.  Take,  for  instance,  what  seems  to  be  referred  to  in  this  verse — the  sense 
of  beauty  in  the  mind.  Beauty  exists  in  the  world  in  a  thousand  forms — in  the 
lines  of  light,  in  the  currents  of  the  wind,  in  the  circle  of  the  moon  and  of  the 
sun,  in  the  forms  of  leaves  and  plants;  and  so  on.  But  what  would  it  all  be  if 
there  were  not  in  the  mind  a  sense  of  beauty  corresponding  to  it?  Do  you 
remember  that  ancient  fancy  of  Plato  that  all  knowledge  is  reminiscence — i.  e. 
when  the  shapes  of  things  present  themselves  to  the  senses  they  do  not  so  much 
convey  knowledge  into  the  mind  as  wake  up  knowledge  that  is  dormant  in  the 
mind.  Have  you  not  noticed  when  you  looked  for  the  first  time  on  some  glorious 
landscape  that  you  felt  as  if  you  had  known  it  all  your  life?  So  when  you  have 
met  for  the  first  time  a  fine  specimen  of  human  nature  you  had  the  impression 
that  you  had  always  been  waiting  for  it.  Why  was  it  that  Shakespeare,  without 
any  classical  cultiu-e,  was  able  with  his  Eoman  play  to  enter  into  the  very  spirit 
of  the  ancient  world  and  in  all  his  works  to  anticipate  forms  of  society  and  describe 
how  all  possible  forms  of  character  would  act  in  all  possible  circumstances?  Was 
it  not  because,  as  another  great  poet  has  said,  "  when  he  came  into  the  world 
he  brought  all  the  world  with  him  "?  Or,  to  put  it  in  other  words,  God  has  set 
the  world  in  his  heart.  2.  Secondly,  let  us  take  this  text  as  it  occurs  in  the 
margin  of  the  E.V. — "  He  hath  set  eternity  in  their  heart."  What  is  the  meaning 
of  that?  Perhaps  the  meaning  is  suggested  by  the  words  which  immediately 
follow — "  Man  cannot  find  out  the  work  that  God  hath  done  from  the  beginning 
even  to  the  end."  Great  as  is  the  satisfaction  which  the  beautiful  world  gives  to 
the  mind  of  man,  it  is  not  a  complete  satisfaction;  the  questions  of  the  mind  are 
never  all  answered;  the  desires  of  the  heart  are  never  all  satisfied.  It  is  vaguely 
the  Divine — something  above  the  world,  which  you  would  fain  be  at.  Many  as 
are  the  things  in  the  mind  which  find  their  corresponding  satisfaction  in  the  world, 
there  is  in  the  mind  something  deeper  which  reacheth  forth  to  something  above  the 
world — to  the  Divine,  the  Infinite,  and  the  Eternal.  The  whole  Book  of  Ecclesi- 
astes,  from  which  this  text  is  taken,  may  be  said  to  consist  of  variations  on  this 
theme.  It  is  a  description  of  a  splendid  nature  determined  to  find  out  all  that  the 
world  contains  for  it,  and  to  tear  out  of  it  its  secret.  From  every  one  of  his 
quests  Solomon  returned  with  the  same  verdict  on  his  lips — "  All  is  vanity  and 
vexation  of  spirit."  And  that,  in  every  age,  has  been  the  verdict  of  every  living 
Boul  that  has  sought  its  satisfaction  in  earthly  things.  It  was  the  verdict  of  St. 
Francis  that  spring  morning  when  he  stood  at  the  gate  of  Assisi,  and  looked 
down  upon  the  smiling  plain  of  TJmbria,  and  yet  felt  in  his  own  heart  nothing  but 
dust  and  ashes.  It  was  the  verdict  of  St.  Augustine  when,  having  lost  a  dearly- 
loved  friand,  he  wept,  and  thought  he  would  "  give  up  the  ghost,"  and  oould  no 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ih. 

longer  live  in  the  town  from  which  his  friend  had  been  taken  away.  He  had  tried 
friendfihip,  learning,  ambition,  and  honour;  he  had  tried  sensual  gratification,  and 
yet  his  heart  was  sick,  unsatisfied,  and  broken.  Yea,  but  the  deep,  searching 
mind  of  St.  Augustine  found  out  exactly  what  was  the  reason  of  his  dissatisfaction, 
and  expressed  it  in  that  immortal  sentence  which  occurs  in  the  first  paragraph  of 
his  "  Confessions,"  *'  Thou  hast  made  each  heart  for  Thyself,  and  it  finds  no  rest 
until  it  rests  in  Thee."  Blessed  are  they  that  discover  that  this  ia  the  reason  of 
their  disappointment  and  dissatisfaction.  3.  Thirdly,  there  is  one  meaning  that 
may  be  put  on  the  words,  "  He  hath  set  eternity  in  their  heart  ";  and  it  is  a 
very  natural  meaning — that  the  Creator  has  set  in  the  human  heart  the  hope  and 
the  desire  of  immortality.  The  Creator  has  put  into  us  a  conscience  by  which 
we  judge  the  world  round  about  us,  but  this  conscience  is  very  little  satisfied  with 
the  world  as  it  sees  it.  The  conscience  anticipates  that  in  the  world  the  righteous 
will  always  be  prosperous  and  the  imrighteous  confoimded.  But  how  little  that  is 
the  aspect  of  the  world  as  at  present  constituted, — on  every  road  the  righteous 
man  is  bearing  his  cross  amidst  persecution  and  contempt,  and  the  unrighteous 
lifts  high  his  head  while  others  bend  before  him.  Therefore,  the  conscience 
anticipatee  another  state  of  things  where  these  diflSculties  will  be  redressed,  where 
the  righteous  will  be  exalted,  and  where  the  unrighteous  will  be  humbled.  But 
this  is  only  one  of  the  pathways  by  which  the  mind  arises  to  the  idea  of  immor- 
tality. There  are  many  others;  in  short,  the  Creator  has  set  in  the  heart  of  man 
the  desire  and  hope  of  immortality,  and  He  has  set  it  very  deep.  Now  it  can 
surely  be  shown  that  at  a  certain  state  of  development  the  hope  of  immortality 
appears;  and  not  only  so,  but  that  where  this  hope  appears  there  sets  in  a  new 
axis  of  development.  When  man  realizes  that  he  has  before  him  not  one  life, 
but  two,  that  he  is  not  only  the  child  of  time,  but  the  heir  of  eternity,  he  shoots 
up  in  moral  stature,  and  a  new  dignity  overspreads  his  existence.  On  the  other 
hand,  when,  after  being  there,  the  hope  of  immortality  perishes,  it  is  as  if  there 
were  extracted  from  the  atmosphere  a  health-giving  element,  so  that  man  becomes 
email  and  miserable.  The  late  Professor  Romanes,  even  before  he  became  a 
Christian,  confessed  that  the  disappearance  in  his  mind  of  the  hope  of  immortality 
was  like  the  disappearance  of  the  sun  from  the  firmament.  It  may  be  argued, 
indeed,  that  neither  the  universality  of  this  belief,  nor  even  of  ijts  exalting  char- 
acter, is  any  conclusive  evidence  that  there  actually  is  a  future  world  corre- 
sponding to  our  desires;  and  that  is  quite  proved  if  you  take  an  atheistic  view  of 
the  world.  But  if  you  take  a  theistic  view  of  the  world,  I  think  the  existence  of 
the  desire  is  evidence  that  it  will  be  satisfied.  God  will  not  deceive  His  creatures. 
When  the  bird  of  passage,  obeying  the  instinct  which  God  has  set  in  its  heart, 
spreads  its  wings  for  the  South,  its  Creator  does  not  deceive  it;  there  are  sunny 
landscapes  awaiting  it  where  it  goes.  And  do  you  think  that,  when  the  human 
spirit,  rising  out  of  selfishness  and  passion,  spreads  its  wings  for  an  immortal 
home,  there  is  no  paradise  there  to  receive  it?  (J.  Stalker,  D.D.)  Eternity  in 
man't  heart: — I.  We  cannot  persuade  ourselves  that  this  present  state  of 

THINGS    IS   all   with   WHICH    WE   HAVE  TO   DO,   FOR   GOD   HATH    SET   ETERNITY    IN   ODB 

HEART.  We  are  lost  in  the  thought  of  the  duration,  the  magnitude,  the  grandeur 
of  the  material  universe.  Siu*ely  one  might  say :  *'  We  have  enough  here  to 
occupy  and  satisfy  us  ";  and  yet  something  within  us  declares,  "  This  is  not  all. 
This  is  but  the  outward  form;  we  want  the  real  substance  of  which  all  this  is 
but  the  shadow  or  the  pictiure.  This  universe  is  passing  and  transient;  we  seek 
the  permanent  and  eternal.  These  things,  all  of  them,  are  but  effects;  our  mind 
must,  by  the  very  law  of  its  being,  press  on  and  up,  and  cannot  rest  content  till  a 
sufficient  cause  is  foimd  to  account  for  them  all."  The  eternal  past  and  the 
eternal  future  are  written  deeply  on  the  heart.  We  look  back  on  the  past,  and  we 
try  to  trace  the  long  chain  of  events  up  to  an  eternal  Creator.  The  soul  looks  on 
to  the  future,  and,  at  that  great  Creator's  side,  it  sees  itself  passing  unhurt 
through  "  the  wreck  of  ages  and  the  crash  of  worlds,"  immortal  as  its  Sire.  One 
of  the  most  valuable  manuscripts  of  the  New  Testament,  known  to  scholars  as 
MS.C,  is  a  palimpsest.  The  writing  of  the  sacred  text  had  grown  dim  or  been 
carelessly  washed  away,  and  over  it — for  parchments  were  precious  in  those  days — 
the  works  of  some  Syrian  saint  had  been  written.  The  old  letters,  however,  had 
not  been  utterly  obliterated;  they  began  to  peep  through,  and,  by  some  chemical 
process,  they  were  again  made  legible,  and  have  been  carefully  deciphered. 
Eternity  is  written  on  our  hearts  by  the  finger  of  God;  we  cannot  blot  it  utterly 
out.     We  try  to  cover  it  up;  but  the  old  writing  ever  and  anon  peeps  through  and 


CHAP.  HI.]  ECCLESIASTES.  103 

takes  U8  by  surprise.  I  hold  in  my  hand  the  thread  with  which  to  w«ave  my  life 
and  destiny;  but  that  thread  comes  to  me  out  of  the  past  and  reaches  far  beyond 
me  into  the  future.  My  life  is  short;  but  all  eternity  has  been  preparing  for  it, 
and  it  is  meant  to  be  a  preparation  for  eternity  to  come.  I  am  the  lord  of  the 
world,  and  yet  I  feel  there  is  One  over  me,  a  great  eternal  Person,  from  whom  I 
come  and  to  whom  I  go.  Thus,  in  the  midst  of  the  order  and  beauty  of  the 
universe,  man  stands  expectant,  as  some  one  puts  it,  like  Elijah  at  Horeb,  waiting 
for  the  still,  small  voice  which  will  reveal  the  unseen  and  eternal.  Conscience, 
reason,  and  heart  are  all  athirst  for  God,  the  living  God.     IT.  Wb  cannot  rest 

CONTENT  WITH  THIS   WOELD,   FOB  GOD  HAS    SET  ETERNITY  IN   ODE  HEAETS.      YoU  tried 

to  fill  your  heart  and  gain  content  by  thinking  of  the  money  you  had  saved,  of 
the  pleasures  with  which  your  path  of  life  was  strewn,  of  yoiur  happy  home  and 
loving  friends;  but  it  was  not  satisfied.  Doubts,  fears,  anxious  questionings  rose 
up  ever  and  anon,  and  cast  their  dark  shadow  over  you.  You  knew  that  all  these 
things  were  transient  and  imcertain;  and  even  while  they  lasted  they  did  not  fit 
into  your  desires  and  cravings  at  every  point;  they  gave  you  much  enjoyment, 
but  not  a  settled  peace.  When  you  dared  to  think  you  looked  forward  with  dread 
to  loneliness  and  death  and  judgment.  Eternity  was  in  your  heart,  and  time 
could  not  satisfy  you.  But  there  came  a  change.  God  had  mercy  on  you.  He 
wakened  you  thoroughly ;  He  brought  you  to  your  right  mind.  Into  the  sanctuary 
of  your  spirit,  where  eternity  is  written,  you  entered  reverently,  and  God  was 
there.  He  spoke  to  you  by  His  Word — that  Word  you  had  often  read  so  care* 
lessly;  and  you  answered  Him  in  prayer,  in  confession  of  sin,  in  supplication  for 
mercy.  Pardon  was  granted  you  in  Jesus  Christ;  God's  favour  was  assured  you; 
the  earnest  of  the  spirit  was  given  you — eternal  life  was  yours.  As  you  passed 
out  into  the  common  walks  and  work  of  life  all  things  seemed  new.  The  world 
was  brighter  than  it  used  to  be,  and  yet  smaller  and  more  insignificant.  Peace 
was  yours,  and  sweet  content.  A  fountain  of  joy  and  hope  was  welling  up  within 
you,  which  no  loss  or  trial  could  dry  up.  III.  Wb  need  not  despaie  about 
HDHANiTT,  siNCB  GoD  HAS  SET  ETEBNiTT  IN  han's  heast.  Human  nature  is  no 
sphinx ;  it  is  not  a  deception  and  a  snare.  The  eye  is  made  for  light ;  and  as  it 
opens,  lol  the  light  surrounds  it.  The  appetite  craves  appropriate  food,  and,  lol 
corn  appears  on  the  world  with  man,  and  will  grow  wherever  he  can  live.  We 
seek  companionship  and  love;  we  cannot  help  it;  and,  behold  I  the  first  thing  the 
little  child  sees,  as  it  begins  to  notice,  is  the  lamp  of  love,  held  up  to  lighten  bis 
path  through  a  dark  and  dangerous  world.  This  longing  after  God  and  eternity — 
is  there  nothing  provided  to  correspond  to  it?  Surely  God  has  not  put  eternity 
in  man's  heart  simply  to  make  him  tmhappy.  Whence  have  I  come?  Why  am 
I  here?  Whither  am  I  going?  Who  is  above  me?  How  can  I  please  Him? 
These  questions  press  upon  me.  Surely  an  answer  will  be  provided  to  them  by 
that  God  whose  I  am,  and  by  whom  eternity  has  been  set  in  my  heart.  At  every 
point  the  revelation  of  God  answers  these  desires  and  questionings.  We  feel 
there  must  be,  behind  the  seen  and  temporal,  another  more  enduring  world;  and 
as  we  turn  to  St.  John  i.  we  hear  that  a  Visitor  has  come  from  it.  His  mission 
authenticated  by  miracles,  to  bring  us  the  very  knowledge  that  we  seek.  "  The 
life  was  manifested,  and  we  have  seen  it,  and  bear  witness."  "  This,  then,  is  the 
message  that  we  have  heard  of  Him,  and  declare  unto  you — that  God  is  light." 
*'  And  these  things  write  we  unto  you  that  your  joy  may  be  full."  We  feel  the 
world  is  not  eternal;  there  must  be  some  one,  eternal  and  almighty,  somewhere, 
to  acooimt  for  its  existence;  and  the  same  apostle  points  to  this  very  Being  who 
came  to  teach  and  help  us,  and  declares  that  "  all  things  were  made  by  Him." 
He  is  the  Son  of  God,  Divine,  eternal,  "  the  effulgence  of  God's  glory  and  the 
very  image  of  His  substance  "  (Heb.  i.  8).  We  want  to  look  into  the  eternal 
future,  and  to  know  what  is  in  store  for  us,  and,  lol  each  path  of  life  is  seen 
running  to  the  judgment-seat;  but,  at  that  point,  the  paths  divide — some  pass 
downwards  into  the  abode  of  darkness  and  woe  eternal,  where  sin,  and  the  misery 
sin  brings,  reign  supreme;  and  others  pass  upwards  to  the  sweet  and  holy  heaven, 
where  144,000,  clad  in  white  robes,  follow  the  Lamb,  and  serve  God  day  and 
night  for  evermore.  The  most  practical  question  comes  last,  and  is  not  left 
unanswered :  "  How  am  I  to  prepare  for  eternity,  so  as  to  escape  the  woe  and 
share  the  glory?"  It  is  to  answer  that  question,  more  than  any  other,  the  revela- 
tion of  God  is  given.  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  the  Maker  of  the  worlds,  took  up 
His  people's  burden,  and  bore  it  to  the  death;  through  His  sacrifice,  which  God 
has  accepted,  there  is  life  and  peace  for  me.     Christ  stands  out,  and  says  :   "  I 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nu 

am  the  Way."  He  unbinds  our  chains;  He  gives  pardon,  purity,  and  peace. 
I  have  only  to  come  to  Him,  to  trust  Him,  to  follow  Him,  and  in  Him  eternal  life 
18  mine.  (W .  Park,  M.A.)  Eternity  in  the  heart: — What  meaning,  what 
dignity,  what  surpassing  hope  and  fear  should  lie  in  this — that  God  hath  set 
eternity  in  your  heart  I  I.  It  ought  to  calm  you.  Recall  the  days  of  the  past 
veek — its  toils,  anxieties  and  cares,  vexations  and  disappointments — how  did  you 
bear  yourself  with  them?  Were  you  despondent,  did  you  lose  self-control,  did 
your  blood  boil  to  fever-heat,  and  were  you  rebellious?  Do  you  think  that  such 
would  have  been  the  manner  of  your  life  if  you  had  turned  your  eyes  inwardly, 
and  quietly  faced  that  Guest  with  the  unfathomable  eyes  and  awe-Lnsptring  grace — 
Eternity?  Get  more  intercourse  with  that  awful  yet  august  Guest  in  your  soul — • 
Eternity — it  will  keep  you  calm  in  hours  when  you  would  be  otherwise  grasping 
at  the  bolts  of  Jove.  II.  It  ought  to  inspire  you.  What  an  impression  it  should 
make  on  mind  and  heart,  when  we  express  in  words  the  destiny  which  belongs 
to  us  all,  "  I  am  to  live  for  everl"  The  realization  of  this  tremendous  thought 
should  give  amplitude,  probity,  strength,  and  gentleness  to  our  lives — liberate 
them  from  ascendancy  of  petty  aims  and  the  discomposedness  of  trifling  worries 
— expose  the  immeasurable  folly  of  letting  ourselves  drift  under  impulses  of  irre- 
sponsible opinion  and  unregulated  passion;  relax  the  destructive  pressure  of 
materialistic  thought  and  secularistic  care,  and  fasten  us  indissolubly  to  Him, 
whose  fortress  shall  survive  the  crash  of  worlds,  and  whose  glory  shall  be  the 
inconceivable  felicity  of  the  faithful  and  triumphant.  III.  It  ought  to  ennoble 
TOU.  Man  is,  let  us  say,  made  up  of  body  and  spirit.  But  there  are  persons  who 
live  in  the  body  only;  they  do  not  live  in  the  spirit,  and,  according  to  the  Bible, 
that  is  not  living,  it  is  death.  Man  cannot  live  with  any  nobleness  unless  those 
high  energies  are  at  work  whose  impetus  is  originated  by  the  presence  in  his 
heart  of  eternity.  (D.  B.  WilUama.)  Noble  discontent: — I.  The  reason  op 
man's  discontent.  Discontent  is  an  imnatural,  strange  thing,  in  a  world  full  to 
overflowing,  as  this  earth  is,  of  wonders,  beauties,  and  all  good  things,  and  with 
natures  fitted  as  ours  are,  to  our  condition  in  such  marvellous  wise.  Yet  has  there 
ever  lived  a  man  without  deep,  serious,  frequent  discontent?  The  sensual  and 
frivolous  are,  probably,  supremely  satisfied  so  long  as  they  can  turn  at  their  will 
from  one  excitement  to  another;  but  it  is  otherwise  with  all  who  think,  and 
inquire,  and  feel  the  mysteries  in  which  all  their  questionings  end.  All  allow  that 
the  pleasures  of  mind  and  soul  are  loftier  and  nobler  than  the  pleasures  of  sense; 
yet,  in  the  degree  in  which  a  man  shares  them  he  shares  discontent,  hankers  after 
something  he  cannot  find :  he  knows  too  much  for  his  peace.  It  is  not  mere 
eternity  which  thoughtful  man  desires,  not  even  the  perpetuity  of  things  as  they 
are;  but  eternal  life  worthy  of  Tihe  noble  name,  and  in  harmony  with  his  highest 
nature,  in  which  the  good  he  aspires  after  shall  be  attained,  and  the  evil  he 
deplores  be  removed,  and  the  unseen  God  be  beheld  with  joy,  and  served  with 
undecaying  energies.  II.  The  mercy  of  man's  discontent.  Is  it  a  paradox  to  say 
that  we  are  better  for  having  these  unsatisfied  cravings?  that  to  be  without  them 
would  be  to  sink  in  the  level  of  creation?  Picture  some  tropical  forest,  where 
vegetable  and  animal  life  luxuriate  to  the  full,  and  where  the  swarms  exuberant 
with  life  know  no  discontent.  Would  you  give  up  your  high  though  unsatisfied 
yearnings  for  bright  but  unreasoning  life  like  theirs?  Or,  when,  in  spring,  you 
wander  through  the  fields,  burdened  with  cares,  and  doubts,  and  fears  about  the 
future,  while  the  birds,  in  utter  freedom  from  care,  are  filling  the  air  with  song, 
would  you  change  with  them,  and  part  with  your  hopes  of  an  endless  life,  your 
longings  for  the  Father  in  heaven?  Or,  if,  with  unsatisfied  desires  of  this  noble 
kind,  you  meet  with  one  who  cares  for  nothing  higher  than  the  worldly  wealth, 
and  ease,  and  pleasure  he  enjoys,  would  you  change  your  noble  discontent  for  his 
ignoble  content  with  "  what  perishes  in  the  using  "?  Remember  two  things. 
Our  discontent  should  be  of  this  noble  sort — aspiration  after  worthier,  divine  life, 
truth,  purity,  goodness,  God;  not,  as  often,  base  craving  for  money,  ease,  repute; 
and  our  longings,  being  a  mercy,  a  dignity,  should  be  cherished  and  cultivated. 
We  must  let  the  eternity  we  crave  have  its  due,  and  live  by  faith  in  the  unseen. 
III.  The  remedy  for  man's  discontent.  We  carmot  get  rid  of  it  till  we  reach 
eternity;  but  it  need  not  remain  a  painful  mystery.  Christ  has  come,  and  shown 
us  God  and  immortality;  He  bids  us  move  cheerfully  towards  the  Father's  house, 
and  pursue  "  the  crown  of  life."  And  looking  on  the  things  unseen  and  eternal, 
and  pursuing  them  with  faith,  and  hope,  and  patience,  and  courage,  our  discontent 
will  be  forgotten,  first  in  eSort,  then  in  victory.     (T.  M.  Herbert,  M.A.)    Eternity 


CHAP.  III.]  ECCLESIASTES.  105 

in  the  heart: — I.  Eteenitt  is  set  in  evert  human  heabt.  The  expression  may 
be  either  a  declaration  of  the  actual  immortality  of  the  soul,  or  it  may  mean,  as 
I  rather  suppose  it  to  do,  the  consoiousness  of  eternity  which  is  part  of  human 
nature.  The  former  idea  is  no  doubt  closely  connected  with  the  latter,  and  would 
here  yield  an  appropriate  sense.  "  In  our  embers  is  something  that  doth  live." 
Whatsoever  befalls  the  hairs  that  get  grey  and  thin,  and  the  hands  that  become 
wrinkled  and  palsied,  and  the  heart  that  is  worn  out  by  much  beating,  and  the 
blood  that  clogs  and  clots  at  last,  and  the  filmy  eye,  and  all  the  oorruptitle  frame; 
yet,  as  the  heathen  said,  "  I  shall  not  all  die,"  but  deep  within  this  transient 
clay-house,  that  must  crack  and  fall  and  be  resolved  into  the  elements  out  of 
which  it  was  built  up,  there  dwells  an  immortal  guest,  an  undying  personal  self. 
In  the  heart,  the  inmost  spiritual  being  of  every  man,  eternity,  in  this  sense  of 
the  word,  does  dwell.  But,  probably,  the  other  interpretation  of  these  words  is 
the  truer, — that  the  Preacher  is  here  asserting,  not  that  the  heart  or  spirit  is 
immortal,  but  that,  whether  it  is  or  no,  in  the  heart  is  planted  the  thought,  the 
consciousness  of  eternity — and  the  longing  after  it.  The  little  child  taught  by 
some  grandmother  Lois,  in  a  cottage,  kiaows  what  she  means  when  she  tells  him 
"  you  will  live  for  ever,"  though  both  scholar  and  teacher  would  be  puzzled  to 
put  it  into  other  words.  When  we  say  eternity  flows  round  this  bank  and  shoal 
of  time — men  know  what  we  mean.  Heart  answers  to  heart — and  in  £ach  heart 
lies  that  solemn  thought — for  everl  That  eternity  which  is  set  in  our  hearts  is 
not  merely  the  thought  of  ever-during  Being,  or  of  an  everlasting  order  of  things 
to  which  we  are  in  some  way  related.  But  there  are  connected  with  it  other  ideas 
besides  those  of  mere  duration.  Men  know  what  perfection  means.  They  under- 
stand the  meaning  of  perfect  goodness;  they  have  the  notion  of  infinite  wisdom 
and  boundless  love.  These  thoughts  are  the  material  of  all  poetry,  the  thread 
from  which  the  imagination  creates  all  her  wondrous  tapestries.  By  the  make 
of  our  spirits,  by  the  possibilities  that  dawn  dim  before  us,  by  the  thoughts 
"  whose  very  sweetness  yieldeth  proof  that  they  were  born  for  immortality," — by 
all  these  and  a  thousand  other  signs  and  facts  in  every  human  life  we  say — "  God 
has  set  eternity  in  their  hearts  I"  II.  The  dispeopoetionate  between  this 
OUB  NATCEE  AND  THE  WORLD  IN  WHICH  WB  DWELL.  Every  other  creature  presents 
the  most  accurate  correspondence  between  nature  and  circumstances,  powers  and 
occupations.  Man  alone  is  like  some  poor  land-bird  blown  out  to  sea  and  floating 
half-drowned  with  clinging  plumage  on  an  ocean  where  the  dove  "  finds  no  rest 
for  the  sole  of  her  foot,"  or  like  some  creature  that  loves  to  glance  in  the  sxmlight 
but  is  plunged  into  the  deepest  recesses  of  a  dark  mine.  In  the  midst  of  a  universe 
marked  by  the  nicest  adaptations  of  creatures  to  their  habitation,  man  alone,  the 
head  of  them  all,  presents  the  unheard-of  anomaly  that  he  is  surrounded  by 
conditions  which  do  not  fit  his  whole  nature,  which  are  not  adequate  for  all  hia 
powers,  on  which  he  cannot  feed  and  nurture  his  whole  being.  Is  this  present  life 
enough  for  you?  Sometimes  you  fancy  it  is.  "  This  world  not  enough  for  me  I" 
you  say — "yes I  it  is,  only  let  me  get  a  little  more  of  it,  and  keep  what  I  get, 
and  I  shall  be  all  right."  So  then — **  a  little  more  "  is  wanted,  is  it?  And  that 
"  little  more  "  will  always  be  wanted,  and  besides  it,  the  guarantee  of  permanence 
will  always  be  wanted,  and  failing  these,  there  will  ever  be  a  hunger  that  nothing 
can  fill  which  belongs  to  earth.  A  great  botanist  made  what  he  called  "  a  floral 
clock  "  to  mark  the  hour  of  the  day  by  the  opening  and  closing  of  flowers.  It  was 
a  graceful  and  yet  a  pathetic  thought.  One  after  another  they  spread  their  petals, 
and  their  varying  colours  glow  in  the  light.  But  one  after  another  they  wearily 
shut  their  cups,  and  the  night  falls,  and  the  latest  of  them  folds  itself  together 
and  all  are  hidden  away  in  the  dark.  So  our  joys  and  treasures — were  they 
sufficient  did  they  last,  cannot  last.  After  a  summer's  day  comes  a  summer's 
night,  and  after  a  brief  space  of  them  comes  winter,  when  all  are  killed  and  the 
leafless  trees  stand  silent.  III.  The  possible  satisfying  op  cue  souls.  The 
Preacher  in  his  day  learned  that  it  was  possible  to  satisfy  the  hunger  for  eternity 
which  had  once  seemed  to  him  a  questionable  blessing.  Standing  at  the  centre, 
he  saw  order  instead  of  chaos,  and  when  he  had  come  back,  after  all  his  search, 
to  the  old  simple  faith  of  peasants  and  children  in  Judah,  to  fear  God  and  keep 
His  commandments,  he  understood  why  God  had  set  eternity  in  man's  heart, 
and  then  flung  him  out,  as  if  in  mockery,  amidst  the  stormy  waves  of  the  changeful 
ocean  of  time.  And  we,  who  have  a  further  word  from  God,  may  have  a  fuller 
and  yet  more  blessed  conviction,  built  upon  our  own  happy  experience,  if  we 
choose,  that  it  it  possible  for  us  to  have  that  deep  thirst  slaked,  that  longing 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

appeased.  We  have  Christ  to  trust  to  and  to  love.  As  in  mysterious  and  tran- 
scendent union  the  Divine  takes  into  itself  the  human  in  that  person  of  Jesus, 
and  Eternity  is  blended  with  Time;  we,  trusting  Him  and  yielding  our  hearts  to 
Him,  receive  into  our  poor  lives  an  incorruptible  seed,  and  for  us  the  soul-satisfy- 
ing realities  that  abide  for  ever  mingle  with  and  are  reached  through  the  shadows 
that  pass  away.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  child  of  eternity: — Here,  indeed,  is 
a  bit  of  revelation.  This  man  sees,  at  this  instant,  the  real  reason  of  the  unrest 
of  humanity,  the  real  reason  of  the  endless  strife,  the  unquenchable  thirst,  the 
unsatisfied  endeavours  of  himself  and  his  fellow-men.  "  Do  you  know,"  says  the 
great  French  preacher  Lamennais,  "  what  it  is  that  makes  man  the  most  suffering 
of  creatures?  It  is  that  he  has  one  foot  in  the  finite  and  the  other  in  the  infinite, 
and  that  he  is  torn  asunder,  not  by  four  horses,  as  in  the  terrible  old  times,  but 
between  two  worlds."  If  the  Infinite  God,  the  Creator,  is  a  Personality,  His 
children,  who  derive  their  personality  from  Him,  must  be  sharers  of  His  infinite 
attributes,  and  must,  therefore,  have  wants,  wishes,  hopes,  aspirations,  needs 
which  are  limitless.  If  man  possesses  such  a  nature  as  this,  whose  capacities  are 
simply  boundless,  if  God  hath  set  eternity  in  his  heart,  his  conduct  here  on  the 
earth  will  give  some  indication  of  this  momentous  fact.  Perhaps  the  great 
phenomenon  of  human  progress  is  one  sign  of  it.  The  race  appears  to  be  always 
going  forward.  The  further  the  race  goes  in  the  path  of  spiritual  and  moral 
attainment,  the  larger  is  the  prospect  and  the  promise  of  futiure  growth.  To  the 
other  animals  no  such  progress  seems  to  be  possible.  The  writer  of  Ecclesiastes 
argues  that  man  is  no  better  than  the  beasts;  he  could  scarcely  have  noted  the 
capacity  for  progress  which  man  possesses  in  such  a  marked  degree,  and  which  the 
beasts  do  not  possess.  Here  is  a  sign  of  that  divine  endowment  which  we  are 
considering.  Viewed  on  its  intellectual  and  spiritual  side,  the  human  race  gives 
no  hint  of  a  term  of  existence.  If  anythmg  is  clear  in  the  study  of  moral  forces 
it  is  that  the  life  of  the  spirit  is  steadily  progressive.  Stagnation  and  decay  may 
indeed  overtake  tribes  and  peoples,  but  only  when  they  forsake  the  ideals  of 
humanity  and  turn  aside  to  the  worship  of  that  which  is  beneath  them.  And  the 
destruction  visited  upon  these  will  show  at  length  to  the  blundering  generations 
the  way  of  life.  The  race  profits  by  the  retributions  of  nations  and  people  who 
persist  in  disobeying  the  organic  law  of  humanity.  It  is  a  costly  kind  of  tuition, 
but  it  seems  to  be  the  only  effectual  kind.  Under  its  instruction  the  race  seems 
to  be  slowly  learning  the  way  of  life.  And  the  evidence  is  strong  that  that  way 
is  an  upward  way.  The  case  is  clearer  when  we  study  the  development  of  the 
individual  soul.  Here  there  is  no  sign  of  a  term.  In  knowledge,  for  example, 
in  mental  power,  is  there  any  such  thing  as  a  fixed  limit?  Is  not  every  advance 
in  knowledge  accompanied,  not  only  by  an  increase  in  the  power  of  knowing,  but 
also  by  an  increase  in  the  desire  to  know?  Even  more  obvious  is  man's  kinship 
with  the  infinite  when  we  consider  his  moral  and  spiritual  nature.  Here,  surely, 
are  possibilities  that  are  boimdless.  The  ideals  which  present  themselves  to 
human  thought  are  not  subject  to  quantitative  measurement.  Limit  there  is  none ; 
to  think  of  one  would  be  immoral.  "  Be  ye,  therefore,  perfect,  even  as  your 
Father  which  is  In  heaven  is  perfect."  That  is  the  lowest  standard  that  any  man 
can  fix.  He  will  fall  far  short  of  it,  but  he  can  aim  at  nothing  lower.  And  not 
only  is  this  divine  endowment  seen  in  the  boundless  possibilities  of  good  which 
open  before  the  heroic  and  aspiring  soul,  it  is  seen  not  less  in  the  perversions  of 
character  with  which  we  are  too  familiar.  Ponder  the  story  of  human  ambition 
as  it  is  outlined  in  such  a  life  as  that  of  Xerxes,  or  Alexander,  or  Napoleon,  as  it 
is  displayed  in  such  stupendous  monuments  of  egoism  as  Babylon  or  Nineveh 
must  have  been,  as  the  Pyramids  of  Egypt  exhibit  to  us  until  this  day.  It  is  not 
toward  royal  palaces  or  mortuary  piles  that  the  in^satiable  spirit  of  man  is  directed 
in  this  age  so  much  as  toward  bank  accoimts  and  accumulations  of  capital.  The 
growth  of  a  plutocracy  in  this  democratic  age — what  a  spectacle  it  is  I  How  do 
you  explain  this  towering  greed  which  heaps  millions  on  millions,  which  compasses 
tend  and  sea  to  add  to  accumulations  that  can  never  be  used?  A  friend  of  mine 
who  is  prospering,  so  far  as  this  world's  goods  are  concerned,  but  who  is  freely 
using  his  gains  in  what  he  esteems  to  be  humane  and  helpful  ministries,  and  who 
is  fully  resolved  not  to  die  a  rich  man,  told  me  not  long  ago  that  for  several 
months  he  had  lost  no  opportimity  of  inquiring  of  men  whom  he  met  who  were 
getting  rich  rapidly  why  they  were  doing  it.  "  What  is  your  reason  for  heaping 
up  money?"  he  asks  them.  "  What  do  you  want  so  much  for?"  "  And  I  tell 
you  the  truth,"  he  said  to  me,  "  when  I  say  that  not  one  of  them  gave  me  an 


CHAP,  mj  BCCLESIASTES.  lOT 

answer  that  was  really  intelligible;  not  one  gave  an  explanation  that  I  could 
feel  satisfied  his  own  reason.  Most  of  them  had  something  to  say  about  their 
families ;  but  when  I  piMhed  the  question  whether  they  thought  it  really  a  good 
thing  for  children  to  leave  them  large  amounts  of  wealth,  they  could  never  answer 
confidently.  It  was  perfectly  evident  to  me,  in  every  case,  that  these  men  were 
driven  on  by  an  unreasoning  craving,  a  kind  of  craze,  that  they  wanted  it,  mainly, 
just  for  the  sake  of  having  it.  And  I  found  it  very  difiBcult  to  make  most  of  them 
think  that  anybody  could  be  actuated  by  any  other  motive.  When  I  said  to 
them,  *  I  am  not  in  business  simply  or  mainly  for  the  sake  of  making  money;  if 
there  was  nothing  in  it  but  just  piling  one  dollar  on  top  of  another  it  would  have 
no  interest  for  me,'  they  looked  at  me  in  blank  amazement."  To  my  mind  we 
have  here  an  appalling  example  of  the  perversions  of  the  highest  powers.  What 
makes  men  capable  of  this  limitless  ambition  and  greed  is  the  endowment  which 
they  have  received  as  the  children  of  God.  It  is  because  "  He  hath  set  eternity 
in  their  hearts  "  that  they  have  the  power  to  compass  the  world  in  their  insatiable 
desires.  And  yet  how  manifestly  this  is  a  case  of  perversion  I  It  is  the  direction 
of  infinite  powers  to  finite  ends.  And  the  restlessness  and  misery  of  the  world 
are  largely  due  to  this  one  fact :  that  men  into  whose  hearts  God  has  set  eternity 
are  striving  to  fill  themselves  with  the  gains  of  time.  For  this  immortal  hunger 
there  is  a  satisfying  portion  even  here.  For  God  is  in  His  world,  my  friends; 
He  is  always  here;  Ha  is  the  one  ever-present,  inescapable  Fact,  the  foundation 
of  every  reality  with  which  we  deal.  How  does  He  reveal  Himself?  One  may 
find  many  answers,  all  inadequate,  for  He  whom  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot 
contain  cannot  be  expressed  in  any  phrase  that  we  can  fashion.  But  we  may  say 
that  we  know  Him  in  this  world  as  Truth  and  Beauty  and  Love.  And  the  soul 
that  delights  in  truth,  that  rejoices  in  beauty,  that  lives  for  love,  has  entered  into 
life.  For  the  eternity  that  is  in  our  hearts  this  is  the  provision.  These  are  the 
elements  of  that  knowledge  of  God  with  which  Jesus  seeks  to  lead  those  who  will 
follow  Him.  This  is  what  He  is  pointing  to  when  He  says,  "  He  that  drinketh 
of  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  never  thirst,  but  it  shall  be  in  him 
a  well  of  water  springing  up  Into  everlasting  life."  (TF.  Qladden,  D.D.)  No 
man  can  find  ont  the  work  that  Ood  maketh  from  the  beginning  to  the  end. — 
The  Divine  W'orlter  and  the  human  student: — ^I.  God  is  eveb  working. 
1.  In  nature.  That  same  power  which  created  our  world  with  all  its  variety  of 
life  and  phenomena  is  constantly  exerted  in  sustaining  and  governing  the  same; 
that  same  hand  which  first  marshalled  the  hosts  of  heaven  is  ever  engaged  preserv- 
ing the  regularity  of  their  movements  in  their  vast  orbits.  2.  In  providence.  In 
the  raising  up  and  the  removal  of  the  wise  and  great,  in  the  rise  and  fall  of 
empires,  we  see  His  agency  originating,  or  guiding,  or  overruling  events.  8.  In 
redemption.  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself."  By  His 
Holy  Spirit,  and  by  various  Christian  ministries.  He  is  ever  working  for  the  salva- 
tion of  men  from  sin.  II.  Man  is  engaged  in  endeavodeing  to  tindeestand  thh 
WOEK  OP  God.  He  seeks  to  "find  out  the  work  that  God  maketh."  Man  ia 
inquisitive  as  to  God's  work  in  the  physical  creation;  the  astronomer,  the  geologist, 
the  naturalist,  the  physiologist,  and  others  endeavour  to  penetrate  into  the 
mystery  of  the  Divine  work  in  the  material  realms.  The  psychologist  seeks  to 
"  xmderstand  the  work  that  God  maketh  "  in  the  realm  of  mind  and  heart.  Man 
also  scrutinizes  the  work  of  God  in  providence  and  in  redemption.  This  is  right. 
Beverently  prosecuted,  this  study  of  "  the  work  that  God  maketh  "  is  most 
quickening,  inspiring,  and  saving  in  its  influence  on  the  student,  m.  Man  la 
UNABLE  TO  UNDEBSTAND  FULLY  THE  WOEK  OF  GoD.  1.  Man  Can  imderstand  the 
work  of  God  in  part.  He  can  "  find  out  " — (1)  That  the  perfection  of  God's  work 
in  man  has  been  marred,  destroyed.  (2)  That  by  his  own  unaided  efforts  man  ia 
utterly  unable  to  recover  his  lost  perfection.  (3)  That  God  has  provided  a  glorioua 
Eestorer  in  Jesus  Christ.  (4)  That  we  need  guidance  and  help  in  the  walk  and 
work  of  liie.  (5)  That  infallible  guidance  and  inexhaustible  strength  are  given  to 
those  who  seek  them  from  God.  Comp.  Prov.  iii.  4,  5;  Deut.  xxxiii.  25;  2  Cor. 
xii.  9.  (6)  That  there  is  a  state  of  being  beyond  this  present  and  visible  one,  in 
which  our  state  and  position  will  be  determined  by  the  character  which  we  form 
here  and  now.  Here  also  there  are  mysteries,  but  the  great  facts  are  very  clearly 
revealed.  2.  Man  cannot  understand  the  work  of  God  fully.  This  is  true  as 
regards  the  material  realm.  Every  part  of  nature  still  has  her  mysteries  to  man. 
Nor  are  we  able  to  understand  fully  God's  work  in  providence.  There  are  chapters 
in  the  history  of  the  human  race  which  are  inscrutable  enigmas  to  tu  when  w» 


108  TTIE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

consider  them  in  relation  to  His  control  of  human  affairs.  Even  in  our  own  lives 
there  are  painful  mysteries,  e.g.  privations,  bereavements,  afflictions,  etc.  Our 
very  being  is  a  mystery  to  us.  We  cannot  understand  much;  we  are  speedily 
bewildered  with  difiQculties,  and  troubled  with  what  are  to  us  dark  and  sad 
anomalies;  but  let  us  rejoice  in  the  fact  that  God  "  maketh  everything  beautiful 
in  its  time";  the  deformity,  and  sin,  and  sorrow  are  not  of  His  making.  Let 
us  rejoice,  too,  that  He  will  work  on  until  order  is  developed  out  of  the  moral 
chaos  of  this  world,  and  the  sin-cursed  earth  blossoms  into  an  Eden  of  unfading 
beauty.     (TF.  Jones.) 

Ver.  12.  I  know  that  there  is  no  good  in  them,  hut  for  a  man  to  rejoice, 
and  to  do  good  in  Ms  life. — Doing  good  and  rejoicing: — Solomon  proposes  two 
things  to  our  practice,  if  we  intend  to  live  happily  and  comfortably  in  this  world. 
First,  that  we  do  good;  and,  secondly,  that  we  rejoice.  I  must  invert  the  order 
in  which  the  words  stand  in  the  text,  because  doing  good  is  the  reason  why  w© 
rejoice;  and  to  be  sure  there  can  be  no  true  joy  or  comfort  in  possessing  or  using 
any  worldly  blessings,  unless  we  can  satisfy  ourselves  that  we  have  done  good 
with  them.  Doing  good  is  a  work  of  that  known  excellency  in  itself,  yielding  such 
sweetness  and  complacency  in  the  practice  of  it,  is  so  agreeable  to  the  consent  and 
opinion  of  all  mankind  in  general,  and  so  well  pleasing  and  acceptable  with  God 
Himself,  the  grand  Exemplar  of  doing  good,  that  they  must  entirely  have  lost  the 
principles  of  good  nature,  of  improved  reason,  and  revealed  religion,  who  take  care 
for  none  but  themselves,  regard  not  how  it  fares  with  others,  so  they  may  live 
in  ease  and  plenty.  Doing  good  is  a  public  benefit,  a  great  advantage  to  the 
world,  and  to  the  common  state  of  mankind.  Doing  good,  lastly,  is  a  work  of  so 
large  and  comprehensive  an  extent,  that  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  learned  or 
unlearned,  may  improve  those  talents  God  hath  been  pleased  to  entrust  them 
with  to  His  honour,  and  to  the  good  of  others;  so  that  for  me  to  go  about  to  tell 
you  what  it  is  to  do  good,  and  wherein  it  consists,  would  be  an  endless  task.  How- 
ever, superseding  the  most  common  acceptation  of  the  phrase,  of  doing  good  by 
charity,  and  giving  of  alms,  I  shall  reduce  it  to  doing  good  to  the  benefit  and 
advantage  of  the  public;  a  subject  no  way  unseasonable  at  all  times,  but  more 
especially  in  these.  1.  Men  may  do  good  by  being  diligent  and  industrious  in 
their  proper  callings  and  particular  employments,  thereby  rendering  themselves 
very  profitable  members  of  a  commonwealth.  If  we  consult  history,  we  shall 
find  that  the  best  men  have  all  along  been  the  most  industrious  in  their  respective 
places  and  ofiQces;  the  worthy  patriarchs,  the  holy  prophets,  the  blessed  apostles 
have  been  very  exemplary  and  eminent  in  their  doings  for  the  service  of  God,  and 
the  benefit  of  mankind;  nay,  the  angels  are  ever  on  the  wing,  in  a  readiness  to 
receive  and  go  upon  God's  commands.  2.  Men  in  public  authority  may  do  good 
by  being  careful,  diligent  and  conscientious  in  the  faithful  discharge  of  those 
trusts  and  offices  unto  which  they  are  called.  That  man  who  has  a  heart  to  act 
according  to  his  duty  is  a  public  blessing,  a  man  of  great  courage  and  resolution, 
aiming  at  nothing  more  than  the  glory  of  God  and  the  public  good;  being  always 
disposed  in  all  his  dealings  to  have  a  principal  regard  to  the  rules  of  his  duty, 
and  the  dictates  of  his  conscience,  without  being  swayed  by  any  appetite  or 
passion,  by  any  sinister  respect  to  his  own  private  interest,  to  the  commission  of 
any  unworthy  or  base  action,  but  acteth  from  good  principles,  and  aims  at  good 
ends,  without  partiality,  or  distinguishing  between  public  or  private;  can  satisfy 
himself  in  his  own  conscience,  and  justify  to  all  the  world  that  his  designs  are 
truly  good,  and  that  whatever  he  doth,  he  doth  all  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  to 
the  benefit  of  those  over  whom  he  presides.  This  is  a  reason  why  our  Heavenly 
Father  in  His  dispensations  entrusts  some  with  greater  outward  advantages  than 
others,  that  they  may  have  fairer  opportunities  of  doing  good.  They  are  set  up 
in  the  world  as  burning  lights  and  visible  examples  to  others,  to  recommend 
goodness  to  the  minds  and  consciences  of  men  by  their  own  practice  and  con- 
versation. I  come  now  to  the  consequence  of  doing  good,  "  for  a  man  to  rejoice." 
By  rejoicing,  here  we  mean  a  constant  habit  of  joy  and  cheerfulness,  being  always 
contented  and  well  pleased,  always  free  from  those  anxieties  and  uncomfortable 
reflections  which  render  the  life  of  man  miserable  and  uneasy;  virtue  and  inno- 
cence, a  behaving  ourselves  eo  in  the  world  that  our  consciences  shall  not  reproach 
us.  It  is  in  vain  to  think  of  any  true  joy  or  peace  without  doing  good.  How 
pleasant  and  comfortable  is  it  to  us  while  we  live,  that  sensible  impression  of 
delight  which  aocompanieB  the  duty  at  present,  is  proportionable  to  the  necessity 


CHAP.  111.]  ECCLESIASTES.  109 

and  strict  injunction  laid  upon  us  to  perform  it;  there  is  a  sweet  complacency  in 
doing  good,  and  being  kind  to  those  that  want,  for  if  even  the  bare  wishes  and 
desires  of  doing  good,  when  out  of  our  power,  afford  the  well-wisher  some  degree 
of  peace  and  content,  and  we  can  satisfy  ourselves  with  the  sincerity  of  our 
designs  and  purposes,  then  certainly  when  we  can  bring  those  wishes  and  desires 
to  good  effect,  there  cannot  but  be  a  spring  of  joy  and  pleasure  arising  in  the 
soul,  such  an  overflowing  of  the  spirits  as  is  not  to  be  expressed  in  terms  or 
words,  and  no  one  can  fully  understand  it,  but  they  that  have  been  ravished 
with  it.  Our  Saviour,  we  may  observe  throughout  the  Gospel,  went  about  doing 
good;  He  coveted  to  spend  His  beams,  rejoiced  to  spread  His  healing  wings  over 
every  place  He  came  to.  And  what  delight  do  we  find  when  we  imitate  Him  I 
What  inward  peace  and  serenity  of  mind  doth  it  raise,  when  love  fills  the  heart, 
and  stretches  out  the  hand,  when  we  carry  about  us  the  mercies  of  the 
Lord,  are  sent  from  the  mercy-seat  with  comfort  and  relief  to  them  that  want 
both.  How  are  we  ourselves  filled  with  joy  and  gladness,  having  had  the  honour 
and  privilege  of  being  in  God's  stead  to  our  brother  at  time  of  need;  neither  is 
this  joy  and  satisfaction  peculiar  only  to  charity  and  relieving  the  poor  and 
needy,  but  to  all  other  actions  and  designs  of  doing  good,  upon  what  account 
soever,  especially  to  those  which  are  done  for  the  public,  for  the  honour  and 
prosperity  of  Church  and  State.  It  is  a  favour  that  God  gives  us  opportunities  as 
well  as  abilities  of  doing  good,  and  He  hath  allowed  us  to  reap  the  profit  and 
pleasure  which  redound  from  such  good  actions  as  long  as  we  live;  He  seldom 
fails  in  this  world  amply  to  repay  what  good  we  do  by  outward  blessings  in  the 
ordinary  dispensations  of  His  providence  either  one  way  or  other,  or  it  may  be  to 
our  children  after  us.  But  it  ends  not  here;  this  world  lasts  but  a  while,  and  we 
have  souls  that  must  live  for  ever.  If,  therefore,  men  have  any  kindness  for 
them,  if  they  mean  not  to  undo  them  to  all  eternity,  it  is  absolutely  necessary 
that  they  should  do  good;  let  us  then  be  all  persuaded  to  labour  and  study  to  do 
good;  let  us  be  daily  giving  evidences  to  the  public  of  our  good  dispositions  towards 
it.  {W.  Baldwin,  M,A.)  Life  enjoyed  and  improved: — ^AU  our  temporal  posses- 
sions are  only  valuable  as  they  are  expended  upon  ourselves  or  others;  either  as 
they  aid  our  own  comfort  or  advance  the  welfare  of  our  fellow-creatures.  Let 
me  then  call  upon  you — I.  To  rejoice  in  them.  1.  Let  me  begin  with  two 
cautions.  (1)  The  first  regards  justice.  See  that  what  you  enjoy  is  your  own. 
"Owe  no  man  anything."  It  was  well  said  by  Lord  Mansfield,  that  "for  one 
cruel  creditor,  there  were  a  hundred  cruel  debtors."  (2)  The  second  regards 
moderation.  You  can  never  suppose  that  God  requires,  or  even  allows,  intemper- 
ance. "  Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  temptation."  2.  After  having 
cautioned  you,  allow  me  to  admonish.  If  you  would  rejoice  in  the  good  things 
which  God  gives  you  under  the  sun — (1)  Cherish  a  grateful  sensibility.  Some 
receive  all  their  mercies  like  the  beasts  that  perish.  The  animal  only  is  gratified 
in  them.  (2)  Guard  against  habitual  discontent.  To  possess  is  not  to  enjoy. 
Many  possess  much  and  enjoy  nothing.  (3)  Shun  avaricious  and  distrustful 
anxiety.  (4)  Entertain  no  harsh  and  superstitious  views  of  religion.  (5)  Seek 
after  a  knowledge  of  your  reconciliation  with  God.  II.  To  do  good.  1.  What 
good  can  these  things  enable  us  to  do? — It  is  of  three  kinds.  (1)  They  enable  us 
to  do  religious  good.  This  is  the  chief.  (2)  They  enable  us  also  to  do  intellectual 
good.  (3)  They  enable  us  to  do  corporeal  good :  by  which  we  mean,  that  which 
immediately  regards  the  body,  though  the  mind  will  also  derive  comfort  from  it. 
2.  In  what  manner  are  we  to  do  it?  (1)  Immediately,  and  with  diligence. 
(2)  Extensively,  and  with  impartiality.  (3)  Perse veringly,  and  without  declen- 
sion. 3.  Why  we  should  be  concerned  to  accomplish  it.  (1)  Because  the  bounties 
of  Providence  were  conferred  upon  us  for  this  very  pxirpose.  (2)  Because  God 
hath  commanded  it.  (3)  Gratitude  requires  it.  (4)  Profit  requires  it.  What  is 
it  that  attaches  one  man  so  powerfully  to  another,  and  gives  him  a  resource  in 
the  tears,  the  prayers,  the  attentions  of  his  fellow-creatures  in  the  day  of  evil? 
(5)  Pleasure  requires  it.  If  you  are  strangers  to  the  pleasures  of  benevolence, 
you  are  to  be  pitied;  for  you  are  strangers  to  the  most  pure,  the  most  durable, 
the  most  delicious,  the  most  satisfactory,  the  most  God-like,  pleasures  to  be 
enjoyed  on  this  side  heaven.     (TF.  Jay.) 

Ver.  14.  I  know  that,  whatsoever  God  doeth,  it  shall  he  for  ever. — The  eiernity 
and  perfection  of  the  Divine  purposes  and  doings : — Most  important  and  consolatory 
truth  is  contained  in  these  words.     In  it  the  Preacher  seems  to  find  refuge  from 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in. 


#he  perplexity  and  uncertainty  of  human  things;  on  it  he  seems  to  rest  that  con- 
clusion of  practical  wisdom  which  he  draws  from  the  consideration  of  the  vanities 
of  human  life;  that  it  is  the  duty,  and  for  the  happiness  of  man,  thankfully  and 
confidingly   to   enjoy   the   good   which   he   possesses,    as   bestowed   at   once,    and 
secured  by  the  merciful  and  unfailing  providence  of  God.     In  this  truth  he  seems 
to  have  found  a  rock,  on  which  he  might  set  his  feet  securely,  being  delivered  by 
the  light  of  Divine  wisdom  out  of  the  unsteady  and  intricate  paths  of   human 
short-sightedness   and  folly.     I.  The   very   natuee  of  man   is   transient   and   im- 
perfect, much  more  the   works  in  which  he  is  engaged.     Frail   are  they,   and 
fugitive,  mutable  and  perishable,  uncertain  and  insecure,  never  continuing  in  one 
stay.     This  is  the  very  property  of  a  dependent  and  finite  creature,  who  cannot 
set  up  a  will  of  his  own,  or  execute  a  work  in  opposition  to  the  will,  and  exempt 
from  the  control  of  that  Supreme  Power  who  gave  him  his  being,  and  to  whom  he 
is  necessarily  subject.     But  beside  this  essential  insufficiency  in  man  as  a  mere 
creature,  sin  has  marred  his  limited  powers,  and  induced  corruptness,  as  well  as 
imperfectness  into  all  his  works.     II.  Consider,  in  opposition  to  this  picture  of 
man,  the  nature  and  works  of  God;  more  particularly  as  they  have  relation  to, 
and  afiect  mankind.     1.  "Whatsoever  God  doeth  it  shall  be  for  ever."     (1)  Be- 
cause there  is  no  change  of  purpose  in  God.     (2)  Every  singular  decree  of  His  will, 
and  every  several  act  of  His  power,  humanly  separated  out  of  this  great  unity, 
"  is,  in  truth,  for  ever,"  and  hath  in  it  a  perpetuity,  being  joined  on,'  indissolubly 
and  eternally,  to  that  one  all-involving  and  everlasting  design.     (3)  It  shall  stand; 
because  no  created  and  superior  power  can  interfere  to  overthrow  it.     2.  But  the 
piu-poses  and  works  of  God  in  relation  to  man  are  also  perfect.     They  are  entire, 
complete,  and  of  finished  excellence.     3.  But  especiall}',  whatsoever  He  doeth  in 
the  covenant  of  His  mercy,  and  in  the  salvation  provided  for  man  in  His  Son,  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  shall  be  for  ever;  nothing  can  be  put  to  it,  nor  anything  taken 
from  it."     (1)  It  is  eternal,  unfailing,  and  unchangeable  in  Christ,  by  whom  it 
hath  been  executed  and  accomplished.     (2)  This  salvation  is  also  eternal  in  God's 
purpose  and  decree  of  mercy.     (3)  This  salvation  is  also  eternal  in  the  work  of 
grace   and  sanctification.     (4)  But,   moreover.  His  salvation   is  perfect  in   itself, 
complete,  entire,  wanting  nothing,  neither  requiring  nor  admitting  any  addition, 
but  providing  all  that  is  needful  for  every  sinner's  recovery  to  everlasting  life. 
It  is  a  full  and  free  salvation.     III.  The  end  and  motive  which  God  hath  in 
His  doings,  eternal  and  perfect  as  they  are,  is,  that  men  may  fear  Him.     Oh  I 
what  a  holy  and  heavenly  blending  of  gracious  influences  and  sweet  emotions  is 
included   in   this   godly   fear;   humble    and    awful   reverence,    bowing   before    the 
supreme  greatness  and  goodness  of  the  Lord  God  omnipotent;  meek,  and  confiding 
trust,  resting  on  His  power  and  mercy,  pledged,  and   engaged,   and  manifestly 
operating   in   behalf  of   fallen   man;   lively   gratitude   for   surpassing   grace,   and 
redemption  at  once  free  and  unfailing;  pure  and  true  love  to  infinite  excellence  of 
omnipotence  and  benevolence.     This  is  sanctified,  this  is  acceptable  fear;  this  is 
that  fear  in  which  holiness  must  be  perfected.     (J.  0.  Parr,  M.A.) 

Ver.  15.  That  which  hath  been  is  now. — The  impotency  of  time;  or,  the 
»ternally  permanent  amidst  the  constantly  fluctuating: — "Impotency  of  time!" 
"Why,  time  is  anything  but  impotent !  Is  not  its  history  a  record  of  stupendouB 
achievements?  Are  not  the  whole  scene  of  our  observation  and  sphere  of  our 
knowledge  covered  with  tokens  of  its  power?  "Time  impotent,"  indeed  I  Its 
hand  is  on  all  things,  and  all  things  yield  to  its  touch;  it  is  the  mighty  sea  that 
bears  all  things  to  our  shore;  and,  anon,  bears  all  away.  Albeit,  contrary  though 
it  may  seem  to  our  common  ideas  and  feeling,  a  little  thinking  on  the  subject  will 
convince  us  that  the  power  of  time  is  seeming,  rather  than  real;  and  that  there 
are  high  and  practical  senses  in  which  it  may  be  regarded  as  impotent.  Time  has 
not  done  much,  notwithstanding  all;  "for  that  which  hath  been  is  now."  This 
ianguage  will  apply — I.  To  all  the  elements  of  material  existence.  The  forms 
of  the  material  world  are  constantly  changing.  Whole  islands  emerge  from  the 
ocean,  whilst  broad  acres,  once  tilled  by  busy  man,  are  entombed  beneath  its 
waves.  The  herbs,  and  flowers,  and  trees  of  the  plantal  realm,  and  the  million 
tribes  of  air,  and  earth,  and  sea,  belonging  to  the  animal  dominion,  have  changed 
many  a  thousand  times  since  the  days  of  Noah,  and  are  changing  every  hour 
But  the  elements  of  which  the  first  types  of  all  were  formed  are  the  same 
Time,  through  all  its  mighty  revolutions,  cannot  destroy  an  atom.  The  language 
of  the  text  applies — II.  To  all  the  spirits  of  mankind.     Argument,  we  think,  is 


CHAP,  m.]  ECCLESIASTES.  Ill 

not  wanting  to  prove  that  all  the  human  souls  that  ever  have  "  been,  are  now.'^ 
On  what  do  I  base  the  conviction,  that  all  the  souls  that  ever  have  lived,  are 
living  still,  and  will  live  for  ever?  Purely  on  the  testimony  of  Christ  and  Hia 
apostles.  In  the  nature  of  the  case  there  is  but  one  way  of  knowing  how  long 
any  creature  is  to  live,  and  that  is,  by  ascertaining  what  is  the  will  of  the  necessary 
existing  one  in  relation  to  Him.  If  He  has  willed  that  man  shall  live  a  year — 
however  constitutionally  strong — he  shall  live  a  year  and  no  more;  or  if  He  has 
willed  that  he  shall  live  for  ever — however  constitutionally  weak — he  shall  live 
for  ever.  To  know  the  limits  of  any  being's  existence,  I  must  know  the  will  of 
God  respecting  it.  All  depends  on  His  will.  But  has  He  revealed  this  in  relation 
to  human  existence?  He  has.  Christ  comes  forth  to  testify  of  this  will;  and 
He  tells  us,  in  language  most  unmistakable,  that  God  has  willed  that  man's 
existence  shall  have  no  termination  (Matt.  x.  28;  Luke  xvi.  19,  etc.;  xz.  88; 
John  V.  24;  viii.  51;  xii.  24-28;  xiv.  2,  8;  2  Cor.  v.  1-10;  2  Tim.  i.  10; 
1  Thess.  iv.  18;  Phil.  i.  23;  1  Peter  iv.  6).  III.  To  all  the  genebal 
TYPES  OF  HUMAN  CBABACTBB.  The  Same  types  reappear  in  all  times.  Your 
Herods  and  Hamans,  your  Athenians  and  Pharisees — indeed,  every  character  in 
the  Bible,  and  every  character  in  history,  seem  to  be  living  again  in  every  age. 
IV.  To  ALL  THE  PBiNCiPLES  OF  THE  DiviNE  GOVEBNMENT.  The  forms  of  God's  deal- 
ings  with  humanity  have  passed  through  various  changes.  There  was  once  simple 
Patriarchalism ;  then  came  gorgeous  Judaism;  and  now  we  have  spiritual  Chris* 
tianity;  but  the  same  principles  are  seen  in  each  and  all.  Because  of  this  un-  ; 
alterableness,  th«  physical  philosopher  can  prophesy  of  things  to  come  centuries 
hence;  he  can  tell  to  the  hour  when  an  eclipse  shall  take  place,  when  the  tide 
shall  overflow  its  boundary,  and  when  another  comet  shall  sweep  the  horizon;  and 
because  of  this,  the  moral  philosopher,  too,  can  predict  with  an  unerring  certainty, 
that  if  minds  continue  under  the  influence  of  certain  principles  of  depravity,  most 
terrible  storms  of  anguish  await  them;  but  if  under  the  influence  of  holy  truth, 
their  path  shall  be  as  the  shining  light,  "  that  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the 
perfect  day."  And  because  of  this,  moreover,  the  good  people  who  rightly  appre- 
ciate the  influences  of  the  last  economy,  can  appreciate  in  full  the  heart-language 
of  the  good  people  who  rightly  appreciated  the  influences  of  the  first.  Asaph  can 
express  his  feelings  in  the  language  of  Job,  and  Paul  in  the  language  of  David, 
and  the  good  of  this  age  in  the  language  of  either  or  all.  V.  To  the  oband  ; 
DESIGN  OF  ALL  THINGS.  What  is  the  great  design  of  all  things?  On  the  assump-  ; 
tion  that  the  author  of  all  is  moral  mind — distinguished  by  rectitude  and  love, 
and  that  all  intelligent  beings  are  His  ofispring — is  it  not  lawful  to  conclude  that 
the  grand  design  in  all  must  be  the  holy  development  of  creature  minds  in  grati- 
tude, reverence,  love,  and  assimilation  to  Himself?  What  we  might  thus,  4: 
•priori,  infer,  all  the  facts  of  nature,  history,  consciousness,  and  the  Bible  con- 
tribute to  establish.  VI.  To  the  becollections  of  the  hdman  hemobt.  Every 
sentence  and  every  verse  of  providential  history  are  written  on  the  disembodied 
souls  of  the  generations  that  are  gone.  The  history  of  man  is  recorded,  not  in 
books,  but  in  souls;  and  will  be  seen  and  studied  in  the  great  eternity.  VII.  To 
all  the  conditions  of  man's  well-being.  Look  at  the  condition  of  man's  physical 
well-being.  Is  it  not  true  that  on  wholesome  food,  fresh  air,  and  proper  exercise 
the  health  of  the  hiiman  body  has  ever  depended?  Look  at  man's  intellectual 
well-being.  Is  it  not  true  that  on  observation,  comparison,  research,  and  reflec- 
tion the  progress  of  the  human  mind  has  ever  been  suspended?  Look  at  his 
spiritual  well-being.  Have  not  repentance  towards  God  and  faith  in  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  been  always  the  necessary  condition  of  human  salvation?  In  rela- 
tion to  all  these  things  we  may  say,  with  the  greatest  truth,  that  "  that  which 
hath  been  is  now."  It  has  ever  been  thus,  that  the  man  who  violated  the 
physical  laws  of  his  being  has  lost  his  health  and  sunk  to  the  grave ;  it  has  always 
been,  that  he  who  neglected  the  conditions  of  intellectual  improvement  has  never 
risen  beyond  the  level  of  the  brute;  and  it  has  always  been,  that  he  who  did 
not  "  repent  "  has  perished;  and  that  he  who  did  not  believe  has  been  damned. 
{Hfimiliat.)  Stability  amidst  change: — This  apothegm  is  not  to  be  taken  without 
some  limitation.  It  intends  not  to  assert  that  there  is  absolutely  no  change,  no 
variety,  no  progress  or  improvement  in  any  direction,  from  time  to  time;  but  it 
sententiously  expresses  the  truth,  or  truths,  that  over  all  change  there  presides  a 
law  of  permanence;  that  amidst  all  variety  there  exists  a  standard  of  uniformity; 
that  much  which  seems  to  be  new  is  in  fact  old;  that  the  main  features  of  the 
fast  are  reproduced  in  the  present,  and  will  be  again  reproduced  in  the  future; 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 


that  the  great  principles  of  human  nature  and  of  the  Divine  government  remain 
the  same  in  all  ages.     In  this  view  of  the  text,  it  gravely  opposes  its  wisdom  to 
those  manifestations,  now  of  vanity,  and  now  of  discontent,  which  are  evinced  in 
the  disparagement  and  rejection  of  "what  has  hitherto  been  received,  cherished  and 
reverenced.     We  often  hear  that  the  world  has  outgrown  such  and  such  opinions, 
habits  or  modes  of  action.     Occasionally  the  assertion  is  made  considerately,  and 
is    true.     It    is    made   concerning   cruelties,    superstitions,    and    puerilities    which 
the  world  ought  to  outgrow,  and  which  a  part  of  the  world  has  partly  outgrown, 
as  any  observer  may  see.     But  the  trouble  and  annoyance  is  that  the  same  asser- 
tion is  used  by  half-sighted  and  confident  men  to  signify  the  supposed^  triumph 
of  their  own  fancies,  and  with  regard  to  things  which  the  world  ought  not  to  out- 
grow,  and  has  not  in  reality  outgrown,  because  they  are  good  and  durable  in 
themselves.     No  sooner  do  a  few  individuals  learn  to  neglect  and  despise  certain 
religious  forms,  than  they  declare  that  the  world  has  outgrown  them.     We  do  not 
outgrow  a  thing,  in  the  true  sense  of  becoming  too  wise  for  it,  simply  because  we 
neglect  and  forget  it  in  a  season  of  indifference,  or  cast  it  away  from  us  in  a  time 
of  strife  and  excitement.     The  whole  French  nation  once  thought  that  they  had 
outgrown  religion,  when  in  fact  they  had  only  renounced  it,  and  renounced  a  great 
good;  and  they  never  acted  so  madly  as  during  that  period  of  delusion.     We  are 
often  told  that  the  world  is  outgrowing,  or  has  outgrown,  forms.     How  far  is  this 
true?     Only  to  a  limited  extent.     All  life  and  all  nature  and  all  art  are  full  of 
forms,  are  hardly  anything  but  forms.     In  every  form  there  is  a  spirit,  which  is 
its  life.     Sometimes  the  spirit  departs  from  it,  and  then  it  dies.     Sometimes  the 
form  which  envelops  the  spirit  is  made  too  cumbrous  by  superfluous  foldings,  and 
then  the  form  must  be  reduced,  in  order  that  the  spirit  may  have  breath.     But 
the  spirit  survives,  in  the  same  form  renewed,  or  in  some  other.     In  some  instances 
the  spirit  may  act  without  a  form,  or  in  a  form  so  reserved  as  to  be  imperceptible 
to  common  eyes.     Masses  for  the  dead  are  not  outwardly  celebrated  by  ourselves. 
But  the  spirit  of  that  form  is  the  desire  springing  from  irrepressible  affection  to 
do  something  by  the  way  of  intercession  for  the  departed  souls  of  those  whom 
we  have  loved.     It  may  be  our  doctrine  that  the  state  of  those  souls  is  now 
fixed  and  unchangeable,  but  it  is  our  feeling  that  something  may  yet  be  done  for 
them  by  earnest  supplication;  and  there  must  be  many  a  one  who,  though  he 
would  not  think  of  asking  for  a  requiem  from  the  Church,  yet  puts  up  his  own 
prayers  for  his  own  dead  in  the  silent  church  of  his  own  bosom.     It  is  evident 
that  there  are  forms  which,  by  their  spirit,  are  so  connected  with  our  eternal 
affections  that,  however  they  may  be  varied,  they  can  never  be  outgrown.     Mean- 
while, let  us  be  satisfied  that  the  essential  things  remain,  and  will  remain,  and 
that  the  world  cannot  outgrow  them.     Keligion  remains ;  for  the  nature  of  man 
requires  it.     Faith  in  Christ  remains;  for  He  is  the  Mediator  between  God  and 
man,  revealing  the  will  of  God,  and  manifesting  the  glory  of  the  Father;  and  man 
must  go  to  Him  for  the  words  of  eternal  life.     The  Bible  remains ;  for  it  is  spread 
through  the  world,  and  guarded  by  its  own  sanctity  and  man's  gratitude.     Prayer 
remains,  for  man  must  speak  to  his  Maker,  and  the  language  of  his  commimion 
is  prayer.     And  things  which  appear  to  some  less  essential  and  permanent  than 
these,  will  still  remain.     Not  only  will  religion  remain  in  spirit,  but  in  external 
form;  for  man  has  senses  as  well  as  a  soul.     Forms  may  be  modified,  but  form 
will  remain.      Ordinances  will  remain;  for  religion  demands  manifestation;  and 
especially   will   those  two  ordinances   remain,   which   the   Savioiu:   enjoined,   and 
which   the   Church   from   the   very   first   has   continued.     Music    will    accompany 
worship,  and  elevate  piety,  while  man  has  an  ear  for  harmony.     Churches  will  be 
reared  with  the  best  graces  of  architecture,  while  man  has  an  eye  for  fitness,  pro- 
portion, and  beauty.     Let  us  not  fear  the  occasional  outcries  of  destructiveness, 
or  be  troubled  by  the  whispered  fears  of  timidity.     The  things  which  we  love  and 
have  reason  to  love,  and  which  have  helped  us  and  made  our  solace,  will  not  be 
outgrown.     If  they  have  engaged  love,  true  and  pure  love,  they  are  worthy  and 
lasting.     If  they  have  touched  and  opened  the  inmost  fountains  of  feeling,  they 
are  real  and  durable.     Let  us  not  fear  for  them  nor  distrust  them,  but  be  true  to 
them,  and  they  will  be  true  to  us.     (J''.  W.  P.  Greenwood,  D.D.)   God  reqaireth 
that  which  is  past. — Life  an  organic  unity: — We  may  render  the  clause  more 
literally   and  intelligently :   '*  God  taketh  account,  maketh  inquisition,  for  that 
which  has  fled  away."     No  part  of  life  is  isolated,  but  each  period  is  connected 
with  what  has  gone  before  and  with  what  comes  after;  all  are  combined  to  make 
ft  vital,  organio  whole,  so  that  in  judging  of  the  present  we  are  really  judging  the 


CHAP,  in.]  ECCLESIASTES.  113 

past,  as  in  the  day  of  final  adjudication  the  acts  of  the  bygone  years  will  coma 
up  for  approval  or  condemnation  before  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth.  We  are  to-day 
what  we  are  by  means  of  the  past,  and  the  future  is  conditioned  on  the  present. 
Life  evolves  itself  out  of  the  present;  as  the  stream  at  the  mouth  bears  a  constant 
relation  to  all  the  streams  that  have  watered  the  hills,  so  age  is  related  to  youth. 
As  the  crest  of  foliage  lifted  by  the  trees  bears  its  relation  to  the  root,  so  does 
life's  flower  and  fruitage  stand  related  to  early  years  of  culture  and  of  growth. 
We  know  this.  When  we  are  censured  or  reproved  we  know  that  it  is  not  the 
present  alone  that  is  judged,  but  the  past.  Knowledge  is  not  extemporaneous. 
It  18  not  a  sudden  acquisition,  any  more  than  a  ship,  or  palace,  or  a  city  with  its 
splendid  mansions,  spacious  avenues  or  extended  commerce,  are  extemporized  by 
nations.  We  sometimes  listen  to  one  in  conversation  and  are  tempted  to  credit 
him  with  intuitive  sagacity,  with  native  wisdom,  whereas  his  rich  and  ready  speech 
pours  its  golden  opulence  only  as  molten  metal  gushes  out  from  the  open  furnace 
when  it  has  felt  the  purifying  fires  within.  Keseareh  and  experiment,  successes 
and  failures,  have  wrought  together  to  make  his  knowledge  accurate,  compact, 
available.  So  in  art,  the  painter  is  not  what  he  is  by  mere  spontaneous,  involun- 
tary impulse.  Study,  practice,  patient  and  protracted  toil  have  given  him  skill. 
So  the  poet,  the  musician,  the  advocate,  the  physician  or  the  orator  is  what  he 
is  to-day  only  by  virtue  of  the  past.  The  past  has  been  the  arena  of  toilful 
struggles,  and  it  is  that  which  is  judged.  Sometimes  it  has  been  too  brief  for 
adequate  preparation,  and  failure  follows.  Again,  in  the  customs  by  which  our 
life  is  governed  or  inspired  or  limited  we  see  the  same  principle  at  work.  By 
resistance  or  by  yielding  to  various  influences  brought  to  bear  upon  us  we  come  to 
be  what  we  are,  strong  against  temptation  or  weak  before  its  alluring  power. 
Paul's  retirement  in  Arabia  was  a  part  of  his  training.  Every  contest  and 
conquest  taught  him.  As  he  bore  the  chain  on  his  hand  he  learned  patience.  As 
he  looked  on  the  soldiers  that  guarded  him,  or  on  the  household  of  the  emperor, 
or  as  he  contemplated  the  crown  which  he  himself  would  wear  in  heaven,  he 
learned  more  of  himself  and  his  Saviour.  The  fanaticism  of  Pharisee,  the  scepti- 
cism of  philosopher,  and  the  bigotry  of  the  Jew  all  taught  him.  In  that  one 
moment  when  he  lifted  up  his  last  prayer  before  ha  suffered  was  reflected  a  life- 
time of  noble  consecration  and  self-discipline.  In  the  special  states  of  mind  which 
control  our  judgment  the  same  fact  reappears.  One  person  is  habitually  gloomy, 
another  gay  and  frivolous.  Thus  life  comes  out  of  the  past.  Its  habits  and 
states  of  feeling  to-day  reflect  the  habits  of  other  years.  Here  is  the  philosophy 
of  history.  It  is  not  a  series  of  isolated  events,  a  concatenation  of  unprophesied 
occurrences,  but  a  continuous  unity.  The  theme  teaches  us  the  solemnity  of  life. 
(B.  S.  StoTTs,  D.D.)  Review  of  life: — I.  A  review  of  past  means  and  privi- 
leges. By  these,  I  mean  your  having  been  born  in  a  land  of  vision  where  the 
Saviour  of  the  world  is  known.  I  mean,  your  having  had  the  Word  of  life,  not 
only  to  read,  but  also  to  hear.  I  mean,  your  having  had  ministers  to  call  you  to 
repentance,  to  warn  you  of  your  danger,  to  beseech  you  in  Christ's  stead  to  be 
reconciled  unto  God.  I  mean,  the  various  ordinances  of  the  sanctuary,  and  all 
the  helps  to  seriousness  and  devotion  which  the  goodness  of  God  has  afforded  you. 
What  influence  have  all  these  had  upon  your  minds?  Are  you  crucified  to  the 
world?  Are  you  denying  yourselves,  and  taking  up  your  cross,  and  following  the 
Saviour?  Are  your  affeStions  more  spiritual,  your  principles  more  powerful,  your 
minds  more  enlightened?  II.  A  review  of  past  mercies.  How  many  times  has 
He  lulled  you  to  sleep  in  His  arms;  fed  you  at  His  table;  clothed  you  from  His 
wardrobe  I  How  often  has  He  supplied  your  wants,  and  wiped  away  tears  from 
your  eyes!  When  brought  low,  has  He  not  helped  you?  When  in  jeopardy,  has 
He  not  defended  you?  When  sickness  has  alarmed  your  fears,  has  He  not  led 
you  back  from  the  gates  of  the  grave?  When  accidents  have  been  ready  to 
destroy,  have  not  "  all  your  bones  said,  who  is  a  God  like  unto  Thee?"  If  we 
had  indulged  a  person  year  after  year  all  through  life,  should  we  not  require  him 
to  think  of  it;  to  be  sensible  of  our  kindness,  and  to  behave  towards  us  in  a 
manner  becoming  his  obligations  ?  There  is  nothing  perhaps  we  feel  more  painfully 
than  the  ungrateful  reception  of  the  favours  we  bestow :  and  a  very  few  instances 
of  unthankfulness  are  sulBcient  to  induce  us  to  discontinue  our  benefits.  What, 
then,  does  God  think  of  us?  HI.  A  review  op  oue  past  sorrows  and  distresses. 
It  is  an  awful  thing  to  come  out  of  trouble;  for  it  always  leaves  us  better  or 
worse  than  it  finds  us.  We  should  therefore  ask  with  peculiar  concern — "  What 
benefit  have  I  derived  from  such  a  visitation  of  Divine  Providence?      The  rod 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 


•poke — did  I  hear  its  message?  The  physician  has  been  employed — is  my  dis- 
temper even  beyond  the  reach  of  medicine?  I  have  lost  the  life  of  my  friend — 
and  have  I  lost  his  death  too?  My  relation  has  entered  the  joy  of  his  Lord— I 
have  one  reason  for  loving  earth  less,  and  do  I  love  it  more?  one  reason  for  loving 
heaven  more,  and  do  I  love  it  less?"  IV.  A  review  of  past  sins.  Many  of 
these  have  grown  out  of  our  privileges,  our  mercies,  and  our  trials.  They  have 
been  attended  with  singular  aggravations.  They  are  more  in  number  than  the 
hairs  of  our  head.  In  many  things  we  offend  all.  This  review  is  painful — but 
it  is  useful,  it  is  necessary.  It  will  lead  us  to  admire  the  longsuffering  of  God, 
in  bearing  with  us  year  after  year.  It  will  be  a  call  to  repentance.  It  will  humble  us. 
It  will  promote  charity.  We  shall  be  tender  towards  others,  in  proportion  as  we  deal 
honestly  and  severely  with  ourselves.  It  will  be  a  spur  to  diligence.  You  have 
much  lost  time  to  redeem,  and  much  lost  ground  to  recover.  {W.  Jay.)  Past 
year$  returning: — ^We  say  in  popular  language  of  a  departed  year,  that  it  is  gone. 
But  in  truth  it  is  not  gone.  Nothing  in  it  is  lost — ^lost  to  itself,  to  the  universe, 
or  to  any  who  have  lived  through  it.  "  God  requireth  that  which  is  past."  1.; 
The  law  of  memory  shows  that  God  requires  the  past.  All  that  ever  hath  been, 
80  far  as  humanity  is  concerned,  is  now  living  in  the  memory  of  all  the  individual 
men  that  ever  lived.  Memory  has  now  its  resurrections.  Scarcely  an  hour 
departs,  in  which  some  grave  does  not  open,  and  the  ghost  of  some  long-buried 
event  does  not  start  up  to  life.  As  ocean  prints  her  undulations  on  the  shore, 
memory  prints  our  actions  and  events  on  the  soul — a  tablet,  this,  not,  however, 
like  sand;  but  like  eternal  adamant.  II.  The  law  of  moral  oadsation  shows  that 
God  requires  the  past.  There  ie  nothing  living  on  which  you  can  fix  your  eye* 
that  is  not  to-day  the  effect  of  all  the  causes  and  influences  that  have  been 
operating  on  it  from  the  beginning  of  its  existence.  This  is  true  of  the  globe 
itself.  Its  condition  to-day  is  the  result  of  all  the  forces  that  have  been  acting 
upon  it  through  the  most  distant  periods  of  geological  calculation.  This  is  true 
of  the  intellect.  The  state  of  my  intellect  at  this  hoiir  is  the  result  of  all  the 
thoughts  that  have  ever  coursed  their  way  through  my  soul.  This  law  holds  true 
in  relation  to  character.  Nothing  that  man  does  ever  dies :  no  act  terminate! 
in  itself,  it  makes  an  everlasting  impression,  it  becomes  an  element  in  the  moral 
existence  of  its  author,  it  sends  its  vibrations  along  the  lines  of  the  endless  future. 
III.  The  law  of  conscience  shows  that  God  requires  the  past.  Conscience,  both 
in  the  savage  and  the  sage,  foreshadows  the  scene  of  coming  retribution.  It  has 
heard  the  trumpet  blast;  it  has  seen  the  Judge  enthroned,  the  prisoner  arraigned, 
the  books  opened,  the  witnesses  examined;  has  heard  the  sentence  pronounced, 
and  marked  the  find  delivery  of  the  culprit  into  the  everlasting  custody  of 
justice.  The  structure  of  the  human  eye  does  not  more  clearly  imply  the  exist- 
ence of  light,  than  the  forebodings  of  s  guilty  conscience  the  existence  of  future 
retribution.  (Homilist.)  Ood  requireth  that  which  is  past: — In  what  senses  does 
God  require  the  past?  I.  God  requires  that  which  is  past  in  the  way  of 
matural  law.  1.  The  matter  of  the  past  God  requires  to-day.  The  mighty 
primeval  forests  which  reared  their  lofty  heads  and  waved  their  huge  branches, 
and  the  earth's  elements  which  rolled  in  fiery  flood  ages  before  the  hiiman  era,  God 
requireth  now  in  this  age  of  advanced  civilization,  and  they  answer  the  requirement, 
the  one  by  furnishing  coal,  the  other  by  supplying  granite  and  metals  for  the  use  of 
man.  And  as  of  the  remote  past,  so  of  the  nearer.  The  leaves  which  a  day  or  two 
back  we  saw  chased  hither  and  thither  by  the  spirit  of  the  wind  will  contribute 
their  due  portion  to  the  vegetation  of  the  coming  year.  2.  What  is  thus  true 
of  nature  is  true  also  of  society.  The  year  has  been  what  it  has  because  of 
what  it  has  received  from  the  past,  and  in  turn  it  will  hand  down  to  the  coming 
years  its  vast  inheritance  of  the  past  increased  with  its  own  individual  contribu- 
tion. 8.  As  also  by  natural  law  God  requires  the  evil  and  the  good  that  are  past. 
You  see  a  nation  as  Greece,  or  as  Spain,  once  so  great,  now  without  physical 
energy  or  moral  vigour;  it  is  the  judgment  exacted  or  required  by  natural  law 
for  the  vices  and  follies  of  the  fathers  and  forefathers.  You  see  certain  weakly 
or  diseased  children;  the  wickedness  of  the  generation  before  them  is  therein 
required  of  them.  The  excesses  of  the  youth  by  natural  law  God  will  sooner  or 
later  require  in  the  man's  disordered  physical  system,  or  in  his  undermined  consti- 
tution succumbing  to  some  disease.  But  it  is  more  true  of  the  good  than  of  the 
evil  that  God  requireth  the  past.  Has  Abraham's  faith  perished?  Has  Jacob's 
wrestling  prayer  died?  Have  David's  psalms  and  prophets'  word,  and,  above  all, 
liava  the  truth  and  grace  of  the  good  Lord  Himself  wrought  so  long  ago  perished? 


CHAP.  HI.]  ECCLESIASTES.  115 

Our  mighty  dead  we  with  us  in  the  saintlier  lives,  in  the  freer  thought,  in  th« 
ampler  work  of  the  Church  to-day.  No;  the  past  is  not  gone.  Time  does  not 
triumph  over  us.  By  natural  laws  God  preserves  the  past.  God  requireth  that 
which  is  past.  In  requiring,  however,  the  past  through  natural  law,  there  is  no 
appeal  to  the  human  will.  II.  We  pass  now  to  the  sphere  of  will,  and  say  that 
a  second  chief  way  in  which  God  requireth  that  which  is  past  is  by  means  of  thb 
MORAL  LAW.  Here  God  appeals  to  man  to  render  somewhat  suitable  to  his  past. 
Here,  ere  the  requirement  of  God  can  be  met,  man  must  consent  and  co-operate. 
1.  In  this  sphere  God  requireth  that  which  is  past  by  requiring  thankfulness  for 
past  mercies.  No  state  of  heart  is  so  happy  as  that  of  thankfulness,  as  no  state 
is  60  conducive  to  the  right  use  of  God's  gifts.  Be  ye  thankful.  2.  But  while 
we  have  received  mercies  many,  who,  as  he  looks  over  this  year,  is  not  conscious 
of  sin?  and  for  the  sin  which  is  past  God  requireth  penitence.  3.  But  God  has 
given  us  time  and  place  here,  and  has  so  constituted  our  life  that  it  puts  us 
through  a  wise  discipline;  and  for  this  discipline  of  the  past  God  requireth  char> 
acter  and  service.  Have  we  fashioned  the  limbs  of  the  moral  man — honesty, 
sincerity,  justice,  honourableness — into  greater  strength  and  beauty?  Have  we 
produced  any  of  the  finer  lines  of  gentleness,  lowliness,  meekness,  devoutness, 
which  are  so  glorious  in  our  Divine  model?  III.  God  requires  the  past  in  the  way 
of  FDTUEK  JUDGMENT.  God,  at  the  judgment,  will  require  that.  The  modern  mode 
of  conceiving  of  past  time  differs  from  the  ancient  mode.  We  think  of  past  time 
as  something  left  behind  us;  the  ancients  thought  of  past  time  as  something  gone 
before  them.  Tempua  fugit  (time  flies)  was  the  common  expression  of  classic 
thought;  the  notion  being  that  time  was  ever  moving  forward,  requiring  therefore 
prompt  action  to  use  it,  and  suggesting  that  when  past  it  had  fled  not  behind  but 
before  us.  lu  like  manner  in  Arabic  philosophy,  and  in  the  Koran,  authorities 
inform  us  that  past  deeds  are  conceived  of  not  as  left  behind  but  as  gone  on 
before,  waiting  in  yonder  great  future  to  confront  their  doers.  It  is  this  con- 
ception of  past  time  that  the  original  of  our  text  presents.  And  this  view  is  just. 
The  moral  feeling  of  all  races  anticipates  judgment  to  come.  Though  pride  and 
unbelief  will  beat  down  the  feeling,  yet,  naturally,  the  bad  man  instinctively 
dreads  the  future,  and  the  good  man  instinctively  hopes.  There  is  a  judgment- 
hall  within  us  where  conscience  sits;  her  judgments,  however,  are  often  slighted, 
drowned  sometimes  in  the  clamour  of  a  rabble  of  worldly  considerations;  in  such 
circumstances  she  anticipates  and  appeals  to  the  future  judgment  to  confirm  and 
enforce  her  despised  judgment.  The  unrepented  evil  will  be  known  and  declared. 
That  undiscovered  lie,  that  secret  immorality,  that  unknown  fraud,  that  godless- 
ness  of  the  heart,  that  enmity  of  the  mind,  that  unbelief  of  the  spirit;  all  will 
stand  clearly  revealed,  and  judgment  just  will  be  passed.  We  cannot  deceive 
Him  the  Omniscient,  nor  elude  Him  the  Omnipresent.  There  is  no  escape  from 
that  supreme  judgment.  From  the  sentence  of  that  judgment  what  vast  issues 
will  flow  1  Eternal  life  or  the  second  death !  Heaven  or  Gehenna  I  Let  us, 
then,  prepare  for  that  judgment  by  requiring  from  oiurselves  our  past.  (A.  Good' 
rich,  D.D.)  The  indelibility  of  the  paet: — ^I.  The  fact  that  there  is  a  sense  in 
which  the  past  is  never  done  away  with,  will  appear  at  once,  from  many  considera- 
tions, to  any  one  who  reflects  upon  the  subject.  There  is  nothing  which  we  are 
more  likely  to  forget  than  the  truth  which  St.  Paul  expressed  when  he  said,  "  A 
man  cannot  live  unto  himself."  To  go  no  farther,  every  man  must  have  some 
influence  upon  his  immediate  relatives.  The  parent  has  some  influence  upon  his 
children.  But  it  is  not  only  as  regard  others — important  and  awful  though  that 
be — that  "  that  which  hath  been  is  now."  II.  Even  if  all  the  injury  we  may  have 
done  to  others  by  a  course  of  which  we  have  now  repented,  still  the  past  will 
leave  its  marks  upon  ourselves;  marks  which  no  repentance  will  blot  out.  Just 
as  there  are  dangerous  wounds  which,  long  after  they  have  been  healed,  leave  a 
tenderness  in  the  part  which  they  affected,  or,  at  all  events,  leave  a  scar  which 
never  can  be  removed;  just  as  there  are  diseases  which  leave  behind  them  a  deli- 
cacy, or  of  which,  even  after  they  are  thoroughly  eradicated,  there  remain  in  the 
robust  frame  the  everlasting  marks;  so  a  course  of  sin,  even  when  it  does  not — 
and  I  believe  this  is  the  exception — even  when  it  does  not  cause  a  permanent 
delicacy,  still  leaves  behind  it  the  marks  of  its  once  putrefying  wounds  and  bruises 
and  sores,  long  after  they  have  been  healed  by  the  Great  Physician.  We  have 
been  saved  from  death,  but  great  and  unceasing  care  is  henceforth  absolutely 
necessary.  Our  sickness  is  over,  but  our  countenance  is  changed.  Mortification 
has  been  checked  by  the  timely  amputation  of  a  limb;  we  are  in  full  health,  but 


11«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hi, 

we  never  get  the  limb  back  again.  There  are,  no  doubt,  those  who,  by  God'j 
grace,  attain,  as  nearly  as  possible,  to  the  character  of  those  who  had  never 
yielded  themselves  deliberately  to  courses  of  sin  or  carelessness.  There  are 
prodigals  who  are  not  only  forgiven  and  received  with  readiness  and  joy,  but  in 
whom  the  traces  of  wantonness  and  degradation  or  selfishness  have  become  almost, 
if  not  altogether,  imperceptible;  between  whom  and  the  son  who  had  "  ever  been 
with  his  father  "  no  man  can  observe  the  difference.  Still,  even  to  such,  the 
past  is  not  a  blank.  It  cannot  but  be  that  the  gloomy  recollection  will  often 
cross  his  mind  of  those  who  have  passed  away  now  from  his  influence,  and  whom 
he  once  influenced  for  evil;  and  who  will  say  that  as  such  a  memory  blends  with 
the  anticipation  of  the  time  when  they  shall  meet  again,  and  suggests,  as  it  will 
suggest,  the  judgment  of  the  Great  Day — who  will  say  that  the  past  of  the  par- 
doned and  accepted  penitent  is  not  painfully  required  of  him?  (J.  C.  Coghlan, 
D.D.)  The  permanence  of  the  past: — In  God's  great  universe  there  is  no  absolute 
past.  Time  and  space  are  the  same.  They  have  no  true  reality,  but  are  mere 
modes  of  contemplation — conditions  by  which  objects  are  rendered  perceptible  to 
us.  Before  God,  endowed  with  the  powers  which  we  lack,  the  whole  history  of  the 
universe  appears  immediately  and  at  once.  The  extension  of  time  and  the  exten- 
sion of  space  cannot  be  distinguished  from  one  another.  The  relations  of  past 
and  future  disappear ;  they  form  one  magnificent  whole.  He  fills  at  once  the 
boundless  infinitude  of  His  being.  He  is  the  Alpha  at  the  same  time  that  He  is 
the  Omega.  With  Him  beginning  and  ending  coalesce  and  enclose  everything 
intermediate.  I.  God  reqdireth  the  past  throughodt  the  universe.  What  are 
our  sciences  but  memories  of  the  past?  Astronomy  is  the  memory  of  the  universe; 
geology  is  the  memory  of  the  earth ;  history  is  the  memory  of  the  human  race. 
There  is  nothing  forgotten  or  left  behind.  The  past  is  brought  forward  into  the 
present,  and  out  of  the  past  the  future  grows.  Each  material  form  bears  in  itself 
the  record  of  its  past  history ;  each  ray  of  light  carries  the  picture  of  that  from 
which  it  has  come.  Owing  to  the  wonderful  improvement  that  has  taken  place 
in  the  construction  and  study  of  the  spectroscope,  we  are  learning  more  and  more 
to  read  the  secrets,  not  only  of  the  present,  but  also  of  the  past  history  of  the 
stars.  The  astronomer  can  not  only  calculate  their  future  movements,  but  also 
recall  their  former  phenomena.  Then  what  a  faithful  testimony  has  our  own  earth 
kept  of  the  changes  through  which  it  has  passed !  The  geologist,  from  the 
unmistakable  signs  which  he  sees  in  the  rocks,  can  reconstruct  in  imagination  the 
seas  and  shores  that  vanished  untold  ages  ago.  Memory  is  not  a  faculty  peculiar 
to  mind,  it  exists  in  each  nerve-centre,  whether  of  sensation  or  motion,  as  is 
proved  by  the  fact  that  each  nerve-centre  can  be  educated  to  respond  to  impres- 
sions. It  is  a  property  of  every  tissue  of  the  body.  The  scar  of  a  wound  is  the 
recollection  by  the  tissue  of  the  injury  which  it  has  received;  and  the  marks  of 
the  small-pox  are  an  evidence  that  the  whole  system  remembers  the  attack  of  the 
disease.  There  is  such  a  thing,  too,  as  ancestral  memory;  and  the  hereditary 
traits  and  peculiarities  which  successive  generations  exhibit  testify  to  its  perma- 
nence. Many  of  the  strange  instincts,  mysterious  associations,  and  shadowy 
recollections  for  whose  origin  in  our  own  experience  we  cannot  account,  and  which 
Wordsworth  in  his  famous  "  Ode  "  alludes  to  as  intimations  of  a  Divine  home 
recently  left,  may  be  traces  in  us  of  the  memory  of  our  forefathers  which  we 
have  inherited.  What  are  the  phenomena  of  rejuvenescence  in  plants  but  a 
reminding — a  grasping  anew  amid  the  old  withered  decaying  forms  of  life  of  the 
ideal  or  type — a  going  back  to  the  first  fair  condition?  Nature  never  forgets. 
Nothing  perishes  without  leaving  a  record  of  it  behind.  The  past  history  of  the 
universe  is  not  only  preserved  in  the  memory  of  God,  but  is  also  inscribed  upon 
its  own  tablets.  II.  God  requireth  the  past  for  our  present  consolation.  He 
takes  up  all  we  have  left  behind  in  the  plenitude  of  His  existence.  The  friends 
who  have  gone  from  us  live  in  Him ;  the  days  that  are  no  more  are  revived  in 
Him.  He  is  intimately  acquainted,  not  only  with  our  present  thoughts,  but  also 
with  the  whole  of  our  past  experience.  The  images  of  the  past  that  haunt  our 
own  minds  are  ineffaceably  impressed  upon  His  also.  In  converse  with  Him,  in 
whom  thus  all  our  life  is  hid,  upon  whose  mind  the  whole  picture  of  our  existence 
is  mirrored,  we  feel  that,  though  lonely,  we  are  not  alone — though  the  perishing 
creatures  of  a  day,  we  are  living  even  now  in  eternity.  III.  God  requireth  thb 
past  for  its  restoration.  As  the  context  indicates,  it  is  a  law  of  the  Divine 
manifestation,  a  mode  of  the  Divine  working  in  every  department,  that  the  past 
should  be  brought  forward  into  the  present,  the  old  reproduced  in  the  new.     la 


CHAP,  m.]  ECCLESIASTES.  117 

nature  and  religion  the  progressive  and  the  conservative  elements  are  combined. 
Each  new  stratum  of  rock  is  formed  out  of  the  ruin  of  the  previous  strata.  In 
man  himself  the  characteristics  of  each  age  are  carried  along  with  him  through 
every  advancing  stage  of  life,  and  the  child-heart  may  be  retained  in  extreme  old 
age.  In  the  history  of  nations  the  past  overshadows  and  forms  the  present,  and 
the  modifications  which  existing  institutions  undergo  are  based  upon  the  solid 
advantages  of  old  institutions;  while  "  freedom  broadens  slowly  down  from  prece- 
dent to  precedent."  In  like  manner  in  Scripture  every  advancing  event  is 
marked  by  new  powers  and  destined  for  higher  ends;  but  with  these  are  always 
essentially  recapitulated  all  things  that  have  been  previously  employed.  Tho 
system  of  truth  contained  in  the  successive  dispensations  of  religion  is  one  and 
the  same.  God,  in  His  house  not  made  with  hands,  is  not  doing  as  we  do  when 
our  household  goods  are  old  and  worn  out  and  we  replace  them  by  things  alto- 
gether new.  He  is  not  continually  refurnishing  the  earth.  He  is  causing  the 
same  flowers  and  trees  and  streams  to  appear  season  after  season.  He  never 
wearies  of  repeating  the  old  familiar  things.  He  keeps  age  after  age,  generation 
after  generation,  year  after  year,  the  same  old  home-feeling  in  His  earth  for  us. 
And  is  not  this  a  strong  argument  that  He  will  keep  the  old  home-feeling  for  us 
in  heaven;  that  we  shall  find  ourselves  beyond  the  river  of  death  in  the  midst 
of  all  the  former  familiar  things  of  our  life,  just  as  when  we  get  out  of  the  winter 
gloom  and  desolation  of  any  year,  we  find  ourselves  in  the  midst  of  all  that  made 
the  former  springs  and  summers  so  sweet  and  precious  to  us?  I  love  to  think  of 
heaven  as  a  recollection,  and  to  believe  that  the  kingdom  of  God  in  its  highest 
sense  is  the  restitution  of  all  things.  Wasted,  toiling  humanity,  after  the  great 
circumnavigation  of  human  history  is  over,  will  return  to  its  early  purity  and 
glory.  The  tree  of  life  will  bloom  again,  and  the  river  of  life  will  flow  through 
the  paradise  regained.  The  New  Jerusalem  will  descend  from  God  out  of  heaven, 
"  not  in  the  unearthly  splendours  of  an  unknown  apocalypse,  but  as  a  lark 
descends  from  the  skies  to  the  nest  she  had  dwelt  and  loved  in."  IV.  But  closely 
connected  with  the  brightness  of  such  thoughts  as  these  is  the  shadow  of  the 
solemn  one  that  God  eeqtjireth  the  past  fob  judgment.  The  stars  of  heaven 
witness  and  retain  the  scenes  and  events  of  our  earth.  The  pictures  of  all  secret 
deeds  that  have  ever  been  done  really  and  actually  exist,  glancing  by  the  vibration 
of  light  farther  and  farther  in  the  universe.  We  are  continually  endowing  the 
inanimate  earth  with  our  own  consciousness,  impressing  our  own  moral  history 
upon  the  objects  around  us;  and  these  objects  react  upon  us  in  recalling  that 
history.  The  sky  and  the  earth  are  thus  books  of  remembrance  that  witness 
against  us,  and  God  will  open  them  on  the  great  day.  "  He  shall  call  to  the 
heavens  from  above  and  to  the  earth  beneath,  that  He  may  judge  His  people."  In 
ourselves,  too,  there  are  indelible  records  of  our  former  history.  The  whole  past  of  our 
lives  is  with  us  in  the  present,  and  accompanies  us  into  the  future;  and  whatever 
we  have  done  or  suffered  or  been  has  entered  into  our  deeper  being,  and  we  have  only 
to  go  there  to  find  it.  Memory  is  indestructible.  We  cannot  undo  the  past  and  begin 
afresh.  We  have  to  take  the  past  as  the  starting-point  and  determining  element 
of  the  future.  We  are  what  the  past  has  made  us;  and  the  memory  of  former 
things  is  indelible.  But  the  Gospel  reminds  us  that  what  cannot  be  obliterated 
may  be  transmuted  by  Divine  grace.  In  Christ  Jesus  we  may  become  new  crea- 
tures; and  in  the  eternal  life  that  we  begin,  in  union  with  Him,  all  old  things,  so 
far  as  there  is  any  condemning  power  in  them,  pass  away,  and  all  things  in  the 
transfiguring  light  of  heavenly  love  become  new.  (H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  Over- 
hauling the  past: — There  is  in  law  what  they  call  a  release.  If  you  have  an 
incumbrance  upon  your  property,  by  the  payment  of  a  certain  sum  of  money  on 
your  part  the  person  to  whom  you  are  obligated  gives  you  a  document  freeing  your 
property  from  any  incumbrance.  That  is  a  release.  Well,  when  a  man  becomes 
s  Christian,  for  and  in  consideration  of  what  Christ  has  paid  in  his  behalf,  God 
grants  him  a  full  release,  and  all  his  old  sins  go  down  into  the  very  depths  of  the 
ocean,  never  to  be  brought  up  again,  neither  in  the  crises  of  this  world  nor  in 
the  Day  of  Judgment;  but  until  that  arrangement  is  made,  "  God  requireth  that 
which  is  past."  There  are  in  our  lives,  however  insignificant,  a  multitude  of 
events  for  which  we  must  give  account.  1.  In  the  first  place,  God  will  require  of 
us  all  our  past  unrecognized  blessings.  Oh,  God  has  been  very  good  to  you.  Have 
you  been  good  to  God?  "  God  requireth  that  which  is  past."  More  than  that. 
He  saw  you  dying,  and  sent  an  angel  to  redeem  you.  Did  He?  No.  He  sent 
His  only  Son.     Why?     To  heal  your  wounds,  and  to  wipe  away  your  tears,  and 


118  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  irt. 

to  carry  your  burdens,  and  to  die  your  death,  and  to  save  your  soul;  and  for  these 
last  ten  or  twenty  years  He  has  been  asking  of  you  one  little  thing,  and  that  i« 
that  you  would  let  Him  just  stand  inside  the  door  of  your  heart.  Oh,  have  you 
done  it?  2.  Again,  God  will  require  of  you,  and  does  require  of  you,  the  warnings 
that  were  unheeded  all  your  life.  Did  any  of  you  have  narrow  escapes?  He  has 
made  a  record  of  them,  and  "  He  requires  that  which  is  past."  So  God  will 
require  of  you  all  the  warnings  that  came  to  you  through  sickness.  So,  also,  God 
will  require  of  you  all  those  warnings  that  came  to  you  through  the  sudden  decease 
of  your  friends.  I  suppose  that  there  have  been  thirty  or  forty  startling  provi- 
dences in  your  life,  when  you  were  impressed  with  the  fact — more  or  less  impressed 
with  it — that  life  was  uncertain,  and  that  at  any  moment  eternity  might  move  in 
upon  your  soul.  How  did  you  feel  about  it?  Did  you  put  the  warnings  that  God 
gave  you  to  any  practical  application,  or  has  it  been  proved  that  there  is  no  power 
in  God's  providences  to  move  and  arouse  and  arrest  your  soul?  There  are  three 
points  at  which  "  God  requires  that  which  is  past."  (1)  One  is  now.  God  is  saying 
to  you  so  loudly  you  cannot  stop  your  ears  against  it :  "0  man,  where  is  thy 
father's  God?  O  man,  where  are  thy  dying  mother's  entreaties?  0  man,  where 
have  you  spent  your  nights  since  you  have  been  in  town?  0  man,  if  you  should 
die  in  your  seat  to-night,  where  would  you  go  to?  0  man,  how  long  will  you 
live?"  (2)  There  is  another  point  at  which  God  makes  requisition,  and  that  is 
the  last  hour  we  live  on  earth.  What  are  the  voices  of  the  past"  saying  to  that 
unrepentant  man  as  he  is  going  out  of  life?  Those  voices  are  saying  to  him: 
"  What  about  those  Sabbath-breaking  rides?  What  about  those  words  bias- 
phemous  or  unclean?  What  about  those  malpractices  in  trade?  What  about 
those  million  bad  thoughts  during  your  life,  of  envy,  or  hatred,  or  lust,  or  pride? 
Come  to  resurrection  all  ye  days,  and  months,  and  years;  come  to  resurrection." 
And  they  come.  What  is  God  doing  with  that  dying  man?  He  is  "requiring 
that  which  is  past."  (3)  There  is  one  other  point  at  which  God  will  make  requisi- 
tion— that  is,  in  the  great  final  day.  Without  a  single  exception,  all  the  unfor- 
given  sins  of  our  past  life  will  come  up  before  us,  and  before  an  assembled  universe 
we  will  be  questioned  about  them.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  The  past: — It  is  by 
no  means  an  uncustomary  thing  for  a  traveller  passing  through  a  certain  country 
to  make  his  pauses  and  to  reflect  upon  the  path  he  has  already  travelled,  and  to 
map  out  before  him  the  path  he  has  to  travel,  and  to  decide  in  his  own  mind  upon 
the  course  he  shall  take  most  calculated  to  bring  him  with  safety  to  his  journey's 
end.  He  doubtless  recalls  some  of  the  scenes  he  has  passed  through,  whether  of 
stirring  interest  or  otherwise.  And  while  doing  this  he  is  impressed  with  a  con- 
sciousness of  enlarged  experience;  and  if  he  is  not  a  fool  he  will  make  this  experi- 
ence serve  him  for  his  advantage  in  the  future.  Even  so  with  the  Christian 
traveller,  he  has  his  pauses  in  the  journey  of  life.  He  brings  before  his  mind 
the  memory  of  the  past  when  he  comes  to  the  close  of  an  old  year,  and  looks 
onward  to  the  beginning  of  a  new  one.  It  becomes  us  all  to  examine  ourselves, 
to  trace  back  our  past  lives,  and  to  look  forward  to  the  future,  for  the  very  reason 
assigned  to  us  by  the  words  of  Solomon,  "  God  requireth  that  which  is  past." 
1.  We  find  the  text  borne  out  according  to  the  requirements  of  the  natural  world 
around  us.  Nothing  of  the  past  is  absolutely  lost,  but,  in  some  form  or  other,  ever 
connected  with  the  passing  present.  2.  We  oft«n  speak  of  forgetting  a  thing,  as 
if  by  its  banishment  from  the  memory  it  were  lost,  gone,  and  perished.  But  fiiere 
is  nothing  forgotten :  for  "  God  requireth  that  which  is  past."  "  The  winds  travel 
on  their  course,  and  seem  to  sweep  past  us,  but  they  do  a  work  which  never 
perishes.  The  waves  flow  high,  and  seem  to  steal  away,  but  each  wave  con- 
tributes a  donation  to  the  business  of  creation  which  never  perishes.  The  sun 
rises,  and  shines,  and  sinks  away  again,  but  leaves  behind  him  an  alms-offering 
to  the  charities  of  fruition  and  of  sustenance  which  never  perishes.  Men  are 
born,  and  live,  and  toil,  and  die,  and  are  by  men  forgotten;  but  their  work  never 
perishes."  8.  Consider  these  words  as  they  refer  to  our  individual  influence  upon 
others.  4.  The  text  reminds  us  all  of  the  impossibility  of  escaping  from  our 
responsibilities.  6.  The  text,  while  thus  binding  the  past,  present  and  future 
together  in  Deity,  acts  as  an  excellent  monition  for  our  future  guidance.  It  tells 
us  that  the  past  can  be  improved  upon,  and,  while  gone  beyond  our  reach  and 
never  to  return  to  us  again,  we  can  nevertheless  seize  the  passing  moment, 
and  so,  from  its  warning,  enter  with  renewed  courage  and  with  renewed  hop« 
upon  the  scenes  of  life  lying  before  us,  untravelled  and  unknown.  (W,  D» 
HoTwood.) 


CHAP.  HI.]  ECCLESIASTES.  119 

Yer.  17.  God  shall  jadge  the  righteoas  and  the  wicked. — The  reatonablenesB 
and  equity  of  a  future  judgment: — I.  It  is  reasonable  and  equal  that  there 
SHOULD  BE  A  FUTURE  JUDGMENT.  1.  Seeing  all  men  come  hither  without  any 
knowledge  or  choice,  having  their  life,  as  it  were,  obtruded  on  them;  and  seeing 
ordinarily  (according  to  the  general  complaints  of  men)  the  pains  of  this  life  do 
overbalance  its  pleasures;  so  that  it  seemeth,  in  regard  to  what  men  find  here,  a 
punishment  to  be  born;  it  seemeth  also  thence  equal  that  men  should  be  put 
into  a  capacity,  on  their  good  behaviour  in  this  troublesome  state,  of  a  better 
state  hereafter,  in  compensation  for  what  they  endure  here;  otherwise  God  might 
seem  not  to  have  dealt  fairly  with  His  creatures.  2.  Seeing  man  is  endued  with 
a  free  choice  and  power  over  his  actions,  and  thence  by  a  good  or  bad  use  thereof 
is  capable  of  deserving  well  or  ill,  it  is  just  that  a  respective  difference  be  made, 
according  to  due  estimation;  and  that  men  answerably  should  be  proceeded  with 
either  here  or  hereafter,  reaping  the  fruits  of  what  they  voluntarily  did  sow.  3. 
Seeing  there  is  a  natural  subordination  of  man  to  God,  as  of  a  creature  to  hia 
Maker,  as  of  a  subject  or  servant  to  his  lord,  as  of  a  client  or  dependant  to  his 
patron,  protector,  and  benefactor,  whence  correspondent  obligations  do  result;  it  is 
just  that  men  should  be  accountable  for  the  performance,  and  for  the  violation  or 
neglect  of  them.  4.  Seeing  also  there  are  natural  relations  of  men  to  one  another, 
and  frequent  transactions  between  them,  founding  several  duties  of  humanity  and 
justice ;  the  which  may  be  observed  or  transgressed ;  so  that  some  men  shall  do, 
and  others  suffer  much  injury,  without  any  possible  redress  from  otherwhere,  it  is 
fit  that  a  reference  of  such  cases  should  be  made  to  the  common  Patron  of  right, 
and  that  by  Him  they  should  be  so  decided,  that  due  amends  should  be  made  to 
one  party,  and  fit  correction  inflicted  on  the  other.  5.  Whereas  also  there  are 
many  secret  good  actions,  many  inward  good  dispositions,  good  wishes,  and  good 
purposes,  unto  which  here  no  honour,  no  profit,  no  pleasure,  no  sort  of  benefit  is 
annexed,  or  indeed  well  can  be  (they  being  indiscernible  to  men),  there  are  like- 
wise many  bad  practices  and  designs  concealed  or  disguised,  so  as  necessarily  to 
pass  away  without  any  check,  any  disgrace,  any  damage  or  chastisement  here, 
it  is  most  equal  that  hereafter  both  these  kinds  should  be  disclosed,  and  obtain 
answerable  recompense.  6.  There  are  also  persons  whom,  although  committing 
grievous  wrong,  oppression,  and  other  heinous  misdemeanours,  offensive  to  God 
and  man,  yet,  by  reason  of  the  inviolable  sacredness  of  their  authority,  or  because 
of  their  uncontrollable  power,  no  justice  here  can  reach,  nor  punishment  can 
touch ;  who  therefore  should  be  reserved  to  the  impartial  and  irresistible  judgment 
of  God.  7.  On  these  and  the  like  accounts,  equity  requireth  that  a  judgment 
should  pass  on  the  deeds  of  men ;  and  thereto  the  common  opinions  of  men  and  the 
private  dictates  of  each  man's  conscience  do  attest.  8.  Every  man  also  having 
committed  any  notable  misdemeanour  (repugnant  to  piety,  justice,  or  sobriety), 
doth  naturally  accuse  himself  for  it,  doth  in  his  heart  sentence  himself  to  deserve 
punishment,  and  doth  stand  possessed  with  a  dread  thereof;  so,  even  unwillingly, 
avouching  the  equity  of  a  judgment,  and  by  a  forcible  instinct  presaging  it  to 
oome.     II.  It  is  further,  on  divers  accounts,  requisite  and  needful  that  men 

SHOULD  have  an  APPREHENSION  CONCERNING  SUCH  A  JUDGMENT  APPOINTED  BY  GoD, 
AND  CONSEQUENTLY  THAT  SUCH  AN  ONE  SHOULD  REALLY  BE.       1.    It  is  Uecdful  to  engage 

men  on  the  practice  of  any  virtue,  and  to  restrain  them  from  any  vice;  for  that 
indeed  without  it,  no  consideration  of  reason,  no  provision  of  law  here,  can  be 
much  available  to  those  purposes.  2.  The  same  supposition  is  also  needful  for 
the  welfare  of  human  society;  the  which,  without  the  practice  of  justice,  fidelity, 
and  other  virtues,  can  hardly  subsist;  without  which  practice  indeed  a  body  of 
men  would  be  worse  than  a  company  of  wolves  or  foxes;  and  vain  it  were  to 
think  that  it  can  anywhere  stand  without  conscience;  and  conscience,  without 
fear  checking,  or  hope  spurring  it  on,  can  be  no  more  than  a  name:  all  societies, 
therefore,  we  may  see,  have  been  fain  to  call  in  the  notion  of  a  futinre  judgment 
to  the  aid  of  justice  and  support  of  fidelity ;  obliging  men  to  bind  their  testimonies 
by  oaths,  and  plight  their  truth  by  sacraments;  implying  a  dread  of  that  Divine 
judgment  to  which  they  solemnly  do  then  appeal  and  make  themselves  account- 
able. 3.  But,  further,  the  persuasion  concerning  a  future  judgment  is,  on  peculiar 
accounts,  most  requisite  to  the  support  of  religion  and  defence  of  piety.  It  ia 
certain  that  no  authority,  on  whatever  reason  or  equity  grounded,  if  it  do  not 
present  competent  encouragements  to  obedient  subjects,  if  it  do  not  hold  forth  an 
armed  hand,  menacing  chastisement  to  the  refractory,  will  signify  anything,  or 
be  able  to  sustain  the  respect  due  to  it;  so  it  is  generally;  and  so  it  is  even  in 


iao  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

regard  to  God,  the  sovereign  King  and  Governor  of  the  world,  as  piety  doth  sup- 
pose Him :  His  authority  will  never  be  maintained,  His  laws  will  never  be  obeyed, 
the  duties  towards  Him  will  never  be  minded,  without  influence  on  the  hopes  and 
fears  of  men;  they  will  not  yield  to  Him  any  reverence,  they  will  nowise  regard 
His  commands,  if  they  may  not  from  their  respect  and  obedience  expect  good 
benefit,  if  they  dread  not  a  sore  vengeance  for  their  rebellion  or  neglect;  nothing 
to  them  will  seem  more  fond  than  to  serve  Him  who  doth  not  well  requite  for  the 
performance,  than  to  revere  Him,  who  doth  not  soundly  punish  for  the  neglect  of 
His  service.  Forasmuch  also  as  piety  doth  require  duties  somewhat  high  and 
hard,  as  much  crossing  the  natural  inclinations  and  desires  of  men,  it  peculiarly, 
for  the  overruling  such  aversion,  doth  need  answerably  great  encouragements  to 
the  practice,  and  determents  from  the  transgression  of  what  it  requireth;  on  which 
score  it  may  also  further  appear  that  temporal  judgments  and  recompenses  here 
are  not  sufficient  to  procure  a  due  obedience  to  the  laws  of  piety;  for  how  indeed 
can  he,  that  for  the  sake  of  piety  doth  undergo  disgrace,  loss,  or  pain,  expect  to 
be  satisfied  here?  What  other  benefits  can  he  presume  od  beside  those  which  he 
doth  presently  forfeit?     (laaac  Barrow,  D.D.) 

Vers.  19-24.  For  that  which  befalleth  the  sons  of  men  befalleth  beasts. — 
Man  and  beast: — It  is  difficult  to  determine  the  exact  object  of  Ecclesiastes  in 
instituting  this  comparison :  partly  because  the  Hebrew  is  capable,  in  one  or  two 
places,  of  different  translations;  and  partly  because  it  is  possible  to  take  very 
different  views  of  the  connection  between  the  two  things  which  Ecclesiastes  had 
"  said  in  his  heart."  One  view  which  may  be  taken  of  this  connection  is  that 
Ecclesiastes,  having  recorded  his  conviction  that  the  righteous  God  will  yet  judge 
between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  goes  on  to  record  how  he  had  speculated 
as  to  the  reason  why  God  does  not  always  execute  this  judgment  here  and  now. 
It  had  occurred  to  him  that  the  reason  of  this  might  be  to  "  prove  "  or  "  test  " 
men,  and  to  show  them  that,  in  and  of  "  themselves,"  they  were  liable  to  de- 
generate into  a  mere  animal  life.  There  is  for  man  both  probation  and  self- 
revelation  in  the  fact  that  God  does  not  visit  all  wickedness  with  immediate  and 
manifest  punishment.  If  a  man  thrusts  his  hand  into  the  fire  it  is  at  once  burnt : 
the  suffering  follows  immediately  on  the  action,  and  the  man  is  not  likely  to  do 
the  same  thing  again.  Now,  if  all  violations  of  the  moral  law  were  followed  like- 
wise by  such  immediate  and  manifest  consequences,  there  might  be  a  test  of 
human  prudence,  but  there  would  scarcely  be  any  test  of  human  virtue.  If,  for 
example,  every  man  who  should  commit  an  act  of  dishonesty  were — at  once  and 
without  fail — to  be  stricken  with  paralysis,  there  would  be  no  more  virtue  in 
honesty  than  there  is  now  in  keeping  one's  hand  out  of  the  fire.  But  the  fact  that 
God  often  postpones  the  manifest  punishment  of  iniquity,  and  allows  wicked  men 
sometimes  even  to  trample  upon  the  righteous  with  apparent  impunity,  affords  a 
test  of  moral  character,  and  leaves  room  for  the  exercise  of  virtues  which  are  the 
result,  not  of  mere  prudence,  but  of  an  actual  allegiance  to  God  and  righteousness. 
And  this  kind  of  probation,  to  which  men  are  subjected,  becomes  an  instrument  of 
self -revelation.  Men  see  how  much  of  the  animal  there  is  in  their  nature.  The 
spirit  of  man,  indeed,  "  goeth  upward"  at  death;  and  the  spirit  of  the  beast 
"  goeth  downward  to  the  earth  "  :  but  "  who  knoweth  "  the  exact  difference 
between  the  two?  The  difference  of  destination  does  not  make  itself  manifest  to 
the  senses.  To  all  outward  appearance  the  dissolution  of  the  man  and  of  the 
beast  is  exactly  the  same  kind  of  thing;  the  human  being  does  not  appear  to  have 
any  pre-eminence  in  this  respect  over  the  mere  animal.  Now,  all  these  circum- 
stances and  appearances  put  men  to  the  proof;  they  test  men  as  to  whether  they 
will  allow  themselves  to  sink  down  into  a  mere  animal,  selfish  life,  or  whether 
they  will  follow  those  Divine  inspirations  which  link  them  to  God,  beckon  them 
to  righteousness,  and  point  them  to  immortality.  But  there  is  another  and  very 
different  view  which  may  be  taken  of  the  passage.  According  to  this  view,  Ecclesi- 
astes is  here  recording  a  mood  of  materialistic  scepticism  through  which  he  had 
passed.  The  two  things  which  he  had  "  said  in  his  heart  "  were  like  the  "  two 
voices  "  of  Tennyson's  poem — voices  conflicting  with  one  another  for  the  mastery, 
and  plunging  the  soul  for  a  time  into  doubt  and  perplexity  (ver.  21,  E.V.). 
Supposing  this,  then,  to  be  the  real  drift  of  the  passage  before  us,  we  siu-ely  need 
not  be  surprised  that  Ecclesiastes,  in  presence  of  the  problems  of  life,  should  have 
passed  through  some  such  mood  of  materialistic  scepticism.  But  it  would  seem 
that  Ecclesiastes  did  not  remain  permanently  in  this  sceptical  attitude.     We  may 


CHAP,  m.']  ECCLESIASTES.  Mt 

regard  him  as  here  telling  his  readers  what  he  had  "  said  in  his  heart  "  about  man 
and  beast :  he  is  not  necessEurily  endorsing  it  at  the  time  when  he  writes  this 
book.  On  the  oontirary,  it  would  appear  from  other  passages  that  he  was  now 
clinging  to  the  assurance  that  God  would  yet  judge  between  righteous  and  wicked 
men,  and  that  the  spirit  of  man  does  not  perish  at  death.  Now,  if  Ecclesiastes 
could  thus,  with  the  light  he  had,  arrive  at  the  final  conviction  that  the  human 
spirit  survives  the  dissolution  of  the  body,  surely  we,  in  the  fuller  light  of  the 
Christian  revelation,  may  well  overcome  the  chilling  doubts  which  may  sometimes 
creep  in  upon  oxa  souls.  Events,  indeed,  sometimes  occur  in  the  providence  of 
God,  which  utterly  baffle  our  understanding,  and  which  seem  almost  to  deal  with 
men  as  if  they  were  mere  animals.  Catastrophes  happen,  in  which  men  seem 
to  be  taken  as  if  they  were  "  fishes  of  the  sea."  The  moet  brilliant  thinker  sud- 
denly meets  with  a  blow  on  the  head  which  robs  him,  for  a  time,  of  all  power  of 
thought.  Such  things  as  these  may  stagger  us.  But  we  recover  faith  when  we 
look  to  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Light  of  the  World,  and  the  Eevealer  of  the  Father. 
He  who  gave  His  Son  to  die  for  us,  and  who  has  led  us  to  trust  in  Hie  own  fatherly 
love  will  not  let  us  go  down  into  nothingness.  He  who  "  died  for  us  and  rose 
again"  has  shown  Himself  to  be  the  conqueror  of  death;  and,  "because  He 
lives,  we  shall  live  also."  Glorying  in  His  character  and  cross,  and  receiving  into 
our  hearts  somewhat  of  His  own  spirit,  we  become  conscious  of  thoughts,  motives, 
and  aspirations  which  raise  us  above  our  mere  animal  nature  and  contain  within 
themselves  the  earnest  of  immortality.     (T.  C.  Finlayton.) 

Ver.  22.  There  is  nothing  better  than  that  a  man  should  rejoice  in  hli  own 
works. — Worldlinttt:  the  Epicurean  gotpel: — These  words  seem  to  mean  that  a 
man  had  better  get  all  he  can,  and  then  enjoy  what  he  has  gathered,  for  that  is 
his  share  of  the  world's  good  things,  and  as  life  is  short  it  is  best  to  spend  it  as 
pleasantly  as  possible.  The  advice  has  been  often  given;  it  will,  I  expect,  be 
often  given  again.  "We  are  familiar  with  it  in  many  forms.  Seize  the  passing 
day  and  make  it  a  day  of  enjoyment.  Beauty  and  brightness,  wine  and  song- 
make  the  most  of  them  while  you  can,  for  neither  you  nor  they  will  be  long  here. 
This  is  the  sum  of  many  men's  idea  of  life.  Whether  gross  or  refined  in  its 
outward  forms,  the  idea  remains  essentially  the  same.  We  sometimes  speak  of 
it  as  an  Epicurean  view,  naming  it  from  the  Greek  philosopher  Epicurus.  Not 
that  it  originated  with  him,  for  it  is  older  far;  as  old,  in  fact,  as  human  nature. 
But  Epicurus  reduced  it  to  a  system,  gave  it  form  and  logical  consistency,  so  as 
to  make  it  a  philosophy.  He,  too,  presented  it  under  its  least  repulsive  features, 
for  he  seems  to  have  been  personally  an  estimable  man.  But  nothing,  not  even 
genius,  can  redeem  such  a  mode  of  thought  from  reproach,  for  it  is  altogether 
earthly  and  of  the  senses.  It  makes  much  of  the  animal  element  in  our  nature; 
it  lives  intoxicated  with  the  outward  and  visible.  Yet,  for  this  very  reason  it  has 
always  been  popular  both  in  theory  and  practice,  especially  in  practice.  Great 
numbers  have  an  intense  love  for  the  pleasures  of  sense,  though  they  would 
shrink  from  confessing  even  to  themselves  how  great  a  part  of  their  lives  these 
pleasiu-es  occupy.  But  if  men  have  any  touch  of  cultivation,  they  cannot  be  con- 
tent to  live  the  life  of  unmixed  animalism.  A  sense  of  dignity,  always  awakened 
by  thought,  protests  and  rebels.  They  must  take  their  pleasure  with  something 
to  qualify  its  grossness.  I  know  no  better  type  of  the  class  of  which  I  am  thinking 
than  King  Charles  II.  No  one  can  compliment  the  purity  of  the  pleasures  in 
which  he  indulged.  And  yet  the  man  of  cultivation  and  refinement  flashes  out 
from  the  very  midst  of  those  scenes  of  revelry.  There  is  an  lu-banity,  a  kindliness, 
a  moderation  even,  which  are  not  without  their  chsunns.  He  never  went  to  the 
extremes  which  injure  health  and  inspire  disgust.  He  was  a  lover,  too,  of  art 
and  science.  If  the  king  spent  the  evening  in  banqueting,  as  he  did,  he  passed 
the  earlier  parts  of  the  day  in  chemical  experiments,  and  other  forms  of  scientifio 
research.  Easy  in  temper,  good-natured,  self-indulgent,  indolent;  such  is  the 
man.  The  type  of  character  is  common,  and  it  is  common  partly  because  it  is 
BO  popular.  Men  of  such  nature  are  considered  "  good  fellows,"  and  treated  with 
boundless  indulgence.  But  these  light-hearted  men,  who  seem  not  so  much  to 
sin  as  to  be  unconscious  of  responsibility,  are  really  the  poison  of  social  life.  They 
are  corrupt  and  corrupting  to  others.  Of  them  it  is  by  emphasis  true,  *'  One  sinner 
destroyeth  much  good."  King  Charles  lulled  the  nation  into  a  lazy,  voluptuous 
sleep,  the  riiin  of  liberty  and  progress.  And  those  who,  in  more  private  life, 
repeat  his  character,  will  shrink  into  the  shame  and  remorse  of  perdition  when 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

they  are  brought  face  to  face  with  the  generous  impulses  thej  have  blighted,  the 
aspirations  they  have  checked,  and  the  opening  faith  and  love  they  have 
destroyed.  Worldliness,  however,  is  a  larger  fact,  and  one  more  widely  spread 
than  the  conscious  pursuit  of  pleasure.  There  are  men  whose  lives  are  most 
"respectable,"  men  at  any  rate  laborious  and  earnest,  whose  course  is  guided 
at  bottom  by  the  Epicurean  theory  of  action.  They  have  a  god  and  a  worship 
whose  rites  and  ceremonies  are  most  exacting.  Their  deity  is  money.  They 
worship  the  power  of  gold.  They  hold  with  Napoleon,  that  not  only  every  thing 
but  every  man  has  his  price,  and  that  there  is  no  door  which  will  not  open  to  a 
golden  key.  No  doubt  there  are  many  facts  which  suggest  such  a  view  and  seem 
to  give  it  support.  Money  will  do  many  things.  It  will  bring  houses,  and  land, 
and  luxuries.  It  will  secure  almost  unbounded  social  influence.  And  yet  there  is 
a  limit  to  its  potency.  Money  is  not  almighty.  Its  powers  are  hedged  about  by 
strict  limitations.  It  cannot  greatly  alter  you.  The  essential  self  of  every  man 
is  beyond  its  sway.  Neither  can  money  alter  the  permanent  conditions  of  well- 
being.  That  vice  leads  to  sickness  and  death,  to  feebleness  of  thought  and 
deadened  petrifaction  of  feeling,  is  a  fact  which  no  money  can  touch.  There  is  a 
form  of  worldliness  which  is  even  more  strange  than  the  love  of  money.  It  shows 
itself  in  an  eager  desire  for  what  is  called  social  position.  Social  display  and 
pretensions  are  starving  bodies  and  souls,  and  often  plunging  men  into  the  vortex 
of  fraudulent  crime.  Position  in  society  is  a  good  thing,  no  doubt,  but  it  is  not 
worth  having  at  the  price  of  honour  and  self-respect.  These  are  different  form* 
assumed  by  the  gospel  of  worldliness.  In  a  very  intelligible  sense  it  is  "  good 
news,"  a  veritable  gospel  to  the  outward  or  sensuous  man;  it  has  the  promise  of 
the  life  that  now  is.  And  we  need  not  deny  that  the  promise  is  redeemed.  Give 
yoiurself  to  the  world,  and  the  world  will  probably  give  itself  to  you.  You  may,  il 
you  go  heartily  for  it,  have  pleasure,  or  wealth,  or  social  honour.  Will  you,  then, 
accept  this  gospel  of  the  worldly  life?  I  do  not  know.  Many  of  you,  I  am  afraid, 
will.  But  to  me  it  seems  open  to  the  gravest  objections.  My  intellect  and  my 
feelings  rise  in  protest  against  it.  Shall  I  try  and  tell  you  why?  First,  it  is  s 
selfish  good  which  is  offered  to  us  after  all.  Worldliness  must  be  selfish,  for  it 
is  clear  that  the  ptirsuit  of  pleasure  only  becomes  possible  when  we  centre  our 
thoughts  on  self.  How  will  this  affect  me?  is  the  one  question  which  every  event 
suggests  to  thought.  Accordingly  in  its  more  vulgar  forms  the  worldly  life  dis- 
gusts us  by  a  selfishness  which  is  "  naked  and  not  ashamed."  It  recommends  us 
coarsely  to  "  take  care  of  number  one,"  as  though  "  number  one  "  were  not,  as  it 
is,  about  the  most  worthless  thing  in  the  universe  of  being.  Or  it  sings  most 
untunefully  about  "  a  little  pelf  to  provide  for  yourself,"  with  a  mean-spirited 
glorying  in  its  purblind  limitation  of  view.  The  same  spirit,  in  its  more  refined 
forms,  speaks  with  contempt  of  the  "  herd,"  and  wraps  itself  in  a  mantle  of  super- 
cilious pride.  Yet  a  selfish  life  is  essentially  a  life  of  misery.  By  one  of  those 
moral  paradoxes  which  are  so  strange,  and  yet  so  beautiful,  the  only  way  to  happi- 
ness is  to  give  up  seeking  for  it  and  to  seek  for  something  better  and  higher.  "  Go 
teach  the  orphan  boy  to  read,  or  teach  the  orphan  girl  to  sew;"  forget  ^  our  narrow, 
restless  self;  let  your  heart  flow  out  in  sympathy  with  others,  and  you  have  taken 
one  step  toward  inward  peace.  He  who  has  no  love  for  others  will  one  day  cry  in 
vain  for  others  to  love  him.  For  love  is  life,  and  those  who  live  without  it  are 
dead  while  they  live.  I  object,  further,  to  the  gospel  of  worldliness  that  it  fails 
to  bring  satisfaction  to  those  who  follow  its  rules.  This  is  singularly  true.  The 
most  discontented,  unresting  class  of  men  in  the  world  are  those  who  give  them- 
selves to  the  pursuit  of  pleasure  on  system.  As  they  grow  older,  they  almost 
always  become  cynics,  as  we  say — that  is,  they  sneer  and  snarl  at  everything  and 
everybody.  The  emptiness,  the  vanity,  the  sham  is  in  the  worldling's  heart,  and 
he  sees  other  things  through  the  mist  of  his  own  thoughts.  Depend  upon  it  there 
is  no  satisfaction  to  be  had  for  men  in  mere  pleasure-hunting.  And  I  will  tell 
you  why.  There  is  that  in  our  souls  which  is  related  to  the  Infinite  and  Eternal. 
We  are  thirsting  after  the  water  of  life,  though  we  know  it  not.  The  aching  void 
in  the  worldling's  heart  is  an  indirect  testimony  to  the  nobleness  of  his  nature. 
The  prodigal  would  fain  have  stayed  his  hunger  with  the  husks  that  the  swine  did 
eat,  but  a  man  cannot  live  on  swine's  food,  and  that  precisely  because  he  is  a 
man.  Oh,  sirs,  there  standeth  One  among  you  whom  ye  know  not.  His  face  ia 
so  marred  more  than  any  man,  and  His  form  than  the  sons  of  men.  And  yet,  oh, 
blessed  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  but  unto  Thee?  Thou,  Thou  only,  hwt  the 
words  of  eternal  life.     I  object,  finally,  to  the  gospel  of  the  world  as  being  irre- 


CHAP.  IV.]  ECCLESIASTES.  123 

ligious.  Beligion,  or  the  sense  of  a  boundless  destiny,  ia  a  fact  in  the  nature  of 
man.  It  is  the  mightiest  fact  in  his  history  also.  It  has  built  temples,  woven 
creeds,  invented  ceremonies,  animated  heroisms,  and  written  itself  in  a  thousand 
ways  upon  all  human  things.  You  may  try  to  put  it  down,  but  it  will  be  too 
strong  for  you.  What  happens  when  a  power  or  faculty  of  our  nature  is  forcibly 
suppressed?  I  will  tell  you;  men  go  mad.  The  oppressed  tendency,  like  the 
volcanic  fires  of  the  earth,  smoulders  underground  till  it  gathers  ungovernable 
force,  and  then  bursts  forth  scattering  devastation  and  death.  So  it  is  with  man's 
religious  nature.  Every  attempt  to  keep  it  down,  however  it  may  succeed  for  a 
time,  only  brings  it  out  in  the  long  run  in  violent  and  perverted  forms.  Men  try 
to  live  on  this  world  and  cannot,  and  then  they  take  to  revolution  and  bloodshed, 
with  the  worship  of  some  abstraction  of  liberty  or  equality,  or  else  they  descend 
into  spiritual  idiotcy,  and  finish  by  turning  tables,  and  finding  mighty  revelations 
in  raps  upon  the  floor.  The  superstition  of  the  day  is  in  near  relation  to  its 
worldliness.  I  know  only  one  deliverance  from  either,  and  that,  thank  God,  is  a 
deliverance  from  both.  It  is  found  in  rational  spiritual  religion,  or,  as  the  apostle 
expresses  ft,  "  repentance  towards  God  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
(/.  P,  8t0ven$on,  LL.B.) 


OHAPTEB  IV. 


Vbb.  1.  8o  I  returned,  and  considered  all  the  oppressions  that  are  done  under 
the  snn. — The  nature  and  wickedness  of  oppression: — There  is  scarce  any  sic 
against  which  more  is  said  in  the  Word  of  God,  or  which  is  more  reproachful  to 
a  man  and  to  a  Christian,  or  more  mischievous  to  society,  than  oppression.  Yet 
I  fear  it  is  a  sin  which  more  persons  are  guilty  of,  and  more  suffer  by,  than  is 
generally  known.  I.  Considbb  what  oppebssion  is,  and  the  most  steikinq 
INSTANCES  IN  WHICH  MEN  AEB  GOiLTT  OF  IT.  1.  It  is  dealing  unjustly  or  unkindly 
by  a  person  over  whose  time,  goods,  trade,  or  business  the  oppressor  hath  power. 
It  is  principally  the  vice  of  rich  men  and  superiors,  who  have  power  over  their 
workmen,  servants,  tenants,  and  other  inferiors.  But  it  is  not  confined  to  them. 
The  poor  often  meet  with  very  bad,  if  not  the  worst,  treatment  from  those  who  in 
station  and  fortune  are  very  little  above  them.  It  is  oppression,  when  men  impose  what 
terms  they  please  upon  others  in  commerce  and  dealings,  without  regarding  what 
is  just  and  right;  when  they  oblige  others  to  sell  their  goods  under  their  real  value, 
because  they  are  in  necessity;  or  to  give  more  for  a  commodity  than  it  is  worth, 
because  they  cannot  do  without  it.  Selling  bad  and  damaged  goods  to  persons 
who  dare  not  refuse  to  take  them,  and  yet  must  lose  by  them,  or  not  sell  them 
again  for  a  reasonable  profit,  is  another  instance  of  this  vice.  If  a  person  makes 
a  relation,  a  neighbour,  or  dependant,  pay  dearer  for  what  he  buys  than  his 
other  customers,  because  he  is  under  particular  obligations  to  buy  of  him,  he  ia 
an  oppressor.  Taking  exorbitant  interest  for  money  lent,  or  exchange  of  bills 
and  cash,  on  account  of  men's  necessities,  is  extortion  and  oppression.  Where  a 
person,  or  a  combination  of  persons,  engross  the  whole  of  any  commodity  which 
is  to  be  sold,  in  order  to  make  an  excessive  gain  of  it,  or  to  injure  other  tradesmen 
in  the  same  way  of  business,  this  is  oppression.  Again,  to  be  rigorous  in  exacting 
debts  or  other  rights  to  the  very  utmost  farthing,  where  poverty,  sickness,  losses, 
dear  seasons,  or  a  large  family  render  men  incapable  of  paying  what  they  owe; 
to  allow  them  no  time  to  satisfy  their  creditors ;  or  to  strip  them  of  their  all ;  this 
is  cruelly  oppressive.  Obliging  persons,  over  whom  men  have  power,  to  vote  or 
act  against  their  consciences;  persecuting,  reviling,  or  even  bantering,  men  for 
their  religious  sentiments  and  worship,  is  dreadful  oppression.  In  the  black  list 
of  oppressors  must  likewise  be  ranged  parents,  masters  and  mistresses  of  families 
and  schools,  who  behave  cruelly  and  severely  to  their  children,  servants,  and 
scholars.  There  is  likewise  great  oppression  in  a  haughty,  insolent,  overbearing 
way  of  speaking  to  inferiors,  which  is  very  grating  and  hurtful  to  any  sensible 
mind.  II.  The  great  evil  and  wickedness  of  it.  1.  It  proceeds  from  a  very 
bad  disposition  of  mind.  The  principal  source  of  it  is  covetousness ;  an  inordinate 
love  of  the  world  (Jer.  xxii.  17).    In  some  persons  the  practice  of  this  sin  proceeds 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nr. 

from  pride;  to  show  their  authority  over  others,  and  to  keep  them  in  awe.  Hence 
they  treat  their  inferiors  as  if  they  were  of  a  lower  species,  and  not  worthy  of 
common  justice.  This  shows  a  base,  ignoble  mind  (Ps.  Ixiii.  6-8).  In  some,  it 
is  owing  to  luxury  and  extravagance.  They  are  dressed  with  the  spoils  of  the  poor; 
and  their  fine  houses,  equipages,  and  entertainments  are  supported  by  the  proper- 
ties and  comforts  of  others.  It  is  sometimes  owing  to  sloth ;  because,  like  drones 
in  the  hive,  they  will  not  work,  they  prey  upon  the  labours  of  the  industrious. 
It  is  very  often  owing  to  resentment,  malice,  and  ill-nature.  2.  Oppression  is  a 
high  ingratitude  and  affront  to  the  righteous  God.  It  is  ingratitude  to  Him, 
because  He  giveth  men  all  their  wealth  and  power  over  others,  and  He  doth  thi», 
not  that  they  may  oppress,  but  protect,  relieve,  and  serve  others,  and  be  a 
blessing  to  them.  It  must,  therefore,  be  horrid  ingratitude  to  abuse  and  pervert 
those  favours  to  their  injury.  But  what  renders  it  worse  is,  that  He  hath 
bestowed  upon  men  spiritual  blessings  and  Christian  privileges,  and,  therefore,  to 
oppress  and  injure  them  must  be  proportionably  wicked.  Further,  He  hath  placed 
men  in  different  circumstances  in  life;  "  made  both  the  rich  and  the  poor."  He 
hath  allotted  to  men  such  conditions  here  that  they  need  one  another's  assistance. 
The  rich  want  the  labour  of  the  poor,  as  the  poor  want  the  money  of  the  rich; 
and  God  expects  that  they  should  help  one  another,  and  so  contribute  to  the 
general  happiness.  To  oppress  the  poor,  then,  is  defeating  the  wise  and  kind 
design  of  God's  providence.  3.  It  is  detestable  inhumanity  and  cruelty  to  the 
oppressed.  "  A  righteous  man  regardeth  the  life  of  his  beast."  What  then 
must  we  think  of  those  who  are  oppressive  and  cruel  to  their  fellow-men,  but  that 
they  are  utterly  void  of  justice,  goodness,  and  humanity,  that  they  are  monsters 
and  not  men?  4.  It  is  directly  contrary  to  the  design  of  the  Gospel;  which  is  to 
promote  righteousness,  love,  peace,  and  happiness  upon  earth,  as  well  as  to 
eecure  the  eternal  salvation  of  mankind.  5.  It  will  sink  men  into  everlasting  ruin. 
God  is  a  just  and  righteous  Being,  and  at  the  judgment-day  "  He  will  render  to 
every  one  according  to  his  works."  The  Lord  seeth  and  remembereth  all  the 
oppression  that  is  done  under  the  sun,  and  He  will  at  length  reckon  with  those 
who  have  done  it.  Application.  1.  I  shall  address  oppressors ;  those  whose 
consciences  tell  them,  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  that  they  have  been  guilty  of  this 
sin  In  the  instances  above  mentioned  or  any  other.  I  exhort  you,  sirs,  to  hearken 
to  the  voice  of  conscience  as  the  voice  of  God;  to  submit  to  its  reproofs;  and  to 
be  humbled  deeply  before  God  for  your  injustice  and  cruelty  to  men.  2.  Let  me 
address  the  oppressed.  It  may  perhaps  be  the  case  of  some  of  you,  and  I  would 
endeavour  to  be  your  comforter.  Acknowledge  the  justice  of  the  Lord  in  what 
you  suffer  from  the  hand  of  men.  Though  they  are  unrighteous.  He  is  righteous, 
for  you  have  sinned;  and  He  may  choose  this  method  of  afflicting  you,  to  lead 
you  to  repentance,  to  exercise  your  virtues,  and  make  your  hearts  better.  Let 
me  exhort  you  to  guard  against  a  spirit  of  malice  and  revenge.  Eemember  that 
their  oppressing  you  will  be  no  excuse  for  injustice  to  them.  That  "  it  is  no 
harm  to  bite  the  biter  "  is  a  very  wicked  maxim.  It  is  better  to  suffer  many 
wrongs  than  to  do  one.  Yea,  it  is  our  duty  to  render  good  for  evil.  3.  I  would 
address  those  who  can  appeal  to  a  heart-searching  God  that  they  are  guiltless 
of  this  sin.  I  would  exhort  you  to  guard  against  the  love  of  money,  which  is 
the  chief  root  of  this  evil.  To  prevent  your  becoming  oppressors,  go  not  to  the 
utmost  bounds  of  things  lawful.  Keep  on  the  safe  side.  Be  not  only  just,  but 
honourable,  generous,  and  charitable,  and  "  abstain  from  the  very  appearance 
of  evil."  Let  me  exhort  you,  likewise,  to  be  comforters  of  the  oppressed.  (Job 
Orton,  D.D.)  Woman^s  work  and  overwork: — It  was  considered  honourable  for 
women  to  toil  in  olden  times.  Alexander  the  Great  stood  in  his  palace  showing 
garments  made  by  his  own  mother.  The  finest  tapestries  at  Bayeux  were  made 
by  the  queen  of  William  the  Conqueror.  Augustus,  the  Emperor,  would  not  wear 
any  garments  except  those  that  were  fashioned  by  some  member  of  his  royal 
(amily.  So  let  the  toilers  everywhere  be  respected  1  The  greatest  blessing  that 
could  have  happened  to  our  first  parents  was  being  turned  out  of  Eden  after  they 
had  done  wrong.  Ashbel  Green,  at  foiirscore  years,  when  asked  why  he  kept 
on  working,  said :  "  I  do  so  to  keep  out  of  mischief."  We  see  that  a  man  who 
has  a  Isu-ge  amount  of  money  to  start  with  has  no  ohanoe.  Of  the  thousand 
prosperous  and  honourable  men  that  you  know,  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  had 
4o  work  vigorously  at  the  beginning.  But  I  am  now  to  tell  you  that  industry  is 
just  as  important  for  a  woman's  safety  and  happiness.  The  little  girls  of  our 
familiaa  must  be  started  with  that  idea.     The  curse  of  our  American  society  is  that 


CHAP,  IT.]  ECCLE8IASTES.  125 


our  young  women  are  taught  that  the  first,  second,  third,  fourth,  fifth,  sixth, 
seventh,  tenth,  fiftieth,  thousandth  thing  in  their  life  is  to  get  somebody  to  take 
care  of  them.     Instead  of  that,  the  first  lesson  should  be  how  under  God  they 
may  take  care  of  themselves.     Madamo  de  Stael  said  :  *'  It  is  not  these  writings 
that  I  am  proud  of,  but  the  fact  that  I  have  facility  in  ten  occupations,  in  any 
one  of  which  I  could  make  a  livelihood."     Though  you  live  in  an  elegant  residence 
and  fare  sumptuously  every  day,  let  your  daughters  feel  it  is  a  disgrace  to  them 
not  to  know  how  to  work.     I  denounce  the  idea  prevalent  in  society  that  though 
oiu:  young  women  may  embroider  slippers  and  crochet  and  make  mats  for  lamps 
to  stand   on   without   disgrace,   the   idea   of   doing   anything   for   a   livelihood   is 
dishonourable.     It  is  a  shame  for  a  young  woman  belonging  to  a  large  family  to 
be  inefficient  when  the  father  toils  his  life  away  for  her  support.     It  is  a  sham© 
for  a  daughter  to  be  idle  while  her  mother  toils  at  the  wash-tub.     No  woman,  any 
more  than  a  man,  has  a  right  to  occupy  a  place  in  this  world  unless  she  pays  a 
rent  for  it.     Society  is  to  be  reconstructed  on  the  subject  of  woman's  toil.    A  vast 
majority  of  those  who  would  have  woman  industrious  shut  her  up  to  a  few  kinds 
of  work.     My  judgment  in  this  matter  is  that  a  woman  has  a  right  to  do  anything 
she  can  do  well.    There  should  be  no  department  of  merchandise,  mechanism,  art, 
or  science  barred  against  her.     If  Miss  Hosmer  has  genius  for  sculptvure,  give  her 
a  chisel.     If  Kosa  Bonheur  has  a  fondness  for  delineating  animals,  let  her  make 
"  The  Horse  Fair."     If  Miss  Mitchell  will  study  astronomy,  let  her  mount  the 
starry  ladder.     If  Lydia  will  be  a  merchant,  let  her  sell  piurple.     It  is  said,  if 
woman  is  given  such  opportunities  she  will  occupy  places  that  might  be  taken 
by  men.     I  say,  if  she  have  more  skill  and  adaptedness  for  any  position  than  a 
man  has,  let  her  have  it  1     She  has  as  much  right  to  her  bread,  to  her  apparel, 
and  to  her  home  as  men  have.     But  it  is  said  that  her  nature  is  so  delicate  that 
she  is  imfitted  for  exhausting  toil.     I  ask  in  the  name  of  all  past  history  what 
toil  on  earth  is  more  severe,  exhausting,  and  tremendous  than  that  toil  of  the 
needle  to  which  for  ages  she  has  been  subjected?    Oh,  the  meanness,  the  despio- 
ability  of  men  who  begrudge  a  woman  the  right  of  work  anywhere  in  any  honour* 
able  calling  1     I  go  still  further  and  say  that  women  should  have  equal  compensa- 
tion with  men.    By  what  principle  of  justice  is  it  that  women  in  many  of  our 
cities  get  only  two-thirds  as  much  pay  as  men  and  in  many  cases  only  half? 
Here  is  the  gigantic  injustice — that  for  work  equally  well,  if  not  better,  done, 
women  receive  far  less  compensation  than  men.    Years  ago  one  Sabbath  night,  in 
the  vestibule  of  this  church,  after  service,  a  woman  fell  in  convulsions.      The 
doctor  said  she  needed  medicine  not  so  much  as  somethiug  to  eat.    As  she  began 
to  revive,   in   her   delirium   she   said,  gaspingly:    "Eight  cents  1      Eight   cents  I 
Eight  cents  1     I  wish  I  could  get  it  done,  I  am  so  tired.     I  wish  I  could  get  some 
sleep,  but  I  must  get  it  done.     Eight  cents  I     Eight  cents  I     Eight  cents  I"     We 
foimd  afterwards  that  she  was  making  garments  for  eight  cents  apiece,  and  she 
could  make  but  three  of  them  in  a  day.    Hear  it  1     Three  times  eight  are  twenty- 
four.     Hear  it,  men  and  women  who  have  comfortable  homes.     How  are  these 
evils  to   be   eradicated?     Some  say :    *'  Give   woman   the   ballot."     What   effect 
such  ballot  might  have  on  other  questions  I  am  not  here  to  discuss;  but  what 
would  be  the  effect  of  female  suffrage  on  women's  wages?    I  do  not  believe  that 
women  will  ever  get  justice  by  woman's  ballot.     Indeed,  women  oppress  women 
as  much  as  men  do.     Do  not  women,  as  much  as  men,  beat  down  to  the  lowest 
figure  the  woman  who  sews  for  them?     Woman  will  never  get  justice  done  her 
from  woman's  ballot.     Neither  will  she  get  it  from  man's  ballot.     How  then? 
God  will  rise  up  for  her.     God  has  more  resources  than  we  know  of.     The  flaming 
sword  that  hung  at  Eden's  gate  when  woman  was  driven  out  will  cleave  with  its 
terrible  edge  her  oppressors.     But  there  is  something  for  women  to  do.    Let  young 
people  prepare  to  excel  in  spheres  of  work,  and  they  will  be  able  after  a  while  to 
get  larger  wages.     If  it  be  shown  that  a  woman  can,  in  a  store,  sell  more  goods 
in  a  year  than  a  man,  she  will  soon  be  able  not  only  to  ask,  but  to  demand  more 
wages,   and   to   demand   them   successfully.     Unskilled   and   incompetent   labour 
must  take  what  is  given;  skilled  and  competent  labour  will  eventually  make  its 
own  standard.    (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)    They  had  no  comforter. — No  comforter :-~- 
It  is  the  glory  of  the  Gospel  that  it  is  not  only  a  religion  of  conversion,  but  s 
religion  of  consolation.     It  ministers  peace,  and  makes  even  the  human  side  of 
life  capable  of  deep  and  abiding  joy.     The  promise  has  been  fulfilled,  and  the  soul 
bears  witness  that  He  is  true  who  says,  "I  will  not  leave  you  orphans;  I  will 
eome  to  youa"    I.  Thx  latent  pain.    This  pain  does  not  leap  forth  at  once.    It 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

iB  a  kind  of  hidden  fire :  a  sort  of  slumbering  force.    Students  of  life  should  think 
deeply  on  this,  that  pain  lies  hidden  in  pleasure.    The  strangest  fact  in  life  is  that 
the  measure  of  joy  is  often  the  measure  of  sorrow.     The  height  of  gain  is  the 
length  of  the  shadow  of  loss.     The  keener  our  affection,  the  more   bitter  our 
anguish  when  bereavement  comes.    The  more  ardent  oiir  pursuit,  the  more  depress- 
ing the  disappointment  in  missing  the  goal.     In  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  He  has 
offered  us  a  renewed  nature  and  a  restful  heart.     He  has  given  us  a  Saviour  and 
a  Comforter.     We  need  no  more.     If  the  latent  pain  leaps  forth,  we  have  an 
anodyne  for  sorrow,  a  perfect  absolution  for  sin,  a  balm  for  broken  hearts,  a 
brother  born  for  adversity,  and  beyond  the  present  the  glories  of  immortal  life. 
At  our  peril  we  put  Christ  away.    Out  in  the  wide  fields  of  human  search  we  come 
upon  no  footprints  of  another  Saviour.      II.  Thb  charlatan  comforters.      Yes  I 
there  are  comforters.     We  find  that  men  will  put  the  poppy  in  the  pillow  when 
there  is  no  peace  in  the  heart.     They  seek  comfort.     Sometimes  in  quiet  retreats, 
where  the  scenes  of  the  city  life  do  not  hatint  them,  Nature's  floral  groves  and 
woodland  shadows  constitute  a  veil  to  hide  the  weird  forms  of  guilt  and  shame 
and  sorrow  to  be  met  with  in  crowded  centres  of  life.     But  past  life  will  there 
come  back  to  memory,  and  unforgiven  sin  will  there  send  its  sharp  dagger  to 
the  heart.     Or  it  may  be  that  freedom  from  necessity  brings  comfort,  and  that 
superfluity  has  made  the  old  days  of  care  and  struggle  only  a  memory  I     Now  at 
all  events  there  are  no  sleepless  nights,  no  battles  amid  daily  anxiety  for  daily 
bread,  and  we  sit  under  the  restful  shadow  of  trees  planted  long  ago  I     Then,  too, 
much  looks  like  comfort,  which  comes  from  ease  of  circumstance,  when  the  couch 
Sa  of  down,  and  no  spectre  of  anxiety  crosses  the  earthly  threshold.     But  even 
then  there  are  deep  necessities  of  the  soul,  if  we  are  dead  to  things  divine.    III. 
Thb  FDLNB88  OF  Christ.     I  do  not  mean  merely  Divine  perfectness  in  the  quantity 
of  sympathy,  but,  if  I  may  say  so,  in  the  quality  of  it.     Nothing  is  more  wonderful 
Ihan  the  way  in  which  the  weary  soul  finds  sympathy  in  the  Saviour.     There  is 
a  revelation  of  grace  in  Christ  which  makes  Him  the  complement  of  each  man's 
nature.     Sorrows  differ;  doubts  differ;  needs  differ;  tastes  differ;  and  even  the 
wounds  inflicted  by  bereavement  differ.     But  Christ  searches  us,  and  knows  us 
all.     And  what  sweet  response  comes  from  hearts  that  have  trusted  in  Him, 
as  they  tmite  in  testifying,  "His  grace  is  sufficient  for  us  I"      How  patiently 
Christians  suffer  I     How  trustfully  they  restl     How  cheerfully  they  toil!     How 
'  hopefully    they   die  I     IV.  Thb    missing    good.     No   comforter  I     Then    who   will 
show  us  any  good?    For  we  cannot  unmake  ourselves.     There  is  the  connection 
of  comfort  with  conscience.     Divine  redemption  still,  as  of  old,  is  a  necessity  of 
the  human  heart.     Then  there  is  the  connection  of  comfort  with  character.     We 
'  are  made  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus.     We  have  new  motives,  new  aims,  new 
desires,  new  sympathies,  new  relationship  to  God.     Our  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in 
God — the  blessed  God :  and  then  peace  flows  like  a  river  through  the  heart.     This 
i  k  life  eternal.     Then  there  is  the  connection  of  comfort  with  influence.     That 
!  man  has  no  comforter  who  realizes  that  the  influence  of  his  life  is  an  infection  of 
i  evil,  an  impulse  to  the  lower  life.     Even  if  he  possess  genius,  it  may  be  but  an 
I  fedded  force  for  harm.    But  the  Christian  has  this  comfort,  though  no  minstrel 
sings  the  story  of  his  chivalry,  though  no  sculptured  marble  tells  the  tale  of  his 
renown — ^yet  he  liveth  to  the  Lord,  he  dieth  to  the  Lord.    The  world  of  holy 
Influence  will  be  the  richer  for  his  being!     (TF.  M.  Btatham.) 

'      Ver.  2.  Wherefore  I  praiaed  the  dead  which  are  already  dead  more  than  the 

living  which  are  yet  alive. — Th»  applause  of  the  dead  regulated,  vindicated  and 

improved: — Scripture  itself  sets  us  an  example  of  applauding  the  virtues  of  the 

departed;  but  I  think  that  in  our  funeral  sermons,   in  our  obituaries   and   on 

iDur  sepulchres,   there  is   much   which   needs   to   be   regulated.     I.  It    must    be 

QUALIFISD.      1.  We  are  not  to  praise  the   dead  with   indiscriminate   eulogy ;   for 

{there  is  suoh  a  thing  as  eonfounding  moral  distinctions,  as  smiling  alike  on  vice 

Bnd  virtue.     2.  We  are  not  to  praise  the  dead  with  exaggerated  panegyric.    For  it 

i  should  never  be  forgotten,  that  however  the  grace  of  God  has  formed  the  subject 

I  iof  it  to  excellence,  he  was  still  the  possessor  of  remaining  moral  infirmities.    3.  We 

I  are  not  to  praise  the  dead  in  a  spirit  of  discontent  with  life.     4.  We  are  not  to 

praise  the  dead  in  the  exercise  of  gratified  envy.     6.  We  ought  not  to  praise  the 

!  dead  in  the  spirit  of  relative  pride.     6.  In  one  word — we  should  not  praise  the 

dead  without  a  humble  cmd  grateful  recollection  that  all  their  gifts  and  virtues 

|>rooeeded  from  Ood.     Let  the  survivor  not  glory  in  the  erudition,  in  the  riches^ 


CHAP.  IV.]  ECCLESIASTES.  12? 

in  the  wealth  or  virtue  of  the  deceased,  but  let  him  glory  only  in  the  Lord. 
II.  This  eulogy  is  to  be  justified.  It  may  be  so  by  a  variety  of  reasons.  1.  There 
is  that  of  Scripture  precedent.  It  speaks,  in  high  terms,  of  the  distinguished 
faith  of  Abraham,  the  patience  of  Job,  the  meeksess  of  Moees,  the  devotion  of 
the  man  after  God's  own  heart,  the  wisdom  of  a  Solomon,  the  magnanimity  of  a 
Daniel,  the  fortitude  of  a  Stephen,  the  humanity  of  a  Dorcas.  2.  This  procedura 
may  also  be  sanctioned  on  the  ground  of  utility.  How  often  does  the  perusal  of 
the  memoirs  of  eminent  persons  excite  desires  in  the  hearts  of  survivors  to 
imbibe  their  sentiments,  to  catch  their  spirit,  and  to  imitate  their  example.  3.  The 
principal  groimds  on  which  we  are  justified  in  praising  the  pious  dead  are 
connected  with  themselves,  as — (1)  The  blessedness  of  their  condition  on  which 
they  have  at  once  entered.  (2)  The  developed  excellences  of  their  character. 
(3)  The  usefulness  of  their  course.  For  much  of  this  as  may  have  been  apparent 
while  they  were  yet  alive,  much  more  is  very  often  discerned  after  their  decease. 
Then  are  discerned  in  their  diaries  and  records  what  were  the  sacred  principles 
on  which  they  acted,  and  how  they  were  constrained  by  the  love  of  Christ  to 
live  not  unto  themselves,  but  to  Him  who  died  for  them  and  rose  again.  Not  till 
the  crisis  of  death,  too,  has  much  of  the  usefulness  of  the  Christian  minister  been 
made  apparent.  III.  The  sentiment  in  the  text  is  to  be  improved.  If  the  ques* 
tion  be  asked — in  what  way  shall  I  praise  departed  ministers?  I  answer — 1.  By 
repenting  of  the  treatment  you  often  showed  them  while  they  were  alive.  2.  By 
recalling  to  serious  reflection  the  important  subjects  of  their  ministry.  3.  By  an 
imitation  of  the  excellencies  with  which  they  were  clothed.  4.  By  meditating  on 
3our  joint  responsibility  with  them  at  the  bar  of  God.  6.  By  a  devout  application 
to  the  great  Head  of  the  Church  to  raise  up  men  of  similar  and  surpassing 
qualifications  to  carry  on  the  interests  of  religion  in  the  Church  and  in  the  world. 
(J.  Clayton.)  Praising  the  dead  more  than  the  living: — I.  It  is  common.  We  sea 
it  in  the  political,  ecclesiastical,  and  domestic  sphere.  So  it  has  become  a  proverb, 
that  the  best  men  must  die  ever  to  have  their  virtues  recognized.  Why  is  this? 
1.  The  dead  are  no  longer  competitors.  2.  Social  love  buries  their  defects.  In 
all,  the  great  Father  of  Love  has  put  a  deep  fountain  of  sympathy.  Death 
unseals  it,  melts  it,  and  causes  it  to  flow  forth  in  such  copious  streams  as  drown 
all  the  imperfections  of  the  departed.  II.  It  is  immoral.  1.  It  is  not  right. 
Virtue  should  be  recognized  and  honoured  wherever  seen;  and  more  so  in  the 
duties  and  struggles  of  life  than  in  the  reminiscences  of  departed  worth.  2.  It 
is  not  generous.  That  husband  is  mean  and  despicable  who  ignores  the  virtues 
of  a  noble  wife  while  living.  3.  It  is  unreal.  To  praise  virtues  in  a  man  when 
dead,  which  were  ever  unnoticed  when  living,  is  hypocritical.     (Homilist.) 

Vers.  4-8.  Again,  I  considered  all  travail,  and  every  right  work,  that  for  this 
a  man  is  envied  of  his  neighbour. — An  old  portrait  of  viodern  men: — Here  is  a 
portrait,  drawn  by  a  man  who  lived  thousands  of  years  ago,  of  three  distinct 
types  of  character  that  you  find  everywhere  about  you.  I.  Here  is  a  man  work- 
ing FOB  THE  GOOD  of  society  (ver.  4).  Thank  God  I  there  have  ever  been  such 
men — generous,  disinterested,  broad-hearted,  God-inspired  men — men  who  are 
doing  the  "  right  work."  They  are  the  "  salt  "  of  the  State;  remove  them,  and 
all  is  putrescence.  How  are  these  men  treated  by  society?  Here  is  the  answer. 
"  For  this  a  man  is  envied  of  his  neighbour."  It  has  ever  been  so.  Cain  envied 
Abel,  Korah  envied  Moses,  Saul  envied  David,  the  Sanhedrim  envied  Christ,  the 
Judaic  teachers  envied  Paul.  To  see  society  envying  such  men  is  a  sore  "  vexa- 
tion "  to  all  true  hearts.  What  do  the  existence  and  treatment  of  these  men 
show?  1.  The  great  kindness  of  Heaven  in  sending  such  men  into  every  age. 
What  would  become  of  an  age  without  such  men  in  it?  The  ignorant  would 
have  no  schools,  the  afflicted  no  hospitals,  the  indigent  no  poor-laws  and  charities, 
the  people  no  righteous  laws  and  no  temples  for  worship.  2.  The  rightful 
acknowledgments  of  most  useful  services  are  not  to  be  expected  on  earth.  How 
did  the  world  treat  Moses,  Jeremiah,  the  apostles,  and  the  Holy  Christ? 
Yonder,  not  here,  is  the  reward  for  truly  right  labour.  3.  The  moral  state  of 
society  is  both  unwise  and  imrighteous.  How  unwise  to  treat  men  who  do  the 
"  right  work  "  amongst  them  with  envyl  For  its  own  good  it  should  cheer  them 
on  in  their  philanthropic  efforts.  How  unrighteous  too  I  These  men  have  a 
claim  to  its  gratitude,  sympathy,  and  co-operation.  II.  Here  is  a  man  utterly 
WORTHLESS  in  society  (vers.  5,  6).  1.  He  exhausts  his  own  property.  The 
indolent  man  evermore  "  eats  his  own  flesh  ";  that  is,  exhausts  his  own  personal 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 


strength,    mental,    moral,    physical,    for    the    want    of    proper    exertion.     2.  Ha 
wrongly   estimates   his   own    happiness.     "  Better   is   an    handful    with    quietness 
than  both  the  hands  full  with  travail  and  vexation  of  spirit."     In  one  sense  this 
is  true  (Prov.  xv.  16).     But  this  is  not  the  sense  in  which  the  lazy  man  regards 
it.     By  quietness  he  meant  quiescence,  non-exertion,  lounging,  folding  the  hands, 
and  sleeping  life  away.    Now,  this  character  abounds  in  our  age  and  land.    These 
characters  are  not  only  a  curse  to  themselves,  dying  with  ennui,  but  a  curse  to 
society;  they  are  clogs  upon  the  wheel  of  industry;  they  are  social  thieves;  they 
eat  what  others  have  produced.    III.  Here  is  a  man  avariciodslt  making  use  of 
society    (ver.    8).     1.    The  man   he   sketches   worked   entirely   for   himself.     Self- 
gratification,   self-aggrandizement,   self   the   centre   and   circumference   of   all   hi* 
activities.     2.  The  man  he  sketches  worked  unremittingly  for  himself.     "  Yet  is 
there  no  end  of  all  his  labour."    Always  at  it — morning,  noon,  and  night;  it  was 
the  one  thing  he  did.     8.  The  man  he  sketches  worked  insatiably  for  himself. 
"  Neither  m   his   eye   satisfied   with  riches."     The   passion   of   avarice  has   been 
called  the  great  sepulchre  of  all  the  passions.    Unlike  other  tombs,  however,  it  ia 
enlarged  by  repletion  and  strengthened  by  age.    An  avaricious  man  is  like  Tantalus, 
up  to  the  chin  in  water,  yet  always  thirsty.     Avarice  seems  to  me  to  be  the 
ruling  passion  of  the  age.     (HomiUat.)     Envy: — Here  Solomon  discloses  to  us  one 
of  the  most  remarkable  among  the  many  sources  of  human  misery;  remarkable, 
because  it  springs  not  out  of  failure,  but  out  of  success;  and  so  it  is  one  which  lies 
deeper  than  any  of  the  ills  wrought  by  the  uncertainty  of  life,  or  by  the  caprice 
of  fortune.     It  is  a  true  and  striking  instance  of  the  vanity  of  human  afiairs, 
when  a  man  spends  a  lifetime  in  the  pursuit  of  wealth,  and  meets  only  with 
poverty  and  ruin;  or  dies  as  soon  as  he  has  obtained  it,  and  "  leaves  his  riches 
to  other."     The  same  reflection  is  forced  upon   us  when  the  student,  who  has 
denied  himself  everything  for  years  in  the  pursuit  of  science,  is  struck  down  by 
death  just  as  he  is  about  to  reap  the  reward  of  his  labours,  and  all  his  knowledge 
rendered  useless.     But  there  is  one  deep  aggravation  of  human  misery  which  does 
not  lie  thus  upon  the  surface.     With  all  these  failures,  a  few  do  succeed,  and 
for  these  there  is  a  special  burden   which  they   must  inevitably   bear;  there  is 
one  adversity  born  of  their  prosperity;  one  calamity  to  which  their  very  happiness 
subjects  them:   and  that  is — Envy.     Not  only  the  envy  of  the  world,  but  the 
envy  of  their  neighbomrs,  and  the  alienation  of  their  friends,  is  often  the  portion 
of  the  successful;  and  isolation  of  soul  is  the  doom  of  the  great.     This  Solomon 
declares  to  be  the  lot  of  all  travail,  and  justly  adds  :  "  This  is  also  vanity  and 
vexation   of   spirit.**    But  not   only   does   this   venomous   principle,   one   of   the 
blackest  traits  in  our  fallen  nature,  come  in  to  poison  the  enjoyment  of  every 
fortune   made,   and   every   position   gained   among   men :    there  is   a   more   truly 
Satanic  development  of  the  passion  than  even  this :  viz.  envy  at  the  success  of 
goodness;    a   malicious   displeasure   when    one   who   has   shown   long,    unwearied 
industry  in  an  honourable  calling,  and  lived  a  life  of  devotion  to  the  glory  of 
God,  and  the  good  of  man,  obtains  the  just  fruit  of  his  labours;  the  promise  of 
godliness  in  the  life  that  now  is.     "  Again,  I  considered  all  travail,  and  every 
'right  work,*  that  for  this  a  man  is  envied  of  his  neighbour."     And  yet  this  is 
what  we  see  in  every  department  of  life.    We  see  it,  for  example,  in  the  venomed 
spite    with   which   low   natures   regard    a   good   man,   just    because   he   is   better 
than  themselves;  disliking  him  because,  whenever  they  are  in  his  presence,  they 
feel  their  own  vileness  and  worthlessness  as  they  never  feel  it  at  any  other  time. 
The   life  of   the  true  Christian   is   one   unflagging  reproach   to   the    world.     His 
ingenuous  truthfulness  and  sincerity  witnesses  against  the  world's  falsehood  and 
hoUowness;  the  Christian's  noble  self-devotedness  against  its  self-love;  his  steadfast 
adherence  to  the  cause  of  righteousness,  against  the  cowardly  looseness  of  the 
world's  principles;  the  Christian's  high  hopes  and  lofty  aspirations  against  the 
worldling's   low   desires   and  grovelling   aims.     "  For   every   right   work,"    he   is 
*'  envied  of  his  neighbour."     No  age,  nor  position,  nor  character,  is  exempt  from 
the  poisoned   shafts   of  envy.     Is  there  a  godly  school-boy?      Such  a   one   will 
generally  be  a  mark  for  the  ridicule,  and  the  petty  persecution,  of  the  lower- 
minded  of  his  playmates.     They  will  watch  him,  as  Satan  observed  Job,  for  some 
little  fault  which  they  may  exaggerate  and  rejoice  over.     They  will  place  tempta- 
tions in  his  path,  and  strive,  in  every  way,  to  bring  him  down  to  the  same  level 
with  themselves.     And  that  is  but  the  prophecy  of  what  awaits  him  in  after  life. 
The  godly  servant  or  workman,  who  regards  the  interest  of  his  employer  as  his 
own,  and  serve*  "  not  with  eye-service,  as  men-pleaseM,  but  with  aingleness  o4 


CHAP.  IT.]  ECCLESIASTES.  129 

heart,  fearing  God,"  will  always  be  exposed  to  the  envy,  the  detraction,  and  the 
slander  of  his  idle  and  unprincipled  fellows,  whose  sole  aim  is,  by  mutual  agree- 
ment, to  do  the  smallest  possible  amount  of  work  for  the  largest  possible  amoxint 
of  pay.  And  the  same  evil  principle  besets  the  Christian  everywhere,  extending 
upwards  through  all  the  strata  of  society.  (H.  E.  Nollath,  B.D.)  How  th» 
success  of  others  should  affect  us: — Instead  of  the  success  of  others  being  a 
matter  of  envy,  it  should  be  used  as  an  example  of  promise  to  us,  inducing  us 
to  go  and  do  likewise.  The  life  of  the  great  man  teaches  us  that  we  also,  being 
brother  to  him,  may  become,  in  a  measure,  great.  There  is  wealth,  too,  to  be 
had,  without  robbing  any  man  of  what  he  has.  It  is  always  to  be  found  ia 
economy  and  work.  For  long  enough  this  doctrine  was  hid,  even  from  the  wise 
and  prudent.  Even  yet  we  try  to  find  it  anywhere  but  in  honest  labour — in 
gold  mines,  or  in  speculation,  or  in  gambling — and  we  may  chance  to  find  it  laid 
up  in  some  of  these;  but  it  has  all  come  from  industry  originally,  and,  in  most 
places,  it  can  be  got  there  in  a  fair  measure  still.  At  any  rate,  it  cannot  be  gofc 
in  idleness.  We  may  cherish  envy  of  him  who  has  succeeded,  and  fold  our  hands 
till  it  eatfl  into  the  very  marrow  of  our  bones,  but  we  shall  be  do  nearer  the 
attainment  of  fortune  than  when   we  commenced  the  operation.     (/.   Bsnnet.) 

Ver.  6.  Better  is  an  handful  with  qnietness,  than  both  the  hands  fall  with  travail 
and  vexation  of  spirit. — Quality  better  than  quantity: — The  "quietness"  here 
spoken  of  is  not  the  inactivity  of  sloth,  but  that  restfulness  of  spirit  which  an 
industrious  man  may  enjoy  when  his  industry  is  pervaded  by  a  cheerful  content- 
ment. Now,  here  is  one  of  those  maxims  with  which  Ecolesiastes  sought  to 
comfort  the  hearts  and  to  direct  the  conduct  of  his  coimtrymen.  Many  of  them 
might  be  disposed  to  murmur  because  the  times  were  adverse  to  their  acquisition 
of  wealth.  But  he  wishes  them  to  remember  that,  even  if  the  times  had  been 
more  prosperous,  they  themselves  would  not  necessarily  have  been  more  happy. 
He  directs  their  attention  away  from  quantity  to  quality  of  possession.  One  man 
may  get  more  real  satisfaction  out  of  a  little  than  another  man  gets  out  of  much. 
Two  handfuls  are  not  necessarily  better  than  one.  It  depends  on  what  is  in  the 
hands.  One  handful  of  grain  is  better  than  two  handfuls  of  chaS.  It  depends 
also  on  what  kind  of  man  has  the  handful  or  handfuls.  Happiness,  in  its  degree 
and  quality,  varies  with  the  man  who  enjoys,  as  well  as  with  the  means  ol 
enjoyment.  Yea,  and  even  the  same  man  may  possibly  get  more  satisfaction  out 
of  one  handful  than  out  of  two  handfuls  of  the  same  thing.  It  depends  on  whether 
the  additional  handful  does  not  bring  with  it  something  else  as  well.  In  human 
life  it  often  happens  that  a  plus  involves  a  minus ;  a  gain  in  one  direction  means  • 
loss  in  another.  This,  indeed,  is  no  argument  for  "  folding  the  hands  "  in  sloth 
or  indiSerence;  for  there  is  no  weariness  like  the  weariness  of  idleness,  and  there 
is  no  more  prolific  source  of  cares  than  carelessness.  But  it  is  an  argument 
against  that  spirit  of  envious  rivalry  and  selfish,  restless  ambition,  which  lessens 
the  capacity,  in  the  very  act  of  increasing  the  means,  of  enjoyment.  This  maxim 
of  Ecclesiastes  is  well  worth  pondering.  It  is  pitched  in  the  same  key  as  the 
maxim  of  the  Apostle  Paul :  "  Godliness  with  contentment  is  great  gain  " :  and  it 
reminds  us  of  the  still  more  inclusive  maxim  of  our  Lord  Himself :  "  A  man's  life 
consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesseth."  (T.  C. 
Finlayson.) 

Vers.  9-12.  Two  are  hotter  than  one,  because  they  have  a  gt>od  reward  for  their 
lahonr. — The  necessity  and  benefits  of  religious  society: — ^I.  Peovb  the  truth  o» 
THB  wiSB  man's  assebtion,  that,  "  two  are  better  than  one,  and  that  in  reference 
to  society  in  general,  and  religious  societies  in  particular."  And  how  can  this  ba 
done  better  than  by  showing  that  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  welfare  both  of 
the  bodies  and  souls  of  men?  Indeed,  if  we  look  upon  man  as  he  came  out  ol 
the  hands  of  his  Maker,  we  imagine  him  to  be  perfect,  entire,  lacking  nothing. 
But  God,  whose  thoughts  are  not  as  our  thoughts,  saw  something  still  wanting 
to  make  Adam  happy.  And  what  was  that?  Why,  an  help  meet  for  him.  And 
if  this  were  the  case  of  man  before  the  fall;  it  a  help  was  meet  for  him  in  a  state 
of  perfection;  surely  since  the  fall,  when  we  come  naked  and  helpless  out  of  our 
mother's  womb,  when  our  wants  increase  with  our  years,  and  we  can  scarcely 
subsist  a  day  without  the  mutual  assistance  of  each  other,  well  may  we  say,  "  It 
is  not  good  for  man  to  be  alone."  Society,  then,  we  see,  is  absolutely  necessary 
in  respect  to  oui  bodily  and  personal  wants.     If  we  carry  our  view  farther,  and 

9 


130  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOS.  [chap.it, 

consider  mankind  as  divided  into  different  cities,  countries,  and  nations,  the  necea* 
sity  of  it  will  appear  yet  more  evident.     For  how  can  communities  be  kept  up,  or 
commerce  carried  on,  without  society?     Many  other  instances  might  be  given  of 
the  necessity  of  society  in  reference  to  our  bodily,  personal,  and  national  wamts. 
But  what  are  all  these  when  weighed  in  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary,  in  com- 
parison of  the  infinite  greater  need  of  it  with  respect  to  the  soul?    Let  us  suppose 
ourselves  in  some  degree  to  have  tasted  the  good  word  of  life,  and  to  have  felt 
the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,  influencing  and  moulding  our  souls   into  a 
religious  frame;  to  be  fully  and  heartily  convinced  that  we  are  soldiers  listed  under 
the  banner  of  Christ,  and  to  have  proclaimed  open  war,  at  our  baptism,  against 
the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil;  and  have,  perhaps,  frequently  renewed  our 
obligations  so  to  do  by  partaking  of  the  Lord's  Supper;  that  we  are  surrounded 
with  millions  of  foes  without,  and  infested  with  a  legion  of  enemies  within ;  that 
we  are  commanded  to  shine  as  lights  in  the  world  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and 
perverse  generation;  that  we  are  travelling  to  a  long  eternity,  and  need  all  imagin- 
able helps  to  show,  and  encourage  us  in,  our  way  thither.    Let  us,  I  say,  reflect 
on  all  this,  and  then  how  shall  each  of  us  cry  out,  "  Brethren,  what  a  necessary 
thing  it  is  to  meet  together  in  religious  societies!"    The  primitive  Christians  were 
fully  sensible  of  this,  and  therefore  we  find  them  continually  keeping  up  com- 
munion with  each  other  (Acts  ii.  42;  iv.  23;  ix.  19;  xii.  12).     And  it  is  reported 
of  the  Christians  in  after  ages  that  they  used  to  assemble  together  before  daylight 
io  sing  a  pealm  to  Christ  as  God.   So  precious  was  the  commimion  of  saints  in  those 
days.     n.  SottB  bbasons  wbt  "  two  abe  betteb  than  one,"  bspeciallt  im 
BELIGIOCB    BOCiETT.     1.   As   man  in   his   present  condition  cannot   always   stand 
upright,  but  by  reason  of  the  frailty  of  his  nature  cannot  but  fall;  one  eminent 
reason  why  two  are  better  than  one,  or,  in  other  words,  one  great  advantage  of 
religious  society  ia,  "  that  when  they  fall,  the  one  will  lift  up  his  fellow."    2.  It 
is  an  observation  no  less  true  than  common,  that  kindled  coals  if  placed  asimder 
toon  go  out,  but  if  heaped  together  quicken  and  enliven  each  other,  and  afford  a 
lasting  heat.    The  same  will  hold  good  in  the  case  now  before  us.    If  Christiana 
kindled  by  the  grace  of  Qod  unite,  they  will  quicken  and  enliven  each  other;  but 
if  they  separate  and  keep  asunder,  no  marvel  if  they  soon  grow  cool  or  tepid.     If 
two  or  three  meet  together  in  Christ's  name,  they  will  have  heat:  but  how  can 
one  be  warm  alone?    8.  Hitherto  we  have  considered  the  advantages  of  religious 
societies  as  a  great  preservative  against  falling  into  sin  and  lukewarmness,  and 
that  too  from  our  own  corruptions.    But  what  says  the  wise  son  of  Sirach?     "  My 
son,  when  thou  goest  to  serve  the  Lord,  prepare  thy  soul  for  temptation;"  and 
that  not  only  from  inward,  but  outward  foes;  particularly  from  those  two  grand 
adversaries,  the  world  and  the  devil:  for  no  sooner  will  thine  eye  be  bent  heaven- 
ward, but  the  former  will  be  immediately  diverting  it  another  way,  telling  thee 
thou  needest  not  be  singular  in  order  to  be  religious ;  that  you  may  be  a  Christian 
without  going  so  much  out  of  the  common  road.     But  see  here  the  advantage 
of  religious  company ;  for  supposing  thou  findest  thyself  thus  surrounded  on  every 
tide,  and  imable  to  withstand  such  horrid  (though  seemingly  friendly)  counsels, 
haste  away  to  thy  companions,  and  they  will  teach  thee  a  truer  and  better  lesson; 
they  will  tell  thee  that  thou  must  be  singular  if  thou  wilt  he  religious ;  and  that 
it  is  as  impossible  for  a  Christian,  as  for  a  city  set  upon  a  hill,  to  be  hidden :  that 
if  thou  wilt  be  an  almost  Christian  (and  as  good  be  none  at  all)  thou  mayest  live 
in  the  same  idle,  indifferent  manner  as  thou  seest  most  other  people  do;  but  if 
thou  wilt  be  not  only  almost,  but  altogether  a  Christian,  they  will  inform  thee 
thou  must  go  a  great  deal  farther :   that  thou  must  not  only  faintly  seek,  but 
"  earnestly  strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate  " :  that  there  is  but  one  way  now 
to  heaven,  as  formerly,  even  through  the  narrow  passage  of  a  sound  conversion: 
and  that  m  order  to  bring  about  this  mighty  work,  thou  must  undergo  a  constant 
but  necessary  discipline  of  fasting,  watching,  and  prayer.     And,  therefore,  the 
only  reason  why  those  friends  give  thee  such  advice  is,  because  they  are  not 
■willing  to  take  so  much  pains  themselves;  or,  as  our  Saviour  told  Peter  on  a 
like  occasion,  because  they  savour  not  the  things  that  be  of  God,  but  the  things 
that  be  of  men.     III.  Thb   several  duties  incumbent  on  bveby  membbe  of  a 
RELIGIOUS  SOCIETY  AS  SUCH.   1.  Mutual  rcproof.   2.  Mutual  exhortation.   8.  Mutual 
assisting   and    defending   each    other.     (G.    Whitejieli,    M.A.)^    Two    better    than 
one : — An  axiom  like  this  needs  no  discussion.     No  man  is  at  his  best  alone.    Some 
powers  are  dormant  and  practically  useless  to  the  individual.    Competition  is  one 
form  of  stimulus.     It  may  act  through  our  selfishness.     We  desire  to  surpast 


CHAP.  IT.]  ECCLESIASTES.  131 

another,  to  do  better  or  acquire  more  and  so  meet  oppositioiiB  and  antagonLsms 
with  resoluteness.  As  iron  sbarpeneth  iron,  so  intellects  may  be  whetted  and 
made  keener  bj  mental  attrition.  The  axe  does  not  sharpen  itself  on  itself,  but 
by  a  atone.  So  are  humEm  minds  improved  by  these  emulative  endeavours.  But 
love  is  a  better  discipline  than  competition.  It  is  akin  to  the  regenerative  power 
of  God.  Two  friends  walk  in  loving  imity  and  fellowship.  They  aim  to  enlarge 
their  faculties  of  observation.  The  two  see  more  objects  than  one  pair  of  eyes 
could  possibly  see,  perhape  threefold  or  tenfold,  for  in  the  friendly  effort,  each 
to  excel,  their  individual  faculties  are  more  vigilant  than  if  each  were  alone. 
In  church  life  these  principles  of  development  constantly  obtain.  Some  come  to 
the  place  of  worship  and  instruction  with  the  true  hunger  of  the  soul.  They  not 
only  help  the  preacher,  who  may  represent  the  original  unit  by  their  added 
■ympathy,  but  enlarge  their  own  spiritual  appreciation  of  truth.  Failure  to 
oo-operate  in  chtirch  work  is  crippling.  It  is  like  putting  the  minus  sign  before  a 
quantity.  You  cripple  not  only  a  finger  by  removing  a  joint,  but  embarrass  the 
whole  hand.  The  entire  grip  is  gone  for  ever.  Paralyze  the  little  muscles  that 
play  over  a  pulley  moving  the  eyelid  and  the  lid  drops  over  the  eye.  So  the 
weakest  member  of  a  church  may  help  or  hinder  the  integrity  and  efficiency  of 
the  whole  body  of  Christ.  As  indifference  is  deadening  and  disheartening,  whether 
in  religious  or  political  enterprise,  when  people  are  slack,  dubious  and  apathetic, 
•o  oo-operation  stimulates  and  the  heart  of  the  toiler  rises  with  courage  and  hope. 
It  may  be  objected  that  one  loses  his  individuality.  But  no  one  is  strictly  inde- 
pendent. Material  forces  are  adjusted  to  each  other,  as  the  centripetal  and  centri- 
fugal, day  and  night,  attraction  and  repulsion,  muscular  flexion  and  extension. 
Bouls  have  their  orbits  as  well  as  planets.  These  may  be  contracted  or  enlarged 
according  to  the  influences  exerted.  No  man  liveth  to  himself  or  is  independent 
of  shrinking  or  quickening  influences.  If  you  come  statedly  and  devoutedly  to 
the  sanctuary,  you  seciure  a  blessing  to  yourself  and  you  help  God  to  convert 
men.  So,  too,  in  the  last  place,  in  Christian  companionship,  two  are  better  than 
one.  For  if  one  fall  by  the  way  the  other  may  lift  him  to  his  feet.  Thus  the 
crosses  and  losses  of  life  become  more  tolerable,  and  the  unity  and  harmony  of 
earthly  fellowship  become  prophetio  of  the  unbroken  and  perfected  felicities  of 
beaTen.     (0.  R.  Bam«$.) 

Ver.  12.  A  threefold  cord  is  not  qaicUy  Inroken. — A  threefold  eord: — ^I  have 
read  somewhere  that  the  ancient  Thebans  had  in  their  army  a  band  of  men  who 
were  pledged  to  friendship  and  fellowship  with  each  other.  They  were  therefore 
almost  irresistible;  they  held  together  by  a  union  caused  by  a  living  principle  that 
■irSxised  and  inspired  them  all,  therefore  when  the  enemy  came  upon  them  it 
was  like  the  sea  breaking  on  the  unmovable  strand.  If  we  as  church  members 
and  fellow-Christians  are  thus  one  in  heart,  we  shall  be  irresistible.  A  common 
Saviour  claims  our  common  love.  We  have  been  cleansed  in  the  same  precious 
lounttdn,  we  have  all  eaten  of  the  Bread  that  came  down  from  heaven,  and  drunk 
of  the  Spiritual  Bock  that  follows  us.  Let  us  hold  more  closely  together  than 
ever — pastors,  officers,  people,  for  '*  a  threefold  cord  is  not  quickly  broken."  "  A 
threefold  cord  is  not  quickly  broken."  Do  we  not  know  this  from  sad  experience? 
C.  It  was  bt  such  oobds  as  thesb  that  wb  webb  obiqinallt  held  in  bondage. 
I  do  not  know  how  many  threads  were  in  them,  how  many  strands  they  con- 
tained. Not  three,  perhaps,  but  thirty,  nay,  thirty  thousand  evil  influences  were 
dragging  us  down  and  holding  us  fast.  All  I  do  know  is  that  they  were  not  quickly 
broken.  It  took  God's  dear  Son  to  break  them,  the  Father's  love,  and  the 
Spirit's  power,  and  oxa  own  faith  and  repentance,  begotten  in  our  hearts  from 
above.  Satan  knows  the  power  of  unity  if  we  do  not.  '*  The  world,  the  flesh, 
and  the  devil,"  a  terrible  trio,  were  in  league  against  us.  It  was  the  cords  of  this 
triple  enemy  that  held  us  fast.  They  were  threefold  cords,  and  they  were  not 
easily  broken.  Sin  is  of  various  shapes  and  sorts.  There  are  three  words  in 
God's  Book  descriptive  of  sin,  and  I  think  I  may  apply  them  to  the  three- 
fold cord.  There  is  iniquity,  that  which  is  out  of  plumb,  or  off  the  line, 
or  out  of  the  level.  There  is  sin,  the  missing  of  the  mark,  the  going  beyond 
by  the  arrow,  or  the  falling  short  of  the  target.  There  is  also  Sransgression, 
breaking  through  God's  settled  rules,  passing  beyond  the  bounds  that  He  has 
fixed,  making  landmarks  of  our  own  instead  of  regarding  God's.  Each  of  these 
may  be  regarded  as  a  strand  in  the  cord  of  sin,  and  all  of  us  were  held  thereby. 
**  A  threefold  cord  is  not  quickly  broken."    It  took  years  of  straining,  and  tugging, 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

and  pulling  by  a  hand  Omnipotent  to  break  these  cords  in  pieces.  Thank  God !  it 
is  done,  and  that  they  can  never  be  spliced  again,  nor  ever  cast  about  us  as  they 
were  originally.  II.  It  was  by  such  coeds  as  these — cords  that  are  not  quickly 
broken,  threefold  cords,  that  we  were  delivered  from  the  power  of  sin.  Tha 
form  of  the  metaphor  changes  a  little  as  we  use  it  now.  We  were  in  a  horrible 
pit  by  reason  of  sin.  Sin  always  sinks  us,  and  we  were  dropping  deeper  and 
deeper  into  it,  and  into  the  mire  that  was  at  the  bottom  of  it.  How  have  we  got 
up  ?  There  waa  no  ladder  placed  for  us  to  climb ;  we  did  not  cut  notches  in  tha 
pit-side  by  our  own  unaided  strength,  and  so  help  ourselves  up  to  light  and 
liberty.  No;  God  had  pity  on  us.  He,  in  the  person  of  His  Son,  came  to  tha 
pit's  mouth  and  looked  down  with  the  eyes  of  love  upon  us,  Christ's  love, 
Christ's  death,  resurrection  and  ascension  into  heaven — these  are  as  another 
threefold  cord.  As  soon  as  our  eyes  were  opened  and  we  saw  this  rope  swinging, 
as  it  were,  in  front  of  us,  God  gave  us  strength  to  leap  to  it,  and  He  did  the  rest; 
nay.  He  did  that,  for  we  had  not  believed  unless  the  Spirit  had  prompted  faith. 
He  drew  ua  with  the  cords  of  love,  and  with  the  bands  of  a  man.  III.  It  is  bt 
8D0H  ooBDS  AS  THESE,  threefold  cords,  cords  that  are  not  quickly  broken,  that  wb 
ABB  NOW  held  CAPTIVE.  By  Creation,  the  claim  of  which  we  understand  better 
than  ever  now;  by  regeneration,  into  the  mystery  of  which  they  and  we  are  being 
daily  further  led;  by  consecration,  both  on  God's  part  and  our  own,  we  are  Hia 
and  His  for  ever.  These  cords  bind  us  to  the  horns  of  the  altar.  "  And  now 
sbideth  faith,  hope,  love,  these  three,  but  the  greatest  of  these  is  love."  I  think 
this  is  another  threefold  cord  by  which  we  are  bound;  bound  to  one  another, 
bound  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  bound  to  this  blessed  book,  and  bound  to  heaven. 
(T.  Spurgeon.)  A  threefold  cord: — I.  Have  a  threefold  cord  in  todr  religion. 
Eeligion  for  yoimg  folks  as  well  as  old.  Is  yours  twofold  or  threefold?  Let  ua 
Bee.  There  is  God — one.  And  you — two.  Is  that  all?  Explain  how  some  people 
have  no  more.  This  not  a  nice  religion.  Can't  get  near  God.  Can't  know  Him. 
Bring  in  Christ,  and  you  have  the  threefold  cord.  Then  this  cord  will  stand  the 
strain.  That  is  a  strong  religion.  When  temptations  come  down  hard  on  you, 
it  will  hold  and  save  you.  II.  Have  a  threefold  cord  in  your  difficulties  and 
DANGERS,  story  of  youth  at  sea.  Ordered,  during  a  storm,  to  go  up  and  put  the 
rigging  right.  Momentary  hesitation  of  boy,  and  then  darted  down  to  his  cabin. 
Appeared  again  immediately,  ascended  mast,  put  rigging  right,  and  came  down. 
Asked  by  oflQcer,  "What  made  you  run  below?"  "For  prayer,  sir:  father 
always  told  me  no  time  was  ever  lost  in  prayer."  "  And  what  is  that  under  your 
jacket?"  "  My  Bible,  sir.  My  mother  gave  it  to  me  when  leaving  home.  I 
thought  if  I  were  drowned,  I  would  like  to  have  it  with  me."  Now  here  was  a 
nice  threefold  cord — Prayer,  the  Bible,  and  Courage.  I  wish  you  had  it.  You 
may  have,  likely  will  have,  many  a  hard  bit  in  your  life.  But  if  you  weave  these 
three  together  into  a  cord,  and  hold  on  by  it,  you  are  safe.  III.  Have  a  three- 
fold CORD  in  toce  FRIENDSHIPS.  There  is  an  old  saying  among  folks,  that  "  Two 
are  good  company,  but  three  are  none."  And  they  expect  us  to  believe  that  1 
We  want  no  friendship  that  is  only  twofold.  Have  you  any  friendship  without 
Jesus?  He  is  the  third  strand  of  the  cord.  If  there  be  anybody  who  wants  you 
to  go  roads  where  Jesus  can't  go  with  you,  give  up  that  company  at  once.  We 
should  want  no  friendship  where  our  Saviour  can't  be  one.     (J.  F.  Dempeter.) 

Vers.  13-16.  Better  is  a  poor  and  a  wise  child  than  an  old  and  foolish  king,  who 
will  no  more  be  admonished. — On  the  advantages  of  Chrietian  knowledge  to  the 
lower  orders  of  society: — There  is  no  topic  on  which  the  Bible  maintains  a  more 
lucid  and  entire  consistency  of  sentiment  than  the  superiority  of  moral  over  all 
physical  and  all  external  distinctions.  One  very  animating  inference  to  be  drawn 
from  our  text  is,  how  much  may  be  made  of  humanity.  Did  a  king  come  to  take 
up  his  residence  amongst  us — did  he  shed  a  grandeur  over  our  city  by  the  presence 
of  his  court,  and  give  the  impulse  of  his  expenditure  to  the  trade  of  its  population 
—it  were  not  easy  to  rate  the  value  and  the  magnitude  which  such  an  event  would 
have  on  the  estimation  of  a  common  understanding,  or  the  degree  of  personal 
importance  which  would  attach  to  him  who  stood  a  lofty  object  in  the  eye  of 
admiring  townsmen.  And  yet  it  is  possible,  out  of  the  raw  and  ragged  materials 
of  an  obscurest  lane,  to  rear  an  individual  of  more  inherent  worth  than  him  who 
thus  draws  the  gaze  of  the  world  upon  his  person.  By  the  act  of  training  in 
wisdom's  ways  the  most  tattered  and  neglected  boy  who  runs  upon  our  pavements 
do  wo  present  the  oommunity  with  that  whiohi  in  wisdom's  estimation^  ig  o| 


CHAP.  IT.]  ECCLESIASTES.  13J 

greater  price  than  this  gorgeous  inhabitant  of  a  palace.  Even  without  looking 
beyond  the  confines  of  our  present  world,  the  virtue  of  humble  life  will  bear  to 
be  advantageously  contrasted  with  all  the  pride  and  glory  of  an  elevated  condition. 
The  man  who,  though  among  the  poorest  of  them  all,  has  a  wisdom  and  a  weight 
of  character  which  makes  him  the  oracle  of  his  neighbourhood — the  man  who, 
vested  with  no  other  authority  than  the  meek  authority  of  worth,  carries  in  his 
presence  a  power  to  shame  and  to  overawe  the  profligacy  that  is  aroimd  him — 
the  venerable  father,  from  whose  lowly  tenement  the  voice  of  psalms  is  heard  to 
ascend  with  the  ofiering  up  of  every  evening  sacrifice — the  Christian  sage,  who, 
exercised  among  life's  severest  hardships,  looks  calmly  onward  to  heaven,  and 
trains  the  footsteps  of  his  children  in  the  way  that  leads  to  it — the  eldest  of  a 
well-ordered  family,  bearing  their  duteous  and  honourable  part  in  the  contest  with 
its  diflBculties  and  its  trials — all  these  offer  to  our  notice  such  elements  of  moral 
respectability  as  do  exist  among  the  lowest  orders  of  human  society,  and  elements, 
too,  which  admit  of  being  multiplied  far  beyond  the  reach  of  any  present  calcula- 
tion. But,  to  attain  a  just  estimate  of  the  superiority  of  the  poor  man  who  has 
wisdom,  over  the  rich  man  who  has  it  not,  we  must  enter  into  the  calculation  of 
eternity — we  must  look  to  wisdom  in  its  true  essence,  as  consisting  of  religion,  at 
having  the  fear  of  God  for  its  beginning,  and  the  rule  of  God  for  its  way,  and  the 
favour  of  God  for  its  full  and  satisfying  termination — we  must  compute  how 
speedily  it  is,  that,  on  the  wings  of  time,  the  season  of  every  paltry  distinction 
between  them  must  at  length  pass  away;  how  soon  death  will  strip  the  one  of 
his  rags,  and  the  other  of  his  pageantry,  and  send  them  in  utter  nakedness  to  the 
dust;  how  soon  judgment  will  summon  them  from  their  graves,  and  place  them 
in  outward  equality  before  the  Great  Disposer  of  their  future  lot,  and  their  future 
place,  through  ages  which  never  end;  how  in  that  situation  the  accidental  distinc- 
tions of  life  will  be  rendered  void,  and  personal  distinctions  will  be  all  that  shall 
avail  them;  how,  when  examined  by  the  secrets  of  the  inner  man,  and  the  deeds 
done  in  their  body,  the  treasure  of  heaven  shall  be  adjudged  only  to  him  whose 
heart  was  set  upon  it  in  this  world;  and  how  tremendously  the  account  between 
them  will  be  turned,  when  it  shall  be  foimd  of  the  one,  that  he  must  perish  for 
lack  of  knowledge,  and  of  the  other,  that  he  has  the  wisdom  which  is  imto 
salvation.  And  let  me  just  state  that  the  great  instrument  for  thus  elevating 
the  poor  is  that  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  may  be  preached  unto  the  poor.  It 
is  the  doctrine  of  His  Cross  finding  an  easier  admission  into  their  hearts  than 
it  does  through  those  barriers  of  human  pride  and  human  resistance,  which  are 
often  reared  on  the  basis  of  literature.  Let  the  testimony  of  God  be  simply  taken 
in,  that  on  His  own  Son  He  has  laid  the  iniquities  of  us  all — and  from  this  point 
does  the  humble  scholar  of  Christianity  pass  into  light,  and  enlargement,  and 
progressive  holiness.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  The  old  king  and  the  youth: — It  has 
been  thought  that  Ecclesiastes  must  here  be  referring  to  some  well-known  event 
of  his  own  times :  but,  if  this  be  the  case,  the  event  has  not  yet  been  identified. 
Perhaps  he  is  simply  presenting  an  imaginary  but  possible  case,  for  which  there 
had  been  quite  sufficient  basis  in  many  a  political  revolution.  In  those  old  king- 
doms and  empires  it  was  always  possible  that  even  a  beggar  or  prisoner  might 
rise  to  the  throne,  whilst  the  monarch  who  had  been  born  to  the  crown  might,  in 
his  old  age,  perhaps  through  his  own  folly,  become  a  poor  man  in  his  own 
kingdom.  Such  was  the  instability  of  the  most  exalted  of  earthly  positions.  And 
Ecclesiastes  sketches  the  picture  of  the  young  upstart — a  usurper  wise  and  skilful 
enough  to  make  himself  the  leader  of  a  successful  revolution,  and  to  place  himself 
in  the  stead  of  the  old  monarch.  So  great  is  the  popularity  of  this  usurper  that 
he  becomes  the  idol  of  the  hour :  millions  flock  aroimd  his  standard,  and  place  him 
on  the  throne.  But  even  this  popularity  is,  in  turn,  an  evanescent  thing;  "  those 
who  come  after  him  "  (the  people  of  a  younger  generation)  "  shall  not  rejoice  in 
him."  He,  too,  has  only  his  day.  It  may  be  that,  even  during  his  lifetime,  he 
loses  the  popular  f avoiir :  and,  at  the  best,  he  soon  passes  away  in  death,  and  is 
speedily  forgotten.  Thus  the  glory  and  fame  even  of  monarchy  itself  is  also 
*'  vanity  and  feeding  on  wind."  It  would  not  be  difficult  to  find  many  a 
**  historical  parallel  "  to  this  picture.  One  of  the  most  striking  has  occurred 
within  the  memory  of  some  of  us.  When  Louis  Philippe,  the  aged  King  of 
Frtmce,  who  would  not  be  admonished  by  the  signs  of  the  times,  had  at  length 
to  flee  from  his  own  kingdom  in  1848,  Louis  Napoleon,  who,  not  long  before,  had 
been  for  five  years  a  prisoner  in  the  fortress  of  Ham,  appeared  in  Paris,  and, 
Alirowing  himself  into  the  midst  of  political  affairs,  gradually  became  more  and 


184  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

more  popular,  until  in  due  time  he  became  President  of  the  Republic,  and 
ultimately  Emperor  of  France.  We  know  how  he  was  worshipped  by  the  masses 
of  the  French  people,  how  there  was  "  no  end  of  all  the  people  "  who  flocked 
around  him  in  their  enthusiasm.  And  we  know  how,  after  many  years  of  royal 
Bplendour,  the  collapse  came  suddenly  at  last,  and  how,  after  the  defeat  at  Sedan, 
the  nation,  almost  as  one  man,  tiu'ned  round  and  kicked  the  idol  they  had 
worshipped.  Even  one  of  our  own  poets  had  hailed  him  as  "  Emperor  evermore!" 
But  where  is  all  his  "  glory  "  now?  Surely  "  vanity  of  vanities  "  might  well  be 
inscribed  on  the  tomb  of  Napoleon  III.  And,  indeed,  the  career  of  many 
a  man  who  has  been  borne  along  into  high  position  on  the  wave  of  popular 
enthusiasm  furnishes  a  most  salutarj  lesson  as  to  the  real  value  of  mere  earthly 
fame  and  greatness.    (T.  0.  Finlayton.) 


CHAPTER   V, 

Tbb8.  1-12.  Keep  thy  foot  when  thou  goest  to  the  house  of  Ood. — Reverence 
ond  fidelity: — This  passage  is  a  series  of  cautions  against  irreverence  and  insin- 
oerit;  in  worship,  against  discouragement  because  of  political  wrongs,  and  against 
the  passion  for,  and  misuse  of,  great  riches.  Distrust  in  God  underlies  all  these 
evils.  Humble  faith  in  and  reliance  upon  Him,  in  the  conti-ast,  mark  the  wise 
man.  Note — I.  One's  peopee  bearing  in  the  Loed's  house  (vers.  1-7).  1.  In 
the  first  three  verses  carelessness  and  loose  speech  are  condemned  in  all  who  come 
into  the  preeence  chamber  of  the  Almighty.  So  it  is  when  subjects  appear  before 
any  sovereign  to  do  him  honour  or  make  request.  Exact  address  and  studied 
phrase  are  required.  The  free  and  easy  spirit  which  will  not  regard  these  is 
expelled  hastily  and  with  great  indignation.  Earthly  dignities  are  but  a  faint 
type  of  the  heavenly.  The  soul  which  faintly  realizes  this  will  come  before  Him 
with  "few  words,"  if  he  be  a  Sinaitic  worshipper;  "in  fulness  of  faith"  and 
"  with  boldness,"  if  he  be  a  Christian  believer.  2.  In  the  further  admonition, 
hasty  and  ill-considered  pledges  are  forbidden.  Impetuous  promising  is  the  worst 
kind  of  trifling,  and  the  Church  or  person  who  incites  another  to  it  only  works  him 
harm.  We  are  in  agreement  with  the  Mosaic  legislation  regarding  such  impiety, 
"  If  thou  shalt  forbear  to  vow,  it  shall  be  no  sin  in  thee."  Sin  lies,  not  in  the 
refusal  to  make  a  partial  and  ill-considered  pledge  to  Ood,  but  in  not  heeding  that 
first  of  all  His  commands,  "  Give  me  thine  heart."  Cordial  assent  to  this  require- 
ment makes  one  an  accepted  worshipper,  whose  acts  and  words  do  not  conflict 
when  he  appears  before  God.  Thoughtless,  giddy,  garrulous  lips  here  are  an 
abomination  unto  Him.  One  might  better  be  dreaming  and  know  it.  II.  Thb 
DUTY  OF  EELTiNG  UPON  THE  DiviNE  JUSTICE  (vers.  8,  9).  The  victims  of  tyranny 
and  wrong  have  not  ceased  wailing.  We  hear  their  pitiful  cries  in  every  era  of 
the  world's  history.  III.  The  delusive  chaeacteb  of  wealth  (vers.  10-12).  To 
denounce  riches  generally  is  as  though  one  inveighed  against  the  air :  all  men 
breathe  it.  All  men  just  as  naturally  long  for  these  material  treasures.  But  our 
lungs  are  fitted  to  receive  only  a  certain  volume ;  we  cannot  use  more.  We  cannot 
store  it  for  consumption,  enjoying  it  all  the  more  that  others  have  not  as  much. 
And  the  like  is  true  of  these  earthly  possessions.  Beyond  the  mere  provision  for 
food,  and  raiment,  and  shelter,  and  our  varied  tastes,  they  have  no  power  to 
minister,  though  piled  high  and  broad  as  the  pyramids.  "  He  cannot  reach  to 
feel  them,"  as  the  philosopher  says.  Yet  the  deceit  is  universal,  that  the  more 
one  can  amass  the  nearer  he  will  come  to  perfect  contentment.  He  will  not 
believe  that  he  chases  thus  only  a  shadow — that  it  is  as  far  from  his  embrace  when 
he  counts  his  millions  as  when  he  had  only  units.  He  may  as  well  expect  to 
quench  his  thirst  by  drinkmg  of  the  ocean.  (De  Witt  8.  Clark.)  Reverence  and 
fidelity: — With  chapter  five  begins  a  series  of  proverbial  sayings  somewhat  like 
those  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  but  showing  more  internal  connection.  These 
represent  some  of  the  experimental  knowledge  which  had  come  to  the  heart  in  its 
chase  after  many  things.  We  may  use  them,  as  we  do  the  Proverbs,  as  condensa- 
tions of  wisdom,  each  having  a  completeness  in  itself.  I.  Wobbhip  (vers.  1-7). 
1.  The  proper  manner  of  worship  is  here  suggested  to  us.  It  must  be  with  a  full 
intention  of  the  heart  and  not  merely  with  the  outward  Bymbols.  Always  in  wor- 
Bhip,  even  when  it  it  moet  freed  of  external  props,  there  it  the  opportunity  for  % 


CHAT.  T.]  ECCLESIASTES.  135 

lack  of  right  intention,  and,  therefore,  a  lack  of  meaning  to  God  as  well  as  to  men. 
Worship  must  always  be  interpreted  by  the  condition  of  heart  of  the  worshipper. 
(1)  Thought  is  necessary  to  due  worship  (ver.  1).  It  would  be  a  good  thing  for 
every  one  of  us  if  we  would  ask  ourselves  as  we  pass  through  the  portals  of  Ood'a 
house,  "  Do  I  really  mean  to  worship  God  this  hour?"  If  we  cannot  say  yes, 
would  it  not  be  better  for  us  not  to  enter?  (2)  Deliberateness  is  necessary  to 
acceptable  worship  (ver.  2).  To  be  rash  with  our  mouth,  to  rattle  off  a  formula, 
however  well  constructed,  without  weighing  the  meaning,  this  is  not  to  please  God. 
(3)  Brevity  is  a  virtue  in  worshipful  utterance.  God  is  high  above  us;  we  are 
here  in  a  position  that  should  make  us  most  deeply  respectful  towards  Him.  We 
should  use  well-weighed  words  before  Him,  and  well-weighed  words  are  few.  The 
touching  prayers  of  the  Bible — the  publican's,  Christ's  on  the  cross,  Saul's  at  his 
conversion — were  brief.  2.  Vows  formed  a  considerable  element  in  the  old  Jewish 
worship,  and  are  more  or  less  recognized  in  the  New  Testament.  We  promise  to 
do  certain  things  :  to  be  faithful  to  Christ  and  His  Church,  to  love  our  fellow- 
Christians,  to  obey  those  who  are  over  us  in  Christ,  etc.  These  are  vows,  pledges 
given  to  God,  and  they  should  be  kept  as  scrupulously  as  we  would  keep  a  business 
obligation  signed  with  our  own  hand.  II.  A  difficult  passage  concerning  Statb- 
CRAFT  follows.  The  State  may  be  mismanaged,  but  it  is  wisest  to  make  the  best  of 
it.  "  If  thou  seest  oppression  of  the  poor  and  violation  of  justice  and  righteous- 
ness in  the  government  of  a  province,  be  not  astonished  at  the  matter.  Such  per- 
version of  state-craft  is  not  confined  to  the  petty  officials  whose  deeds  you  know. 
Clear  up  to  the  top  of  the  Government  it  is  apt  to  be  the  same.  For  there  is  a 
high  one  over  a  high  one  watching,  and  higher  persons  over  them,  and  all  are  pretty 
much  alike  "  (ver.  8).  "  But  the  advantage  of  a  land  in  every  way  is  a  king 
devoted  to  the  field  "  (ver.  9).  The  idea  here  is  that  the  old  simple  agricultural 
form  of  government  was  the  best  for  the  people  of  that  day.  The  general  meaning 
is  that  good  government  comes  from  having  rulers  who  are  not  rapacious  for  their 
own  aggrandizement,  but  have  the  interests  of  the  country  at  heart.  III.  The 
matter  of  riches,  which  requires  such  special  thought  to-day,  when  riches  come 
easily  and  to  many,  was  not  without  its  importance  in  the  olden  time.  1.  Wealth 
then  as  now  was  unsatisfying  (ver.  10).  It  held  out  promises  which  it  had  no 
power  to  fulfil.  It  said  to  men,  '*  Be  rich  and  you  will  be  happy."  They  became 
rich,  but  they  were  not  happy.  The  soul  is  made  to  crave  the  most  ethereal 
kind  of  food;  but  the  rich  man  tries  to  satisfy  it  with  coarse  things.  It  is  made 
to  hunger  for  the  things  of  heaven;  he  thrusts  upon  it  the  things  of  earth.  2. 
Here  also  is  emphasized  the  thought  that  the  increase  of  wealth  is  not  satisfying 
(ver.  11).  8.  And  then  comes  the  old  lesson,  which  many  a  rich  man  has  con- 
fessed to  be  true,  but  which  those  who  are  not  rich  find  it  very  hard  to  believe 
true,  that  labour  with  contentment  is  better  than  wealthy  idleness  (ver.  12). 
Many  a  successful  millionaire  has  confessed  that  his  happiest  hours  were  in  the 
beginning  of  his  career,  when  he  felt  that  he  must  work  hard  for  his  wife  and 
babies,  and  when  he  returned  home  at  night  with  a  sweet  sense  of  contented 
fatigue  that  never  comes  now  in  his  anxious  days  of  great  prosperity.  {D.  J. 
BuTTell,  D.D.)  Behaviour  in  church: — I.  That  you  should  enter  the  scene  of 
PDBLio  WORSHIP  WITH  DEVOUT  PREPARATION.  '*  Keep  thy  foot,"  etc.  The  man 
whom  Solomon  addresses  is  supposed  to  be  on  his  way  to  the  house  of  God.  The 
character  of  a  man's  step  is  often  an  index  to  the  state  of  his  soul.  There  is  the 
slow  step  of  the  dull  brain  and  the  quick  step  of  the  intensely  active;  there  is 
the  step  of  the  proud  and  the  step  of  the  humble,  the  thoughtless  and  the  reflective. 
The  soul  reveals  itself  in  the  gait,  beats  out  its  own  character  in  the  tread.  1. 
Realize  the  scene  you  are  entering.  It  is  "  the  house  of  God."  Whom  are  you 
to  meet?  "  The  high  and  holy  One,"  etc.  Draw  not  hither  thoughtlessly. 
"  Put  oft  thy  shoes  from  ofE  thy  feet,"  etc.  (Ex.  iii.  6).  "  How  dreadful  is  this 
place  1"  etc.  (Gen.  xxviii.  16, 17).  Do  not  rush  hither.  2.  Realize  the  solemnity  of 
the  purpose.  It  is  to  meet  with  the  Mighty  Creator  of  the  universe,  whom  you 
have  offended  and  insulted.  It  is  to  confess  to  Him,  and  to  implore  His  forgive- 
ness. II.  That  you  shodld  listen  to  the  instruction  of  public  worship  with 
DEEP  attention.  Having  entered  the  house  of  God,  it  is  your  duty  to  be  more 
"  ready  to  hear,  than  to  offer  the  sacrifice  of  fools."  1.  You  should  attend  with 
profound  carefulness  to  the  services  of  God's  house,  that  you  may  avoid  a  great 
evil, — that  of  "  offering  the  sacrifice  of  fools."  Mere  bodily  sacrifices  are  the 
sacrifice  of  fools  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  81).  Lip  services  are  the  sacrifice  of  fools  (lea 
xxix.  13).     The  hypocritical  services  are  the  sacrifices  of  fools  (Luke  xviii.  11,  12). 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  t. 


What  are  the  sacrifices  that  God  will  accept?  (Ps.  li.  17;  Isa.  Ixvi.  2).  2.  You 
should  attend  with  profound  carefulness  to  the  services  of  God's  house  that  your 
mind  may  be  in  a  right  state  to  receive  true  good.  "  Be  more  ready  to  hear," 
etc.  (1)  Be  ready  to  hear  teachably.  Let  the  soul  be  open  as  the  parched  garden 
in  summer  to  the  gentle  showers.  (2)  Be  ready  to  hear  earnestly.  Wonderful 
things  are  propounded  in  the  house  of  God;  things  vitally  connected  with  your 
everlasting  well-being.  (8)  Be  ready  to  hear  practically.  All  the  truths  are  to 
be  appropriated,  embodied,  and  brought  out  in  life.     III.  That  yod  should  attend 

TO    THE    ENGAGEMENTS    OF    PUBLIC    WORSHIP    WITH    PROFOUND    REVERENCE.       "  Be    DOt 

rash  with  thy  mouth,"  etc.  Let  thy  words  be  in  harmony  with  thy  real  state  of 
Boul;  and  see  that  thy  state  of  soul  is  truthful  and  right.  There  seem  to  be  two 
reasons  here  against  vapid  verbosity  in  worship.  1.  The  vast  disparity  between 
the  worshipper  and  the  object  he  addresses.  "  For  God  is  in  heaven,"  etc.  Duly 
realize  His  presence  and  greatness,  and  you  will  become  all  but  speechless 
before  Him.  Isaiah  did  so  (Isa.  vi.  1-6).  2.  The  fearful  tendency  of  an 
empty  soul  to  an  unmeaning  verbosity  (ver.  8).  (Homiliat.)  A.  dream 
cometh  through  the  multitude  of  business. — The  prayer  and  the  dream: — There 
is  an  analogy  instituted  between  voluminous  prayer  and  the  voluminous  dream. 
The  dream  arises  out  of  the  various  transactions  of  business,  and  the  fool's 
prayer  springs  from  the  variety  of  his  vocabulary.  Confusion  is  the  characteriBtio 
of  both.  They  are  produced  by  external  influences.  The  soul  as  a  directing 
rational  power  is  asleep.  Dim  memories  of  things  mingle  in  a  wild  phantasmagoria 
before  the  closed  portals  of  the  sense  of  the  dreamer.  It  is  just  so  with  the  wor- 
shipping word-monger.  The  nature  and  character  of  God,  the  promises,  Scripture 
language,  are  floating  before  the  closed  vision  of  the  pietistio  dreamer,  and  his 

Erayers  are  a  jumble  of  disjointed  things.  This  will  always  be  the  case  with 
im  who  gives  himself  up  to  the  external  influences.  But  as  it  is  better  to 
dream  than  to  be  dead,  so  is  it  always  better  to  pray,  even  disjointedly  and 
wildly,  than  to  be  without  that  breath  of  the  spiritual  life.  The  mere  enthusiast, 
guided  by  no  reason  in  his  devotions,  may  be  brought  under  its  direction;  but 
how  shall  mere  reason  become  enthusiastic?  We  answer,  by  the  action  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  on  the  soul.  What  we  need  is  this  Spirit.  We  can  prophesy  to 
the  dry  bones,  and  clothe  them  with  flesh ;  but  the  Spirit  of  God  is  needed  that 
they  may  stand  up  and  become  an  army  of  God.  "  Gome,  0  breath,  and  breathe 
on  those  slain,  that  they  may  live,"  is  to  be  our  prayer.  When  we  have  got  the 
answer  to  that  petition,  we  shall  be  living,  loving,  active  Christians.     (J.  Bennet.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  When  thou  vowest  a  vow  unto  God,  defer  not  to  pay  it. — Of  remem- 
bering and  keeping  our  vows: — One  of  the  greatest  inconveniences  to  which  men 
are  exposed  in  the  various  transactions  of  life,  one  of  the  greatest  hindrances  in 
their  performance  of  duty,  is  forgetfulness  :  and  this  may  be  owing,  partly  to  a 
defective  constitution  of  mind,  more  frequently  to  habits  of  inattention  and  wilful 
neglect.  A  benefactor  confers  upon  us  a  distinguished  favovir :  we  feel  deeply 
sensible  of  the  obligation,  and  sure  that  it  must  always  be  remembered;  we 
venttire  to  pledge  ourselves  that  such  will  be  the  case ;  our  own  interest  is  greatly 
concerned  that  it  should  be  so;  the  continued  good-will  and  kindness  of  our  friend 
depend  upon  it :  and  yet,  when  the  benefit  is  past,  and  not  seldom  even  while  it 
Is  enjoyed,  we  are  led  to  bestow  scarcely  a  thought  upon  the  hand  from  which 
our  bounty  has  been  supplied.  None  of  us  will  deny  our  obligations  to  God  for 
the  blessings  of  His  providence  and  the  riches  of  His  grace;  and  probably  there 
are  few  of  us,  who  have  not  been  at  some  time  or  other  eo  powerfully  affected  by 
a  consideration  of  the  Lord's  dealings  with  us,  as  to  have  entered  into  some  resolu- 
tions before  Him,  and  made  some  promises  of  honouring  and  serving  Him.  But 
how  soon  have  these  hopeful  convictions  lost  their  power;  how  soon  has  the 
enemy,  who  was  watching  all  the  while  with  jealousy  over  them,  "  caught  away 
that  which  was  sown  in  their  heart,"  and  scattered  it  to  the  winds.  The  gains 
and  pleasures,  the  corrupt  indulgences,  the  fashionable  follies  of  the  world,  have 
rushed  in  like  a  flood,  and  swept  from  them  the  very  recollection  of  their  promised 
change.  If  we  could  have  kept  a  register  of  our  thoughts  and  purposes,  no  doubt 
we  should  find,  upon  consulting  it,  that  we  had  repeatedly,  in  the  course  of  our 
lives,  made  our  resolutions,  and  avowed  our  purposes  m  the  sight  of  Heaven,  to 
walk  more  humbly  and  faithfully  with  our  God,  and  to  live  for  eternity.  And 
though  we  have  long  ago  dismissed  these  matters  from  our  minds,  and  no  longer 
trouble  ourselves  either  with  the  promised  obligations,  or  our  forgetfulness  of 


•Hiy.T.]  SCCLESIASTES.  ISt 

tliem,  yet  are  they  standing  before  God  in  living  characters,  which  no  time  can 
efface  or  alter.  The  sentiments,  and  affections,  and  conduct,  which  we  saw 
neoeflsary  for  us  years  ago,  continue  to  be  equally  necessary,  though  they  are  no 
longer  felt;  our  feelings  may  be  changed  and  gone,  but  there  is  no  change  in 
duty :  whatever  it  was  wise  and  good  for  us  to  promise,  that  we  are  now  as  much 
bound  to  perform,  as  we  were  when  the  promise  was  originally  made;  and  God 
will  demand  it  at  our  hands.  There  is  one  momentous  occasion  of  our  lives  to 
which  most  of  us  may  carry  back  our  thoughts  with  peculiar  advantage ;  one  occasion 
on  which  we  certainly  did,  in  the  most  open,  and  solemn,  and  unqualified  manner, 
pledge  ourselves  to  God  in  the  presence  of  His  Church  and  people;  and  that  was 
when  we  took  upon  ourselves  the  vows  and  promises,  which  were  made  for  us  at 
our  baptism,  when  we  were  confirmed.  This  is  a  transaction  and  a  service  upon 
which  we  ought  to  dwell  with  great  solemnity  and  frequency.  It  is  incumbent, 
on  me  to  say  a  word  to  those  who  are  about  to  take  upon  themselves  the  promises 
and  vows  made  at  their  baptism.  Let  the  matter  be  well  weighed :  let  it  be 
•oberly  considered  that  they  are  going  to  give  a  promise  and  a  pledge  to  the  God 
of  truth ;  to  declare  that  they  are  fully  sensible  of  the  engagement  which  has  been 
made  for  them,  and  are  willing  to  take  it  wholly  upon  themselves;  to  declare  that, 
for  the  remainder  of  their  days,  they  will  walk  worthily,  by  the  help  of  the  Lord, 
of  that  new  and  holy  state  into  which  they  were  baptized.  Now,  that  this  is  a 
most  serious,  important,  and  awful  engagement,  no  one,  who  is  come  to  years  of 
discretion,  can  fail  to  perceive.  Let  all  them  be  assured,  that  if  this  solemn  vow 
be  earnestly  made  and  faithfully  kept,  God  will  be  their  friend,  and  "  He  will  save 
them  ";  if  this  solemn  vow  be  trifled  with  and  broken,  God  will  punish  such 
mockery,  and  will  become  their  enemy,  and  they  may  perish  everlastingly.  Cer> 
tainly  we  may  say,  in  this  case,  if  in  any,  "  Better  is  it  that  thou  shouldest  not^ 
vow,  than  that  thou  shouldest  vow  and  not  pay."  (/.  Blade,  M.A.)  The  vow: — 
The  vow  is  a  form  of  prayer.  It  is  a  prayer  with  an  obligation.  The  worshipper 
wants  something,  and,  either  that  he  may  get  it  or  that  he  may  show  his  grati- 
tude, he  resolves  to  do  a  certain  thing.  In  the  Old  Testament  economy  the  vow 
was  a  common  form  of  worship.  There  was  something  in  it  suited  to  those  lower 
and  feebler  views  of  God  which  obtained  in  the  infancy  of  the  Church.  The  chief 
objection  to  it  is,  that  it  lays  a  man  under  a  bond  to  do  what  should  always  spring 
from  love;  that  it  is  likely  to  be  put  as  a  full  satisfaction  for  the  religious  obliga- 
tions of  the  Christian,  which  yet  include  the  whole  life  and  being;  and  that  there 
is  in  it  an  assumption  that,  if  we  do  not  make  the  vow,  the  obligation  on  our  part 
is  not  incurred;  whereas  this  is  not  so,  for  I  may  say  that  whatever  is  lawful  for 
us  to  vow  is  always  right  for  us  to  do,  even  if  we  had  not  made  the  vow.  Bash- 
ness  and  inconsiderateness  should  not  lead  us  to  make  any  vow,  either  which  we 
cannot  keep,  which  we  will  not  keep,  or  which  it  would  be  unlawful  for  us  to 
keep,  for  such,  translated  into  our  language,  is  no  doubt  the  essential  meaning 
of  those  words — "  Suffer  not  thy  mouth  to  cause  thy  flesh  to  sin;  neither  say  thou 
before  the  angel," — ^that  is,  the  messenger  of  God,  the  minister,  the  priest,  who 
was  cognizant  of  the  making  of  the  vow, — **  that  it  was  an  error :  wherefore 
•hould  God  be  angry  at  thy  voice,  and  destroy  the  work  of  thy  hands?"  We  aro 
cautioned  here  not  only  against  rash  vows,  but  against  unconsidered  and  volumin- 
ous prayers.  Be  not  rash  nor  hasty  :  let  thy  words  be  few.  Our  Saviour  cautioned 
against  vain  repetitions.  Several  gross  vices  in  prayer  are  here  indicated.  First, 
voluminous  prayer  is  to  be  guarded  against — the  utterance  of  the  same  request 
in  many  forms,  as  though  God  should  be  affected  with  the  variety  and  quantity 
of  speech  I  This,  when  done  as  a  duty,  is  an  evil;  when  done  for  pretence,  is  a 
hypocrisy.  When  we  go  to  God,  we  should  go  with  some  petition  which  we  want 
granted.  We  should  Imow  what  it  is;  and  if  we  have  many  petitions,  we  should 
have  them  arranged  in  proper  order,  and  we  should  express  them  simply.  There 
is  much  prayer  without  desire;  and  if  God  would  grant  many  petitions  which  are 
offered  up,  many  a  worshipper  would  be  greatly  amazed  and  sadly  disappointed. 
Take  for  instance  our  prayers  for  a  new  nature,  for  spiritual-mindedness.  Well, 
we  are  afraid  that  there  are  prayers  lying  at  the  back  of  these  petitions  giving 
them  the  negative.  The  petitioners  do  not  think  there  is  not  a  good  and  a  benefit 
In  these  things,  but  they  do  not  want  them  for  themselves,  at  least  not  now.  A 
new  nature  is  just  what  they  do  not  want,  but  a  little  more  indulgence  of  the 
old.  They  are  as  full  of  worldly-mindedness  as  they  can  be,  and  do  not  wish  to 
have  it  destroyed.  What  then?  Should  we  cease  to  offer  up  such  prayers? 
No !    But  what  we  should  do  is  this :  try  to  get  such  views  of  the  nature  of 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  ▼, 

things  sought  to  be  got  rid  of  as  shall  lead  to  earnestness  in  our  petitions  against 
them,  and  to  get  such  views  of  the  blessings  prayed  for  as  shall  lead  us  really 
to  desire  them.  We  require  to  study,  that  our  prayers  be  of  the  right  kind — 
that  they  be  not  mere  verbiage;  and,  as  in  going  before  men  for  any  favour,  our 
words  should  be  few,  and  well  ordered.  About  the  exercise  of  prayer  there  are 
great  difficulties,  which  can  only  be  surmounted  by  previous  study,  by  constant 
•watchfulness,  and  by  a  simple  reliance  on  the  Spirit  of  God,  as  the  source  from 
whom  all  our  inspirations  flow.     (/.  Bennet.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  He  that  loveth  silver  shall  not  be  satisfied  with  silver. — The 

unsatisfactorineas  of  material  wealth: — I.  That  as  goods  increase,  desire 
INCREASES.  This  is  not  the  case  universally.  There  are  men  whose  property  is 
daily  increasing,  but  whose  desires  are  not  increasing.  The  answer,  as  to  who 
these  men  are,  is  suggested  by  the  text.  They  are  those  who  have  not  set  their 
affections  upon  money.  Love  of  silver  leads  to  dissatisfaction  with  silver.  Love 
of  abundance  leads  to  dissatisfaction  with  increase.  He  who  loves  silver  wants 
gold.  He  who  loves  gold  wants  land.  "  Man  never  is,  but  always  to  be  blessed," 
if  he  look  for  blessedness  only  to  earth.  As  bodily  hunger  cannot  be  satisfied  by 
fine  scenery  which  appeals  to  the  eye;  as  thirst  cannot  be  quenched  by  the  strains 
of  even  the  sweetest  music;  and  as  what  ministers  to  mental  growth  will  not, 
directly  at  least,  tend  to  physical  development;  so  neither  can  the  soul  thrive 
upon  food  other  than  its  own.  God  made  man  for  Himself,  and  away  from  God, 
there  is  for  man  no  abiding,  no  solid  satisfaction.  II.  That  expenditure  keeps 
PACE  WITH  INCOME.  Wants  are  born  of  "  goods."  These  increase  and  so  do  those 
who  eat  them.  Further,  wealth  has  its  duties  as  well  as  its  advantages;  and  if 
its  possessor  be  a  Christian  he  will  recognize  those  duties.  The  practical  recogni- 
tion of  them  proves  this,  that  "  when  goods  are  increased  they  are  increased  that 
eat  them."  III.  That  the  love  of  wealth  is  vanity.  "This  also  is  vanity." 
To  love  wealth  "  is  vanity  ";  because  love  of  wealth  makes  men  cold,  unsympa- 
thetic, and  morally  unmanly,  causes  them  to  live  from  circumference  to  centre, 
instead  of  from  centre  to  circumference.  On  the  contrary  he  who  lives  for  others 
lives  a  radiating  life,  realizes  that  all  are  brethren.  To  love  wealth  is  vanity, 
because  whilst  there  is  an  excitement  in  the  pursuit  of  wealth  there  is  no  true 
enjoyment  in  its  possession.  A  soul  centred  upon  worldly  wealth,  like  the 
daughter  of  the  horse-leech,  cries,  "  Give  I  give!"  We  cannot  serve  God  and 
mammon.  (J.  S.  Swan.)  The  vanity  of  riches: — This  passage  describes  the 
vanity  of  riches.  With  the  enjoyments  of  frugal  industry  it  contrasts  the  woes 
of  wealth.  Looking  up  from  that  condition  on  which  Solomon  looked  down,  it  may 
help  to  reconcile  us  to  our  lot,  if  we  remember  how  the  most  opulent  of  princes 
envied  it.  1.  In  all  grades  of  society  human  subsistence  is  very  much  the  same. 
Even  princes  are  not  fed  with  ambrosia,  nor  do  poets  subsist  on  asphodel.  Bread 
and  water,  the  produce  of  the  flocks  and  the  herds,  and  a  few  homely  vegetables, 
form  the  staple  of  his  food  who  can  lay  the  globe  under  tribute;  and  these 
essentials  of  healthful  existence  are  within  the  attainment  of  ordinary  industry. 
2.  When  a  man  begins  to  amass  money,  he  begins  to  feed  an  appetite  which 
nothing  can  appease,  and  which  its  proper  food  will  only  render  fiercer.  "  He 
that  loveth  silver  shall  not  be  satisfied  with  silver."  To  greed  there  may  be 
"increase,"  but  no  increase  can  ever  be  "abundance."  Therefore,  happy  they 
who  have  never  got  enough  to  awaken  the  accumulating  passion,  and  who,  feeling 
that  food  and  raiment  are  the  utmost  to  which  they  can  aspire,  are  therewith 
content.  3.  It  should  reconcile  us  to  the  want  of  wealth,  that,  as  abundance 
grows,  so  grow  the  consumers,  and  of  riches  less  perishable,  the  proprietor  enjoys 
no  more  than  the  mere  spectator.  A  rich  man  buys  a  pictinre  or  a  statue,  and  he 
is  proud  to  think  that  his  mansion  is  adorned  with  such  a  famous  masterpiece. 
But  a  poor  man  comes  and  looks  at  it,  and,  because  he  has  the  cesthetic  insight, 
in  a  few  minutes  he  is  conscious  of  more  astonishment  and  pleasure  than  the  dull 
proprietor  has  experienced  in  half  a  century.  Or,  a  rich  man  lays  out  a  park  or  a 
garden,  and,  except  the  diversion  of  planning  and  remodelling,  he  has  derived 
from  it  little  enjoyment;  but  some  bright  morning  a  holiday  student  or  a  town- 
pent  tourist  comes,  and  when  he  leaves  he  carries  with  him  a  freight  of  life-long 
recollections.  4.  Amongst  the  pleasures  of  obscurity,  or  rather  of  occupation,  the 
next  noticed  is  sound  slumber.  Sometimes  the  wealthy  would  be  the  better  for  a 
taste  of  poverty;  it  would  reveal  to  them  their  privileges.  But  if  the  poor  could 
get  a  taste  of  opulence,  it  would  reveal  to  them  strange  luxmries  in  lowliness. 


CHAP.  ▼.]  ECCLESIASTES.  129 

Fevered  with  late  hours  and  false  excitement,  or  soared  by  visions  the  righteous 
recompense  of  gluttonous  excess,  or  with  breath  suppressed  and  palpitating  heart 
listing  the  fancied  footsteps  of  the  robber,  grandeur  often  pays  a  nightly  penance 
for  the  triumph  of  the  day.  5.  Wealth  is  often  the  ruin  of  its  possessor.  It  is 
"  kept  for  the  owner  to  his  hurt."  Like  that  King  of  Cyprus  who  made  himself 
BO  rich  that  he  became  a  tempting  spoil,  and  who,  rather  than  lose  his  treasures, 
embarked  them  in  perforated  ships;  but,  wanting  courage  to  draw  the  plugs, 
ventured  back  to  land  and  lost  both  his  money  and  his  life  :  so  a  fortune  is  a 
great  perplexity  to  its  owner,  and  is  no  defence  in  times  of  danger.  And  very 
often,  by  enabling  him  to  procure  all  that  heart  can  wish,  it  pierces  him  through 
with  many  sorrows.  Ministering  to  the  lust  of  the  eye,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and 
the  pride  of  life,  misdirected  opulence  has  ruined  many  both  in  soul  and  body. 
6.  Nor  is  it  a  small  vexation  to  have  accumulated  a  fortune,  and  when  expecting 
to  transmit  it  to  some  favourite  child,  to  find  it  suddenly  swept  away  (vers.  14— 
16).  There  is  now  the  son,  but  where  is  the  sumptuous  mansion?  Here  is  the. 
heir,  but  where  is  the  vaunted  heritage?  7.  Last  of  all,  are  the  infirmity  and 
fretfulness  which  are  the  frequent  companions  of  wealth.  You  pass  a  stately 
mansion,  and  as  the  powdered  menials  are  closing  the  shutters  of  the  brilliant 
room,  and  you  see  the  sumptuous  table  spread  and  the  fire-light  flashing  on  vessels 
of  gold  and  vessels  of  silver,  perhaps  no  pang  of  envy  pricks  your  bosom,  but  a 
glow  of  gratulation  for  a  moment  fills  it :  Happy  people  who  tread  carpets  so 
soft,  and  who  swim  through  halls  so  splendid  1  But,  some  future  day,  when  the 
candles  are  lighted  and  the  curtains  drawn  in  that  selfsame  apartment,  it  is  your 
lot  to  be  within;  and  as  the  invalid  owner  is  wheeled  to  his  place  at  the  table, 
and  as  dainties  are  handed  round  of  which  he  dare  not  taste,  and  as  the  guests 
interchange  cold  courtesy,  and  all  is  so  stifi  and  so  commonplace,  and  so  heart- 
lessly grand,  your  fancy  cannot  help  flying  off  to  some  humbler  spot  with  which 
you  are  more  familiar,  and  "  where  quiet  with  contentment  makes  her  home." 
{J.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Silver  and  tatiaf action : — This  is  true  of  all  earthly  things. 
No  man  is  satisfied  with  any  human  idol.  I.  Corrupt  affection.  All  worldly 
love  is  corrupt.  There  is  nothing  good  in  silver.  It  has  only  present  beauty  and 
usefulness.  II.  Ths  glamodb  of  time.  How  bright  is  the  tinsel  of  an  illuminated 
theatre  I  Such  is  the  spell  cast  over  the  things  of  time  and  sense,  until  the 
Spirit  of  God  causes  the  sunshine  to  beam  in  our  hearts.  III.  Thb  disappointment 
OF  AMBITION.  Like  a  mirage  the  object  sought  eludes  the  grasp.  No  acquisition 
is  final.     The  more  we  get  the  more  we  want.     {Homiliit.) 

Ver.  18.  It  is  good  and  comely  for  one  to  eat  and  to  drink,  and  to  enjoy  the 
good  of  all  his  labour. — Labour: — It  is  concerning  Labour  in  its  broadest  sense 
that  I  wish  to  speak.  The  navvy  with  his  shovel,  the  ploughman  with  his  team, 
the  weaver  with  his  loom,  the  clerk  with  his  pen,  the  "  commercial  "  with  his 
order-book,  the  domestic  with  her  scrubbing-brush,  the  designer,  manager, 
inventor,  writer  with  his  brain  and  brilliant  gifts,  the  minister  with  tender  heart 
and  cultured  mind — these  all  are  sons  of  Labour,  who,  in  their  striving  to  do  true 
work,  can  realize  a  responsibility  so  great  as  to  declare  their  brotherhood  with 
Him  who  declared,  "  I  must  work  the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Me  while  it  is 
day,  for  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  can  work."  I.  The  Eights  of  Labour. 
1.  Has  not  the  labourer  a  right  to  expect  some  degree  of  pleasure  in  his  labour? 
To  some  this  may  seem  somewhat  fanciful,  but  they  cannot  deny  its  justness. 
To  eat,  to  drink,  to  sleep,  to  think,  to  speak,  are  pleasurable  sensations;  why 
should  so  natural  and  necessary  a  function  as  toil  be  otherwise?  Yet  we  know  it 
is  to  many.  Multitudes  are  brutalized  by  work,  simply  because  they  find  no 
satisfaction  in  it.  They  work  in  order  to  live,  and  die  in  order  to  find  rest.  2. 
Equally  just  is  it  for  Labour  to  assert  its  right  to  an  honest  reward.  Adam 
Smith,  in  his  "  Wealth  of  Nations,"  got  to  the  root  of  the  wage  question  when 
he  said  that  the  wages  of  labour  were  the  fruits  of  labour.  And  the  writer  of  the 
Book  of  Eccleaiastes,  had  he  been  able  to  hear  that  sentiment,  would  have  said 
"  Amen  I  for  it  is  his  portion."  Amid  the  complex  tangle  of  modern  mercantile 
transactions  it  would  be  an  impossibility  to  assign  to  the  hand-worker  the  exact 
product  of  his  individual  labour,  after  deducting  the  wages  of  the  brain- worker 
who  designs,  organizes,  or  superintends,  and  the  other  expenses  involved  in  pro- 
duction. But  should  it  not  be  the  striving  of  a  Christian  employer  to  secure  to 
every  worker  as  near  an  approximation  to  his  true  reward  as  can  be  ascertained? 
Should  it  not  be  frowned  upon  as  a  deadly  sin  for  men  to  grow  rich  on  "  the  hire 


ilKJ  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHip.  Tfc 

of  the  labourers,  which  they  keep  back  by  fraud  "?  8.  Further,  it  is  surely 
Labour's  right  to  have  the  fullest  liberty  in  seeking  these  ends.  The  work  done 
by  our  trade  unions  is  a  splendid  monument  to  the  sturdy  self-restraint  of  the 
workers,  and  whilst  in  the  future  the  principles  taught  and  the  methods  adopted 
by  them  may  undergo  considerable  change,  yet  the  intelligent  association  of  men 
for  purposes  of  educating  public  opinion,  and  influencing  the  legislature  will 
remain  the  most  eSective  of  means  for  realizing  Labour's  ideals.  II.  Thb  Dutibs 
OF  Labouu.  Let  Labour,  whilst  seeking  for  justice  to  itself,  seek  to  deal  justly 
with  others.  If  "  capital  "  be  the  miserable  abstraction  of  which  the  proverb 
says  it  has  "  neither  soul  to  save,  nor  heart  to  feel,  nor  body  to  kick,"  it  is  no 
reason  why  workers  should  deal  imf airly  with  the  individual  '*  capitalist,"  who 
often  is  as  much  the  victim  of  an  evU  social  system  as  the  worker  himself. 
If  it  be  the  maxim  of  commerce  to  buy  in  the  cheapest  market  and  sell  in  the 
dearest,  blind  to  all  considerations  as  to  whether  thereby  one  obeys  or  disobeys 
the  law  of  Christ;  if  to  take  advantage  of  a  brother's  necessity  is  not  condemned 
as  a  breach  of  commercial  ethics,  there  is  no  justification  whatever  for  any  worker 
adopting  similar  principles  in  his  life  work.  Because  a  man  does  not  believe  in 
the  justice  of  our  present  system  of  doing  business,  it  is  no  reason  why  he  should 
play  ducks  and  drakes  with  his  employer.  Assuming  that  the  principle  of  com- 
petition is  a  cruelly  oppressive  one,  and  that  many  employers  are  heartless  tyrants, 
a  sensible  worker  will,  nevertheless,  while  those  evil  conditions  remain — ^and  they 
may  for  some  time  yet — make  the  best  he  can  of  them.  To  worry  employers  for 
concessions  that  it  would  be  suicidal  to  grant  is,  at  best,  a  short-sighted  policy. 
Better  to  attack  the  system  to  which  both  masters  and  men  are  victims.  Em- 
ployers of  labour  are  sometimes  made  unnecessarily  hard  by  the  foolishness  and 
inconsiderateness  of  workers.  It  may,  for  instance,  be  quite  legitimate  for  a  mill- 
hand  to  grumble  over  the  poorness  of  his  pay,  but  the  justice  of  his  plea  beoomei 
miserably  weakened  when  he  "  plays  "  for  a  couple  of  days  when  work  is  abun- 
dant, with  the  consequence  that  that  work  is  driven  elsewhere.  It  may  be  quite 
lawful  for  a  man  to  take  a  holiday  at  any  time  he  pleases,  but  not  expedient. 
Even  in  such  a  matter  the  higher  law  of  brotherliness  should  prevail.  In  the 
ranks  of  manual  labour,  though  not  these  exclusively,  we  find  a  lamentable  "  want 
of  thought,"  which  in  its  results  is  often  as  bad  as  "  want  of  heart."  It  has  been 
asserted  that  the  British  workman  is  the  hardest  of  all  masters  when  he  reaches 
that  position;  that  in  his  co-operative  societies  his  "  diwy  "  is  often  larger  than 
it  should  be  because  of  underpaid  labour.  Not  difficult  would  it  be  to  prove  that 
the  overwork  of  multitudes  of  shop  assistants  is  caused  by  thoughtless  working- 
folk  who  "  shop  "  late  when  it  would  be  as  easy  to  "  shop  "  early.  A.  man's 
religion  is  seen  in  the  byways  of  conduct,  and  if  in  these  movements  he  is  not 
above  suspicion,  he  loses  all  claim  to  be  called  a  Christian,  for  the  spirit  of  Christ's 
Gospel  says,  "  Deal  with  all  men  as  with  your  brother,  as  with  children  of  Qod, 
whose  oecessity  ii  your  sorrow,  whose  strength  ia  your  joy."     (T.  A.  Leonard.) 


CHAPTBB  VI. 


Ybbs.  8,  4.  If  a  man  live  many  years,  so  that  the  dayi  of  hli  yean  be  many, 
and  his  sonl  be  not  filled  with  good,  I  say  that  an  untimely  birth  is  better  than 
he. — The  bottows  of  old  age: — The  wise  Preacher  supposes  a  man  to  have  seen 
the  utmost  possible  limit  of  human  existence.  And  then  he  estimates  the  worth 
of  the  whole  of  this  proud  and  protracted  life,  if  it  has  passed  without  the 
acquisition  of  that  object  which  the  Word  of  God  proposes  for  the  attainment  of 
man.  I.  What  is  the  great  object  op  human  life?  It  is  that  "  the  soul  may 
be  filled  with  good."  It  was  to  gain  this  that  each  one  has  been  placed  in  his 
period  of  earthly  education.  It  is  for  this  alone  that  Divine  forbearance  lengthens 
out  to  grey  hairs  the  life  of  man  who  has  not  yet  secured  it,  to  give  to  men  the 
full  opportunity  to  be  wise,  and  to  think  of  the  things  which  belong  to  their 
peace.  How,  then,  shall  this  soul  be  filled  with  good?  Is  there  anythmg  within 
the  limits  of  the  gifts  of  this  world,  which  can  thus  fill  it?  When  he  can  sow 
grace  in  the  furrows  of  his  field,  or  fill  his  barns  with  glory,  when  he  can  plough 
up  heaven  from  the  earth,  and  extract  God  from  perishing  creatures,  the  world 


^JHAP.  Ti.]  ECCLE8IASTE8.  141 

■ — ■ 

may  fill  his  soul  with  good  and  furnish  an  adequate  exchange  for  its  loss.  Bui 
who  does  not  see  the  utter  disproportion  between  the  desires  of  the  soul  and  all 
the  fruits  which  earth  produces?  The  sinner  is  descending  where  his  earthly 
glory  cannot  descend  after  him,  and  where,  for  a  soul  unredeemed,  all  redemption 
ceaseth  for  ever.     II.  Thb  sobbows  of  tbx  uan  who  has  lived  long  without 

ATTAINING  THIS  OBEAT  OBJECT  OF  LIFB,  whoSe  SOul  Is  not  "  filled  with  gOod."      1.  Hd 

has  passed  through  a  life,  a  reflection  upon  which  gives  him  no  comfort.  Every 
hour  rises  up  as  the  accuser  of  a  guUty  conscience.  The  remembrance  of  youth 
is  a  remembrance  of  convictions  smothered,  the  Holy  Spirit  resisted,  and  a 
Saviour's  love  despised.  The  thoughts  upon  manhood  present  the  awful  picture 
of  the  self-immolation  of  the  sinner's  soul  to  the  enemy  of  God  and  man  upon  the 
altar  of  worldly  gain.  All  the  resolutions  and  plans  which  were  made  for  life  hava 
gone  by  unfulfilled.  Every  opportunity  has  been  lost.  Every  mercy  has  been 
abused.  Oh,  what  sorrow  for  the  aged  sinner  does  such  a  life  produce  I  2.  H« 
is  pressing  onward  to  a  near  eternity,  for  which  he  has  no  preparation.  How  truly 
is  that  old  age  which  has  no  such  provision  for  eternity,  and  to  which  "  hop* 
comes  not,  that  comes  to  all  "  besides,  an  evil  day,  in  which  man  finds  no 
pleasure  I  8.  He  has  experienced  the  vanity  of  the  world,  and  has  nothing  which 
can  supply  its  place.  They  are  thus  left  without  a  single  source  of  comfort;  and 
while  they  are  struggling  thus  with  unconquerable  despair,  they  feel  that  the 
man  who  has  not  an  interest  in  the  Saviour,  and  a  sure  acceptance  in  His  redemp- 
tion, has  no  hope,  though  he  has  gained,  when  God  takes  away  his  soul.  (8.  H, 
Tyng,  D.D.)  Sottowm  of  old  age  without  religion: — Even  with  all  the  comforts 
and  hopes  of  Christianity,  old  age  is  not  a  desirable  condition  of  being.  Wa 
naturally  desire  to  live;  we  shrink  instinctively  from  death — and  yet  many  an 
aged  one  longs  to  lay  down  the  oppressive  burden  of  life  before  the  appointed 
time.  If  this  be  true,  with  all  the  consolations  and  supports  which  true  religion 
affords,  how  unutterably  sad  and  sorrowful  must  old  age  be  to  the  aged  pilgrim 
who  has  no  home  in  the  skies  to  look  forward  to — no  God  and  Saviour  to  light 
ap  the  dark  valley  and  welcome  him  to  an  eternity  of  bliss  t  But  why  are  tha 
■orrowe  of  an  irreligious  old  age  so  many  and  poignant?  1.  A  portion  of  them  ia 
natural  and  common  alike  to  all.  Nature  will  decay;  the  system  wear  out.  Tha 
organs  of  the  body  and  the  faculties  of  the  mind  become  impaired.  We  are  out 
of  touch  with  the  life  around  us.  Our  children,  our  friends,  our  neighbours,  ara 
gone  from  us.  We  are  solitary,  desolate.  2.  The  retrospect  of  a  godless  life  from 
the  period  of  old  age  must  necessarily  be  a  painful  one,  at  least  one  destitute  ol 
rational  comfort  and  satisfaction.  The  day  of  activity,  of  passion,  of  recklessness, 
has  gone  by.  With  old  age  come  reflection,  introspection,  seriousness,  and  tha 
monitions  of  a  coming  judgment.  0  the  bitterness  of  the  retrospeot  of  a  Ufa 
devoted  to  the  world — a  life  without  God  and  without  a  serious  purpose  I  8.  If 
■uoh  the  bitterness  of  the  retrospect,  what  shall  we  say  of  the  anticipation?  Very 
few  repent  in  old  age.  What  a  prospect!  A  misspent  probation,  a  hopeleti 
death,  a  lost  eternity  1     (/.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Do  not  all  go  to  one  place? — ^411  men'$  place: — Do  you  know  what  tha 
wise  man  means  when  he  offers  this  question  to  your  consideration,  "  Do  not  all 
go  to  one  place?"  The  thing,  no  doubt,  here  spoken  of  is  death;  the  place  here 
spoken  of,  no  doubt,  is  the  grave.  An  amazing  consideration  I  part  of  the  first 
sentence  that  the  great  and  holy  God  ever  denounced  against  fallen  man,  to  ona 
and  all,  "  Dust  thou  art,  and  unto  dust  thou  shalt  return."  But  in  another  case 
we  may  venture  to  contradict  even  Solomon :  for  if  we  consider  the  words  of  our 
text  in  another  view,  all  do  not  go  to  one  place;  it  is  true,  all  are  buried  in  the 
grave  either  of  earth  or  water,  but  then  after  death  comes  judgment;  death  gives 
the  decisive,  the  separating  blow.  Suppose,  then,  in  our  enlarging  on  the  text, 
we  should  confine  the  word  "  all  "  to  the  unregenerate ;  these,  indeed,  die  when 
they  will,  all  go  to  one  place.  0  awful  thought  I  and  yet  it  is  a  certain  truth,  all 
on  earth  must  go  to  one  place;  if  we  live  like  devils  here,  we  must  go  to,  and  be 
with  them,  when  we  die,  for  ever  I  A  blessed  minister  of  Christ,  in  Scotland,  told 
me  a  story  he  knew  for  truth,  of  a  dreadful  answer  a  poor  creature  gave  on  her 
deathbed.  This  person  when  dying  was  asked  by  a  minister,  "  Where  do  you  hope 
to  go  when  you  die?"  Says  she,  "  I  do  not  care  where  I  go."  "What,"  says 
he,  "  do  not  you  care  whether  you  go  to  heaven  or  hell?"  "  No,"  says  she;  "  I 
do  not  care  whither  I  go."  "  But,"  says  he,  "if  you  were  put  to  your  choice, 
where  would  you  go?"    Says  she,  "To  hell."    To  that  he  replied,  "Are  you 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tm. 


mad— wUl  you  go  to  hell?"  "  Yes,"  says  she,  *'  I  will."  "  Why  so?"  says  he. 
"  Why,"  says  she,  "  all  my  relations  are  there."  But  I  have  another  place  to  tell 
you  of,  and  another  sort  of  people  to  speak  of,  who  shall  all,  as  well  as  those 
I  have  spoken  of,  go  to  one  place;  blessed  is  it  to  live  in  God.  When  death 
closes  the  eyes,  an  actual  separation  is  made,  and  instead  of  hearing  "  Depart,  ye 
cursed,"  they  will  hear,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  My  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom 
prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  If  you  ask  where  that  place 
is?  I  answer,  to  heaven;  if  you  ask  to  whom  they  shall  go?  I  answer,  to  the 
spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect;  and,  what  will  be  best  of  all,  to  Jesus  Christ, 
the  heavenly  Inheritance.  If  we  were  not  to  go  to  Him,  what  would  heaven  be? 
If  we  were  not  to  see  Him,  what  would  glory  be?     (G.  Whitefield,  M,A,) 

Vers.  10-12.  That  which  hath  been  is  named  already,  and  it  is  known  that  it 
is  man. — Solomon's  dark  ideas  of  life: — He  says  in  effect — I.  Fate  is  fixsd. 
•*  That  which  hath  been."  Everything  is  fate.  Most  men  feel  this  at  times.  Do 
you  ever  say,  I  must  obey  my  destiny?  It  is  no  use  contending  with  fate.  Mine 
is  an  unlucky  star.  There  is  some  truth  in  this  idea.  Christ  taught  a  pre- 
ordination in  all  events.  But  His  fate  was  moral,  not  mechanical;  not  a  blind 
destiny,  but  a  wise  decree.  II.  Man  is  feeble.  "  Neither  may  he  contend  with 
Him  that  is  mightier  than  he."  And  Christless  humanity  is  a  very  feeble  thing. 
His  bodily  frame  is  feeble.  An  insect's  sting  has  been  known  to  consign  it  to 
dissolution.  Man's  intellect  is  feeble;  still  the  human  intellect  can  do  something 
great  in  connection  with  Christ.  III.  Joy  is  futile  (ver.  11).  What  the  better  is 
man  for  all  he  has?  What  the  better  for  his  wealth,  his  reputation,  his  philo- 
sophy? IV.  Life  is  fleeting.  It  "  is  a  vain  life,"  and  all  its  days  are  a 
shadow.  A  shadow  is  the  nearest  thing  to  anility.  A  cloud  may  catch  the  eye, 
and  its  changing  views  and  figures  may  give  amusement  for  a  few  minutes — a 
shadow,  who  notes  it  or  records  it?  V,  The  future  is  enigmatic.  "  Who  can 
tell  what  shall  be  after  him  under  the  sun?"  (J.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Seeing  there 
be  many  things  that  increase  vanity,  what  is  man  the  better! — How  is  the 
adherent  vanity  of  every  condition  most  effectually  abated  by  serious  godliness  ?— 
I.  EvBEY  condition  IS  CLOGGED  WITH  VANITY.  1.  God  never  made  the  world, 
nor  any  condition  in  it,  to  be  a  place  of  rest  and  satisfaction.  And  since  sin  hath 
eo  far  marred  the  beauty  of  the  universe,  there  is  a  judicial  vanity  upon  the  whole 
creation  (Rom.  viii.  20).  2.  We  know  but  very  little  of  the  true  nature  of  things,  nor 
of  ourselves,  nor  of  our  temptations,  nor  of  our  interests  (Job  viii.  9).  3.  That  little 
that  we  do  know  of  anything,  we  come  so  droppingly  to  the  knowledge  of  it  that, 
ere  we  can  lay  things  together,  so  as  to  compare  them,  and  separate  them,  smd 
sort  them,  and  compound  them,  so  as  to  make  a  judgment,  either  things  them- 
selves or  our  circumstances  are  altered,  or  upon  alteration.     II.  All  things  om 

THIS    SIDE   religion,    WHEREBY   MEN   ENDEAVOUR   TO   GET   ABOVE   VANITY,    INCREASE    IT. 

The  multiplication  of  cyphers  amounts  to  less  than  nothing.  Can  anything  of  the 
world  supply  the  soul  with  grace,  satisfy  the  desires  in  so  much  as  any  one  thing, 
or  fill  any  one  faculty  of  the  soul  to  satisfaction?  Can  the  world  fill  the  mind 
with  heavenly  light,  or  the  will  with  heavenly  love,  or  the  conscience  with  that 
"peace  that  passeth  understanding"?    III.  It  is  only  serious  godliness  that 

CAN  ANY  WHIT  REALLY  ABATE  THE  VANITY  THAT  CLEAVES  TO  EVERY  CONDITION.   To 

hate  sin  and  love  holiness;  to  live  a  life  of  faith,  in  dependence  upon  God  and 
resignation  to  Him;  to  live  above  the  transports  of  hopes  and  fears  about  things 
temporal;  in  short,  to  be  blessings  to  the  world  while  we  live,  and  to  be  blessed 
with  God  when  we  die  :  this  is  the  business  and  fruit  of  serious  godliness ;  and  this 
alone  is  that  which  at  present  can  effectually  abate  the  vexatious  vanities  which 
every  condition  swarms  with.  1.  Serious  godliness  will  make  your  present  con- 
dition good  for  you,  be  it  what  it  will.  2.  Serious  godliness  will  make  every 
change  of  condition  good  for  us,  though  the  change  shock  both  nature  and  grace. 
3.  Serious  godliness  will  make  relative  afflictions  (which  of  all  outward  afflictions 
are  the  most  grievous)  good  for  us ;  and  nothing  else  can  do  it.  4.  Serious  godliness 
will  make  horror  of  conscience  and  Divine  desertions  good  for  us.  5.  Serious 
godliness  will  force  something  good  out  of  the  evil  of  sin.  The  rising  ground  of  a 
dunghill  may  help  to  raise  thy  flight  towards  heaven.  6.  Though  to  your  own 
apprehension  you  have  no  faith  at  all  to  believe  any  one  word  of  all  this,  nor  any 
skill  at  all  to  know  what  to  do;  yet  serious  godliness  will  make  all  this  good  to 
thee.  TJeee : — 1.  Set  your  hearts  upon  serious  godliness.  2.  Learn  to  be  more  than 
harely  contented  with  your  present  condition.    8.  Make  oonscienee  of  both  sorts  ot 


CHAP.  Ti.]  ECCLESIASTES.  Itf 

duties, — religious  and  worldly;  and  allot  fit  and  distinct  times  for  heavenly  and 
worldly  business.  But  with  this  difference,  let  religion  mix  iteelf  with  worldly 
business,  and  spare  not;  but  let  not  the  world  break  in  upon  religion,  lest  it  spoil 
it.  4.  Whatever  you  do  for  the  bettering  of  your  condition,  follow  Ood,  but  do 
not  go  before  Him.     (S.  Annetley,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  12.  For  who  knoweth  what  is  good  for  man  in  thii  life,  all  the  dayi  of 
hia  vain  life  which  he  tpendeth  as  a  shadow  1  for  who  can  tell  a  man  what  shall  be 
after  him  under  the  sun! — The  known  and  the  unknown: — I.  Odb  lifb  which  wb 
DO  KNOW.  1.  We  do  know  something  about  our  present  life,  and  what  we  do 
know  about  it  should  humble  us  in  the  presence  of  Ood,  for,  first,  it  is  very  short. 
Solomon  here  says  nothing  about  the  "  years  "  of  our  life,  he  only  counts  it  by 
"  days."  The  older  a  man  grows,  the  shorter  his  life  seems  to  be;  and  it  was 
because  Jacob  was  so  old,  and  had  seen  so  many  days,  that  he  called  them  "  few 
and  evil."  Children  and  youths  appear  to  have  lived  a  long  while;  men  seem  to 
have  lived  only  a  short  time;  older  men  an  even  shorter  period;  but  the  oldest 
man  reckons  his  days  the  shortest  of  all.  The  calculations  about  time  are  very 
singular,  for  length  seems  to  turn  to  shortness.  Well,  then,  since  I  sun  such  an 
ephemeral  creature,  the  insect  of  an  hour,  an  aphis  creeping  on  the  bay  leaf  of 
existence,  how  dare  I  think  of  contending  with  Thee,  my  God,  who  wast  long 
before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth,  and  who  wilt  be  when  mountains  are 
gone  for  ever?  2.  Our  life,  besides  being  very  short,  is  singularly  uncertain.  Do 
not  let  ua  forget  this  fact,  for  if  the  thought  be  unpleasant  to  us,  it  is  because 
there  ia  something  wrong  within.  The  child  of  God,  when  he  is  right  with  his 
Father,  forgets  the  uncertainty,  and  remembers  that  all  things  are  certain  in  the 
eternal  piu-pose  of  God,  and  that  all  changes  are  wisely  ordained,  and  therefore 
the  uncertainty  causes  him  no  distress.  Yet  should  this  truth  make  us  live  with 
much  caution,  and  tenderness,  and  watchfulness.  8.  Yet  again,  our  life  is  not 
only  short  and  uncertain,  but,  while  we  have  it,  it  is  singularly  unsubstantial. 
Many  things  which  we  gain  for  ourselves  with  much  care  are  very  unsatisfying. 
Have  you  never  heard  the  rich  man  confess  that  it  is  so?  Have  you  never  heard 
the  scholar,  who  has  won  many  degrees,  and  stood  at  the  head  of  his  profession, 
declare  that  the  more  he  knew  the  less  he  felt  that  he  knew?  "  Verily,  every 
man  at  his  best  state  is  altogether  vanity."  Now,  look  ye;  it  ill  becomes  us,' 
whose  lives  are  so  uncertain,  and  whose  lives  at  the  best  are  so  unsubstantial,  to 
begin  to  contend  with  Him  in  whose  hand  our  breath  is,  and  whose  are  all  our 
ways.  It  were  better  far  for  us  at  once  to  submit  otirselves  to  Him,  and  to  learn 
that  in  Him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being.  It  were  well  for  us  also  to 
give  the  Lord  all  this  poor  life,  be  it  what  it  may,  to  be  used  in  His  service,  and 
to  be  spent  for  His  glory.  II.  What  is  best  fob  os  is  not  known  to  us.  Sup-, 
pose  we  ask  the  question,  "  Which  is  the  better  for  a  man  in  this  life — wealth  or 
poverty?" — what  will  be  the  answer?  Wealth — the  eye  is  dazzled  with  it;  ilr 
brings  many  comforts  and  luxuries;  yet  there  is  a  passage  of  Scripture  as  true 
now  as  when  the  Master  first  uttered  it,  "  How  hard  is  it  for  them  that  trust  in 
riches  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  Who  knows,  then,  that  wealth  is  a 
good  thing?  Do  any  choose  poverty?  There  is  as  much  to  be  said  concerning  the 
evils  and  the  disadvantages  of  poverty  as  there  is  to  be  said  on  the  other  side. 
He  that  lacks  bread  is  often  tempted  to  envy,  and  to  many  other  sins  which  he 
might  not  have  committed  if  he  had  not  been  in  that  state.  It  is  not  for  you  or  for 
me  to  be  able  to  balance  the  answer  to  this  question,  "  Who  knoweth  what  is 
good  for  man  in  this  life, — wealth  or  poverty?"  There  was  a  wise  man  who  said, 
"  Give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches,"  and  he  seemed  to  have  hit  the  golden 
mean.  Now,  take  another  question, — that  of  health  or  sickness :  "  What  is  good 
for  man  in  this  life?"  It  seems  at  first  that  it  must  be  good  for  a  man  to  enjoy 
the  best  of  health,  and  the  most  sprightly  vigour,  does  it  not?  We  all  wish  for 
it,  and  we  are  allowed  to  do  so.  Nobody  thinks  that  sickness  and  disease  can 
really  be  in  themselves  a  blessing.  Yet  have  I  seen  some  gentle,  holy,  devout, 
matured  spirits  that  could  not  have  come  from  any  garden  but  that  which  was 
walled  around  with  disease,  and  grief,  and  woe.  The  graver's  best  art  has  been 
spent  upon  them,  the  graving  tool  has  been  very  sharp,  and  the  hammer  has 
smitten  them  very  terribly.  They  had  never  been  such  marvels  of  the  Master's 
grace  if  it  had  not  been  for  their  sorrows.  Yet  I  doubt  not  that  there 
are  other  spirits  who  have  been  brought  nearer  to  God  in  their  gladsome- 
seas,  saints  who,  for  very  gratitude  to  God  for  their  overflowing  delights,  and^ 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

the  mercies  of  this  life,  and  the  health  of  their  bodies,  have  been  drawn  and 
bound  more  closely  to  their  God.  So  is  it  with  regard  to  publicity  or  obscurity. 
There  are  some  persons  whose  graces  are  best  seen  in  public,  and  they  minister 
for  the  good  of  others;  they  have  to  be  thankful  that  God  has  placed  them  in  a 
position  where  they  are  seen,  for  it  has  led  them  to  watchfulness  and  carefulness. 
The  vows  of  God  have  been  upon  them,  and  they  have  been  helped  in  their  way 
to  heaven  by  the  very  responsibilities  of  their  public  position.  But,  sometimes, 
I  have  wished  that  I  might  be  a  violet,  that  I  might  shed  my  perfume  in  soma 
lowly  spot  hidden  by  leaves.  Yet  I  do  not  doubt  that  obscurity  has  its  ills  as 
well,  and  that  many  a  man  would  fain  escape  from  it.  "  Who  knoweth  what  ia 
good  for  man  in  this  life?"  All  depends  upon  your  being  where  God  puts  you. 
Any  man  is  safe  if  he  ia  where  God  would  have  him  to  be,  and  if  he  trembles  for 
his  own  safety,  and  clings  to  the  Strong  for  strength;  but  those  who  think  that 
their  position  gives  them  immunity  from  danger  are  in  peril  already  from  their 
fancied  security.  I  believe  that  the  same  question  might  be  asked  concerning 
Christian  experience:  *' Who  knoweth  what  is  good  for  man  in  this  life?"  It 
must  be  good  to  be  full  of  high  joys, — to  rise  to  the  loftiest  heights  of  holiness 
and  blessedness,  must  it  not?  Tes,  yes,  but  it  may  be  good  to  go  down  into  ths 
Tery  deeps,  and  to  know  the  plague  of  your  own  heart,  and  to  feel  the  scourging 
of  your  Father's  rod.  '*  Who  knoweth  what  is  good  for  man  in  this  life?"  A 
mixed  experience  may  be  better  than  one  uniform  level  either  of  height  or  depth. 
III.  The  text  mentions  another  form  of  our  ignorance,  and  it  is  this,  what  shall 
BE  AFTSB  DS  18  NOT  KNOWN  TO  cs  :  "  for  who  can  tell  a  man  what  shall  be  after 
him  under  the  sun?"  1.  The  question  may  mean,  "  Who  can  tell  a  man  what 
he  will  yet  go  through  in  this  life?"  He  is  now  well-to-do,  he  is  prosperous,  ha 
is  healthy;  but  who  can  tell  him  what  is  yet  to  come  to  him?  No  one;  therefore, 
let  not  the  rich  man  glory  in  the  wealth  which  may  take  to  itself  wings  and  &j 
sway.  Let  not  the  man  who  is  honoured  by  his  fellows  reckon  that  the  appIauM 
of  men  is  any  more  substantial  than  a  vapour.  2.  But  I  think  that  the  text  has 
its  main  bearing  on  what  will  happen  after  death.  That  we  must  leave  in  ths 
Lord's  hands;  it  is  not  for  us  to  know  what  will  be  done  when  we  are  called 
•way  from  the  earth.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  secret  of  a  happy  life: — The 
question  of  the  text  has  been  repeated  many  a  time  since  the  days  of  Solomon, 
end  various  replies  have  been  given  by  teachers  who  have  claimed  to  be  the  leaders 
of  men.  The  Stoic  has  replied, — "  The  chief  good  for  man  in  this  life  is  to  take 
everything  just  as  it  comes,  and  maintain  stolid  indifference, — be  like  a  cold, 
unmoved  statue  amid  the  storms  or  amid  the  sunshine  of  life."  The  Epicure 
replies, — "Eat  and  drink  and  be  merry;  indulge  your  senses,  and  banish  all 
thought  and  care  about  the  future."  The  Miser  replies, — "  Get  all  you  can,  and 
give  as  little  as  you  can;  heap  up  riches,  and  treasure  up  the  choicest  thing 
earth  can  yield — ^gold."  The  Ascetic  says, — "  Treat  the  world  with  disdain  and 
scorn,  retreat  from  it,  and  trample  upon  all  its  associations  and  joys."  Let  us 
answer  the  question  of  the  text  in  the  light  of  the  New  Testament,  and  we  shall 
see  that  it  is  good  for  man  in  this  life — I.  To  expebiinge  beoonoiliation  to 
God.  The  prodigal  could  not  be  happy  while  away  from  his  father,  while  at 
variance  with  him;  and  man  cannot  be  happy  away  from  God,  while  at  variance 
with  Him.  Enmity  in  the  heart  is  a  disturber  of  joy;  and  for  a  man  to  have 
enmity  in  his  heart  against  God  cannot  be  good,  cannot  conduce  to  joy.  It  it 
good  for  a  man  to  surrender  himself,  and  be  on  the  Lord's  side;  then,  instead 
of  discord,  there  will  be  harmony  in  his  heart;  instead  of  conflict,  there  will  be 
peace  in  his  mind.  II.  To  exbboisb  bssionation  to  God.  A  man  cannot  have 
a  happy  life  who  denies  God,  or  who  harbours  doubt  about  His  goodness  and 
wisdom,  whose  will  runs  counter  to  the  Divine  will.  This  is  the  mind  that  was 
in  Christ;  He  surrendered  to  the  will  of  His  Father  constantly  and  entirely. 
in.  To  expect  BESTIT0T1ON  FBOM  GoD.  We  shall  only  find  rest  and  joy  by 
believing  in  the  final  triumph  of  goodness,  in  the  ultimate  reconciliation  of  all 
the  apparent  discrepancies  of  the  now.  These  things  comprise  the  good  for  man 
in  this  life,  and  will  make  human  existence  not  only  tolerable,  but  happy.  (F.  W. 
Brown.)  On  our  ignorance  of  good  and  evil  in  this  life: — ^Let  us  inquire  what 
account  oan  be  given  of  our  present  ignorance,  respecting  what  ia  good  for  us  in 
this  life;  whether  nothing  be  left,  but  only  to  wander  in  uncertainty  amidst  this 
darkness ,  and  to  lament  it  as  the  sad  consequence  of  our  fallen  state ;  or  whether 
such  instructions  may  not  be  derived  from  it,  as  give  ground  for  acknowledging 
llhat  by  this,  at  by  all  its  other  appointments,  the  wisdom  of  Providence  brings 


«HAi«.  •»!.]  ECCLESIASTES.  145 

real  good  out  of  seeming  evil.  I.  Illustbatb  thb  dootbinb  of  tbb  tbzt.  When 
we  review  the  course  of  human  affairs,  one  of  the  first  objects  which  everywhere 
attracts  our  notice  is  the  mistaken  judgment  of  men  concerning  their  own  interest. 
The  sore  evil  which  Solomon  long  ago  remarked  with  respect  to  riches,  of  their 
being  kept  by  the  owners  thereof  to  their  hurt,  takes  place  equally  with  respecl 
to  dominion  and  power,  and  all  the  splendid  objects  and  high  stations  of  life. 
"We  every  day  behold  men  climbing,  by  painful  steps,  to  that  dangerous  heighfc 
which,  in  the  end,  renders  their  fall  more  severe,  and  their  ruin  more  con- 
spicuous. But  it  is  not  to  high  stations  that  the  doctrine  of  the  text  ie  limited. 
Around  us,  we  everywhere  behold  a  busy  multitude.  Restless  and  uneasy  in  their 
present  situation,  they  are  incessantly  employed  in  accomplishing  a  change  of  it; 
and  as  soon  as  their  wish  is  fulfilled,  we  discern,  by  their  behavioiu',  that  they 
are  as  dissatisfied  as  they  were  before.  Where  they  expected  to  have  found  a 
paradise,  they  find  a  desert.  The  man  of  business  pines  for  leisure.  The  leisure 
for  which  he  had  longed  proves  an  irksome  gloom;  and,  through  want  of  employ- 
ment,  he  languishes,  sickens,  and  dies.  The  man  of  retirement  fancies  no  state 
to  be  so  happy  as  that  of  active  life.  But  he  has  not  engaged  long  in  the  tumults 
and  contests  of  the  world,  until  he  finds  cause  to  look  back  with  regret  on  the 
ealm  hours  of  his  former  privacy  and  retreat.  Beauty,  wit,  eloquence,  and  fame, 
are  eagerly  desired  by  persons  in  every  rank  of  life.  They  are  the  parent's  fondest 
wish  for  his  child;  the  ambition  of  the  young,  and  the  admiration  of  the  old. 
And  yet  in  what  numberless  instances  have  they  proved,  to  those  who  possessed 
them,  no  other  than  shining  snares;  seductions  to  vice,  instigations  to  folly,  and, 
in  the  end,  sources  of  misery?  II.  The  fact  then  being  undoubtedly  certain  that 
it  i«  common  for  men  to  be  deceived  in  their  prospects  of  happiness,  let  us  next 
INQOIBB  INTO  THB  CAUSES  OF  THAT  DECEPTION.  Let  US  attend  to  those  peculiar 
circumstances  in  our  state,  which  render  us  such  incompetent  judges  of  future 
good  or  evil  in  this  life.  1.  We  are  not  sufficiently  acquainted  with  ourselves  to 
foresee  our  future  feelings.  Our  minds,  like  our  bodies,  undergo  great  alteration, 
from  the  situations  into  which  they  are  thrown,  and  the  progressive  stages  of  life 
through  which  they  pass.  Hence,  concerning  any  condition  which  is  yet  untried, 
we  conjecture  with  much  uncertainty.  2.  But  next,  supposing  our  knowledge  of 
ourselves  sufficient  to  direct  us  in  the  choice  of  happiness,  yet  still  we  are  liable 
to  err,  from  our  ignorance  of  the  connections  which  subsist  between  our  own 
oondition  and  that  of  others.  8.  Farther,  as  we  are  ignorant  of  the  events  which 
will  arise  from  the  combination  of  our  circumstances  with  those  of  others,  so 
we  are  equally  ignorant  of  the  influence  which  the  present  transactions  of  our 
life  may  have  upon  those  which  are  future.  4.  Supposing  every  other  incapacity 
to  be  removed,  our  ignorance  of  the  dangers  to  which  our  spiritual  state  ia 
ezpoeed  would  disqualify  us  for  judging  soundly  concerning  our  true  happiness. 
Can  you  esteem  him  prosperous  who  is  raised  to  a  situation  which  flatters  his  pas- 
sions, but  which  corrupts  his  principles,  disorders  his  temper,  and,  finally,  oversets 
his  virtue?  In  the  ardour  of  pursuit,  how  little  are  these  effects  foreseen  1  And 
yet  how  often  are  they  accomplished  by  a  change  of  oondition  I  Latent  corrup- 
tions are  called  forth;  seeds  of  guilt  are  quickened  into  life;  a  growth  of  crimes 
arises,  which,  had  it  not  been  for  the  fatal  culture  of  prosperity,  would  never 
b*Te  seen  the  light.  III.  Instead  of  only  lamenting  this  ignorance,  let  us  con- 
8IDBB  HOW  IT  OUGHT  TO  BB  IHPBOTBD ;  what  duties  it  suggcsts,  and  what  wise  ends 
it  was  intended  by  Providence  to  promote.  1.  Let  this  doctrine  teach  us  to 
proceed  with  caution  and  circumspection  through  a  world  where  evil  so  fre* 
quently  lurks  under  the  form  of  good.  2.  Let  our  ignorance  of  what  is  good  or 
evil  correct  anxiety  about  worldly  success.  S.  Let  our  ignorance  of  good  and 
evil  determine  us  to  follow  Providence,  and  to  resign  ourselves  to  God.  Study 
to  aoquire  an  interest  in  the  Divine  favour;  and  you  may  safely  surrender  your- 
selves to  the  Divine  administration.  4.  Let  our  ignorance  of  what  is  good  for  us 
in  this  life  prevent  our  taking  any  unlawful  step  in  order  to  compass  our  most 
IsTOurite  designs.  6.  Let  our  imperfect  knowledge  of  what  is  good  or  evil  attach 
OS  the  more  to  those  few  things  concerning  which  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  their 
being  truly  good.  6.  Let  our  ignorance  of  what  is  good  or  evil  here  below  lead 
our  thoughts  and  desires  to  a  better  world.  (H.  Blair,  D.D.)  Object  of  human  i 
life: — What  is  the  use,  the  meaning  of  my  life?  For  what  purpose  was  it  given?  ! 
To  what  end  shall  it  aim?  Is  life  an  instrument  ministering  to  some  solid  pur-  I 
pose,  or  a  fleeting  phantasmagoria,  that  leaves  no  lasting  result?  Such,  sub-  | 
•iantially,  was  the  inquiry  of  tiie  Preacher  three  thousand  years  ago,  and  which  i 

10 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vri. 

demands  an  answer  still  from  every  new  generation  and  living  man.  Have  any  of 
you  been  willing  to  go  on,  without  settling,  or  even  starting,  this  great  query; 
willing  to  sail  in  this  frail  boat  of  our  mortality  down  the  stream  of  years,  without 
knowing  whither,  or  desiring  any  port?  If  you  reflect,  you  cannot  proceed  in 
this  ignorant  and  accidental  way.  "  Commune  with  your  own  heart,"  and  you 
will  not  be  satisfied  till  some  object  rise  broad  as  the  horizon  before  you,  em- 
bracing all  lesser  occupations  and  pursuits  in  its  glorious  compass,  and  enabling 
you,  by  clear  and  continual  reference,  to  shape  every  daily  trifle  and  detail,  other- 
wise worthless  or  perhaps  unmeaning,  towards  its  accomplishment.  To  this 
single  point  I  would  hold  your  attention,  to  decide  whether  such  an  object  be 
tfours;  for  in  the  want  of  it  lies,  if  anywhere,  man's  great  fault,  fatal  error, 
unpardonable  sin.  The  principle  may  be  put  into  various  forms  of  statement. 
Tou  may  recur  to  the  old  Preacher's  language,  or  you  may  say  with  the  modern 
catechism,  that  the  **  chief  end  of  man  is  to  glorify  God,  and  enjoy  Him  for 
ever."  Tou  may  speak  in  the  phrase,  rightly  understood,  of  the  philosophy  of 
our  time,  "  Self -culture  ";  or  in  the  phrase,  profoundly  interpreted  of  the  philan- 
thropy of  our  time,  "Beform."  All  these  mean  essentially  the  same  thing, 
requiring  in  the  analysis  the  same  elements.  This  solution  of  our  problem  carries 
us  into  no  fanatical  austerity,  does  not  abolish  the  minor  callings  and  aims  of 
activity,  of  study,  or  traffic,  or  mechanical  skill,  in  this  world.  It  but  leavens 
them  with  a  higher  spirit,  and  turns  them  to  a  nobler  influence.  It  polarizes  the 
wandering  and  aimless  affairs  of  time  and  sense,  makes  all  our  dealings  not  only 
serve  temporary  purposes,  but,  in  their  effects  on  our  hearts,  point  to  permanent 
results.  It  puts  a  new  question  into  oiu*  mouth,  which  the  changeling  slave  of 
temporal  expedients  and  little  ends  does  not  think  to  ask, — a  question  that  rightly 
comes  up  with  every  transaction  we  engage  in,  every  conversation  we  hold,  every 
plan  we  form,  every  measure  we  execute, — Are  we  promoting  here  in  this  very 
thing,  however  great  or  trifling  it  may  look,  the  object  of  life?  If  not  promoting, 
but  defeating  this  object,  it  bids  us  beware  and  abstain.  It  does  not  shut  us  up 
in  a  narrow  place  of  hermit  stiffness  and  seclusion,  but  goee  with  us  over  the 
broad  ocean  of  worldly  business,  only  asking  that  it  may  stand  a  Divine  pilot  at 
the  helm.  It  lays  no  bar  upon  pleasure,  tasted  with  an  innocent  moderation, 
but  it  converts  pleasure  itself  from  the  foe  into  the  friend  and  servant,  as  it  well 
may  be  the  true  friend  and  faithful  servant,  of  virtue.  It  does  not  condemn  the 
acquisition  of  wealth  as  a  means  which  may  accomplish  the  very  ends  of  religion; 
but  it  inquires  with  a  searching  whisper  at  the  very  confessional  of  man's  spirit, 
and  which,  beside  God,  only  the  man  himself  can  hear,  whether  the  heart  is 
given  to  wealth,  delighting  in  it,  with  supreme  habitual  desire;  or,  on  the  con- 
trary, as  a  steward  regarding  it  as  God's  loan,  as  a  worshipper  proffering  it  for  his 
sacrifice;  while,  on  the  wings  of  its  chief  and  ardent  aspiration,  itself  ever  rises 
to  him  as  the  Infinite  Good,  takes  the  breath  of  His  Spirit  in  return  for  the 
incense  of  its  praise,  and,  from  the  elevation  of  its  prayer,  brings  dowa  the 
counsels  of  His  majestic  law  upon  its  mortal  conduct.     (C7.  A,  Bartol.) 


CHAPTER  Vn. 


YsB.  1.  A  good  najQe  is  better  than  precions  ointment. — The  fragrance  of  moral 
worth: — ^I.  Thb  elements  of  a  good  name.  It  is  something  more  than  being 
**  well  spoken  of,"  for  often  **  what  is  highly  esteemed  among  men  is  abomination 
in  the  sight  of  God."  It  is  not  even  a  good  reputation,  unless  that  be  sustained 
by  the  good  reality.  Socrates,  on  being  asked  how  one  might  obtain  a  good  name, 
replied,  "  Study  really  to  be  what  you  wish  to  be  accounted."  "  A  good  name  " 
is  enshrined  in  *'  whatsoever  things  are  honest,  lovely,  and  of  good  report  " — a 
**  name  "  not  only  remembered  on  earth,  but  "  written  in  heaven."  It  includes — 
1.  Piety.  2.  Diligence.  8.  Integrity.  4.  Patriotism.  5.  Benevolence.  6.  Devoted- 
nesB.  II.  Thb  supbeioe  valdh  op  a  good  name.  "  Better  than  precious  ointment." 
1.  It  is  rarer.  Rare  as  some  oriental  unguents  are,  they  are  plentiful  compared 
with  Scripture's  "  good  name  "  in  this  pretentious  world.  2.  It  is  more  costly. 
Not  a  little  did  the  alabaster  box  of  ointment,  poured  by  one  on  the  Saviour,  cost; 
but  who  shall  estimate  the  expense  at  which  a  rebel  against  God  has  been  so 


CHAP,  vn.]  ECCLESIASTES.  147 

changed  in  state  and  character  as  to  have  a  name,  absolutely  fragrant,  not  only 
in  a  sinful  earth,  but  throughout  a  sinless  universe?  The  sufferings  of  Jesus  and 
the   influences  of  the  Spirit  indicate  a  cost  which  no  arithmetic  can  compute. 

3.  It  is  more  enduring  than  ointment.  The  latter's  delectable  properties  will  soon 
evaporate,  as  if  it  had  never  been;  but  a  "  good  name,"  earned  in  *'  doing  the  will 
of  God,  abideth  for  ever."     "  The  righteous  shall  be  in  everlasting  remembrance." 

4.  Than  ointment,  such  a  "  good  name  "  is  "  better  "  for  the  individual  himself. 
It  inlays  the  soul  with  satisfaction.  "  A  good  man  shall  be  satisfied,"  not  with, 
but  "  from  himself."  He  secures  a  signal  luxury.  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give 
tlian  to  receive."  Such  "  a  good  name  "  is  "  better  "  for  society.  It  is  stimulat- 
ing. Barnabas'g  "  good  name  "  was  a  passport  to  Saul  of  Tarsus  among  the 
Churches.  Paul's  "  good  name  "  was  all  that  was  needed  to  secure  large  donations 
for  the  poor  saints  at  Jerusalem.  Such  a  name  is  absolutely  beneficial.  What 
woes  have  not  fled  before  its  odoriferous  power  1  What  songs  has  it  not  kindled 
on  lips  unaccustomed  to  "  the  music  of  the  spheres  "I  {A.  M.  Stalker.)  A  welU 
grounded  good  name: — The  improving  of  our  life  in  this  world  to  the  raising  up 
a  well-grounded  good  name  and  savoury  character  in  it,  is  the  best  balance  for 
the  present  for  the  vanity  and  misery  attending  our  life,  better  than  the  most 
savoury  earthly  things.  I.  Some  things  supposed  in  the  doctrine.  1.  There  ia 
a  vanity  and  misery  that  is  the  inseparable  attendant  of  human  life  in  this  world. 
No  man  in  life  is  free  of  it,  nor  can  be  (Ps.  xxxix.  6).  2.  Every  man  will  find 
himself  obliged  to  seek  for  some  allay  of  that  vanity  and  misery  of  life,  that  ha 
may  be  enabled  to  comport  with  it  (Ps.  vi.  6).  This  makes  a  busy  world,  every 
one  seeking  something  to  make  his  hard  seat  soft.  3.  It  is  natiu-al  for  men  to  seek 
an  allay  to  the  vanity  and  misery  of  life  in  earthly  things  (Ps.  vi.  6).  4.  But 
the  best  of  eanbly  things  will  make  but  a  sorry  plaster  for  that  sore;  they  will 
not  be  able  to  balance  the  vanity  and  misery  of  life,  but  with  them  all  life  may 
be  rendered  sapless,  through  the  predominant  vanity  and  misery  of  it.  5.  Howbeit, 
the  improving  of  life  to  the  raising  a  vv  ell-grounded  good  name,  will  balance  the 
vanity  and  misery  of  life  effectually ;  so  that  he  who  has  reached  that  kind  of 
living,  has  what  is  well  worth  the  enduring  all  the  miseries  of  life  for.     There  ia 

•an  excellency  and  good  in  it  that  downweigh  all  the  evils  attending  life. 
11.  What  is  the  well-grodnded  good  name  that  is  the  balance  of  the  vaniti 
AND  MISERY  OF  HUMAN  LIFE?  1.  It  is  the  name  of  religion,  and  no  less;  for  there 
is  nothing  truly  good  separate  from  religion  (Matt.  vii.  18).  2.  It  is  raised  on 
the  reality  of  religion,  and  no  less;  for  a  mere  show  of  religion  is  but  a  vain 
and  empty  thing,  which  will  dwindle  to  nothing  with  other  vanities.  We  may 
take  up  that  good  name  in  three  parts.  (1)  Friend  of  God  (James  ii.  28). 
(2)  Faithful  to  the  Lord  (Acts  xvi.  15).  That  designs  the  man's  temper  and 
way  towards  God.  (3)  Useful  to  men,  serving  his  generation  (Acts  xiii.  35). 
That  designs  the  man's  temper  and  way  towards  his  neighbour.     III.  What  is 

the    improvement    of   LIFE    WHEREBY   THAT    GOOD    NAME    MAY    BE    RAISED.       1.    ImprOVe 

your  life  by  a  personal  and  saving  entering  into  the  covenant  of  grace,  and 
uniting  with  Christ,  by  believing  on  His  name.  2.  Improve  your  life  to  a  living 
a  life  of  faith  in  this  world.  (1)  Let  it  be  a  life  of  believing  and  dependence 
on  God  in  Christ  for  all.  (2)  Let  it  be  a  life  of  devotion,  despise  and  scoff  at  it 
who  will.  In  respect  of  the  truths  of  God  made  known  to  you,  reckoning  every 
truth  sacred,  and  cleaving  thereto  against  all  hazards  and  opposition  (Prov. 
xxiii.  23).  In  respect  of  the  worship  of  God,  in  secret,  private,  and  public, 
showing  reverence  in  the  frame  of  your  heart  and  outward  gestures;  so  shall  ya 
have  the  good  name.  (3)  Let  it  be  a  life  of  heavenly-mindedness  and  contempt 
of  the  world  (Phil.  iii.  20).  So  Enoch  got  the  good  name  of  walking  with  God 
(Gen.  V.  24),  and  the  worthies  (Heb.  xi.  13-16).  (4)  Let  it  be  a  life  of  Christian 
deportment  under  trials  and  afflictions  in  life.  So  patience,  resignation,  holy 
cheerfulness  under  the  cross  are  necessary  to  raise  the  good  name  (James  i.  4). 
(5)  Let  it  be  a  life  of  uprightness,  the  same  where  no  eye  sees  you  but  God's, 
as  where  the  eyes  of  men  are  upon  you.  8.  Improve  your  life  to  the  living  of  a 
life  beneficial  to  mankind,  profitable  to  your  fellow-creatures,  diffusing  a  benign 
influence  through  the  world,  as  ye  have  access;  so  that  when  you  are  gone,  tha 
world  may  be  convinced  they  have  lost  a  useful  member  that  sought  their  good; 
so  shall  ye  have  the  good  name,  "  Useful  to  men  "  (Acts  xiii.  36).  (1)  Cast  tha 
world  a  copy  by  your  good  example  (Matt.  v.  16).  Of  devotion  and  piety  towarda 
God,  in  a  strict  and  religious  observance  of  your  duty  towards  Him.  This  will  be 
Ht  ptActical  testimony  for  Him,  a  light  that  will  condemn  the  world's  profane 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  yn. 

contempt  of  Him  (Prov.  xxviii.  4).  Of  exact  justice  and  truth  in  all  your  doings 
and  sayings  with  men  (Zech.  viii.  16).  Of  sobriety  in  moderating  your  own 
passions  with  a  spirit  of  peacefulness,  meekness,  and  forbearance  (Matt.  xi.  29). 
(2)  Be  of  a  beneficent  disposition,  disposed  to  do  good  to  mankind  as  you  haT* 
access  (Gal.  vi.  10).  (8)  Lay  out  yourselves  to  forward  the  usefulnees  of  others 
(1  Cor.  xvi.  10,  11).  (4)  Be  conscientious  in  the  performance  of  the  duties  ol 
your  station  and  relations  (1  Cor.  vii.  24).  It  is  exemplified  in  the  case  of  th* 
priests  (Mai.  ii.  6);  of  wives  (1  Pet.  iii.  1);  and  of  servants  (Tit.  ii.  9,  10).  To 
pretend  to  usefulness  without  our  sphere  is  the  effect  of  pride  and  presumption, 
and  is  the  same  absurdity  in  moral  conduct  as  it  would  be  in  nature  for  the  moon 
and  stars  to  set  up  for  the  rule  of  the  day,  the  sun  contenting  himself  with  tha 
rule  of  the  night.  IV.  Confirm  the  point.  1.  This  improvement  of  life  is  the  beak 
balance  for  the  present,  for  the  vanity  and  misery  of  life.  (1)  Hereby  a  man 
answers  the  end  of  his  creation,  for  which  he  was  sent  into  the  world;  and  surely 
the  reaching  of  such  a  noble  end  is  the  best  balance  for  all  the  hardships  in  the 
way  of  it.  (2)  It  brings  such  a  substantial  and  valuable  good  out  of  our  life  as 
will  downweigh  all  the  inconveniencee  that  attend  our  life  in  the  world.  (8)  It 
brings  such  valuable  good  into  our  life  as  more  than  counterbalanceth  all  the 
vanity  and  misery  of  it.  A  present  comfort  and  satisfaction  within  oneself 
(2  Cor.  i.  12).  A  future  prospect,  namely,  of  complete  happiness,  whioh 
must  needs  turn  the  scales  entirely,  be  the  miseries  of  life  what  they  will  (Bom. 
viii.  35-39).  (4)  That  good  name  well  groimded  is  a  thing  that  may  cost  muoh 
indeed,  but  it  cannot  be  too  dear  bought  (Prov.  xxiii.  28).  Whatever  it  ooet 
you,  you  will  be  gainers,  if  ye  get  it  (Phil.  iii.  8).  2.  This  improvement  of  life  is 
better  than  the  best  and  most  savoury  earthly  things.  (1)  It  will  give  a  greater 
pleasure  to  the  mind  than  any  earthly  thing  can  do  (Prov.  iii.  17 ;  Ps.  iv.  7 ;  2  Cor. 
i.  17).  (2)  It  will  last  longer  than  they  will  all  do  (Ps.  cxii.  6).  (3)  It  is  the 
only  thing  we  can  keep  to  ourselves  in  the  world  to  our  advantage  when  we  leave 
the  world.  (4)  The  good  name  will,  after  we  are  away,  be  savoury  in  the  world, 
when  the  things  that  others  set  their  hearts  on  will  make  them  stink  when  they 
are  gone.  (6)  The  good  name  will  go  farther  than  the  beet  and  most  savoury 
things  of  the  earth.  Mary  pours  a  box  of  precious  ointment  on  Christ,  which  no 
doubt  sent  its  savour  through  the  whole  house;  but  Christ  paid  her  for  it  with 
the  good  name  that  should  send  its  savour  through  the  whole  world  (Matt, 
zxvi.  13).  But  ye  may  think  we  can  have  no  hope  that  ever  our  good  name  will 
go  that  wide.  That  is  a  mistake;  for  if  we  raise  ourselves  the  good  name,  it  will 
certainly  be  published  before  all  the  world  at  the  last  day  (Rev.  iii.  6),  and  we 
will  carry  it  over  the  march  betwixt  the  two  worlds  into  the  other  world  (ver.  12). 
(T.  Botton,  D.D.)  A  good  name: — There  are  a  thousand  men  in  our  cities  to-day 
who  are  considering,  "  What  is  the  best  investment  that  I  can  make  of  myself  t 
What  are  the  tools  that  will  cut  my  way  in  life  best?"  It  sounds  to  them  very 
much  like  old-fashioned  preaching  to  say  that  a  good  name  is  the  beet  thing  yoa 
can  have.  Now,  let  us  consider  that  a  little.  In  the  first  place,  what  is  included 
in  a  name?  A  man  that  has  a  name  has  a  character;  and  a  good  name  is  a 
good  character;  but  it  is  more  than  a  good  character;  it  is  a  good  character  with 
a  reputation  that  properly  goes  with  character.  It  is  what  you  are,  and  then  what 
men  think  you  to  be — the  substance  and  the  shadow  both;  for  character  is  what 
a  man  is,  and  what  men  think  him  to  be;  and  when  they  are  coincident,  then 
you  have  the  fulness  of  a  good  name.  In  the  world  at  large,  what  are  the 
elements  of  conduct  which  leave  upon  society  a  kind  of  impression  of  you?  The 
first  foundation  quality  of  manliness  is  truth-speaking.  Then,  perhaps,  next  to 
that  is  justice;  the  sense  of  what  is  right  between  man  and  man;  fairness.  Then 
sincerity.  Then  fidelity.  If  these  are  all  coupled  with  good  sense,  or  common 
sense,  which  is  the  most  uncommon  of  all  sense;  if  these  are  central  to  that 
form  of  intelligence  which  addresses  itself  to  the  capacity  of  the  average  man, 
you  have  a  very  good  foundation  laid.  Men  used,  before  the  era  of  steam,  to 
wearily  tow  their  boats  up  through  the  lower  Ohio,  or  through  the  Mississippi, 
with  a  long  line ;  and  at  night  it  was  not  always  safe  for  them  to  fasten  their  boats 
on  the  bank  while  they  slept,  because  there  was  danger,  from  the  wash  of  the 
underflowing  current,  that  they  would  find  themselves  drifting  and  pulling  a 
tree  after  them.  Therefore  they  sought  out  well-planted,  solid,  enduring  trees  and 
tied  to  them,  and  the  phrase  became  popular,  "  That  man  will  do  to  tie  to  " — that 
is  to  say,  he  has  those  qualities  which  make  it  perfectly  safe  for  you  to  attach 
yourself  to  him.    Kow,  not  only  are  these  foundation  qualities,  but  thej 


CHAP,  vn.]  ECCLESIASTES.  U$ 

qualities  which  tend  to  breed  the  still  higher  elements.  If  with  tubstantial  moral 
exoellenoe  there  comes  industry,  superior  skill,  in  any  and  every  direction,  if  a 
man's  life  leads  him  to  purity  and  benevolence,  then  he  has  gone  up  a  stage 
iiigher.  If  it  is  found,  not  that  the  man  is  obsequious  to  the  sects,  but  that  he  is 
(iod-f earing  in  the  better  sense  of  the  term  fear,  that  he  is  really  a  religious* 
minded  man,  that  he  is  pure  in  his  moral  habits,  though  he  is  deficient  in  his 
enterprise  luid  endeavours,  so  that  his  inspiration  is  not  calculation,  so  that  the 
influence  that  is  working  in  him  is  the  influence  of  the  eternal  and  invisible;  if 
all  these  qualities  in  him  have  been  known  and  tested;  if  it  is  found  that  his 
sincerity  is  not  the  rash  sincerity  of  inexperience,  and  that  it  is  not  the  impulse 
of  an  untutored  and  untrained  generosity;  if  it  is  found  that  these  qualities 
implanted  in  him  have  been  built  upon,  that  they  have  increased,  that  they  have 
had  the  impact  of  storms  upon  them,  and  that  they  have  stood;  if  there  have  been 
inducements  and  temptations  to  abandon  truth  and  justice,  and  sincerity  and 
fidelity,  but  the  man  has  been  mightier  than  the  temptation  or  the  inducement-^ 
then  he  has  built  a  name,  at  least,  which  is  a  tower  of  strength;  and  men  say, 
"  There  is  a  man  for  you."  Now,  how  does  a  man's  name  aSect  his  prosperity? 
It  is  said  that  it  is  better  than  precious  ointment.  Well,  in  the  first  place,  U 
works  in  an  invisible  way,  in  methods  that  men  do  not  account  for.  It  suffuses 
around  about  one  an  atmosphere,  not  very  powerful,  but  yet  very  advantageous, 
in  the  form  of  kind  feelings  and  wishes.  Then  consider  how  a  good  name,  where 
it  is  real,  and  is  fortified  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing,  increases  in  value. 
There  is  no  other  piece  of  property  whose  value  is  enhanced  more  rapidly  than 
this,  because  every  year  that  flows  around  about  a  man  fortifies  the  opinion  of 
men  that  it  is  not  put  on,  that  it  is  not  vincible,  that  it  is  real  and  stable.  Then, 
a  good  name  is  a  legacy.  There  is  many  and  many  a  father  that  has  ruined  a 
son  by  transmitting  money  to  him.  There  is  no  knife  that  is  so  dangerous  as  a 
golden  knife.  But  there  is  no  man  that  ever  hurt  his  son  by  giving  him  a  good 
name — a  name  that  is  a  perpetual  honour;  a  name  such  that  when  it  is  pro- 
nounoed  it  makes  every  one  turn  roiuid  and  say,  "Ah,  that  is  his  son,"  and 
smile  upon  him.  A  good  name  is  worth  a  man's  earning  to  transmit  to  his 
posterity.  And  that  is  not  the  end  of  it,  where  men  are  permitted  to  attain  a 
great  name.  Some  such  we  have  had  in  our  history.  Some  such  appear  in 
every  age  and  generation  in  European  history — some  far  back  over  the  high 
summits  of  the  thousands  of  years  that  have  rolled  between  them  and  us.  But 
some  names  there  are  in  European  history,  and  some  names  there  are  in  American 
history,  that  have  lifted  the  ideal  of  manhood  throughout  the  whole  world.  80  a 
good  name  becomes  a  heritage  not  only  to  one's  children,  to  one's  country,  and  to 
one's  age,  but,  in  the  oases  of  a  few  men,  to  the  race.  (H.  W.  Bsecher.)  A 
good  name: — Hitherto  the  book  has  chiefly  contained  the  diagnosis  of  the  great 
disease.  The  royal  patient  has  passed  before  us  in  every  variety  of  mood,  from 
the  sleepy  collapse  of  one  who  has  eaten  the  fabled  lotus,  up  to  the  frantio 
consciousness  of  a  Hercules  tearing  his  limbs  as  he  tries  to  rend  off  his  robe  of 
fiery  poison.  He  now  comes  to  the  ewe.  He  enumerates  the  prescriptions  which 
he  tried,  and  mentions  their  results.  Solomon's  first  beatitude  is  an  honoiurable 
reputation.  He  knew  what  it  had  been  to  possess  it;  and  he  knew  what  it  was 
to  lose  it.  And  here  he  says,  Happy  is  the  possessor  of  an  untarnished  character! 
so  happy  that  he  cannot  die  too  soon  I  A  name  truly  good  is  the  aroma  from 
virtuous  character.  It  is  a  spontaneous  emanation  from  genuine  excellence.  It  is 
a  reputation  for  whatsoever  things  are  honest,  and  lovely,  and  of  good  report. 
To  secure  a  reputation  there  must  not  only  be  the  genuine  excellence  but  the 
genial  atmosphere.  There  must  be  some  good  men  to  observe  and  appreciate 
the  goodness  while  it  lived,  and  others  to  foster  its  memory  when  gone.  But 
should  both  combine, — the  worth  and  the  appreciation  of  worth, — the  resulting 
good  name  is  better  than  precious  ointment.  Barer  and  more  costly,  it  is  also 
one  of  the  most  salutary  influences  that  can  penetrate  society.  For,  just  as  a 
box  of  spikenard  is  not  only  valuable  to  its  possessor,  but  pre-eminently  precious 
in  its  diffusion;  so,  when  a  name  is  really  good,  it  is  of  unspeakable  service  to  all 
who  are  capable  of  feeling  its  exquisite  inspiration.  And  should  the  Spirit  of 
God  so  replenish  a  man  with  His  gifts  and  graces,  as  to  render  his  name  thus 
wholesome,  better  than  the  day  of  hie  birth  will  be  the  day  of  his  death;  for  at 
death  the  box  is  broken  and  the  sweet  savour  spreads  abroad.  There  is  an  end 
of  the  envy  and  sectarianism  and  jealousy,  the  detraction  and  the  calumny, 
which  often  environ  goodness  when  living;  and  now  that  the  stopper  of  prejudice 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

is  removed,  the  world  fills  with  the  odour  of  the  ointment,  and  thousands  grow 
stronger  and  more  lifesome  for  the  good  name  of  one.  Without  a  good  name  you 
can  possess  little  ascendancy  over  others;  and  when  it  has  not  pioneered  your 
way  and  won  a  prepossession  for  yoiJtrself,  your  patriotic  or  benevolent  intentions 
are  almost  sure  to  be  defeated.  And  yet  it  will  never  do  to  seek  a  good  name  as 
a  primary  object.  Like  trying  to  be  graceful,  the  eSort  to  be  popular  will  make 
you  contemptible.  Take  care  of  your  spirit  and  conduct,  and  your  reputation  will 
take  care  of  itself.  (/.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  The  day  of  death  than  the  day  of 
one's  hirth. — The  day  of  the  Chrietian'e  death: — This  statement  must  be  under- 
stood not  absolutely,  but  conditionally.  It  is  applicable  only  to  those  who  "  dia 
unto  the  Lord,"  and  none  can  do  so  but  those  who  are  sincere  believers  in  Christ, 
the  sinner's  Saviour.  I.  Tbb  dat  of  tbb  Chbistian's  death  brings  delivebancb 
FBOM  all  sdffskino  AND  OBiXF.  The  end  of  a  voyage  is  better  than  the  begin- 
ning, especially  if  it  has  been  a  stormy  one.  Is  not  then  the  day  of  a  Christian's 
death  better  than  the  day  of  his  birth?    II.  In  the  case  of  the  believer  in  Jesus, 

TBB   DAT  OF   DEATH   IS   THE   DAT   OF   FINAL   TRIUMPH   OVER  ALL   SIN.      It   is   the   day   LQ 

which  the  work  of  grace  in  his  soul  is  brought  imto  perfection ;  and  is  not  that  day 
better  than  the  day  of  his  birth?    III.  In  the  case  of  Christ's  followers,  the  dat 

OF  THEIR  DECEASE  INTRODOOBS  THEM  INTO  A  STATE  OF  ENDLESS  REWARD   (Ps.  XXXi.   19; 

1  Pet.  i.  4;  1  Cor.  ii.  9;  Rev.  iii.  21).  (G.  8.  Ingram.)  The  believer's  deathday 
better  than  hit  birthday: — ^Tou  must  have  a  good  name, — ^you  must  be  written 
among  the  living  in  Zion,  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life,  or  else  the  text 
is  not  true  of  you;  and,  alas,  though  the  day  of  your  birth  was  a  bad  day,  the 
day  of  your  death  will  be  a  thousand  times  worse.  But  now,  if  you  are  one  of 
God's  people,  trusting  in  Him,  look  forward  to  the  day  of  your  death  as  being 
better  than  the  day  of  your  birth.  I.  First,  then,  oub  deathdat  is  better  than 
OUB  BiRTHDAT :  and  it  is  so  for  this  among  other  reasons — "  Better  is  the  end  of 
a  thing  than  the  beginning  thereof."  When  we  are  born  we  begin  life,  but  what 
will  that  life  be?  Friends  say,  "  Welcome,  little  stranger."  Ah,  but  what  kind 
of  reception  will  the  stranger  get  when  he  is  no  longer  a  new-comer?  He  who  is 
newly  born  and  is  ordained  to  endure  through  a  long  life  is  like  a  warrior  who 
puts  on  his  harness  for  battle;  and  is  not  he  in  a  better  case  who  puts  it  o3 
because  he  has  won  the  victory?  Ask  any  soldier  which  he  likes  best,  the  first 
shot  in  the  battle  or  the  sound  which  means  "  Cease  firing,  for  the  victory  is 
won."  When  we  were  born  we  set  out  on  our  journey;  but  when  we  die  we  end 
our  weary  march  in  the  Father's  house  above.  Surely  it  is  better  to  have  com© 
to  the  end  of  the  tiresome  pilgrimage  than  to  have  commenced  it.  Better  is  the 
day  of  death  than  our  birthday,  because  about  the  birthday  there  hangs  uncer- 
tainty. I  heard  this  morning  of  a  dear  friend  who  had  fallen  asleep.  When  I 
wrote  to  his  wife  I  said,  "  Concerning  him  we  speak  with  certainty.  You  sorrow 
not  as  those  that  are  without  hope.  A  long  life  of  walking  with  Ood  proved  that 
he  was  one  of  God's  people,  and  we  know  that  for  such  there  remains  joy  without 
temptation,  without  sorrow,  without  end,  for  ever  and  ever."  Oh,  then,  as  much 
as  certainty  is  better  than  uncertainty,  the  day  of  the  saint's  death  is  better  than 
the  day  of  his  birth.  So,  too,  in  things  which  are  certain  the  saint's  deathday  is 
preferable  to  the  beginning  of  life,  for  we  know  that  when  the  child  is  born  he  ia 
born  to  sorrow.  Trials  must  and  will  befall,  and  your  little  one  who  is  born  to-day 
is  born  to  an  inheritance  of  grief,  like  his  father,  like  his  mother,  who  prophesied 
it  as  it  were  by  her  own  pangs.  But  look,  now,  at  the  saint  when  he  dies.  It  is 
absolutely  certain  that  he  has  done  with  sorrow,  done  with  pain.  Now,  surely, 
the  day  in  which  we  are  certain  that  sorrow  is  over  must  be  better  than  the  day 
in  which  we  are  certain  that  sorrow  is  on  the  road.  II.  The  day  of  death  is 
BETTER  TO  THE  BELIEVER  THAN  ALL  HIS  HAPPY  DAYS.  What  Were  his  happy  days? 
I  shall  take  him  as  a  man,  and  I  will  pick  out  some  days  that  are  often  thought 
to  be  happy.  There  is  the  day  of  a  man's  coming  of  age,  when  he  feels  that  he 
is  a  man,  especially  if  he  has  an  estate  to  come  into.  That  is  a  day  of  great 
festivity.  You  have  seen  pictures  of  "  Coming  of  age  in  the  olden  time,"  when 
the  joy  of  the  young  squire  seemed  to  spread  itself  over  all  the  tenants  and  all 
the  farm  labourers  :  everybody  rejoiced.  Ah,  that  is  all  very  well,  but  when 
believers  die  they  do  in  a  far  higher  sense  come  of  age,  and  enter  upon  their 
heavenly  estates.  Then  shall  I  pluck  the  grapes  from  those  vines  that  I  have  read 
of  as  enriching  the  vales  of  Eshcol;  then  shall  I  lie  down  and  drink  full  draughts 
of  the  river  of  God,  which  is  full  of  water;  then  shall  I  know  even  as  I  am  known, 
and  see  no  more  through  a  glass  darkly,  but  face  to  face.     Another  very  happy 


CHAP,  vii.]  ECCLESIASTES.  151 

day  with  a  man  is  the  day  of  his  marriage:  who  does  not  rejoice  then?  What 
cold  heart  is  there  which  does  not  beat  with  joy  on  that  day?  But  on  the  day 
of  death  we  shall  enter  more  fully  into  the  joy  of  our  Lord,  and  into  that  blessed 
marriage  union  which  is  established  between  Him  and  ourselves.  There  are  days 
with  men  in  business  that  are  happy  days,  because  they  are  days  of  gain.  They 
get  some  sudden  windfall,  they  prosper  in  business,  or  perhaps  there'  are  long 
months  of  prosperity  in  which  all  goes  well  with  them,  and  God  is  giving  them 
the  desires  of  their  heart.  But,  oh,  there  is  no  gain  like  the  gain  of  our  departure 
to  the  Father;  the  greatest  of  all  gains  is  that  which  we  shall  know  when  we  pass 
out  of  the  world  of  trouble  into  the  land  of  triumph.  "  To  die  is  gain."  There 
are  days  of  honour,  when  a  man  is  promoted  in  ofiBce,  or  receives  applause  from 
his  fellow-men.  But  what  a  day  of  honour  that  will  be  for  you  and  me  if  we  are 
carried  by  angels  into  Abraham's  bosom  I  Days  of  health  are  happy  days,  too. 
But  what  health  can  equal  the  perfect  wholeness  of  a  spirit  in  whom  the  Good 
Physician  has  displayed  His  utmost  skill?  We  enjoy  very  happy  days  of  social 
friendship,  when  hearts  warm  with  hallowed  intercourse,  when  one  can  sit  a  while 
with  a  friend,  or  rest  in  the  midst  of  one's  family.  Yes,  but  no  day  of  social 
enjoyment  will  match  the  day  of  death.  Some  of  us  expect  to  meet  troops  of 
blessed  ones  that  have  gone  home  long  ago,  whom  we  never  shall  forget.  III.  The 
day  of  a  believer's  death  is  bettes  than  his  holy  days  on  babth.  I  think  that 
the  best  holy  day  I  ever  spent  was  the  day  of  my  conversion.  There  was  a 
novelty  and  freshness  about  that  first  day  which  made  it  like  the  day  in  which 
a  man  first  sees  the  light  after  having  been  long  blind.  Since  then  we  have 
known  many  blessed  days;  our  Sabbaths,  for  instance.  We  can  never  give  up 
the  Lord's  day.  Precious  and  dear  imto  my  soul  are  those  sweet  rests  of  love — 
days  that  God  has  hedged  about  to  make  them  His  own,  that  they  may  be  ours. 
Oh,  our  blessed  Sabbaths  I  Well,  there  is  this  about  the  day  of  one's  death— 
we  shall  then  enter  upon  an  eternal  Sabbath.  Our  commimion  days  have  been 
very  holy  days.  It  has  been  very  sweet  to  sit  at  the  Lord's  table,  and  have 
fellowship  with  Jesus  in  the  breaking  of  bread  and  the  drinking  of  wine;  but 
sweeter  far  will  it  be  to  commune  with  Him  in  the  paradise  above,  and  that  we 
shall  do  on  the  day  of  our  death.  Those  days  have  been  good,  I  am  not  going  to 
depreciate  them,  but  to  bless  the  Lord  for  every  one  of  them.  When  we  say  that 
a  second  thing  is  "  better,"  it  is  supposed  that  the  first  thing  has  some  goodness 
about  it.  Aye,  and  our  holy  days  on  earth  have  been  good;  fit  rehearsals  of  the 
jubilee  beyond  the  river.  When  you  and  I  enter  heaven,  it  will  not  be  going  from 
bad  to  good,  but  from  good  to  better.  The  change  will  be  remarkable,  but  it  will 
not  be  so  great  a  change  as  thoughtless  persons  would  imagine.  First,  there  will 
be  no  change  of  nature.  The  same  nature  which  God  gave  us  when  we  were 
regenerated — the  spiritual  nature — is  that  which  will  enjoy  the  heavenly  state. 
On  earth  we  have  had  good  days,  because  we  have  had  a  good  nature  given  ua 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  we  shall  possess  the  same  nature  above,  only  more  fully 
grown  and  purged  from  all  that  hinders  it.  We  shall  follow  the  same  employments 
above  as  we  have  followed  here.  We  shall  spend  eternity  in  adoring  the  Most  High. 
To  draw  near  to  God  in  communion — that  is  one  of  our  most  blessed  employments. 
We  shall  do  it  there,  and  take  our  fill  of  it.  Nor  is  this  all,  for  we  shall  serve 
God  in  glory.  You  active-spirited  ones,  you  shall  find  an  intense  delight  in 
continuing  to  do  the  same  things  as  to  spirit  as  you  do  here,  namely,  adoring 
and  magnifying  and  spreading  abroad  the  saving  name  of  Jesus  in  whatever 
place  you  may  be.  IV.  The  day  of  a  saint's  death  is  bexteb  than  the  wholb  or 
Eis  DAYS  PCT  TOOETHEB,  bccsuse  his  days  here  are  days  of  dying.  The  moment 
we  begin  to  live  we  commence  to  die.  Death  is  the  end  of  dying.  On  the  day  of  the 
believer's  death  dying  is  for  ever  done  with.  This  life  is  failiue,  disappointment, 
regret.  Such  emotions  are  all  over  when  the  day  of  death  comes,  for  glory  dawns 
upon  us  with  its  satisfaction  and  intense  content.  The  day  of  our  death  will  be 
the  day  of  our  cure.  There  are  some  diseases  which,  in  all  probability,  some  of 
us  never  will  get  quite  rid  of  till  the  last  Physician  comes,  and  He  will  settle 
the  matter.  One  gentle  touch  of  His  hand,  and  we  shall  be  cured  for  ever. 
Our  deathday  will  be  the  loss  of  all  losses.  Life  is  made  up  of  losses,  but  death 
loses  losses.  Life  is  full  of  crosses,  but  death  is  the  cross  that  brings  crosses  to  an 
end.  Death  is  the  last  enemy,  and  turns  out  to  be  the  death  of  every  enemy. 
The  day  of  our  death  is  the  beginning  of  our  best  days.  "  Is  this  to  die?"  said 
one.  ••  Well,  then,"  said  he,  "it  is  worth  while  to  live  even  to  enjoy  the  bliss  of 
dying/*    The  holy  oalm  of  some  and  the  transport  of  others  prove  that  better  « 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rif. 

the  day  of  death  in  their  case  than  the  day  of  birth,  or  all  their  days  on  earth. 
(0.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Of  the  birthday  and  the  dying-day: — To  one  who  has  so  lived 
WM  to  obtain  the  good  name,  his  dying  day  will  be  better  than  his  birthday,  quite 
downweighing  all  the  vanity  and  misery  of  life  in  this  world.  I.  BouB  tbdths 
OONTAINID  IN  THIS  DOCTRINE.  1.  However  men  live,  they  must  die.  2.  The  birth- 
day is  a  good  day,  notwithstanding  all  the  vanity  and  misery  of  human  life.  It 
is  a  good  day  to  the  relations,  notwithstanding  the  bitterness  mixed  with  it 
(John  xvi.  21).  And  so  it  is  to  the  party,  too,  as  an  entrance  on  the  stage  of 
Ufe  whereby  God  is  glorified,  and  one  may  be  prepared  for  a  better  life  (Isa. 
xzzviii.  19).  8.  The  dying-day  is  not  always  so  frightful  as  it  looks;  it  may  be  a 
good  day  too.  As  in  scouring  a  vessel,  sand  and  aehes  first  defiling  it  makes  it  to 
glister;  so  grim  death  brings  in  a  perfect  comeliness.  The  waters  may  be  red  and 
frightful,  where  yet  the  ground  is  good,  and  they  are  but  shallow,  passable  with 
all  safety.  4.  Where  the  dying-day  follows  a  well-improved  life,  it  is  better  than 
the  birthday,  however  it  may  appear.  There  is  this  diSerence  betwixt  them,  tba 
birthday  has  its  fair  side  outmost,  the  dying  day  has  its  fair  side  inmost;  henca 
the  former  begins  with  joy,  but  opens  out  m  much  sorrow;  the  latter  begins  with 
sorrow,  but  opens  out  in  treasinres  of  endless  joy.  And  certainly  it  is  better  to 
step  through  sorrow  into  joy  than  through  joy  into  sorrow.  6.  The  dyin^-day  in 
that  case  is  so  very  far  better  than  the  birthday,  that  it  quite  down  weighs  all  the 
former  vanity  and  misery  of  life.  6.  But  it  will  not  be  so  in  the  case  of  an  ill- 
spent  life.  For  whatever  joy  or  sorrow  they  have  been  born  to  in  this  world,  they 
will  never  taste  of  joy  more,  but  be  overwhelmed  with  floods  of  sorrow  when  once 
their  dying-day  is  come  and  over.  II.  In  what  latitude  this  dootbine  is  to  be 
UMOBBSTOOD.  1.  Ab  to  the  parties,  those  who  have  so  lived  as  to  obtain  the  good 
name.  It  is  to  be  understood  of  them — (1)  Universally,  whatever  different  degrees 
be  among  them  in  the  lustre  of  the  good  name.  (2)  Inclusively,  of  infants  dying 
in  their  infancy,  before  they  are  capable  of  being  faithful  to  God,  or  usefiU  to 
men;  because,  having  the  Spirit  of  Christ  dwelling  in  them,  whereby  they  are 
united  to  Christ,  they  are  the  friends  of  God.  (S)  Exclusively  of  all  others.  They 
that  have  not  so  lived  as  to  obtain  the  good  name  have  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this 
matter  (Prov.  xiv.  82).  2.  As  to  the  points  in  comparison,  the  birthday  and  the 
dying-day,  it  is  to  be  understood  of  them — (1)  In  their  formal  notion  as  days  of 
passing  into  a  new  world.  It  is  better  for  him  when  he  has  got  the  good  name  to 
leave  bis  body  a  corpse,  than  it  was  to  leave  the  womb  of  his  mother  when  he 
was  a  ripe  infant.  (2)  In  all  circumstances  whatsoever.  The  saint's  dying-day 
compared  with  his  birthday  does  so  preponderate,  that  no  circumstances  what- 
•oflver  can  cast  the  balance;  suppose  him  born  healthy  and  vigorous,  dying  in  the 
most  languishing  manner,  or  in  the  greatest  agonies;  born  heir  to  an  estate  or  a 
crown,  dying  poor  at  a  dyke-side,  neglected  of  all;  yet  the  day  of  his  death,  m 
spite  of  all  these  advantages  of  his  birth,  is  better  than  the  day  of  his  birth.  3.  As 
to  the  preference,  it  stands  in  two  points.  (1)  The  advantages  of  the  saint's  dying- 
day  are  preferable  to  the  advantages  of  his  birthday.  (2)  The  advantages  of  the 
saint's  dying-day  downweigh  all  the  disadvantages  of  his  birthday.  III.  Demon- 
ITBATE  the  tbdth  OF  THIS  PABADOX,  this  unlikely  tale.  That  the  saint's  dying-day 
is  better  than  his  birthday.  1.  The  day  of  the  saint's  birth  clothed  him  with  a 
body  of  weak  and  frail  flesh,  and  so  clogged  him ;  the  day  of  his  death  looses  the 
clog,  and  sets  him  free,  clothing  him  with  a  house  that  will  never  clog  him 
(2  Cor.  V.  1-8).  2.  The  day  of  his  birth  clogged  him  with  a  body  of  sin ;  the  day 
of  his  death  sets  him  quite  free  from  it,  and  brings  him  into  a  state  morally 
perfect  (Heb.  xii.  23).  8.  The  day  of  the  saint's  death  carries  him  into  a  better 
world  than  the  day  of  his  birth  did.  (1)  The  day  of  his  birth  brought  him  into 
a  world  of  uncertainty,  set  him  down  on  slippery  ground;  the  day  of  hie  death 
takes  him  into  a  world  of  certainty,  sets  his  feet  on  a  rock.  (2)  The  day  of  his 
birth  brought  him  into  a  world  of  sin  and  defilement;  but  the  day  of  his  death 
brings  him  into  a  world  of  purity  (Heb.  xii.  23).  (3)  The  day  of  his  birth  brought 
him  into  a  world  of  toil  and  labour;  but  the  day  of  his  death  brings  him  into  a 
world  of  rest  (Rev,  xiv.  13).  (4)  The  day  of  his  birth  brought  him  into  a  world 
of  care  and  sorrow;  but  the  day  of  his  death  brings  him  into  a  world  of  ease  and 
,  joy  (Matt.  xxY.  21).  (6)  The  day  of  his  birth  brought  him  into  a  world  of 
disappointment;  but  the  day  of  his  death  brings  him  into  a  world  surmounting 
expectation  (1  Cor.  ii.  9).  (6)  The  day  of  his  burth  brought  him  into  a  world  of 
death;  but  the  day  of  his  death  takes  him  into  a  world  of  life  (Matt.  x.  30). 
A*  Th*  day  of  hia  death  tettles  him  among  better  company  than  the  day  of  his 


CHAP.  Tn.]  ECCLESIASTES.  ICj" 

' 3 

birth  did  (Heb.  xii.  22).  (1)  The  day  of  his  birth  brought  him  at  most  into  but ' 
a  small  oompany  of  brothers  and  sisters;  perhaps  he  was  an  eldest  child,  or  an 
only  one;  but  the  day  of  his  death  lands  him  in  a  nimierous  family,  whereof  each 
one  with  him  calls  God  in  Christ  Father  (Rev.  xiv.  1).  Whatever  welcome  he 
had  in  the  day  of  his  birth  from  neighbours  or  relations,  the  joy  was  but  on  one 
side;  though  they  rejoiced  in  him,  he  could  not  rejoice  in  them,  for  he  knew  them 
not;  but  in  the  day  of  his  death  the  joy  will  be  mutual;  he  that  in  the  day  of  his 
birth  was  not  equal  to  imperfect  men  will  in  the  day  of  his  death  be  equal  to  the 
angels.  He  will  know  God  and  Christ,  the  saints,  and  angels,  and  will  rejoice 
in  them,  as  they  will  rejoice  in  him.  Whatever  welcome  he  had  into  the  world 
in  the  day  of  his  birth,  he  had  much  uncomfortable  society  there  in  the  iayi  of 
his  after  life  that  made  him  often  see  himself  in  his  neighbourhood  in  the  world, 
as  in  Mesech  and  Kedar  (Ps.  oxx.  6),  yea,  dwelling  among  lions'  dens  and  moun- 
tains of  leopards  (Cant.  iv.  8).  But  in  the  day  of  his  death  he  will  bid  an  eternal 
farewell  to  all  imcomfortable  society,  and  never  see  more  any  in  whom  he  will 
not  be  comforted  to  be  with  them.  6.  The  day  of  his  death  brings  him  into  a 
better  state  than  the  day  of  his  birth  did.  (1)  The  day  of  his  birth  sets  him 
down  in  a  state  of  imperfection,  natural  and  moral;  the  day  of  hie  death  advances 
him  to  a  state  of  perfection  of  both  kinds  (Heb.  xii.  23).  (2)  The  day  of  his  birth 
brought  him  into  a  state  of  probation  and  trial;  but  the  day  of  his  death  brings 
him  into  a  state  of  retribution  and  recompense  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  (8)  The  day  of  his 
birth  brought  him  into  a  state  of  changes,  but  the  day  of  his  death  brings  him 
into  an  imalterable  state  (Bev.  ill.  12).  6.  The  day  of  the  saint's  death  brings 
him  to,  and  settles  him  in  better  exercise  and  employment  than  the  day  of  his 
birth  did.  He  wUl  spend  his  eternity  in  the  other  world  better  than  he  did  his 
time  in  this  world,  how  well  soever  he  spent  it  (Bev.  iv.  8).  (T.  Bouton,  D.D.) 
Comparative  estimate  of  life  and  death: — What  are  those  circimistanoes  of  the 
Christian  which  give  superiority  to  the  time  of  death — which  justify  us  in 
adopting  the  sentiment  of  the  text  as  our  own?     I.  Thebb  is  an  essential  diffbb- 

BNCB    in    the    condition    OF    THE    CeEISTIAN    AT    THE    PERIODS    OP    HIS    EAELIE3T    AND 

LATEST  CONSCIOUSNESS.  At  the  day  of  birth  you  cannot  distinguish  the  future 
king  from  the  peasant;  the  hero  from  the  coward;  the  philosopher  from  the 
clown;  the  Christian  from  the  infidel.  There  is  a  negation  of  character  common 
to  them  all;  and  the  positive  qualities  of  each  are  not  to  be  distinguished  from 
the  other.  What  is  there  to  give  value  to  the  birthday  of  such  a  being?  We  pass 
over  the  years  of  childhood  and  youth,  during  which  the  human  being  is  acquiring 
varied  knowledge,  to  the  period  when  character  is  more  fully  developed.  He  feels 
his  responsibility,  and  knows  himself  to  be  a  sinner;  but  his  heart  has  never 
submitted  to  Divine  authority,  he  has  never  sought  for  the  pardon  of  his  sins,  he 
is  an  utter  stranger  to  the  grace  of  the  Gospel.  What  reason  has  such  a  man 
to  exult  in  the  day  of  his  birth?  to  commemorate  it  as  a  joyous  event?  But 
imagine  him  spared  by  the  goodness  of  God  imtil  he  is  brought  to  repentance. 
He  ia  in  an  essentially  different  position  to  that  in  which  he  was  on  the  day  of  his 
birth,  not  only  by  the  enlargement  of  his  faculties,  and  the  exercise  of  his  affec- 
tions, but  they  are  directed  to  nobler  objects;  he  knows  and  loves  the  character 
of  God,  he  aspires  after  the  enjoyment  of  Him,  looks  forward  to  enduring  happiness 
with  Him  after  the  toils  and  sufferings  of  earthly  existence,  and  his  faith  becomes 
"the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  On  the 
day  of  his  birth  be  was  the  mere  creature  of  flesh  and  sense,  but  now  he  is  born 
of  the  Spirit,  and  he  lives  by  faith.  Oh,  let  death  come  when  it  may  to  the 
Christian,  his  dying  day  will  be  better  than  his  birthday.    11.  Lifb  is  a  period  of 

PROBATION,  THB   SU00B88FDL  TERMINATION  OF   WHICH   IS   BETTER  THAN   ITS   COMMENCE- 

MBNT.  It  requires  the  utmost  circumspection  and  watchfulnesG — the  strictest 
examination  of  our  motives  and  feelings,  to  preserve  the  evidences  of  our  Christian 
oharaoter  bright  and  unclouded.  There  are  few  Christians,  faithful  to  their  own 
hearts,  who  have  not  had  seasons  of  darkness  and  gloominess,  and  been  distressed 
with  various  doubts  and  fears.  And  when  once  these  arise  in  the  mind,  they 
impart  a  character  of  uncertainty  to  our  personal  salvation.  But  as  we  draw 
nearer  to  the  goal,  our  confidence  increases;  the  decline  of  a  Christian's  life  is 
ordinarily  marked  by  greater  stability  of  mind — by  a  less  wavering  faith.  God 
has  been,  in  times  past,  better  to  us  than  our  fears;  He  has  frequently  perfected 
His  strength  in  our  weakness,  and  carried  us  unexpectedly  through  deep  waters 
of  affliction ;  the  ultimate  issue  appears  more  certain ;  we  are  more  habitually 
ymflHmj  on  the  arm  of  omnipotence.    And  when  we  come  to  die,  with  our  souls 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tu" 

awake  to  our  real  condition,  conscious  that  we  have  been  upheld  to  the  last 
monient,  a  vigorous  faith  may  enable  the  Christian  to  say,  with  the  apostle,  in  the 
near  prospect  of  death,  "  I  have  fought  the  good  fight,"  etc.  We  mean  not  to 
Bay  that  every  successful  competitor  has  a  feeling  of  triumph  in  the  dying  hour. 
The  shout  of  victory  may  not  be  heard  on  this  side  the  stream  of  death;  but, 
when  he  has  passed  through  its  fiood,  and  reached  the  opposite  bank,  his  redeemed 
Boul  will  be  attuned  to  a  song  of  glorious  and  everlasting  triumph.     III.  If  wb 

CONSIDER  THE  EVILS  TO  WHICH  THE  CHRISTIAN  IS  EXPOSED  IN  LIFE,  WE  SHALL  SEE  HE 
HAS   REASON    TO   REGARD   THE   DAT   OF   DEATH  AS   BETTER  THAN    THE    OAT   OF   HIS    BIRTH. 

On  this  side  death  there  are  bitter  herbs  for  medicine,  suitable  to  imperfect  and 
diseased  conditions  of  life;  but  on  the  other  side  are  the  fruits  of  paradise,  not  to 

'  correct  the  tendencies  of  an  evil  nature,  but  to  feed  the  soul,  to  nourish  it  up 
unto  everlasting  blessedness.  IV.  The  present  life  is  to  the  Christian  a 
PERIOD  of  imperfect  enjotment.  Here  he  is,  at  a  distance  from  home,  from  his 
Father's  house,  in  which  there  are  many  mansions;  here  his  graces  are  imperfect, 
and  constitute  very  limited  channels  of  happiness  to  his  spirit;  here  he  cannot 
always  enjoy  God.     His  weak  faith  fails  to  realize  the  loveliness  and  perfections 

'  of  Jehovah.  Here  he  cannot  at  all  times  hold  fellowship  with  the  Saviour;  it  is 
interrupted  by  doubts  and  fears — by  imworthy  suspicions  and  criminal  feelings. 
Here  he  knows  but  in  part,  sees  but  through  a  glass  darkly,  and  this  state  of 
imperfection  will  continue  imtil  the  period  of  death.  The  better  country  which 
the  Christian  seeks  is  a  heavenly  coimtry — it  is  an  incorruptible,  undefiled, 
unfading  inheritance,  not  to  be  realized  in  mortal  fiesh — ^not  to  be  reached  until 
the  spirit,  freed  from  the  bonds  of  earth,  ascends  to  God  who  gave  it. 
(S.  Summer*.) 

t 

;  Vers.  2-4.  It  is  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  mourning,  than  to  go  to  the  hoose 
of  feasting. — On  the  benefits  to  be  derived  froin  the  house  of  mourning: — It 
is  evident  that  the  wise  man  does  not  prefer  sorrow,  upon  its  own  account, 
to  mirth;  or  represent  sadness  as  a  state  more  eligible  than  joy.  He  considers 
it  in  the  light  of  discipline  only.     He  views  it  with  reference  to  an  end.     The 

>  true  scope  of  his  doctrine  in  this  passage  is,  that  there  is  a  certain  temper  and 
Btate  of  heart,  which  is  of  far  greater  consequence  to  real  happiness,  than  the 
habitual    indulgence   of   giddy   and   thoughtless    mirth;    that   for   the   attainment 

'  and  cultivation  of  this  temper,  frequent  returns  of  grave  reflection  are  necessary ; 
that,  upon  this  account,  it  is  profitable  to  give  admission  to  those  views  of 
human   distress   which   tend   to   awaken   such  reflection   in   the   mind;   and   that 

.  thus,  from  the  vicissitudes  of  sorrow,  which  we  either  experience  in  our  own 
lot,  or  sympathize  with  in  the  lot  of  others,  much  wisdom  and  improvement 
may  be  derived.     I  begin   by   observing,   that  the  temper  recommended  in   the 

k  text  suite  the  present  constitution  of  things  in  this  world.  Had  man  been 
destined  for  a  course  of  undisturbed  enjoyment,  perpetual  gaiety  would  then  have 

''  corresponded  to  his  state;  and  pensive  thought  have  been  an  unnatural  intru- 
Bion.      But  in  a   state  where  all   is  chequered   and  mixed,   where   there  is  no 

^  prosperity  without  a  reverse,  and  no  joy  without  its  attending  griefs,  where  from  the 

.^ouseof  feasting  all  must,  atone  time  or  other,  pass  into  the  house  of  mourning,  it 

'  would  be  equally  unnatural  if  no  admission  were  given  to  grave  reflection.  It  is 
proper  also  to  observe,  that  as  the  sadness  of  the  countenance  has,  in  our  present 

.situation,  a  proper  and  natural  place;  so  it  is  requisite  to  the  true  enjoyment  of 
pleasure.  It  is  only  the  interposal  of  serious  and  thoughtful  hours  that  can  give  any 
lively  sensations  to  the  returns  of  joy.  Having  premised  these  observations,  I  pro- 
ceed to  point  out  the  direct  effects  of  a  proper  attention  to  the  distresses  of  life  upon 
our  moral  and  religious  character. — 1.  The  house  of  mourning  is  calculated  to 
give  a  proper  check  to  our  natural  thoughtlessness  and  levity.  When  soma 
affecting  incident  presents  a  strong  discovery  of  the  deceitfulness  of  all  worldly 
joy,  and  rouses  our  sensibility  to  human  woe;  when  we  behold  those  with  whom 
we  had  lately  mingled  in  the  house  of  feasting,  simk  by  some  of  the  sudden 
vicissitudes  of  life  into  the  vale  of  misery;  or  when,  in  sad  silence,  we  stand 
by  the  friend  whom  we  had  loved  as  oiir  own  soul,  stretched  on  the  bed  of 
death;  then  is  the  season  when  the  world  begins  to  appear  in  a  new  light; 
when  the  heart  opens  to  virtuoTis  sentiments,  and  is  led  into  that  train  of  reflec- 
tion which  ought  to  direct  life.  He  who  before  knew  not  what  it  was  to  com- 
mune with  hifl  heart  on  any  serious  subject,  now  puts  the  question  to  himself, 
For  what  purpose  he  was  sent  forth   into  this   mortal,   transitory   state:   what 


CHAP,  vn.]  ECCLESIASTES.  155 

his  late  is  likely  to  be  when  it  concludes ;  and  what  judgment  he  ought  to  form 
of  those  pleasures  which  amuse  for  a  little,  but  which,  he  now  sees,  cannot 
save  the  heart  from  anguish  in  the  evil  day?  2.  Impressions  of  this  nature  not 
only  produce  moral  seriousness,  but  awaken  sentiments  of  piety,  and  bring 
men  into  the  sanctuary  of  religion.  Formerly  we  were  taught,  but  now  we 
see,  we  feel,  how  much  we  stand  in  need  of  an  Almighty  Protector,  amidst  the 
changes  of  this  vain  world.  Our  soul  cleaves  to  Him  who  despises  not,  nor 
abhors  the  affliction  of  the  afflicted.  Prayer  flows  forth  of  its  own  accord  from 
the  relenting  heart,  that  He  may  be  our  God,  and  the  God  of  our  friends  in 
distress;  that  He  may  never  forsake  us  while  we  are  sojourning  in  this  land  of 
pilgrimage;  may  strengthen  us  imder  its  calamities.  The  discoveries  of  His 
mercy,  which  He  has  made  in  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  are  viewed  with  joy,  as 
so  many  rays  of  light  sent  down  from  above  to  dispel,  in  some  degree,  the 
surroimding  gloom.  A  Mediator  and  Intercessor  with  the  Sovereign  of  the 
universe,  appear  comfortable  names;  and  the  resurrection  of  the  just  becomes 
the  powerful  cordial  of  grief.  3.  Such  serious  sentiments  produce  the  happiest 
eflect  upon  our  disposition  towards  our  fellow-creatures,  as  well  as  towards  God. 
It  is  a  common  and  just  observation,  that  they  who  have  lived  always  in 
affluence  and  ease,  strangers  to  the  miseries  of  life,  are  liable  to  contract  hard- 
cess  of  heart  with  respect  to  all  the  concerns  of  others.  By  the  experience  of 
distress,  this  arrogant  insensibility  of  temper  is  most  effectually  corrected;  as 
the  remembrance  of  our  own  sufferings  naturally  prompts  us  to  feel  for  others 
when  they  suffer.  But  if  Providence  has  been  so  kind  as  not  to  subject  us  to 
much  of  this  discipline  in  our  own  lot,  let  us  draw  improvement  from  the 
harder  lot  of  others.  Let  us  sometimes  step  aside  from  the  smooth  and  flowery 
paths  in  which  we  are  permitted  to  walk,  in  order  to  view  the  toilsome  march 
of  our  fellows  through  the  thorny  desert.  By  voluntarily  going  into  the  house 
of  mourning;  by  yielding  to  the  sentiments  which  it  excites,  and  mingling  our 
tears  with  those  of  the  afflicted,  we  shall  acquire  that  humane  sensibUity  which 
is  one  of  the  highest  ornaments  of  the  nature  of  man.  4.  The  disposition  recom- 
mended in  the  text,  not  only  improves  us  in  piety  and  humanity,  but  likewise 
assists  us  in  self-government,  and  the  due  moderation  of  our  desires.  The  house 
of  mourning  is  the  school  of  temperance  and  sobriety.  Thou  who  wouldst  act 
like  a  wise  man,  and  build  thy  house  on  the  rock,  and  not  on  the  sand,  con- 
template human  life  not  only  in  the  sunshine,  but  in  the  shade.  Frequent  tha 
house  of  mourning,  as  well  as  the  house  of  mirth.  Study  the  nature  of  that 
state  in  which  thou  art  placed;  and  balance  its  joys  with  its  sorrows.  Thou 
seest  that  the  cup  which  is  held  forth  to  the  whole  human  race,  is  mixed.  Of 
its  bitter  ingredients,  expect  that  thou  art  to  drink  thy  portion.  Thou  seest  the 
storm  hovering  everywhere  in  the  clouds  around  thee.  Be  not  surprised  if  on 
thy  head  it  shall  break.  Lower,  therefore,  thy  sails.  Dismiss  thy  florid  hopes; 
and  come  forth  prepared  either  to  act  or  to  suffer,  according  as  Heaven  shall 
decree.  Thus  shalt  thou  be  excited  to  take  the  properest  measures  for  defence, 
by  endeavouring  to  secure  an  interest  in  His  favour,  who,  in  the  time  of  trouble, 
can  hide  thee  in  His  pavilion.  Thy  mind  shall  adjust  itself  to  follow  the  order 
of  His  providence.  Thou  shalt  be  enabled,  with  equanimity  and  steadiness,  to 
hold  thy  course  through  life.  6.  By  accustoming  ourselves  to  such  serious  views 
of  life,  oMi  excessive  fondness  for  life  itself  will  be  moderated,  and  our  minds 
gradually  formed  to  wish  and  to  long  for  a  better  world.  If  we  know  that  our 
continuance  here  is  to  be  short,  and  that  we  are  intended  by  oiu*  Maker  for  a 
more  lasting  state,  and  for  employments  of  a  nature  altogether  different  from 
those  which  now  occupy  the  busy,  or  amuse  the  vain,  we  must  surely  be 
convinced  that  it  is  of  the  highest  consequence  to  prepare  ourselves  for  so 
important  a  change.  This  view  of  our  duty  is  frequently  held  up  to  us  in  the 
sacred  writings;  and  hence  religion  becomes,  though  not  a  morose,  yet  a  grave 
and  solemn  principle,  calling  off  the  attention  of  men  from  light  pursuits  to  those 
which  are  of  eternal  moment.  (H.  Blair,  D.D.).  The  house  of  mourning: — 
Jesus,  our  Almighty  Saviour,  authoritative  Teacher  and  perfect  Exemplar, 
attended  houses  of  feasting  sometimes,  but  ever  seemed  more  ready  to  go  to, 
and  more  at  home  in,  houses  of  mourning.  His  example  suggests  that  while  it 
may  be  good  to  visit  the  former,  it  is  better  to  visit  the  latter.  I.  It  is  better  to 
go  to  the  house  of  mourning,  than  to  the  house  of  feasting,  because  we  can  okt 
HOSE  good  theee.  We  may  get  less  good  for  the  body,  but  we  shall  get  more 
good  for  the  soul.    We  may  get  less  to  minister  to  our  present  pleasure,  but 


''156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  vii. 

i 

\  we  shall  get  more  that  will  minister  to  our  future  well-being.  It  is  a  school- 
room in  which  great  moral  and  spiritual  lessons  are  very  lucidly  and  very 
impressively  taught.  1.  There  we  may  thoroughly  learn  the  terrible  evil  of 
sin.  2.  There  we  best  learn  the  vanity  of  the  creature.  8.  There  we  may  best 
learn  the  value  of  time.  4.  There  we  may  learn  the  present  blessedness  of  true 
personal  religion.  II.  It  is  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  mourning  than  to  the 
house  of  feasting,  becadse  we  oan  do  mobe  good  there.  Every  man  should 
be  as  much  concerned  about  doing  good  as  about  getting  good.  In  fact,  doing 
good  is  one  of  the  most  certain  ways  of  getting  good.  But,  even  apart  from  that, 
the  man  who  has  received  great  good  from  God  should  endeavour  to  dispense 
good  to  his  fellow-men,  and  we  can  generally  do  more  good  in  the  house  of 
mourning  than  we  can  in  the  house  of  feasting.  For  in  the  latter  men  are  so 
given  over  to  the  business  of  pampering  their  bodies  that  they  are  usually  little 
disposed  to  heed  anything  you  may  venture  to  say  about  the  salvation  of  their 
souls.  But  in  the  house  of  moxu'ning,  where  poverty,  sickness  or  death  has  been 
busy,  if  you  have  shown  an  immistakable  interest  in  the  family's  temporal  wel- 
fare, you  will  usually  find  them  disposed  to  listen  to  what  you  may  have  to  say 
about  their  spiritual  and  eternal  welfare.  Thus  shall  you  scatter  much  sorrow 
and  let  in  much  peace  and  comfort.  Thus  shall  you  benefit  your  fellow- 
creatures,  enrich  your  own  souls,  and  glorify  that  Christ  who  died  for  your 
salvation.  (John  Morgan.)  On  the  dangers  of  pleasure: — Sensual  pleasures  are 
among  the  most  dangerous  enemies  of  virtue.  But,  ardent  and  prone  to  excess, 
,  they  require  to  be  subjected  to  a  prudent  and  holy  vigilance,  and  to  be  indulged 
i  with  caution  and  circumspection.     I.  Much  indulgence  in  pleasure  tends  to 

;   WBAKES    THAT    WATCHFULNESS    AND    GUARD,     WHICH    A     WISE    AND     GOOD     MAN     WILL 

i  FIND  IT  NECESSARY  ALWAYS  TO  MAINTAIN  OVER  HIMSELF.  Pleasure  Seldom  admits 
I  wisdom  of  her  party.  The  wand  of  truth  which  she  carries,  would  destroy  all 
I  those  unreal  images  and  airy  visions  with  which  the  deluded  voluptuary  is  sur- 
roimded.  There  the  heart  is  thrown  loose  from  restraint,  and  laid  6pen  to  the 
lively  and  warm  impression  of  every  seducing  idea.  Men  abandon  themselves 
without  suspicion  to  the  sweet  neglect,  and  through  the  unguarded  avenues  enter 
a  multitude  of  enemies,  who  were  only  lying  in  wait  for  this  decisive  moment. 
II.  Pleasure  not  only  impairs  the  guard  which  a  wise  man  should  constantly 

MAINTAIN    OVER   HIS    HEART,    BUT    OFTEN    LAYS    IT   OPEN    TO   TOO    STRONG   TEMPTATIONS. 

Of  this  David  affords  us  an  instructive  and  affecting  example.  How  much  more 
certainly  will  pleasure  corrupt  those,  who  enter  its  purlieus  without  circum- 
spection, and  expose  themselves  imguarded  to  all  the  dangerous  force  of  its 
temptations  in  the  house  of  feasting  I  Here  example,  and  sympathy,  all  the  arts 
of  seduction,  all  the  allurements  of  ingenuity,  all  the  decorations  that  wit  can 
give  to  vice,  imite  their  influence  to  betray  the  heart.     III.  Scenes  of  pleasurb 

AND  indulgence  TEND  TO  IMPAIR  THE  SENTIMENTS  OF  PIETY  TOWARDS  GOD.  A  con- 
tinual succession  of  pleasures  is  apt  to  efface  from  the  mind  that  sentiment  of 
dependence  upon  the  Creator,  so  becoming  the  state  of  man.  The  mind, 
humbled  by  suffering,  enjoys  the  smallest  mercy  with  gratitude;  while  the 
greatest,  by  proud  prosperity,  is  first  abused  and  then  forgotten.     IV.  High  and 

CONSTANT  PLEASURES  ARE  UNFRIENDLY  TO  THE  EXERCISE  OF  THE  BENEVOLENT  AFFEC- 
TIONS. They  tend  to  contract  and  harden  the  heart.  The  importunities  of 
want,  the  sighs  of  wretchedness,  are  unwelcome  intruders  on  the  joj'ous  festival. 
Who  are  disposed  to  seek  out  the  retreats  of  sorrow  and  distress,  and  to  administer 
there  those  consolations  which  the  afflicted  require?  Are  they  not  those  who 
have  themselves  been  educated  in  the  school  of  misforttme,  and  who  have  been 
taught,  by  theur  own  feelings,  the  claims  of  suffering  humanity?  Are  they  not 
those  who  often  turn  aside  from  the  prosperous  course,  which  Providence  permits 
them  to  hold  through  life,  to  visit  the  receptacles  of  human  wretchedness,  and 
to  carry  comfort  into  the  habitations  of  penury  and  disease?  Who  learn  there 
to  feel  what  is  due  to  human  nature?  Pleasure  is  selfish.  Attracting  everything 
into  its  own  centre,  it  loosens  the  bonds  of  society.  Hence  it  is  that  luxury 
hastens  the  ruin  of  nations  in  proportion  as  it  makes  the  love  of  pleasure  the 
reigning  character  of  their  manners.  V.  Pleasurbb  tend  to  enfeeble  thh 
FBiNOiFLB  OP  SELF-GOVERNMENT.  Self-denial  is  necessary  to  self-command.  In 
the  midst  of  moderate  enjoyments  and  corrected  appetites,  the  sentiments  of 
duty  have  opportunity  firmly  to  root  themselves,  and  to  acquire  ascendancy 
among  the  other  principles  of  the  heart,  unrestrained  indulgence  corrupts  them. 
I  >"<*  the  pMsioDSi  growing  inflamed  and  ungovernable,  hurry  away  their  weak 


CHAP.  Til.]  ECCLESIASTES.  157 

captives  over  all  the  fences  of  prudence  as  well  as  of  piety.  Moderation  and  self- 
denial  are  necessary  to  restore  the  tone  of  nature,  and  to  create  the  highest  relish 
even  of  the  pleasures  of  sense.    VI.  Pleascee  is  onfavoceable  to  those  serious 

REFLECTIONS  UPON  OUR  MORTAL  CONDITION,  AND  THE  INSTABILITY  OF  ALL  HUMAN 
THINGS,    80    USEFUL   TO    PREPARE   THE    SOUL    FOR   HEE    IMMOETAL    DESTINATION.      It    il 

only  when  we  recollect  that  we  are  united  to  this  world  by  a  momentary  tie,  and 
to  the  next  by  eternal  relations,  that  we  shall  despise,  as  reasonable  beings  ought 
to  do,  the  fantastic  occupations  of  the  dissipated  and  the  idle,  and  cultivate  tha 
solid  and  immortal  hopes  of  piety.  These  are  leasona  not  taught  in  the  hous*  of 
seating.     (S.  B.  Smith,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  Sorrow  it  better  than  laughter. — Sorrow  better  than  laughter: — Sorrow 
is  set  over  against  laughter;  the  house  of  mourning  over  against  the  house  o( 
mirth;  the  rebuke  of  the  wise  over  against  the  music  of  fools;  the  day  of  death 
over  against  the  day  of  birth :  all  tending,  however,  to  this,  that  trouble  and  grief 
have  their  bright  side,  and  that  giddy  indulgence  and  merriment  carry  a  sting.. 

I.  BOREOW    IB    BETTER   THAN    LAUGHTER,    BECAUSE   A    GREAT    PART   OF   WOBLDLT   HBRBI- 

HBNT  18  NO  BETTER  THAN  FOLLT.  Here  we  take  no  extreme  or  ascetic  groimd.  It 
would  be  morose  and  imchristian  to  scowl  at  the  gambols  of  infancy,  or  to  hush 
the  laugh  of  youth,  on  fit  occasions.  Cheerfulneas  is  nowhere  forbidden,  even  in 
adult  life;  and  we  perhaps  oSend  God  oftener  by  our  frowns  than  by  our  smiles. 
But  you  all  know  that  there  is  a  merriment  which  admits  no  rule,  confines  itself 
by  no  limit,  shocks  every  maxim  even  of  sober  reason,  absorbs  the  whole  powers, 
wastes  the  time,  and  debilitates  the  intellect,  even  if  it  do  not  lead  to  supreme 
love    of    pleasure,    profligacy,    and    general    intemperance    and    voluptuousness. 

II.  Sorrow  is  better  than  laughter,  because  much  or  worldly  merriment 
TENDS  TO  NO  INTELLECTUAL  OR  MORAL  GOOD.  Worldly  pleasures,  and  the  expressions 
of  these,  do  nothing  for  the  immaterial  part.  The  utmost  that  can  be  pretended 
is  that  they  amuse  and  recreate.  In  their  very  notion  they  are  exceptions,  and 
should  be  sparing.  But  there  are  a  thousand  recreative  processes  connected  with 
healthful  exercise,  with  knowledge,  with  the  study  of  beautiful  nature,  with  the 
practice  and  contemplation  of  art,  and  with  the  fellowship  of  friends,  which 
unbend  the  tense  nerve  and  refresh  the  wasted  spirits,  while  at  the  same  time 
they  instruct  the  mind  and  soften  or  tranquillize  the  heart.  Not  so  with  the 
unbridled  joys  which  find  vent  in  redoubled  peals  of  mirth  and  obstreperous 
carousal,  or  in  the  lighter  play  of  chattered  nonsense  and  never-ending  giggle. 

III.  Sorrow  is  better  than  laughter,  because  worldly  mirth  is  short.  In  the 
Eastern  countries,  where  fuel  is  very  scarce,  every  combustible  shrub,  brush,  and 
bramble  is  seized  upon  for  culinary  fires.  Of  these  the  blaze  is  bright,  hot,  and 
soon  extinct.  Such  is  worldly  mirth.  "  For  as  the  crackling  of  thorns  imder  a 
pot,  so  is  the  laughter  of  the  fool."  It  is  noisy — more  noisy  than  if  there  were 
anything  in  it.  But  it  soon  ceases.  Physical  limits  are  put  to  gay  pleasures. 
The  loudest  laughter  cannot  laugh  for  ever.  Lungs  and  diaphragm  forbid  and  rebel. 
There  is  a  time  of  life  when  such  pleasures  become  as  difiScult  as  they  are 
ungraceful;  and  there  is  not  in  society  a  more  ridiculous  object,  even  in  its  own 
circle,  than  a  tottering,  antiquated,  bedizened  devotee  of  fashion.  Grief  comes  in 
and  shortens  the  amusement.  Losses  and  reverses  shorten  it.  And,  if  there  were 
nothing  else,  pleasure  must  be  short,  because  it  cannot  be  extended  to  judgment 
and  eternity.  IV.  Worldly  mirth  is  unsatisfying.  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all 
is  vanity,"  ».  e.  emptiness  and  disappointment.  The  man  wonders  why  the  toys 
and  rattles  which  pleased  him  once  please  him  now  no  more.  They  are  vanity, 
and  all  is  vanity;  and  every  day  that  he  lives  longer  will  make  it  more  formidable 
vanity.  Now,  pray  observe,  the  case  is  directly  the  reverse  with  regard  to  sound 
intellectual  and  spiritual  enjoyments;  for  which  the  capacity  is  perpetually 
increasing  with  its  indulgence.  V.  Sorrow  is  better  than  laughter,  because 
SORROW  breeds  reflection.  There  can  be  no  contemplation  amidst  the  riot  of 
self-indulgence;  but  the  house  of  mourning  is  a  meditative  abode.  Before  they 
were  afflicted,  a  large  proportion  of  God's  people  went  astray;  and,  if  they  live 
long  enough,  they  can  all  declare  that  the  solenm  pauses  of  their  bereavement, 
illness,  poverty,  shame,  and  fear,  have  been  better  to  them  than  the  dainties  of 
the  house  of  feasting.  VI.  Sorrow  is  better  than  laughter,  because  sorrow 
brings  lessons  of  wisdom.  Sufferers  not  only  think  but  learn.  Many  sermons 
could  not  record  all  the  lessons  of  affliction.  It  tells  us  wherein  we  have  offended. 
It  takes  us  away  from  the  flattering  crowd,  and  from  seducing  charmers,  and 


i58  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tii, 

keenly  reaches,  with  its  probe,  the  hidden  iniquity.     This  is  less  pleasing  than 

;  'Worldly  joy,  but  it  is  naore  profitable.    The  Bible  is  the  chief  book  in  the  house  of 

mourning — ^read  by  some  there  who  have  never  read  it  elsewhere,  and  revealing 

i  to  its  most  assiduous  students  new  truths,  shining  forth  in  affliction  like  stars 

which  have  been  hidden  in  daylight.     VII.  Sobbow  is  bettek  than  laoohtbb, 

'  BECAUSE  sobbow  AMENDS  THE  HEABT  AND  LIFE.     Not  by  any  efficiency  of  good;  of 

!  euch  efficiency,  pain,  whether  of  body  or  mind,  knows  nothing;  but  by  becoming 

I  the  vehicle  of  Divine  influences.     The  ways  of  Providence  are  such,  that  troubled 

j  spirits,  bathed  in  tears,  are  repeatedly  made  to  cry  with  a  joy  which  swallows  up 

'  all  foregoing  griefs,  "  Before  we  were  afflicted  we  went  astray,  but  now  have  we 

I  kept  Thy  lawl     VIII.  Sobbow  is  betteb  than  laughteb,  because  sobbow  likens 

I  cs  TO  Him  whom  we  love.     You  know  His  name.     He  is  the  Man  of  Sorrows — 

'  the  companion  or  brother  of  grief.     His  great  work,  even  our  salvation,  was  not 

I  more  by  power  or  holiness  than  by  sorrows.     He  took  our  flesh  that  He  might 

bear    our   sorrows.     If    we    suSer    with    Him,    we   shall    also   reign    with    Him. 

IX.  Sobbow  is  betteb  than  ladqhteb,  because  sobbow  ends  in  jot.     The  very 

:  resistance  of  a  virtuous  mind  to  adversity — the  bracing  of  the  frame — the  breast- 

;  ing  of  the  torrent — the  patience,  the  resignation,  the  hope  amidst  the  billows, 

!  the  high  resolve  and  courage  that  mount  more  boldly  out  of  the  surge  of  griefs 

'  the  silent  endurance  of  the  timid  and  the  frail,  when  out  of  weakness  they  are 

made  strong — these,  and  such  as  these,  increase  the  capacity  for  future  holineaa 

and  heavenly  bliss.     "  These  are  they  that  have  come  out  of  great  tribulation." 

\{J.  W.  Alexander,  D.D.)     The  service  of  sorrow : — I.  Sobbow  sebves  to  fbomotb 

INDiviDUALisu  OF  SOUL.    1.  A  deep  practical  sense  of  self-responsibility  is  essential 

to  the  virtue,  the  power,  and  progress  of  the  soul.     2.  Social  influences,  especially 

in  this  age  of  combinations,  tend  to  destroy  this  and  absorb  the  individual  in  the 

mass.     8.  Sorrow  is  one  of  the  most  individualizing  of  forces.     Sorrow  detaches 

man  from  all,  isolates  him,  makes  him  feel  his  loneliness.    II.  Sobbow  serves  to 

BUHANizE  CUB  AFFECTIONS.     It  helps  US  to  feel  for  others;  to  "weep  with  those 

who  weep,"  etc.    III.  Sobbow  sebves  to  spibitualize  oub  natubb.    There  are 

tremendous  forces  ever  at  work  to  materialize.     Sorrow  takee  us  away  into  the 

spiritual;  makes  us  feel  alone  with  God,  and  view  the  world  as  but  a  passing 

ehow.     IV.   Sobbow   sebves  to  pbepabe  us   to  appreciate   Chbistianity.    The 

Gospel  is  a  system  to  "  heal  broken  hearts."     Who  appreciates  pardon,  but  the 

sorrowing  penitent?     Who  values  the  doctrine  of  a  parental  providence,  but  the 

tried?    Who  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection,  but  the  bereaved  and  the  dying f 

[{Homilist.) 

Ver.  4.  The  heart  of  the  wise  is  in  the  houBe  of  mooming. — The  advantages 
'of  visiting  the  mansions  of  distress: — ^For  so  valuable  a  purpose  it  is  well  worth 
while  to  bestr  with  all  the  gloominess  of  the  house  of  mourning.  For  most  useful 
lessons  will  the  heart  of  the  wise  be  able  to  learn  there;  and  excellent  rules  of 
conduct,  with  respect  to  himself,  to  the  memory  of  those  who  are  deceased,  and 
to  such  as  they  have  left  behind  them.  1.  With  respect  to  himself.  "  Death  is 
the  end  of  all  men,  and  the  living  will  lay  it  to  his  heart."  It  is  because  we  do 
not  lay  it  to  our  hearts  that  we  most  of  us  go  on  just  as  if  we  imagined  there  was 
to  be  no  end  at  all;  and  though  we  do  not,  indeed,  speculatively  think  so,  yet  we 
live  and  act  upon  that  supposition;  and  our  knowing  it  to  be  a  false  one  hath  no 
manner  of  influence  for  want  of  reflecting  upon  it  as  such.  This  could  not  be 
would  we  but  stop  a  little  at  the  house  of  mourning;  and  make  the  most  obvious 
of  all  reflections  there,  from  contemplating  the  end  of  others,  how  very  quickly 
our  own  end  may  come,  and  how  soon  it  must.  Such  thoughts  will  enliven  our 
diligence  in  performing  our  duty  here;  in  working,  while  it  is  day,  the  works  of 
Him  that  sent  us.  And  as  the  thoughts  of  death  are  excellently  fitted  to  compose 
the  vehemence  of  our  other  passions,  so  they  are  fitted  particularly  to  check  that 
very  sinful  kind  of  vehemence,  which  we  are  exceedingly  prone  to  express,  one 
against  another.  Another  instruction,  which  the  heart  of  the  wise  will  learn  in 
the  house  of  mourning,  is,  never  to  flatter  himself  with  expectations  of  any  lasting 
good  in  a  state  so  uncertain  as  this.  You  see,  therefore,  what  improvement  the 
heart  of  the  wise  may  receive  from  a  general  consideration  of  the  end  of  all  men. 
But  the  further  view  of  the  different  ends  of  different  men  is  a  subject  of  yet 
further  advantage.  2.  The  heart  of  the  wise,  whilst  it  dwells  in  the  house  of 
mourning,  will  not  only  improve  itself  in  a  general  sense  of  Christian  piety,  but 
also  more  especially  in  such  precepts  of  it  as  constitute  a  proper  behaviour  with 


CHAP.  Til.]  ECCLESIASTES.  15» 

— — ^.— ^— ^^^— ^^■^— — ^-^— ^— ^^^— ^^^_.^^_-_^_^^___^__^^.^______^_  I 

respect  to  the  memory  of  those  whose  departure  is  at  anj  time  the  object  of  our 
thoughts.  The  dead,  indeed,  are  out  of  our  reach :  our  goodness  extends  not  to 
them,  and  our  enmity  can  do  them  no  harm.  But  for  the  sake  of  common  justice 
and  humanity,  we  are  bound  to  the  amiable  duties  of  showing  candour  in  regard 
to  their  failings,  and  paying  the  honour  which  is  due  to  their  merit.  3.  We  may 
learn,  from  a  considerate  meditation  on  the  examples  of  mortality,  very  useful 
instruction*  for  oiu:  behaviour,  not  only  with  respect  to  the  deceased,  but  those 
whom  they  have  left  behind  any  way  peculiarly  related  to  them.  The  death  of  a 
wise  and  good,  of  a  near  and  affectionate  friend,  is  unspeakably  the  greatest  of  all 
calamities.  Whoever  is  capable  of  these  reflections,  if  he  allows  himself  time  to 
make  them,  will  sincerely  pity  aU  that  have  suffered  such  a  lose,  and  equally 
eeteem  all  that  show  they  are  sensible  of  it.    (T.  Seeker.) 

Ver.  8.  Better  is  the  end  of  a  thiag  than  the  he^ning  thereof. — The  new 
year: — The  text  expresses  the  general  principle  or  doctrine,  that  by  the  condition 
of  our  existence  here,  if  things  go  right,  a  conclusion  is  better  than  a  beginning. 
The  fruit  is  better  than  the  blosfiom;  the  reaping  is  better  than  the  sowing;  the 
enjoyment  than  the  reaping;  the  second  stage  of  a  journey  to  the  happy  home  is 
better  than  the  first ;  the  home  itself  than  all ;  the  victory  is  better  than  the  march 
and  the  battle;  the  reward  is  better  than  the  course  of  service;  the  ending  in  the 
highest  improvement  of  means  is  better  than  being  put  at  first  in  possession  of 
them.  In  all  this  we  see  it  is  conditionally,  and  not  absolutely,  that  "  the  end  is 
better  than  the  beginning."  Now  let  ub  consider  in  a  short  series  of  plain 
particulars  what  state  of  the  case  would  authorize  us  at  the  end  of  the  year  to 
pronounce  this  sentence  upon  it.  1.  It  will  easily  occur  as  a  general  rule  of 
Judgment  on  the  matter,  that  the  sentence  may  be  pronounced  if,  at  the  end  of 
the  year,  we  shall  be  able,  after  deliberate  conscientious  reflection,  to  affirm  that 
the  year  has  been,  in  the  most  important  respects,  better  than  the  preceding.  , 
2.  The  sentence  will  be  true  if,  during  the  progress  of  the  year,  we  shall  effectually 
avail  ourselves  of  the  lessons  suggested  by  a  review  of  the  preceding  year.  3.  At 
the  close  of  this  year,  should  life  be  protracted  so  far,  the  text  will  be  applicable, 
if  we  can  then  say,  "  My  lessons  from  reflection  on  the  departed  year  are  much 
lees  painful,  and  much  more  cheering  than  at  the  close  of  the  former  ";  if  we  can 
Bay  this  without  any  delusion  from  insensibility,  for  the  pamfulness  of  reflection 
may  lessen  from  a  wrong  cause;  but  to  say  it  with  an  enlightened  conscience  to 
witness,  how  delightful  I  To  be  then  able  to  recall  each  particular,  and  to  dwell 
on  it  a  few  moments — '*  that  was,  before,  a  very  painful  consideration — ^now,  .  .  ." 
**  This,  again,  made  me  sad,  and  justly  so — ^now,  .  .  .1"  "  What  shall  I  render 
to  Ood  for  the  mercy  of  His  granting  my  prayer  for  all-sufficient  aid?  I  will 
render  to  Him,  by  His  help,  a  still  better  year  next."  And  let  us  observe,  as  the 
chief  test  of  the  true  application  of  the  text,  that  it  will  be  a  true  sentence  if 
then  we  shall  have  good  evidence  that  we  are  become  really  more  devoted  to  God. 
4.  If  we  shall  have  acquired  a  more  effectual  sense  of  the  worth  of  time,  the 
sentence,  "  Better  is  the  end  of  a  thing  than  the  beginning,"  will  be  true.  Being 
intent  on  the  noblest  purposes  of  life  will  itself  Id  a  great  degree  create  this 
"  effectual  sense."  But  there  may  require,  too,  a  special  thought  of  time  itself — 
a  habit  of  noting  it — because  it  is  so  transient,  silent,  and  invisible  a  thing. 
There  may  be  a  want  of  faith  to  "  see  this  invisible,"  and  of  a  sense  of  its  flight. 
For  want  of  this,  and  the  sense,  too,  of  its  vast  worth,  what  quantities  reflection 
may  tell  us  we  have  wasted  in  past  years — in  the  last  year  1  How  important  to 
have  a  powerful  habitual  impression  of  all  this!  And  if,  this  year,  we  shall 
acquire  much  more  of  this  strong  habitual  sense — if  we  become  more  covetous 
of  time — if  we  caimot  waste  it  without  much  greater  pain — if  we  shall,  therefore, 
lose  and  misspend  much  less — then  the  text  is  true.  6.  It  will  again  be  true  if, 
with  regard  to  fellow-mortals,  we  can  conscientiously  feel  that  we  have  been  to 
them  more  what  Christians  ought — than  in  the  preceding  year.  "  I  am  become 
more  solicitous  to  act  toward  you  in  the  fear  of  God.  I  am  become  more  con- 
scientiously regardful  of  what  is  due  to  you,  and  set  a  higher  importance  on  your 
welfare.  I  have  exerted  myself  more  for  your  good.  On  the  whole,  therefore,  I 
stand  more  acquitted  towards  you  than  I  have  at  the  conclusion  of  any  former 
season."  6.  Another  point  of  superiority  we  should  hope  the  end  may  have  over 
the  beginning  of  the  year,  is  that  of  our  being  in  a  better  state  of  preparation 
for  all  that  is  to  follow.  Who  was  ever  too  well  prepared  for  sudden  emergencies 
of  trial? — ^too  well  prepared  for  duty,  temptation,  or  affliction? — too  well  prepared 


180   .  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

for  the  last  thing  that  is  to  be  encountered  on  earth?  7.  It  will  b»  a  great 
advantage  and  advancement  to  end  the  year  with,  if  we  shall  then  have  acquired 
more  of  a  rational  and  Christian  indifference  to  life  itself.  "  My  property  in  life 
ia  now  less  by  almoet  400  days;  so  much  less  to  cultivate  and  reap  from.  If  they 
were  of  value,  the  value  of  the  remainder  is  less  after  they  are  withdrawn.  As  to 
temporal  good,  I  have  but  learnt  the  more  experimentally  that  that  cannot  make 
me  happy.  I  have,  therefore,  less  of  a  delusive  hope  on  this  ground  as  to  the 
future.  The  spiritual  good  of  so  much  time  expended  I  regard  as  transferred 
to  eternity;  so  much,  therefore,  thrown  into  the  scale  of  another  life  against  this. 
Besides,  the  remaining  portion  will  probably  be,  in  a  natural  sense,  of  a  much 
worse  quality.  Therefore,  as  the  eSect  of  all  this,  my  attachment  to  this  life  m 
loosening,  and  the  attraction  of  another  is  augmenting."  {John  Foster.)  The 
«nd  of  a  good  man'e  life  it  better  than  the  beginning: — I.  At  the  end  of  his  lifb 
EB  IS  INTRODUCED  INTO  A  BETTEB  8TATB.  1.  He  begins  his  life  amidst  impurity. 
The  first  air  he  breathes,  the  first  word  he  heeure,  the  first  impression  he  receives, 
are  tainted  with  sin;  but  at  its  end  he  is  introduced  to  purity,  saints,  angels, 
Christ,  God  I  2.  He  begins  his  life  on  trial.  It  is  a  race — shall  he  win?  It  is  a 
voyage — shall  ho  reach  the  haven?  The  end  determines  all.  8.  He  begins  his  life 
amidst  suSering.  "  Man  is  born  to  trouble."  II.  Ax  thb  end  of  his  life  he  is 
INTRODUCED  INTO  BETTEB  OCCUPATIONS.  OuT  occupations  here  are  threefold — 
physical,  intellectual,  moral.  All  these  are  more  or  less  of  a  painful  kind.  But 
in  the  state  into  which  death  introduces  us,  the  engagements  will  be  congenial  t* 
the  tastes,  invigorating  to  the  frame,  delightful  to  the  soul  and  honouring  to  God. 

III.  At  THE  END  OF  HIS  LIFE  HE  IS  INTRODUCED  INTO  BETTER  SOCIETY.     We  are  made 

for  society.  But  society  here  is  frequently  insincere,  non-intelligent,  unaffec- 
fcionate.  But  how  delightful  the  society  into  which  death  will  Introduce  us  I  We 
shall  mingle  with  enlightened,  genuine,  warm-hearted  souls,  rising  in  teeming 
cumbers,  grade  above  grade,  up  to  the  Eternal  God  Himself.     {Homiliet.)     The 

fiatient  in  spirit  is  better  than  the  proud  in  spirit. — The  power  of  patience: — The 
ion  was  caught  in  the  toils  of  the  hunter.  The  more  he  tugged,  the  more  his  feet 
got  entangled;  when  a  little  mouse  heard  his  roaring,  and  said  that  if  his  majesty 
would  not  hurt  him,  he  thought  he  could  release  him.  At  first  the  king  of  beast.<< 
took  no  notice  of  such  a  contemptible  ally;  but  at  last,  like  other  proud  spirits  in 
trouble,  he  allowed  his  tiny  friend  to  do  as  he  pleased.  So  one  by  one  the  mouse 
nibbled  through  the  cords  till  he  had  set  free  first  one  foot  and  then  another,  and 
then  all  the  four,  and  with  a  growl  of  hearty  gratitude  the  king  of  the  forest 
acknowledged  that  the  patient  in  spurit  is  sometimes  stronger  than  the  proud  in 
spirit.  And  it  is  beautiful  to  see  how,  when  some  sturdy  nature  is  involved  in 
perplexity,  and  by  its  violence  and  vociferation  ie  only  wasting  its  strength  without 
forwarding  its  escape,  there  will  come  in  some  timely  sympathizer,  mild  and 
gentle,  and  will  suggest  the  simple  extrication,  or  by  soothing  vehemence  down 
into  his  own  tranquillity,  will  set  him  on  the  way  to  effect  his  self -deliverance. 
Even  so,  all  through  the  range  of  philanthropy,  patience  is  power.  It  is  not  the 
water-spout  but  the  nightly  dew  which  freshens  vegetation.  They  are  not  the 
flashes  of  the  lightning  which  mature  our  harvests,  but  the  daily  sunbeams,  and 
that  quiet  electricity  which  thrills  in  atoms  and  which  flushes  in  every  ripening 
ear.  Niagara  in  all  its  thunder  fetches  no  fertility;  but  the  Nile,  coming  without 
observation,  with  noiseless  fatness  overflows,  and  from  under  the  retiring  flood 
Egypt  looks  up  again,  a  garner  of  golden  corn.  The  world  is  the  better  for  its 
moral  cataracts  and  its  spiritual  thunderbolts;  but  the  influences  which  do  the 
world's  great  work — which  freshen  and  fertilize  it,  and  which  are  maturing  its 
harvests  for  the  garner  of  glory,  are  not  the  proud  and  potent  spirits,  but  th» 
patient  and  the  persevering;  they  are  not  the  noisy  and  startling  phenomena,  but 
the  steady  and  silent  operations.     (/.  Hamilton,  D.D.) 

Vet.  10.  Say  not  thou,  What  is  the  canse  that  the  former  days  were  better  than 
these  1 — Mistaken  signs: — On  the  whole  we  may  confidently  affirm  that  the  world 
improves,  and  yet  in  certain  moods  we  are  apt  to  regard  its  conditions  as  increas- 
ingly desperate.  Thus  is  it  sometimes  with  our  religious  life — we  mistake  the 
aigns  of  progress  for  those  of  retrogression,  and  through  this  mistake  do  injustice 
to  ourselves.  1.  "I  am  not  so  happy  as  I  once  was,"  is  a  lament  from  Christian 
tips  with  which  we  are  almost  distressingly  familiar.  We  look  back  to  our  con- 
1  version,  to  the  glittering  joy  which  welled  up  in  our  soul  in  those  days,  and  tha 
I  memory  moves  us  to  tears.    Than  "  all  things  were  apparelled  in  celestial  Ught, 


CHAP,  Til.]  SCCLESIASTES.  161 


the  glory  and  the  freehness  of  a  dream."     Then  we  turn  to  consider  the  preaeni 
phases  of  our  experience,  and  conclude  sadly  that  we  are  not  so  happy  now  •• 
then — all  the  gold  has  changed  to  grey.     Now,  is  this  really  so?     We  fully  allow 
that  it  may  be  so.     Through  unfaithfulness  we  may  have  lost  the  joy  and  power 
of  the  days  when  first  we  knew  the  Lord.     But  may  not  the  mournful  inference 
be  mistaken,  and  what  we  regard  as  a  diminished  happiness  be  really  a  profounder 
blessedness?     The  essence  of  religion  is  submission  to  the  will  of  God,  and  that 
grave  tranquillity  of  mind  which  follows  upon  deeper  self-renvmciation,  the  chastened 
cheerfulness  which  survives  the  strain  and  strife  of  years,  is  a  real,  although  not 
perhaps  seeming,  gain  upon  the  first  sparkling  experiences  of  our  devout  life. 
2.  "  I  am  not  so  holy  as  I  onoe  was,"  is  another  note  of  self -depreciation  with 
which  we  are  unhappily  familiar,  and  with  which,  perhaps,  we  are  sometimea 
disposed  to  sympathize.    When  we  first  realized  forgiveness,  we  felt  that  there  was 
"  no  condemnation  ";  the  Spirit  of  God  seemed  to  hallow  our  whole  nature;  our 
heart  was  cleansed,  and  strangely  glowed.    But  it  is  not  so  now.     We  have  not 
done  all  we  meant  to  do,  not  been  all  we  meant  to  be,  and  have  •  consciousness 
of  imperfection  more  vivid  than  ever.     With  the  lapse  of  years  we  have  grown 
more  dissatisfied  with  ourselves;  and  this  more  acute  sense  of  worldliness  leads 
us  to  the  conclusion  that  we  have  lost  the  rarer  purity  of  other  days.    Once  more 
we  admit  that  this  may  be  the  case.    There  may  be  a  very  real  depreciation  in  our 
life;  we  may  have  allowed  our  raiment  to  be  soiled  by  the  world  and  the  flesh.    Bui 
may  not  this  growing  sense  of  imperfection  be  a  sign  of  the  perfecting  of  our  spirit? 
It  may  be  that  we  are  not  less  pure  than  formerly,  only  the  Spirit  of  God  has  been 
opening  our  eyes,  heightening  our  sensibility,  and  faults  once  latent  are  now 
discovered;  the  clearer  vision  detects  deformities,  the  finer  ear  discords,  the  pure 
taste  admixtures  which  were  once  unsuspected.     It  is  possible  to  be  growing  in 
moral  strength  and  grace,  in  everything  that  constitutes  perfection  of  character 
and  life,  when  appearances  are  decidedly  to  the  contrary.     Watch  the  sculptor 
and  note  how  many  of  his  strokes  seem  to  mar  the  image  on  which  he  works, 
rendering  the  marble  more  unshapely  than  it  seemed  the  moment  before,  and  yet 
in  the  end  a  glorious  statue  rises  imder  his  hand;  so  the  blows  of  God,  bringing 
us  into  glorious  grace,  often  seem  as  if  they  were  marring  what  little  symmetry 
belonged  to  us,  often  ae  if  knocking  us  out  of  shape  altogether.     8.  "  I  do  not  love 
God  as  I  onoe  did,"  is  another  sorrowful  confession  of  the  soul.     How  glowing 
was  that  first  love  1     Your  whole  soul  went  out  after  the  Beloved  1     But  it  is  not 
so  now.     The  temperature  of  your  soul  seems  to  have  fallen,  your  love  to  your 
God  and  Saviour  does  not  glow  as  in  those  memorable  hours  when  first  it  was 
kindled  "  by  the  spirit  of  burning."    Once  again,  it  may  be  so.    The  Church  at 
Epheeue  had  "left"  its  "first  love,"  and  we  may  not  cherish  the  same  fervid 
affection  for  God  which  once  filled  and  purified  our  heart.     But  may  we  not 
misconceive  the  love  we  bear  to  God?     Our  more  dispassionate  affection  may  be 
equally  genuine  and  positively  stronger.     Our  love  to  God  may  not  be  so  gushing, 
BO  florid  in  expression  as  it  once  was,  but  in  this  it  only  bears  the  sober  hue  of  all 
ripened  things.     (1)  The  test  of  love  is  sacrifice.     We  love  those  for  whose  sake 
we  are  prepared  to  suffer.     Will  our  love  to  God  to-day  bear  this  test?     Would 
we  for  His  sake  endure  hardship,  death?     Many  sorrowing  souls  know  they  are 
ready  to  die  for  Him  whom  they  cannot  love  as  they  feel  He  ought  to  be  loved. 
(2)  The  test  of  love  is  obedience.     We  love  those  to  whom  we  pay  ungrudging 
service.     "If  ye  keep  My  commandments,  ye  shall  abide  in  My  love;  even  as  I 
have  kept  My  Father's  commandments,  and  abide  in  His  love.  ...  Ye  are  My 
friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you."     Here,  once  more,  are  we  sure 
of  ourselves?    We  "  have  not  wickedly  departed  from  "  our  God.     Is  it  not  the 
supreme  purpose  of  our  heart  to  bring  life  into  entire  harmony  with  the  will  of 
God?     (8)  The  test  of  love  is  confidence.    We  love  those  whom  we  trust.    Do  we 
not  feel,  then,  that  God  has  our  confidence  so  thoroughly  that  even  if  He  "  slay  " 
us,  yet  will  we  trust  in  Him?     "  Bed-hot  religion  "  has  its  place  and  value,  but 
white-hot  religion,  the  silent,  intense  force  which  acts  without  sparks,  smoke  or 
noise,  is  a  diviner  thing.     Is  it  thus  with  our  love  to  God?     Has  that  passion 
simply  changed  from  red  to  white?     Has  the  sentiment  become  a  principle,  the 
ecstasy  a  habit,  the  passion  a  law?    If  so,  the  former  days  were  not  better  than 
these.     4.  "  I  do  not  make  the  rapid  progress  I  once  did,"  is  another  familiar 
regret.     Once  we  had  the  pleasing  sense  of  swift  and  perpetual  progress.    Each  day 
we  went  from  strength  to  strength,  esush  night  knew  our  "  moving  tent  a  day's 
maroh  neaxer  home."    But  we  have  not  that  sense  ol  progress  now,  and  this  faot 

11 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tii. 

is  to  UB,  perhaps,  a  great  grief.  Our  grief  may  be  well  founded;  for  those  who 
"  did  run  well  "  are  sometimes  "  hindered  "  and  fall  into  slowest  pace.  Yet 
impatience  with  our  rate  of  progress  is  capable  of  another  construction.  Our  first 
experiences  of  the  Christian  life  are  in  such  direct  and  striking  contradistinction  to 
the  earthly  life  that  our  sense  of  progress  ia  most  vivid  and  delightful;  but  as  we 
climb  heaven,  get  nearer  Ood,  traverse  the  infinite  depths  of  love  and  righteousness 
sown  with  all  the  stars  ol  light,  the  sense  of  progress  may  well  be  less  definite 
than  when  we  had  just  left  the  world  behind.  And  in  considering  our  rate  of 
progress,  we  must  not  forget  that  the  sense  of  progress  is  regulated  by  the  desire 
for  progress.  (W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Vain  thoughtt  concerning  the  past: — What  a 
softening  power  there  is  in  distance;  how  often  an  object,  on  which  you  ganed 
with  great  delight  while  beheld  afar  oS,  will  lose  its  attractiveness  when  it  is 
brought  near.  Every  admirer  of  the  natural  landscape  is  thoroughly  conscious 
of  this.  Now,  we  are  inclined  to  suppose  that  there  is  much  the  same  power  in 
distance,  with  regard  to  what  we  may  call  the  moral  landscape,  which  is  so 
universally  acknowledged  with  regard  to  the  natural.  We  believe  that  what  is 
rough  becomes  so  softened,  and  what  is  hard  so  mellowed  through  being  viewed 
in  the  retrospect,  that  we  are  hardly  fair  judges  of  much  on  which  we  bestow 
unqualified  admiration.  If,  however,  it  were  only  the  softening  power  of  distance 
which  had  to  be  taken  into  the  account,  it  might  be  necessary  to  caution  men 
against  judging  without  making  allowance  for  this  power,  but  we  should  scarcely 
have  to  charge  it  upon  them  as  a  fault,  that  they  looked  so  complacently  on  what 
was  far  back.  But  from  one  cause  or  another  men  become  disgusted  with  the 
days  in  which  their  lot  is  cast,  and  are  therefore  disposed  to  the  concluding  that 
past  days  were  better.  Whence  does  it  arise  that  old  people  are  so  fond  of  talking 
of  the  degeneracy  of  the  times,  and  referring  to  the  days  when  they  were  young, 
as  days  when  all  things  were  in  a  healthier  and  more  pleasing  condition?  If  you 
were  to  put  implicit  faith  in  the  representations  you  would  conclude  that  there  was 
nothing  which  had  not  changed  for  the  worse,  and  that  it  was  indeed  a  great 
misfortune  that  you  had  not  been  born  half  a  century  sooner.  And  here  comes 
into  play  the  precept  of  our  text — "  Say  not  thou.  What  is  the  cause  that  the 
former  days  were  better  than  these?  for  thou  dost  not  inquire  wisely  concerning 
this."  To  quote  the  words  of  a  brilliant  modern  historian:  "The  more  carefully 
we  examine  the  history  of  the  past,  the  more  reason  shall  we  find  to  dissent  from 
those  who  imagine  that  our  age  has  been  fruitful  of  new  social  evils.  The  truth  is, 
that  the  evils  are,  with  scarcely  an  exception,  old.  That  which  is  new  is  the 
intelligence  which  discerns  them,  and  the  humanity  which  relieves  them."  But 
we  shall  speak  only  of  the  religious  advantages  of  different  times,  in  endeavouring 
to  prove  "  that  the  former  days  "  were  not  "  better  than  these."  1.  And  first,  it 
ought  to  be  carefully  observed  in  regard  of  human  nature  that  it  did  not  grow 
corrupt  by  degrees,  but  became  all  at  once  as  bad  as  it  was  ever  to  be.  The  being 
who  had  been  formed  in  the  very  image  of  his  Maker  became  instantly  capable  of 
the  most  heinous  of  crimes;  and  so  far  was  human  nature  from  requiring  long 
familiarity  with  wickedness,  in  order  to  the  learning  to  commit  it  in  its  most 
atrocious  shapes,  that  well  nigh  its  first  essay  after  apostatizing  from  God  was  one 
which  still  Ms  us  with  horror,  notwithstanding  our  daily  acquaintance  with  a 
thousand  foul  deeds.  Sin  was  never  an  infant;  it  was  a  giant  in  the  very  birth; 
and  forasmuch  as  we  should  have  had  precisely  the  same  evil  nature  whensoever 
we  had  lived,  it  would  be  vary  hard  to  show  that  any  former  period  would  have 
been  better  for  us  than  the  present.  You  may  fix  on  a  time  when  there  was 
apparently  less  of  open  wickedness,  but  this  would  not  necessarily  have  been  a 
better  time  for  individual  piety.  The  religion  of  the  heart,  perhaps,  flourishes  most 
when  there  is  most  to  move  to  zeal  for  the  insulted  law  of  God.  Or  you  may  fix 
upon  a  time  when  there  was  apparently  less  of  misery;  but  we  need  not  say  that 
this  would  not  necessarily  have  been  a  better  time  for  growth  in  Christian  holiness, 
seeing  that  confessedly  it  is  amidst  the  deepest  sorrows  that  the  strongest  virtues 
are  produced.  So  that  if  a  man  regard  himself  as  a  candidate  for  immortality,  we 
can  defy  him  to  put  his  finger  on  an  age  of  the  past,  in  which,  as  compared  with 
the  present,  it  would  necessarily  have  been  more  advantageous  for  him  to  live. 
2.  Now,  we  are  quite  aware  that  this  general  statement  does  not  exactly  meet 
the  several  points  which  will  suggest  themselves  to  an  inquiring  mind;  but  we 
propose  to  examine  next  certain  of  the  reasons  which  might  be  likely  to  lead  men 
to  a  different  conclusion  from  that  which  seems  stated  in  our  text.  And  here 
•gain  we  must  narrow  the  field  of  inquiry,  and  confine  ourselves  to  points  in  which. 


CHAP.  Til.]  ECCLESIASTE8.  16» 

ae  Christians,  we  have  an  especial  interest.  Would  any  former  days  have  been 
better  days  for  us,  estimating  the  superiority  by  the  superior  facilities  for  believing 
the  Christian  religion,  and  acquiring  the  Christian  character?  In  answering  such 
a  question,  we  must  take  separately  the  evidences  and  the  truths  of  our  holy 
religion.  And  first,  as  to  the  evidences.  There  is  a  very  common  and  a  very 
natural  feeling  with  regard  to  the  evidences  of  Christianity,  that  they  must  have 
been  much  stronger  and  much  clearer,  as  presented  to  those  who  lived  in  the  times 
of  our  Lord  and  of  His  apostles,  than  as  handed  down  to  ourselves  through  a  long 
succession  of  witnesses.  Many  are  disposed  to  imagine  that  if  with  their  own  eyes 
they  could  see  miracles  wrought,  they  should  have  a  proof  on  the  side  of  Christi- 
anity far  more  convincing  than  any  which  they  actually  have,  and  that  there  would 
be  no  room  whatever  for  a  lingering  doubt  if  they  stood  by  a  professed  teacher 
from  Ood,  whilst  he  stilled  the  tempest,  or  raised  the  dead.  Why  should  such 
superior  power  be  supposed  to  reside  in  the  seeing  a  miracle?  The  only  thing  to 
be  sure  about  is,  that  the  miracle  has  been  wrought.  There  are  two  ways  of 
gaining  this  assurance:  the  one  is  by  the  testimony  of  the  senses,  the  other  is  by 
the  testimony  of  competent  witnesses.  The  first,  the  testimony  of  the  senses,  is 
granted  to  the  spectator  of  a  miracle;  only  the  second,  the  testimony  of  witnesses, 
to  those  who  are  not  present  at  the  performance.  But  shall  it  be  said  that  the 
latter  must  necessarily  be  less  satisfactory  than  the  former?  Shall  it  be  said  that 
those  who  have  not  visited  Constantinople  cannot  be  as  certain  that  there  is  such  a 
city  as  others  who  have?  The  testimony  of  witnesses  may  be  every  jot  as  con- 
clusive as  the  testimony  of  your  own  senses.  Though,  even  if  we  were  forced  to 
concede  that  the  spectator  of  a  miracle  has  necessarily  a  superiority  over  those  to 
whom  the  miracle  travels  down  in  the  annals  of  well-attested  history,  we  should 
be  far  enough  from  allowing  that  there  is  less  evidence  now  on  the  side  of  Christi- 
anity than  was  granted  to  the  men  of  some  preceding  age.  Let  it  be,  that  the 
evidence  of  miracle  is  not  so  clear  and  powerful  as  it  was ;  what  is  to  be  said  of  the 
evidence  of  prophecy?  Who  will  venture  to  deny,  that  as  century  has  rolled 
away  after  century,  fresh  witness  has  been  given  to  the  Bible  by  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  predictions  recorded  in  its  pages?  The  stream  of  evidence  has  been 
like  that  beheld  in  mystic  vision  by  Ezekiel,  when  waters  issued  out  from  the 
eastern  gate  of  the  temple.  Yes,  the  Christian  religion  now  appeals  to  mightier 
proofs  than  when  it  first  engaged  in  combat  with  the  superstitions  of  the  world. 
Its  own  protracted  existence,  its  own  majestic  triumphs,  witness  for  it  with  a 
voice  far  more  commanding  than  that  which  was  heard  when  its  first  preachers 
called  to  the  dead,  and  were  answered  by  their  starting  into  life.  Away,  then,  with 
the  thought  that  it  would  have  been  better  for  those  who  are  dissatisfied  with  the 
evidences  of  Christianity,  had  they  lived  when  Christianity  was  first  promulgated 
on  earth.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Discontent  with  the  present  unreasonable: — The 
matter  in  controversy  is,  the  pre-eminence  of  the  former  times  above  the  present; 
when  we  must  observe,  that  though  the  words  nm  in  the  form  of  a  question,  yet 
they  include  a  positive  assertion,  and  a  downright  censure.  1.  That  it  is  ridiculous 
to  ask  why  former  times  are  better  than  the  present,  if  really  they  are  not  better, 
and  so  the  very  supposition  itself  proves  false;  this  is  too  apparently  manifest  to 
be  matter  of  dispute:  and  that  it  is  false  we  shall  endeavoior  to  prove.  (1)  By 
reason  :  because  there  were  the  same  objects  to  work  upon  men,  and  the  same 
dispositions  and  inclinations  in  men  to  be  wrought  upon,  before,  that  there  are 
now.  All  the  affairs  of  the  world  are  the  births  and  issue  of  men's  actions;  and 
all  actions  come  from  the  meeting  and  collision  of  faculties  with  suitable  objects. 
There  were  then  the  same  incentives  of  desire  on  the  one  side,  the  same  attract- 
iveness in  riches,  the  same  relish  in  sovereignty,  the  same  temptation  in  beauty, 
the  same  delicacy  in  meats  and  taste  in  wines;  and,  on  the  other  side,  there 
were  the  same  appetites  of  covetousness  and  ambition,  the  same  fuel  of  lust  and 
intemperance.  (2)  The  same  may  be  proved  by  history,  and  the  records  of 
antiquity;  and  he  who  would  give  it  the  utmost  proof  that  it  is  capable  of  from 
this  topic  must  speak  volumes,  and  preach  libraries,  bring  a  century  within  a  line, 
and  an  age  into  every  period.  Is  the  wickedness  of  the  old  world  forgot,  that  we 
do  so  aggravate  the  tempest  of  this?  In  those  days  there  were  giants  in  sin,  as 
well  as  sinners  of  the  first  magnitude,  and  of  the  largest  size  and  proportion.  And 
to  take  the  world  in  a  lower  epocha,  what  after-age  could  exceed  the  lust  of  the 
Sodomites,  the  idolatry  and  tyranny  of  the  Egyptians,  the  fickle  levity  of  the 
Grecians?  and  that  monstrous  mixture  of  all  baseness  in  the  Roman  Neros,  Cali- 
giilas,  and  Domitians,  emperors  of  the  world,  and  slaves  to  their  vice?    I  conceive 


164 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nu 


the  state  ol  the  Christian  Church  also  may  come  withm  the  compass  of  our 
present  discourse.     Take  it  in  its  infancy,  and  with  the  properties  of  infancy,  it 
was  weak  and  naked,  vexed  with  poverty,  torn  with  persecution,  and  infested  with 
heresy.     It    began    the    breach    with    Simon    Magus,    continued    it    with    AriuB, 
Nestorius,  Eutyches,  Aerius,  some  rending  her  doctrine,  some  her  discipline;  and 
what  are  the  heresies  that  now  trouble  it,  but  new  editions  of  the  old  with  further 
gloss  and  enlargement?    2.  I  shall  now  take  it  in  a  lower  respect;  as  a  casa 
disputable,  whether  the  preceding  or  succeeding  generations  are  to  be  preferred; 
and  here  I  shall  dispute  the  matter  on  both  sides.     (1)  And  first  for  antiquity,  and 
the  former  ages,   we  may   plead  thus.      Certainly   everything  ia  purest  in  tha 
foimtain   and   most   untainted   in   the   original.     The   dregs    are   still   the   most 
likely   to   settle   in   the   bottom,   and   to   sink   into   the  last    ages.      The   world 
cannot  but  be  the  worse  for  wearing;  and  it  must  needs  have  contracted  much 
dross,  when  at  the  last  it  cannot  be  purged  but  by  a  universal  fire.     (2)  Bui 
secondly,  for  the  pre-eminence  of  the  succeeding  ages  above  the  former,  it  may 
be  disputed  thus :  If  the  honour  be  due  to  antiquity,  then  certainly  the  present  aga 
must  claim  it,  for  the  world  is  now  oldest,  and  therefore  upon  the  very  right  of 
seniority  may  challenge  the  precedency;  for  certainly,  the  longer  the  world  lasts, 
the  older  it  grows.     And  if  wisdom  ought  to  be  respected,  we  know  that  it  is  tha 
offspring  of  experience,  and  experience  the  child  of  age  and  continuance.    In  every 
thing  and  action  it  is  not  the  beginning,  but  the  end  that  is  regarded :  it  is  still 
the  issue  that  crowns  the  work,  and  the  Amen  that  seals  the  petition :  the  plaudit* 
is  given  to  the  last  act :  and  Christ  reserved  the  best  wine  to  conclude  the  feast ; 
nay,  a  fair  beginner  would  be  but  the  aggravation  of  a  bad  end.    And  if  we  plead 
original,  we  know  that  sin  is  strongest  in  its  original;  and  we  are  taught  whence  to 
date  that.     The  lightest  things  fioat  at  the  top  of  time,  but  if  there  be  such  a 
thing  as  a  golden  age,  its  mass  and  weight  must  needs  sink  it  to  the  bottom 
and  concluding  ages  of  the  world.     In  sum,  it  was  the  fulness  of  time  which 
brought  Christ  into  the  world ;  Christianity  was  a  reserve  for  the  last :  and  it  was 
the  beginning  of  time  which  was  infamous  for  man's  fall  and  ruin;  so,  in  Scripture, 
they  are  called  the  "  last  days  "  and  the  "  ends  of  the  world,"  which  are  ennobled 
with  his  redemption.     But  lastly,  if  the  following  ages  were  not  the  best,  whenca 
is  it  that  the  older  men  grow  the  more  still  they  desire  to  live?     Now  such  things 
as   these  may   be  disputed   in   favour   of   the  latter   times   beyond   the  former. 
3.  That  admitting  this  supposition  as  true,  that  the  former  ages  are  really  the 
best,  and  to  bo  preferred  :  yet  still  this  querulous  reflection  upon  the  evil  of  tha 
present  times,  stands  obnoxious  to  the  same  charge  of  folly  :  and,  if  it  be  con- 
demned also  upon  this  supposition,  I  see  not  where  it  can  take  sanctuary.     Now 
that  it  ought  to  be  so,  I  demonstrate  by  these  reasons.     (1)  Because  such  com- 
plaints have  no  efficacy  to  alter  or  remove  the  cause  of  them  :  thoughts  and  words 
alter  not  the  state  of  things.     The  rage  and  expostulations  of  discontent  are  like  a 
thunder  without  a  thunderbolt,  they  vanish  and  expire  into  noise  and  nothing; 
and,  like  a  woman,  are  only  loud  and  weak.     (2)  Such  complaints  of  the  evil  of 
the  times  are  irrational,  because  they  only  quicken  the  smart,  and  add  to  tha 
pressure.     Such  querulous  invectives  against  a  standing  government  are  like  a 
stone  flung  at  a  marble  pillar,  which  not  only  makes  no  impression  upon  that,  but 
rebounds  and  hits  the  flinger  in  the  face.     (3)  These  censorious  complaints  of  the 
evil  of  the  times  are  irrational,  because  the  just  cause  of  them  is  resolvable  into 
ourselves.     It  is  not  the  times  that  debauch  men,  but  men  that  derive  and  rabb 
a  contagion  upon  the  time :  and  it  is  still  the  liquor  that  first  taints  and  infects 
the  vessel.     (B.  South,  D.D.)    Former  things  not  better: — As  we  grow  older  we 
are  more  prone  to  look  back  into  the  past.    Our  best  days  and  brightest  hours  are 
those  which  have  long  since  passed  away.     Most  of  the  old  poets  have  written 
and  sung  of  a  golden  age.     But  it  was  away  in  the  distant  past.     They  have 
pictured  it  near  the  world's  beginning,  in  the  days  when  the  human  race  was 
yet  in  its  youth.    And  so  every  nation  has  had  its  fancied  golden  age.    Dreamers 
have  dreamed  of  its  charms.     A  time  of  peace,  and  love,  and  joy,  when  the  earth 
yielded  all  maimer  of  fruits  and  flowers,  and  all  nations  lived  together  in  harmony 
and  peace.     And  the  Bible,  too,  tells  of  &  golden  age  in  the  far  distant  past.    As 
our  thoughts  go  back  to  that  blessed  time,  we  can  scarcely  refrain  from  asking 
bitterly,  *'  What  is  the  cause  that  the  former  days  were  better  than  these?"    But 
in  our  text  the  wise  man  cautions  us  that  we  do  not  inquire  wisely  concerning  this. 
The  tree  is  beautiful  when  it  is  covered  with  blossoms.     But  is  it  not  a  richer, 
though  a  different  kind  of  beauty,  when  in  »utumn  it  is  loaded  with  delicious 

I 


CHAP.  Tn.]  ECCLESIASTES.  Kjs'' 

fruit?  The  morning  is  beautiful  when  the  rising  sun  bathes  stream  and  flood,  hill 
and  dale  with  his  glorious  beams.  But  is  it  not  another  and  a  higher  kind  of  beauty 
when,  at  the  close  of  day,  the  sun  is  slowly  sinking  in  the  west,  like  a  king  dying 
on  a  couch  of  gold,  and  the  fading  hues  of  even  light  up  the  whole  heavens  with  a 
glory  that  seems  to  have  come  down  from  the  New  Jerusalem  I  The  field  is  beau- 
tiful when  the  fresh  green  blades  appear,  like  a  new  creation,  life  out  of  death. 
But  it  is  another  and  a  higher  order  of  beauty  when,  instead  of  the  fresh  young 
blade,  you  have  the  rich  golden  harvest.  The  spring  is  beautiful  with  all  its  stores 
of  bloom  and  fragrance  and  song.  But  is  it  not  a  higher  beauty,  a  more  advanced 
perfection  when  the  bloom  of  spring  has  given  place  to  the  golden  sheaves  and 
plentiful  stores  of  autumn?  Life's  opening  years  may  be  beautiful,  but  its  close 
may  be  glorious.  You  may  have  seen  the  raw  recruit,  fresh  from  his  country 
home,  setting  out  to  join  the  war  in  a  distant  land.  His  laurels  are  yet  unsullied. 
The  keen  edge  of  his  sword  has  never  yet  been  blunted.  See  him  years  afterward, 
when  he  oomes  home,  after  a  long  service  in  some  foreign  land.  His  clothes  are 
tattered  and  torn;  his  coloiu-s  are  in  rags;  his  steps  are  feeble  and  tottering;  his 
brow  is  seamed  and  scarred;  his  sword  is  broken.  He  seems  but  the  wreck,  the 
mere  shadow  of  his  former  self.  But  in  all  that  is  true,  and  noble,  and  unselfish, 
ha  is  a  braver  and  a  better  man.  His  courage  has  been  tried.  The  tinsel  has  been 
lost,  but  the  fine  gold  all  remains.  And  so  is  it  with  the  youthful  Christian.  In  the 
first  days  of  his  profession,  when  he  has  given  his  heart  to  Jesus  for  the  first  time, 
all  his  graces  seem  so  fresh  and  lovely  All  his  being  is  filled  with  joy  unspeak- 
able. Years  pass  on.  The  young  professor  grows  into  the  aged  Christian.  His 
graces  do  not  now  seem  so  fresh  and  beautiful  as  they  did  forty  or  fifty  years  ago. 
His  feelings  do  not  flow  out  so  steadily  toward  the  Saviour  whom  he  loves,  nor 
do  the  tears  come  as  freely  now  as  they  did  long  ago  when  he  sits  down  at  the 
table  of  the  Lord.  You  would  say  that  in  his  case  the  former  days  were  better 
than  these.  But  you  do  not  inquire  wisely  concerning  this.  His  last  days  are  his 
best  days.  The  blossoms  may  have  perished,  but  you  have  in  their  stead  the 
mellow,  luscious  fruit.  The  golden  age  of  a  nation  is  not  always  behind,  lost  in 
the  myths  of  its  earliest  existence.  Years  of  conflict,  ages  of  revolution,  centuries 
ef  daring  and  doing  nobly,  freedom's  battle  bequeathed  by  bleeding  sire  to  son, 
through  long  decades  of  stern  resistance  to  all  oppression  and  tyranny.  It  is 
through  such  a  fiery  discipline  as  this  that  a  nation  becomes  truly  great  in  all 
those  qualities  that  ennoble  them  in  the  sight  of  Ood.  When  they  stand  up  as 
the  champions  of  right,  the  defenders  of  the  oppressed,  then  are  they  entering  on 
their  true  golden  age,  the  perfection  of  their  national  existence.  Nor  is  it  true 
in  regard  to  the  world  that  its  former  days  were  better  than  these.  Its  golden  age 
has  not  all  passed  away.  A  still  more  glorious  golden  age  awaits  it  in  the  ages 
that  are  to  come.  The  curse  of  sin  is  to  be  fully  and  for  ever  removed.  The  old 
earth  is  to  pass  away.  The  destroying  fire  will  burn  out  the  footprints  of  evil. 
And  God  will  make  all  things  new.  A  new  heaven  and  •  new  earth.  (/.  Oar- 
miehael,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  The  excellency  of  knowledge  i>,  that  wisdom  giveth  life  to  them  that 
have  it. — Religioui  education: — The  argument  which  I  shall  advance  on  behalf  of 
this  and  of  all  other  institutions  with  which  it  is  the  happiness  of  our  country  now 
to  aboimd,  having  a  similar  object  in  view — the  supply  of  wholesome  education 
for  the  poor — is  this,  that,  in  providing  instruction  for  the  destitute,  you  confer  on 
them  a  much  more  precious  gift  than  in  giving  them  pecuniary  supplies  for  the 
relief  of  their  outward  and  physical  necessities.  To  this  mode  of  stating  the  ease  I 
have  been  led  by  observing  the  remark  of  the  wise  man  in  the  text — that  "  wisdom 
is  a  defence  " — the  possession  of  solid,  but  more  especially  of  religious  knowledge, 
IB  the  means  of  protecting  a  man  from  many  dangers  and  many  calamities — 
"  and  money,"  too,  "  is  a  defence  " — as  the  medium  of  procioring  the  outward 
necessaries  and  comforts  of  life,  it  has  the  power  of  saving  its  possessor  from 
numerous  and  painful  sufferings  and  fears — but  yet,  if  we  compare  these  two 
defences  with  one  another,  "  the  excellency,"  the  advantage  will  be  found  upon 
the  side  of  knowledge  or  wisdom,  for  this  reason,  "  that  wisdom  giveth  life  to  them 
that  have  it."  1.  The  blessing  of  education  is  a  more  valuable  gift  of  charity  to 
the  poor  than  the  dh-ect  relief  of  their  physical  necessities,  even  in  the  way  of 
supplying  them  with  the  resources  of  natiu-al  life.  The  gift  of  money  will,  no 
doubt,  STail  to  procure  the  means  of  physical  maintenance  and  enjoyment  so  far 
•s  it  goes,  and  so  long  as  it  lasts;  but  then  it  perishes  in  the  using — it  has  in  it 


16«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTSATOS.  [chap.  vn. 

DO  Belf-preaerving,  no  self-renewing  power.  What  you  give  the  poor  man  to 
expend  on  food  and  raiment,  clothes  and  supports  him  for  a  season;  but  then 
food  IB  consumed,  and  raiment  waxes  old,  and  it  avails  him  no  longer  to  remember 
that  he  has  been  warmed,  that  he  has  been  filled.  He  cannot  feed  on  the  memory 
of  food,  nor  yet  array  himself  with  that  of  clothing.  But  lay  out,  on  the  other 
hand,  a  comparatively  trivial  sum  in  bestowing  on  the  indigent  child,  otherwise 
the  heir  of  hopeless  ignorance,  a  sound  and  suitable  instruction,  and  then  you 
bestow  on  him  a  som:ce  of  support  and  comfort  which  really  is  inexhaustible. 
"  Knowledge  is  power,"  and  being  personal  is  permanent  power.  It  is  in  a  man, 
and  therefore  continues  with  him  whatever  changes  may  occur  in  his  outward 
estate  to  strip  him  of  that  which  is  not  inherent  but  attached — ^not  in  but  about 
him ;  the  gift  of  education  gives  him  a  means  of  support  which  is  not  exhausted  by 
being  used — which,  if  it  is  useful  to-day,  was  useful  yesterday,  and  will  be  so 
to-morrow — which  is  self-preserving,  self -strengthening,  self-renewing.  And  while, 
as  the  giver  of  life  to  those  who  have  it,  knowledge  thus  excels  money  in  respect 
of  permanence — no  less  does  the  former  surpass  the  latter  in  respect  of  its 
efficiency.  In  the  degree  in  which  education  is  judiciously  conducted  does  it 
give  a  human  being  the  command  of  what  are  the  highest,  the  mightiest,  the  most 
productive  of  human  powers — the  faculties  of  the  rational  and  immortal  mind — 
faculties  which,  whether  acting  by  themselves  or  co-operating  with  corporeal 
energies  to  the  production  of  what  is  needful  for  the  support,  the  comfort,  the 
refreshment,  the  convenience  of  the  present  state,  give  at  once  an  elevated  char- 
acter, and  an  enlarged  efficiency  to  all  the  individual's  exertions  and  pursuits. 
By  implanting,  too,  and  conforming,  the  habit  of  thinking — prospective, 
serious,  considerate  thinking — which  is  one  great  aim  and  efEect  of  education, 
you  put  into  the  hands  of  man  or  woman  what  has  been  well  denominated 
"  the  principle  of  all  legitimate  prosperity."  Not  these  habits  alone,  however, 
but  all  moral  and  religious  principles  are  nursed  and  cherished  by  such  an 
education  as  that  of  which  we  speak — the  activity  and  temperance  which  are 
the  parents  of  health — the  industry  and  integrity,  the  benevolence  and 
magnanimity,  the  prudence  and  public  spirit,  the  rectitude  and  love,  of  which  the 
progeny  are  substance,  reputation,  influence,  domestic  and  social  comfort — the 
morality  which  is  connected  by  so  general  a  law  even  with  worldly  prosperity — 
the  godliness  which  "  hath  the  promise  of  this  life  as  well  as  of  that  which  is  to 
come."  2.  While  "  wisdom  is  a  defence,  and  money  is  a  defence,  the  excellency 
of  knowledge  is,  that  wisdom  giveth  "  intellectual  "life  to  them  that  have  it." 
It  is  of  the  nature  of  our  intellectual,  as  of  all  our  other  powers,  to  rust  through 
want  of  use;  so  that  in  him  who  has  never  been  accustomed  to  employ  his  mind, 
the  very  mind  itself  seems  to  fall  into  dormancy,  and  the  man  to  become,  at 
length,  a  merely  sentient  rather  than  a  rational  being.  Have  you  never  witnessed 
cases  in  which  the  spirit  has  seemed  thus  steeped  in  lethargy — ^persons  who  could 
be  kept  awake  only  by  the  necessity  of  manual  labour  and  the  stimulants  of 
sensual  excitement,  and  who  deprived  of  these,  seem  to  suffer  the  suspension  of 
their  whole  spiritual  existence,  and  sink  straightway  into  utter  apathy  and  listless- 
ness,  finding  no  resources  within  them  to  employ  time,  or  keep  alive  attention, 
when  the  impulse  from  without  has  disappeared — who  employ  their  minds,  such 
as  they  are,  but  as  the  slaves  and  instruments  of  body,  and  have  their  whole 
being  rightly  defined,  "  of  the  earth,  earthy  "?  Now,  to  prevent  this  death,  as  it 
may  be  called,  of  the  intellectual  soul  within  its  clayey  dungeon — whether  it  expire 
in  stupefaction  or  in  agony — the  only  means  you  can  employ  is  to  supply  it  with 
that  knowledge,  "  the  excellency  of  which  is,  that  it  giveth  life  to  them  that  have 
it."  The  capacity  of  intellectual  exercise  must  be  early  provoked,  and  stimulated, 
and  directed.  The  taste  for  intellectual  enjoyment  must  be  early  implanted,  and 
nourished,  and  improved.  In  providing,  then,  the  means  of  education  for  the 
else  deserted  children  of  your  city  and  your  coimtry,  you  are  providing  the  only 
direct — the  absolutely  necessary  means  of  rendering  them  worthy  of  the  name  of 
rational  and  intelligent  creatures — of  saving  from  being  overborne  and  extinguished 
that  which  defines  them  human  beings.  Tou  may,  peradventure,  give  the  first 
impulse  to  some  master-mind  which  else  might  have  remained  for  ever  cramped 
and  fettered  without  command  or  consciousness  of  its  latent  powers,  but  which, 
let  loose  by  you,  may  mightily  accelerate  and  advance  the  great  march  of  human 
improvement.  You  may,  peradventure,  kindle  some  luminous  spirit  which  else 
must  have  been  finally  absorbed  amidst  the  gloom  in  which  it  had  its  birth,  and 
which  shall  stream  far-darting  and  imperishable  lustre  to  distant  generations  and. 


CHAT.  Tii.T  ECCLESIASTE8.  167 

distant  climes.  8.  While  we  admit,  in  speaking  of  the  case  of  our  necessitous 
fellow-creatures,  "  that  money  is  a  defence  and  wisdom  a  defence,"  still  we  say 
that  "the  excellency  belongeth  unto  knowledge;  because  wisdom  giveth  life  "— 
life  spiritual  and  eternal — "  to  those  that  have  it."  It  is  "  the  key  of  knowledge  " 
that  opens  the  kingdom  of  heaven;  and  if  this  be  the  constitution  of  the  Oospel, 
very  plain  it  is  that  the  state  of  a  human  soul  abandoned  to  utter  ignorance  is  thai 
of  a  soul  devoted  to  inevitable  death.  Alas  1  what  multitudes  are  in  this  con« 
dition.  But  there  is  still  another  circumstance  which  darkens  and  aggravates  the 
view  we  are  compelled  to  take  of  the  spiritually  deathful  power  of  ignorance,  and 
it  is  this — that,  especially  amidst  a  condensed  and  crowded  population,  those  who 
grow  up  utterly  uneducated  are  almost  sure  to  grow  up  openly  profligate.  The  first 
and  most  direct  consequence  of  their  early  abandonment  without  the  means  of 
education  is,  that  they  are  left  to  spend  their  time  in  utter  idleness.  Led  by 
idleness  follows  the  twin-plague  evil  company,  under  whose  noxious  breath  every 
budding  of  thought  or  emotion  congenial  to  vurtuo  grows  sickly  and  expires,  while 
every  plant  of  deathful  odour  and  poisonous  fruit  expands  Into  dense  and  over- 
ehadowing  rankness.  In  process  of  time  such  childish  associations  in  childish  folly 
and  childish  vice  ripen  into  combinations  of  licentiousness  and  leagues  of  iniquity. 
The  means  are  in  your  power  of  possibly,  of  probably  averting  so  sad  a  catastrophe 
in  a  multitude  of  cases.  {J.  B.  Patterson,  M.A.)  Chrigtianity  the  guardian  of 
human  life: — ^We  may  imhesitatingly  charge  upon  heathenism,  even  ii  you  keep 
out  of  sight  its  debasmg  eSect  upon  morals,  and  thmk  of  it  only  as  a  system  of 
religious  ceremonies  and  observances,  the  having  a  direct  tendency  to  the  destroy- 
ing men's  lives.  It  has  not  been  merely  amongst  the  more  savage  of  pagans,  but 
also  amongst  those  who  have  advanced  far  in  civilization,  that  the  custom  has 
prevailed  of  offering  human  sacrifices.  The  Grecians  made  great  progress  in 
sciences  and  arts;  yet  it  would  seem  to  have  been  a  rule  with  each  of  their  states 
to  sacrifice  men  before  they  marched  against  an  enemy.  The  Romans,  who 
emulated  the  Grecians  in  civilization,  appear  not  to  have  been  behind  them  in  the 
cruelties  of  their  religion;  even  so  late  as  in  the  reign  of  Trajan,  men  and  women 
were  slain  at  the  shrine  of  some  one  of  their  deities.  As  to  the  heathenism  of  lesa 
refined  states,  it  would  be  easy  to  affix  to  it  a  yet  bloodier  character :  nothing,  for 
example,  could  well  exceed  the  massacres,  connected  with  religious  rites,  which 
appear  to  have  been  common  among  the  nations  of  America  :  the  annual  sacrifices 
of  the  Mexicans  required  many  thousands  of  victims,  and  in  Peru  two  hundred 
children  were  devoted  for  the  health  of  the  sovereign.  What  a  frightful  destruc- 
tion of  life  I  But  we  should  vastly  underrate  the  influence  of  Christianity  in 
saving  human  life,  were  we  merely  to  compute  from  the  abolition  of  the  destructive 
ritee  of  heathenism.  The  influence  has  been  exerted  in  indirect  modes  yet  mors 
than  in  direct.  It  has  gradually  substituted  mild  for  sanguinary  laws,  teaching 
rulers  that  the  cases  must  be  rare  which  justify  the  punishing  with  death.  And 
what  but  Christianity,  giving  sacredness  to  human  life,  ever  taught  men  to  erect 
asylums  for  the  sick  and  the  aged?  Add  to  this  the  mighty  advancings  which 
have  been  made  under  the  fostering  sway  of  Christianity  in  every  department  of 
science.  And  how  wonderfully,  in  promoting  knowledge,  has  Christianity  preserved 
life.  The  study  of  the  body,  of  its  structure  and  diseases;  acquaintance  with  the 
properties  of  minerals  and  plants;  skill  in  detecting  the  sources  of  pain,  and 
applying  remedies  or  assuagements — all  this  would  appear  peculiar,  in  a  great 
degree,  to  Christian  nations;  as  if  there  could  be  only  inconsiderable  progress  in 
medical  science,  whilst  a  land  were  not  trodden  by  the  alone  Physician  of  the 
soul.  And  need  we  point  out  how  knowledge  of  other  kinds,  cherished  by  Christi- 
anity, has  subserved  the  preservation  of  life?  Witness  astronomy,  watching  the 
mariner,  lest  he  be  bewildered  on  the  waters.  Witness  chemistry,  directing  the 
miner,  that  he  perish  not  by  subterranean  fires.  Witness  geography,  with  its 
maps  and  charts,  informing  the  traveller  of  dangers,  and  pointing  him  to  safety. 
Witness  architecture,  rearing  the  lighthouse  on  rocks,  where  there  seemed  no 
foundation  for  structures  which  might  brave  the  wild  storm,  and  thus  warning 
away  navies  which  must  otherwise  have  perished.  Witness  machinery,  providing 
for  the  poorest  what  once  the  wealthy  alone  could  obtain,  the  means  of  guarding 
against  inclement  seasons,  and  thus  preserving  health  when  most  rudely  threat- 
ened. But  it  were  greatly  to  wrong  Christianity  as  a  giver  of  life,  were  we  to  con- 
fine our  illustrations  to  the  bodies,  in  place  of  extending  them  to  the  souls  of  men. 
We  have  higher  evidence  thsm  any  yet  assigned,  that  Christianity  is  the  only 
wisdom  which  will  answer  the  description  contained  in  our  text.     It  may  be  said 


r 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tti. 

of  the  world,  in  every  period  of  its  history,  "  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not 
God."  Our  liability  to  punishment  is  discoverable  by  human  wisdom,  but  the 
possibility  of  our  escaping  it  not  without  heavenly ;  and  hence  there  is  no  life-giving 
power  in  the  former.  But  the  wisdom  which  the  Holy  Ghost  continually  imparts 
to  such  as  submit  to  His  influence  is,  from  first  to  last,  a  quickening,  vivifying 
thing.  It  makes  the  believer  alive,  in  the  sense  of  being  energetic  for  God  and 
for  truth;  alive,  as  feeling  himself  immortal;  alive,  as  having  thrown  off  the 
bondage  of  corruption;  alive,  as  knowing  himself  "begotten  again"  "  to  an 
inheritance  that  fadeth  not  away."  "I  live,"  said  the  great  apostle,  "yet  not 
I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  And  life  indeed  it  is,  when  a  man  is  made  "  wise 
unto  salvation  ";  when,  having  been  brought  to  a  consciouaness  of  his  state  as  a 
rebel  against  God,  he  has  committed  his  cause  unto  Christ,  "  who  was  delivered 
for  our  oSences,  and  was  raised  again  for  our  justification."  There  is  needed  only 
that,  renouncing  all  wisdom  of  our  own,  we  oome  unto  God  to  be  taught,  and  wa 
■hall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  that  Spirit  which  is  breath  to  the  soul,  quicken- 
ing it  from  the  death  of  nature,  and  causing  its  torpid  energies  and  perverted 
•Sections  to  rise  to  their  due  use,  and  fix  on  their  due  end.  And  the  excellency  of 
this  knowledge  is,  that,  having  it,  you  will  have  life.  You  cannot  have  it,  except 
in  the  heart;  for  no  man  knows  Christ  who  knows  Him  only  with  the  head.  And 
having  this  knowledge  in  the  heart,  you  have  renewal  of  the  heart;  and  with 
renewal  of  the  heart  forgiveness  of  sin,  and  the  earnests  of  immortality.  Are  we 
sot  now,  therefore,  able  to  vindicate  in  all  its  extent  the  assertion  of  our  text?  In 
the  former  part  of  the  verse  the  wise  man  had  allowed  that  "  wisdom  is  a  defence, 
and  money  is  a  defence."  But  "  riches  profit  not  in  the  day  of  wrath,"  and  "  the 
wisdom  of  this  world  is  foolishness  with  God."  But  they  whose  treasure  has  been 
above — they  who  have  counted  "  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  " — ^they  shall  have  a  defence,  a  sure  defence,  when  the  rich 
man  is  destitute  and  the  wise  man  speechless.  They  have  chosen  that  which 
cannot  be  taken  away,  and  which,  indeed,  is  then  only  fully  possessed,  when  every- 
thing else  departs  from  human  hold.  As  they  soar  to  inherit  the  kingdom  obtained 
for  them  by  Christ,  and  thus  lay  hold  on  an  immortality  of  joy  through  having 
acquainted  themselves  with  Him  as  "  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life,"  there  may 
be  none  to  say  that  "  money  is  a  defence,  and  wisdom  is  a  defence  " — none  to  say 
it  in  the  face  of  the  confounding  witness  of  the  elements  melting  with  fervent 
heat,  and  of  the  shrinking  away  of  those  who  have  been  "  wise  in  their  own  eyes, 
and  prudent  in  their  own  sight  ";  but  the  whole  company  of  the  redeemed  shall 
be  joined  by  the  thousand  times  ten  thousand  of  the  celestial  host,  in  confessing 
and  publishing  that  the  excellency  of  knowledge  is,  "  that  wisdom,"  Christian 
wisdom,  "  giveth  life  to  them  that  have  it."     (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  Consider  the  work  of  Ood:  for  who  can  make  that  straight  which 
He  hath  made  arookedl — Tht  power  of  God,  and  the  duty  of  man: — I.  What  wb 
ARB  TO  DNDEKSTAND  BY  "  THE  WORK  OF  GoD."  This  is  an  expressiou  often  used  in 
the  Scriptures,  and  has  different  significations.  In  one  place  it  refers  to  the  two 
tables  of  stone,  containing  the  Ten  Commandments,  written  by  the  finger  of  God 
and  given  to  Moses.  In  another  to  the  reception  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by 
faith  (John  vi.  29,  30).  In  a  third  to  the  progress  of  the  Gospel,  and  to  the 
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  heart,  by  which  a  radical  change  is  effected, 
and  holy  tempers  produced  (Rom.  xiv.  20).  In  the  text  it  is  evidently  used  to 
point  out  to  us  the  infinitely  wise  arrangement  of  all  the  situations  and  circum- 
stances of  the  sons  of  men  :  that  the  bounds  of  their  habitation  are  marked  out 
by  Him  to  whom  all  things  in  earth  and  heaven  owe  their  existence.     11.  Thb 

IMPOSSIBILITY    OF    ALTERING    OR    DEFEATING    THE    PURPOSES    OF    GoD.       To    prOVe    this, 

might  I  not  refer  to  the  experience  and  observation  of  all  people?  Our  fields  may 
be  cultivated  with  all  imaginable  care — we  may  sow  the  best  corn  that  can  be 
procured — but  if  the  will  of  the  Lord  be  so,  we  can  reap  nothing  but  disappoint- 
ment. If  He  designs  to  chastise  a  guilty  people  by  sending  a  famine  upon  them. 
He  can  make  a  worm,  or  a  dew,  hail,  storm,  or  lightning,  to  blast  man's  hope  in 
•  moment,  and  to  teach  him  that  except  the  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour 
in  vain  that  build  it ;  and  that  except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the  watchman 
waketh  but  in  vain  (Ps.  cxxvii.  1).  If  it  be  His  will  to  fill  a  sinner  with  remorse 
of  conscience.  He  can  make  him  cry  out  with  Cain,  My  punishment  is  greater 
than  I  can  bear — or  with  Joseph's  brethren,  when  they  imagined  that  vengeance 
was  about  to  overtake  them,  "We  are  verily  guilty  concerning  our  brother — or  with 


CHAP.  TH.]  ECCLESlASTES.  169 

Judae,  I  have  sinned,  in  that  I  have  betrayed  the  innocent  blood.  All  hearts  ue 
in  His  hand ;  His  power  rules  over  all ;  none  can  stay  that  hand  or  resist  Buccess- 
fully  that  power.  III.  The  dutt  incumbent  on  man  to  be  satisfied  with  hii 
LOT.  A  sinner  by  nature  and  practice,  man  deserves  no  blessing  from  hir 
Maker — he  can  lay  no  claim  to  a  continuance  of  present  mercies,  nor  has  he  in 
himself  any  ground  to  hope  for  fresh  ones — of  course  everything  he  enjoys  ia 
unmerited.  Is  it  for  such  a  being  as  this  to  be  dissatisfied  with  what  he  possesses, 
because  others  possess  more?  Is  it  for  him  to  think  that  he  is  hardly  dealt  with, 
while  oppressed  by  pain,  sickness,  hunger  or  thirst — when  a  moment's  reflection 
ought  to  convince  him  that  anything  short  of  hell  is  a  blessing?  The  heart  must 
be  changed  by  the  grace  of  God  before  it  can  rejoice  in  tribulation — and  testify 
that  tribulation  worketh  patience;  and  patience,  experience;  and  experience,  hope: 
and  it  is  through  the  belief  of  the  Gospel  that  this  change  is  effected.     IV.  Con- 

8IDBBATI0N   IS   AN   IMPORTANT  AND   PLAINLY  ENJOINED    DUTY — and   when   we   take   'uto 

account  the  character  of  man,  and  the  distractions  produced  in  his  mind  by 
visible  things,  its  necessity  is  quite  apparent.  Let  us  then  consider  that  we  are 
not  called  upon  to  account  for  the  Lord's  dealings,  or  to  make  the  vun  attempt 
of  reconciling  the  seeming  contrarieties  in  the  Divine  administration.  If  clouds 
and  darkness  are  round  about  Him,  we  may  yet  be  sure  that  righteousness  and 
judgment  are  the  habitation  of  His  throne.  His  servants  will  one  day  under- 
■tand,  as  far  as  is  necessary,  everything  which  now  appears  dark  and  perplexing, 
and  in  the  mean  season  they  are  called  to  live  by  faith — to  "  take  no  thought  for 
the  morrow  " — ^to  "  commit  their  ways  unto  Him,"  and  to  be  satisfied  with  the 
assurance  that  "  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  does  right."  (P.  Roe,  M.A.)  The 
crook  in  ihe  lot: — ^A  just  view  of  afflicting  incidents  is  altogether  necessary  to  a 
Christian  deportment  under  them :  and  that  view  is  to  be  obtained  only  by  faith, 
not  by  sense.  For  it  is  the  light  of  the  Word  alone  that  represents  them  justly, 
discovering  in  them  the  work  of  God,  and  consequently  designs  becoming  the 
Divine  perfections.  These  perceived  by  the  eye  of  faith,  and  duly  considered,  one 
has  a  just  view  of  afflicting  incidents,  fitted  to  quell  the  turbulent  motions  of 
corrupt  affections  under  dismal  outward  appearances.  I.  Whatsoeveb  cbook  is 
IN  onb'8  lot,  it  is  oe  God's  maeinq.  1.  As  to  the  crook  itself,  the  crook  in  the 
lot,  for  the  better  understanding  thereof  these  few'  things  following  are  premised. 
(1)  There  is  a  certain  train  or  course  of  events,  by  the  providence  of  God,  falling 
io  every  one  of  us  during  our  life  in  this  world :  and  that  ie  our  lot,  as  being 
allotted  to  us  by  the  sovereign  God,  our  Creator  and  Governor,  in  whose  hand 
our  breath  is,  and  whose  are  all  our  ways.  (2)  In  that  train  or  course  of  events, 
tome  fall  out  cross  to  us,  and  against  the  grain;  and  these  make  the  crook  in  our 
lot.  (3)  Everybody's  lot  in  this  world  hath  some  crook  in  it.  Complainers  are 
apt  to  make  odious  comparisons :  they  look  about,  and  taking  a  distant  view  of 
the  condition  of  others,  can  discern  nothing  in  it  but  what  is  straight,  and  just 
to  one's  wish;  so  they  pronounce  their  neighbour's  lot  wholly  straight.  But  that 
is  a  false  verdict :  there  is  no  perfection  here,  no  lot  out  of  heaven  without  a 
erook.  (4)  The  crook  in  the  lot  came  into  the  world  by  sin :  it  is  owing  to  the 
fall  (Bom.  V.  12).  2.  Having  seen  the  crook  itself,  we  are,  in  the  next  place,  to 
consider  of  God's  making  it.  (1)  That  the  crook  in  the  lot,  whatever  it  is,  is  of 
God's  making,  appears  from  these  three  considerations.  It  cannot  be  questioned, 
but  the  crook  in  the  lot,  considered  as  the  crook,  is  a  penal  evil,  whatever  it  is 
for  the  matter  thereof:  that  is,  whether  the  thing  in  itself,  its  immediate  cause 
and  occasion  be  sinful  or  not,  it  is  certainly  a  punishment  or  affliction.  Now,  as 
it  may  be,  as  such  holily  and  justly  brought  on  us,  by  our  sovereign  Lord  and 
Judge,  so  He  expressly  claims  the  doing  or  making  of  it  (Amos  iii.  6).  It  is 
evident  from  the  Scripture-doctrine  of  Divine  providence  that  God  brings  about 
every  man's  lot  and  all  the  parts  thereof.  (2)  That  we  may  see  how  the  crook 
in  the  lot  is  of  God's  making,  we  must  distinguish  between  pure  sinless  crooks 
and  impure  sinful  ones.  There  are  pure  and  sinless  crooks :  the  which  are  mere 
afflictions,  cleanly  crosses;  grievous  indeed,  but  not  defiling.  Such  were  Lazarus' 
poverty,  Bachel's  barrenness,  Leah's  tender  eyes,  the  blindness  of  the  man  who 
had  been  so  from  his  birth  (John  ix.  1).  Such  crooks  in  the  lot  are  of  God's 
making,  in  the  most  ample  sense,  and  in  their  full  comprehension,  being  the 
direct  effects  of  His  agency,  as  well  as  the  heavens  and  the  earth  are.  There  are 
impure  sinful  crooks,  which,  in  their  own  nature,  are  sins  as  well  as  afflictions, 
defiling  as  well  as  grievous.  Such  was  the  crook  made  in  David's  lot,  through 
his  family  disorders,  the  defiling  of  Tamar,  the  murder  of  Amnon,  the  rebellion 


J70  rfl'E  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Ttr. 


of  Absalom,  all  of  them  unnatural.  Now,  the  crooks  of  this  kind  are  not  of  God's 
making,  in  the  same  latitude  as  those  of  the  former;  for  He  neither  puts  evil  in 
the  hearts  of  any,  nor  stirreth  up  to  it  (James  i.  13).  But  they  are  of  His  making, 
by  His  holy  permission  of  them,  powerful  bounding  of  them,  and  wise  over-ruling 
of  them  to  some  good  end.  (3)  It  remains  to  inquire  why  God  makes  a  crook  in 
one's  lot.  And  this  is  to  be  cleared  by  discovering  the  design  of  that  dispensation  : 
a  matter  which  it  concerns  every  one  to  know,  and  carefully  to  notice,  in  order 
to  a  Christian  improvement  of  the  crook  in  their  lot.  The  design  thereof  seems 
to  be,  chiefly,  seven-fold.  The  trial  of  one's  state — whether  one  is  in  the  state 
of  grace,  or  not?  Whether  a  sincere  Christian,  or  s  hypocrite?  Excitation  to 
duty,  weaning  one  from  this  world,  and  prompting  him  to  look  after  the  happiness 
of  the  other  world.  Conviction  of  sin.  As  when  one,  walking  heedlessly,  is  sud- 
denly taken  ill  of  a  lameness;  his  going  halting  the  rest  of  his  way  convinceth 
him  of  having  made  a  wrong  step ;  and  every  new  painful  step  brings  it  afresh  to 
his  mind :  so  God  makes  a  crook  in  one's  lot,  to  convince  him  of  some  false  step 
he  hath  made,  or  course  he  hath  taken.  Correction  or  punishment  for  sin.  In 
nothing  more  than  in  the  crook  of  the  lot  is  that  word  verified  (Jer.  ii.  19).  Pre- 
Tenting  of  sin  (Hob.  ii.  6).  Many  are  obliged  to  the  crook  in  their  lot,  that  they 
go  not  to  these  excesses,  which  their  vain  minds  and  corrupt  affections  would 
with  full  sail  carry  them  to :  and  they  would  from  their  hearts  bless  God  for 
making  it,  if  they  did  but  calmly  consider  what  would  most  likely  be  the  issue  of 
the  removal  thereof.  Discovery  of  latent  corruption,  whether  in  saints  or  sinners. 
The  exercise  of  grace  in  the  children  of  God.  The  crook  in  the  lot  gives  rise 
unto  many  acts  of  faith,  hope,  love,  self-denial,  resignation,  and  other  graces; 
to  many  heavenly  breathings,  pantings,  longings,  and  groanings,  which  otherwise 
would  not  be  brought  forth.  II.  What  crook  God  makes  in  our  lot,  wk  will 
KOT  BB  ABLE  TO  EVEN.  1.  Show  God's  marring  and  making  a  crook  in  one's  lot,  as 
He  seee  meet.  (1)  God  keeps  the  choice  of  every  one's  crook  to  Himself :  and 
therein  he  exerts  His  sovereignty  (Matt.  xx.  15).  (2)  He  sees  and  observes  the 
bias  of  every  one's  will  and  inclination  how  it  lies,  and  wherein  it  specially  bends 
away  from  Himself,  and  consequently  wherein  it  needs  the  special  bow.  (3)  By 
the  conduct  of  His  providence,  or  a  touch  of  His  hand.  He  gives  that  part  of  one's 
lot  a  bow  the  contrary  way;  so  that  henceforth  it  lies  quite  contrary  to  that  bias 
of  the  party's  will  (Ezek.  xxiv.  25).  (4)  He  wills  that  crook  in  the  lot  to  remain 
while  He  sees  meet,  for  longer  or  shorter  time,  just  according  to  His  own  holy 
ends  He  designs  it  for  (2  Sam.  xii.  10;  Hos.  v.  15).  2.  Consider  man's  attempting 
to  mend  or  even  that  crook  in  their  lot.  This,  in  a  word,  lies  in  their  making 
efforts  to  bring  their  lot  in  that  point  to  their  own  will,  that  they  may  both  go  one 
way;  so  it  imports  three  things.  (1)  A  certain  uneasiness  under  the  crook  in 
the  lot;  it  is  a  yoke  which  is  hard  for  the  party  to  bear,  till  his  spirit  be  tamed 
and  subdued  (Jer.  xxxi.  18).  (2)  A  strong  desire  to  have  the  cross  removed,  and 
to  have  matters  in  that  part  going  according  to  our  inclinations.  (3)  An  earnest 
use  of  means  for  that  end.  This  natively  follows  on  that  desire.  And  if  the 
means  used  be  lawful,  and  not  relied  upon,  but  followed  with  an  eye  to  God  in 
them,  the  attempt  is  not  sinful  either,  whether  he  succeed  in  the  use  of  them  or 
cot.  3.  In  what  sense  it  is  to  be  understood,  that  we  will  not  be  able  to  mend 
or  even  the  crook  in  our  lot?  (1)  It  is  not  to  be  understood  as  if  the  case  were 
absolutely  hopeless,  and  that  there  is  no  remedy  for  the  crook  in  the  lot.  For 
there  is  no  case  so  desperate  but  God  may  right  it  (Gen.  xviii.  14).  (2)  We  will 
never  be  able  to  mend  it  by  ourselves;  if  the  Lord  Himself  take  it  not  in  hand 
to  remove  it,  it  will  stand  before  us  immovable,  like  the  mountain  of  brass, 
though,  perhaps,  it  may  be  in  itself  a  thing  that  might  easily  be  removed.  We 
take  it  up  in  these  three  things.  It  will  never  do  by  the  mere  force  of  our  hand 
iX  Sam.  ii.  9).  The  use  of  all  allowable  means,  for  it  will  be  successless  unless 
the  Lord  bless  them  for  that  end  (Lam.  iii.  37).  It  will  never  do  in  our  time,  but 
in  God's  time,  which  seldom  is  so  early  as  ours  (John  vii.  6).  4.  Keasons  of  the 
point.  (1)  Because  of  the  absolute  dependence  we  have  upon  God  (Acts  xvii. 
28).  (2)  Because  His  will  is  irresistible  (Isa.  xlvi.  10).  Inference  1.  There  is  a 
necessity  of  yielding  and  submitting  under  the  crook  in  our  lot;  for  we  may  as 
well  think  to  remove  the  rocks  and  mountains,  which  God  has  settled,  as  to  make 
that  psut  of  our  lot  straight  which  He  hath  crooked.  2.  The  evening  of  the 
crook  in  our  lot,  by  main  force  of  our  own,  is  but  a  cheat  we  put  on  ourselves, 
and  will  not  last,  but,  like  a  stick  by  main  force  made  straight,  it  will  quickly 
return  to  the  bow  again.     8.  The  only  effectual  way  of  getting  the  crook  evened 


i 


CHAP.  VII.]  ECCLESIASTES.  ITl 

ia  to  apply  to  God  for  it.  Exhortation  1.  Let  us  then  apply  to  God  for  removing 
any  crook  in  our  lot,  that  in  the  settled  order  of  things  may  be  removed.  2.  What 
crook  there  is,  that,  in  the  settled  order  of  things,  cannot  be  got  removed  or 
evened  in  this  world,  let  us  apply  to  God  for  suitable  relief  under  it.  3.  Let  us 
then  set  ourselves  rightly  to  bear  and  carry  under  the  crook  in  our  lot,  while 
God  sees  meet  to  continue  it.  What  we  cannot  mend,  let  us  hear  Christianly,  and 
not  fight  against  God.  So  let  us  bear  it — (1)  Patiently,  without  firing  and  fretting, 
or  murmuring  (James  v.  7;  Pa.  xxxvii.  7).  (2)  With  Christian  fortitude,  without 
sinking  under  discouragement — "  nor  faint  when  thou  art  rebuked  of  Him  "  (Heb. 
xii.  5).  (3)  Profitably,  so  as  we  may  gain  some  advantage  thereby  (Ps.  cxix.  71). 
Motives  to  press  this  exhortation.  1.  There  will  be  no  evening  of  it  while  God 
seee  meet  to  continue  it.  2.  An  awkward  carriage  under  it  notably  increases  the 
pain  of  it.  3.  The  crook  in  thy  lot  \&  the  special  trial  God  has  chosen  for  thee  to 
take  thy  measure  by  (1  Pet.  i.  6,  7).  Think,  then,  with  thyself  under  it.  Now, 
here  the  trial  of  my  state  turns;  I  must,  by  this  be  proven  either  sincere  or  a 
hypocrite.  For — (1)  Can  any  be  a  cordial  subject  of  Christ  without  being  able  to 
submit  his  lot  to  Him?  Do  not  all  who  sincerely  come  to  Christ  put  a  blank  in 
His  hand?  (Acts  ix.  6;  Ps.  xlvii.  4).  And  does  He  not  tell  us  that  without  that 
disposition  we  are  not  His  disciples?  (Luke  xiv.  26).  (2)  Where  is  the  Christian 
self-denial  and  taking  up  of  the  cross  without  submitting  to  the  crook?  This  is 
the  first  lesson  Christ  puts  in  the  hands  of  His  disciples  (Matt.  xvi.  24).  (3) 
Where  is  our  conformity  to  Christ,  while  we  cannot  submit  to  the  crook?  (4)  How 
will  we  prove  ourselves  the  genuine  kindly  children  of  God,  if  still  warring  with 
the  crook?  4.  The  trial  by  the  crook  here  will  not  last  long  (1  Cor.  vii.  81). 
6.  If  ye  would,  in  a  Christian  manner,  set  yourselves  to  bear  the  crook,  ye  would 
find  it  easier  than  ye  imagine  (Matt.  xi.  29,  SO).  6.  If  ye  carry  Christianly  under 
your  crook  here,  ye  will  not  lose  your  labour,  but  get  a  full  reward  of  grace  in  the 
other  world,  through  Christ  (2  Tim.  ii.  12;  1  Cor.  xv.  58).  7.  If  ye  do  not  carry 
Christianly  under  it,  ye  will  lose  your  souls  in  the  other  world  (Jude  15,  16). 

III.    CONSIDERINQ   THE   CROOK   IN   THE  LOT  AS   THE   WORK   OF   GOD   IS   A   PROPER   MEANS 

TO  BRING  ONE  TO  CARRY  RiOHTLT  UNDER  IT.  1.  What  it  is  to  consider  the  crook  as 
the  work  of  God.  (1)  An  inquiry  into  the  spring  whence  it  riseth  (Gen.  xxv.  22). 
(2)  A  perceiving  of  the  hand  of  God  in  it.  (3)  A  representing  it  to  ourselves  as 
the  work  of  God,  which  He  hath  wrought  against  us  for  holy  and  wise  ends, 
becoming  the  Divine  perfections.  This  is  to  take  it  by  the  right  handle,  to  repre- 
sent it  to  ourselves  under  a  right  notion,  from  whence  a  right  management  under 
it  may  spring.  (4)  A  continuing  of  the  thought  of  it  as  such.  It  is  not  a  simple 
glance  of  the  eye,  but  a  contemplating  and  leisurely  viewing  of  it  as  His  work  that 
is  the  proper  mean.  (5)  A  considering  it  for  the  end  for  which  it  is  proposed 
to  MS,  viz.  to  bring  to  a  dutiful  carriage  under  it.  2.  How  is  it  to  be  under- 
stood to  be  a  proper  means  to  bring  one  to  carry  rightly  under  the  crook?  (1) 
Kegatively;  not  as  if  it  were  sufficient  of  itself,  and  as  it  stands  alone,  to  produce 
that  eifect.  But  (2)  Positively;  as  it  is  used  in  faith,  in  the  faith  of  the  Gospel: 
that  is  to  say,  a  sinner's  bare  considering  the  crook  in  his  lot  as  the  work  of  God, 
without  any  saving  relation  to  him,  will  never  be  a  way  to  carry  rightly  under  it : 
but  having  believed  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  so  taking  God  for  his  God,  the  considering 
of  the  crook  as  the  work  of  God,  his  God,  is  the  proper  means  to  bring  him  to  that 
desirable  temper  and  behaviour.  3.  I  shall  confirm  that  it  is  a  proper  mean  to 
bring  one  to  carry  rightly  under  it.  (1)  It  is  of  great  use  to  divert  from  the 
considering  and  dwelling  on  these  things  about  the  crook,  which  serve  to  irritate 
our  corruption.  (2)  It  has  a  moral  aptitude  for  producing  the  good  effect.  Though 
our  cure  is  not  compassed  by  the  mere  force  of  reason;  yet  it  is  carried  on,  not 
by  a  brutal  movement,  but  in  a  rational  way  (Eph.  v.  14).  This  consideration  has 
a  moral  efficacy  on  our  reason,  is  fit  to  awe  us  into  submission,  and  ministers  much 
argument  for  it,  moving  to  carry  Christianly  under  our  crook.  (3)  It  hath  a  Divine 
appointment  for  that  end,  which  is  to  be  believed  (Prov.  iii.  6).  (4)  The  Spirit 
may  be  expected  to  work  by  it,  and  does  work  by  it  in  them  that  believe,  and  look 
to  Him  for  it,  forasmuch  as  it  is  a  mean  of  His  own  appointment.  (T.  Boaton, 
D.D.)  Crooked  things  (with  Isa.  xl.  4) : — These  two  passages  contain  a  question 
and  the  answer  to  it.  We  are  taught  therefrom  that  God,  and  God  alone,  can 
make  that  straight  which  He  has  permitted  to  be  made  crooked — that  He  alone 
can  make  that  plain  which  He  has  allowed  to  become  rough.  I.  The  inequali- 
ties, OR  CROOKEDNESS,  OF  TEMPORAL  THINGS.  1.  We  must  first  of  all  grant  that 
erooked  things  are  not  necessarily  evil  things.     Many  of  them  are  very  beautiful — 


171  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tit. 

many  very  useful.  If  all  the  limbs  of  a  tree  were  straight,  how  curious  would  b« 
our  surroundings  I  If  all  the  fields  were  flat,  how  monotonous  the  landscape, 
and  how  unhealthy  the  situation  1  It  is  when  crookedness  takes  the  place  of  thai 
which  ought  to  be  straight  that  the  crookedness  becomes  an  evil.  2.  We  must, 
secondly,  bear  in  mind  that  these  crooked  things  are  made  so  by  God — "  that 
which  God  hath  made  crooked."  There  are  many  reasons  why  He  has  done  eo, 
but  He  has  not  revealed  all  those  reasons  to  us.  Some,  however,  are  so  evident 
that  we  cannot  but  see  them.  (1)  He  would  not  make  this  world  too  comfortabla 
for  us,  or  else  we  should  never  desire  a  better  one.  (2)  He  could  not  leave  ub 
without  temptations,  or  else  we  should  never  be  proved.  (3)  He  could  not 
obliterate  the  consequences  of  sin  until  sin  is  done  away.  Man  brought  these 
consequences  on  himself  at  the  fall,  and  they  must  remain  as  long  as  sin  remains. 
8.  Let  us  now  glance  at  some  of  these  crooked  things.  (1)  See  them  in  nature. 
There  are  extremes  of  heat  and  cold.  No  part  of  the  world  is  without  its  draw- 
backs. In  no  country  are  all  advantages  combined.  A  warm  land  has  venomous 
serpents,  and  insect-plagues  infest  the  inhabitants.  In  northern  countries  the  cold 
absorbs  half  the  pleasure  of  human  life.  Tornadoee,  tempests,  storms  destroy  the 
verdure  of  spring,  and  spread  terror  and  dismay.  Mountains  and  oceans  and 
language  separate  nations.  The  very  change  of  seasons  introduces  an  element  of 
uncertainty  and  crookedness.  (2)  See  it  in  life.  Pain  racks  the  limbs,  fear, 
anxiety,  dread,  sorrow,  bereavement,  trial,  the  bitter  struggle  of  existence,  the 
cry  of  cruel  want,  poverty,  and  improvidence;  the  strange  distribution  of  wealth 
and  power,  the  inequalities  of  ability.  All  these  things  stand  out  prominently 
and  in  lurid  brightness,  among  the  crooked  things.  (3)  See  it  in  social  relation- 
ships. We  meet  with  crooked  characters,  and  crooked  dispositions  in  others^ 
and  are  not  without  crooked  tempers  in  our  own  breasts.  There  are  contrary 
people  around  us,  conceited  people,  thoughtless  people,  with  whom  we  come  ia 
contact.  There  are  changeable  people,  irritating  people,  cross-grained  people, 
vexatious  acts  and  foolish  repartees,  until,  disheartened  and  crushed,  we  feel  at 
if  it  were  a  very  crooked  world  indeed  (4)  See  it  in  spiritual  things.  No 
sooner  do  we  begin  to  try  to  serve  and  love  God  than  these  roughnesses  crop  up. 
Watch  the  door  of  your  lips  and  see  bow  much  irreverence,  how  many  vain  and 
foolish  words  come  forth.  Watch  your  tempers,  and  something  surely  comes  to 
put  them  out  of  gear.  II.  No  human  poweb  can  put  these  things  stbaioht. 
How  could  we  expect  anything  different?  How  can  man  contravene  the  purposes 
of  an  almighty  God?  No  more  can  we  expect  to  rectify  things  in  this  world  than 
we  could  expect  to  create  the  world  itself.  III.  The  grand  consummation  se- 
FERRED  to  IN  ouE  SECOND  TEXT — "The  crookcd  shall  be  made  straight."  Yes; 
but  this  is  by  God  Himself,  and  not  by  man.  God  shall  put  things  straight  by 
going  down  to  the  cause  of  their  disorder.  He  will  not  attack  the  details  like  man 
would  when  he  finds  a  medicine  to  cure  a  pain;  but  He  will  set  the  springs  right, 
and  then  all  the  wheels  will  run  with  smoothness  and  regularity.  {Homiliat.) 
The  crooked  in  life: — I.  What  la  hebb  implied.  It  is  something  crooked.  What 
is  this?  It  is  not  the  same  in  all,  but  it  may  easily  be  found.  1.  It  is  sometimes 
found  in  the  mind.  One  complains  of  the  slowness  of  his  apprehension;  another 
of  a  narrow  capacity;  another  of  a  treacherous  memory.  2.  It  is  sometimes  found 
in  the  body.  Some  are  defective  in  their  limbs.  Some  are  the  subjects  of  indie- 
position  and  infirmity.  3.  It  is  sometimes  found  in  our  connections.  Perhaps  it 
is  a  bad  wife.  Perhaps  it  ia  a  brother.  Perhaps  it  is  a  servant.  Perhaps  it  is  a 
treacherous  or  a  frail  friend.  4.  It  is  sometimes  found  in  our  calling  or  business. 
Bad  times.  Untoward  events.  Dear  purchases  and  cheap  sales.  Bad  debts. 
6.  Sometimes  it  is  found  in  our  condition  considered  at  large.  Is  the  man 
wealthy?  In  the  midst  of  his  suflBciency  he  is  afraid  of  poverty.  Has  he  been 
crowned  with  success?  There  is  some  circumstance  that  tarnishes  the  lustre,  or 
mars  the  joy.  Has  he  honour?  This  bringeth  along  with  it  defamation.  Has 
he  exquisite  pleasure?  It  soon  cloys,  and  the  repetition  of  the  scene  becomes 
insipid.  II.  What  is  expressed — namely,  that  God  is  the  author  of  this.  There 
is  no  such  thing  as  chance  in  our  world.  Nothing  can  befall  us  without  the  per- 
mission and  appointment  of  the  all-disposing  providence  of  our  Heavenly  Father, 
Now,  how  rational  this  is.  Why,  surely  it  is  not  beneath  God  to  govern  what  it 
I  was  not  beneath  Him  to  create  I  III.  What  is  enjoined.  It  ia  to  "consider." 
;  1.  So  consider  the  work  of  God  as  to  be  led  to  acknowledge  that  resistance  to  it 
is  useless.  2.  See  and  acknowledge  the  propriety  of  acquiescence.  (1)  Remember, 
'  in  order  to  produce  this  acquiescence,  that  your  case  is  not  peculiar.    (2)  Bemem* 


-CHAP.  TO.]  ECCLESIASTES.  178 

ber  that  all  is  not  crookedness.  (3)  There  is  wisdom  in  the  appropriating  of  your 
crook.  (4)  There  is  goodness  in  your  crook.  8.  So  consider  the  work  of  God  aa 
to  improve  it  and  turn  it  to  advantage.  (1)  Let  it  embitter  sin.  (2)  You  are  to 
improve  it  by  turning  from  the  creature  to  the  Creator.  (3)  You  are  to  improve 
it,  by  its  leading  you  from  earth  to  heaven.     (T7.  Jay.) 

Ver.  14.  In  tlie  day  of  prosperity  be  joyful,  but  in  the  day  of  adversity  con- 
sider.— Prosperity  and  adversity: — The  llie  of  man  is  made  up  of  prosperity  and 
adversity,  of  pleasure  and  pain,  which  succeed  one  another  here  below  in  an 
eternal  rotation,  like  day  and  night,  summer  and  winter.  Prosperity  and  adversity 
usually  walk  hand  in  hand.  The  Divine  providence  hath  joined  them,  and  I  shall 
not  put  them  asunder,  but  offer  some  remarks  upon  them  both.  I.  I  begin  with 
the  latter  part  of  the  sentence;  In  the  day  of  adversity  consider.  In  the  day 
of  adversity  we  should  consider  whether  we  can  free  ourselves  from  it.  For  it 
happens  sometimes  that  whilst  we  complain,  we  have  the  remedy  in  our  own 
hands,  if  we  had  heart  and  the  sense  to  make  use  of  it;  and  then  we  cannot 
expect  that  men  or  that  God  should  assist  us,  if  we  are  wanting  to  ourselves.  But 
most  commonly  adversity  is  of  that  nature,  that  it  is  not  in  our  power  to  remove 
it;  and  then  we  should  consider  how  to  lessen  it,  or  how  to  bear  it  in  the  best 
manner  we  can.  We  should  consider  that  adversity,  as  well  as  prosperity,  is 
permitted  or  appointed  by  Divine  providence.  God  hath  so  ordered  the  course  of 
things  that  there  should  be  a  mixture  and  a  rotation  of  both  in  this  world,  and, 
therefore,  we  ought  to  acquiesce  in  it,  and  to  be  contented  that  God's  will  bo 
done.  Submission,  patience  and  resignation  are  of  a  calm  and  quiet  nature,  and 
afford  some  relief,  composure  and  peace  of  mind;  but  repining  and  reluctance 
only  irritate  the  pain,  and  add  one  evil  to  another.  To  tell  an  afflicted  person  that 
it  must  be  so,  may  be  thought  a  rough  and  an  overbearing  argument,  rather  fit 
to  silence  than  to  satisfy  a  man.  Therefore  we  should  add  this  consideration, 
not  only  that  adversity  is  proper  because  God  permits  it,  but  that  God  permits 
it  because  it  is  proper.  Perhaps  we  have  brought  the  adversity  upon  ourselves, 
by  our  own  imprudence  and  misconduct.  If  so,  it  is  just  that  God  should 
suffer  things  to  take  their  course,  and  not  interpose  to  relieve  ue,  and  we  ought 
to  submit  to  it,  as  to  a  state  which  we  deserve.  Nature,  indeed,  will  dispose  us 
in  such  a  case  to  discontent  and  to  remorse;  but  religion  will  teach  us  to  make  a 
good  use  of  the  calamity.  God  may  suffer  us  to  fall  into  adversity  by  way  of 
correction  for  our  sins.  If  so,  sorrowful  we  should  be  for  the  cause,  and  sorrowful 
we  may  be  for  the  effect;  but  we  have  many  motives  to  patience,  resignation  and 
gratitude.  It  is  much  better  that  we  should  receive  our  punishment  here  than 
hereafter;  and  if  it  produce  any  amendment  in  us,  it  serves  to  the  best  of  pur> 
poees,  and  ends  in  peace  and  joy  and  happiness.  God  may  visit  us  with  adversity, 
by  way  of  trial,  and  for  our  greater  improvement,  that  we  may  correct  some 
frailties  and  faults  into  which  prosperity  hath  led  us,  or  of  which  it  could  never 
cure  us,  that  we  may  look  upon  the  transitory  vanities  of  the  present  world  with 
more  coldness  and  indifference,  and  set  our  affections  on  things  above,  that  we  may 
be  humble  and  modest,  and  know  ourselves,  that  we  may  learn  affability,  human- 
ity and  compassion  for  those  who  suffer,  and  likewise  that  we  may  have  a  truer 
taste  for  prosperity  when  it  comes,  and  enjoy  it  with  wisdom  and  moderation. 
Upon  all  theee  accounts  adversity  is  suitable  to  us,  and  tends  to  our  profit.  II. 
One  of  the  ends  of  adversity  is  to  make  us  better  disposed  and  qualified  to  receive 
the  favours  of  God,  when  they  come,  with  prudence  and  gratitude,  and,  aa 
Solomon  directs  us  in  the  other  part  of  the  text,  to  rejoice  in  the  days  op 
prosperity.  1.  We  ought  to  be  in  such  a  temper  as  to  be  easily  contented,  and 
to  account  our  state  prosperous  whenever  it  is  tolerable.  2.  We  ought  to  remem- 
ber that  prosperity  is  a  dangerous  thing,  that  it  is  a  state  which  often  perverts 
the  judgment,  and  spoils  the  understanding,  and  corrupts  the  heart,  that  it  is 
never  sincere  and  unmixed,  that  it  is  also  of  a  precarious  nature,  and  may  leave 
us  in  an  instant."  By  being  sober  and  sedate,  it  will  be  more  easily  preserved, 
and  the  less  liable  to  pass  away,  and  to  be  turned  into  sadness.  The  truest  joy 
is  an  even  cheerfulness,  pleased  with  the  present,  and  not  solicitous  about  the 
futiure.  3.  We  ought  to  consider  what  Solomon,  who  exhorts  us  to  rejoice  in 
prosperity,  hath  represented  as  the  most  important  point :  Let  us  hear,  says  he, 
the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter;  Fear  God,  and  keep  His  commandments;  for 
this  concerns  us  all.  This  is  what  every  man  may  do,  and  this  is  what  every 
man  must  do,  and  whosoever  neglects  it  cannot  be  happy.    4.  If  we  would  rejoice 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  yii. 


in  prosperity,  we  must  acquire  and  preserve,  cherish  and  improve  a  love  towards 
our  neighbour,  an  universally  benevolent  and  charitable  disposition,  by  which  we 
shall  be  enabled  to  take  delight  not  only  in  our  own  prosperity,  but  in  that  of 
others;  and  this  will  give  us  several  occasions  of  satisfaction,  which  selfish  pereonB 
never  regard  or  entertain.     III.  This  subject  which  wb  have  been  disodssing  is 

CONSIDERED  IN   A   VEEY  DIFFERENT  MANNER  IN   THE  OlD  TESTAMENT  AND   IN   THE    NbW. 

Solomon,  as  a  wise  man,  recommends  it  to  his  nation  to  be  cheerful  in  prosperity 
and  considerate  in  adversity.  Further  than  this  the  wisdom  and  religion  of  his 
times  could  not  conduct  a  man.  But  St.  Paul,  when  he  treats  the  subject,  exhorts 
Christians  to  rejoice  evermore,  and  consequently  in  adversity  as  well  as  in  pros- 
perity; our  Saviour  commands  His  disciples  to  rejoice  and  to  be  exceeding  glad 
when  they  should  be  ill  used  for  His  sake;  and  it  is  said  of  the  fixst  believers, 
that  they  were  sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing,  and  that  they  had  in  all  oircum- 
stances  an  inward  serenity,  of  which  nothing  could  deprive  them.  1.  Christianity 
represents  God  as  a  God  of  love  and  goodness,  and  removes  all  gloomy  and  super- 
stitious apprehensions  of  Him.  2.  It  represents  Him,  indeed,  as  a  God  of  perfect 
purity,  holiness  and  justice,  which  must  raise  in  mortal  minds  a  dread  proportion- 
able to  their  imperfections  and  offences,  that  is,  to  those  imperfections  which  are 
indulged,  and  to  those  offences  which  are  wilful;  but  by  the  gracious  doctrine  of 
forgiveness  to  the  penitent  it  allays  all  tormenting  terrors  and  excludes  despond- 
ence and  despair.  3.  It  gives  us  rules  of  behaviour,  which,  if  carefully  observed, 
have  a  natural  and  necessary  tendency  to  secure  us  from  many  sorrows,  and 
enliven  our  minds,  and  to  set  before  us  happy  prospects  and  pleasing  expecta- 
tions. 4.  It  promises  a  Divine  assistance  under  pressures  and  dangers,  and  losses 
and  afflictions,  which  shall  raise  the  mind  above  itself  and  above  all  outward 
and  earthly  things.  5.  It  promises  an  eternal  recompense  of  well-doing,  which 
whosoever  believes  and  expects  must  be  happy,  or  at  least  contented  in  all  times 
and  states :  and  without  question,  to  a  want  of  a  lively  faith,  and  of  a  reasonable 
hope  in  this  great  point,  and  to  a  certain  degree,  more  or  less,  of  doubt  and 
diffidence,  is  to  be  principally  ascribed  the  want  of  resignation  and  of  composure. 
6.  When  to  these  Christian  considerations  are  also  added  reflections  on  the  days 
of  our  abode  here  below,  which  are  few,  and  on  the  world  which  passeth  away,  a 
sedateness  and  evenness  of  temper  will  ensue,  which  as  it  is  patient  and  resigned 
under  changes  for  the  worse,  eo  it  is  pleased  with  prosperity,  accepts  it  as  a 
Divine  blessing,  and  uses  it  soberly  and  discreetly.  (J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  Conaidera' 
tions  in  adversity: — I.  The  design  of  the  visitation.  It  includes — 1.  Correction. 
2.  Prevention.  8.  Trial  or  testing  of  character.  4.  Instruction  in  righteousness. 
6.  Increased  usefulness.  II.  The  belief  which  God  is  beadt  to  bestow.  1. 
Your  afflictions  are  not  peculiar.  It  is  not  "  a  strange  thing  that  has  happened 
unto  you."  2.  They  happen  not  by  chance.  God's  wisdom  plans,  and  His  love 
executes,  them  all.  3.  They  are  not  unmixed  evil.  "  It  is  good  for  me  that  I 
have  been  afflicted."  4.  They  are  not  to  endure  always.  Only  for  "  a  moment," 
and  then  heaven  1  5.  We  are  not  asked  to  bear  these  afflictions  alone.  (Homiletio 
Review.)  CompenaatioriB  for  a  poor  harvest: — More  than  one  person  has  said  to 
me,  in  relation  to  the  services  we  hold  to-day,  "  There  is  no  harvest  worth  being 
thankful  for  this  year."  We  are  like  children,  ready  enough  to  find  fault  with 
their  parents'  arrangements,  but  not  so  ready  to  be  thankful  for  the  daily  care  and 
love  around  them  in  the  home.  These  they  take  for  granted.  There  is,  if  we 
have  only  eyes  to  discern  it,  a  wonderful  law  of  compensation  running  through 
all  things.  It  may  be  discerned  even  in  the  recent  harvest,  failure  though  it 
seems  to  be.  We  may  see  this  if  we  remember  that  what  is  usually  called  the 
harvest  is,  after  all,  only  a  part  of  the  harvest  of  the  year.  The  autumn  is  not  the 
only  harvest  time,  though  that  may  be  specially  the  time  of  ingathering.  All  the 
year  is,  in  greater  or  less  degree,  productive.  And  this  year,  though  a  poor  one 
in  respect  of  the  harvest  of  hay  and  corn,  is,  if  I  mistake  not,  an  exceptionally 
good  one  in  respect  of  grass  and  roots  on  which  the  cattle  so  largely  depend  for 
sustenance.  There  is  another  aspect  of  the  present  year's  weather  which  should 
not  be  overlooked.  We  have  grumbled  at  the  continuous  downpour  of  rain ;  but 
let  us  not  forget  that  the  rain  which  frustrated  so  many  plans  and  caused  so 
much  anxiety,  has  replenished  the  springs  which,  through  the  drought  of  last 
year,  had  become  so  low  that  more  than  one  English  city  came  very  near  to  a 
famine  of  water.  And  this  leads  me  to  say  that  very  often  weather  which  is 
good  for  one  part  of  the  country,  and  for  one  kind  of  crop,  is  anything  but  good  for 
another  part  and  for  another  kind  of  crop.     And  sometimes  we  must  be  content  (o 


CHAP,  vii.]  ECCLESIASTES.  1^5 ' 

suffer  that  others  may  prosper,  whilst  when  we  prosper  others  must  be  content 
to  suffer.  We  can't  have  it  always  our  own  way.  Unbroken  prosperity  is  not 
good  for  us  men  who  are  so  disposed  to  settle  on  our  leefi,  and  to  cry,  "  I  shall 
naver  be  moved."  For  let  us  not  forget  that  the  Divine  arrangements  in  the 
lower  and  material  world  have  reference  to  man's  higher  nature.  They  are  in- 
tended to  be  a  means  of  moral  and  spiritual  discipline.  And  if  it  be  so,  and  that 
it  is,  few  who  have  carefully  observed  life,  will  deny;  then  harvest  disappointment 
will  be  often  counterbalanced  by  a  more  enduring  spiritual  gain.  If  earthly  loss 
force  us  to  lift  our  eyes  to  the  hills  from  whence  cometh  our  help,  then  the  gain 
is  greater  than  the  lose.  But  this  principle  of  compensation — that  one  thing  is 
set  over  against  another — has  wider  applications.  It  seems  to  run  through  all 
the  Divine  arrangements.  It  applies  to  the  different  positions  and  callings  among 
men — e.  g.  the  rich  seem  to  be  the  people  to  be  envied;  their  lot  seems  to  have 
no  drawbacks;  they  seem  to  have  everything  that  heart  can  wish.  But  riches  do 
not  ensure  happiness;  indeed,  they  too  often  lead  men  and  women  to  so  purposeless 
a  life,  to  such  a  neglect  of  work,  that  life  becomes  a  burden,  and  time  hangs 
heavy  on  their  hands.  The  poor  man's  condition,  on  the  other  hand,  seems  to 
be  without  any  compensations — one  utterly  to  be  pitied.  But,  ae  a  matter  of 
fact,  except  in  extreme  cases,  the  very  necessity  for  labour  brings  with  it  no  small 
measure  of  happiness,  for  work  has  more  of  pleasiure  in  it  than  idleness.  The 
happiest  people  are  those  who  work,  whether  such  work  be  compulsory  or 
voluntary.  Nor  is  it  otherwise  with  the  different  callings  of  life.  Those  in  which 
men  have  to  work  with  the  brain  seem  the  easiest  and  pleasantest,  and  those  in 
which  men  have  to  work  with  their  hands  the  least  to  be  desired.  But  work  with 
the  brain  has  its  drawbacks.  It  develops  the  nerves  at  the  expense  of  the  muscles. 
It  brings  a  weariness  of  its  own.  Whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  work  with  the  hand 
develops  the  muscles  at  the  expense  of  the  nerves,  and  has  its  own  kind  of 
weariness.  Then,  too,  the  same  remark  applies  to  the  various  ages.  Youth  longs 
ior  manhood,  that  it  may  escape  restraint;  but  when  the  restraint  goes,  responsi- 
bility begins.  Manhood  longs  for  rest  from  toil;  but  when  the  time  for  rest 
comes,  the  vigour  of  life  usually  wanes.  In  each  season  one  thing  must  be  set 
over  against  another — the  youth's  freedom  from  responsibility  against  the  restraint 
under  which  he  lives;  the  vigour  of  manhood  over  against  its  toil;  the  rest  of  old 
age  over  against  its  feebleness.  There  are  very  few  conditions  of  life  which  have 
not  their  compensations;  and  no  estimate  can  be  fair  which  does  not  take  them 
into  account.  Plato,  in  his  "  Gorgias,"  says  to  Callicles,  *'  I  exhort  you  also 
to  take  part  in  the  grave  combat,  which  is  the  combat  of  life,  and  greater  than 
every  other  earthly  conflict."  And  if  it  is  to  be  that,  it  would  not  do  for  life  to 
be  without  drawbacks,  disappointments,  trials,  changes.  A  life  sheltered  from  all 
these  would  be  a  poor  affair.  But  though  these  abound,  yet  there  are  always,  or 
nearly  always,  compensations,  which  show  a  grtusious  design  even  in  the  midst  of 
the  discipline;  that  it  ifl  the  order  of  One  "  who  doth  not  afflict  willingly,  or  grieve 
the  children  of  men."  The  laws  under  which  we  live  look  stem  and  hard;  but  in 
the  heart  of  them  is  a  loving  purpose.  (W.  0.  Horder.)  Hard  times: — "  Hard 
times  I"  That  is  the  cry  we  hear,  all  the  week  long,  wherever  we  go.  And  this, 
strange  to  say,  in  face  of  crops  of  imparalleled  abundance  I  1.  We  ask  ourselves, 
what  is  the  cause  of  these  hard  times?  "Over-production,"  say  some;  others, 
"  under-consumption."  One  party  blames  a  "high  tariff";  the  other,  "free 
trade."  I  will  not  attempt  to  discuss  here  the  purely  political  or  economical 
aspects  of  the  case.  But  there  is  a  moral  cause  at  work,  which  it  is  the  province 
of  the  pulpit  to  point  out.  At  this  moment,  while  commerce  and  manufactures 
are  nearly  stagnant,  the  money  market  is  glutted  with  funds  that  cannot  be 
used  I  Why?  One  answer  is,  for  want  of  confidence.  Monstrous  frauds,  dis- 
graceful failiu-es,  outright  robberies,  and  numberless  rascalities,  small  and  great, 
have  paralyzed  credit,  and  made  sensitive  capital  shrink  into  itself.  We  want 
more  plodding  and  patient  industry,  more  incorruptible  honesty.  No  man  can 
revolutionize  a  community.  But  every  good  man  has  a  certain  power,  more,  per- 
haps, than  he  thinks.  It  is  the  honest  men  who  keep  society  from  going  to 
piecM  altogether.  2.  Under  cover  of  the  proverb,  "  Desperate  diseases  require 
desperate  remedies,"  certain  wild  proposals  are  put  forward  by  professed  "  friends 
of  the  working  man,"  who  are  really  his  worst  enemies,  whether  they  mean  it  or 
not.  Take,  for  example,  the  Socialist  idea  of  abolishing  private  property  in  land 
or  anything  else,  making  the  State  the  universal  proprietor  and  the  universal 
employer,  and  all  men's  conditions  equal.     It  is  only  under  the  maddening  pressure 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  th.  , 

of  hunger  that  just  and  reasonable  men  can  entertain  such  schemes.  In  dragging 
down  "  bloated  monopolists,"  we  bury  the  day-labourer  in  the  common  ruin.  It 
is  like  setting  fire  to  the  house  to  get  rid  of  the  rats  t  3.  What  a  light  is  cast 
by  our  present  condition  on  the  Bible  sayings,  "<"We  are  members  one  of 
another";  "No  man  liveth  unto  himself  1"  We  live  in  a  vast  system  of  co- 
operation and  interdependence.  And  this,  whether  we  wish  it  or  not.  The  ends 
of  the  earth  are  ransacked  to  furnish  food  and  clothing.  Sailors  cross  the  seas, 
miners  delve  in  the  earth,  woodmen  hew  down  the  forests,  farmers  sow  and  reap, 
mechanics  ply  their  tools,  merchants  buy  and  sell,  physicians  study  diseases  and 
remedies,  teachers  instruct,  authors  write,  musicians  sing,  legislators  make,  judges 
administer  and  governors  execute  laws — all  for  your  benefit  and  mine.  God  has 
bound  us  up  together,  so  many  wheels  in  a  vast  machine,  different  members  of 
one  body.  You  cannot  break  away  from  it.  It  is  as  foolish  as  it  is  wicked  to  try 
to  live  apart,  for  ourselves  alone,  to  take  and  not  to  give,  to  expect  good  only, 
and  to  complain  of  suftering  through  those  around  us.  4.  That  is  a  good  time  to 
"  consider  "  what  use  we  have  made  of  past  times  of  '*  prosperity  "  in  preparing 
for  days  of  "  adversity."  We  must  learn  the  old-fashioned  virtues  of  saving 
and  "going  without."  And  these  hard  times  are  sent,  among  other  things,  to 
drive  that  lesson  home.  Those  who  came  from  the  old  and  crowded  lands  of 
Europe  are  showing  us  examples  in  this  that  we  should  be  wise  to  follow.  6.  We 
do  well  to  ask  ourselves  at  this  time  how  far  the  words  of  God  by  Malachi  apply 
to  our  case:  "Ye  are  cursed  with  a  curse;  for  ye  have  robbed  Me."  .  .  . 
"  Wherein?  In  tithes  and  offerings."  6.  Not  all  of  us  feel  the  full  pressure  of 
hard  times.  If  you  are  not  thrown  out  of  employment,  if  your  pay  is  not 
reduced,  if  your  investments  yield  as  much  income,  if  your  business  is  nearly 
or  quite  as  profitable,  what  special  duties  devolve  upon  you?  First,  great  thank- 
fulness to  God.  By  the  sharp  sorrows  of  your  less  fortunate  neighbours  learn 
how  good  He  has  been  to  you.  Do  not  think  that  it  is  because  of  your  superior 
worth.  One  duty  is  to  see  that  His  cause  of  the  Gospel  does  not  suffer — to  give 
double  because  others  can  only  give  one-half.  Another  is,  to  relieve  the  wants  of 
deserving  sufferers.  7.  May  I  say  a  brotherly  word  to  those  who  do  feel  the 
pressure  of  the  times?  It  is  a  hard  discipline  you  are  passing  through,  very 
hard.  But  "  your  Father  knoweth,"  Money  and  goods  are  not  everything.  "  A 
man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesseth." 
Your  character,  your  soul,  is  more  to  you  than  your  earthly  condition.  That  is 
what  God  is  training,  and  the  wide  sweep  of  this  providential  dispensation, 
affecting  whole  nations,  also  includes  your  individual  case.  Receive  the  chasten- 
ing. Submit  without  murmuring.  Exercise  your  heart  in  the  strong  virtues  of 
patience  and  fortitude.  "  Hope  thou  in  God."  "  Walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight." 
(F.  H.  Marling.)  Sunshine  and  thadow: — ^I.  Fust,  concerning  this  twofold 
woBD  OF  EXHORTATION.  "  In  the  day  of  prosperity  be  joyful."  Prosperity  then  is 
not  in  itself  an  evil  thing.  Undue  prosperity  is  not  to  be  coveted.  "  Give  me 
neither  poverty  nor  riches;  feed  me  with  food  convenient  for  me."  But  pros- 
perity which  is  obtained  in  honest  fashion,  accepted  with  a  thankful  heart,  and 
employed  for  the  glory  of  God,  is  surely  one  of  the  best  boons  that  Heaven  itself 
can  send.  Further,  gladsomeness  is  by  no  means  to  be  prohibited.  Alas!  for 
those  who  would  stop  our  laughter.  God  Himself  is  glad,  His  Gospel  is  glad;  it  is 
the  Gospel  of  the  glory  of  the  happy  God.  Christ  Himself  is  joyous.  Let  your 
hearts  have  their  sacred  outpourings;  let  your  souls  rejoice  before  the  Lord  in  the 
land  of  the  living.  "  Be  joyful  in  the  Lord."  Spiritual  prosperity  is  best  of 
all.  Be  thankful  and  bless  His  name.  But  the  other  part  of  the  exhortation  is 
not  less  necessary,  and  is,  perhaps,  more  appropriate  to  the  most  of  my  hearers. 
•*  In  the  day  of  adversity  consider."  What  are  we  to  consider?  Not  the  adversity 
only.  "  Consider  the  work  of  God."  So  this  adversity  is  the  work  of  God.  He 
may  have  employed  agencies,  but  He  is  at  the  back  of  them.  Even  the  devil 
works  in  chains,  and  can  do  nought  apart  from  permission  from  the  throne. 
"  Consider  the  work  of  God."  Look  away  to  first  causes,  trace  the  stream  to  its 
•ource.  When  you  think  of  this  adversity  as  being  the  work  of  God  you  come  to 
the  conclusion  that  it  is  all  right,  that  it  is  the  best  thing  that  could  happen.  It 
is  better  than  prosperity  if  it  is  the  work  of  God.  II.  Now  we  turn  to  the  second 
point,  AN  0B8BBVATI0N.  "  God  hath  even  made  the  one  side  by  side  with  the 
other."  Oh,  what  mercy  there  ia  here.  If  you  had  prosperity  all  the  days  of 
your  life  it  would  be  the  ruin  of  you.  He  has  woven  our  web  of  time  with  mercy 
and  with  judgment.    He  has  paved  our  path  of  life  with  mingled  colours,  so  that. 


«HAr.  Til.]  ECCLESIASTES.  177 

it  is  a  mosaic,  curiously  wrought;  sunshine  and  shadow  have  been  our  lot  almost 
from  babyhood  till  now,  and  April  weather  has  greeted  us  from  the  cradle,  and 
will  be  with  us  till  the  tomb.  If  this  is  true  in  daily  life,  it  is  true  also  of 
religious  experience.  You  must  not  be  surprised  that  your  way  is  up  and  down. 
So  far  as  we  are  responsible  for  it  it  should  not  be  so.  Spiritual  experience  is  of 
the  switchback  order  after  all,  up  towards  heaven  and  down  into  the  deep,  but  ib 
matters  little  if  we  are  going  onward  all  the  time,  and  upward  to  the  glorious  end. 
The  Lord  sets  the  one  beside  the  other.  III.  This  word  of  explanation  as  we 
end.  Why  has  God  allowed  it  thus  to  be?  Why  does  He  give  us  joy  to-day  and 
grief  to-morrow?  It  is  that  we  may  realize  that  His  way  is  not  of  a  set  pattern; 
that  He  works  according  to  a  programme  of  His  own  choosing;  that  though  He  is 
a  God  of  order,  that  order  may  be  very  different  from  our  order;  that  we  may  come 
to  no  conclusion  as  to  the  probabilities  of  our  experiences  to-morrow,  that  we  may 
make  no  plans  too  far  ahead ;  that  we  may  not  peer  behind  the  curtain  of  obscurity 
And  futurity.     {Thoma$  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  16,  17.  Be  not  righteoui  oyermneli. — The  "  righteou$  overmuch  ": — 
When  the  worldling  sees  another  anxiously  caring  for  the  things  of  his  soul  or 
attending  earnestly  to  the  duties  of  religion,  he  is  apt  to  refer  to  this  text,  and  to 
say,  "  Be  not  righteous  overmuch."  At  first  sight  one  might  imagine,  that  of 
this  warning  in  this  wicked  world  there  can  be  no  special  need.  And  if  we  search 
among  our  kinsfolk,  shall  we  find  many  of  whom  we  can  say,  that  they  are 
■"  righteous  overmuch  "?  Do  we  remember  ever  having  heard,  or  ever  having 
met  the  man  who  has  said,  "  I  have  been  ruined  because  I  went  to  church  too 
often — because  I  have  engaged  continually  in  meditation  and  prayer  "?  People 
seem  to  think  that  some  degree  of  religion  is  necessary,  but  while  they  admit 
the  fact  that  some  degree  of  religion  is  necessary,  and  will  take  care  ol 
what  ifi  the  minimum  of  faith  and  good  works  which  will  save  them  from  damna- 
tion, they  accuse  other  persons,  who  think  it  safer  to  obey  the  Gospel  injunction 
which  says,  "go  on  unto  perfection,"  of  the  sin  of  being  "righteous  overmuch." 
But  look  a  little  forward.  A  few  years  hence,  the  Lord  Jesus  will  come  again 
into  this  world  to  be  our  Judge.  Before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  Satan,  the 
accuser  of  the  brethren,  will  stand;  by  our  side  he  will  stand;  and  when  he  saya 
of  any  one,  "  I  accuse  him  of  being  '  righteous  overmuch,'  "  what  think  you  will 
be  the  decision  of  the  Divine  Judge?  Will  He  say,  "  Oh,  thou  wicked  servant  I 
thou  hast  been  very  scrupulous  in  thy  conscience;  thou  hast  prayed  seven  times 
a  day  instead  of  twice;  thou  hast  fasted  sometimes  as  well  as  prayed;  thou  hast 
gone  to  church  every  day,  instead  of  confining  thy  devotions  to  the  Sunday; 
because  of  these  things,  on  account  of  thy  committing  these  things,  thou  hast 
committed  the  great  sin  of  being  '  righteous  overmuch,'  and  therefore  thou  shalt 
be  'cast  into  outer  darkness,  where  there  is  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth'; 
'  depart  from  Me,'  ye  '  righteous  overmuch,'  '  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for 
the  devil  and  his  angels  '  "?  The  very  thought  of  such  a  judgment  proceeding 
from  the  mouth  of  the  all-righteous  Judge  is  so  monstrous  that  we  have  only  to 
state  the  case  as  I  just  have  done,  and  by  that  statement  we  show  the  folly  as 
well  as  the  iniquity  of  those  who  would  lower  the  tone  of  religion  among  us  by  this 
fear,  lest  their  neighbours  should  commit  this  imaginary  sin  of  being  "  righteous 
overmuch."  It  is  said,  again,  that  too  much  religion  makes  men  morose;  and 
there  are  pretenders  to  religion  both  censorious  and  morose.  Some,  perhaps  a 
vast  number  of  those  who  assume  to  themselves  the  character  of  being  religious, 
are  like  the  Pharisees  of  old,  mere  hypocrites,  men  who  deceive  themselves  by 
supposing  that  under  the  cloak  of  religion  they  may  freely  indulge  the  worst  and 
most  malignant  passions  of  their  nature.  We  frankly  admit  that  they  who  preach 
against  being  "  righteous  overmuch  "  have  here  their  strongest  ground.  But  deal 
fairly  with  this  case  also — is  it  religion  that  has  made  these  men  what  they  are? 
Were  they  not,  morose  in  temper  before  they  pretended  to  be  religious  ?  Were  they 
not  crafty  in  their  dealings  with  the  world  before  they  became  deceivers  in  things 
spiritual?  You  do  not  know  any  one  who,  having  been  frank,  generous,  disinter- 
ested, noble-hearted  before  his  conversion,  has  become  morose  because  he  has 
learnt  to  love  his  Ood  as  well  as  his  neighbour,  and  enthusiastically  to  labour  for 
the  promotion  of  his  Saviour's  glory.  It  is  true,  he  takes  a  new  view  of  the 
amusements  of  the  world;  but  is  that  of  necessity  a  morose  view?  It  is  not 
moroseness  but  advancement,  that  raises  the  true  Christian  above  the  things  of 
this    world,   which  renders   him    independent   of   external   things,    while    he    caa 

12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  m. 

afiectionately  sympathire  with  those  who  are  now  what  he  once  was,  and  whom  he 
hopes  to  see  ere  long,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  even  further  advanced  than  he  him- 
self as  yet  may  be.  For  true  Christianity  rejoices  in  the  spiritual  progress  of 
another.  Perhaps  it  may  occur  to  some  that  in  speaking  thus  I  am  speaking 
rather  against  than  for  the  text.  But  it  is  merely  against  a  wrong  interpretation 
of  the  text  that  I  am  preaching.  One  part  of  our  text  shows  at  once  that  it  is  not 
to  be  understood  literally — that  part  which  says,  "make  not  thyself  over- wise." 
Now,  they  who  are  very  fearful  lest  they  should  be  over-righteous,  are  seldom 
alarmed  on  the  score  of  their  being  over-wise.  I  call  upon  you  to  dismiss  from 
your  mind  all  idle  fears  lest  you  should  become  "righteous  overmuch  ";  and  in 
the  name  of  our  God,  I  exhort  you  to  take  good  heed,  lest  you  become  overmuch 
wicked,  and  be  not  righteous  enough.  Oh  I  here  is  the  real  danger;  this  is  the  sin 
against  which  we  have  really  need  to  be  warned.  And,  ask  you,  how  are  you  to 
know  whether  you  are  righteous  enough?  That  is  a  question  to  which  neither  I 
nor  any  one  else  can  give  an  answer.  What,  then,  is  the  conclusion  but  this — "  be 
as  righteous  as  you  possibly  can;  go  on  improving;  seek  to  grow  in  grace;  attend 
to  little  things,  as  well  as  great;  be  always  careful  lest  you  should  not  be  righteous 
enough,  if  God  were  this  day  to  require  your  soul  of  you.  Be  very  careful  lest 
you  should  be  overmuch  wicked;  let  no  man  scare  you  from  your  duty,  in  seeking 
to  advance  in  the  straight  and  narrow  path,  which  leadeth  unto  life,  by  their 
suggestions  that  ye  be  not  "  righteous  overmuch."  {Dean  Hook.)  Strained 
piety: — This  text  may  fairly  be  taken  as  a  warning  against  strained  piety.  It  is 
a  common  thing  for  religion  to  run  wild;  for  goodness  to  be  pushed  on  wrong 
lines;  for  it  to  be  strained,  arbitrary,  inharmonious,  and  exaggerated.  I.  It  some- 
times reveals  itself  in  doctrinal  fastidiousness.  Paul  writes  to  Timothy,  "  Hold 
fast  the  form  of  sound  words,  which  thou  hast  heard  of  me,  in  faith  and  love 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  Hold  fast  the  form,  the  pattern.  The  religion  of 
Christ  finds  expression  in  the  definite,  the  concrete,  the  intelligible.  But  some  of 
us  are  not  content  until  we  have  etherealized  the  great  articles  of  our  faith,  made 
our  creed  vague,  intangible,  and  generally  such  as  it  is  not  possible  for  a  man  to 
utter.  De  Quincey  said  of  Coleridge,  touching  the  poet's  endless  refinements  and 
transcendentalisms,  "  He  wants  better  bread  than  can  be  made  with  wheat." 
That  is  rather  a  common  failure  in  our  day,  and  especially  with  men  of  a  certain 
temper.  They  refine  and  sublimate  their  creed  until  they  nearly  lose  hold  of  the 
substantial  saving  verity.  II.  It  reveals  itself  in  morbid  introspectiveness. 
There  is,  of  course,  such  a  thing  as  a  just  introspection,  that  a  man  looks  closely 
into  his  own  heart  and  life.  It  is,  indeed,  a  solemn  duty  that  we  should  examine 
ourselves  in  the  sight  of  God.  And  yet  this  duty  is  often  misconceived  and 
pressed  to  false  issues.  Men  sometimes  get  morbid  about  the  state  of  their 
health.  For  example,  there  are  the  people  who  are  always  weighing  themselves. 
Their  feelings  go  up  or  down  with  their  weight ;  they  are  the  sport  of  their  gravity. 
We  all  feel  that  such  solicitude  is  a  mistake;  it  is  the  sign  of  a  morbid,  miserable 
condition.  But  good  people  are,  not  rarely,  victims  of  a  similar  morbidity : 
jealous  about  their  religious  state,  curious  about  obscure  symptoms,  always  with 
beating  heart  putting  themselves  into  the  balances  of  the  sanctuary.  This  habit 
may  prove  most  hurtful.  It  makes  men  morally  weak  and  craven;  it  destroys 
their  peace;  it  robs  their  life  of  brightness.  III.  It  reveals  itself  in  an  BXACTiNa 
CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.  It  was  said  of  Grote  that  "  ho  suffered  from  a  pampered 
conscience."  Many  good  people  do.  A  fastidious  moral  sense.  It  is  a  legal 
maxim  that  "  the  law  concerneth  not  itself  with  trifles,"  and  the  court  is  specially 
impatient  of  "  frivolous  and  vexatious  "  charges.  But  some  of  us  are  evermore 
arraigning  ourselves  at  the  bar  of  conscience  about  arbitrary,  frivolous,  vexatious 
things.  It  is  a  great  mistake.  A  true  and  noble  conscience  is  tender,  quick, 
incisive,  imperative;  but  it  is  also  large,  majestic,  generous,  as  is  the  eternal  law 
of  which  it  is  the  organ.  We  cannot  pretend  to  go  through  life  with  a  conscience 
akin  to  those  delicate  balances  which  are  sensitive  to  s  pencil-mark;  if  we 
attempt  such  painful  minuteness,  we  are  likely  to  be  incapable  of  doing  justice  to 
the  weightier  matters  of  the  law.  IV.  This  strained  piety  not  rarely  reveals  itself 
in  THE  INORDINATE  CULTURE  OF  SOME  SPECIAL  VIRTUE.  For  some  reason  or  other 
a  man  conceives  a  special  affection  for  a  particular  excellence;  it  engrosses  his 
attention;  it  shines  in  his  eye  with  unique  splendour.  But  this  extreme  love  for 
any  one  virtue  may  easily  become  a  snare.  A  literary  botanist  says,  "  Most  of 
the  faults  of  flowers  are  only  exaggerations  of  some  right  tendency."  May  not 
the  same  be  said  about  the  faults  of  some  Christians?    V.  It  reveals  itself  in 


CHAP,  vii.]  ECCLESIASTES.  179 

STRIVING  AFTEB  IMPRACTICABLE   STANDARDS  OF  CHARACTER.      It  iS  a  fine  characteristio 

of  Christianity  that  it  is  so  sane,  reasonable,  practical,  humane;  it  never  forgets 
our  nature  and  situation,  our  relations  and  duty.  But  many  think  to  transoeud 
the  goodness  of  Christianity ;  they  are  dreaming  of  loftier  types  of  character,  of 
sublimer  principles,  of  more  illustrious  lives  than  Christianity  knows.  Fanciful 
ideals  exhaust  us,  distort  us,  destroy  us.  What  sweet,  bright,  fragrant  flowers 
God  has  made  to  spring  on  the  earth — cowslips  in  the  meadow,  daffodils  by  the 
pools,  primroses  in  the  woods,  myrtles,  wall-flowers,  lavenders,  pinks,  roses  to 
bloom  in  the  garden,  an  infinite  wealth  of  colour  and  sweetness  and  virtue  I  But 
in  these  days  we  are  tired  of  God's  flowers,  and  with  a  strange  wantonness  wa 
have  taken  to  dyeing  them  for  ourselves :  the  world  is  running  after  queer  blos- 
soms that  our  fathers  knew  not — yellow  asters,  green  carnations,  blue  dahlias, 
red  lilacs.  And  in  the  moral  world  we  are  guilty  of  similar  freaks.  "  Learn  of 
Me,"  says  the  Master.  Yes;  let  us  go  back  to  Him  who  was  without  excess  or 
defect.  Nothing  is  more  wonderful  about  our  Lord  than  His  perfect  naturalness. 
His  absolute  balance,  His  reality,  reasonableness,  artlessness,  completeness. 
With  all  His  mighty  enthusiasm  He  never  oversteps  the  modesty  of  nature. 
(W.L.  Watkinaon.)  The  danger  of  being  over-righteous  or  over-wise: — There  may 
be  several  accounts  given  of  these  words  if  we  take  them  as  spoken  by  Solomon. 
1.  They  seem  to  refer  to  the  method  of  God's  dealing  with  good  and  bad  men 
in  this  world;  of  which  he  spake  (ver.  15).  Be  not  too  strict  and  severe  in 
passing  judgment  on  God's  providence;  be  not  more  righteous  and  wise  than  God 
is ;  do  not  think  you  could  govern  the  world  better  than  He  doth ;  pry  not  too 
far  into  those  mysteries  which  are  too  deep  for  you;  why  shouldst  thou  confound 
thyself?  2.  They  may  refer  to  religion;  but  then  they  are  not  to  be  understood 
of  what  is  truly  and  really  so;  but  of  what  passes  in  the  world  for  it;  and  men 
may  esteem  themselves  very  much  for  the  sake  of  it.  For  although  men  cannot 
exceed  in  the  main  and  fundamental  duties  of  religion,  in  the  belief  and  fear  and 
love  of  God;  yet  tb.ey  may,  and  often  do,  mistake  in  the  nature  and  measures 
and  bounds  of  what  they  account  duties  of  religion.  3.  They  may  be  taken  in 
a  moral  sense  for  that  righteousness  which  men  are  to  show  towards  each  other, 
both  in  judgment  and  practice;  and  for  that  wisdom,  which  mankind  is  capable 
of,  as  a  moral  virtue;  and  in  both  these  there  are  extremes  to  be  avoided;  and 
BO  they  are  not  to  be  righteous  overmuch,  nor  to  make  themselves  over-wise.  (1) 
In  not  making  allowance  for  the  common  infirmities  of  mankind;  which  do  not 
only  consist  in  the  imperfections  of  good  actions,  but  in  such  failings,  which 
human  nature  is  subject  to  in  this  state,  notwithstanding  our  greatest  care  to 
avoid  them.  (2)  In  putting  the  worst  construction  upon  men's  actions,  which  is 
directly  contrary  to  that  charity  St.  Paul  so  much  commends.  Now,  there  are 
many  things  men  do  which  are  accounted  good  or  evil,  according  to  the  intention 
of  the  doer  of  them.  I  do  not  say  that  alters  the  nature  of  the  action  in  itself; 
for  what  God  commands  is  good,  and  what  He  forbids  is  evil,  whatever  men's 
intentions  be;  but  although  a  good  intention  cannot  make  a  bad  action  good, 
yet  a  bad  intention  may  make  a  good  action  evil;  not  in  itself,  but  to  him  that 
doth  it.  And  bo  there  are  two  ways  men  may  exceed  in  judging.  In  making  no 
abatement  in  an  evil  action  as  to  the  person  for  the  goodness  of  his  intention. 
For  although  the  action  be  not  good  by  it,  yet  it  is  so  much  less  evil;  and  in 
doubtful  cases  it  takes  much  from  the  guilt,  although  not  where  the  command 
is  plain,  as  in  the  case  of  Saul.  In  charging  persons  with  a  bad  intention  in  a 
good  action  where  there  is  no  plain  evidence;  for  then  it  is  but  suspicion  and  an 
uncharitable  judgment.  (8)  In  judging  men's  condition  towards  God,  from  some 
particular  actions,  although  contrary  to  the  general  course  of  them.  (4)  In  judging 
of  men's  spiritual  estate  from  outward  afflictions  which  befall  them.  (5)  In 
judging  too  easily  concerning  the  faults  and  miscarriages  of  others.  Men  show 
their  severity  to  others,  and  partiality  to  themselves  this  way;  they  think  them- 
selves hardly  dealt  with,  to  be  censured  upon  vain  and  idle  reports,  and  yet  they 
are  too  apt  to  do  the  same  thing  by  others.  (6)  In  not  using  the  same  measures, 
in  judging  the  good  and  the  evil  of  other  men.  The  one  they  presently  and  easily 
believe,  but  the  other  they  make  many  difficulties  about.  (7)  In  pronouncing 
concerning  men's  final  state  in  another  world.  Which  is  wholly  out  of  our  reach 
and  capacity.  For  that  depends  upon  such  things  which  it  is  impossible  for  us 
to  know;  as  the  nature  and  aggravation  of  men's  sins;  which  depend  upon 
rjcumstances  we  cannot  know,  but  God  doth.  The  sincerity  of  their  repentance 
Jor  those  sins.     We  cannot  know  how  much  they  have  smarted  for  those  sins  in 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  th. 

•ecret.  What  failings  are  consistent  with  a  general  sincerity.  What  things  are 
absolutely  necessary  to  salvation,  of  particular  persons.  Bold  and  presumptuous 
men  are  very  positive  and  daring  in  such  cases,  but  such  as  are  modest  and 
humble  dare  not  go  farther  than  God  hath  declared.  The  bounds  of  God's  mercy. 
The  usual  terms  of  it  are  expressed  in  Scripture.  But  even  that  hath  acquainted 
us  that  God  hath  not  tied  up  Himself  from  some  extraordinary  instances  of  it. 
As  in  the  case  of  the  thief  on  the  cross.  4.  The  mischief  they  bring  upon  them- 
selves, by  being  thus  severe  towards  others.  (1)  This  provokes  the  malice  of 
others  against  them.  (2)  It  provokes  God  to  be  severe  to  such  as  show  no  mercy 
towards  others.  And  so  our  Saviour  understands  it  (Matt.  vii.  1,  2).  5.  We  may 
be  righteous  overmuch  in  the  moral  practice  of  righteousness  towards  others. 
(1)  That  men  may  exceed  herein.  When  they  mind  justice  without  mercy.  Tha 
truth  is,  such  persons  are  not  so  much  as  moral  heathens,  so  far  are  they  from 
being  good  Christians.  Which  so  earnestly  recommends  charity  and  kindness  to 
our  greatest  enemies.  So  that  even  our  justice  ought  to  have  a  mixture  of  mercy 
ID  it.  When  they  make  the  law  the  instrument  of  their  revenge;  when  they  are 
glad  they  have  taken  their  enemies  at  such  an  advantage.  We  may  here  apply 
St.  Paul's  words  (1  Tim.  i.  8).  When  they  seek  for  no  accommodation  of  their 
differences  in  a  fair  and  amicable  manner.  (2)  How  this  proves  so  mischievous 
to  men.  It  makes  such  men's  lives  very  unquiet  and  troublesome  to  themselvee 
and  others.  For  it  is  impossible  for  some  to  disturb  others,  but  they  must  expect 
a  retaliation.  (3)  It  provokes  God  to  shorten  their  days  out  of  pity  to  the  rest 
of  the  world.  6.  To  conclude  all  by  way  of  advice  as  to  the  general  sense  of 
these  words — (1)  Not  to  think  everything  too  much,  in  religion  and  virtue, 
because  some  are  here  said  to  be  righteous  overmuch.  The  far  greatest  part  of 
mankind  err  the  other  way.  (2)  To  understand  the  difference  between  true 
wisdom  and  righteousness  and  that  which  is  not.  For  upon  that  depends  tha 
just  measure  of  them  both.  (3)  Be  not  too  curious  in  searching,  nor  too  hard 
in  censuring  the  faults  of  others.  (4)  Live  as  easily  with  others  as  you  can,  for 
that  tends  much  to  the  sweetening  and  prolonging  life.  If  you  are  forced  to 
right  yourselves,  do  it  with  that  gentleness  and  fairness  that  they  may  see  you 
delight  not  in  it.  (5)  Avoid  a  needless  scrupulosity  of 'conscience,  as  a  thing 
which  keeps  our  minds  always  uneasy.  A  scrupulous  man  is  always  in  the  dark, 
and  therefore  full  of  fears  and  melancholy  apprehensions;  he  that  gives  way  to 
scruples  is  the  greatest  enemy  to  his  own  peace.  But,  then,  let  not  the  fear  of 
■orupulosity  make  you  afraid  of  keeping  a  good  conscience,  for  that  is  the  wisest 
and  best  and  safest  companion  in  the  world.  (Bishop  Stillingfleet.)  Overmuch: — 
Many  a  really  good  man  has  made  enemies  to  himself  by  his  rigid  adherence  to, 
and  unwise  advocacy  of,  what  might  be  called  no  more  than  a  mistaken  scruple; 
while  not  a  few  who  seemed  to  be  running  well  have  fallen  away  altogether  from 
the  profession  and  practice  of  the  truth,  by  mistaken  views  of  their  own  liberty. 
Hence,  says  this  instructor,  beware  of  both  extremes  :  "Be  not  righteous  over- 
much, neither  make  thyself  over-wise  ";  or,  in  other  words,  do  not  imagine  that 
thou  hast  a  monopoly  of  the  wisdom  of  the  world.  **  Why  shouldest  thou  destroy 
thyself?"  But,  on  the  other  hand  (I  would  that  our  scoffer  would  quote  this 
too),  "  Be  not  overmuch  wicked,  neither  be  thou  foolish  :  why  shouldest  thou 
die  before  thy  time?"  I.  Look  at  thosx  things  which  this  precept  neither 
TOUCHES  NOB  FORBIDS.  1.  It  does  not  touch  the  idea  that  the  whole  man  should 
be  under  the  power  of  the  truth.  This,  in  fact,  is  needful,  to  have  anything  which 
the  Word  of  God  could  call  religion,  or  righteousness;  for  it  is  the  heart  that 
determines  what  the  action  is,  and  not  the  action  which  gives  its  character  to 
the  heart.  The  sulphurous  spring,  with  its  healing  properties,  takes  its  nature 
from  the  strata  in  which  it  has  its  source;  and  he  would  be  a  fool  who  should  say 
that  the  water  gave  its  properties  to  them.  The  fruit  is  determined  by  the  nature 
of  the  tree,  not  the  nature  of  the  tree  by  the  fruit.  I  admit,  indeed,  nay  contend, 
that  the  fruit  evidences  what  the  nature  of  the  tree  is;  but  it  does  so  only  because 
the  tree  gives  its  nature  to  the  fruit,  and  not  the  fruit  to  the  tree.  Now,  iu 
perfect  harmony  with  this  principle  that  pervades  nature,  it  is  the  heart  of  a 
man  which  gives  its  character  to  the  man,  and  to  the  man's  life;  and  hence, 
unless  his  heart  be  right  with  God,  he  has  no  religion  worthy  of  the  name,  and 
is  not,  in  the  Scripture  sense,  a  righteous  man.  Let  no  one  who  is  unconverted, 
therefore,  shelter  himself  under  a  false  interpretation  of  these  words.  Conversion 
w  not  being  righteous  overmuch;  regeneration  is  not  too  much  of  a  good  thing; 
but  contrariwise.     It  ii  that  one  indispensable  thing  without  which  there  is  no 


CHAf .  Tii.l  ECCLESIA8TE8.  181 

righteousness  at  all,  and  the  soul  is  still  in  sin.  2.  This  text  neither  touches  nor 
oondemns  the  idea  that  a  man  should  be  under  the  influence  of  the  truth  at  all 
times;  for,  of  course,  if  his  heart  be  under  its  power,  he  cannot  but  be  so  always. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  of  importance  enough  to  have  a  place  by  itself;  for  there  are 
multitudes  who  have  here,  too,  the  most  fallacious  opinions.  Religion,  they  say, 
is  for  Sabbath.  Or,  if  they  extend  its  province  farther,  and  allow  it  to  come  into 
the  week-day  at  all,  they  are  careful  to  confine  it  to  the  closet,  and  never  by 
any  chance  permit  it  to  go  farther.  They  write  up  on  the  door  of  their  counting- 
room  or  their  workshop,  "No  admittance,  except  on  business";  and  as  they 
conceive  Religion  has  no  business  there,  she  is  unceremoniously  shut  out.  "  Every- 
thing," say  they,  "  in  its  own  place;  and  this  is  not  the  place  for  Religion."  And 
if  she  is  not  suffered  to  enter  the  place  of  business,  still  less,  if  possible,  is  she 
permitted  to  make  her  appearance  in  the  hall  of  pleasure.  There  is  a  time  for 
everything;  is  there?  "Yes,"  you  answer,  "so  Solomon  says."  But  will  you 
please  to  turn  to  the  passage,  and  see  if,  amid  his  exhaustive  enumeration  of 
things  for  which  there  is  a  time,  you  will  find  this :  "  There  is  a  time  for 
religion,  and  a  time  to  have  no  religion."  You  will  look  for  that  in  vain;  and 
•uoh  an  omission  is  of  very  great  significance.  No  doubt  you  will  say,  "  But 
then  we  cannot  always  be  engaged  in  religious  exercises."  Ah!  but  you  have 
shifted  your  ground;  religious  exercises  is  not  religion.  There  are  many  so-called 
religious  exercises,  I  will  venture  to  say,  in  which  there  is  no  religion  at  all;  and 
there  are  many  exercises,  which  are  not  so  denominated,  in  which  there  is  a 
great  deal.  Would  you  confine  the  blood  to  the  heart,  and  not  allow  it  to  cir- 
culate to  the  extremities  of  the  body?  No  more  need  you  attempt  to  confine 
religion  to  one  place,  or  to  imprison  her  into  one  day.  She  will  not  be  chained 
thus  to  one  spot;  she  must,  and  she  will,  have  free  course;  and  if,  in  your  view, 
it  is  being  righteous  overmuch,  to  seek  always  and  everywhere  to  serve  God, 
then  it  is  a  siu-e  sign  that  you  have  yet  to  learn  wherein  true  righteousness  con- 
sists, n.  Now,  CONSIDXB  WHAT  THIS  PRECEPT  DOES  FORBID.  1.  When  Other  im- 
portant duties  are  neglected  for  the  purpose  of  engaging  in  what  are  called, 
strictly  speaking,  religious  meetings,  such  a  case  comes  clearly  under  the  prohibi- 
tion of  the  text.  The  multiplication  of  religious  meetings  seems  to  me  to  be 
fast  becoming  one  of  the  evils  of  the  day.  I  have  often  admired  the  answer  of  a 
working-man,  who,  being  asked  by  his  neighbour  one  Monday  morning  why  he 
did  not  come  out  a  third  time  on  the  previous  day,  when  the  minister  preached 
an  able  sermon  on  family  training,  replied,  "  Because  I  was  at  home  doing  it." 
Now,  this  reply  will  help  you  to  understand  my  meaning.  I  do  not  want  the 
attendance  on  such  meetings  to  interfere  with  the  "  at  home  doing  it."  Unless 
this  be  watched,  the  religion  will  become  a  thing  of  mere  spiritual  dissipation, 
and  thereafter  it  will  dwindle  into  a  lifeless  form,  and  entirely  lose  its  power. 
2.  This  prohibition  fairly  enough  applies  to  those  who,  by  their  religious  fasting 
and  asceticism,  so  weaken  their  bodies  as  to  render  them  incapable  of  attending 
to  their  proper  work.  God  asks  no  man  to  starve  himself  for  His  glory.  He 
bids  us  rather  attend  to  our  bodily  health,  and  spend  our  strength  by  working  in 
His  service.  8.  This  prohibition  touches  and  forbids  the  magnifying  of  small 
points  of  religious  opinion  into  essential  importance,  and  the  thinking  of  it  a  matter 
of  conscience  and  of  duty  to  have  no  fellowship  with  those  who  do  not  hold 
them.  4.  The  principle  of  my  text  touches  and  prohibits  all  trust  in  personal 
righteousness  for  acceptance  with  God.  Every  man  who  thinks  to  work  out  his 
own  righteousness,  is  righteous  overmuch.  Indeed,  I  question  very  much  if  the 
idea  of  working  out  something  which  may  have  merit  in  God's  sight,  is  not,  in 
one  form  or  other,  at  the  bottom  of  those  things  which  I  have  enumerated. 
{W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Righteout  overmuch: — In  considering  the  text  we  may, 
I  apprehend,  at  once,  with  perfect  safety,  decide  what  cannot  be  the  true  meaning 
of  the  inspired  writer.  It  cannot,  in  the  first  place,  be  his  design  to  imply  that 
our  feelings  of  piety  and  devotion  towards  God  can  strike  into  our  hearts  with  too 
deep  a  root,  or  can  press  upon  us  with  too  close  and  powerful  an  influence.  In 
the  second  place,  it  cannot  be  his  intention  to  convey  the  idea  that  the  sincere 
endeavour  of  any  human  beings  to  secure  the  eternal  salvation  of  their  souls  can 
be  too  strong,  too  constant,  or  too  earnest.  Neither,  in  the  third  place,  can  we 
possibly  err,  on  the  side  of  a  faulty  excess,  in  scrupulously  endeavouring  to  dis- 
charge all  the  duties  of  morality.  If  we  love  God,  we  must  keep  His  command- 
ments. We  cannot  be  too  watchful  against  temptations,  too  guarded  against  the 
■edootions  ol  sinful  pleasure,  too  careful  to  check  every  intemperate  and  irregular 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vti. 


desire.     Neither  can  we  be  too  anxious  to  perform  our  duties  towards  our  fellow- 
creatures;  too  kind,  beneficent,  and  merciful,  too  just  or  honest  in  our  dealings. 
It  must,  therefore,  be  perfectly  clear  that,  when  we  are  cautioned  against  "  being 
righteous  overmuch,"  as  well  as  against  making  ourselves  "  over- wise,"  we  are 
cautioned,  not  against  extremes  in  respect  to  true  righteousness,  or  true  wisdom, 
but  against  mistakes  in  the  pursuit  of  both  these  excellencies,  and  false  pretensions 
to  them.     A  person  may  be  said  to  "  make  himself  over- wise  "  when  he  mistakes 
the  ends  of  true  wisdom,  or  when  he  follows  false  wisdom  instead  of  true,  or  when 
he  pretends  to  possess  it  in  matters  where  he  is  really  deficient.     And  so,  in  a 
corresponding  sense,  he  may  become  "  righteous  overmuch,"  when  he  professes 
to  be  more  righteous  than  others,  and  really  is  not  so,  wearing  his  religion  merely 
on  the  outside,  and  not  inwardly  in  the  heart;  or  when  he  mistakes  the  means  of 
righteousness  for  the  end;  or  when,  in  some  manner  or  other,  he  follows  and 
exhibits  a  false  kind  of  righteousness  instead  of  that  which  the  Word  of  God, 
rightly  understood,  prescribes  and  enjoins.     (G.  D'Oyly,  D.D.)     Be  not  righteous 
overmuch: — 1.  In  general,  they  are  righteous  overmuch  who  run  into  any  excess 
in  the  practice  of  those  sets  which  are  of  a  religious  natxire,  which  are  good,  and 
absolutely  necessary  in  a  certain  degree;  such,  for  example,  as  prayer,  contempla- 
tion, retirement,  reading  the  Scriptures  and  other  good  books,  frequenting  the 
public  worship  of  God,  instructing  others,  abstinence,  mortification,  almsgiving, 
and  religious  conversation.     These  things  are  overdone  when  the  practice  of  any 
of   them   interferes   with   other   necessary   duties,   so   as    to   cause   them   to   be 
omitted,  or  when  they  are  carried  further  than  the  health  of  the  body,  or  the 
attention  of  the  mind,  can  accompany  them,  or  the  situation  and  circumstances 
of  life  can  admit.    2.  Over-righteousness  consists  also  in  everything  that  is  properly 
called  will-worship — the  invention  and  the  practice  of  such  expedients  of  appeasing 
or  of  pleasing  God  as  neither  reason  nor  revelation  suggest;  and  which,  since 
they  are  not  contained  in  the  law  of  nature,  or  in  the  law  of  God,  must  either 
be  wicked,  or  at  least  frivolous  and  foolish.     3.  Keligious  zeal,  being  naturally 
brisk  and  resolute,  is  a  warmth  of  temper  which  may  easily  run  into  excesses, 
and  which  breaks  in  upon  the  great  law  of  charity,  when  it  produces  oppression 
and  persecution.     The  zealot  pleads  conscience  for  his  own  behaviour,  but  never 
will  allow  that  plea  in  those  who  dissent  from  him  :  and  what  a  perverse  and 
saucy   absurdity  is  this  I     4.  Over-righteousness  hath  conspicuously  appeared   in 
indiscreet  austerities,  a  solitary  life,  a  voluntary  poverty,  and  vows  of  celibacy. 
I  join  all  these  together,  because  they  have  very  often  gone  together.     5.  This 
leads  us  to  another  instance  of  over-righteousness,  which  was  common  amongst 
the  ancient  Jews  or  Hebrews,  namely,  making  solemn  vows  to  God,  without  duly 
considering    the    inconveniences    which    might    attend    them.     Such    vows    either 
ended  in  neglecting  to  perform  them,  which  was  perjury;  or  in  performing  them 
with  a  slovenly  sorrow  and  reluctance,  and  in  offending  God,  who  loveth  a  cheerful 
giver.     6.  Zeal,  or  righteousness,  is  carried  beyond  its  bounds  when  men  run  into 
unnecessary  danger  even  for  a  good  cause.     The  ancient  Christians  had  a  laudable 
«eal  for  the  Gospel;  but  it  carried  some  of  them  into  excessive  imprudence  in 
provoking,  insulting,  and  defying  their  Pagan  enemies,  and  seeking  out  martyr- 
dom when  they  were  not  called  to  it.    But  it  was  observable  that  several  of  these 
rash  zealots,  when  it  came  to  the  trial,  fell  off  shamefully,  and  renounced  their 
religion;  whilst  other  Christians,  who  were  timorous  and  diffident,  who  fled  and 
hid  themselves,  and  used  every  lawful  method  to  shun  persecution,  being  seized 
upon  and  brought  forth  to  suffer,  behaved,  by  the  gracious  assistance  of  God, 
with  exemplary  courage  and  constancy,     7.  Another  instance  of  over-righteousness 
appears  in  a  busy,  meddling,  intriguing  forwardness  to  reform  defects,  real   or 
supposed,  in  the  doctrines,  discipline,  or  manners  of  the  Christian  community. 
Every  one  is  not  qualified  for  the  office  of  a  reformer.     He  hath  a  call,  he  will 
say  :  but  a  call  to  be  turbulent  and  troublesome  is  not  a  call  from  God.     8.  Lastly, 
a  modest  and  a  prudent  man  will  not  be  over-righteous  in  the  following  instances  : 
he  will  not  be  forward  to  rebuke  all  evil-doers  at  all  times,  and  on  all  occasions, 
when  the  bad  temper,  or  the  high   station  of  the  offenders   may  make   them 
impatient  of  censiu-e,  and  draw  upon  him  for  an  answer,  Who  made  thee  a  judge 
and  a  ruler  over  us?     Mind  thy  own  concerns,  and  mend  thy  own  manners.     He 
will  not  be  fond  of  disputing  with  every  one  who  is  in  an  error.     It  may   be 
observed  that  in  almost  all  debates,  even  between  civil  and  polite  contenders,  the 
issue  is,  that  each  departs  with  the  same  sentiments  which  he  brought  along 
with  him,  and  after  much  hath  been  said,  nothing  is  done  on  either  side,  by  way 


CHAT".  Tn.]  ECCLESIASTES.  18» 

of  conviction.  This  will  make  a  wise  man  not  over-fond  of  the  task  of  mending 
wrong  heads.  {J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  A  perilout  compromise: — That  is  most  soothing 
and  comforting  counsel  for  the  indolent  soul.  "  Be  not  righteous  overmuch." 
What  an  easy  yoke  I  How  mild  the  requirements  I  How  delightfully  lax  the 
discipline !  Why,  the  school  is  just  a  playground  I  Have  we  any  analogous 
counsel  in  our  own  day?  In  what  modern  guise  does  it  appear?  Here  is  a 
familiar  phrase:  "  We  can  have  too  much  of  a  good  thing."  Such  is  the  general 
application  of  the  proverb.  But  the  word  is  stretched  out  to  include  the  sphere 
of  religion.  The  counsel  runs  somewhat  in  this  wise ;  we  require  a  little  religion 
if  we  would  drink  the  nectar  of  the  world,  and  we  require  a  little  worldliness  if 
we  would  really  appreciate  the  flavour  of  religion.  To  put  the  counsel  baldly,  we 
need  a  little  devilry  to  make  life  spicy.  That  is  one  modern  shape  of  the  old 
counsel.  Here  is  the  old  counsel  in  another  dress  :  "  We  must  wink  at  many 
things."  We  must  not  be  too  exactingly  scrupulous.  That  is  the  way  to  march 
through  life  easily,  attended  by  welcome  comforts.  Don't  be  too  particular;  "  be 
not  righteous  overmuch."  Here  is  a  third  dress  in  which  the  old  counsel  appears 
in  modern  times  :  "  In  Kome,  one  must  do  as  Rome  does."  Our  company  must 
determine  our  moral  attire.  We  must  have  the  adaptability  of  a  chameleon.  If 
we  are  abstainers,  don't  let  us  take  our  scrupulosity  into  festive  and  convivial 
gatherings.  Don't  let  us  throw  wet  blankets  over  the  genial  crowd.  If  some  par- 
ticular expedient,  some  rather  shaky  policy  be  prevalent  in  your  line  of  business, 
do  not  stand  out  an  irritating  exception.  "Be  not  righteous  overmuch."  Now, 
let  us  pass  from  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  to  another  part  of  the  sacred  Word, 
and  listen  to  a  voice  from  a  higher  sphere.  What  says  the  prophet  Isaiah? 
"  Your  wine  is  mixed  with  water."  The  people  had  been  carrying  out  the  counsel 
of  Koheleth.  They  had  been  diluting  their  righteousness.  They  had  been  putting 
a  little  water  into  their  wine.  The  prophet  proclaims  that  God  will  not  accept  any 
dilutions.  He  will  not  accept  a  religion  that  is  watered  down.  He  despises  a 
devotion  which  has  been  thinned  into  compromise.  In  many  parts  of  the  Old 
Testament  this  perilous  compromise  is  condemned.  "  They  have  given  their 
tears  to  the  altar,  and  have  married  the  daughter  of  a  strange  god."  "  They 
feared  the  Lord  and  served  their  own  gods."  This  is  the  type  of  broken  fellow- 
ship and  of  impaired  devotion  against  which  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament 
direct  their  severest  indictments.  Let  us  pass  on  now  to  the  day  when  the  light 
is  come,  and  the  "  glory  of  the  Lord  "  is  risen  upon  us.  Let  us  hear  the  counsel 
and  command  of  "the  Word  made  flesh."  "Be  ye  perfect;"  that  ie  the 
injunction  of  the  Master.  We  are  to  carry  the  refining  and  perfecting  influences 
of  religion  into  everything.  Everywhere  it  is  to  be  pervasive  of  life,  as  the  blood 
is  pervasive  of  the  flesh.  Everything  in  our  life  is  to  constitute  an  allurement 
to  help  to  draw  the  world  to  the  feet  of  the  risen  Lord.  This  all-pervasive  religion, 
this  non-compromising  religion,  is  the  only  one  that  discovers  the  thousand  secret 
sweets  that  are  yielded  by  the  Hill  of  Zion.  It  is  the  only  religion  that  presses 
the  juice  out  of  the  grapes  of  life,  and  drinks  the  precious  essences  which  God 
hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him.  "Be  ye  perfect;  "  sanctify  the  entire 
round,  never  be  oS  duty,  and  life  will  become  an  apocalypse  of  ever- heightening 
and  ever-brightening  glory.     (J.  H.  Jowett,  U.A.) 

Ver.  20.  For  there  is  not  a  jnst  man  upon  earth,  that  doeth  good,  and  sinneth 
not. — Man'$  inability  to  keep  the  law  perfectly: — Here  is  the  undoubted  character 
of  all  the  human  race,  fixing  imperfection  and  sinfulness  on  the  best  of  the  kind 
in  this  world,  and  so  concluding  all  to  be  liable  to  sin,  and  under  it.     I.  What  is 

LEGAL  PERFECTION,  OR  PERFECT  KEEPING  OF  THE  COMMANDS.  It  is  &  perfect  Con- 
formity of  heart  and  life  to  the  commands  of  God;  and  implies — 1.  A  perfection 
of  the  principles  of  action  (Matt.  xxii.  37).  2.  A  perfection  of  the  parts  of 
obedience.  No  part  must  be  lacking,  every  command  of  whatsoever  nature  must 
be  kept  (Gal.  iii.  10).  8.  A  perfection  of  degrees  in  every  part  (Matt.  xxii.  37). 
Sincerity  is  not  enough  in  the  eye  of  the  law.  In  everything  one  must  come  to 
the  highest  pitch,  or  there  is  no  perfection.  4.  A  perfection  of  duration  or  con- 
tinuance (Gal.  iii.  10).  One  bad  trip  after  a  course  of  obedience  will  mar  all. 
II.  The  attainableness  of  this  perfection.  1.  Adam  before  the  fall  was  able  to 
have  kept  the  commands  perfectly;  he  might  have  attained  it;  for  "God  made 
him  upright  "  (Eccles.  vii.  29).  2.  The  man  Christ,  who  was  not  a  mere  man, 
but  God-man,  who  was  not  only  able  to  keep  the  law  perfectly,  but  actually  did 
so.     3.  The  saints  in  heaven  are  able,  and  do  actually  perfectly  obey  whatever 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.tiu 

God'B  will  to  them  is  (Heb.  xii.  23).  4.  But  aince  Adam  fell,  no  mere  man  i» 
able,  while  in  this  life,  either  of  himself,  or  by  virtue  of  any  grace  now  given,  to^ 
keep  the  commands  perfectly  (James  iii.  2).  This  inability  is  owing  to  the  remains 
of  corruption  that  cleaves  to  every  one  of  them  in  this  mortal  state  (Rom.  vii. 
23),  and  from  which  they  ardently  long  to  be  delivered  (ver.  24).  III.  How  thb 
SAINTS  SIN  DAU.T,  AND  BBEAK  THE  COMMANDS.  1.  How  many  ways  the  commands 
may  be  broken.  (1)  In  deeds  done  contrary  to  the  command  of  God,  or  not  done, 
though  required.  (2)  In  words,  either  speaking  what  we  ought  not,  or  not  speak- 
ing what  we  ought,  or  speaking  what  we  ought,  but  not  in  the  manner  commanded. 
(3)  In  thoughts.  One  may  sin  by  thinking  what  he  ought  not,  by  omitting  of 
good  thoughts,  and  by  not  managing  good  thoughts,  in  the  manner  required  by  th» 
law.  2.  In  what  respect  the  saints  sin  daily,  in  thought,  word  and  deed.  (1) 
Negatively :  not  that  the  saints  fall  into  gross  sins  daily,  against  the  letter  of  the 
law,  either  in  thought,  word  or  deed.  Such  spots  are  not  the  spots  of  God's 
people.  Christ's  dwelling  by  His  Spirit  in  them,  the  breaking  of  the  reign  of  sin 
in  them  by  the  power  of  Divine  grace,  and  their  habitual  tenderness  and  watchful- 
ness, hold  them  ofiE  that  way  of  life.  (2)  Positively.  Besides  that  saints  may  b» 
surprised  into  gross  sins  in  thought,  word  and  deed,  sometimes  by  inadvertency, 
weakness  and  violence  of  temptation,  which  is  the  burden  of  their  souls,  they  sin 
every  day  in  thought,  word  and  deed  when  they  keep  the  strictest  watch  and 
have  most  of  the  Divine  assistance.  3.  How  these  failures  of  theirs  break  the 
commands,  while  they  sincerely  endeavour  to  obey  them.  Why,  the  moral  law 
is  the  eternal  rule  of  righteousness,  and  in  whatever  state  the  creature  be,  he  is 
bound  to  obey  his  Creator,  whether  in  a  state  of  nature  or  grace,  glory  or  damna* 
tion.  And  though  perfection  be  not  attainable  in  this  life,  yet  it  is  the  saints* 
duty  as  well  as  that  of  others.  So  every  coming  short  of  that  perfection  is  their 
ein,  needing  to  be  taken  away  by  Christ's  blood.  IV.  Confirm  thb  point,  that 
PERFECTION  IS  NOT  ATTAINABLE  IN  THIS  LIFE.  1.  The  Scripture  attests  that  there  i» 
no  man  without  sin  (1  Kings  viii.  46;  James  iii.  2).  If  any  man  set  up  for  it  in 
himself,  the  Spirit  of  God  says  he  deceives  himself  (1  John  i.  8).  See  an  unanswer- 
able question  (Prov.  xx.  9).  2.  The  best  have  a  corrupt  as  well  as  a  gracious 
principle,  making  the  spiritual  combat  never  ending  till  death  give  the  separating 
stroke  (Gal.  v.  17).  3.  "We  are  taught  always  to  pray  for  pardon,  "  Forgive  us 
our  debts";  but  sinless  creatures  need  no  pardons.  This  clearly  shows  that  all 
sin,  and  so  come  short  of  perfect  obedience.  4.  Consider  the  spirituality  of  the 
law  and  its  extent  with  human  weakness,  and  you  will  see  this  clearly. 
I  (T.  Boiton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  21.  Also  take  no  heed  nnto  all  words  that  are  spoken :  lest  thou  hear  tbj 
■errant  curse  thee. — Listeners  hear  no  good  of  themselvet: — I.  We  should  pa? 

BOMB    ATTENTION    TO    WHAT   OTHERS    THINK    AND    SAT    ABOUT   D8.       What   a   forCC   publio 

opinion  is  I  We  cannot  see  it,  nor  touch  it;  and  yet  it  is  a  great  factor  in  shaping 
the  character  and  actions  alike  of  men  and  nations.  Public  opinion  may  be 
utterly  wrong;  and  then  we  must  oppose  it  at  any  cost,  even  though  we  stand 
alone.  And  some  of  us  might  do  well  to  pay  a  little  more  attention  than  we  do 
to  the  tone  of  thought  and  feeling  around  us.  If  a  man  see  that  his  acts  and  life 
are  giving  pain  to  others,  that  he  is  a  stumblingblock  to  his  neighbours,  even 
though  it  only  be  to  those  whom  he  would  consider  weaker  brethren ;  and  if  he 
go  on  his  way  recklessly,  regardless  of  what  men  say  or  think,  verily  he  will  not  b» 
able  to  free  himself  from  guilt.  By  such  thoughtlessness  we  are  apt  to  harden, 
to  irritate,  to  mislead  our  fellows.  II.  We  should  not  be  too  curious  to  know 
WHAT  OTHER  PEOPLE  THINK  OF  US.  Soms  men  are  selfish  or  obstinate.  They  do 
what  is  pleasant;  they  follow  the  path  which  in  their  own  eyes  seems  right.  Am 
I  my  brother's  keeper?  they  exclaim,  in  answer  to  every  remonstrance.  We  are 
all  one  family,  closely  united,  and  at  every  point  we  are  hurting  or  helping  one 
another.  There  are  thousands,  however,  who  err  on  the  opposite  side.  They 
allow  the  opinion  of  the  world,  the  fashion  of  the  day,  to  shape  their  life  and 
character.  There  are  many  whose  life  is  darkened  for  a  whole  day  because  some 
one  has  said  a  severe  word  about  them  and  the  report  of  it  has  reached  their 
ears.  It  is  foolish  to  make  so  much  of  the  world's  opinion.  For  think  how  much 
idle  gossip  is  floating  about  everywhere.  Sharp  words  are  often  spoken  in  a 
I  passion,  or  under  a  misconception,  and  the  speaker  regrets  them  bitterly  after- 
'  wards.     He  is  a  wise  man  who  is  not  anxious  to  hear  too  much.     III.  We  should 

lALWATS   BE  ANXIOUS   TO  ENOW    God'S   OPINION  OF   US,   AND   TO  HAVB  HiS   APPROVAL. 


TM.]  ECCLESIASTES.  185 


Some  one  may  say,  I  do  not  mind  what  men  say  of  me;  but,  oh,  that  I  knew 
God'B  opinion  of  me  I  It  is  easy  to  know  it.  "  The  Father  Himself  loveth  you, 
because  ye  have  loved  Me."  Do  you  love  Christ?  Then  you  are  loved  by  God. 
"  He  that  belie veth  not  the  Son  ...  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."  Have 
you  never  trusted  Christ  as  your  Saviour?  Then  God's  wrath  has  its  resting* 
place  upon  you.     (W.  Park,  M.A.) 

Yar.  28.  A  woman  among  all  thoie  have  I  not  fotmd. — ^Solomon**  titimait  of 
woman: — This  sentence  of  Solomon  has  been  often  quoted  to  show  the  utter 
worthlessness  of  the  female  character.  It  is,  however,  an  entirely  worthless  con- 
clusion as  regards  woman  when  placed  in  her  legitimate  and  appropriate  sphere  as 
the  one  sole  companion  of  man's  life  in  love,  cares  and  labours.  As  well  might 
the  tyrant  who,  by  cruelty,  has  alienated  his  subjects,  complain  that  he  has  failed 
to  find  loyal  men,  as  the  debauchee,  who  has  subjected  himdreds  to  his  lust,  that 
he  had  found  no  noble,  virtuous  woman.  It  is  not  thus  that  the  commerce  of 
love  is  carried  on.  Pearls  are  not  to  be  exchanged  for  pebbles.  The  law  of  love 
which  God  has  established  is  heart  for  heart;  and  the  affections  that  are  dissipated 
among  a  thousand  objects  must  ever  be  without  return  of  that  which  yet  the 
soul  seeks — the  undivided  love.  Of  this  fact  Solomon  seems  to  have  had  a  dim 
perception  when  he  gives  those  never-to-be-forgotten  advices  to  the  young  man, 
to  avoid  the  strange  woman  whose  steps  take  hold  on  hell,  and  to  live  joyfully 
with  the  wife  of  his  youth.  It  was  not  given  to  Solomon,  wise  as  be  was,  to 
limn  the  picture  of  the  virtuous  woman,  but  to  another  king  whose  wisdom  was 
derived  from  the  inspiration  of  his  mother.  The  words  of  Lemuel  are  well 
worthy  of  oiu-  attention,  both  as  neutralizing  the  false  impression  produced  by 
Solomon's  philosophy,  and  as  showing  what  the  true  woman  is  (Prov.  xzzi.  10-81). 
(/.  Bennet.) 

Ver.  29.  Ood  hath  made  man  upright ;  hut  they  have  sought  ont  many  inventions. 
' — Af  an  in  hit  original  and  in  his  lapsed  $tate: — I.  God  hade  man  upbioht.  Our  text, 
then,  teaches  us  that  man  was  made  in  a  state  of  perfect  conformity  to  some 
rule.  If  it  is  asked,  what  rule?  I  answer,  the  law  of  God,  for  this  is  the  only 
perfect,  immutable  and  eternal  rule  to  which  God  requires  His  creatures  to  be 
conformed,  and  in  conformity  to  which  rectitude  or  uprightness  consists.  1.  A 
state  of  perfect  conformity  to  the  Divine  law  implies  the  possession  of  an  under- 
standing perfectly  acquainted  with  that  law.  2.  A  state  of  perfect  uprightness, 
or  conformity  to  the  Divine  law,  implies  a  memory  which  faithfully  retains  all 
its  precepts.  8.  A  state  of  perfect  conformity  to  the  Divine  law  implies  a  con- 
science which  always  faithfully  applies  it.  4.  A  state  of  perfect  conformity  to  the 
Divine  law  implies  a  heart  which  perfectly  loves  that  law.  6.  A  state  of  perfect 
conformity  to  the  law  of  God  implies  a  will  perfectly  obedient  and  submissive  to 
that  law;  or,  in  other  words,  to  the  Divine  government  and  authority.  6.  There 
still  remains  one  faculty  possessed  by  man,  which  it  is  necessary  to  consider — that 
which  is  usually  called  the  imagination.  When  man  left  the  forming  hand  of  his 
Maker,  this  faculty,  like  the  others  which  we  have  mentioned,  was  entirely  free 
from  moral  imperfection.  Instead  of  filling  the  mind,  as  it  now  does,  with  vain 
thoughts,  waking  dreams,  and  worthless  or  sinful  fancies,  it  presented  nothing 
but  holy  images  of  spiritual  and  heavenly  objects.     II.  Though  God  made  man 

THUS    UPBIOHT,    THST    BAYS    80UOHT    OUT    HANT    INVENTIONS.      1.    Men    haVC    SOUght 

out  or  invented  many  new  ways  in  which  to  walk,  forsaking  the  good  old  way  in 
which  God  originally  placed  them.  2.  Men  have  forsaken  the  one  living  and  true 
God,  in  whom  they  live,  and  move,  and  are,  and  sought  out  or  invented  innumer- 
able false  gods  and  created  idols,  to  which  they  give  that  homage  and  attention 
which  are  due  to  Him  alone.  8.  Men  have  ceased  to  be  conformed  to  the  Divine 
law,  and  have  sought  out  many  other  rules — ^rules  more  agreeable  to  their  present 
sinful  inclinations — ^by  which  to  regulate  and  try  their  conduct.  Some  adopt  for 
this  purpose  the  laws  of  their  country ;  others  the  opinion  of  some  human  teacher ; 
while  &  third  and  more  numerous  class  govern  themselves  by  the  maxims  which 
pass  currently  in  the  society  of  which  they  happen  to  be  members.  Thus,  in 
Tarious  ways,  men  measure  themselves  by  themselves,  and  compare  themselves 
among  themselves,  and  therefore  are  not  wise;  for  while  they  follow  these  rules 
cf  human  invention,  they  have  lost  all  that  uprightness,  that  conformity  to  the 
Divine  law,  which  has  been  described.  4.  Notice,  among  the  inventions  of  sinful 
■laa  the  innumerable  ezousett  pleat  and  apologies  which  he  has  sought  out  to 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

justify  his  conduct,  and  to  make  himself  appear  unfortunate,  rather  than  criminal. 
(E.  Pay$on,  D.D.)  The  original  state  of  man,  and  the  covenant  of  works: — I.  Thb 
NATURAL  FOBM  OE  CONSTITUTION  OF  MAN,  AS  MAN.  The  primitive  bodies  of  our  first 
parents  were  not  subject  to  the  deformities  and  infirmities,  the  fatigues  of  labour, 
and  the  injuries  of  climates,  or  seasons,  nor  to  distempers,  violence  and  death 
which  we  are  now  exposed  to;  and  no  doubt  but  they  were  built  with  various 
beauties  of  due  proportions,  colour  and  form  vastly  superior  to  all  that  now  appear 
in  the  ruins  of  human  nature.  But  the  chief  glory  of  the  natural  form  of  man 
lies  in  his  soul,  which  is  an  incorporeal,  invisible  and  immortal,  intelligent,  free 
and  active  being,  and  so  bears  the  natural  image  of  God,  as  He  is  a  Spirit.  The 
bands  of  union  between  soul  and  body,  and  the  way  of  their  influencing  and 
impressing  one  another,  lie  among  the  unsearchable  mysteries  of  nature  of  which 
we  have  no  ideas.  But  this  we  know,  that  by  their  union  with  each  other  to 
constitute  a  human  person,  the  glories  of  the  upper  and  lower  worlds  are  in  a 
Bort  epitomized  and  shadowed  out  in  man.  II.  His  hobal  statb  or  condition  as 
AN  upright  man.  1.  With  respect  to  his  rectitude.  (1)  His  understanding  was 
full  of  light.  (2)  His  will  was  perfectly  holy  and  free.  (3)  His  affections  and 
appetites  were  all  pure  and  regular.  2.  With  respect  to  his  happiness.  (1)  He 
was  a  happy  creature  in  the  very  constitution  of  his  being  as  an  innocent,  upright 
man.  (2)  He  was  a  happy  creature  in  his  communion  with  God  and  sense  of 
His  favour.  (3)  He  was  a  happy  creature  in  the  pleasure  of  his  situation,  with 
the  free  use  and  government  of  all  the  creatures  round  about  him.     III.  Thb 

TENURE  BT  WHICH  OB  THE  TERMS  UPON  WHICH  HE  WAS  TO  HOLD  THIS  MORAL  STATE. 

It  was  not  entailed  upon  him  by  any  absolute  promise  that  he  should  continue 
in  it;  nor  was  it  put  upon  a  mere  act  of  Divine  sovereignty  whether  he  should 
hold  or  lose  it;  the  first  would  have  left  no  room  for  a  trial  of  his  obedience,  and 
the  last  would  have  taken  away  a  grand  article  of  his  encouragement  to  that 
obedience  and  of  his  pleasure  in  it.  But  he  was  to  hold  it  by  a  covenant  of 
works,  upon  condition  of  perfect  obedience  to  the  end  of  that  state  of  probation 
in  which  it  became  the  wisdom  of  God  to  place  him.  IV.  The  concern  that  all 
MANKIND  had  therein.  He  whom  God  created  after  His  own  image  is  to  be 
considered  as  a  public  person,  who  was  to  hold  or  lose  that  happy  state,  not  only 
for  himself,  but  for  all  his  natural  offspring.  Had  he  stood,  we  had  all  been 
blessed  and  confirmed  in  blessedness  with  him,  as  upon  his  fall.  Scripture  and 
experience  assure  us,  we  lost  it  with  him.  Use : — 1.  This  shows  what  dreadful 
work  sin  has  made  in  the  world.  2.  This  shows  that  all  good  is  from  God,  and 
all  evil  from  ourselves.  8.  Let  us  be  deeply  affected  with  the  present  state  of 
human  nature.  4.  Let  us  turn  our  eyes  to  the  better  covenant  and  the  better 
Head  which  God  has  provided  for  our  recovery.  (/.  Ouyse,  D.D.)  The  state  of 
innocence: — I.  The  righteousness  of  this  state  wherein  man  was  created. 
"  God  made  him  upright."  1.  This  supposes  a  law  to  which  he  was  conformed 
in  his  creation ;  as  when  anything  is  made  regular,  or  according  to  rule,  of  neces- 
sity the  rule  itself  is  presupposed.  Whence  we  may  gather  that  this  law  was. 
no  other  than  the  eternal,  indispensable  law  of  righteousness  observed  in  all 
points  by  the  second  Adam,  opposed  by  the  carnal  mind,  and  some  notions  of 
which  remain  yet  among  the  Pagans,  who,  "  having  not  the  law,,  are  a  law  unto 
themselves  "  (Rom.  ii.  14).  (1)  Man's  understanding  was  a  lamp  of  light.  He 
had  perfect  knowledge  of  the  lay,  and  of  his  duty  accordingly :  he  was  made 
after  God's  image,  and  consequently  could  not  want  knowledge,  which  is  a  part 
thereof  (Col.  iii,  10).  (2)  His  will  in  all  things  was  agreeable  with  the  will  of 
God  (Eph.  iv.  42).  (3)  His  affections  were  orderly,  pure  and  holy.  2.  From  what 
has  been  said  it  may  be  gathered  that  the  original  righteousness  explained  was 
universal  and  natural,  yet  mutable.  (1)  It  was  universal,  both  with  respect  to 
the  subject  of  it,  the  whole  man,  and  the  object  of  it,  the  whole  law.  There  was 
nothing  in  the  law  but  what  was  agreeable  to  his  reason  and  will,  as  God  made 
him,  though  sin  hath  now  set  him  at  odds  with  it;  his  soul  was  shapen  out  in 
length  and  breadth  to  the  commandment,  though  exceeding  broad;  so  that  his 
original  righteousness  was  not  only  perfect  in  its  parts,  but  in  degrees.  (2)  Aa 
it  was  universal,  so  it  was  natural  to  him,  and  not  supernatural  in  that  state. 
Kot  that  it  was  essential  to  man,  as  man,  for  then  he  could  not  have  lost  it 
without  the  loss  of  his  very  being,  but  it  was  natural  to  him ;  he  was  created  with 
it,  and  it  was  necessary  to  the  perfection  of  man,  as  he  came  out  of  the  hand 
of  Ood,  necessary  to  his  being  placed  in  a  state  of  integrity.  8.  It  was  mutable; 
it  was  •  righteousness  that  might  be  lost,  as  it  manifested  by  the  doleful  event. 


CHAP.  Til.]  ECCLESIASTES.  18T 

Let  no  man  quarrel  with  God'a  works  in  this;  for  if  Adam  had  been  unchangeably 
righteous,  he  must  have  been  so  either  by  nature  or  by  free  gift :  by  nature  ha 
eould  not  be  so,  for  that  is  proper  to  God,  and  incommunicable  to  any  creature ; 
if  by  free  gift,  then  no  wrong  was  done  to  him  in  withholding  what  he  could  not 
crave.  II.  Some  of  those  things  which  accompanied  ob  flowed  from  the 
BIGHTE0USNE88  OF  MAN'S  PRIMITIVE  STATE.  Happiness  is  the  result  of  holiness; 
and  as  this  was  a  holy,  so  it  was  a  happy  state.  1.  Man  was  then  a  very  glorious 
creature.  There  was  no  impurity  to  be  seen  without;  no  squint  look  in  the  eyes, 
after  any  unclean  thing;  the  tongue  spoke  nothing  but  the  language  of  heaven; 
and,  in  a  word,  "  the  King's  son  was  all-glorious  within,"  and  his  '*  clothing  of 
wrought  gold."  2.  He  wae  the  favourite  of  Heaven.  "While  he  was  alone  in  the 
world  he  was  not  alone,  for  God  was  with  him.  His  communion  and  fellowship 
were  with  his  Creator,  and  that  immediately;  for  as  yet  there  was  nothing  to 
turn  away  the  face  of  God  from  the  work  of  His  own  hands,  seeing  sin  had  not 
as  yet  entered,  which  alone  could  make  the  breach.  8.  God  made  him  lord  of 
the  world,  prince  of  the  inferior  creatures,  universal  lord  and  emperor  of  the  whole 
earth.  The  Lord  dealt  most  liberally  and  bountifully  with  him — "  put  all  things 
under  his  feet";  only  He  kept  one  thing,  one  tree  in  the  garden,  out  of  his 
hands,  even  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  But  you  may  say,  and  did 
He  grudge  him  this?  I  answer.  Nay;  but  when  He  had  made  him  thus  holy 
and  happy.  He  graciously  gave  him  this  restriction,  which  was  in  its  own  nature 
a  prop  and  stay  to  keep  him  from  falling.  And  this  I  say  upon  these  three 
grounds : — (1)  As  it  was  most  proper  for  the  honoior  of  God,  who  had  made  man 
lord  of  the  lower  world,  to  assert  His  sovereign  dominion  over  all,  by  some  par- 
ticular visible  sign,  so  it  was  proper  for  man's  safety.  (2)  This  was  a  memorial  of 
his  mutable  state  given  to  him  from  heaven,  to  be  laid  up  by  him  for  his  greater 
caution. ,  (3)  God  made  man  upright,  directed  towards  God  as  his  chief  end. 
This  fair  tree,  of  which  he  was  forbidden  to  eat,  taught  him  that  his  happiness  lay 
not  in  enjoyment  of  the  creatures,  for  there  was  a  want  even  in  paradise :  so 
that  the  forbidden  tree  was,  in  effect,  the  hand  of  all  the  creatures  pointing  man 
away  from  themselves  to  God  for  happiness.  It  was  a  sign  of  emptiness  hung 
before  the  door  of  the  creation,  with  the  inscription,  "  This  is  not  yotir  rest." 
4.  As  he  had  a  perfect  tranquillity  within  his  own  breast,  so  he  had  a  perfect 
calm  without.  His  heart  had  nothing  to  reproach  him  with;  conscience,  then,  had 
nothing  to  do  but  to  direct,  approve,  and  feast  him;  and,  without,  there  was 
nothing  to  annoy  him.  5.  Man  had  a  life  of  pure  delight  and  unalloyed  pleasure 
in  this  state.  God  placed  him,  not  in  a  common  place  of  the  earth ;  but  in 
Eden,  a  place  eminent  for  pleasantness,  as  the  name  of  it  imports;  nay,  not  only 
in  Eden,  but  in  the  Garden  of  Eden;  the  most  pleasant  spot  of  that  pleasant 
place;  a  garden  planted  by  God  Himself,  to  be  the  mansion-house  of  this  His 
favourite.  6.  He  was  immortal.  He  would  never  have  died  if  he  had  nofe 
sinned;  it  waa  in  case  of  sin  that  death  was  threatened  (Gen.  ii.  17),  which 
shows  it  to  be  the  consequence  of  sin,  and  not  of  the  sinless  human  nature.  III. 
The  oootbinb  of  the  state  of  innocence  applied.  1.  For  information.  (1)  Not 
Ood,  but  man  himself  was  the  cause  of  his  ruin.  (2)  God  may  most  justly 
require  of  men  perfect  obedience  to  His  law,  and  condemn  them  for  their  not 
obeying  it  perfectly,  though  now  they  have  no  ability  to  keep  it.  In  so  doing, 
He  gathers  but  where  He  has  sown.  (8)  Behold  here  the  infinite  obligation  we 
lie  under  to  Jesus  Christ  the  second  Adam,  who,  with  His  own  precious  blood  has 
bought  our  freedom,  and  freely  makes  offer  of  it  again  to  us  (Hos.  xiii.  9),  and 
that  with  the  advantage  of  everlasting  security,  and  that  it  can  never  be  altogether 
lost  any  more  (John  x.  28,  29).  Free  grace  will  fix  those  whom  free  will  shook 
down  into  the  gulf  of  misery.  2.  This  conveys  a  reproof  to  three  sorts  of  persons. 
(1)  To  those  who  hate  religion  in  the  power  of  it,  wherever  it  appears;  and  can 
take  pleasure  in  nothing  but  in  the  world  and  in  their  lusts.  (2)  It  reproves 
those  who  put  religion  to  shame,  and  those  who  are  ashamed  of  religion,  before 
a  graceless  world.  (8)  It  reproves  the  proud,  self -conceited  professor,  who  admires 
himself  in  a  garment  of  rags  which  he  has  patched  together.  8.  Of  lamentation. 
Here  was  a  stately  building;  man  carved  like  a  fair  palace,  but  now  lying  in 
ashes :  let  us  stand  and  look  on  the  ruins,  and  drop  a  tear.  Ah,  may  we  not 
now  say,  **  0  that  we  were  as  in  months  past  I"  when  there  was  no  stain  in  otir 
nature,  no  cloud  on  our  minds,  no  pollution  in  our  hearts  I  Had  we  never  been 
in  better  case,  the  matter  had  been  less;  but  they  that  were  brought  up  in 
scarlet  do  now  embrace  dunghills.    Where  is  our  primitive  glory  now?    (T.  Bo$ton, 


188  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

D.D.)  Man'$  creation  in  a  holy,  but  mutable,  state: — ^I.  God  endued  the  natdbb 
OP  MAN,  IN  His  oeeation,  with  a  perfect  and  universal  rectitude.  1.  All 
created  rectitude  consists  in  conformity  to  some  rule  or  law.  2.  The  highest  rule 
of  all  created  rectitude  is  the  will  of  God,  considered  as  including  most  intrinsically 
an  eternal  and  immutable  reason,  justice  and  goodness.  8.  Any  suflScient  significa- 
tioii  of  this  will,  touching  the  reasonable  creature's  duty,  is  a  law,  indispensably 
obliging  such  a  creature.  4.  The  law  given  to  Adam  at  his  creation  was  partly 
natural,  given  by  way  of  internal  impression  upon  his  soul;  partly  positive,  given 
(as  is  probable)  by  some  more  external  discovery  or  revelation.  5.  Adam  was 
endued  in  his  creation  with  a  sufficient  ability  and  habitude  to  conform  to  this 
whole  law,  both  natural  and  positive;  in  which  ability  and  habitude  his  original 
rectitude  did  consist.     II.  Man's  defection  from  his  primitive  state  was  merely 

VOLUNTARY,  AND  FROM  THE  UNCONSTRAINED  CHOICE  OF  HIS  OWN  MUTABLE  AND  SELF- 
DETERMINING  WILL.  1.  The  nature  of  man  is  now  become  universally  depraved 
and  sinful.  This  Scripture  is  full  of  (1  Kings  viii.  46;  Ps.  xiv.  1;  Bom.  iii.  10-19, 
28;  v.  12,  13,  17-19;  1  John  v.  19,  etc.),  and  experience  and  common  observation 
put  it  beyond  dispute.  2.  The  pure  and  holy  nature  of  God  could  never  be  the 
original  of  man's  sin.     This  is  evident  in  itself.     God  disclaims  it;  nor  can  any 

rBrm  it  of  Him  without  denying  His  very  being  (Deut.  xxxii.  4;  Ps.  v.  4; 
John  11).  8.  It  is  blasphemous  and  absurd  to  talk  of  two  principles  (as  the 
Manicheee  of  old);  the  one  good,  and  tihe  cause  of  all  good;  the  other  evil,  and 
the  cause  of  all  evil.  (1)  This  would  suppose  two  Gods,  two  independent  beings. 
(2)  It  would  suppose  an  evil  God.  4.  It  was  not  possible  that  either  external 
objects,  or  the  temptation  of  the  devil,  should  necessitate  the  will  of  man  to  sin. 
6.  The  whole  nature  of  sin  consisting  only  in  a  defect,  no  other  cause  need  be 
assigned  of  it  than  a  defective;  that  is,  an  understanding,  will,  and  inferior 
powers,  however  originally  good,  yet  mutably  and  defectively  so.  6.  Man,  being 
created  mutable  as  to  his  holiness,  must  needs  be  so  as  to  his  happiness  too.  And 
that  both  upon  a  legal  account  (for  the  law  had  determined  that  if  he  did  sin  he 
must  die),  and  also  upon  a  natural;  for  it  was  not  possible  that,  his  soul  being 
once  depraved  by  sin,  the  powers  of  it  vitiated,  their  order  each  to  other  and  toward 
their  objects  broken  and  interrupted,  there  should  remain  a  disposition  and  aptitude 
to  converse  with  the  Highest  Good.  (John  Howe,  M.A.)  Man'g  fall: — I.  Man's 
PRIMITIVE  INNOCENCE.  II.  Man's  ACQUIRED  SIN.  1.  It  is  striking  to  observc  that 
**  many  inventions  "  is  in  the  plural.  Eighteousness  is  spoken  of  as  oneness, 
singleness  of  heart.  But  the  ways  of  sin  are  many.  2.  These  ways  are  of  man's 
seeking — sought  out.  All  men  have  followed  the  example  of  Adam,  seeking  ways 
of  happiness  beyond  what  God  has  prescribed  for  them.  True  happiness  is  only 
to  be  found  in  His  service,  and  if  man  seeks  it  elsewhere  he  will  be  disappointed. 
m.  Lessons.  1.  The  folly  of  palliating  our  condition,  or  assuming  a  character 
we  do  not  possess.  A  man's  character  may  possess  much  that  is  lovely,  but  the 
best  are  fallen  creatures.  2.  The  folly  of  casting  the  blame  of  our  sinfulness  on 
God.  God  originally  made  man  upright.  3.  The  folly  of  supposing  that  we  can 
recover  ourselves  from  the  fall.  4.  The  blessedness  of  comparing  our  own  folly 
with  the  wisdom  of  God,  and  our  present  wretched  condition  with  that  which 
He  has  provided.  He  can  restore  and  recover  us  through  the  sacrifice  of  Christ, 
and  His  vicarious  atonement  on  our  behalf.  (Homili$t.)  The  fall: — At  first 
sight  it  would  seem  almost  incredible  that  a  being  endowed  and  circumstanced  as 
was  Adam,  probably  informed  that  not  only  his  own  happiness,  but  that  of  an 
imnumbered  posterity,  depended  on  his  obedience  to  a  single  command,  should 
have  signally  failed  in  his  probation,  and  provoked  a  curse  which  the  least  stead- 
fastness might  have  averted.  Our  only  business  now,  however,  in  examining  this 
matter,  is  with  the  truth  that  "  God  made  man  upright,"  and  that  in  making  him 
upright  He  had  done  enough  for  His  creature.  You  may,  indeed,  say  that  God 
might  have  so  constituted  Adam  that  he  should  have  been  incapable  of  falling, 
and  you  may  ask,  "  Why  was  he  not  thus  constituted?"  If  you  mean  that  human 
nature  might  have  been  such  that  to  sin  would  have  been  impossible,  we  believe 
you  to  assert  what  is  altogether  incorrect.  An  incapacity  of  sinning  is  the  property 
of  no  finite  nature.  The  archangel,  sublime  in  his  prowess,  is  nevertheless  finite — 
and  what  is  finite  may  be  measured  and  matched  by  temptation;  and  you  must 
pass  from  the  created  to  the  uncreated,  and  bow  down  before  Him  who  is  every 
way  infinite,  ere  you  can  find  a  being  of  whom  to  declare  that  he  cannot  sin 
because  by  nature  inaccessible  to  evil.  But  then  you  will  say,  "  If  not  by  nature, 
I  vndoubtedlj  by  grace,  our  first  parents  might  have  been  prevented  from  yielding; 


CHAP.  TH."]  ECCLESIASTES.  189 

grace  in  sufficient  measure  to  maintain  them  in  their  obedience  had  been  granted 
to  many  angels,  and  might,  if  God  had  seen  fit,  have  been  granted  to  man.'* 
Yes,  it  might;  but  grace,  from  its  very  nature,  must  be  altogether  free;  Ood  may 
give  it  or  withhold  it,  according  to  His  pleasure;  and  if  there  was  no  flaw  in  the 
original  constitution  of  Adam,  his  powers  having  all  that  perfectness  which  con- 
sisted with  creatureehip,  it  could  not  have  been  at  variance  with  any  attribute  of 
God  to  withhold  that  grace  which  should  have  kept  him  from  falling.  That  God 
should  have  placed  His  creature  in  a  state  of  probation,  the  trial  being  quite 
within  the  strength,  and  the  reward  of  obedience  unspeakably  magnificent,  you 
can  imagine  nothing  more  equitable,  nothing  more  worthy  every  way  of  Deity; 
but  there  can  be  no  probation  where  there  is  that  prevention  which  you  think 
might  have  been  extended  to  Adam;  if  you  allow  it  worthy  of  God  to  place  His 
creature  on  trial,  you  make  it  indispensable  that  He  should  suSer  him  to  fall. 
But  if  there  still  lurk  a  feeling  in  your  minds — a  feeling  not  to  be  met  by  argu- 
ment— that  it  was  unlike  a  merciful  God  to  permit  His  creature  to  work  out  for 
himself  a  heritage  of  woe  and  of  shame,  why,  then,  we  call  upon  you  to  remember 
that,  whilst  allowing  the  evil,  God  had  determined  the  antidote.  I  doubt  not  the 
glory  of  an  unf alien  man,  I  question  not  the  splendour  and  loveliness  of  an 
imblighted  paradise;  very  noble  must  Adam  have  been,  and  beautiful  amidst  the 
eurrounding  creation,  when  God  conversed  familiarly  with  man,  and  earth  was  as 
the  shrine  of  its  Maker;  and  sublime,  indeed,  would  have  been  the  spectacle,  and 
majestic  our  inheritance,  had  each  of  us  been  born  in  the  image  of  God,  and 
secured  against  losing  the  resemblance;  but  I  would  not  exchange  what  I  am,  il 
linked  by  faith  with  the  Mediator  Christ,  for  what  I  should  have  been  bad  Adam 
never  transgressed.  I  know  not  what  place  would  then  have  belonged  to  our 
natvire  amongst  the  orders  of  creation,  but  this  I  know,  that  now  it  is  associated 
with  the  Divine,  and  imagination  itself  fails  to  measure  its  dignity.  I  know  that 
by  occupying  my  place,  suffering  and  obeying  in  my  stead,  the  Son  of  God  hai 
done  vastly  more  than  reinstate  me  in  my  forfeited  possession :  He  has  set  ma 
"far  above  principalities  and  powers";  He  has  opened  to  me  happiness  which 
is  not  to  be  reached  by  aught  else  created ;  He  has  brought  me  into  a  relationship 
with  Deity,  which  could  not  have  resulted  from  creation.  Oh  I  then,  to  murmur 
because  Adam  was  allowed  to  destroy  us  by  his  apostasy  is  to  forget  or  deny  thai 
Christ  redeemed  us  by  His  agony ;  to  make  it  matter  of  complaint  that  we  were 
suffered  to  fall  is  to  repine  at  being  placed  unspeakably  higher  than  we  originally 
stood.  It  was  not  through  any  fault  in  his  original  constitution  that  Adam  fell 
away.  That  constitution  was,  indeed,  mutable,  because  Adam  was  a  creature,  and 
no  created  nature,  not  the  very  highest,  can  in  itself  be  immutable.  But  there  was 
no  defect  in  Adam,  unless  you  choose  to  reckon  it  a  defect  that  he  was  finite. 
The  understanding  could  immediately  distinguish  truth  from  error;  the  will  wa» 
prompt  to  follow  the  verdict  of  the  understanding ;  and  the  passions  were  all  held 
in  thorough  subordination;  so  that,  comparing  the  circumstances  and  the  endow- 
ments of  Adam,  you  may  see  that  he  possessed  sufficient  power  for  passing  sue- 
oessfully  through  his  probation,  and  that,  having  been  created,  he  might,  had  he 
chosen,  have  continued  in  uprightness.  Just,  then,  and  true,  and  merciful  was 
God  in  His  dealings  with  the  father  of  our  race,  for  man  could  not  have  fallen 
had  he  not  of  his  own  will  "  sought  out  inventions."  This  brief  description  has 
been  applicable  from  the  first.  It  was  that  they  might  "be  as  gods,"  that  they 
might  "  know  good  and  evil,"  that  they  might  advance  themselves  in  the  scale 
of  intelligence,  for  this  it  was  that  Adam  and  Eve  partook  of  the  forbidden  fruit 
and  set  at  nought  the  positive  command.  They  tried  the  experiment,  and,  with 
all  the  consequences  of  failure,  bequeathed  to  their  children  the  fatal  wish  to 
invent  good  for  themselves  rather  than  seek  it  in  God.  The  many  inventions 
which  we  seek  out;  the  schemes,  even  where  there  is  the  light  of  revelation,  for 
being  ourselves  the  authors,  either  in  whole  or  in  part,  of  our  own  deliverance, 
these  are  continued  evidences  that  we  are  the  children  of  those  who  even  in 
paradise  planned  their  own  exaltation  and  thought  to  be  wiser  than  God.  We 
imitate  our  forefather,  resolving  to  be  ourselves  the  architects  of  our  greatness, 
and  therefore  building  on  the  quicksand;  neglecting,  as  he  did,  the  simple  declara- 
tions of  revelation,  we  take  our  own  way  of  acquiring  knowledge  and  learn  it  by 
being  lost.  Oh  I  for  the  spirit  of  St.  Paul — "  I  determined  not  to  know  anything 
among  you  save  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified."  I  read  the  history  of  human 
transgression  and  ruin.  I  read  it  in  the  pages  of  Scripture;  I  read  it  in  the 
throes  and  the  convulsions  of  a  disorganized  world.     I  then  turn  to  the  record  oi 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin. 

redemption.  I  find  that  God  has  graciouely  taken  into  His  own  hands  the  work 
of  my  salvation.  I  learn  that,  though  fallen,  He  is  ready  to  exalt  me;  though 
corrupted,  He  is  willing  to  purify,  though  worthy  of  condemnation,  He  offen  m* 
forgiTeness  and  pardon.     (H,  Melvill,  B.D.) 


CHAPTEB  Vm. 


Vbb.  1.  A  man's  wisdom  maketh  his  face  to  shine  and  the  holdness  of  his  face 

shall  be  changed. — The  human  face: — In  all  the  works  of  Ood  there  is  nothing 

more  wonderful  than  the  human  ooimtenance.     The  face  i£  ordinarily  the  index 

of  character.     It  is  the  throne  of  the  emotions,  the  battlefield  of  the  passions. 

It  is  the  catalogue  of  character,  the  map  of  the  mind,  the  geography  of  the  soul. 

Whether  we  will  or  not,  physiognomy  decides  a  thousand  things  in  commercial,  and 

financial,  and  social,  and  religious  domains.    From  one  lid  of  the  Bible  to  the  other 

there  is  no  science  so  recognized  as  that  of  physiognomy,   and  nothing   mor* 

thoroughly  taken  for  granted  than  the  power  of  the  soul  to  transfigure  the  face. 

The  Bible  speaks  of  the  "  face  of  Qod,"  the  "  face  of  Jesus  Christ,"  the  "  face  o( 

Esau,"  the  "face  of  Israel,"  the  "face  of  Job,"  the  "face  of  the  old  man," 

the  shining  "  face  of  Moses,"  the  wrathful  "  face  of  Pharaoh,"  the  ashes  on  th« 

face  of  humiliation,  the  resurrectionary  sta£E  on  the  face  of  the  dead  child,  tha 

hypocrites  disfiguring  their  face,  and  in  my  text  the  Bible  declares,  "  A  man's 

wisdom  maketh  his  face  to  shine  and  the  sourness  of  his  face  shall  be  sweetened." 

And  now  I  am  going  to  tell  you  of  some  of  the  chisels  that  work  for  tha  disfigura* 

tion  or  irradiation  of  the  human  countenance.     One  of  the  sharpest  and  most 

destructive  of  those  chisels  of  the  countenance  is — I.  Gtnioish.     That  sours  tha 

disposition  and  then  sours  the  face.    It  gives  a  contemptuous  eurl  to  the  lip.    II 

draws  down  tha  corners  of  the  mouth  and  inflates  the  nostril  as  with  a  mal-odour. 

It  is  the  chastisement  of  God  that  when  a  man  allows  his  heart  to  be  cursed  with 

cynicism  his  face  becomes  gloomed,  and  scowled,  and  lachrymosed,  and  blasted 

with  the  same  midnight.     II.  But  let  Chkistian  oeieesfdlnbss  try  its  chisel  upon 

a  man's  countenance.     Feeling  that  all  things  are  for  his  good,  and  that  God  rules, 

and  that  the  Bible  being  true  the  world's  floralization  is  rapidly  approaching,  emd 

the  day  when  distillery,  and  bomb-shell,  and  rifle-pit,  and  seventy-four  pounders, 

and  roulette-tables,  and  corrupt  book,  and  satanic  printing  press  will  have  quit 

work,  the  brightness  that  comes  from  such  anticipation  not  only  gives  zest  to  his 

work,  but  shines  in  his  eyes  and  glows  in  his  cheek,  and  kindles  a  morning  in  his 

entire  countenance.     The  grace  of  God  comes  to  the  heart  of  a  man  or  woman 

and  then  attempts  to  change  a  forbidding  and  prejudicial  face  into  attractiveness. 

Perhaps   the  face  is  moat   impromising  for   the  Divine   Sculptor.      But   having 

changed  the  heart  it  begins  to  work  on  the  countenance  with  celestial  chisel,  and 

into  all  the  lineaments  of  the  face  puts  a  gladness  and  an  expectation  that  changes 

it  from  glory  to  glory,  and  though  earthly  criticism  may  disapprove  of  this  or 

that  in  the  appearance  of  the  face,  Christ  says  of  the  newly-created  countenance 

that  which  Pilate  said  of  Him,  "  Behold  the  manl"    III.  Here  is  another  mighty 

chisel  for  the  countenance,  and  you  may  call  it  ebvkngb,  oe  hatb,  oe  malevo- 

LENOB.    This  spirit  having  taken  possession  of  the  heart  it  encamps  seven  devils 

under  the  eyebrows.     It  puts  cruelty  into  the  compression  of  the  lips.     You  can 

tell  from  the  man's  looks  that  he  is  pursuing  some  one  and  trying  to  get  even 

with  him.     There  are  suggestions  of  Nero,  and  Eobespierre,  and  Diocletian,  and 

thumbscrews,  and  racks  all  up  and  down  the  features.      Infernal  artists   with 

mmrderers'  daggers  have  been  cutting  away  at  that  visage.    The  revengeful  hear* 

has  built  its  perdition  in  the  revengeful  countenance.     Disfiguration  of  diabolic 

passion  I     IV.  But  here  comes  another  chisel  to  shape  the  countenance,  and  it  is 

KINDNESS.     There  came  a  moving  day,  and  into  her  soul  moved  the  whole  family 

of  Christian  graces,  with  all  the  children  and  grandchildren,  and  the  command 

has   come   forth   from   the  heavens   that   that   woman's   face   shall   be   made   to 

correspond  with  her  superb  soul.     Her  entire  face  from  ear  to  ear  becomes  the 

canvas  on  which  all  the  best  artists  of  heaven  begin  to  put  their  finest  strokes, 

and  on  the  small  compass  of  that  face  are  put  pictures  of  sunrise  over  the  sea, 

and  angels  of  mercy  going  up  and  down  ladders  all  a-flash,  and  mountains  of 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ECCLESIASTE8.  191 

transfiguration  and  noon-day  in  heaven.  Kindness !  It  ie  the  most  magnificent 
sculptor  that  ever  touched  human  countenance.  It  makes  the  face  to  ehine  whil» 
life  lasts,  and  after  death  puts  a  summer  sunset  between  the  still  lips  and  tha 
smoothed  hair  that  makes  me  say  sometimes  at  obsequies,  *'  She  seems  too 
beautiful  to  bury."  V.  But  here  comes  another  chisel,  and  its  name  is  hypocbisy* 
Christ  with  one  terrific  stroke  in  his  Sermon  on  the  Mount  described  this  char» 
Bcter :  "  When  ye  fast  be  not  as  the  hypocrites,  of  a  sad  countenance;  for  they 
disfigure  their  faces  that  they  may  appear  unto  men  to  fast."  Hypocriay  having 
taken  possession  of  the  soul  it  immediately  appears  in  the  countenance.  Hypo- 
crites are  always  solemn.  They  carry  several  country  graveyards  in  their  facea. 
They  are  tearful  when  there  is  nothing  to  cry  about.  A  man  cannot  hav« 
hypocrisy  in  his  heart  without  somehow  showing  it  in  his  face.  All  intelligent 
people  who  witness  it  know  it  is  nothing  but  a  dramatization.  VI.  Here  comes 
another  chisel,  and  that  belongs  to  the  old-fashioned  beligion.  It  first  takes 
possession  of  the  whole  soul,  washing  out  its  sins  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  and 
starting  heaven  right  there  and  then.  This  is  done  deep  down  in  the  heart. 
Beligion  says,  "  Now  let  me  go  up  to  the  windows  and  front  gate  of  the  face 
and  set  up  some  signal  that  I  have  taken  possession  of  this  castle.  I  will  oelebrata 
the  victory  by  an  illumination  that  no  one  can  mistake.  I  have  made  this  man 
happy,  and  now  I  will  make  him  look  happy.  I  will  draw  the  corners  of  hia 
mouth  as  far  up  as  they  were  drawn  down.  I  will  take  the  contemptuous  curl 
•way  from  the  lip  and  nostril.  I  will  make  his  eyes  flash  and  his  cheeks  glow 
at  every  mention  of  Christ  and  heaven.  I  will  make  even  the  wrinkles  of  his  face 
look  like  furrows  ploughed  for  the  harvests  of  joy.  I  will  make  what  we  call  the 
'  crow's  feet  '  aroimd  his  templea  suggestive  that  the  dove  of  peace  has  been 
alighting  there."  There  may  be  signs  of  trouble  on  that  face,  but  trouble 
eanctified.  There  may  be  scars  of  battle  on  that  face,  but  they  will  be  scars  of  cam> 
paigns  won.  (T.  D«  Witt  Talmage.)  Oofpel  of  the  shining  face  (with  Matt.  xvii.  2)  :— 
Note  the  variation  of  the  Douay  version :  "  The  wisdom  of  a  man  shineth  in  hia 
countenance."  We  would  have  been  glad  to  stand  with  the  disciples  on  the 
moimtain  to  see  Jeaus  when  His  face  shone.  I.  What  is  thb  final  secbet  of  ▲  , 
BADiANT  face  LIKE  THAT  OF  Jescs?  1.  "A  man's  wisdom  maketh  his  face  to 
ahine."  The  genuine  radiance  of  wisdom  is  not  an  outside  application.  Outward 
polish  deairable,  but  not  to  be  substituted  for  inward  character.  2.  There  is  a  humaa 
wisdom  in  man  that  cornea  up  through  nature  that  seems  to  have  some  radiating 
quality.  The  reign  of  life  begins  with  the  creature  flat  on  his  face.  Ascending 
orders  are,  on  the  whole,  increasingly  erected,  tmtil  man  comes,  the  only  creature 
with  wisdom  to  turn  his  face  upward.  He  is  the  "  being  with  the  upturned  face." 
8.  But  the  light  of  nature  in  man  was  not  that  which  shone  in  the  transfigured 
face  of  Jesufi.  This  light  does  not  come  up  through  nature,  but  down  from  God. 
Entering  man,  it  changes  the  qualities  of  the  nature  light.  It  is  only  when  i4> 
streams  out  again  that  we  also  get  transfiguration  experiences.  This  light  in  ua 
is  the  "  wisdom  "  that  makes  the  face  shine.  II.  How  mat  we  have  and  show 
THIS  shining  face?  1.  Companying  with  Christ.  The  true  disciple's  face  will 
always  reflect  the  Master's  light.  2.  Busy  interest  in  a  great  aim  pursued  for 
Jesus'  sake.  In  cheerful  work  the  face  will  shine.  8.  Faith  in  the  coming 
triumph  of  the  kingdom.  4.  The  immortal  hope.  Upon  the  disciple's  face  the 
light  is  always  that  of  the  eternal  city.  Dying  sainta  in  pain  comfort  us  with 
shining  faces  when  we  go  hoping  to  comfort  them.  "  Let  your  light  shine." 
{Homiletie  Review.) 

Ver.  2.  I  counsel  thee  to  keep  the  kind's  eommandment,  and  that  in  regard  of 
the  oath  of  Ood. — Obedience  to  the  civil  government: — Notwithstanding  men 
differ  so  much  in  their  several  opinions  concerning  human  authority,  and  enter- 
tain  such  various  notions  about  the  rise  and  original  foundation  of  civil  govern- 
ment :  yet  it  is  generally  agreed  upon  by  all  sides  that  it  is  absolutely  necessary 
that  there  should  be  such  a  thing  as  government;  and  the  common  voice  of  reason 
(as  well  as  the  practice  of  all  ages)  plainly  declares  that  the  universal  good  of 
mankind  can  in  no  wise  be  carried  on  without  it.  From  hence  it  appears  to  be 
the  interest  of  mankind  in  general  that  government  should  be  kept  up  and  main- 
tained; but  because  men  are  so  partial  to  themselves,  as  through  pride,  ambition, 
or  revenge,  to  overlook  and  disregard  the  public  good,  when  it  stands  in  com- 
petition with  their  own  private  advantage :  God  in  His  wisdom  has  thought  fit 
not  to  leaTC  ui  to  the  guidance  and  direction  of  natural  reason  only,  but  has  also 


191  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tiit. 


by  His  revealed  will  more  strongly  enforced  our  obligation  to  contribute  in  our 
several  capacities  towards  promoting  the  public  good  and  common  welfare  of 
society.     In   discoursing  upon   which   words   I   propose   to  consider   them — I.  As 

THEY    RELATED    PAETICOLAELY    TO    THE    PEOPLE    OF    ISEAEL.       They    may    admit    of    this 

paraphrase :  I  advise  and  counsel  you  to  pay  all  dutiful  submission  to  your  king 
and  governor,  to  obey  his  commands  in  all  instances  which  are  not  contrary  to 
God's  laws;  and  thus  I  counsel  thee  to  observe  the  king's  commandment,  not 
only  in  point  of  prudence  and  humane  policy,  because  he  can  do  whatsoever 
pleaseth  him,  and  has  an  absolute  power  to  inflict  punishment  upon  such  as  shall 
dare  to  disobey  his  commands;  but  upon  a  more  weighty  and  religious  account, 
because  your  disobedience  will  not  only  render  you  obnoxious  to  the  wrath  and 
displeasure  of  a  powerful  earthly  prince,  but  provoke  to  anger  the  great  God  of 
heaven  and  earth,  in  whose  presence  you  have  obliged  yourself  by  an  oath  to 
bear  true  allegiance  to  your  sovereign;  and  who  (as  you  very  well  know)  has 
denounced  severe  threatenings  against  all  such  as  shall  presume  to  swear  falsely 
by  his  name,  and  has  positively  declared  that  he  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  who 
IB  not  careful  to  perform  unto  the  Lord  his  oath.  II.  As  containing  the  obound 
AND  EEASON  OF  ODB  OBEDIENOB  TO  GOVEENMBNT.  That  obedience  is  due  from 
■ubjects  to  their  governors  is  a  truth  fairly  deducible  from  natural  reason;  and 
that  it  is  the  duty  of  all  men  to  comply  with  the  laws  of  the  particular  constitu- 
tion of  the  place  where  they  live,  the  Scriptures  evidently  declare.  They  acquaint 
us  that  governors  are  the  ministers  of  God,  appointed  for  the  common  good  of 
Booiety,  that  whosoever  reeisteth  the  power  resisteth  the  ordinance  of  God. 
As  for  the  grounds  and  reasons  upon  which  our  obedience  to  government  is 
founded,  they  are  many  and  various ;  some  take  their  force  from  those  laws  which 
the  voice  of  reason  dictates;  some  from  those  precepts  and  commands  which  are 
contained  in  the  books  of  Scripture;  some  from  that  personal  security  which  it  has 
been  the  custom  among  many  nations  for  the  supreme  authority  to  require  of  the 
several  members  which  are  under  its  jurisdiction;  and  from  those  engagements 
end  promises  which  subjects  have  given  the  government  to  which  they  belong, 
that  they  will  obediently  submit  to  such  rules  and  orders  as  the  legislative  power 
shall  think  fit  to  enjoin  them  to  observe.  An  oath  is  a  solemn  appeal  to 
Almighty  God,  as  a  Witness  and  Avenger.  As  a  Witness  to  the  truth  of  what 
we  affirm,  and  the  sincerity  of  our  resolution  to  perform  and  do  what  we  promise. 
As  an  Avenger  in  case  we  deliver  for  a  truth  what  we  know  or  believe  to  be  false, 
ftnd  do  not  actually  design  to  perform  what  we  promise.  It  is  therefore  a  moet 
•hameful  and  abominable  practice  to  play  fast  and  loose  with  things  of  so  sacred 
•  nature :  it  is  one  of  the  vilest  as  well  as  most  dangerous  sins  a  man  can  commit, 
one  of  the  greatest  indignities  he  can  ofier  to  his  Creator;  it  is  in  a  manner  as 
enormous  a  crime  as  the  calling  in  question  God's  infinite  truth  and  knowledge, 
and  near  as  hazardous  a  provocation  as  that  of  bidding  defiance  to  His  almighty 
power.     (T.  Faynt,  M.A.) 

Ver.  4.  Where  the  word  of  a  king  is  there  is  power.— Tfca  Ung't  word  .-—The 
reference  is,  doubtless,  to  certain  kings  who  lived  in  ancient  times,  perchance,  for 
instance,  to  Solomon  himself.  But  we  speak  to-day  not  of  an  earthly  ruler,  but 
of  a  heavenly.  There  is  another  King,  one  Jesus,  who  shares  with  His  Father 
the  throne  of  the  universe,  whose  word  stands  fast  for  ever.  May  we  love  Him 
■o  well,  and  trust  Him  so  perfectly,  that  His  word,  whatever  it  is,  shall  have  due 
power  with  us.  There  is  power  in  it,  and  we  shall  do  well  to  yield  to  it  at  once. 
Happy  the  subjects  of  this  holy  King  whose  word  while  it  is  powerful  is  always 
•weet,  and  true,  and  tender.  I.  Theodghout  His  vast  dominions  the  Woed  or 
God  and  Christ  exbeoises  indisputable  and  ieeesistible  influence.  How 
•mall  are  the  kingdoms  of  this  earth,  how  great  and  glorious  are  the  kingdoms  of 
our  God  and  of  His  Christ.  I  know  that  as  yet  we  see  not  all  things  put  under 
Him,  but  even  now  the  sun  never  sets  upon  His  kingdom,  and  countless  worlds, 
lor  aught  we  know,  are  rolling  towards  His  feet.  He  is  already  "  the  blessed  and 
only  Potentate,  the  King  of  kmgs  and  Lord  of  lords."  Alike  in  nature,  provi- 
dence and  grace.  He  sits  supreme.  He  is  ordaining  and  ordering  all  things.  Let 
your  doubts  and  fears  be  gone;  He  fainteth  not,  neither  is  He  weary.  He  is  neither 
sleeping  nor  hunting,  nor  journeying.  His  sceptre  is  still  in  His  hand,  and  the 
band  is  not  shrunken  nor  feeble.    While  God  lives  and  reigns  all  is  well  I     II.  Thh 

WOBD   or   A   KING   HAS   POWBB — SPECIAL   POWBB,   PERHAPS — IN   HIS   THBONI   BOOU.      If 

God's  word  and  Christ's  bars  power  in  any  plaos^  they  maj  bs  supposed  to  hsT« 


CHAP.  Tni.]  ECCLESIASTES.  198 

epeoial  iniSuenoe  in  the  very  centre  of  His  palace.  There  He  sits  at  His  Father'* 
eide,  sharing  the  Father's  glory,  rejoicing  in  His  well-deserved  renown;  His  word 
has  power  there  if  nowhere  else.  Elsewhere,  rebellion  may  seek  to  lift  its  hideoxia 
head,  but  not  there.  The  angels  wait  upon  Him,  bright  servitors,  whose  only  joy 
it  ia  to  fly  at  His  command,  to  do  His  bidding,  whatever  it  may  be.  The  spirits 
of  just  men  made  perfect  circle  round  Him,  serving  Him  day  and  night  in  His 
temple;  men  and  women,  aye,  and  little  children  too,  rejoice  to  run  the  errands  ol 
the  King,  and  so  to  show  their  love;  while  mysterious  living  creatures  bow  before 
His  face  and  help  to  swell  the  anthem  that  ever  rises  to  His  praise.  III.  Evbn 
WHKN  THE  Kino  was  tbavellino  in  disouibb  tbbbb  was  still  powbb  in  His 
WOBD.  He  was  King  of  hearts;  He  summoned  men  to  join  His  train  with  just 
that  irresistible  "  Follow  Me."  He  was  King  of  the  elements,  so  that  the  winds 
and  waves  hearkened  to  His  voice,  and  laid  themselves  to  rest  like  cowed  beasts 
within  their  lairo.  He  was  King  of  disease,  so  that  however  virulent  or  long* 
standing,  it  fled  and  ceased  at  His  command.  He  was  King  of  death :  "  Lazarus, 
come  forth,"  He  cried,  with  a  loud  voice,  and  Lazanu  came  forth,  bound  hand 
and  foot  with  graveolothes.  He  was  King  of  Satan,  for  though  the  devil  bada 
Him  fall  at  his  feet  and  worship  him,  Christ  got  the  victory  again  and  again.  He 
was  King  of  sin,  for  only  He  could  say  to  those  who  had  long  been  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins,  "  Be  of  good  cheer,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee."  He  was  • 
King,  every  inch  of  Him,  from  His  cradle  to  His  grave.  IV.  Thb  wobd  of  a  kino 
HAS  8PB0IAL  powBB  IN  BIS  AUDiENOB  OHAMBBB.  In  the  palaco  of  which  I  Speak, 
there  is  an  apartment  set  aside  for  the  special  purpose  of  holding  interviews  with 
those  who  would  petition  the  king.  To  it  subjects  of  every  name,  and  race,  and 
degree,  are  always  welcome;  nay,  our  King,  if  I  may  so  say,  sits  even  in  the  gate, 
BO  that  applicants  who  have  not  boldness  to  venture  to  the  palace  can  still 
approach  Him.  There  He  stretches  out  His  silver  sceptre,  welcoming  all  who 
have  petitions  to  present  and  pleas  to  urge.  In  this  audience  chamber  the  word 
of  the  King  has  power.  He  permits  you  to  pray,  and  that  permit  none  can  cancel. 
He  gladly  hears  your  arguments,  and  if  they  are  such  as  He  has  prompted,  they 
will  avail  with  Him.  There  is  power  in  His  word  of  promise;  He  has  never 
recalled  one.  He  has  never  failed  to  fulfil  one.  "  The  gifts  and  calling  of  Ood 
are  without  repentance."  He  may  keep  you  waiting  a  little  while,  according  to 
His  wisdom,  but  the  blessing  is  already  on  the  wing.  If  your  heart  is  open  for  it, 
it  will  soon  come  fluttering  in.  V.  Thb  wobd  of  a  kino  is  heard  in  his  banquet* 
INO  HALL.  Jesus  is  never  so  happy  as  when  He  feasts  His  saints.  He  loves  them 
to  commune  with  Him,  he  rejoices  when  their  meditation  of  Him  is  sweet,  and 
when,  instead  so  much  of  speaking  to  Him,  they  employ  their  spiritual  powers  in 
hearing  and  listening  to  His  voice.  There  is  power  in  every  word  He  speaks, 
power  in  the  invitation  that  He  issues,  and  in  the  welcome  that  He  utters  to  all. 
What  a  knack  He  has  of  making  His  guests  feel  at  home.  How  readily  He  sets 
them  at  their  ease.  How  charmingly  He  makes  them  understand  that  all  that 
Hs  has  is  theirs,  that  the  good  things  on  the  table  are  not  for  ornament,  but  can 
be  taken,  tasted  and  enjoyed.  VI.  There  is  power  in  the  kino's  word,  mobb> 
OVBB,  ON  THE  BATTLBFiBLD.  "  The  Lord  is  a  Man  of  war;  the  Lord  is  His  name." 
He  fights,  as  we  do,  with  weapons  that  are  not  carnal  but  spiritual.  There  is  • 
sword  that  goeth  out  of  His  mouth,  that  is  the  word  of  the  King's  power.  II 
strikes  terror  like  a  barbed  arrow  into  the  hearts  of  the  King's  enemies.  When 
He  sounds  His  battle  cry,  even  Midian  is  put  to  confusion  and  to  flight.  On  this 
same  battlefield  He  inspires  His  followers.  If  He  says  "  Up  guards  and  at 
them,"  though  we  be  but  a  thin  red  line,  we  will  charge  the  serried  ranks  of  th« 
enemy.  If  He  bids  us  lie  in  the  tranches,  though  it  may  not  be  such  congenial 
work,  we  will  do  it,  for  there  is  a  power  in  His  word  we  dare  not  resist.  There  is, 
moreover,  enabling  power  in  it.  We  can  hold  ourselves  in  reserve  if  Ood  bids  us 
do  so.  It  He  sends  us  out  on  pioneer  work,  or  on  sentry-go — this  is  lonely  work 
—we  will  do  either,  for  there  will  be  8u£Bcient  grace  whatever  the  King's  orders 
are.  His  very  word  is  omnipotent,  and  we  are  omnipotent  if  we  obey  it  I 
Vn.  There  is  powbb  in  the  kino's  wobd  in  fobeign  coobts.  We  talk  about 
*•  the  Oreat  Powers  of  Europe."  Comparatively  speaking  they  are  powerful,  with 
their  armies  and  their  navies  and  their  armaments  and  exchequers,  but  oh,  there 
is  a  greater  Power  than  all  of  these  of  both  worlds  rolled  into  one.  And  we  are 
servants  of  that  great  Power,  ambassadors  of  Ood  who,  in  Christ's  stead  warn 
and  rebuke  and  beseech.  (T.  8j)urgeon.)  The  word  of  a  king: — Kings  in 
Solomon's  day  had  a  vast  amount  of  power,  for  their  word  was  absolute.    When 

13 


IM  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tui. 

8ucb   s  monarch  happened  to  be  wise   and  good,  it  was   •   great  blessing   to 
the   people;    for    "a    king   that   sitteth    in    the   throne   of   judgment    scattereth 
away  all  evil  with  his  eyes."     But  if  he  was  of  a  hard,  tyrannical  nature,  his 
subjects   were  mere  slaves,  and  groaned  beneath  a  yoke  of  iron.     We  do  not 
eufgciently  give  thanks  for  the  blessings  of  a  constitutional  government.     There 
is,   however,   one   King   whose  power   we  do  not   wish   in   any   degree   to  limit 
Of  circumscribe.     God  doeth  as  He   wills  amongst  the  armies   of  heaven,   and 
amongst  the  inhabitants  of  this  lower  world;  none  can  stay  His  hand,  or  say 
onto  Him,  What  doest  Thou?     In  this  we  greatly  rejoice.     I.  First,  ws  would 
see  the  power  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  order  to  excitb  oub  awb  of  Hiu.     What 
are  we  poor  creatures  of  a  day?     Man  proposes,  but  God  disposes;  man  resolves, 
but  God  dissolves;  that  which  man  ezpecteth,  God  rejecteth;  for  the  word  of  the 
Lord  standeth  for  ever,  but  man  passes  away  and  is  not.    Think  of  the  day  before 
all  days  when  there  was  no  day  but  the  Ajicient  of  Days,  and  when  God  dwelt 
all  alone;  then  He  willed  in  His  mind  that  there  should  be  a  world  created.     "  Ha 
spake,  and  it  was  done:  He  commanded,  and  it  stood  fast."     When  the  Lord 
created  He  used  no  hand  of  cherubim  or  seraphim :   all  that  we  read  in  the 
sublimely  simple  record  of  Genesis  is,  "  God  said,  let  there  be,"  and  there  was. 
Hie  word  accomplished  all,  and  when  He  wills  to  destroy  either  one  man  or  a 
million  His  word  is  able  to  work  His  will.     Oh,  how  we  ought  to  worship  Thee, 
thou  dread  Supreme,  upon  whose  word  life  and  death  are  made  to  hang  I      I 
might  in  another  division  of  this  part  of  my  subject  remind  you  of  the  power 
which  attends  both  His  promises  and  £[is  threatenings.     God  has  never  promised 
without  performing  in  due  time  to  the  last  jot  and  tittle.     Hath  He  said,  and 
•hall  He  not  do  it?     Hath  He  commanded,  and  shall  it  not  come  to  pass?    There 
is  power  in  God's  word  to  foretell,  so  that,  when  He  tells  what  is  to  be  in  the 
future,  we  know  that  it  shall  come  to  pass.     "  Seek  ye  out  of  the  book  of  the 
Lord,  and  read:  no  one  of  these  shall  fail,  none  shall  want  her  mate."     Thus 
■aith  the  Lord,  "  I  have  spoken  it,  I  will  also  bring  it  to  pass;  I  have  purposed  it, 
I  will  also  do  it."     Li  the  word  of  the  Lord  also  there  is  power  to  predestinate  as 
well  as  to  foretell,  so  that  what  He  decrees  Is  fixed  and  certain.     "  There  are 
many  devices  in  a  man's  heart;  nevertheless  the  counsel  of  the  Lord,  that  shall 
stand."    Let  us  worship  the  great  Ordainer,  Benefactor,  and  Ruler,  whose  every 
word  is  the  word  of  a  King,  in  which  there  is  power.     II.  Secondly,  we  would 
think  of  the  power  of  God's  word  in  order  to  bnsubk  oub  obediekce  to  it.    When- 
ever God  gives  a  word  of  command  it  comee  to  us  clothed  with  authority,  and  its 
power  over  our  minds  should  be  immediate  and  unquestioned.     The  sole  authority 
in  tha  Church  is  Christ  Himself:  He  is  the  Head  of  His  Church,  and  His  word 
is  the  only  authority  by  which  we  are  ruled.     Every  precept  that  He  gives  He 
intends  us  to  keep ;  He  does  not  ordain  it  that  we  may  question  it ;  He  commands 
that  we  may  obey.    Let  me  refer  you  to  what  Solomon  says  in  ver.  2  :  *'  I  counsel 
thee  to  keep  the  king's  commandment."     This  is  admirable  counsel  for  every 
Christian :  if  the  commandment  were  of  the  wisest  of  men,  we  might  break  it, 
and  perhaps  do  right  in  breaking  it;  but  if  it  be  the  King  who  gives  the  com- 
mand, even  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  King  in  Zion,  then  the  advice  of 
the  Preacher  is  wise  and  weighty.     Solomon  goes  on  to  say,  *'  Be  not  hasty  to 
go  out  of  His  sight."     There  is  such  power  in  God's  word  that  I  would  have  you 
also  obey  this  precept,  and  seek  to  remain  in  His  presence.    Walk  in  communion 
with  Christ  in  whatever  path  He  may  point  out  to  you.     Never  mind  how  rough 
it  is :  do  not  imagine  it  is  the  wrong  road  because  it  is  so  rough ;  rather  reckon 
it  to  be  right  because  it  is  rough,  for  seldom  do  smoothness  and  Tightness  go 
together.    Oh,  to  abide  in  Christ  the  Word,  and  to  have  His  word  abiding  in  us  I 
Solomon  then  says,  "  Stand  not  in  an  evil  thing."     There  is  such  power  in  the 
word  of  God  that  He  can  readily  destroy  you,  or  heavily  chastise  you,  therefore 
be  quick  to  amend,  and  "  stand  not  in  an  evil  thing."     Repent,  obey,  submit, 
confess,  seek  pardon  at  once.     III.  And  now,  thirdly,  to  inspire  our  confidence, 
let  us  think  that  "  where  the  word  of  a  king  is,  there  is  power."     If  there  is  a 
heart  here  that  is  seeking  mercy,  if  you  can  go  before  God  with  such  a  promise  as 
this  in  your  mouth,  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,"  etc.,  that  word  of  His 
is  not  a  mere  sound,  there  is  the  power  of  truth  in  it.    If  you  do  what  He  there 
bids  you  do  you  shall  find  that  He  can  and  will  abundantly  pardon.     Do  you  tell 
me  that  you  cannot  conquer  your  evil  passions  and  corrupt  desires?     Here  is  a 
promise  from  the  word  of  the  Lord,  "  From  all  your  filthiness,  and  from  all  your 
idols,  will  I  oleanie  you.    A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,  and  a  new  spirit 


CHAP,  Till.]  ECCLESIASTES.  19S 

will  I  put  within  yon."  Kow  come  and  plead  these  precious  promises,  there  ia 
power  in  them,  they  are  the  words  of  a  King,  and  if  you  plead  them  at  the  mercy- 
seat  you  shall  become  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus  :  old  things  shall  pass  away ; 
all  things  shall  become  new.  And  are  there  any  of  you  who  are  struggling  at  this 
time  with  a  remaining  corruption  which  you  cannot  conquer?  Now  come  and  lay 
hold  of  the  promise  that  you  shall  overcome,  and  plead  it  before  the  mercy-seat. 
If  you  do  but  get  any  promise  of  God  suited  to  your  case,  make  quick  use  of  it, 
for  there  is  power  in  it;  it  is  the  word  of  a  Kingl  Then,  also,  are  there  any  of 
you  in  great  trouble?  Remember  His  word,  "  Many  are  the  afflictions  of  the 
righteous:  but  the  Lord  delivereth  him  out  of  them  all."  Go  and  tell  him  that 
He  has  thus  spoken,  and  that  He  has  therein  pledged  Himself  to  deliver  you  out 
of  all  afflictions :  and  be  sure  of  this.  He  will  be  as  good  as  His  word.  Do  you 
expect  soon  to  die?  Are  you  somewhat  distressed  because  sickness  is  imder- 
mining  your  constitution?  Be  not  afraid,  for  His  Spirit  teaches  you  to  sing, 
"  Yea,  though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear  no 
evil:  for  Thou  art  with  me:  Thy  rod  and  Thy  stafE  they  comfort  me."  IV.  I 
address  myself  to  all  people  of  God  who  are  associated  in  Church-fellowship,  and 
striving  to  do  the  Lord's  service;  and  to  you  who  will  be  so  associated  here.  My 
text  is  to  be  used  to  dibeot  toub  bffobts.  You  need  power;  not  the  power  of 
money,  or  mind,  or  influence,  or  numbers;  but  "  power  from  on  high."  All  other 
power  may  be  desirable,  but  this  power  is  indispensable.  Spiritual  work  can  only 
be  done  by  spiritual  power.  I  counsel  you  in  order  to  get  spiritual  power  in  all 
that  you  do  to  keep  the  King's  commandment,  for  "  where  the  word  of  a  king  is, 
there  is  power."  Whatsoever  you  find  in  Scripture  to  be  the  command  of  (he 
]King,  follow  it,  though  it  leads  you  into  a  course  that  is  hard  for  the  flesh  to 
bear :  I  mean  a  path  of  singular  spirituality  and  nonconformity  to  the  world. 
Bemember  that,  after  all,  the  truth  may  be  with  the  half-dozen,  and  not  with  the 
million.  Christ's  power  may  be  with  the  handful  as  it  was  at  Pentecost,  when 
the  power  came  down  upon  the  despised  disciples,  and  not  upon  the  chief  priests 
and  scribes,  though  they  had  the  sway  in  religious  matters.  If  we  want  to  win 
souls  for  Christ  we  must  use  the  Word  of  God  to  do  it.  Other  forms  of  good  work 
languish  unless  the  Gospel  is  joined  with  them.  Set  about  reforming,  civilizing, 
and  elevating  the  people,  and  you  will  lose  your  time  unless  you  evangelize  them. 
Then  again,  if  you  want  power,  you  must  use  this  Word  in  pleading.  If  your 
work  here  is  to  be  a  success,  there  must  be  much  praying;  everything  in  God's 
house  is  to  be  done  with  prayer.  Give  me  a  praying  people,  and  I  shall  have  a 
powerful  people.  The  Word  of  the  King  is  that  which  gives  power  to  our  prayers. 
There  is  power  in  accepting  that  Word,  in  getting  it  into  you,  or  receiving  it.  You 
never  keep  the  truth  till  you  have  received  this  Word  of  a  King  into  your  spiritual 
being,  and  absorbed  it  into  your  spiritual  nature.  Oh,  that  you  might  every  ons 
of  you  eat  the  Word,  live  on  it,  and  make  it  your  daily  food  I  And  then,  there  is 
power  in  the  practising  of  it.  Where  there  is  life  through  the  King's  Word,  it  will 
be  a  strong  life.  The  sinner's  life  is  a  feeble  life;  but  an  obedient  life,  an  earnest 
Christian  life,  is  a  life  of  strength.  Even  those  who  hate  it  and  abhor  it  cannot 
help  feeling  that  there  is  a  strange  influence  about  it  which  they  cannot  explain, 
and  they  must  respect  it.     (C.  H.  Bpurgeon.) 

Ver.  6.  A  wise  man's  heart  discemeth  both  time  and  judgment. — A  watchnight 
meditation: — Of  all  seasons  of  the  year  the  present  one  inclines  us  most  to 
thought.  If,  when  the  old  year  is  dying,  or  when  the  new  is  being  born,  men  will 
not  think,  it  is  very  doubtful  if  they  will  ever  think  at  all.     I.  A  man  who  is  not 

UTTERLY    UNWISE    WILL    SEE    THAT    THIS    IS    A    TIME    FOB    BEVIEW.       It    IS    Said    of    the 

Emperor  Titus  that  he  used  to  review  each  day  as  it  drew  to  its  close,  and  if  ha 
could  not  recall  anything  which  he  had  done  for  the  good  of  others  he  set  it  down 
in  his  note-book  that  he  had  lost  a  day.  It  was  not  a  bad  rule  for  a  heathen 
king,  but  hardly  good  enough  for  a  Christian  mem.  And  yet  some  of  us  who  live 
in  the  mid-day  of  the  Gospel  do  not  aim  so  high,  with  the  poor  result  that  we 
hit  something  very  much  lower  than  the  mark  set  before  us.  We  come  short  of 
the  glory  of  doing  the  Divine  will.  It  is  bad  enough  to  lose  one  day,  but  how 
about  losing  three  hundred  and  sixty-five?  Yes,  unless  it  has  been  lived  in  God, 
consciously  in  Him  and  for  Him,  we  may  set  it  down  as  lost.  Let  us  all  find 
opportimity  for  a  quiet,  earnest  talk  with  the  hours  of  the  year  that  has  gone. 
Look  well  at  the  old  before  you  greet  the  new.  It  will  make  the  new  all  the 
better,  and  when  in  its  turn  it  becomes  old  the  task  of  reviewing  it  will  not  be  so 


19«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin. 


unpleasant.  II.  A  man  op  wisdom  will  seb  that  this  is  an  appeopeiatb  timb 
FOR  EEC0NC1LIATI0N8.  Has  there  been  a  little  rift  in  friendship's  lute?  Now  is  a 
good  time  for  mending  the  instrument  and  bringing  back  the  harmony,  music  for 
the  King  of  kings.  Take  the  tide  of  good  feeling  at  the  flood,  and  be  reconciled 
to  those  whom  for  a  while  thou  mayest  have  been  alienated.  "  When  death,  tha 
great  reconciler,  has  come,  it  is  never  our  tenderness  we  repent  of,  but  our 
eeverity."  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  enter  the  new  year  at  peace  with  God.  Ha 
is  reconciled  in  Christ  to  us.     Why  should  we  stand  out?     III.  Thb  wisb  mak 

WHO   OBSEBVETB  timb  and  ^DGMENT  will  HBAB  a  VOIOB  at  this   PABTICULAB  TIM! 

appealing  TO  HIS  OENEBOSiTT.  Yea,  there  is  more  than  one  voice  speaking  to  us 
on  this  behalf.  There  is  the  very  voice  of  poverty  itself  speaking  in  plaintive 
tones  to  those  who  have  the  sympathetic  ear.  There  is  the  voice  of  our  own  joys 
and  comforts  reminding  us  of  the  distress  of  those  who  are  devoid  of  these  things. 
IV.  This  is  a  timb  fob  oonsecbation.  To  consecrate  ourselves  to  God  is  to 
recognize  the  supreme  fact  of  oiur  existence  and  to  act  upon  it.  This  is  the  time 
of  all  times  for  consecration,  while  the  goodness  of  God  is  passing  before  us. 
As  the  mercies  of  the  year  marshal  past  ua  in  grand  and  swift  review  let  us  listen 
to  their  pleading  and  present  ourselves  to  God.  (T.  Jackton.)  The  wiae  man's 
improvement  of  time: — I.  Thb  Christian's  spiritual  discernment  of  timb. 
1.  The  wise  man  marks  with  a  discerning  eye  the  successive  developments  which 
time  has  made  of  God's  gracious  purposes  towards  our  guilty  race.  2.  The  man 
who  is  spiritually  "  wise,"  and  divinely  taught,  solemnly  ponders  the  devastations 
of  time.  And  how  fearful  have  been  his  ravages  1  He  has  overturned  the 
mightiest  empires,  sapped  the  loftiest  towers,  and  laid  low  the  proudest  cities. 
But  above  all,  time  has  with  irresistible  flood  swept  away  in  succession  the 
countless  millions  of  oiur  race.  Tamerlane  the  Tartar  reared  a  vast  pyramid, 
formed  of  the  skulls  of  those  victims  whom  he  had  slain  in  battle;  but  death 
wages  a  more  fatal  contest  over  a  wider  field;  and  for  us  "  there  is  no  discharge 
from  that  war."  Diseases  in  all  their  sad  variety  are  his  ministers;  and  were  s 
pyramid  to  be  erected  by  him  of  human  bones,  it  would  pierce  the  clouds  ol 
heaven.  8.  The  Christian  marks  and  ponders  the  shortness  of  time.  What  are 
six,  or  ten,  or  a  himdred  thousand  years?  They  are  but  units  in  eternity's 
countless  reckoning;  they  are  but  drops  in  eternity's  tmfathomable  and  shoreless 
ocean.  But  when  we  reckon  time  by  the  period  of  man's  life,  "  the  days  of  our 
years  are  threescore  years  and  ten;  and  if  by  reason  of  strength  "  in  some  "  they 
be  fourscore  years,  yet  is  their  strength  labour  and  sorrow;  for  we  are  soon  cut 
off,  and  we  flee  away."  Life  is  truly  like  the  bridge  which  the  moralist  describes; 
a  mighty  multitude  presses  to  cross  it,  but  it  is  filled  with  openings  through 
which  the  passengers  are  continually  dropping  into  a  dark  and  rapid  river  beneath, 
and  but  a  few  are  left;  and  as  these  approach  the  other  side  they,  too,  fall 
through  and  perish.  The  Christian,  "  knowing  the  time,"  learns  to  die  daily;  he 
cherishes  more  and  more  of  the  pilgrim  spirit,  and  in  all  his  plans  and  prospects 
he  acts  continually  under  the  practical  influence  of  the  apostle's  appeal  (James 
iv.  18-16).  Ye  merchants  and  busy  tradesmen,  I  ask,  is  it  thus  in  your  caseT 
Is  such  wise  discernment  of  the  shortness  of  time  yours?  4.  The  wise  man's 
heart  also  discerneth  the  swiftness  of  time.  And  thus  it  is  that  human  life  is 
compared  to  "  a  tale  that  is  told,"  to  "  the  weaver's  shuttle  "  flying  rapidly 
across  the  web.  6.  Finally,  the  Christian  discerns  that  time  is  a  precious  talent 
for  which  he  must  give  an  account.  II.  The  lessons  and  duties  suggested  bt 
thb  tear  that  is  past,  and  that  which  has  now  begun.  1.  In  a  public  and 
national  sense  this  has  been  a  truly  memorable  year.  2.  The  past  year  is  memor- 
able in  the  review  of  it,  in  your  history  as  families.  8.  How  solenm  and  affecting 
to  you  as  a  congregation  is  the  review  of  the  past  year  1     III.  In  refekenob  to 

THE    YEAR    ON    WHICH    WE    HAVE    NOW    ENTERED,    WHAT    IMPORTANT    DUTIES    DEVOLVB 

UPON  US  I  1.  Let  us  never  forget  that  as  we  live  in  a  world  of  change,  it  becomes 
tis  to  expect  changes  and  trials,  and  to  calculate  upon  the  probability  of  being 
called  away  by  death,  ere  the  year  has  closed.  2.  Let  the  disciples  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  remember  their  solemn  responsibility  to  live  for  the  glory  of  God.  8.  Finally, 
let  us  unite  our  prayers  with  those  of  the  people  of  God  of  every  name  who  are 
met  at  this  season  to  supplicate,  with  one  accord,  the  outpouring  tA  the  Holy 
Ghost  on  the  Church  and  the  world.     (John  Weir.) 

Yer.  8.  There  is  no  man  that  hath  power  over  the  spirit  to  retain  the  ■pirit.— 
Death  an  unpreventable  exit  of  the  epirit: — 1.  It  is  implied  that  man  has  a  spirit^ 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ECCLESIASTE8.  m 

2.  Man'8  power  over  his  spirit  is  not  absolute.  He  has  some  power  over  it;  power 
to  excite  it  to  action,  direct  its  thoughts,  control  its  impulses,  train  its  faculties, 
and  develop  its  wonderful  resources.  Self-government  is  the  duty  of  every  man. 
But  whatever  the  amount  of  power  he  may  have  over  his  spirit,  he  is  utterly 
unable  to  "  retain  "  it  here,  to  keep  it  in  permanent  connection  with  the  body. 
From  this  fact  I  deduce  three  practical  lessons.    I.  We  should  take  propee  caeh 

OF    THIS     "  SPIRIT  "     WHILE     WE    HAVE     IT     WITH     US.       II.     WB     SHODLD     KEEP     THIS 

"  SPIRIT  "  EVER  IN  READINESS  FOR  ITS  EXIT.  It  requires  to  have  its  errors  cor- 
rected, its  guilt  removed,  its  pollutions  cleansed  away.     III.  Efforts  for  thh 

PERMANENT    ENTERTAINMENT     OF     THIS     "  SPIRIT  "     HERE     ARE     TO     THE     LAST     DEGREB 

CNwiSE.  What  are  men  doing  here?  On  all  hands  they  are  endeavouring  to 
provide  for  their  spirits  a  permanent  entertainment.  "  Soul,  thou  hast  much 
goods,"  etc.  "  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  your  labour  for  that  which  satisfieth 
not?"  (Homilist.)  The  uncertainty  of  life: — Autumn,  with  its  tinted  leaves,  its 
slanting  shadows,  and  brief  sunshine,  points  out  the  same  truth  as  the  text.  Man 
is  powerless — much  as  he  might  wish  it — to  check  the  fast  falling  shower  of  faded 
foliage,  or  to  throw  back  the  shadows  of  the  sundial.  The  fortune  of  the  world 
could  not  procure  a  moment's  respite  from  that  silent  and  regular  work  of  decay 
which  is  going  on  in  the  surrounding  world.  So,  likewise,  "  No  man  hath  power 
over  the  spirit  to  retain  the  spirit."  Each  one  of  us  must  gradually  pass  away 
from  the  visible  universe.  When  that  solemn  moment  arrives,  there  will  be 
those  who  would  long  to  retain  us  by  their  side — those  who  have  yet  to  learn  that 
the  "  communion  of  saints  "  is  not  broken  by  the  accident  of  death.  And  yet 
it  cannot  be ;  we  must  let  go  our  hold  of  the  departing  soul.  Others  will  long 
and  vainly  struggle  to  remain  behind  themselves.  As  we  contemplate  the 
prospect  of  death,  a  new  stimulus  should  be  given  to  duty  and  action.  For  it  has 
been  well  said,  "  Duty  is  done  with  all  energy  then  only  when  we  feel  '  the 
night  cometh  when  no  man  can  work  '  in  all  its  force."  Let  me  lead  your 
thoughts  then  for  a  brief  space  in  this  direction.  "  Redeem  the  time."  This  is 
the  precept,  the  echo  of  a  past  inspiration,  which  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  would 
still  sound  in  our  ears  as  we  look  forward  to  the  termination  of  present  life. 
Spend  the  life  in  earnest,  and  as  if  the  whole  future  depended  upon  it.  Spend 
to-day  as  if  there  were  no  certain  to-morrow.  Be  watchful  about  little  things, 
and  especially  the  brief  moments  of  time.  The  few  pence  and  the  fragments 
of  food  have  their  value.  (A.  WilliamBon,  M.A.)  There  is  no  discharge  in  that 
war. — The  battle  of  life: — The  leaves  are  always  falling  from  the  forest  trees  in 
autumn-time.  Unheard,  unnoticed,  they  flutter  every  morning  to  the  ground, 
but  anon  there  is  a  crash  in  the  forest  as  a  giant  tree,  decayed,  comes  headlong 
to  the  earth,  and  the  winds  that  helped  to  bring  it  down  seem  to  moan  among 
the  trees  that  still  stand  firm.  "  Howl,  fir-tree,  for  the  cedar  has  fallen."  Some- 
times even  the  falling  of  a  leaf  is  noticed,  if  it  happens  to  tumble  down  exactly 
at  one's  feet,  or  even  the  falling  of  a  little  branch  or  twig  will  startle  one,  should 
it  chance  to  light  upon  one's  head  or  hand.  It  is  even  so  with  mortals  in  the 
matter  of  death.  I.  There  is  no  "  casting  off  "  of  weapons  in  the  war.  In 
every  other  war  there  is,  for  one  or  other  of  the  contending  parties  obtains  a 
return  in  triumph,  a  blowing  of  the  trumpet  and  a  beating  of  the  drums,  an 
unharnessing  of  armour  and  a  laying  by  of  sword  and  spear  and  shield,  a  tide  of 
congratulations  flowing  in  from  king  or  queen,  and  from  a  grateful  country  that 
has  been  delivered  from  impending  danger.  "  But,"  says  the  Preacher,  "  there 
is  no  casting  off  of  weapons  in  that  war."  It  must  be  fought  out  to  the  bitter 
end,  it  mast  be  waged  till  the  vanquished  combatant  at  last  surrenders  at  dis- 
cretion to  the  Black  Prince  of  death.  The  struggle  begins  at  birth.  What  tussles 
the  infants  have  for  life  1  Have  we  not  seen  them  from  their  earliest  breath 
fighting  with  the  dragon  that,  as  it  were,  waited  for  their  birth?  Fight,  little 
stranger,  fight  1  Fight  thou  must  it  thou  wouldest  live  at  all,  for  there  are,  even 
in  thy  weakest  days,  a  thousand  enemies  who  fain  would  drain  thy  life  away  I 
Moreover,  the  fight  is  specially  fierce  at  times.  When  sickness  threatens,  and 
disease  invades,  and  when  we  are  called  to  pass  through  places  specially  unwhole- 
some, or  to  engage  in  occupations  peculiarly  perilous,  oh,  how  hot  the  battle  then 
becomes.  II.  Another  rendering  of  this  remarkable  expression  will  give  us  this 
idea.  There  is  no  *'  casting  of  "  weapons  in  that  war.  By  this,  I  understand 
that  there  is  not  in  any  mortal  hand  a  weapon,  of  whatsoever  a  description,  that 
is  likely  to  avail  against  this  king  of  fears.  You  know  how  it  is  in  the  present 
day  with  the  art  of  war,  as  some  are  pleased  to  call  it.    If  one  man  invents  a  gun 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rnr. 


of  epecial  calibre,  or  a  bullet  of  peculiarly  penetrating  powers,  another  forthwith 
invents  an  armour  that  resists  them  both;  this  has  no  parallel  in  the  matter 
of  life  and  death.  There  can  be  found  for  death's  shot  and  shell  no  armour  that 
can  resist  it.  Goliath's  spear,  though  it  be  like  a  weaver's  beam,  will  not  defend 
him  from  the  stroke  of  death;  Saul's  javelin,  though  he  aim  it  better  than  when 
he  cast  it  at  active  David,  is  not  likely  to  pin  death  to  the  wall;  and  the  gilded 
sword  of  bribery,  with  its  jewelled  hilt,  is  vain  against  this  adversary.  Elizabeth 
exclaimed,  "  All  my  possessions  for  a  moment  of  timel"  but  there  was  no  casting 
of  the  weapons  in  that  war,  even  for  the  virgin  queen.  We  are  virtually  defence- 
less. "  It  is  appointed  imto  man  to  die."  III.  Yet,  again,  there  is  this  render- 
ing of  the  passage.  "  There  is  no  sending  of  a  substitute  in  that  wae."  I 
believe  that  the  conscription,  where  it  obtains,  allows  for  substitution;  that  one 
may,  at  least  on  certain  conditions,  send  another  in  his  place  to  serve  his  country; 
but  there  is  no  such  provision  here.  There  is,  indeed,  the  possibility  of  one  taking 
another's  place  temporarily.  A  brave  miner,  for  instance,  has  said  to  another  in 
equal  peril  with  himself,  "  Only  one  of  us  can  get  out  of  this:  you  may  go,  and 
I  will  die."  "  Death  passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  sinned."  If  this 
be  true,  is  it  not  very  marvellous  how  unconcerned  most  are  I  It  was  enjoined 
upon  the  ancient  Thebans  that  before  they  erected  a  house  they  should  build  a 
sepulchre  in  its  neighbourhood,  and  the  Egyptians  were  wis©  enough  to  bring 
roimd  at  their  feasts  an  image  of  death,  that  the  guests  might  be  reminded  of 
their  mortality.  "  Ponder,  0  man,  eternity,"  for  "  there  is  no  sending  of  a 
substitute  in  that  war."  IV.  There  is  no  exemption  feom  fighting  in  this 
battle — ^no  excuse  from  joining  in  this  campaign.  We  all  are  hastening  to  the 
boiirne  from  which  no  traveller  returns.  You  know  that  in  the  days  of  Moeea 
there  were  certain  exemptions  and  excuses  in  connection  with  the  military  service. 
8uch  was  the  mercy  of  God  that  He  arranged  that,  if  a  man  had  built  a  new 
house,  he  was  not  called  to  take  up  arms,  he  must  go  and  dedicate  it.  After  the 
house-warming  he  might  go  to  the  battle,  but  not  before.  Or  if  one  had  planted 
ft  vineyard,  he  should  wait  till  he  had  eaten  of  it,  lest  another  should  reap  the 
result  of  his  labours.  'Twas  the  same  with  the  newly-married  man;  and  for  the 
faint-hearted  there  was  this  kind  provision  made,  that  they  should  go  back  to 
their  homes;  not,  indeed,  so  much  for  their  own  sakes,  as  lest  their  brethren 
should  become  faint-hearted  too.  There  are  no  such  considerations  in  this  case : 
there  cannot  be.  I  heard  only  last  week  of  one  who  was  married  for  two  short 
days,  and  was  taken  under  heartrending  circumstances  from  his  bride.  We  some- 
times talk  about  sudden  death,  and  it  is  awfully  sudden  for  those  who  are  looking 
on  and  living  still,  but  I  believe  there  should  be  no  such  thing  as  sudden  death 
to  any  who  know  the  power  of  death  and  the  certainty  of  it.  (T.  Spurgeon.) 
Christian  life-service: — I  would  use  our  text  as  an  illustration  of  the  Christian 
life  and  the  Christian's  life  allegiance:  "There  is  no  discharge  in  that  war." 
I.  So  RUNS  the  summons.  Now,  this  Book  of  God  is  full  of  sentences  which  bind 
the  conscience  of  every  believer,  and  compel  an  irrevocable  self -consecration.  But, 
aside  from  all  the  direct  expressions  of  Scripture,  is  the  spirit  of  the  Christ  life 
to  which  we  are  conformed,  commanding  in  the  consecration  which  it  exhibits 
and  influences.  Oh,  how  soon  the  soldier  comes  to  mirror  his  captain  1  There 
was  somewhat  of  Napoleon  in  every  member  of  the  Old  Guard — somewhat  of  his 
fortitude,  his  steadfastness,  his  untiring  perseverance,  whatsoever  might  be  the 
harassing  or  hindering  circumstances  of  the  march.  Even  so  does  he  who  has 
given  his  pledge  to  Christ,  and  who  persistently  avows  his  relationship  to  Him, 
come  to  receive  somewhat  of  the  spirit  of  Christ  and  His  constancy  of  devotion. 
There  are  no  vacations,  there  are  no  furloughs,  there  are  no  personal  Lnteresta. 
"  If  any  man  will  come  after  Me,  let  him  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  Me  " — 
day  by  day,  year  by  year,  even  unto  the  end — eaith  the  Lord  who  hath  redeemed 
us.  II.  But  beyond  the  summons,  "  There  is  no  discharge  in  that  war,"  so 
GLADLV  responds  THE  SOLDIER.  There  is  no  joy  like  that  of  those  who  go  forth  to 
those  daily  battles  against  sin  in  the  name  of  the  God  of  Israel.  Their  battle 
Bongs  would  befit  a  banquet,  and  their  triumph  of  spirit  is  a  presage  and  earnest 
of  their  triumph  of  possession.  1.  Gratitude  inspires  conseoration.  "  There  is  no 
discharge  in  that  war,"  responds  the  soldier  gladly.  **  What  shall  I  render 
unto  the  Lord?"  is  the  constant  self-inquiry.  Such  a  grateful  soul  is  covetous 
most  of  all  of  opportunities.  He  does  not  check  the  calls  upon  him  for  exertion. 
He  seeks  everywhere  for  occasions  to  manifest  the  love  which  swells  and  rules 
\vithin  him.     2.  But  hope  expects  coronation  1     It  is  the  mainspring  of  the  wheel. 


CHAP.  Till.]  ECCLESTASTES.  Ifljf 

It  >8  the  life-preserver  on  the  tide.  It  is  the  double  wing  of  the  soul  in  its  eflfort 
to  rise  above  the  things  restraining  and  hindering  it.  And  every  believer  responds, 
"  There  is  no  discharge  in  that  war  ";  I  want  none;  for  hope  expects  coronation. 
It  ifi  not  presumptuous  hope,  because  it  is  founded  upon  the  purposes  of  the  Word 
of  God.  III.  So  REQUIRES  THE  SERVICE.  Thus  does  our  Divine  Saviour  sum  up 
the  work  He  does  for  us,  in  us,  and  by  us.  That  which  He  makes  the  great 
impulse  of  our  hearts  is  also  a  necessity  of  our  work.  1.  We  have  the  conflict  with 
evil  about  us.  John  Wesley's  old  motto  is  the  grand  talisman  of  success  :  "  We 
are  all  at  it;  we  are  always  at  it."  Such  steadfastness  in  Christian  example  and 
influence  is  that  for  which  the  times  most  imperatively  cry.  2.  But  beyond  that 
there  is  the  conquest  of  sin  in  thine  own  eoul  to  which  thou  art  called;  for 
"  better  is  he  that  ruleth  his  own  spirit  than  he  that  taketh  a  city."  Time  after 
time  God's  people  are  tempted  to  return  to  the  city  from  which  they  have  set  out, 
and  there  is  that  within  them  which  is  constantly  hinting,  suggesting,  constrain- 
ing them  to  return.  Now,  if  thou  art  to  meet  this,  thou  must  battle  by  little  and 
by  little.  Character  is  not  built  up  in  a  day;  it  is  a  very  slow  process,  even  as 
God  changes  the  contour  of  the  earth.  No  volcanic  action  in  the  sudden  mani- 
festation of  power  is  to  be  expected.  No  man  grows  instantly  very  good  or  very 
bad.  By  steps  we  descend,  and  by  steps  we  ascend  in  our  tendency  towards  God. 
But  there  is  never  a  time  when  we  outgrow  this  necessity  of  conflict  in  this  world. 
(S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  All  this  have  I  seen,  and  applied  my  heart  onto  every  work  that  ii 
done  nnder  the  sun. — The  contemplation  of  human  life: — The  writer  means,  by 
"  applying  his  heart,"  the  exercise  of  his  attention  and  his  judgment.  He 
observed,  thought,  and  formed  opinions  on  the  works  of  men  spread  over  the 
earth.  We  are  placed  in  a  very  busy  world,  full  of  "  works,"  transactions, 
evente,  varieties  of  human  character  and  action.  W^e  witness  them — hear  of  them 
— think  of  them — talk  of  them.  Now,  it  is  a  matter  of  great  importance  that 
we  should  do  this  wisely,  so  as  to  turn  these  things  to  a  profitable  account.  In 
the  first  place,  if  this  attention  to  the  actions  and  events  of  the  world  be  em- 
ployed merely  in  the  way  of  amusement,  there  will  be  little  good.  It  is  so  with 
many.  They  have  no  fixed,  serious  interest  and  purpose  to  occupy  their  minds; 
no  grand  home-business  within  their  own  spirits.  Yet  they  must  have  some- 
thing to  keep  their  faculties  in  a  pleasant  activity,  or  call  it  play.  The  mind, 
therefore,  flies  out  as  naturally  and  eagerly  as  a  bird  would  from  an  opened  cage. 
The  attention  rambles  hither  and  thither,  with  light  momentary  notices  of  things ; 
great  and  small ; — here ,  there  or  yonder ;  it  is  all  one ; '  *  welcome  I ' '  and  '  *  begone  1 ' ' 
to  each  in  turn.  Now,  how  useless  is  such  a  manner  of  "  applying  the  heart  "I 
But  there  may  be  another  manner  much  worse  than  useless.  For  attention  may 
bt  exercised  on  the  actions,  characters  and  events  among  mankind  in  the  direct 
service  of  the  evil  passions;  in  the  disposition  of  a  savage  beast,  or  an  evil  spirit; 
in  a  keen  watchfulness  to  descry  weakness,  in  order  to  make  a  prey  of  it : — in  aa 
attentive  observation  of  mistake,  ignorance,  carelessness,  or  untoward  accidents,— 
in  order  to  seize,  with  remorseless  selfishness,  unjust  advantages; — in  a  penetrat- 
ing inquisition  into  men's  conduct  and  character  in  order  to  blast  them;  or  (in  a 
lighter  mood)  to  turn  them  indiscriminately  to  ridicule.  Or  there  may  be  such 
an  exercise  in  the  temper  of  envy,  jealousy  or  revenge;  or  (somewhat  more 
excusably,  but  still  mischievously)  for  the  purpose  of  exalting  the  observer  in  his 
own  estimation.  But  there  would  be  no  end  of  describing  the  useless  and  per- 
nicious modes  of  doing  that  which  our  text  expresses.  Let  us  try  to  form  some 
notion  of  what  would  be  the  right  one.  In  doing  so  there  is  one  most  important 
consideration  to  be  kept  in  mind ;  that  is,  the  necessity  of  having  just  principles  or 
rules  to  be  applied  in  our  observation  of  the  world.  With  the  aid  of  these  we 
are  to  look  on  this  busy  mingled  scene  of  all  kinds  of  actions  and  events.  And 
we  might  specify  two  or  three  chief  points  of  view  in  which  we  should  exercise 
this  attention  and  judgment.  And  the  grand  primary  reference  with  which  we 
survey  the  world  of  human  action  should  be  to  God;  we  should  not  be  in  this 
respect  "  without  God  in  the  world."  We  are  exercising  our  little  faculty  on  the 
scene;  let  us  recollect  One  whose  intelligence  pervades  it  all,  and  is  perfect  in 
every  point  of  it  I  Let  us  think,  again,  while  we  are  judging  He  is  judging  I 
"  There  is  at  this  instant  a  perfected  estimate  in  an  unseen  mind  of  this  that  I 
am  thinking  how  to  estimate  I — if  that  judgment  could  lighten  on  me,  and  on  its 
aobject         1"    Our  minds,  also,  should  be  habituated,  in  looking  at  this  world 


r»  BIMJCALUt^^^^ 


[cHAT>.  vni. 


200 ■ TTivtoreflect  that  there 

•»*'  "'  ?r£  »S  "'  ■"""If  *  These  W.S  m^S  •'"  'IvTus    «am.    '»' 


n>eS«  ??  '•rSilr.elve.  eWc*  t°,*f  JtZded   *e  iodgmeB.-.e.y* 


l,«lnit-  then  shall  it  stana  lu    ^  g^^^  ty^e  wicKea  ^  j-  g^all  want 

if  ^an' army  ^itb  ^Y^^^^^a  J^  wb  akb  going  ^J  «"  Xrn^be  place  of  the 
Sace  of  ihe]'^?-  T.^^;  t  a  man  who  has  «°«^^,^t  J  been  a  county  magistrate^ 
-««  to  attend  it.     There  w  »      ,      profession.     He  i^s  dbc  ^^  ^^^  heareo 


CHAP,  vin.}  SCCLESIASTES.  801 


people  stare  to  see  such  a  long  train  of  carriages  coming  to  follow  one  poor  worm 
to  its  resting-place.     What  pomp  1  what  grandeur  I     Will  you  just  think  of  it,  and 
who  are  they   mourning   for?     A  hypocrite  1     Who  ie   all  this   pomp  for?     For 
one  who  was  a  wicked  man ;  a  man  who  made  a  pretension  of  religion ;  a  man  who 
judged  others,  and  who  ought  to  have  been  condemned  himself.     But  possibly  I 
may  have  seen  the  wicked  man  buried  in  a  more  quiet  way.     He  is  taken  quietly 
to  hie  tomb  with  as  little  pomp  as  possible,  and  he  is  with  all  decency   and 
solemnity  interred  in  the  grave.     And  now  listen  to  the  minister.     If  he  is  a  man 
of  God,  when  he  buries  such  a  man  as  he  ought  to  be  buried,  you  do  not  hear  a 
solitary  word  about  the  character  of  the  deceased;  you  hear  nothing  at  all  about 
any  hopes  of  everlasting  life.     He  is  put  into  his  grave.     As  for  the  pompous 
funeral,  that  was   ludicrous.     A   man   might   almost  laugh  to  see   the   folly   of 
honouring  the  man  who  deserved  to  be  dishonoured,  but  as  for  the  still  and  silent 
and  truthful  funeral,  how  sad  it  is  1     We  ought  to  judge  ourselves  very  much  in 
the  light  of  our  funerals.     That  is  the  way  we  judge  other  things.     Look  at  your 
fields  to-morrow.     There  is  the  flaunting  poppy,  and  there  by  the  hedge-rows  are 
many  flowers  that  lift  their  heads  to  the  sun.     Judging  them  by  their  leaf,  you 
might  prefer  them  to  the  sober-coloured  wheat.     But  wait  until  the  funeral  when 
the  poppy  shall  be  gathered  and  the  weeds  shall  be  bound  up  in  a  bundle  to  be 
burned — ^gathered  into  a  heap  in  the  field  to  be  consumed,  to  be  made  into  manure 
for  the  soil.     But  see  the  funeral  of  the  wheat.     What  a  magnificent  funeral  has 
the  wheat-sheaf.     *'  Harvest  home  "  is  shouted  as  it  is  carried  to  the  garner,  for 
it  is  a  precious  thing.     Even  so  let  each  of  us  so  live,  as  considering  that  we  must 
die.     But  there  is  a  sad  thing  yet  to  come.     We  must  look  a  little  deeper  than 
the  mere  ceremonial  of  the  burial,  and  we  shall  see  that  there  is  a  great  deal 
more  in  some  people's  cofiins  besides  their  corpses.     If  we  had  eyes  to  see  invisible 
things,  and  we  could  break  the  lid  of  the  hypocrite's  coffin,  we  should  see  a  great 
deal  there.     There  lie  all  his  hopes.     The  wicked  man  may  come  and  go  from  the 
place  of  the  holy,  but  he  has  no  hope  of  being  saved.     He  thought,  because  he 
bad  attended  the  place  of  the  holy  regularly,  therefore  he  was  safe  for  another 
world.     There  lie  his  hopes,  and  they  are  to  be  buried  with  him.     Of  all  the 
frightful  things  that  a  man  can  look  upon,  the  face  of  a  dead  hope  is  the  most 
horrible.     Wrapt  in  the  same  shroud,  there  lie  all  his  dead  pretensions.     When 
he  was  here  he  made  a  pretension  of  being  respectable;  there  lies  his  respect,  he 
shall  be  a  hissing  and  a  reproach  for  ever.     But  there  is  one  thing  that  sleeps  with 
him  in  his  coffin  that  he  had  set  his  heart  upon.     He  had  set  his  heart  upon  being 
known  after  he  was  gone.     He  thought  surely  after  he  had  departed  this  life  he 
would  be  handed  down  to  posterity  and  be  remembered.     Now  read  the  text — 
**  And  they  were  forgotten  in  the  city  where  they  had  so  done."     There  is  his 
hope  of  fame.     I  have  often  noticed  how  soon  wicked  things  die  when  the  man 
dies  who  originated  them.     Look  at  Voltaire's  philosophy;  with  all  the  noise  it 
made  in  his  time — where  is  it  now?     There  is  just  a  little  of  it  lingering,  but  it 
•eems  to  have  gone.     And  there  was  Tom  Paine,  who  did  his  best  to  write  his 
name  in  letters  of  damnation,  and  one  would  think  he  might  have  been  remem- 
bered.    But  who  cares  for  him  now?     Except  amongst  a  few,  here  and  there,  bis 
name  has  passed  away.     And  all  the  names  of  error,  and  heresy,  and  schism, 
where  do  they  go?     You  hear  about  St.  Austin  to  this  day,  but  you  never  hear 
about  the  heretics  he  attacked.     Everybody  knows  about  Athanasius,  and  how  he 
stood  up  for  the  divinity  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  but  we  have  almost  forgotten 
the  life  of  Arius,  and  scarcely  ever  think  of  those  men  who  aided  and  abetted 
bim  in  his  folly.     Bad  men  die  out  quickly,  for  the  world  feels  it  is  a  good  thing 
to  be  rid  of  them;  they  are  not  worth  remembering.     But  the  death  of  a  good  man, 
the  man  who  was  sincerely  a  Christian — how  different  is  thatl     And  when  you 
see  the  body  of  a  saint,  if  he  has  served  God  with  all  his  might,  how  sweet  it  is 
to  look  upon  him — ah,  and  to  look  upon  his  coffin  too,  or  upon  his  tomb  in  after 
years  1     III.  We  are  to  wbitb  his  epitaph  ;  and  his  epitaph  is  contained  in  these 
short  words :  "  this  also  is  vanity."     And  now  in  a  few  words  I  will  endeavour  to 
show  that  it  is  vanity  for  a  man  to  come  and  go  from  the  house  of  God,  and  yet 
have  no  true  religion.     Why,  although  you  must  deplore  a  wicked  man's  wicked- 
ness as  a  fearful  crime,  yet  there  is  some  kind  of  respect  to  be  paid  to  the  man 
who  is  downright  honest  in  it;  but  not  an  atom  of  respect  to  the  man  who  wants 
to  be  a  cant  and  a  hypocrite.     (0.  H.  Bpurgeon.)     The  funeral  of  the  wicked: — 
I.  WiOKSD  UBN  BUBiBD.     1.  A  truly  sad  scene.     Wicked  men  going  to  their  graves, 
their  probation  over,  the  means  of  improvement  ended.     2.  A  common  scene. 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vin! 

Death  does  not  wait  for  a  man's  repentance.  II.  Who  were  once  in  connection 
WITH  EELiGioos  ORDINANCES.  "  Who  had  coms  and  gone  from  the  place  of  the 
holy."  This  suggests : — 1.  The  religious  craving  of  human  nature.  The  eoul 
everywhere  is  restless  for  a  God.  All  feel  the  want,  whatever  their  character. 
2.  The  power  of  man  to  resist  Divine  impressions.  3.  The  surest  way  to  contract 
guilt.  "  It  will  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrha,"  etc.  4.  There  in 
no  necessary  power  in  religious  means  to  improve  men.  III.  Passing  from  the 
MEMORY  OF  THE  LIVING.  There  is  a  greater  tendency  in  the  living  to  forget  tha 
wicked  than  the  good.  It  is  true  that  some  giants  of  depravity  have  stamped 
their  impress  on  the  heart  of  ages;  such  as  Nero,  Caligula,  Napoleon,  etc.;  bxrt 
the  great  mass  of  wicked  men  sink  into  oblivion,  whilst  the  "  righteous  shall  be 
in  everlasting  remembrance."  What  are  the  powers  of  mind  that  prompt  men  to 
remember  the  departed?  1.  Gratitude  is  a  commemorative  power.  Men  instinct- 
ively remember  the  good,  but  what  benefits  have  the  wicked  wrought?  2.  Love 
is  a  commemorative  power.  Those  who  have  had  power  to  draw  out  the  esteem 
and  admiration  of  the  soul  will  not  easily,  if  ever,  fade  from  the  memory.  The 
mystic  hand  of  love  will  hold  them  close  to  the  heart.  But  who  can  love  in  a 
moral  sense  the  wicked?  3.  Hope  is  a  commemorative  power.  Those  from  whom 
we  anticipate  good  we  do  not  easily  forget.  What  good  can  be  anticipated  from 
the  wicked?  Future  meetings,  should  they  ever  take  place,  will  be  very  fearful 
things.     (HomiliBt.) 

'  Ver.  11.  Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,  there- 
fore the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil. — Present  forbear- 
ance no  argument  against  future  retribution: — Solomon  had  looked  abroad,  and 
had  seen  sin  abounding; — men  revelling  in  iniquity,  vainly  counting  that,  because 
God  kept  silence.  He  would  never  awake  to  judgment.  Who  can  deny  that  this 
is  true  of  our  own  day?  I.  The  operation  of  the  peinciplb.  1.  It  has  its 
influence  amongst  merely  professing  Christians.  It  lies  at  the  root  of  their 
indecision.  2.  It  has  its  influence  upon  the  religiously  indifferent.  To  them  there 
is  nothing  threatening  in  the  horizon.  What  may  come  they  know  not,  nor  are 
they  much  concerned  to  know.  They  hope  to  be  prepared  for  things  as  they  turn 
up  upon  the  wheel  of  fortune.  To  them  there  is  a  powerful  argument  in — "  All 
things  as  they  were."  A  change  may  come,  certainly,  but  there  is  no  promise  of 
such  change  coming  now.  Were  the  penalty  of  transgression  suspended  over  their 
heads,  ready  to  fall  upon  the  commission  of  sin,  they  might  be  restrained;  but  it 
is  in  the  future, — how  far  they  know  not,  nor  do  they  care  to  inquire.  8.  There 
lis  yet  another  class  by  whom  the  principle  is  embraced,  and  held  as  a  part  of  their 
determined  creed — the  professedly  infidel  (2  Pet.  iii.  3,  4).  To  the  eye  of  one  who 
I  cares  not  to  analyze  the  past,  or  to  indulge  in  serious  thoughts  of  the  future, 
'things  appear  to  be  now  as  they  have  been,  and  as  they  must  ever  be;  and  thus 
I  present,  living,  undeniable  facts  are  made  to  give  the  lie  to  everything  predictive 
Jof  a  change.  II.  The  evils  of  the  prinoiplb.  1.  It  erects  a  false  standard 
between  right  and  wrong.  Punished  or  not  punished,  now  or  in  the  future — or, 
if  such  a  thing  might  be,  never  punished  at  all — such  a  fact  could  in  no  way 
affect  the  character  of  an  essentially  evil  deed.  2.  It  argues  a  deplorable  ignorance 
of,  or  dishonesty  towards,  other  parts  of  the  Divine  administration.  If  God  be 
the  universal  Lawgiver;  if  the  same  hand  which  penned  the  Decalogue  impressed 
upon  Nature  her  laws,  and  fixed  the  principles  of  her  movements;  then  there  is 
something  to  be  apprehended  from  a  course  of  sin,  even  though  a  just  recompense 
may  be  long  delayed.  Our  sky  may  be  bright,  but  our  sins,  in  the  meantime, 
may  be  gathering  into  one  big  thunder-cloud  on  the  horizon,  which  is  destined 
to  break  upon  us  in  one  overwhelming  torrent  of  direst  woe.  Even  so  when  this 
life  and  another  are  taken  as  the  periods.  We  may  sin  for  a  season — "sentence 
against  an  evil  work  "  may  not  be  "  executed  speedUy  " — but  all  nature  joins 
testimony  with  the  Bible  in  declaring  that  sin  shall  not  go  unpunished.  3.  The 
conduct  is  opposed  to  the  entire  economy  under  which  we  live.  Man  is  sinful : 
'human  nature  ie  fallen.  God  designs  to  raise  it;  but  in  a  manner  consistent  with 
His  own  character  and  the  character  of  man.  Moral  agents  have  to  be  dealt 
with; — He  therefore  employs  moral  means.  Divine  patience  and  longsuSering 
are  essential  to  probation;  and  thus  we  see  that  the  forbearance  which  God 
exercises  toward  a  sinner  is  fundamental  in  that  gracious  economy  under  which 
we  live.  According  to  the  terms  of  the  evangelical  covenant,  sin  cannot  adequately 
be  punished  at  once.     It  would  be  to  frustrate  His  own  designs — to  do  violence  to 


CHAP.  TOi.]  ECCLESIASTES.  203 

His  own  arrangements.  4.  The  conduct  is  abusive  of  the  richest  mercy,  and  the 
highest  privileges  of  Heaven.  We  pity  the  blindness  and  impenitence  of  the 
antediluvians,  who,  in  spite  of  the  warnings  of  a  righteous  God,  brought  down  the 
death-floods  of  a  wakened  wrath; — but  ours  is  a  more  fearful  portion;  and  a 
bitterer  verdict  awaits  us  if,  "  because  sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not 
executed  speedily,  our  hearts  are  more  fully  set  in  us  to  do  evil."  (/.  H.  Rylance.) 
The  longauffering  of  God  with  individuals: — The  wise  man  points  out  in  the  text 
one  general  cause  of  the  impenitence  of  mankind.  "  The  heart  of  the  sons  of 
men  is  fully  set  to  do  evil."  "Why?  "Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work 
is  not  executed  speedily."  This  shameful,  but  too  common,  inclination  we  will 
endeavour  to  expose.  What  are  the  perfections  of  God?  They  are,  ye  answer, 
truth,  which  is  interested  in  executing  the  threatenings  that  are  denounced  against 
sinners :  wisdom,  which  is  interested  in  supplying  means  of  re-establishing  order : 
and  particularly  justice,  which  is  interested  in  the  punishing  of  the  guilty.  I 
reply ,  your  idea  of  truth  is  opposite  to  truth :  your  idea  of  wisdom  is  opposite  to 
wisdom  :  your  idea  of  justice  is  opposite  to  justice.  The  delay  of  the  punishment 
of  sinners,  ye  say,  is  opposite  to  the  truth  of  God:  on  the  contrary,  God  hath 
declared  that  He  would  not  punish  every  sinner  as  soon  as  he  had  committed  an 
act  of  sin.  The  delay  of  the  punishment  of  sinners,  ye  say,  is  opposite  to  the 
wisdom  of  God  :  on  the  contrary,  it  is  this  delay  which  provides  for  the  execution 
of  that  wise  plan  which  God  hath  made  for  mankind,  of  placing  them  for  soma 
time  in  a  state  of  probation  in  this  world,  and  of  regulating  their  future  reward 
or  punishment  according  to  their  use  or  abuse  of  such  a  dispensation.  The  delay 
of  the  punishment  of  sinners,  ye  say,  is  repugnant  to  the  justice  of  God.  Quite 
the  contrary.  The  delay  of  the  punishment  of  sinners  will  not  seem  incompatible 
with  the  justice  of  God  unless  ye  consider  that  perfection  detached  from  another 
perfection,  by  which  God  in  the  most  eminent  manner  displays  His  glory — I  mean 
His  mercy.  What  would  have  become  of  David  if  Divine  mercy  had  not  pro- 
longed his  days  after  he  had  fallen  into  the  crimes  of  adultery  and  murder;  or 
if  justice  had  called  him  to  give  an  account  of  his  conduct  while  his  heart,  burning 
with  a  criminal  passion,  was  wishing  only  to  gratify  it?  It  was  the  longsuSering, 
the  patience  of  God  that  gave  him  time  to  recover  himself,  to  get  rid  of  his 
infatuation,  to  see  the  horror  of  his  sin,  and  to  say  under  a  sense  of  it,  "  Have 
mercy  upon  me,  0  God,"  etc.  What  would  have  become  of  St.  Peter  if  God  had 
called  him  to  give  an  account  of  himself  while,  frightened  and  subverted  at  the 
sight  of  the  judges  and  executioners  of  his  Saviour,  he  was  pronouncing  those 
cowardly  words,  "  I  know  not  the  man  "?  It  was  the  longsuffering  and  patience 
of  God  that  gave  him  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  merciful  looks  of  Jesus  Christ 
immediately  after  his  denial  of  Him.  What  would  have  become  of  St.  Paul  if 
God  had  required  an  account  of  his  administration  while  he  was  breathing  out 
threatenings  and  slaughter  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord?  It  was  the  long- 
BufiEering  of  God  that  gave  him  an  opportxmity  of  saying,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou 
have  me  to  do?"  It  was  the  patience  of  God  which  gave  him  an  opportunity  of 
making  that  honest  confession,  "  I  was  before  a  blasphemer,  and  a  persecutor, 
and  injurious:  but  I  obtained  mercy."  (J.  Saurin.)  The  impunity  of  bad  men 
in  the  world: — I.  Show  some  very  dangerous  mistakes  that  are  abodt  this 
MATTER.  1.  This  has  been  the  great  objection  of  atheists  in  all  ages  against 
the  being  of  a  God.  The  story  of  Diagoras  is  well  known,  who,  seeing  a  wretch 
forswear  himself  and  remain  unpunished,  became  a  professed  atheist.  2.  Others 
admit  the  being  of  a  God,  but  deny  His  providence  in  the  administration  of 
human  affairs,  because  they  see  bad  men  unpunished  in  the  world.  8.  Bad  men 
that  own  a  God  and  a  providence,  seeing  their  crimes  unpunished,  fall  into 
another  error.  It  raises  them  to  a  great  confidence  about  the  nature  of  those 
actions,  which,  because  God  does  not  punish,  they  think  cannot  be  bad.  Dionysius 
said  the  gods  were  pleased  with  his  sacrilege  when  they  sent  him  a  prosperous 
voyage  after  he  had  robbed  their  temples.  4.  There  is  a  fault  incident  to  many 
otherwise  good  men.  They  are  uneasy  at  the  impunity  of  bad  men  in  the  world. 
They  repine  at  the  patience  and  longsuffering  of  God  towards  them.  And  this 
undoubtedly  is  a  sin.  Ought  they  not  to  acquiesce  in  the  Divine  methods  and 
dispensations  and  adore  the  righteousness  of  God's  ways  in  the  world,  although, 
perhaps,  they  cannot  comprehend  them?  5.  But  the  great  and  common  evil  that 
is  among  men,  arising  from  the  impunity  of  bad  men  in  the  world,  is  that  there 
are  very  few  that  from  thence  do  not  take  encouragement  to  go  on  securely  in 
their  sins,   not  dreading  that  punishment  which  some  think   will   never  come; 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nn. 

others  look  on  at  such  a  distance  that  the  apprehension  of  it  is  not  strong  enough 
to  make  them  turn  from  their  evil  ways.  II.  Expound  this  biddle  of  providence, 
THE  IMPUNITY  OF  BAD  MEN  IN  THE  woELD.  1.  Public  societiefi  or  bodies  of  men 
are  punished  in  thia  world,  though  particular  persons  may  not.  By  public  societiea 
I  mean  kingdoms,  nations,  and  states,  and  churches;  these  being  also  considered 
as  societies  of  Christian  men,  who  have  special  rules  set  them  for  their  conduct 
in  that  relation  wherein  they  stand  to  each  other.  National  judgments  for  national 
sins  are  immoderate  droughts,  excessive  rains  and  inundations  of  waters,  contrary 
seasons,  and  a  conflict  in  the  elements,  all  which  cause  famines  and  barrenness 
in  the  earth;  pestilences,  and  other  contagious  and  malignant  distempers.  2.  A» 
for  particular  bad  men,  they  are  a  punishment  to  themselves.  A  bad  man  alway» 
bears  a  secret  punishment  within  him.  Every  ill  action  he  does  exposes  him  ta 
the  severe  rebukes  of  his  own  conscience.  Moreover,  the  tumult  and  disorder  of 
his  passions,  which  clash  with  each  other,  and  often  meet  with  exasperating  diffi- 
culties in  the  pursuit  of  unlawful  objects,  his  restless  desires,  his  awakening 
fears,  and  jealousies,  and  distrusts,  and  thirst  of  revenge,  these,  and  a  thousand 
things  more  of  the  like  nature,  disturb  the  peace  of  his  soul.  8.  Nor  are  bad 
men  secure  even  against  outward  punishment.  For  wickedness  and  vice  are  not 
always  prosperous  in  the  world.  4.  The  end  of  Divine  punishment  in  this  world 
must  be  the  correction  or  the  destruction  of  the  oSender.  But  there  are  very 
good  reasons  why  Ood  does  not  always  punish  bad  men  in  this  world  with  respect 
to  either  of  these.  (1)  With  respect  to  the  first,  God  does  not  always  punish 
bad  men  in  this  world,  because  He  considers  men  as  rational  creatures,  and  who 
ought  therefore  to  be  dealt  with  by  rational  methods.  Present  and  frequent 
punishments  would  not  be  congruous  to  the  nature  of  man.  The  rod  and  the 
whip  are  only  fit  for  beasts,  creatures  void  of  understanding,  but  of  quick  sense, 
not  to  be  argued  but  lashed  into  duty  by  the  pungency  of  present  pain.  God 
does  not  always  punish  bad  men  in  this  world,  because  man  is  a  ^ee  agents 
but  present  punishment  would  bring  a  force  and  a  compulsion  upon  him  incon- 
sistent with  that  freedom;  and  his  obedience  to  God  would  not  be  voluntary, 
because  it  were  not  free.  (2)  With  respect  to  the  second,  God  does  not  always 
punish  bad  men  in  this  world,  because  He  takes  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the 
wicked,  and  does  not  afflict  willingly,  nor  grieve  the  children  of  men.  God  does 
not  always  punish  bad  men  in  this  world  that  He  may  set  mankind  an  example 
of  longanimity,  and  meekness  under  injuries,  and  of  mutual  forbearance  to  each 
other.  And  the  world  needs  such  an  example.  God  does  not  always  punish  bad 
men  in  this  world,  that  they  may  have  time  to  repent  and  grow  better.  God 
does  not  always  punish  bad  men  in  this  world  because  this  world  is  a  state  of 
probation  and  trial,  and  such  a  state  will  not  admit  of  present  punishment.  For 
in  order  to  be  proved  men  must  be  left  in  a  manner  to  themselves.  God  does 
not  always  punish  bad  men  in  this  world  because  they  are  to  have  their  portion 
in  it.  Thus,  the  wicked  rich  man  was  told  in  hell  that  in  his  lifetime  he  had 
received  his  good  things.  God  does  not  always  punish  bad  men  in  this  world 
because  they  are  bo  intermixed  with  the  good  that  the  one  cannot  be  punished 
but  the  other  must  participate  in  their  punishment;  God  therefore  spares  the 
bad  in  pity  and  compassion  to  the  good.  God  does  not  always  punish  bad  men  in 
this  world  that  He  may  exercise  the  faith  of  good  men.  God  does  not  always 
punish  bad  men  in  this  world  because,  says  Plutarch,  He  reserves  them  to  be  a 
punishment  to  others.  Even  good  men  may  need  correction.  When  they  do  so, 
and  God  will  have  the  hands  of  men  to  intervene  in  it.  He  does  not  usually 
employ  the  ministry  of  other  good  men  to  chastise  them;  He  employs  bad  men, 
as  fittest  for  that  work :  and  He  makes  the  bad  punish  one  another.  God  does 
not  always  punish  bad  men  in  this  world  because  their  sins  are  not  yet  ripe  for 
punishment.  God  does  not  always  punish  bad  men  in  this  world  because  He 
has  appointed  a  day  wherein  He  will  pass  a  strict  and  impartial  judgment  upon 
all  men,  and  will  finally  render  to  every  one  according  to  his  works.  (P.  Falle.) 
Abused  goodness: — I.  GoD'a  forbearance.  Though  strict  to  mark  iniquity,  He 
is  slow  to  punish  it.  The  crimes  of  the  old  world  cried  long  to  heaven.  Drunkards, 
blasphemers,  extortioners,  murderers,  and  sinners  of  all  sorts,  are  permitted  to 
live  on  and  sin  on  for  years,  whilst  their  richly-merited  doom  is  not  visited  upon 
them.  II.  Man'8  pebvebsenbss.  We  would  suppose  that  such  displays  of  Divine 
forbearance  would  be  softening  and  restraining  to  meji's  hearts;  and  some  it  does 
lead  to  repentance.  There  is  a  potency  in  kindness.  The  roughest  natures  often 
.  surrender  to  its  power,  and  even  the  maniao's  madness  often  yieldb  to  it«  tofteninc 


CHAr.  Tin.]  ECCLESIASTES.  205 

touch.  But,  alas  for  poor  human  nature  I  the  very  leniency  of  God  is  oftea 
turned  iuto  licence  for  crime.  Aa  ft  vessel  at  sea,  headed  for  the  destined  port, 
with  sails  set,  canvas  filled,  and  speeding  on  in  one  unvarying  course,  so  the 
sinner,  because  he  is  not  at  once  dashed  upon  the  rocks,  or  beaten  back  by 
judgments,  all  the  capacities  of  his  being  are  bent  on  evil.  III.  The  cebtaintt 
OF  RETEiBDTiON.  The  Sentence  against  every  evil  work  has  been  passed  where 
nothing  is  ever  taken  back.  Even  for  the  saved  Christ  had  to  suSer  and  die. 
The  trampled  Law  will  assert  its  dignity  and  avenge  its  insults  some  day.  As 
Jehovah  lives,  His  decrees  must  go  into  effect.  For  every  soul,  and  for  every 
sin,  judgment  must  come.  It  cannot  be  otherwise.  God  is  just  and  holy,  and 
can  in  no  wise  clear  the  persevering  guilty.  We  may  question,  equivocate,  and 
disbelieve;  but  that  will  not  serve  to  stay  the  chariot- wheels  of  an  avenging  God. 
There  is  mercy  now,  but  mercy  despised  is  certain  death.  (Joseph  A.  Betas,  D.D.) 
The  abuse  of  Divine  forbearance: — I.  Sin  is  deservedly  called  an  iviL  WOBK.  It 
is  "  the  work  of  the  devil.  It  is  folly,  ingratitude,  rebellion,  treason.  It  degrades 
and  defiles  the  soul.  It  robe  us  of  the  likeness,  the  presence,  the  favour  of  God. 
How  deplorable  are  its  consequences  I  It  cannot  go  unpunished.  There  is  a 
sentence  denounced  against  it.  God  is  the  governor  of  the  world.  But  there 
is  no  governing  without  laws,  and  laws  are  nothing  without  sanctions — from  these 
they  derive  their  force  and  their  eflBcacy.  Laws  issued  by  a  legislator,  unaccom- 
panied with  threatenings,  would  be  harmless,  and,  inspiring  no  terror,  would  be 
trifled  with  or  considered  only  as  advice.  Thus  the  notion  of  punishment  follows 
from  the  very  constitution  of  law.  Accordingly,  a  sentence  the  most  tremendous 
is  denounced  against  every  transgressor.  Do  you  ask  where  it  is  recorded?  Look 
within  thee,  0  man,  and  read  it  there :  read  it  in  the  trouble,  the  remorse,  ths 
iorebodings  of  thy  own  conscience.  Examine  the  history  of  mankind,  and  read  it 
there.  See  it  in  the  expulsion  of  the  happy  pair  from  Paradise;  in  the  flood 
which  destroyed  the  world  of  the  ungodly;  in  the  fire  and  brimstone  which  con- 
simied  the  cities  of  the  plain.  Open  the  Bible,  and  peruse  it  there.  There  you 
read  that  the  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die.  II.  Sentence  against  an  evil  work 
IS  NOT  SPEEDILY  EXECUTED.  With  much  lougsuff Bring  God  endures  the  provoca- 
tions of  the  ungodly,  and  delays  from  day  to  day  the  wrath  which  they  have 
deserved.  Patience  is  one  of  the  distinguishing  glories  of  His  character :  it  is 
often  ascribed  to  Him  in  Scripture;  and  the  exercise  of  it  appears  in  numberless 
instances.  And  are  not  you,  are  not  all  of  you  examples?  Can  you  consider  the 
time  of  your  provocation — the  number  of  your  offences — the  aggravations  of  your 
iniquities,  and  not  say,  with  wonder  and  admiration,  "  It  is  of  the  Lord's  mercies 
that  we  are  not  consumed,  because  His  compassions  fail  not  "?  We  are  obviously 
intended  for  a  social  state :  but  the  intercourse  we  are  required  to  maintain  with 
our  fellow-creatures  exposes  us  to  innumerable  provocations  and  offences;  and  the 
effects  of  sudden  and  uncontrolled  resentments  would  be  fatal  to  ourselves  and 
others.  Hence  we  are  commanded  to  be  "  slow  to  wrath  ";  and  to  be  "  patient 
towards  all  men."  And  in  this  forbearance  God  places  Himself  before  us  as  our 
example.  If  the  commission  of  sin  were  always  immediately  followed  with  the 
punishment  of  it,  this  world  would  not  be  a  state  of  probation.  His  **  judgments  *' 
would  not  be  "  a  great  deep,"  and  the  whole  nature  and  design  of  religion  would 
be  subverted.  If  the  wrath  of  God  instantly  crushed  every  transgressor.  Ha 
would  be  the  destroyer  rather  than  the  governor  of  the  world.  To  destroy  is 
comparatively  easy,  and  discovers  little  perfection :  but  the  wisdom  of  God  appears 
in  reigning  over  the  extravagance  of  the  world;  in  making  the  wrath  of  man  to 
praise  Him.  It  is  also  worthy  of  our  remark  that  many  who  deserve  destruction 
are  useful  in  the  present  state  of  the  world;  they  are  able  to  promote  the  arts 
and  sciences,  and  are  qualified  to  render  great  services  to  a  country.  Such  men 
are  links  in  the  chain  of  Providence,  and  their  destiny  secures  them.  There  are 
also  purposes  which  the  wicked  can  only  accomplish.  God  calls  the  Assyrian  the 
rod  of  His  anger  and  the  staff  of  His  indignation;  and  says,  "  I  will  send  him 
against  an  hypocritical  nation;  and  against  the  people  of  My  wrath  will  I  give 
him  a  charge,  to  take  the  spoil,  and  to  take  the  prey,  and  to  tread  them  down 
like  the  mire  in  the  streets."  The  ungodly,  by  their  continuance,  are  useful  to 
the  righteous :  they  exercise  their  patience,  call  forth  their  zeal,  and  wean  them 
from  the  present  world.      III.  Thb  depbavity  of  man  turns  Divine  clemency 

INTO  presumption,   AND  ABU8BB  THE   PATIENCE   WHICH   BEARS    WITH    HIM   TO   PURPOSES 

THB  MOST  VILE.  1.  Nothing  is  more  common  than  this  abuse.  Perhaps  many  of 
you  are  examples  of  it.     To  decide  this  I  ask,  Would  you  have  continued  in  your 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tm. 

einful  courses  to  this  hour,  had  you  not  been  persuaded  that  God  would  bear 
with  you?  Would  you  now  perpetrate  another  crinae  if  you  supposed  that  God 
would  instantly  destroy  you  for  It?  2.  Nothing  can  be  more  vile  and  base  than 
this  abuse.  Clemency  affords  you  a  shelter  from  the  storm,  and  you  enter,  and 
then  wound  your  kind  Benefactor,  and  wound  Him  because  He  had  pity  upon  you. 
8.  Be  assured  nothing  will  be  more  fatal.  Mercy  is  your  final  resource;  and, 
when  this  is  provoked,  to  what  can  you  turn?  (TF.  Jay.)  Ood't  delay  of 
executing  the  sentence  of  condemnation  against  ungodly  men  often  m^ieerably 
abused  by  them: — I.  There  is  a  sentence  passed  in  the  couet  of  heaven,  and 

STANDING,    AGAINST   UNGODLY   MEN,   EVIL- WORKERS,    HOWEVER  EASY   THEY    BB    UNDER   IT 

FOE  A  TIME.  To  explain  the  nature  of  this  sentence,  consider.  Every  evil  work  is 
a  breach  of  God's  law;  and  every  sinful  thought,  word,  or  action  is  an.  evil  work 
(1  John  iii.  4).  The  grounds  of  it  more  particularly  are — 1.  The  sin  of  nature, 
original  sin  imputed  (Rom.  v,  12).  2.  The  sins  of  the  heart  (Ps.  xxiv.  4;  Matt. 
V.  28,  29).  3.  The  sins  of  the  tongue  (Matt.  xii.  37).  It  is  a  channel  by  which 
the  heart  vents  much  of  its  inbred  corruption,  contempt  of  God,  etc.  4.  The  sins 
of  the  life,  wicked  actions,  whether  of  impiety  against  God,  unrighteousness 
against  men,  or  intemperance  against  ourselves  (Jude  15).  II.  The  Lord  often- 
times   DOES    NOT    SOON   COME   TO   THE   EXECUTION    OF   THE    SENTENCE   AGAINST   UNGODLT 

MEN,  EVIL- WORKERS ;  BUT  DELAYS  IT  FOR  A  TIME.  1.  We  shall  take  a  view  of  the 
method  of  Providence  in  this  matter.  (1)  There  is  a  swift  method  the  Lord 
Bometimes  takes  with  sinners  (Mai.  iii.  5).  Sometimes  the  sinner  has  an  ill  work 
in  design,  and  the  Lord  counts  his  will  for  the  deed,  and  prevents  by  a  speedy 
execution;  as  in  Haman's  case.  He  hatched  the  mischief,  but  he  did  not  see  it 
come  forth.  Sometimes  the  sinner  is  in  actual  motion  to  the  ill  work,  and  execu- 
tion is  done  on  him  ere  he  get  it  performed.  So  it  fared  with  the  rebellious 
Israelites,  in  their  attempting  to  go  into  the  promised  land  (Num.  xiv.  44,  45). 
And  so  it  fared  with  Jeroboam,  putting  forth  his  hand  to  lay  hold  on  the 
prophet  (1  Kings  xiii.  4);  and  with  Uzziah  having  the  censer  in  his  hand  (2  Ohron. 
xxvi.  19).  Sometimes  the  execution  trysts  with  the  very  doing  of  the  ill  work, 
BO  that  the  sinner  is  taken  away  with  the  stroke  in  his  sin.  Thus  fared  it  with 
Nadab  and  Abihu  offering  strange  fire  (Lev.  x.  1,  2);  with  Zimri  and  Cozbi  out 
off  in  the  act  of  uncleanness  (Num.  xxv.  8);  and  with  Herod,  who  was  eaten  up 
of  worms  for  his  atheism  and  blasphemy  (Acts  xii.  23).  Sometimes  as  the  ill 
work  is  done  out  and  ended,  the  execution  begins.  So  it  fared  with  Sennacherib's 
blasphemous  letter  (2  Kings  xix.  14,  35).  Sometimes  the  execution  keeps  pace 
with  the  ill  work,  and  the  one  goes  on  as  the  other  does;  judgment  in  the  several 
degrees  following  hard  at  the  heels  of  the  sin.  So  it  fared  with  Hiel  in  his 
building  of  Jericho  (1  Kings  xvi.).  Sometimes  execution  begins  with  the  sinner's 
beginning  to  reap  the  fruit  of  his  sin  when  he  leans  upon  his  wall,  a  serpent 
bites  him.  So  it  fared  with  Ahab  taking  possession  of  Naboth's  vineyard  (1  Kings 
xxi.  18,  19),  and  with  the  lusters  in  the  wilderness  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  30,  31).  Some- 
times when  one's  sin  begins  to  work,  in  its  bitter  fruits  and  effects  on  others,  it 
recoils  on  the  sinner  himself.  So  it  fared  with  Judas  the  traitor  (Matt,  xxvii.  8, 
4,  5).  (2)  There  is  a  slow  method  the  Lord  takes  oftentimes  with  sinners  (Neh. 
ii.  17).  They  commit  their  evil  works;  the  sentence  is  presently  passed  for  them  : 
but  then  the  execution  is  delayed  (Ps.  1.  21).  The  sinner  may  get  his  evil  work 
contrived  and  accomplished,  without  any  let  in  this  way  from  Heaven,  by  any 
execution  against  him.  The  ill  work  being  done  without  let,  the  sinner  may  also 
for  a  time  pass  unpunished,  and  as  little  notice  may  seem  to  be  taken  of  it  as  if 
there  were  not  a  God  to  judge  upon  the  earth  (Ezek,  ix.  9).  Nay,  sinners  may 
prosper  in  an  ill  course.  So  far  may  they  be  from  execution  done  against  them, 
that  they  may  thrive  in  the  world  in  it  (Ps.  xxxvii.  85).  When  execution  is  at 
length  begun,  it  may  be  carried  on  very  leisurely  for  a  time :  the  drops  may  come 
very  few  and  soft  before  the  shower  (Isa.  ix.  1),  More  than  all  that,  the  execution 
may  be  entirely  put  off  during  this  life.  2.  We  shall  account  for  this  alow 
method  of  Providence.  (1)  This  method  is  taken  to  bring  sinners  to  repentance, 
and  prevent  their  ruin  (2  Pet.  iii.  9);  and  it  is  becoming  the  perfections  of  a 
merciful  God  therefore  to  use  it.  (2)  In  the  slow  method  God  takes  with 
sinners.  He  often  has  an  eye  to  posterity.  Though  the  slow  method  seems  strange 
to  us  short-sighted  creatures,  it  is  not  at  all  strange  being  viewed  in  the  glass  of 
the  infinite  perfections  of  the  Divine  nature.  God  is  eternal,  from  everlasting  to 
everlasting  (Ps.  xo.  2).  If  men  do  not  soon  pursue  their  quarrels,  death  may 
•natch  them  away,  and  they  can  have  no  access  more  to  do  it :  but  however  long 


OHAP.Tin.3  ECCLESIASTES.  20? 

iha  Lord  delays  pleading  His  quarrel,  He  can  lose  no  time,  for  He  is  eternal. 
In  God's  eternal  duration  there  are  no  difierences  of  time;  all  is  present  to  Him. 
He  sees  exactly  the  time  appointed  for  execution  against  every  impenitent  sinner, 
and  will  not  let  it  pass  beyond  that  one  moment  (Hab.  ii.  8).  He  knows  what 
He  intends  to  do,  and  none  can  hinder  (Dan.  iv.  37).  He  is  infinitely  blessed  in 
Himself,  and  nothing  the  creature  can  do  against  Him  can  hurt  Him,  nor  in  the 
least  disturb  His  repose  in  Himself  (Job  xxxv.  6,  8).  There  is  a  necessity  for 
both  the  swift  and  slow  methods  being  used  by  Providence  iii  the  government  of 
the  world ;  it  is  so  corrupt  and  atheistical.  The  swift  method  is  necessary  to  show 
that  there  is  a  God  to  judge  upon  the  earth  (Ps.  Iviii.  10,  11).  The  slow  niethod 
is  necessary  to  show  there  is  a  judgment  to  come  (2  Thees.  i.  4-7).  Let  sinners 
be  spared  never  so  long,  not  one  of  all  their  ill  works  will,  or  can  be,  forgotten. 
The  longer  sinners  are  spared,  their  counts  will  be  the  greater,  and  all  will  come 
on  at  once  (Luke  xi.  50,  51;  1  Sam.  iii.  12).  When  it  comes  on  the  impenitent 
sinner,  God  will  charge  both  the  interest  and  the  principal  sum  together.  III. 
God's  delat  of  execution  is  often  miseeably  abused  by  sinners,  to  the  filling 

OF   THBIE   HEARTS    TO   DO   EVIL,    AND    SINNING    MORE    AND    MORE.      1.    I    shall    point    OUt 

the  abuse  of  God's  patience  in  the  delay  of  execution  that  ungodly  sinners  make, 
to  the  filling  of  their  hearts  to  do  evil.  (1)  They  abuse  it  to  carnal  security 
(Ps.  X.  6).  (2)  They  abuse  it  to  a  sensual  life,  wherein  their  aim  is  not  to  keep 
a  clean  conscience,  but  to  gratify  their  senses,  as  their  circumstances  in  the  world 
will  permit,  as  the  rich  man  did  (Luke  xii.  19).  (3)  They  abuse  it  to  impudence 
in  sin  (Jer.  vi.  14,  15).  (4)  They  abuse  it  to  contempt  of  God  and  all  that  is 
sacred  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  9).  (5)  They  abuse  it  to  sirming  more  difiusely,  giving  loose 
reins  to  their  several  lusts  (Jer.  vii.  9,  10).  (6)  They  abuse  it  to  sinning  more 
eagerly  (Eph.  iv.  19).  (7)  They  abuse  it  to  incorrigibleness  and  obstinacy  in  sin 
(Jer.  xxii.  21).  2.  How  comes  it  to  pass  that  sinners  so  abuse  God's  patience 
with  them?  (1)  Sin  reigning  in  the  ungodly,  fear  of  wrath  is  their  highest  motive 
to  good,  and  most  forcible  restraint  from  evil :  and  so  when  that  restraint  is  taken 
oS  by  the  delay  of  execution  again  and  again,  the  heart  naturally  goes  to  its  own 
bias,  and  is  like  the  wild  ass's  colt  snuffing  up  the  wind  at  her  pleasiu-e.  (2)  They 
mistake  the  design  of  Providence.  They  construe  it  as  if  God  approved  of  their 
ways,  or  had  such  a  regard  for  them  that  He  will  not  be  so  angry  with  them  as 
one  would  make  them  believe ;  they  cannot  think  that  He  is  so  very  angry  at  their 
•in  while  they  prosper  in  it  by  His  providence.  (8)  There  is  a  root  of  atheism 
in  the  hearts  of  all  men  naturally,  and  it  reigns  in  the  tmgodly  (Ps.  xiv.  1). 
(4)  The  Lord  often  in  that  way  carries  on  a  holy  hardening  work.  In  which  case 
Satan  and  the  evil  heart  conspire  to  this  abuse.  (T.  Botton,  D.D.)  Sin  and  itt 
$entenc»  (with  Num.  xxxii.  28) : — I.  The  afpaebnt  slowness  of  God  to  punish  sin. 
"  Sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily."  That  is  how  it  seems 
to  be.  It  seems  as  if  sin  were  not  the  dangerous  thing  it  is  represented  to  be;  as 
if  it  were  a  harmless  thing,  and  one  might  commit  it  without  any  consequence 
being  forthcoming.  And  this  is  one  way  in  which  people  are  ensnared  to  go  on 
sinning.  They  are  misled  and  deceived  by  appearances.  They  think  they  will 
have  nothing  to  pay  now  for  what  they  are  doing.  You  all  know  what  an  alluring 
thing  credit  is  to  some  people.  There  are  plenty  of  people  who  buy  things  which 
they  would  not  buy  if  they  had  to  pay  for  them  at  the  time.  Now,  just  as  credit 
in  worldly  aSairs  is  to  some  people  a  snare,  so  in  relation  to  sin  some  people 
think  that  they  can  sin  upon  credit;  that  they  can  sin  and  have  nothing  to  pay 
at  once.  Then,  too,  there  is  the  thought  that  there  may  be  even  exemption 
from  penalty.  People  think  that  they  will  get  off  altogether.  They  think  "  there 
is  a  kind  of  miscarriage  of  justice  in  the  moral  world ;  there  are  some  who  escape ; 
why  may  not  I?"  II.  Thb  certainty  of  penalty.  "Be  sure  your  sin  will  find 
you  out."  1.  Every  sin  has  its  appropriate  penalty.  A  man  suffers  according  as 
be  transgresses.  Sometimes  this  penalty  for  sin  is  twofold  in  its  nature.  It  is 
outward;  that  is  to  say,  a  man  suffers  in  his  body,  in  his  circumstances,  in  his 
social  position,  in  his  reputation.  He  suffers,  also,  inwardly;  that  is.  In  his 
character,  in  his  spirit,  in  the  higher  life  of  the  man.  Sometimes  both  these 
penalties  go  together,  hand  in  hand,  and  visit  the  transgressor.  2.  The  penalty 
begins  with  the  beginning  of  sin.  The  dropping  of  water  wears  away  a  stone. 
You  see  the  stone  crumbled  and  disintegrated.  When  did  the  process  of  wearing 
away  begin?  Did  it  begin  with  the  thousandth  drop?  No,  it  began  with  the 
first  drop.  If,  perhaps,  you  had  looked  at  that  stone  when  the  first  drop  had 
iftllen,  you  would  not  have  detected  anything,  but,  nevertheless,  the  impression ; 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tth. 

was  made.  It  began  to  wear  away  as  much  after  the  first  drop  had  fallen  upon  it 
S8  after  the  thousandth  or  ten  thousandth.  And  it  is  like  that  with  the  penalty 
for  sin.  As  we  commit  the  sin  the  penalty  follows  close  upon  its  heels.  The 
■entence  is  never  divorced  from  the  evil  work.  They  go  together  step  by  step, 
hand-in-hand.  They  are  twin  companions.  They  are  never  broken  or  separated 
from  each  other.  3.  The  penalty  increases  as  we  go  on  sinning.  God  is  inexor- 
able in  this  matter.  Follow  out  the  history  of  those  who  sin  by  thoughtless 
indulgences,  such  as  idleness,  drunkenness,  love  of  pleasure,  gambling,  and  what 
do  you  behold?  Situations  are  lost,  self-respect  is  gone,  social  respect  is  with- 
drawn, poverty  comes  in  at  the  door  and  at  the  window,  too;  the  body  gets 
enfeebled,  begins  to  tremble,  unequal  to  its  work;  the  brain  ceases  to  have  ita 
vitality  and  vigour;  memory  becomes  a  poor  decrepit  thing,  and  sometimes  reason 
loses  its  balance  and  is  overthrown.  There  is  the  man,  in  hiinself  and  in  his 
surroundings,  ruined.     (T.  Hammond.)     The  longauffering  of  God: — I.  That  ubn 

▲RE  VERY  APT  TO  ABU3B  THK  LONGS0iFERING  OF  GoD,  TO  THE  ENCODRAGING  AND 
HARDENING  OF  THEMSELVES  IN  AN  EVIL  COURSE,  THE  EXPERIENCE  OF  THE  WORLD,  IN 
ALL  AGES,  DOBS  GIVE  ABUNDANT  TESTIMONY.  II.  WHENCE  THIS  COMES  TO  PASS, 
AND    DPON    WHAT    PRETENCE    AND    COLOUR    OF    REASON    MEN    ENCOURAGE    THEMSELVES    IN 

BIN,  FROM  THE  LONGSUFFERiNO  OF  GoD.  And  there  is  no  doubt  but  this  proceeds 
from  our  ignorance  and  inconsiderateness  and  from  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  from 
the  temptation  and  suggestion  of  the  dftvil.  All  these  causes  do  concur  to  the 
producing  this  monstrous  effect:  but  that  which  I  design  to  inquire  into  is,  from 
what  pretence  of  reason,  grounded  upon  the  long  suSering  of  God,  sinners  argue 
themselves  into  this  confidence  and  presumption.  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  what 
those  falsa  conclusions  are,  which  wicked  men  draw  from  the  delay  of  punishment, 
and  to  discover  the  sophistry  and  fallacy  of  them.  1.  Those  conclusions  which 
are  more  gross  and  atheistical,  which  bad  men  draw  to  the  hardening  and  encour- 
aging of  themselves  in  sin,  from  the  delay  of  punishment  (which  we,  who  believe 
a  God,  call  the  patience  or  longsuSering  of  God),  are  these  three:  either  that 
there  is  no  God;  or,  if  there  be,  that  there  is  no  providence;  or  that  there  is  no 
difierence  between  good  and  evil.  2.  But  because  those  who  are  thus  are  but 
few,  in  comparison,  there  being  not  many  in  the  world  arrived  to  that  degree  of 
blindness  and  height  of  impiety  as  to  disbelieve  a  God  and  a  providence;  and  I 
think  none  have  attained  to  that  perfect  conquest  of  conscience  as  to  have  lost 
all  sense  of  good  and  evil;  therefore  I  shall  rather  insist  upon  those  kind  of 
reasonings  which  are  more  ordinary  among  bad  men,  and  whereby  they  cheat 
themselves  into  everlasting  perdition ;  and  they  are  such  as  these  : — (1)  Because 
sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  speedily  executed,  therefore  sin  is  not  eo 
great  an  evil.  (2)  Therefore  God  is  not  so  highly  offended  and  provoked  by  it. 
(3)  God  is  not  so  severe  in  His  own  nature  as  He  is  commonly  represented.  (4) 
Therefore  the  punishment  of  sin  is  not  so  certain.  (5)  It  is  at  a  distance,  and 
may  be  prevented  time  enough  by  a  future  repentance  in  our  old  age  or  at  the 
hour  of  death.     III.  If  the  longsuffep.ino  of  God  be  the  occasion  of  men's 

HARDNESS  AND   IMPENITENCY,   THEN   WHY  IS   GOD   SO  PATIENT  TO   SINNERS,    WHEN  THEY 

ABB  SO  PRONE  TO  ABUSE  His  GOODNESS  AND  PATIENCE?  And  how  is  it  goodness  in 
God  to  forbear  sinners  so  long,  when  this  forbearance  of  His  is  so  apt  to  minister 
to  them  an  occasion  of  their  further  mischief  and  greater  ruin?  It  should  seem, 
according  to  this,  that  it  would  be  much  greater  mercy  to  the  greatest  part  of 
sinners  not  to  be  patient  toward  them  at  all.  1.  I  ask  the  sinner  if  he  will  stand 
to  this :  wouldest  thou,  in  good  earnest,  have  God  to  deal  thus  with  thee,  to  take 
the  very  first  advantage  to  destroy  thee,  or  turn  thee  into  hell,  and  to  make 
thee  miserable  beyond  all  hopes  of  recovery?  2.  It  is  likewise  to  be  considered 
that  the  longsuSering  of  God  towards  sinners  is  not  a  total  forbearance :  it  is 
usually  so  mixed  with  afflictions  and  judgments  of  one  kind  or  other,  upon  our- 
selves or  others,  as  to  be  a  sufficient  warning  to  us,  if  we  would  consider  and  lay 
it  to  heart,  to  "  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing  come  upon  us."  And  is  not  this 
great  goodness  to  warn  us,  when  He  might  destroy  us?  to  leave  room  for  a 
retreat,  when  He  might  put  our  ease  past  remedy?  8.  Nothing  is  further  from 
the  intention  of  God  than  to  harden  men  by  His  longsuffering  (2  Pet.  iii.  9). 
4.  There  is  nothing  in  the  longsuSering  of  God  that  is  in  truth  any  groimd  of 
encouragement  to  men  in  an  stU  course;  the  proper  and  natural  tendency  of 
Ood's  goodness  ia  to  lead  men  to  repentance,  and  by  repentance  to  bring  them 
to  happiness  (Bom.  ii.  4).  6.  That  through  the  longsuffering  of  God  sinners  are 
hardened  in  their  eril  waje  is  wholly  to  be  ascribed  to  their  abuse  of  God's  good- 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ECCLESIASTES.  209 

ness;  it  is  neither  tbe  end  and  intention,  nor  the  proper  and  natural  effect  of  the 
thing,  but  the  accidental  event  of  it  through  our  own  fault.  And  is  this  any 
real  objection  against  the  longsufEering  of  God?  6.  But  because  this  objection 
pinchetb  hardest  in  one  point,  viz.  that  God  certainly  foresees  that  a  great  many 
will  abuse  His  longsuSering,  to  the  increasing  of  their  guilt,  and  the  aggravating 
of  their  condemnation ;  and  how  is  longsuffering  any  mercy  and  goodness  to  those, 
who  He  certainly  foreknows  will  in  the  event  be  so  much  the  more  miserable  for 
having  had  so  much  patience  extended  to  them?  Therefore,  for  a  full  answer, 
I  desire  these  six  things  may  be  considered : — (1)  God  designs  this  life  for  the 
trial  of  our  obedience,  that,  according  as  we  behave  ourselves,  He  may  reward 
or  punish  us  in  another  world.  (2)  There  could  be  no  trial  of  obedience,  nor  any 
capacity  of  rewards  and  punishments,  but  upon  the  supposition  of  freedom  and 
liberty;  that  is,  that  we  do  not  do  what  we  do  upon  force  and  necessity,  but  upon 
free  choice.  (3)  God,  by  virtue  of  the  infinite  perfection  of  His  knowledge,  does 
clearly  and  certainly  foresee  all  future  events,  even  those  which  are  most  con' 
tingent,  such  as  are  the  arbitrary  actions  of  free  and  voluntary  agents.  (4)  The  bare 
foreknowledge  of  things  futtire  hath  no  more  influence  upon  them  to  make  them 
to  be,  than  the  sight  and  knowledge  of  things  present  hath  upon  them  to  make 
them  to  be  present.  (5)  Consequently,  foreknowledge  and  liberty  may  very  well 
consist;  and,  notwithstanding  God's  foreknowledge  of  what  men  will  do,  they  may 
be  as  free  as  if  He  did  not  foreknow  it.  (6)  God  doth  not  deal  with  men  accord- 
ing to  His  foreknowledge  of  the  good  or  bad  use  of  their  liberty,  but  according  to 
the  nature  and  reason  of  things;  and  therefore,  if  He  be  longsuffering  toward 
sinners,  and  do  not  cut  them  off  upon  the  first  provocation,  but  give  them 
a  space  and  opportunity  of  repentance,  and  use  aJl  proper  means  and 
arguments  to  bring  them  to  repentance,  and  be  ready  to  afford  His  grace 
to  excite  good  resolutions  in  them,  and  to  second  and  assist  them,  and 
they  refuse  and  resist  all  this;  their  wilful  obstinacy  and  impenitency  is 
«s  culpable,  and  God's  goodness  and  patience  as  much  to  be  acknowledged 
as  if  God  did  not  foresee  the  abuse  of  it;  because  Hie  foresight  and  knowledge  of 
what  they  would  do  laid  no  necessity  upon  them  to  do  what  they  did.     IV.  Somb 

INFBKENOEB   FBOM  THIS   WHOLB  DISCOUBSE  UPON  THIS   ABOUHENT.      1.    This  shoWS  tha 

unreasonableness  and  perverse  disingenuity  of  men,  who  take  occasion  to  harden 
and  encourage  themselves  in  sin  from  the  longsuffering  of  God,  which,  above  all 
things  in  the  world,  should  melt  and  soften  them.  2.  This  may  serve  to  convinor 
men  of  the  great  evil  and  danger  of  thus  abusing  the  longsuffering  of  God.  It  is 
a  provocation  of  the  highest  nature,  because  it  is  to  trample  upon  His  dearest 
attributes,  those  which  He  most  delights  and  glories  in.  His  goodness  and  mercy; 
for  the  longsuffering  of  God  is  His  goodnees  to  the  giiilty,  and  His  mercy  to  those 
who  deserve  to  be  miserable.  8.  To  persuade  us  to  make  a  right  use  of  the 
patience  and  longsuffering  of  God,  and  to  comply  with  the  merciful  end  and 
design  of  God  therein.  (1)  It  is  the  design  of  God's  longsuffering  to  give  us  • 
space  of  repentance.  (2)  I'he  longsuffering  of  Qod  it  a  great  encouragement  to 
repentance.     (/.  Tillotton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  Tet  rarely  I  know  that  It  ahall  be  well  with  them  that  fear  Ch>d.— 
The  Christian'M  welfare  certified: — ^In  this  verse  the  character  and  condition  ol 
sinners  are  contrasted  with  those  of  the  righteous.  However  long  the  sinner 
lives  in  sin,  and  however  prosperous  he  may  seem  to  be,  yet  it  shall  be  ill  with 
him;  but  however  it  may  seem  sometimes  to  be  with  the  righteous  man,  in  tha 
long  run,  it  shall  be  well  with  him.  The  text  is  well  calculated  to  check  the  folly 
and  presumption  of  the  sinner,  and  to  comfort  the  righteous  man  in  the  trials  of 
life;  and  especially  in  the  apparent  delay  of  justice  in  permitting  the  triumphs  of 
the  ungodly.  I.  Thh  pebsons  who  abs  hbbs  dkbcbibed — "  them  that  fear  God." 
This  ie  in  the  Word  of  God  a  common  designation  of  the  people  of  God.  The  fear 
of  the  Lord  is  emphasized  as  the  beginning  of  wisdom.  What  is  meant  by  thia 
fear?  What  kind  of  fear  is  it?  It  is  not  servile  fear.  It  may  have  that  char, 
aoteristic  in  its  beginning;  but  it  will  not  long  continue  in  that  atmosphere.  Tha 
man  who  is  learning  a  now  language,  or  to  speak  his  own  correctly,  speaks  for  a 
time  laboriously  under  the  fear  of  violating  some  grammatical  rule;  but  after  • 
time  the  knowledge  of  the  language  becomes  a  part  of  his  very  nature,  and  ha 
rises  above  the  fear  of  violating  the  rules  of  grammar  and  comes  into  the  lova 
of  eorreot  speech.  So,  starting  in  the  Christian  life  on  the  low  plane  of  fsar  In  its 
lower  senses,  we  rise  Into  the  perfect  love  of  God  which  oasteth  out  all  fear;  wa 

U 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viu. 


love  truth,  holiness  and  God  for  their  own  sake;  we  would  serve  God  if  there 
were  no  hell  to  be  shunned  and  no  heaven  to  be  won ;  we  think  little  of  either ;  the 
love  of  Christ  constraineth  us.  We  fear  simply  lest  we  may  offend  God,  our 
Father,  Friend,  and  Redeemer.  This  fear  is  filial.  It  is  the  fear  of  a  son,  and 
not  that  of  a  slave.  II.  The  promise  concerning  the  people  of  God  :  "  It  shall 
be  well  with  them."  It  is  not  said  that  believers  shall  not  have  their  share  in  the 
ordinary  trials  of  life.  The  Bible  nowhere  promises  us  exemption  from  these 
trials.  It  does  not  assure  us  that  we  shall  not  go  into  the  furnace,  nor  into  the 
deep  waters ;  but  it  does  promise  that  the  fire  shall  not  consume  us  and  the  waters 
shall  not  overflow  us.  It  is  not  said  that  Christians  shall  not  have  extraordinary 
trials.  Christianity  develops  manhood;  vastly  enlarges  the  sphere  of  life.  It  gives 
•  broader  surface  across  which  the  winds  of  adversity  may  sweep.  It  gives  greater 
possibilities  of  enjoyment ;  and  these  make  greater  trials  certain.  A  Christian  man 
is  higher,  deeper,  and  broader  than  other  men  are.  He  has  more  fully  developed 
•11  his  capacities  both  for  joy  and  sorrow.  The  more  our  natures  are  developed, 
the  greater,  also,  will  be  our  responsibilities.  Loyalty  to  God  put  Joseph  into 
prison;  made  Elijah  face  cruel  Ahab  and  wicked  Jezebel;  drove  Daniel  into  s 
den  of  lions;  hurled  the  three  faithful  Hebrews  into  the  seven-times  heated  fur- 
nace; put  Peter  into  the  common  prison,  and  Paul  and  Silas  into  the  inner 
prison,  with  their  feet  fast  in  the  stocks.  But  it  was  still  well  with  them.  Thi« 
fact  is  the  glory  of  our  faith;  this  ie  the  joy  of  our  life  in  God.  Joseph  finds  hia 
prison  the  vestibule  to  the  palace  of  the  Pharaohs;  Elijah's  fiery  mission  is  but 
the  prelude  to  the  chariot  of  fire  which  carried  him  to  glory  and  to  God.  III.  Thb 
ABSOLDTB  CERTAINTY  HERB  EXPRESSED.  "  Yet  stirely  I  know."  The  inspired 
preacher  had  good  grounds  for  his  knowledge.  Because  of  God's  character  men 
may  be  sure  that  it  will  be  well  with  those  who  fear  Him.  God  must  be  right, 
God  must  do  right.  (B.  8.  MacArthur,  D.D.)  Well  with  those  who  fear  Ood  :—- 
I.  The  CHARACTER  HERB  MENTIONED—**  them  that  fear  God."  The  fear  of  God  i« 
that  principle  which  reverences  God  and  respects  His  authority.  It  is  one  of  the 
great  blessings  of  the  new  covenant,  produced  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 

I.  This  fear  is  the  result  of  regeneration.  An  unrenewed  man  does  not  fear  God 
(Bom.  iii.  18).  But  regeneration  turns  the  heart  from  unlawful  objects  to  God  as 
the  chief  good.  2.  This  fear  is  the  result  of  adoption.  God  is  regarded  as  a 
Father,  worthy  of  reverence  and  love.  3.  This  fear  is  manifested  by  hatred  to  that 
which  is  hateful  to  God.  4.  Manifested  by  delighting  in  that  which  is  pleasing 
to  God.  The  fruits  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22,  23).  Delight  in  His  house,  in  His 
people,  in  His  service,  etc.  6.  This  fear  is  submission  to  His  will.  Their  will  is 
revealed  in  Hie  Word;  it  is  manifested  in  His  appointments.  As  to  doctrines, 
ordinances  and  precepts,  I  do  not  follow  my  own  mind.  In  afflictions  I  do  not 
resist  or  repine.     "It  is  the  Lord;  let  Him  do  as  seemeth  good  in  His  sight." 

II.  The  happiness  herb  referred  to — "  It  shall  be  well  with  them."  1.  It  is 
well  with  them  already.  Are  they  not  saved  from  guilt  and  condemnation? 
Have  they  not  hope?  They  "fear  God,"  and  from  that  principle  arises  their 
happiness.  2.  It  shall  be  well  with  them  hereafter.  They  are  under  the  conduct 
of  Divine  providence.  God  appoints  the  bounds  of  their  habitations.  It  shall  be 
well  in  adversity.  Well  in  death.  The  retrospect  of  life  will  give  no  pain.  "  The 
righteous  hath  hope  in  His  death."  Well  in  the  resurrection.  The  fearers  of 
God  will  be  raised  to  immortal  life  (Rom.  viii.  11;  Phil.  iii.  20,  21).  Well  in  the 
judgment  day.  It  shall  be  well  with  them  then.  It  shall  be  well  with  them  for 
ever — "  Their  sun  shall  no  more  go  down."  III.  The  certainty  here  affirmed — 
**  Surely  I  know."  1.  I  know  from  experience.  I  never  found  happiness  in  sin — 
I  have  found  it  in  the  fear  of  God.  2.  I  know  it  from  observation.  "  Mark  the 
perfect  man."  "  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous."  (Homilist.)  Five 
fear$: — Now,  you  will  notice  that  fear  may  be  yoked  into  the  service  of  God. 
True  fear,  not  fearing,  but  believing,  saves  the  soul;  not  doubt,  but  confidence,  is 
the  strength  and  the  deliverance  of  the  Christian.  Still,  fear,  as  being  one  of 
those  powers  which  God  hath  given  us,  is  not  in  itself  sinful.  Fear  may  be  used 
for  the  most  sinful  purposes;  at  the  same  time  it  may  be  so  ennobled  by  grace, 
and  so  used  for  the  service  of  God,  that  it  may  become  the  very  grandest  part  of 
man.  In  fact.  Scripture  has  honoured  fear,  for  the  whole  of  piety  is  comprehended 
in  these  words,  "  Fear  God  ";  "the  fear  of  the  Lord  ";  "  them  that  fear  Him." 
These  phrases  are  employed  lo  express  true  piety,  and  the  men  who  possess  it. 
I.  There  is,  first,  thb  fear  caused  by  an  awakening  conscience.  This  is  the 
lowest  grade  of  godly  fear;  here  «II  true  piety  takes  its  rise.     We  shall  never 


CHAP.  Till.]  ECCLESIASTES.  811 

forget,  to  our  dying  day,  that  hour  of  desperate  grief  when  first  we  discovered 
our  lost  estate.  Sinner,  it  shall  be  well  with  thee  if  thou  art  now  made  to  fear 
the  wrath  of  God  on  account  of  thy  sin;  if  God  the  Spirit  hath  poured  forth  the 
vials  of  Almighty  wrath  into  thy  soul,  so  that  thou  art  cast  down  and  sore  vexed. 
Think  not  thou  shalt  be  destroyed;  it  shall  be  well  with  thee.  Your  distresses 
are  very  painful,  but  they  are  not  singular;  others  have  had  to  endure  the  same. 
But  I  will  tell  thee  something  else  to  comfort  thee;  I  will  put  this  question  to 
thee — Wouldst  thou  wish  to  go  back  and  become  what  thou  once  waiSt?  Sins  are 
now  so  painful  that  thou  canst  scarce  eat,  or  drink,  or  sleep.  II.  There  are  many 
who  have  believed,  and  are  truly  converted,  who  have  a  fear  which  I  may  call 
THE  FEAR  OF  ANXIETY.  They  aro  afraid  that  they  are  not  converted.  They  are 
converted,  there  is  no  doubt  of  it.  Sometimes  they  know  they  are  so  themselves, 
but,  for  the  most  part,  they  are  afraid.  First,  they  will  tell  you  they  are  afraid 
they  never  repented  enough;  the  work  in  their  hearts,  they  say,  was  not  deep; 
it  was  just  superficial  surface-ploughing,  and  never  entered  into  their  souls.  Then 
they  are  quite  sure  they  never  came  to  Christ  aright;  they  think  they  came  the 
wrong  way.  How  that  can  be  no  one  knows,  for  they  could  not  come  at  all  except 
the  Father  drew  them ;  and  the  Father  did  not  draw  them  the  wrong  way.  They 
»ay  they  can  trust  Christ,  but  they  are  afraid  they  do  not  trust  Him  aright;  and 
they  always,  do  what  you  may,  come  back  to  the  old  condition;  they  are  always 
afraid.  And  now,  what  shall  I  say  to  these  good  souls?  Why,  I  will  say  this, 
"  Surely  I  know  that  it  shall  be  well  with  them  that  fear  God,  which  fear  before 
Him."  Not  only  those  who  believe,  but  those  who  fear,  have  got  a  promise,  I 
would  to  God  that  they  had  more  faith;  I  would  that  they  could  lay  hold  on  the 
Saviour,  and  had  more  assiu-ance,  and  even  attain  unto  a  perfect  confidence;  but 
if  they  cannot,  shall  I  utter  a  word  that  would  hurt  them?  God  forbid;  "  Surely 
it  shall  be  well  even  with  them  that  fear  God,  with  them  that  fear  before  Him." 
III.  And  now,  in  the  next  place,  there  is  A  feae  which  works  caution.  When  we  get 
a  little  further  advanced  in  the  Christian  life,  our  present  state  is  not  so  much  a  matter 
of  anxiety  as  our  future  state.  These  persons  say,  "  I  dare  not  join  the  Church, 
because  I  am  afraid  I  shall  fall."  That  fear  is  good,  in  itself.  But  do  you  think 
that  you  would  not  bring  disgrace  on  Christ's  cause  as  it  is?  You  are  always  at 
the  place  of  worship ;  you  are  never  away.  You  were  always  looked  upon  as  being 
one  of  the  Church,  though  you  have  not  made  a  profession.  Now,  if  you  were  to 
sin,  would  it  not  dishonour  the  Church  even  now?  And  then  I  will  ask  you  thia 
question.  Where  do  you  think  a  man  is  safest — in  the  paths  of  obedience,  or  in  the 
paths  of  disobedience?  You  are  afraid  you  will  fall  into  sin — "  Surely  I  know 
that  it  shall  be  well  with  them  that  fear  God,  which  fear  before  Him."  If  you 
should  tell  me  you  were  not  afraid  of  falling,  I  would  not  have  you  in  the  Church 
for  the  world;  you  would  be  no  Christian.  I  love  your  fear,  and  love  you,  too,  for 
it;  you  are  my  brother  and  sister  in  Jesus  if  you  can  truly  say  that  you  fear  lest 
you  should  sin.  Seek  then,  my  friends,  to  grow  in  this  fear  of  caution;  obtain 
more  and  more  of  it;  and  whilst  thou  dost  not  distrust  the  Saviour,  learn  to  dis- 
trust thyself  more  and  more  every  day.  IV.  I  notice,  in  the  next  place,  the  fear 
which  I  may  call  the  fear  of  jealoost.  Strong  love  will  usually  promote 
jealousy.  The  true  believer,  when  he  gets  his  Saviour  in  full  possession,  and  in 
blissful  communion,  is  so  jealous  lest  any  rival  should  intrude  in  his  heart;  he  is 
afraid  lest  his  dearest  friend  should  get  more  of  his  heart  than  the  Saviour  has. 
He  is  afraid  of  his  wealth;  he  trembles  at  his  health,  at  his  fame,  at  everything 
that  is  dear  to  him,  lest  it  should  engross  his  heart.  Oh,  how  often  does  he  pray, 
"  My  Lord,  let  me  not  be  of  a  divided  spirit;  cast  down  each  idol — self-will,  self- 
righteousness."  And  I  tell  you  the  more  he  loves,  the  more  he  will  fear  lest  he 
should  provoke  his  Saviour  by  bringing  a  rival  into  hie  heart,  and  setting  up  Anti- 
christ in  his  spirit;  so  that  fear  just  goes  in  proportion  to  love;  and  the  bright 
love  is  congenial,  and  must  walk  side  by  side  with  the  deepest  jealousy  and  the 
profoundest  fear.  V.  I  will  conclude  by  just  mentioning  that  fear  which  is  felt 
WHEN  WE  HAVE  HAD  DiviNE  MANIFESTATIONS.  Did  you  never,  in  the  silence  of  the 
night,  look  up  and  view  the  stars,  feeding,  like  sheep  on  the  azure  pastures  of  the 
.«ky?  Have  you  never  thought  of  those  great  worlds,  far,  far  away,  divided  from 
U9  by  almost  illimitable  leagues  of  space?  Did  you  never,  whilst  musing  on  the 
starry  heavens,  lose  yourself  in  thoughts  of  God?  and  have  you  never  felt,  at  such 
a  time,  that  you  could  say  with  Jacob,  "How  dreadful  is  this  place  I  This  is 
none  other  than  the  house  of  God,  and  the  very  gate  of  heaven  "?  Now,  thia 
kind  of  fear  if  you  have  ever  felt  it,  if  it  has  been  produced  in  your  heart  by  coa- 


JI2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [«3KAp.  Tirt. 


lemplation  of  Qod,  is  a  high  and  hallowed  thing,  and  to  you  thiB  promise  k 
addressed — "  Surely  I  know  that  it  shall  be  well  with  them  that  fear  Ood,  which 
fear  before  Him."     (0.  H.  Bpurgeon.) 

Ver.  14.  There  be  just  men,  onto  whom  It  happeneth  according  to  the  work 
of  the  wicked. — Apparent  diicrepancy  between  character  and  circum$tanc$$ : — 
There  is  doubtless  a  law  for  everything  in  heaven  and  on  earth;  a  systematio 
connection  between  cause  and  effect,  alike  in  the  physical,  moral  and  spiritual 
existences.  Our  wise  men  acknowledge  this,  and  find  in  the  heavens  above  and 
the  earth  beneath,  as  far  as  their  intellects  can  penetrate,  a  sequence  and  an 
irrevocable  destiny  in  everything  they  study.  But  as  for  the  laws  that  morally 
govern  the  world,  that  give  rise  to  its  convulsions  and  preserve  its  peace,  that 
dismay  us  now  and  overjoy  us  then,  that  frustrate  our  plans  or  help  us  to  attain 
our  desires,  from  the  dismemberment  of  a  kingdom  to  the  trivialities  of  existence — 
these  laws  are  unwritten.  The  Almighty  has  set  the  machinery  of  nature  in 
motion,  and  its  action  is  unchangeable  till  its  destiny  is  attained.  But  He  eiti 
with  the  sceptre  of  His  moral  government  in  His  hands,  and  the  rules  by  which 
He  governs,  and  the  ends  He  means  to  attain,  we  know  not;  and  it  is  this  ignor« 
ance  of  the  Almighty's  plans  which  baffles  our  little  hopes.  It  is  with  this  die- 
similitude  of  events  as  they  occur  with  those  we  had  hoped  and  striven  for,  and 
by  probability  led  ourselves  to  expect,  that  our  text  has  to  do.  It  deals  with 
the  apparent  reversal  in  many  cases  of  an  ordinary  law,  and  shows  the  utter 
impossibility  of  human  minds  gaining  any  clue  to  the  moral  events  which  happen) 
or  may  happen,  around  us.  Men  make  use  of  their  limited  wisdom  to  produce  • 
desired  eSect.  If  that  effect  is  not  gained  they  abandon  their  attempts.  The 
initiative  is  their  own,  and  they  abandon  it  as  they  please.  Far  otherwise  is  it, 
however,  in  matters  of  moral  or  spiritual  import.  The  initiative  is  not  man's,  but 
the  Almighty's.  Eternal  life  is  not  a  bait  held  out  for  our  greed  to  clutch  at, 
but  rather  a  spontaneous  reward  for  our  obedience  and  love.  That  this  ia  clearly 
a  principle,  our  text  teaches,  and  everyday  life  verifies.  The  good  man  in  this 
world  often  meets  with  the  treatment,  and  is  placed  in  the  circumstancee,  whieh 
attend  the  career  of  the  vilest;  while  the  wicked  man  oft  sits  in  the  highest  place, 
and  mockingly  sways  his  prostrate  courtiers  with  the  arrogant  pretentiousness 
of  a  usurped  power.  He  thinks  his  position  is  the  reward  of  his  genius,  and  scoSi 
at  the  idea  of  anything  having  to  do  with  his  elevation  but  himself.  Theee 
reversed  positions  clearly  show  that  the  reward  or  punishment  of  the  good  or 
wicked  does  not  necessarily  begin,  and  clearly  does  not  end,  with  this  mortal  life. 
This,  to  a  good  man,  is  a  source  of  joy.  He  forgets  his  present  ignominy  in  hit 
future  hopes  :  the  present  calamity  he  takes  as  an  earnest  for  his  future  blise.  The 
wicked  man,  however,  often  has  somewhat  of  his  own  way  in  the  world.  He  takes 
the  present  as  his  all,  and  is  satisfied  therewith.  He  wants  no  future  reward : 
his  enjoyment  now  is  ample,  and  instead  of  taking  warning  from  the  position  of 
the  good  man  as  indicative  of  what  bis  position  ought  possibly  to  be,  his  gratified 
senses  and  pampered  vanity  stiffs  his  reason  and  destroy  his  conscience,  and  he 
descends  to  the  grave  in  a  false  position  to  open  his  appalled  eyes  in  the  one 
belonging  to  him.     {Homiliat.) 

Ver.  16.  Then  I  commended  mirth,  becanse  a  man  hath  no  better  thing  under 
the  snn,  than  to  eat,  and  to  drink,  and  to  be  merry. — The  benefits  of  wholeeome 
recreation: — Viewed  by  itself,  and  apart  from  its  context  and  from  the  rest  of 
the  argument  of  the  wise  king,  this  sentiment  might  seem  to  partake  very  much 
of  the  spirit  of  the  Epicureans,  so  strongly  condemned  by  St.  Paul — "  Let  us  eat 
and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die  ";  but  when  we  come  to  look  closely  into  it,  we 
find  that  it  would  be  a  manifest  perversion  of  the  whole  passage  to  apply  it  in 
any  such  Epicurean  sense.  The  man  to  whom  he  refers,  as  the  one  who  is  en- 
couraged "  to  eat  and  to  drink  and  to  be  merry,"  is  not  the  idle  drone  whose 
whole  life  is  spent  in  self-indulgence,  or  in  the  pursuit  of  pleasure;  not  the  Dives 
who  fares  sumptuously  every  day  while  so  many  around  have  scarcely  wherewithal 
to  purchase  the  scanty  meal — but  he,  whose  whole  attention  has  been  hitherto 
absorbed  in  some  toilsome  and  laborious  pursuit;  he  who  has,  so  to  speak,  been 
the  slave  of  wealth,  or  ambition,  or  pleasure,  or  business — the  seeker  after  worldly 
wisdom— or,  in  fine,  the  man  so  filled  with  anxiety  and  care  about  the  objects 
of  his  desire,  as  to  need  this  salutary  warning  how  better  to  employ  his  days.  Thiu, 
if  we  >^ight  venture  to  paraphrase  the  passage,  we  should  assume  it  to  bear  tome 


«B1P.  rm.]  ECCLESIASTES.  21S- 

•uob  an  import  ai  the  following : — "  Se  not  so  wrapt  op  in  the  cares  or  oonoema 
of  thia  life,  oh  I  ye  foolish  sons  of  men,  as  to  forget  the  grand  end  and  aim  (^ 
your  being.  There  are,  indeed,  many  things  well  worthy  of  your  attainment,  but 
none  of  so  solid  and  enduring  a  character  as  to  justify  your  total  absorption  in 
the  pursuit  of  them.  Lose  not  the  real  enjoyment  of  life  by  devoting  it  thus 
unremittingly  to  any  earthly  end.  While  thus  toiling  to  secure  some  fancied 
good,  you  are  really  allowing  to  escape  those  fleeting  moments  which  should  be 
devoted  to  some  loftier  purpose.  Aim  first  and  chiefly  to  attain  the  heavenly 
wisdom,  for  *  this  alone  will  bring  peace  at  the  last.'  Axid  then,  with  regard 
to  all  earthly  schemes  of  happiness,  let  not  your  pursuit  of  the  problematic  future 
deprive  you  of  the  lawful  enjoyment  of  present  good,  but  '  having  food  and 
raiment  be  therewith  content.'  '  Eat,  drink  and  be  merry.'  Cultivate  a  cheerful 
and  a  happy  frame  of  mind,  as  opposed  to  that  gloomy,  over-anzious,  ever-toiling 
disposition,  which  you  now  possess — as  is  the  cold,  cheerless  mantle  of  night  to 
the  glow  and  warmth  of  the  midday  sun — for  this  calm  and  tranquil  state  shall 
•bide  with  you,  and  give  you  enjoyment  in  the  midst  of  your  labour  all  the  days 
of  your  life  which  God  giveth  you  under  the  sun."  And  who  does  not  perceive 
the  consonance  of  this  advice  with  the  more  plain  and  direct  teaching  of  our  Lord 
and  His  inspired  apostles?  Who  does  not  recognize  in  this  Old  Testament  warning 
the  foreshadowing  of  those  deep  and  wholesome  truths  which  Christ  announced  in 
His  famous  sermon  from  the  Mount?  "  Therefore  I  say  unto  you.  Take  no 
thought  for  your  life,  what  ye  shall  eat,  or  what  ye  shall  drink;  nor  yet  for  your 
body,  what  ye  shall  put  on.  Is  not  the  life  more  than  meat,  and  the  body  than 
raiment?"  But  rather  "  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness, 
and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you."  Who  does  not  trace  in  the  language 
of  Solomon  the  workings  of  that  same  Spirit  which  inspired  St.  Paul  to  say, 
"  Whether  therefore  ye  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  y©  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of 
God  " — "  Bejoice  in  the  Lord  alway;  and  again  I  say,  Eejoice  "?  Not,  Qien,  in 
antagonism  to  the  spirit  of  the  New  Testament,  but  in  perfect  accordance  with  it, 
doea  Solomon,  in  the  words  of  my  text,  recommend  the  rational  enjoyment  of  the 
good  things  of  this  life.  In  what,  then,  does  rational  enjoyment  or  recreation 
consist?  I  think  we  may  safely  answer  this  question  by  the  obvious  reply — "  In 
the  moderate  use  of  all  the  gifts  of  God's  good  providence,  and  in  the  healthful 
cultivation  of  all  those  facultie.  the  improvement  of  which  can  tend  to  His 
honour  or  glory."  Under  this  head,  then,  as  you  will  perceive,  so  far  as  bodily 
refection  is  concerned,  we  should  include  the  temperate  use  of  all  healthful 
articles,  whether  of  food  or  of  drink.  "  Not  that  which  entereth  into  the  mouth 
defiletb  a  man."  God  makes  no  distinction  either  of  meats  or  drinks,  provided 
we  use  all  lawfully,  to  the  just  refreshment  and  strengthening  of  the  body,  not 
to  its  undue  pampering,  or  mere  carnal  gratification.  And  so,  also,  with  regard 
to  questions  of  bodily  or  mental  recreation.  Healthfiil  exercise,  whether  for  the 
body  or  mind,  may  allowably  be  included  under  the  Preacher's  commendation 
of  rational  "  mirth."  The  Scriptures  have  not  prescribed  to  us  what  species  of 
mirth  to  select,  nor  what  to  avoid.  They  have  evidently  left  it  as  a  matter  of 
conscience,  to  the  feelings  and  experience  of  every  Christian,  to  choose  his  own 
most  appropriate  mode  of  rejoicing,  provided,  as  in  the  former  case,  that  even 
allowable  mirth  be  not  carried  beyond  the  limits  of  moderation,  and  degenerate 
into  senseless  hilarity.  It  is  true  that  St.  James  exhorts,  "Is  any  merry?  let 
him  sing  psalms  ";  but  this  advice  is  more  of  the  nature  of  a  permission  than  a 
command;  and  it  is  clearly  evident,  that  with  very  many  the  literal  interpretation 
of  this  precept,  if  it  be  correctly  translated,  would  be  impracticable,  seeing  that 
they  are  altogether  devoid  of  musical  tendencies.  This  passage,  then,  so  far 
from  limiting,  as  it  has  been  supposed  to  do,  the  exhibition  of  our  cheerful  ten- 
dencies  to  psalm-singing  alone,  seems  to  m«  to  make  quite  for  the  opposite  view, 
and  would  apparently  sanction  the  employment  of  any  musical  agency,  and,  by 
a  parity  of  reasoning,  of  any  other  squally  harmless  and  humanising  source  of 
amusement  as  a  juatifiabla  mode  of  axhibiting  •  mirthfal  spirit  before  the  Lord. 
<F.  F,  Btathtm,  BJL.) 


fl4  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbap.  ix.' 


CHAPTER   IX. 

ViB.  1.  The  righteoas,  and  the  wise,  and  their  works,  are  in  the  hand  of  Ood.— 
Jn  the  hand  of  Ood: — ^ThU  is  the  sober  second  thought  of  a  wise  man  who  has 
been  sorely  troubled  in  his  mind  by  dwelling  on  the  myeteries  of  Providence. 
But  the  darkness  begins  to  disappear  as  soon  as  he  allows  his  mind  to  rest  on  the 
thought  of  God  and  of  His  work  in  eternity,  the  end  of  which  no  man  can  see. 
The  first  thought  suggested  is  the  negative  one  that  "  the  righteous  and  the  wise 
and  their  works  are  in  the  hands  of  God,"  and,  therefore,  withdrawn  from  the 
sight  of  men.  It  is  of  great  importance  for  our  peace  of  mind  firmly  to  grasp  the 
thought  that  we  cannot  at  all  infer  what  Ood  thinks  or  intends  concerning  any 
person  or  his  works  from  the  outward  circiunstances  we  observe.  Is  this  man 
prosperous  in  the  world?  It  does  not  by  any  means  follow  from  this  that  God 
regards  him  with  special  favour  (Luke  xiii.  1-6).  But  there  is  a  positive  truth 
also  in  the  words  of  the  text — "  The  righteous  and  the  wise  and  their  works  are 
in  the  hand  of  Ood  " — ^not  only  in  the  sense  that  they  are  withdrawn  from  the 
eight  of  men,  but  in  this  far  better  sense,  that  they  are  safe.  Being  in  the  hand 
of  Ood  they  are  in  the  best  hand.  It  is  not  with  the  onlookers  here  that  the 
righteous  and  the  wise  have  to  do.  It  is  with  Him  who  looks  on  from  the  side 
of  eternity,  and  who  makes  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  Him. 
Are  you  and  your  works  in  the  hand  of  God?  First,  and  most  important,  are  you 
yourselves  in  His  hand?  Are  you  dwelling  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High, 
abiding  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty?  And  you,  who  yourselves  are  in  the 
hand  of  Ood,  see  that  your  works  are  there  also.  We  know  on  the  best  authority 
that  a  man  may  belong  to  the  righteous  and  not  to  the  wise;  he  may  faimseU 
be  saved  and  yet  his  work  be  lost.  Our  work,  as  well  as  ourselves,  must  be  built 
on  Christ.     (/.  M.  Qibion,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  All  things  come  alike  to  all. — The  impaTtiality  of  Providence : — Of  what 
service  is  a  religious  life  to  man  since  Providence  treats  all  alike?  This  statement 
is — I.  Phenohenallt  teub.  To  all  outward  appearance  the  good  and  the  bad 
are  treated  alike.  All  are  subject  to  the  same  diseases,  bereavements,  disappoint- 
ments, all  go  down  to  the  grave  alike.  1.  This  a  perplexing  fact.  Antecedently 
one  might  have  supposed  that  the  God  of  holiness  and  rectitude  would,  in  His 
providence,  have  treated  men  according  to  their  moral  character,  that  happiness 
and  misery  would  be  measured  out  according  to  the  merits  and  demerits  of  man- 
kind. 2.  This  fact  is  significant.  It  shows — (1)  The  unalterableness  of  God's 
laws.  They  pay  no  deference  to  moral  character.  (2)  The  high  probability  of  a 
future  state.  II.  Spihitdallt  false.  "  All  things  "  do  not  "  come  alike  to  all." 
1.  They  do  not  come  in  the  same  character.  (1)  To  the  wicked  the  trials  of  earth 
are  either  blind  casualties  or  penal  inflictions.  But  to  the  godly  they  are  chastise- 
ments of  fatherly  love.  (2)  To  the  wicked  the  prosperity  and  enjoyment  appear 
as  the  results  of  their  own  skill,  industry,  and  merit.  To  the  godly  they  appear 
as  the  \mmerited  favoius  of  a  merciful  God.  2.  They  do  not  come  with  the  same 
influence.  Trials  irritate  the  spirit  of  the  wicked;  they  purify  the  godly.  Pros- 
perity feeds  the  vanity  and  ambition  of  the  wicked;  but  inspires  the  godly  with 
devout  humility  and  holy  gratitude.  The  same  soils,  dews,  and  sun- 
beams that  fill  the  hemlock  with  poison,  fill  the  wheat  with  food  for  nations. 
And  the  same  events  which  transform  some  men  into  devils,  transform 
others     into    seraphs.     (HomiUei).)    Providence: — ^I.     Fob    thh     same     THiNas 

UNOBBTAINLT    AND    INDIFFEBBNTLY    TO    BEFALL    THE    BIOHTEOUS    AND    THE    WICKED    IN 

THIS  LIFE  IS  TJNAVOIDABLT  NBOESSABT.  1.  Because  men  have  the  dominion  over 
their  own  actions,  and  do  that  which  themselves  choose  to  do.  2.  Because 
a  great  deal  of  prosperity  and  affliction  befalls  men,  not  as  the  reward 
er  the  effect  of  anything  done  by  themselves,  but  by  descent  from  their  parents, 
whose  virtues  and  vices  have  great  influence  upon  the  persons  and  fortunes  of 
their  children  by  the  providence  of  God,  and  by  the  laws  of  men,  and  by  the 
course  of  nature.  8.  Because  they  are  so  mixed  together  in  their  persons,  interests, 
employments,  and  places  of  abode,  that  they  cannot  be  distinguished  in  the  events 
that  befall  them.  4.  For  the  more  evident  and  certain  distinguishing  of  them 
one  from  another.     II.  Thbt  who  make  this  objection  against  Providenob  abe 

MO   OOHPETENT  JUOaBS   IN   THE   CASE,  AND   SUPPOSE   IN   THBIB  OBJECTION  THAT   WHICH 


CHAT,  m]  ECCLESIASTES.  215 ' 

IS  FAiiSE.  It  it  supposed  in  this  objection  that  the  righteous  endure  so  much 
grief,  and  the  wicked  enjoy  so  much  pleasure,  as  cannot  consist  with  God's  love 
to  the  righteous  and  anger  at  the  wicked,  if  He  take  notice  and  be  concerned  in 
that  which  happens.  The  better  to  judge  of  this  supposition,  let  two  things  ba 
considered.  1.  That  by  the  outward  estate  of  men  we  know  very  little  of  their 
present  grief  or  pleasure.  2.  If  we  did  know  their  present  grief  or  pleasure,  we 
cannot  infer  from  thence  which   is  the  good,  and   which  is  the  bad  condition. 

III.   HOWEVEE,  THE  DaY  OF  JUDGMENT   IS   A   SUFFICIENT  ANSWER  TO  THE   OBJECTION. 

St.  Paul,  when  he  felt  the  smart  of  his  present  afflictions,  called  them  light 
afflictions,  for  a  moment,  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  to  be  revealed. 
(Z.  Cradock,  D.D.)  The  sufferings  of  good  men: — 1.  God  permits  the  sufferings 
of  good  men  for  the  advancement  of  the  honour  and  interest  of  religion.  A 
passive  state  is  the  proper  sphere  of  action  for  the  noblest  virtues  of  Christianity; 
and  for  this  reason  the  Son  of  God,  when  He  took  our  nature  upon  Him,  chose 
to  appear  in  such  a  state  that  His  example  might  be  of  more  powerful  and  general 
influence  to  mankind.  And  indeed,  next  to  the  miraclea,  whereby  the  truth  of  the 
Christian  religion  was  established,  nothing  contributed  more  to  the  propagation 
of  it  than  the  invincible  patience  and  oonstancy  of  its  possessors.  2.  God  has  this 
further  wise  and  religious  end  in  the  sufferings  of  good  men :  that  we  may  learn 
by  them  to  moderate  our  affections  to  this  deceitful  world;  and  to  cast  our  views 
•  forward  upon  a  more  durable  state  of  happiness,  and  better  suited  to  the  noble 
faculties  and  inclinations  of  human  nature.  3.  The  sufferings  of  good  men  are 
designed  to  remind  us  both  of  our  duty  and  our  danger;  when  it  is  observed  that 
the  righteous  fall  and  no  man  layeth  it  to  heart,  it  is  implied  that  this  is  a  proper 
season  of  inquiring  into  the  occasions  of  God's  public  judgments,  and  reforming 
those  sins  which  provoked  them ;  and  this  is  the  more  incumbent  upon  us  in  propor- 
tion  to  the  dignity  of  the  person  and  the  character  he  sustains.  4.  There  is  no 
man  so  good  but  he  is  conscious  to  himself  he  deserves  what  he  suffers.  The 
world  perhaps  cannot  charge  him  with  any  visible  or  notorious  escapes;  yet  he 
need  only  put  the  question  to  his  own  heart  concerning  the  reasons  of  his  suffer- 
ings, and  it  will  acquit  the  justice  of  heaven  in  them.     {R.  Fiddes.) 

Ver.  8.   The  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fall  of  evil. — Scriptural  statement  of 

the  doctrines  of  human  corruption,  and  of  the  renewal  of  the  heart  to  holiness: — 

I.  Man's  natural  corruption.     1.  One  prevailing  misconception  on  the  subject  of 

human  corruption  respects  the  seat  of  the  disorder.     What  is  the  daily  language 

of  numbers?     "  Our  lives,  it  is  true,  are  not  exempt  from  blame.    We  are  guilty 

of  many  indiscretions.     But  our  heart  is  good."     In  opposition  to  this  language, 

the  text  asserts  that  the  origin  of  all  the  evil  is  within.     "  The  heart  of  the  sons 

of  men  is  full  of  evil."     Not  the  streams  alone  are  filthy  and  defiled;  but  the 

foimtain  is  polluted   (Gen.   viii.   21;  Jer.  vii.  24;  xvii.  9;  James  iv.   1;   Matt. 

xii.  34;  xv.  19).     2.  Another  ground  of  misconception  on  the  subject  of  human 

corruption  respects  the  degree  and  extent  of  the  disorder.     The  text  says  that  this 

corruption  is  not  only  radical  but  total.     Generosity,  gratitude,  fidelity,  and  the 

exercise  of  many  other  pleasing  qualities  between  man  and  man;  the  spontaneous 

applause  of  virtue;  the  decided  condemnation  of  immorality  may  all  exist,  without 

any  tendency  in  man  to  what  is  truly  good  (Isa.  i.  5,  6;  Rom.  vii.  18;  viii.  7; 

Gen.  vi.   5).     3.  The  declaration  in  the  text  is  also  absolute.     No  exception  is 

stated  or  implied  on  account  of  any  difference  of  outward   dispensation   under 

which  mankind  may  be  placed.    The  Gospel  uniformly  proceeds  on  the  supposition 

that  man  is  born  in  sin;  that  his  corruption  is  not  accidental,  but  innate;  not 

acquired,  but  hereditary.     "That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh."     II.  Thb 

BENEWAL  OF  THB  HEART  TO  HOLINESS.      If,   as   the   Scriptures   teach,   "  without 

holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord,"  then  every  text  which  points  out  the  nature 

and  extent  of  human  corruption,  points  out  by  implication  the  nature  and  extent 

of  that  moral  change  which  man  must  undergo.    1.  Let  us  thankfully  receive  the 

information  vouchsafed.     2.  Let  us  also  profitably  use  the  information  vouchsafed. 

While  the  text  sets  before  us  the  picture  of  mankind  in  general,  let  us  remember 

that  it  sets  before  us  oui  picture  in  particular.     Let  us  seek  to  acquire  a  deep, 

an  experimental  conviction  of  the  truth.     Let  our  experience  of  the  inveteracy  of 

the  malady  lead  us  earnestly  to  seek  for  help  from  Him  who  alone  can  heal  oinr 

disordered  souls.     (B.  Cooper.)     The  unconverted  world: — I.  Their  guilt.    "  The 

heart — full  of  evil  "  (Mark  vii.  21).     It  applies  to  all.     The  most  peaceable  man 

ftUve  has  often  probably  committed  murder  in  his  heart.    The  man  of  purity  and 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tr. 


chastity  may  often,  in  the  heart,  have  been  guilty  of  adultery.    Pasaiona,  vile  ani 
loathsome  ae  the  pit  from  which  they  spring,  only  wait  their  opportunity.     la  th» 
man  provoked?     He  is  enraged.     Is  he  admired?     He  ia  proud  and  puffed  up. 
Does  God  afflict  him?     He  is  rebellious.     Does  God  cross  him?     He  is  discon* 
tented  and  impatient.     II.  Their  uadness.     1.  It  ia  a  well-known  symptom  of 
natural  madness  that  the  poor  creature  who  is  thus  afflicted  ia  apt  to  entertain 
moat  extravagant  notions   of   his   own   greatness   and   importance.      Whilst   the 
chains  are  on  hie  hands,  whilst  he  is  confined  within  the  narrow  limits  of  hi* 
gloomy  cell,  be  often  struts  about,  and  thinks  himself  a  king.     Is  this  acknow* 
ledged  to  be  madness?  and  ia  there  none,  then,  in  the  conduct  of  those  men  who» 
being  spiritually  "  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked,"  are 
saying  of  themselves,  "  I  am  rich  and  increased  with  goods,  and  I  have  need  of 
nothing  "?    2.  Men  who  are  mad,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  expreesion,  are» 
for  the  most  part,  utterly  insensible  of  danger,  and  incapable  of  fleeing  from  it. 
They  walk  on  unconcerned,  where  men  poeseesed  of  reason  and  of  foresight  would 
be  shifting  for  their  safety.     Are  those  men,  then,  to  be  set  down  for  sober  who 
■how  an  equal  unconcern  when  the  danger  is  eternal?    8.  But  mark  eoiother 
painful  symptom  of  the  man  who  labours  under  a  natural  derangement,  he  knows 
cot  hia  best  friend.     Those  whom,  were  he  in  hia  senses,  he  would  hasten  to 
embrace,  be  looks  on  with  a  cold,  unfeeling  eye.     Nay,  perhaps  be  turns  away 
from   them,  be  counts  them   enemies.     It  is  also  the  worst  symptom  of  that 
spiritual  derangement  with  which  the  men  of  this  world  are  afflicted.    They  also 
luiow  not  their  best  Friend.     They  "  turn  away  from  Him  who  speaketh  to  them 
from  heaven."     III.  Thiib  hisesablb  end.     "  After  that,  they  go  to  the  dead." 
After  what?    After  all  the  evil  and  the  madness  of  their  earthly  course — after 
having  wasted  all  their  years  in  worldliness  and  folly — then,  "  they  go  to  the 
dead."     Their  souls  are  gathered  to  the  place  where  all  who  lived  and  died  like 
them  are  gone  before.    And  what  place?    Can  we  doubt  that  hell  is  meant? 
Where  else  do  they  go  "  who  forget  God  "?     What  other  wages  hath  sin,  the 
worldly    mafias    master,   to   bestow    upon    its    servants?     (A.    Robertson,    M.A.) 
Uadness  is  in  their  heart  while  they  live. — Moral  madneai: — There  is  a  worse 
madness  than  mental.    Many  men  intellectually  sane  are  moral  maniacs.    Wherein 
doea  the  madness  of  the  unregenerate  appear?    I.   In  practically  ignoring  the 
greatest  Being.    II.  In  ignoring  the  greatest  intebestb.     III.  In  ignoring  the 
greatest  dignities.     The  dignity  of  a  pure  character,  moral  conquests,  and  self- 
sacrificing  deeds.     These  they  never   recognize.     (HomiliBt.)     Moral  in$anity: — 
This  affirmation  is  not  made  of  one  or  two  men,  nor  of  some  men  merely;  but  of 
*'  the  sons  of  men,"  as  if  of  them  all.     1.  The  insanity  spoken  of  in  the  text  is 
moral,  that  of  the  heart.     By  the  heart  here  is  meant  the  will — the  voluntary 
power.     2.  Who  are  the  morally   insane?     Those  who,  not  being  intellectually 
insane,  yet  act  as  if  they  were.     The  conduct  of  impenitent  men  ia  the  perfection 
of  irrationality.    You  see  this  in  the  ends  to  which  they  devote  themselves,  and  in 
the  means  which  they  employ  to  secure  them.    An  end  madly  chosen — sought  by 
means  madly  devised;  this   is   the  life-history  of  the  masses  who  reject  God. 
8.  This  moral  insanity  ia  a  state  of  unmingled  wickedness.     (1)  It  is  voluntary — 
cot  from  the  loss  but  from  the  abuse  of  reason.     (2)  It  ia  often  deliberate.    (8)  It 
is  a  total  rejection  of  both  God's  law  and  Gospel.    The  law  he  will  not  obey;  the 
Gospel  of  pardon  he  will  not  accept.     He  seems  determined  to  brave  the  Omnipo- 
tence of  Jehovah.     Is  he  not  mad  upon  his  idols?    Is  it  saying  too  much  when 
the  Bible  affirms — "Madness  is  in  their  heart  while  they  live"?     Remarks: — 
1.  Sinners  strangely  accuse  saints  of  being  mad  and  crazy.     Yet  those  very  sinners 
admit  the  Bible  to  be  true,  and  admit  those  things  which  Christians  believe  as 
true  to  be  really  so.     2.  If  intellectual  insanity  be  a  shocking  fact,  how  much 
more  so  is  moral?     Suppose  the  case  of  a  Webster.     His  brain  becomes  softened; 
be  is  an  idiot  I     There  is  not  a  man  in  all  the  land  but  would  feel  solemn.    What  t 
Daniel  Webster — that  great  man,  an  idiot  I     How  have  the  mighty  fallen  I     What 
a  horrible  sight  I     But  how  much  more  horrible  to  see  him  become  a  moral  idiot — 
to  see  a  selfish  heart  run  riot  with  the  clear  decisions  of  his  gigantic  intellect — ^to 
see  hia  moral  principles  fading  away  before  the  demands  of  selfish  ambition — to  see 
such  a  man  become  s  drunkard,  a  debauchee,  a  loafer.    Intellectual  idiocy  ia  not 
to  be  named  in  the  comparison!     3.  Although  some  sinners  may  be  externally 
labr,  and  may  seem  to  be  amiable  in  temper  and  character,  yet  every  real  sinner 
ia  actually  insane.     Eternity  so  vast,  and  its  issues  so  dreadful,  yet  this  sirmer 
Arives  furiously  to  hell  m  if  he  were  on  the  high-road  to  heaven  i    And  all  this 


CHAP.  IX.]  ECCLESIASTES.  2lT 

only  because  he  \»  infatuated  with  the  pleasures  of  un  for  a  season.  (0. 0. 
Finnty,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  A  living  dog  is  better  than  a  dead  lion. — 8inner$,  living  and  dtad^— 
I.  Soma  Binners  abb  mobb  contbmptiblb  than  otbebs.  There  is  as  much  difference 
between  some  and  others  as  there  is  between  the  "  dog "  and  the  "  lion." 
1.  Some  sinners  are  baser  in  nature  than  others.  There  are  some  who  are  eonstita* 
tionally  low,  and  mean,  and  sordid — like  the  dog.  2.  Some  sinners  are  in  baser 
circumstances  than  others.  Some  tenant  the  hovels  of  pauperism,  others  dwell 
in  palaces.  Some  wear  the  wretched  appearance  of  starving  curs,  others  the 
majeetic  bearing  of  lions.  II.  The  least  contemptible  of  sinners  must  dib.  There 
is  the  "  dead  lion."  The  sinner,  however  noble  in  nature  or  circumstances, 
must  die.  Death  to  the  sinner  is  a  terrible  thing.  1.  It  detaohee  him  from  all 
good.  2.  It  connects  him  with  all  evil.  III.  The  most  contemptible  sinner, 
whilst  living,  has  an  advantagb  over  the  least  contemptible  who  is  dead.    Why? 

1.  He  is  living  in  a  world  fitted  for  happiness.  Everything  in  the  natural  world 
is  intended  and  suited  to  minister  pleasure  to  man.  2.  He  is  living  in  the  sphere 
of  redemptive  mercy.  (HomiliBt.)  The  delusion  of  common  life  rebuked  and 
eorreoted: — Life  is  an  immense  advancement  over  death.  Organization  is  greatly 
in  advance  of  inorganized  matter;  life  is  an  advancement  over  organization,  for 
one  may  exist  without  the  other.  But  a  rational  life  is  as  superior  to  simple  life  in 
itself,  as  life  is  in  advance  of  simple  lifeless  organization.  Beason  cannot  exist 
without  life,  for  it  is  its  first  and  essential  condition ;  but  it  is  different  from  it, 
and  superior  to  it;  it  is  an  addition  to  it,  an  adornment  and  completion  of  it,  it 
makes  life  great,  grand,  powerful,  and  Divine-like.  The  distance  and  difference 
between  life  and  death  are  the  difference  and  extreme  distance  between  prin- 
ciples,  viewed  in  their  moral  character,  relation,  and  result.  As  life  is  superior  to 
death  in  the  power  of  consciousness,  action,  and  advancement,  so  are  true  prin- 
ciples  and  good  character  to  the  false  and  the  bad.  On  this  ground,  "  a  living  dog 
is  better  than  a  dead  lion."  I.  Some  of  the  pbinoiplbs  the  wobds  of  the  text 
BCOGEST.  1.  Life  is  the  period  within  which  all  is  possible  that  is  requisite  and 
required.     A  dead  lion  is  helpless  and  hopeless,  a  living  dog  is  able  and  hopeful. 

2.  Little  real  goodness  is  better  than  much  nominal  and  fanciful.  A  small  living 
spark  will  produce  a  fiame,  which  cannot  be  done  by  a  large  dead  charcoal;  a 
■mall  mustard-seed  will  grow  into  a  beautiful  and  useful  tree,  whereas  a  forest 
of  dead  roots  cannot  produce  such  results.  8.  The  small  used  rightly  is  better 
than  the  great  unused.  A  small  candle  that  gives  light  is  better  than  a  sun 
covered  with  darkness.  A  little  water  that  can  be  used  by  the  dying  or  thirsty 
is  better  than  a  river  which  cannot  be  so  used.  We  constantly  hear  complaints 
and  excuses  of  small  possessions,  of  small  means,  of  small  opportunities,  and  of 
small  powers,  and  these  are  made  the  causes  of  neglect  and  misery  in  the  lips 
of  those  who  make  them.  What  we  need,  first  of  all,  is  not  greater  quantity,  but 
the  power  of  using  faithfully  what  we  have.  4.  The  past  of  life  will  not  satisfy 
and  meet  the  present  demands  of  human  need  and  Divine  requirements.  Every 
day  creates  its  duties — every  day  brings  its  wants;  the  provision  of  the  day  covers 
the  need  of  a  day,  as  the  work  of  the  day  covers  the  obligation  of  a  day.  Ths 
present  will  not  cover  the  future,  no  more  than  the  future  can  cover  the  present — 
every  day  must  provide  for  itself;  if  it  does  not,  it  is  a  day  of  want,  for  the 
blessings  of  yesterday  and  to-morrow  are  partly  dead  things  to  us  to-day.  6.  The 
small,  with  evidence  and  security,  is  better  than  much  with  groundless  hope  and 
imcertainty.  A  little  goodness  done  is  better  than  much  in  vows  and  promises; 
a  small  portion  of  solid  and  real  happiness  is  better  than  great  superficial  and 
imcertain  pleasure;  a  little  producing  power  is  better  than  much  that  is  unpro* 
ductive;  a  little  of  actual  reality  possessed  of  truth,  virtue,  and  religion  is  of  far 
higher  worth  than  much  in  boastful  fancy.  6.  The  small  with  contentment  is 
better  than  the  great  without.  The  value  and  importance  of  a  thing  to  us  is  in 
the  fitness  of  it  to  satisfy  our  heart  and  mind;  it  may  be  small  and  insufficient 
in  its  outward  form  or  in  the  estimate  of  people  relative  to  it,  but  it  is  better  thoJX 
the  possession  which  people  call,  in  outward  appearance,  grand  and  glorious. 
With  contentment,  which  comprehends  peace  of  conscience  and  tranquillity  of  mind, 
•  humble  position  and  a  small  possession  are  better  than  a  lofty  station  and 
magnifiaent  possession.  II.  Tbi  application  and  thb  bebukb  of  tbb  text  to 
COMMON  Lin.  1.  It  rebukes  that  class  who  trust  in  fortuitous  chances  more  than 
in  ths  right  eonduct  ol  life.     It  msj  indeed  be,  in  many  instances,  that  true 


S18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOS,  [chap.  vs.. 

conduct  is  often  elow  in  bringing  success  and  happiness,  and  that  the  contrary, 
in  many  cases  in  this  life,  leads  to  what  many  call  success  sooner  and   with 
greater  certainty;  because  wrong,  in  a  world  of  falsehood,  has  more  means  and 
ways  at  its  disposal  than  truth  and  law  have,  for  the  means  and  ways  of  truth 
must  be  all  true,  or  else  it  is  no  longer  true  itself.    But  the  success  and  happiness 
got  any  way  apart  from  a  right  conduct  or  the  order  of  law,  are  neither  true  nor 
real,  they  are  but  things  of  wrong  and  misconception,  and  are  neither  to  be 
desired  nor  enjoyed  by  the  true,  nor  held  long  by  the  deluded  wrong.     2.  It 
rebukes  another  class  in  society,  namely,  those  who  trust  more  in  appearance 
than  in  high  principles  of  real  life.     When  appearance  is  sought  and  loved  for  its 
own  sake  as  an  end,  it  is  vanity;  when  it  is  made  to  conceal  and  deceive  others,  it 
is   hypocrisy.      These   feelings   are   found   everywhere   in   society,   deforming   its 
beauty  and  eating  up  its  life  and  reality;  they  are  the  dead  lions  of  society, 
beginning  in  vain  appearance  and  ending  in  death.    3.  It  rebukes  those  who  will 
not  do  the  little  they  can,  because  they  have  no  means  or  opportunities  to  do  the 
great  and  illustrious.     To  bury  the  one  talent  because  we  are  not  possessors  of 
five,  or  not  to  use  the  one  until  the  other  four  will  be  possessed,  is  a  vain  delusion; 
and  better  is  the  man  who  uses  his  little  faithfully,  than  he  who  thus  vainly 
hopes  tmtil  he  possesses  more:  one  is  conscious  of  life  and  gives  expression  to  it; 
the  other  is  dead  in  heart  and  action,  and  notwithstanding  his  plans  and  promises, 
a  living  dog  is  better  than  his  dead  lion.    4.  There  is  a  rebuke  here  to  those  who 
neglect  present  duties  until  future  time.    The  thing  which  should  be  done  to-day, 
but  left  until  the  morrow,  is  undone,  and  is  virtually  never  done.    The  probability 
is  that  it  will  never  be  actually  done;  but  if  it  will,  it  will  have  lost  some  of  its 
virtue  and  beauty,  because  it  ought  to  have  been  done  before.    But  everything  in 
the  form  of  a  present  duty,  thus  neglected  until  a  future  time,  is  virtually  dead, 
for  the  future  is  imcertain;  and  if  the  time  ever  comes,  our  views  and  feelings 
instead  of  being  more  inclined  to  do  the  thing  which  thus  was  neglected  in  the 
past,  will  be  more  disinclined  to  do  it,  and  will  probably  be  inclined  to  throw  it  to 
a  greater  future  still.     5.  The  words  rebuke  human  folly  that  trusts  in  shadowy 
unreality  rather  than  in  reality.     It  is  not  seldom  that  people  give  away  their 
present  position  and  happiness  because  they  fancy   something  greater  and   far 
better,  and  thus  give  up  the  real  for  the  vain,  and  the  certain  for  the  things  which 
too  often  prove  unattainable.     This  is  exemplified  religiously  in  different  forms, 
but  is  the  same  thing  in  character  and  result.    One  tries  to  make  a  good  show  to 
gain  approval  and  applause,  or  conceal  some  purpose  which  is  not  made  known, 
which  is  hypocrisy.     In  such  a  case,  inward  principle  is  not  sought,  conscious 
enjoyment  is  not  known;  all  is  outward  appearance,  which  is  not  life  and  reality, 
but  a  formal  and  hard  affectation.     There  is   another  class,   again,  who  make 
feeling  all  their  aim.     With  these,  knowledge  is  of  no  value,  principle  of  truth 
and  integrity  is  of  no  importance;  unless  a  state  of  vague  and  excited  moral 
intoxication  absorbs  all,  everything  is  worthless.     Others  there  are  who  make  all 
their  religious  reality  dependent  upon  some  few  points  of  belief,  which  may  be 
nothing  better  than  opinion,  and  when  it  comes  to  the  test,  there  is  neither  lif© 
nor  reality  in  them.     There  are  others,   again,   who  depend  upon  some  secret 
purpose  in  God's  mind  for  all  their  salvation  and  heaven,  exclusive  of  all  goodness 
by  and  in  themselves.     6.  There  is  here  a  rebuke  to  those  who  desire  their  posses- 
sion to  consist  in  form  and  magnitude  rather  than  in  quality.     How  feeble  and 
foolish  are  we  I     We  allow  sense  to  control  our  reason,  and  not  reason  oiur  sense; 
we  too  frequently  allow  fancy  to  govern  conscience  rather  than  conscience  fancy; 
we  submit  our  best  judgment  to  sentimental  delusion,  rather  than  be  governed 
according  to  the  laws  of  truth  and  equity.     How  long  shall  we  and  others  be 
guilty  of  pursuing  the  dead  lions  of  vain  ambition  and  delusive  blindness,  and 
be  rebuked   and   punished  by  justice  for  the  folly  of  our  conduct?    III.   Thh 
LESSONS  OP  IN8TEU0TI0N8  INTENDED  TO  COMMON  LIFE.      1.  One  important  lesson 
here  intended  is  not  to  trust  in  the  helpless.      The  earthly   and  material   are 
helpless,  for  they  are  unfit  for  our  moral  and  spiritual  nature.     The  perishable 
cannot  help  us,  for  they  die  behind  us,  and  are  Insufficient  from  their  nature  to 
satisfy  our  immortal  hope  and  aspiration.    The  sinful,  whatever  it  is,  is  helpless; 
for  instead  of  improving,  it  deteriorates,  and  instead  of  adding  to  resources  and 
happiness,  it  diminishes  and  destroys.    The  thing  which  is  not  in  unity  with  God's 
will  and  order,  with  the  advancement  of  truth  and  happiness,  cannot  help  us,  and 
must  not  be  trusted  in.     No  finite  thing  must  have  all  the  confidence  of  our  soul, 
for  everything  and  everybody  are  insufficient  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  soul  vol 


CHAP.  IX.]  ECCLESIASTES.  21l> 

all  its  relations  and  conditions.     We  must  have  a  living  God,  a  living  Saviour, 
a  living  Comforter,  a  living  faith,  a  living  hope,  a  living  love — these  will  comfort 
and  be  sufficient  when  everything  else  fails  and  dies.    2.  Another  lesson  intended 
to  teach  us,  is  not  to  judge  things  from  their  forms,  but  from  their  character. 
If  we  judge  from  appearance,  we  go  wrong  in  the  most  common  matters  of  life. 
In  childhood  we  should  put  the  penny  above  the  sovereign  because  it  is  larger; 
and  judging  from  outward  strength  and  swiftnefis  we  should  put  the  horse  above 
man.     Outward  appearance,  when  natural  and  true,  is  an  index  of  the  inward 
character  and  meaning  of  things;  but  we  must  not  take  it  alone  as  a  final  test, 
for  it  may  not  be  genuine,  and  moreover,  we  may  by  something  not  right  in  us 
misinterpret  it;  it  must  be  taken  in  connection  with  other  things  more  safe  and 
true  as  tests  of  quality  and  character.     8.  We  are  taught  to  use  faithfully  tha 
means  and  powers  we  possess,  and  not  excuse  our  virtue  upon  the  chance  of 
things.     What  we  need  is  not  so  much  more  power,  but  the  use  of  what  wa 
possess  more  faithfully.     In  this  God  has  given  us  useful  lessons  in  the  ant,  the 
bee,  and  the  bird;  they  use  what  they  have,  and  they  answer  successfully  the 
purpose   of   life.    4.   There   is   another   lesson   of   sacred   importance  taught   us, 
namely,  that  God  looks  at  the  vitality  of  things  in  their  nature,  and  not  on  their 
outward  form  of  grandeur  and  greatness.     God  accepts  of  a  humble  publican, 
with  his  unassuming  manner  and  confession,  rather  than  the  boastful  prayer  of 
the  Pharisee.     He  looks  at  the  vitality  of  the  heart,  and  not  at  the  gorgeous 
outward  manifestation.     He  accepts  the  attitude  of  the  inward  spirit.     He  is  a 
Spirit,  and  must  be  worshipped  in  spirit  and  in  truth.     What  a  comfort  and 
encouragement  is  this  to  us  all !     What  God  thinks  of  us  is  the  great  thing  belong- 
ing to  us  all  alike.    He  demands  a  living  thought,  a  living  love,  a  living  faith, 
and  a  living  devotion;  they  are  suitable  in  themselves,  and  accepted  by  God  from 
all  alike.     6.  Another  lesson  of  importance  given  us  here  is,  that  the  secret  of 
happiness  is  to  enjoy  the  little  we  have.     However  small  our  blessings,  we  have 
more  than  we  use  to  our  own  advancement  and  happiness;  the  reason  of  our 
misery  is  the  non-application  rightly  of  what  we  possess,  and  not  deficiency  in  the 
quality  and  degree  of  our  possession.    This  is  often  beautifully  illustrated  in  life, 
you  often  see  more  happiness  in  the  cottage  than  in  the  palace,  in  poverty  than 
in  wealth,  in  pain  and  affliction  than  in  ease  and  health.  How  is  this?  It  is  because 
one  applies  and  enjoys  his  little  better  than  the  other  his  greater  and  richer  blessings. 
6. 1  mention  one  more  lesson  taught  us  in  the  text,  namely,  that  our  goodness  should 
be  an  active,  growing  thing;  our  goodness  must  live  to  be  active,  and  active  to 
live.    A  little  living  seed  is  better  than  all  the  dead  flowers  in  the  country;  so  a 
little  progressive  goodness  is  more  hopeful  than  all  past  life  of  virtue  and  religion. 
Growth   is   a   preparation   for  the  future,   arising   from   present   life   and   deep* 
rootedness.     It  is  not  the  majesty  and  largeness  of  the  lion  that  makes  it  undesir- 
able,  but  its  dead  condition;  as  such,  it  is  a  condition  of  inactivity  and  decay 
rather  than  one  of  action  and  strength.     It  is  not  the  smallness  of  the  dog  that 
makes  it  an  object  of  desire,  but  its  life.     Under  this  condition  it  is  competent  of 
useful  service,  and  of  growth  and  activity.     The  lesson  intended  to  be  conveyed 
to  us  is,  that  life,  action,  and  growth  are  united;  and  that  it  is  needful  to  have 
life  before  the  others  can  exist.    The  teaching  of  truth  is.  Grow  in  grace;  let  us 
go  hence;  let  us  not  be  weary  in  well-doing;  and  these  things  are  incompatible 
with  inactivity,  stultification,  and  death.     IV.  Thb  encouraqembnt  and  comfort 
INTENDED  TO  COMMON  LIFE.     Most  things  Contain  in  them  an  element  of  comfort, 
if  we  are  able  to  find  it,  and  in  a  fit  state  to  receive  and  apply  it.    All  comforts 
are  not  of  the  same  kind;  they  vary  in  form  and  diversity,  in  common  with  other 
things.     When  you  assist  a  man  in  distress  with  your  material  means,  it  is  a 
comfort,  or  soothe  his  bodily  pain,  or  restore  him  from  the  verge  of  death  into 
health  and  vigour,  it  is  a  high  comfort.    When  you  tell  a  friend  the  way  to  success, 
or  restore  a  wanderer  from  a  path  of  danger  and  wrong,  and  put  and  direct  him 
on  in  safety,  it  is  comforting.     When  you  solve  any  difficult  problem,  or  dissipate 
some  doubt  and  fear,  or  soothe  a  heart  depressed  and  cast  down,  it  is  no  small 
comfort  you  impart  to  their  subjects.     When  you  show  new  light  upon  any  dark 
picture,  or  give  new  means  to  conquer  difficulties,  or  discover  new  hope  to  vanquish 
the  common  foes  of  life,  these  are  no  small  comforts  to  those  who  need  them. 
These  are  some  of  the  various  form  of  comforts,  and  they  are  all  valuable  and 
needed,  and  accepted  with  gratitude  by  those  who  are  in  such  conditions.     We 
have  in  the  text  an  encouraging  comfort  for  the  true  and  humble  ones  who  are 
depressed  and  dejected  by  reason  of  their  state  and  condition,  or  from  the  small- 1 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ek. 

sesa  of  their  sacrifice,  or  the  little  they  can  do.  They  look  at  the  lofty  station, 
splendour,  power,  and  great  gifts  of  others,  and  are  discouraged  and  ready  to  flag 
in  the  path  of  duty,  and  think  they  have  neither  a  plea  nor  a  hope  to  be  accepted 
of  Qod,  and  be  among  the  successful  competitors  of  religion  and  heaven.  But 
He  looks  not  as  man  looks,  He  accepts  the  small  and  unadorned  sincerity  before 
dead  splendour  and  outward  dignified  grandeur.  You  humble  dejected  ones,  be 
(hen  comforted,  that  the  Lofty  One  looks  on  the  humble  and  true  on€s,  and 
accepts  the  mean  in  outward  appearance,  if  it  be  true,  before  the  most  illustrioua 
grandeur  and  the  greatest  outward  ornament  which  a  combined  universe  could 
offer  Him.  (/.  Hughes.)  Reality  versus  Show: — In  the  estimation  of  an  Oriental, 
the  lion  was  the  symbol  of  all  that  was  brave  and  kingly — the  dog,  of  all  that  waa 
base  and  contemptible.  Between  the  living  dog  and  the  living  lion  there  could 
be  no  comparison,  any  more  than  you  could  compare  a  Christian  philosopher  with 
an  African  slave — there  was  only  a  contrast;  but  the  lion  dead  changes  the  whole 
aspect  of  the  thing.  Its  regal  bearing,  its  voice  of  thunder,  its  courage,  are  gone, 
and  nothing  but  the  appearance  is  left  behind.  Than  that,  the  wise  man  says, 
the  living  dog  is  better.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  writer  of  Ecclesiastes  has  set 
before  himself  the  purpose  of  scourging  the  people  for  their  vain,  pretentious,  and 
foolish  display.  The  great  outstanding  sin  of  the  nation  was  a  love  of  mere  show. 
They  set  little  store  on  the  reality  of  the  thing  if  they  were  only  feasted  with  the 
appearance.  There  must  be  pomp,  pageantry,  glare,  dazzle,  grand  outward 
show — ^never  mind  how  hollow,  never  mind  how  unreal.  Artificiality  was  ruining 
the  nation.  They  had  set  up  the  dead  lion,  and  spurned  the  living  dog.  A  very 
foolish  nation,  certainly,  that  nation  of  Jews;  and  it  does  seem  astonishing  that 
grown-up  men  and  women  could  have  been  so  childish.  But  wait ;  let  us  ask 
if  (here  is  not  something  of  this  here,  and  now,  among  oiurselves.  Here  in  this 
Western  world,  among  a  people  not  poetic,  not  dreamy — ^now  in  an  age  that 
claims  (o  be  intensely  practical — it  seems  to  me  that  we  are  given  over  to  appear- 
ances, and  sham  is  lord  of  the  ascendant.  Is  it  difficult  to  prove  that?  I  think 
cot.  Look  at  dress.  Simple  garments  with  simple  lines,  simple  ornaments,  plain 
but  real;  nature's  grand  simplicity — where  will  you  find  it?  Only  here  and  there. 
It  is  built  up  with  fold  upon  fold,  gaudy  extravagance,  glaring  tinsel,  diamonds 
of  pure  carbon,  or  diamonds  of  cut-glass;  ornaments  of  gold,  or  ornaments  of 
aluminium;  flowers  from  the  garden,  if  not,  then  flowers  from  the  toy  shop;  any- 
thing and  everything  for  show.  Bich  and  poor  alike  are  rushing  into  this  foolish 
eitravsigance  of  dress.  Simplicity  is  gone — banished  to  the  wilds  of  Siberia  or 
elsewhere,  and  we  are  given  over  to  the  gaudy  and  the  unreal.  Then,  again,  take 
our  social  life  and  customs.  In  certain  circles,  party -going  and  party-giving  fill 
up  a  large  portion  of  the  time.  The  day  is  but  a  wearisome  waiting  or  toilsome 
preparation  for  the  evening's  festivities.  Then  there  will  be  songs  and  laughter — 
for  the  most  part  foolish,  sentimental  songs,  and  the  most  forced  and  silly 
laughter.  And  the  secret  of  much  of  this  party-going  and  party-giving  is  the  lov© 
of  display.  A  week's  honest  earnings  wasted  in  a  night;  charities  to  the  poor 
and  deserving  lessened  or  cut  off;  children  defrauded  of  a  part  of  their  rightful 
inheritance :  and  all  to  show  up  a  dead  lion.  Better  the  living  dog,  I  am  sure. 
See  all  this  hard  work  about  you;  all  this  wear  and  tear  of  body  and  mind;  all 
this  straining  and  striving.  What  does  it  mean?  It  means  money,  money.  Men 
make  haste  to  be  rich,  that  they  may  have  more  display,  and  in  their  blind 
eagerness  fall  into  many  snares  and  divers  temptations.  The  hardy  virtues  are 
dying;  the  brave,  simple,  manly  men — the  heroes,  the  giants — are  becoming 
extinct.  Let  there  be  some  grand  effort  made  to  rescue  society  from  this  threat- 
ened danger;  let  us  put  forth  our  hands,  and  grasp  again  those  simple,  hardy 
virtues  which  were  the  foundation  of  England's  greatness.  Our  feasting  is 
destroying  us;  our  luxury  is  wasting  our  manhood.  Better  poverty  than  this; 
better  the  living  dog  than  the  dead  lion.  Take,  again,  our  commercial  world,  and 
you  will  find  much  worship  of  the  dead  lion,  and  much  contempt  of  the  living 
dog  there.  It  is  a  maxim  that  if  a  man  would  succeed,  he  must  make  a  show. 
A  small  house  in  an  unpretending  place  will  gain  little  or  no  credit.  There  must 
be  display,  or  it  is  nothing.  And  so  you  have  it  all  around  you — this  dead  lion 
worship— this  appearance,  this  shameful  and  fraudulent  display.  Everywhere 
people  are  asking  for  brilliance,  and  care  little  for  the  reality.  The  dead  lion  is 
enthroned — that  is  king,  that  is  priest,  that  is  philosopher,  that  is  statesman; 
while  the  living  dog,  the  unostentatious  reality,  is  passed  by  with  contempt  or 
thrust  out  of  sight.    But  what  about  the  Church — that  representative  of  God's 


CHAP.  DC.]  ECCLESIASTE8.  221 


kingdom  on  the  earth — that  grcmd  and  heaven-formed  mBtitution,  which  has 
nothing  to  do  with  condition,  but  everything  to  do  with  character?  Has  sha 
protested  against  this  love  of  show?  Has  she  stood  forth  a  reaUty  in  a  world  of 
unrealities,  pure  gold  as  compared  with  thLngs  of  tinsel,  a  flower  bright  and 
fragrant,  unfolding  in  divinest  beauty  under  the  rays  of  the  central  sun  as 
against  the  out  and  painted  paper  of  man's  invention?  Or  has  she,  too,  drank 
in  the  spirit  of  the  world  and  talten  the  dead  lion  to  her  arms?  Splendid  organiza- 
tions, elaborate  theologies,  well-defined  creeds,  and  a  goodly  array  of  dogmas,  those 
are  the  things  we  have  busied  ourselves  about.  We  have  set  too  great  store  upon 
mere  profession  and  orthodoxy,  and  too  little  store  upon  personal  life.  "  Whal 
a  good  man  is  Mr.  Screw  1  what  a  great  Christian  I"  Mr.  Screw  never  had  a 
doubt  about  religion  in  his  life,  and  never  will.  Orthodox  I  if  he  were  to  live 
through  all  the  changes  a  thousand  years  will  see,  he  would  never  have  the  charge 
of  heresy  preferred  against  him.  Tell  him  the  oreed,  and  he  will  subscribe  it. 
But  he  holds  his  money  as  dearer  than  his  faith.  He  is  devout  on  Sunday,  and 
on  Monday  morning  wUl  pull  a  string  and  set  in  motion  a  whole  organization  of 
fraud,  and  then  devour  a  widow's  house,  and  say  grace  after  the  meal.  No 
matter,  he  is  orthodox,  and  the  Church  will  have  him.  Ah  i  better  a  living  dog 
than  that  dead  lion.  Better  a  widow's  mite  in  the  box  and  an  honest,  loving 
heart  throbbing  in  the  pew.  The  cry  is  raised  in  all  our  churches  for  a  revival. 
But  the  revival  will  not  come  until  there  is  more  reality  in  our  ohiurch  life.  We 
must  take  a  piure  religion  into  the  streets.  The  shop,  and  the  warehouse,  and 
the  mill,  must  be  conducted  upon  principles  of  Christian  integrity.  (A,  J.  Bray.) 
Lion  or  dog: — I.  In  besfbot  to  the  possession  of  life,  we  conclude,  even  under 
the  greatest  disadvantages,  existence  is  betteb  than  non-existence.  To  live  is 
to  be  conscious.  To  think,  to  know,  to  reason,  to  act  is  elevation.  To  possess 
powers  of  estimating  even  misery  is  a  matter  for  thankfulness.  Tbe  difGculties  of 
life  should  be  faced  courageously.  "  If  we  faint  in  the  day  of  adversity  our 
strength  is  small."  We  should  always  cherish  hope;  hope  will  give  life.  We 
should  not  yield  to  envy,  for  that  is  the  foundation  of  despair.  The  rich  have 
their  annoyances,  disappointments,  trials,  social  i^norings  and  terrible  losses;  the 
poor  can  have  their  simple  pleasiires  and  healtbfu  est.  Where  there  is  the  desire 
to  make  the  best  of  circumstances  it  is  wonderful  how  much  of  joy  may  be  even 
found  in  positions  that  appear  most  pitiable.  We  are  not  wishing  to  imply  that 
those  under  conditions  of  poverty  should  be  content  always  to  remain  therein.  On 
the  contrary,  we  wish  them  ever  to  be  seeking  to  improve  their  surroundings 
and  their  minds,  but  ever  to  remember  that  "  a  living  dog  is  better  than  a  dead 
lion."  II.  In  respect  to  the  decisions  we  may  have  to  arbive  at  in  VARions 
OIBOCMSTANCES  the  truth  of  the  text  may  guide  us.  If  a  man  seeking  employment 
should  find  a  task  that  appears  to  be  below  his  dignity,  or  the  pay  below  his 
deserts,  it  is  better  to  accept  such  a  position  than  to  be  workless  and  go  perhaps 
starving,  or  subsisting  on  charity.  The  poor  say,  frequently,  "  Half  a  loaf  is 
better  than  none,"  and  this  is  common  sense.  Further,  in  respect  to  soma 
anterprise  in  which  a  man  may  be  tempted  to  embark  by  the  promise  of  great 
profits  or  interest,  but  for  which  he  must  sacrifice  some  steady,  but  less  promising 
occupation,  it  would  be  well  for  him  to  remember  the  text.  Better  the  cer- 
tainty, though  small,  than  the  profits  of  alluring  amount,  but  which  are  problem* 
atical.  In  bearing  certain  difficulties,  misrepresentations,  and  evils  we  may 
remember  that  efforts  to  remove  them  may  only  increase  them.  It  is  "  better 
to  bear  the  ills  we  have  than  to  fly  to  others  that  we  know  not  of."  III.  In 
J17D0IN0  07  OEBTAiN  8TSTXMS  the  principle  of  the  text  is  applicable.  To-day  we 
have  to  choose  either  rationalism,  agnosticism,  ultimate  despair,  universal  suicide* 
or  religion  of  some  kind.  We  say  better  any  form  of  religion  than  none,  any 
vitality  rather  than  death.  Even  if  we  have  to  decide  between  various  forms  of 
religion,  we  should  seek  that  which  promotes  intellectual  and  spiritual  lifa 
oombined;  but  if  we  cannot  find  the  spiritual  advanced,  and  only  cold  formalism 
or  intelleotualism  cultivated,  then  we  must  accept  that  which  has  life  and  warmth 
and  love  in  it.  Christianity  is  a  system  of  doctrines  concerning  God  and  immort 
tality.  Anything  that  will  keep  alive  the  knowledge  of  the  one  and  hope  for  tha 
other  is  better  than  allowing  it  to  die  out.  IV.  The  principle  of  the  text  applies 
in  respect  to  the  possession  of  spibitual  life.  To  have  it  in  however  lov 
degree  is  better  than  to  have  to  confess  to  its  absence.  Spiritual  life  is  character* 
ized  by  peace  through  faith  in  the  one  great  sacrifice,  effort  after  purity,  love  ol 
tbe  Word,  and  practice  of  prayer  and  charity  toward  all.    Many  of  the  poor  andl 


222  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «. 

unlearned  are  rich  in  this  possession.  They  have  that  which  ii  a  permanent 
poeseasion,  too — something  which  will  not  be  destroyed  at  death  or  dissipated  by 
one's  heirs.  Better  be  the  poorest  and  most  despised  on  earth,  with  this  spiritual 
life,  than  the  "  lion  of  society  "  without  it.  He  that  is  "  least  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  "  is  greater  than  the  lordliest  worldling.  Lord  Byron  sent  to  a  lady 
who  once  wrote  to  him,  pressing  upon  him  the  necessity  of  religion,  a  reply 
which  is  in  harmony  with  what  we  have  been  saying.  He  said :  "  I  thank  you 
for  your  interest  in  me.  I  am  bound  to  say  that  all  who  entertain  a  belief  in 
God  and  religion  have  a  tremendous  advantage;  for  it  not  only  affords  conflola- 
tions  in  this  life,  but  even  if  there  is  no  hereafter  it  smooths  the  downward  course 
of  life  and  takes  from  death  its  darkness  and  fear."  Yet,  knowing  that  th© 
"  living  dog  was  better  than  the  dead  lion,"  that  erratic,  that  proud,  that  highly- 
talented  geniua  turned  away  and  lived  for  the  world  and  for  misery.  Alas  1  many 
imitate  him  even  now.     (F.  Hastinga.) 

Vet.  6.  For  the  living  know  that  they  shall  die. — A  funeral  termon: — I.  Whenob 

IT  IB  THAT  THE  LIVING  ATTAIN  THE   SURE  AND  INFALLIBLE  KNOWLEDGE  OP  THBIE  OWN 

DEATH.  1.  There  be  many  things  from  whence  we  may  collect  the  necessity  of 
dying.  (1)  We  may  collect  it  by  those  harbingers  and  forerxinners  of  death, 
diseases,  pains,  and  natural  decays  which  are  incident  to  all  men.  (2)  The 
observation  of  death's  universal  empire  over  all  other  things,  and  over  all  other 
men,  may  give  us  a  certain  knowledge  that  we  also  must  shortly  die.  (3)  We  may 
certainly  k;^ow  ourselves  mortal  by  knowing  oiurselves  sinful  creatures.  There  is 
a  double  necessity  of  death  on  account  of  sin.  As  a  punishment.  As  a  purgation 
of  it.  2.  Now,  though,  by  these  and  other  such-like  considerations,  we  may 
arrive  at  a  certain  knowledge  that  we  shall  die;  yet  the  particular  curcumstancee 
of  the  time  and  manner  of  our  death  are  known  to  God  only.  (1)  He  only  knows 
the  critical  and  punctual  time  of  our  death;  for  He  hath  determined  it,  to  a  very 
moment.  (2)  In  what  manner  our  death  will  appear  to  U8,  we  know  not :  this 
is  a  secret  of  God's  own  breast.     II.  Whence  it  peoobeds,  that  men  aae  so 

STUPIDLY   irrational,  THAT,  THOUGH  THEY  ALL  KNOW   THET   SHALL  DIB,  YET 

so  FEW  SERIOUSLY  PREPARE  THEMSELVES  FOB  IT.  1.  Men  are  generally  so  immersed 
in  the  businesses  and  pleasures  of  life,  that  these  swallow  up  all  serious  thought* 
of  death  and  preparations  for  it.  They  are  employed  about  other  things :  like  a 
heap  of  ants,  that  are  busily  toiling  to  get  in  their  provision^  without  regarding 
the  foot  that  is  ready  to  crush  them.  Such  are  the  impertinent  and  vain  cares 
of  men  I  The  riches  and  honours,  which  are  but  the  dust  and  smoke  of  this 
world,  have  so  blinded  our  eyes,  that  we  cannot  discern  the  near  approaches  of 
death;  and  thus,  while  we,  Archimedes  like,  are  busily  drawing  projects  and 
designs  In  the  dust,  and  are  wholly  intent  about  vainer  speculations  than  his,  we 
mind  not  the  alarm,  nor  perceive  the  enemy  is  upon  us,  till  we  are  stricken  dead 
through  the  reins.  2.  Men  delay  serious  preparations  for  death,  because  they 
generally  look  upon  it  as  afar  off.  (1)  Men  reckon  old  age  a  vast  while  off. 
(2)  Most  men  presume  that  they  shall  live  to  extreme  age.  (3)  Men  think  a  few 
of  their  latest  days  and  thoughts  are  enough  to  prepare  them  for  death.  Think 
you  your  souls  can  then  vigorously  bestir  themselves  when  they  are  grown  stiff 
with  age;  when  your  faculties  are  benumbed,  and  your  spirits  congealed  past  the 
thaw  of  a  fire?  8.  Men  generally  put  off  serious  thoughts  of  dying  because  of 
the  terrors  and  insupportable  dread  which  such  apprehensions  bring  with  them. 
And  therefore  death  is  called  (Job  xviii.  14)  "  the  king  of  terrors  ";  a  king  that 
eomee  attended  with  a  thousand  phantoms  and  frightful  apparitions.  III.  Applica- 
tion. 1.  If  we  all  certainly  know  that  we  must  die,  this  might  teach  us  so  much 
wisdom  as  not  to  set  our  affections  eagerly  upon  anything  in  this  present  world; 
a  world  which  we  must  shortly  leave.  2.  Since  we  all  know  that  we  shall  die,  let 
this  serve  to  exhort  us  seriously  to  prepare  for  our  death.  Some  sad  instances 
there  have  been  of  those  who,  havmg  neglected  this  great  work  till  the  end  of 
their  life,  have  then  spent  that  little  remnant  of  time  which  they  had  in  crying 
out  for  more.  But  if  we  have  carefully  prepared  ourselves  for  death,  it  will  be 
to  us  a  repose  instead  of  a  terror.    (6p.  E.  HophinB.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  Oo  fhy  way,  eat  thy  bread  with  joy,  and  drink  thy  wine  with  a 
merry  heart;  for  God  now  aocepteth  thy  works. — Festival  joy: — This  is  one  of 
those  passages,  so  remarkable  in  the  writings  of  Solomon,  in  which  the  words  of 
sinful  men  in  the  world  are  taken  up  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  be  applied  in  a^ 


CHAP.  IX.]  ECCLESIASTE8.  929 

Christian  sense.  As  they  itand  in  Ecclefiiastea,  they  are  intended  to  represent  th« 
eayings  of  sensual,  careless  people,  indulging  themselves  in  their  profane  ways, 
their  utter  neglect  of  God  and  goodness,  with  the  notion  that  this  world  is  all. 
It  is  much  the  same  as  the  imbeliever's  saying,  "  Let  mb  eat  and  drink,  for 
to-morrow  we  die."  But  see  the  ever- watchful  goodness  and  mercy  of  God.  The 
words  which  the  dissolute,  wild-hearted  sinner  uses  to  encourage  himself  in  his 
evil,  inconsiderate  ways,  He  teaches  us  to  take  up,  and  use  them  in  a  very 
different  sense;  to  express  the  inward  joy  and  comfort  which  God's  people  may 
find  in  obeying  Him.  As  thus :  suppose  a  person  giving  himself  up,  with  his 
whole  heart,  to  the  service  and  obedience  of  God ;  suppose  him  really  withdrawing 
himself  from  the  sins  which  had  most  easily  beset  him;  suppose  him  making 
some  great  sacrifice,  parting  with  what  he  held  very  dear,  or  submitting  to  pain 
or  grief  for  Christ's  sake:  then  the  holy  and  merciful  Comforter  seems  to  say  to 
him  in  the  words  of  the  text,  "  Go  thy  way  now,  thank  God,  and  take  courage; 
the  blessing  of  God  is  now  restored  to  thee,  and  will  be  upon  all  thou  hast,  and 
upon  thine  ordinary  employments  and  refreshments :  now  thou  mayest  eat  thy 
bread  with  joy,  and  drink  thy  wine  with  a  merry  heart,  for  God  now  accepteth 
thy  works."  What  a  heavenly  light  it  would  throw  over  our  ordinary  works  and 
refreshments,  if,  being  always  careful  to  set  about  them  with  a  good  conscience, 
we  could  seriously  bring  it  home  to  oiu-selves,  that  they  are  so  many  tokens  of 
heavenly  and  eternal  love;  so  many  reasonable  grounds  of  hope,  that  God  really 
accepteth  our  works.  But  there  is  yet  a  higher,  a  Christian  sense  of  these  words. 
The  bread  and  wine,  the  white  garments,  the  ointment  for  the  head,  are  figures 
and  types  of  our  Christian  privileges,  the  blessings  and  favours  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  It  is,  then,  as  if  the  Holy  Word  had  said  to  us,  being,  as  we  are. 
Christian  men,  members  of  the  mystical  Body  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  "  Now 
you  have  been  brought  into  the  communion  of  saints;  now  God  has  set  His  seal 
upon  you;  now  you  are  washed,  sanctified,  justified,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God.  Go  your  way,  then ;  use  yoiir  privileges 
with  all  reverence,  joy,  and  fear."  And  it  would  seem  that  if  Christians  were  at 
all  such  as  they  ought  to  be,  the  words  might  be  well  and  profitably  understood 
with  a  particular  reference  to  this  sacred  season  of  Whitsuntide.  This  is  the  last 
of  the  holy  seasons;  it  represents  to  us  the  full  completion  of  God's  unspeakable 
plan  for  the  salvation  of  the  world.  The  words  have  a  sound  most  comfortable 
to  penitents,  as  well  as  to  those  who,  by  God's  help,  have  kept  themselves  from 
wilful,  deadly  sin.  They  sound  like  words  of  absolution  :  "  Go  thy  way,  return  again 
to  that  holy  Table,  from  which  thy  transgressions  had  for  a  time  separated  thee: 
eat  thy  Bread  and  drink  thy  Wine  with  a  courageous  and  hopeful  heart;  for  now 
there  is  hope  that  God  accepteth  thy  works;  that  He  hears  thee,  since  thou  hast 
left  oft  inclining  imto  wickedness  with  thine  heart.  Thy  case  indeed  is  alarming, 
from  the  continual  danger  of  a  relapse;  and  thy  loss  at  best  is  great,  penitency 
instead  of  innocency  being  thy  portion;  yet  go  on  steadily  and  cheerfully." 
Observe,  however,  the  words  which  follow,  which  to  the  hearing  of  a  thoughtful 
Christian  convey  a  very  serious  admonition,  telling  us  on  what  these  imspeakable 
privileges  depend,  so  far  as  our  own  conduct  is  concerned :  "  Let  thy  garments 
be  always  white,  and  let  thine  head  lack  no  ointment."  To  say,  therefore,  to 
Christians  at  Whitsuntide,  "  Let  thy  garments  be  always  white,"  was  the  same 
as  saying,  "  Take  care  that  at  no  time  you  stain  or  sully  the  bright  and  clear 
robe  of  your  Saviour's  righteousness,  which  has  just  been  thrown  over  you: 
according  to  the  apostle's  saying,  '  As  many  as  have  been  baptized  into  Christ 
have  put  on  Christ.*  As  much  as  possible  keep  it  clear  from  all  spot  of  wilful 
sin."  Again,  says  the  wise  man,  "  Let  thine  head  lack  no  ointment  ";  and  this 
again  is  an  allusion  which  would  come  with  a  particular  meaning  in  early  times 
to  the  new-baptized  Christians,  and  those  who  had  been  present  at  their  baptism. 
And  oil  is  in  Scripture  the  constant  token  of  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Therefore,  to  say,  "  Let  thy  head  lack  no  ointment,"  would  mean,  "  Take 
care  that  thou  stir  up,  cherish,  and  improve  the  unspeakable  gift  of  which  thou 
art  now  made  partaker.  Use  diligently  all  the  means  of  grace  which  Christ  has 
provided  for  thee  in  His  kingdom,  whereof  thou  art  now  come  to  be  an  inheritor." 
(Plain  SermonB  by  Contributors  to  the  "  Tracts  for  the  Times.")  Let  thy  garments 
"be  always  white. — White  robes: — One  of  the  most  common  beliefs  of  men  concern- 
ing heaven  is  that  all  are  to  be  robed  in  white;  and  it  is  no  idle  fancy,  for  the 
Bible  warrants  such  a  belief.  The  priestly  robes  worn  in  the  temple  service  were 
white;  the  apocalyptic  vision  was  filled  with  the  white-robed;  the  poetry  of  the 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cffAP.  VC 

Bible  teaches  that  purity  and  joy  in  life  are  symbolized  by  snowy  raiment — "  Le4 
thy  garments  be  always  white."  "  Thy  garments."  This  is  a  personal  matter. 
The  command  is  to  the  end  that  each  is  to  see  that  his  own  dress  is  clean.  The 
neighbour  will  take  care  of  his  own.  And  now  the  emphasis  comes  on  "  always." 
There  must  not  be  a  single  careless  moment.  Why  is  the  colour  of  our  garments 
to  be  white?  Why?  Because  everybody  looks  well  in  white.  All  complexions 
can  stand  white.  The  plainest  are  adorned  and  the  most  beautiful  are  made 
more  angelic  by  wearing  it.  We  love  white  garments  because  they  are  so  pure. 
No  impure  dyes  have  disfigured  the  cloth,  and  all  of  Nature's  tints  the  bleachers 
have  taken  away.  So  white  robes  remind  us  constantly  of  purity.  And  did  you 
ever  think  how  important  it  is?  The  springs  that  furnish  the  thirsty  with  water 
must  be  m  their  fountain-heads  pure,  or  who  will  dare  to  use  it?  The  usefulness 
of  anything  depends  upon  its  purity.  The  white  garment  is  an  object  lesson, 
then,  teaching  the  vital  importance  of  purity  in  heart  and  life.  To  be  able  to  look 
God  in  the  face  with  steady  eye  and  unblanched  cheek.  0,  that  is  worth  all  th» 
sacrifice  that  it  may  demand  1  "  But  it  is  so  hard  to  keep  pure  and  sweet,"  they 
say.  I  may  be  tempted  by  the  allurements  of  the  world.  Money,  with  its 
shining  sunbeams,  may  twine  its  fingers  about  my  heart  to  woo  it.  Ambition, 
with  her  lofty  and  imposing  mien,  may  awe  me  to  obey  her.  Shall  I  give  up  th» 
white  raiment  of  my  soul?  I  would  not  dare  to  soil  my  raiment  now,  for  th» 
spots  in  such  a  light  the  whole  world  could  see,  and  how  could  I  ever  again  look 
up  and  cry  '*  Abba,  Father,"  if  on  my  heart  was  the  stain  of  evil?  But  white 
raiment  is  the  symbol  of  another  quality  in  the  true  life.  It  is  joy.  Always 
dependent  upon  purity  for  its  life,  yet  a  separate  quality.  No  impure  life  is  ever 
a  truly  happy  life.  We  put  on  our  clean  raiment  to  honoiu*  the  joyful  occasion. 
Children,  I  believe  that  pure  heart  is  always  happy.  Then  there  is  a  duty 
attached,  the  duty  to  be  joyful  in  being  and  doing  good.  How  different  the  world 
would  be  to-day  ijf  the  command  about  our  spiritual  toilet  were  heeded  I  Let  us 
try  hereafter  to  live  in  such  a  way  as  to  teach  oxa  friends  how  blessed  it  is  to  have 
pure,  and,  therefore,  happy  hearts.  White  robes  bring  great  responsibility.  They 
soil  so  easily.  The  clean  garment  shows  the  dirt  at  the  slightest  contact.  Keep 
your  hearts  clean,  for  they  will  soil  as  easily  as  the  white  dress.  The  little  girl 
who  went  home  from  a  visit  to  a  neighbour's  by  far  the  longest  way,  in  order  to 
keep  her  dress  from  the  mud  of  a  certain  street,  on  being  asked  why  she  did  it 
since  it  made  her  very  tired,  said :  "  It  kept  my  dwess  tean."  How  much  better 
children  of  our  Heavenly  Father  we  should  be  if  we  were  as  particular  to  keep 
the  raiment  of  our  hearts  free  from  the  mud-stains  of  sin,  even  though  the  extra 
toil  makes  us  very  weary.  Better  be  tired,  even  to  death,  than  soil  the  raiment 
of  the  soul.     (G.  F.  Prenti«».) 

Ver.  10.  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  inight.-;-0/  induniry 
in  general: — ^By  industry  we  understand  a  serious  and  steady  application  of  mind, 
joined  with  a  vigorous  exercise  of  our  active  faculties,  in  prosecution  of  any 
reasonable,  honeet,  useful  design,  in  order  to  the  accomplishment  or  attainment  of 
some  considerable  good.  Industry  doth  not  consist  merely  in  action;  for  that 
is  incessant  in  all  persons,  our  mind  being  a  restless  thing,  never  abiding  in  a 
total  cessation  from  thought  or  from  design;  being  like  a  ship  in  the  sea,  if  not 
steered  to  some  good  purpose  by  reason,  yet  tossed  by  the  waves  of  fancy,  or 
driven  by  the  winds  of  temptation  somewhither.  But  the  direction  of  our  mind  to 
some  good  end,  without  roving  or  flinching,  in  a  straight  and  steady  course, 
drawing  after  it  our  active  powers  in  execution  thereof,  doth  constitute  industry; 
the  which  therefore  usually  is  attended  with  labour  and  pain;  for  our  mind  is  not 
easily  kept  in  a  constant  attention  to  the  same  thing;  and  the  spirits  employed 
in  thought  are  prone  to  flutter  and  fly  away,  so  that  it  is  hard  to  fix  them :  and 
the  corporeal  instruments  of  action  being  strained  to  a  high  pitch,  or  detained  in 
a  tone,  will  soon  feel  a  lassitude  somewhat  offensive  to  nature;  whence  labour 
or  pain  is  commonly  reckoned  an  ingredient  of  industry,  and  laboriousness  is  a 
name  signifying  it;  on  which  account  this  virtue,  as  involving  labour,  deserveth 
a  peculiar  commendation;  it  being  then  most  laudable  to  follow  the  dictates  of 
reason,  when  so  doing  is  attended  with  difficulty  and  trouble.  1.  Industry  doth 
befit  the  constitution  and  frame  of  our  nature;  all  the  faculties  of  our  soul  and 
organs  of  our  body  being  adapted  in  a  congruity  and  tendency  thereto !  our  hands 
are  suited  for  work,  our  feet  for  travel,  our  senses  to  watch  for  occasion  ol 
pursuing  good  and  eschewing  evil,  our  reason  to  plod  and  oontriye  waya  of  emplojy 


CHAP. «.]  ECCLESIASTES.  225 

ing  the  other  parts  and  powers;  all  these,  I  say,  are  formed  for  action;  and  that 
not  in  a  loose  and  gadding  way,  or  in  a  slack  and  remiss  degree,  but  in  regard  to 
determinate  ends,  with  vigour  requisite  to  attain  them;  and  especially  our 
appetitee  do  prompt  to  industry,  as  inclining  to  things  not  obtainable  without  it; 
wherefore  in  not  being  industrious  we  defeat  the  intent  of  our  Maker;  we  pervert 
His  work  and  gifts;  we  forfeit  the  use  and  benefit  of  our  faculties;  we  are  bad 
husbands  of  nature's  stock.  2.  In  consequence  hereto  industry  doth  preserve  and 
perfect  our  nature,  keeping  it  in  good  tune  and  temper,  improving  and  advancing 
it  towards  its  best  state.  If  the  water  runneth,  it  holdeth  clear,  sweet,  and  fresh; 
but  stagnation  turneth  it  into  a  noisome  puddle :  if  the  air  be  fanned  by  winds, 
it  is  pure  and  wholesome;  but  from  being  shut  up,  it  groweth  thick  and  putrid: 
if  metals  be  employed,  they  abide  smooth  and  splendid;  but  lay  them  up,  and 
they  soon  contract  rust :  if  the  earth  be  belaboured  with  culture,  it  yieldeth  corn ; 
but  lying  neglected,  it  will  be  overgrown  with  brakes  and  thistles;  and  the  better 
its  soil  is,  the  ranker  weeds  it  wUl  produce :  all  nature  is  upheld  in  its  being, 
order,  and  state,  by  constant  agitation;  every  creature  is  incessantly  employed 
in  action  conformable  to  ite  designed  end  and  use ;  in  like  manner  the  preservation 
and  improvement  of  our  faculties  depends  on  their  constant  exercise.  8.  As  wa 
naturally  were  composed,  so  by  Divine  appointment  we  were  originally  designed 
for  industry;  Ood  did  not  intend  that  man  should  live  idly,  even  in  bis  beet  state, 
or  should  enjoy  happiness  without  taking  pains;  but  did  provide  work  enough  even 
in  paradise  itself.  4.  By  our  transgression  and  fall  the  necessity  of  industry 
(together  with  a  difficulty  of  obtaining  good,  and  avoiding  evil)  was  increased  to 
us;  being  ordained  both  as  a  just  punishment  for  our  oSences,  and  as  an  expedient 
remedy  of  our  needs.  6.  Accordingly  our  condition  and  circumstances  in  the  world 
are  so  ordered  as  to  require  industry;  so  that  without  it  we  cannot  support  our 
life  in  any  comfort  or  convenience.  6.  Industry  hath  annexed  thereto,  by  Divine 
appointment  and  promise,  the  fairest  fruits,  and  the  richest  rewards :  all  good 
things  are  the  fruits  of  industry ;  ordered  to  sprout  from  it,  under  the  protection 
and  influence  of  God's  blessing,  which  commonly  doth  attend  it.  Ood  indeed 
oould  not  well  proceed  otherwise  in  dispensing  His  favours  to  us;  not  well,  I  say; 
that  is,  not  without  subverting  the  methods  of  things  which  Himself  hath  estab- 
lished; not  without  slighting  and  voiding  His  own  first  bounty,  or  rendering  the 
common  gifts  of  nature  (our  reason,  our  senses,  our  active  powers)  vain  and 
useless;  not  without  making  us  incapable  of  any  praise,  or  any  reward,  which 
suppose  works  achieved  by  our  earnest  endeavour;  not  without  depriving  us  ol 
that  sweetest  content,  which  springeth  from  enjoying  the  fruit  of  our  labour. 
Nothing  is  more  grateful  to  men  than  prosperous  success  in  their  undertakings, 
whereby  they  attain  their  ends,  satisfy  their  desires,  save  their  pains,  and  coma 
oS  with  credit;  this  commonly  is  the  effect  of  industry,  and  scarce  ever  ia  foimd 
without  it :  nothing  of  worth  or  weight  can  be  achieved  with  half  a  mind,  with 
a  faint  heart,  with  a  lame  endeavour.  Plentiful  accommodations  for  our  8UBte« 
nance  and  convenience  all  men  will  agree  to  be  very  desirable;  and  these  are 
indeed  the  blessings  of  Him,  who  "  visiteth  the  earth  and  enricheth  it";  who 
"  crowneth  the  year  with  His  goodness,"  and  "  whose  clouds  drop  fatness  ";  but 
they  are  so  dispensed  by  Heaven  that  industry  must  concur  therewith  in  deriving 
them  to  us,  and  sloth  will  debar  us  of  them.  Another  darling  of  human  aflection 
is  honour,  or  reputation  among  men :  this  also  plainly,  after  the  common  reason 
and  course  of  things,  is  purchased  and  preserved  by  industry :  for  he  that  aspireth 
to  worthy  things,  and  assayeth  laudable  designs,  pursuing  them  steadily  with 
serious  application  of  heart  and  resolute  activity,  will  rarely  fail  of  good  success, 
and  consequently  will  not  miss  honour,  which  ever  doth  crown  victory;  and  if  he 
should  hap  to  fail  in  his  design,  yet  he  will  not  lose  his  credit;  for  having  meant 
well,  and  done  his  best,  all  will  be  ready  to  excuse,  many  to  commend  him :  the 
very  qualities  which  industry  doth  exercise,  and  the  eSeots  which  it  doth  produce, 
to  beget  honour,  as  being  ornaments  of  our  person  and  state.  Another  yet  mora 
precious  good,  far  surpassing  all  external  advantages  of  our  state;  wisdom,  I 
mean,  or  a  good  comprehension,  and  right  judgment  about  matters  of  highest 
importance  to  us,  is  the  prize  of  industry,  and  not  to  be  gained  without  it;  it  ia 
the  offspring  of  watchful  observation  and  experience,  of  serious  meditation  and 
study;  of  careful  reflection  on  things,  marking,  comparing,  and  weighing  their 
nature,  their  worth,  their  tendencies  and  consequences;  these  are  needful  to  the 
getting  of  wisdom,  because  truth,  which  it  seeketh,  commonly  doth  not  lie  in  the 
•urfaee,  obvious  to  a  ■uperfioial  glance,  nor  only  dependeth  on  a  simple  considera« 

15 


22fl  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ix. 


tion  of  few  things;  but  is  lodged  deep  in  the  bowels  of  things,  and  under  a  knotty 
complication  of  various  matters;  so  that  we  must  dig  to  come  at  it,  and  labour  in 
unfolding  it :  nor  is  it  an  easy  task  to  void  the  prejudices  springing  from  inclina- 
tion or  temper,  from  education  or  custom,  from  passion  and  interest,  which  cloud 
the  mind,   and   obstruct  the  attainment  of  wisdom.      What  should  I   speak   of 
learning,  or  the  knowledge  of  various  things,  transcending  vulgar  apprehension? 
Who  knoweth  not  that  we  carmot  otherwise  reach  any  part  of  that,  than  by  assidu- 
ous study  and  contemplation?    Who  can  be  ignorant  that  no  wit  alone,  or  strength 
of  parts  can  suffice,  without  great  industry,  to  frame  any  science,  to  learn  any 
one  tongue,  to  know  the  history  of  nature,  or  of  providence?     But  farther  yet, 
virtue,  the  noblest  endowment  and  richest  possession  whereof  man  is  capable;  the 
glory  of  our  nature,  the  beauty  of  our  soul,  the  goodliest  ornament  and  the  firmest 
support  of  our  life ;  that  also  is  the  fruit  and  blessing  of  industry ;  that  of  all  things 
most  indispensably  doth  need  and  require  it.     It  doth  not  grow  in  us  by  nature, 
nor  befall  us  by  fortune;  for  nature  is  so  far  from  producing  it,  that  it  yieldeth 
mighty  obstacles  and  resistances  to  its  birth,  there  being  in  the  best  dispositions 
much  averseness  from  good,  and  great  proneness  to  evil;  fortune  doth  not  further 
its  acquists,  but  casteth  in  rubs  and  hindrances  thereto,  every  condition  presenting 
its  allurements,  or  its  aSrightmente  from  it;  all  things  within  us  and  about  us 
conspire  to  render  its  production  and  its  practice  laborious.     Indeed   the   very 
nature  and  essence  of  virtue  doth  consist  in  the  most  difficult  and  painful  efforts 
of  soul;  in  the  extirpating  rooted  prejudices  and  notions  from  oiu:  understanding; 
in  bending  a  stiff  will ,  and  rectifying  crooked  inclinations ;  in  overruling  a  rebellious 
temper;  in  curbing  eager  and  importunate  appetites;  in  taming  wild  passions;  In 
withstanding  violent  temptations;  in  surmounting  many  difficulties,  and  sustain- 
ing many  troubles;  in  struggling  with  various  unruly  lusts  within,  and  encounter- 
ing many  stout  enemies  abroad,  which  assault  our  reason,  and  "  war  against  our 
soul  ":  in  such  exercises  its  very  being  lieth;  its  birth,  its  growth,  its  subsistence 
dependeth  on  them;  so  that  from  any  discontinuance  or  remission  of  them  it 
would  soon  decay,  languish  away,  and  perish.    Lastly,  the  sovereign  good,  the 
last  scope  of  our  actions,  the  top  and  sum  of  our  desires,  happiness  itself,  or 
eternal  life  in  perfect  rest,  joy,  and  glory;  although  it  be  the  supreme  gift  of  God, 
and  special  boon  of  Divine  graoe,  yet  it  also  by  God  Himself  is  declared  to  be  the 
result  and  reward  of  industry;  for  we  are  commanded  "  to  work  out  our  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling,"  and  to  '*  give  diligence  in  making  our  calling  and 
election  sure,"  by  virtuous  practice.     It  is  plainly  industry  which  climbeth  the 
holy  mount;  it  is  industry  which  taketh  *'  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  force  ";  it  is 
industry  which  "  so  runneth  as  to  obtain  "  the  prize,  which  so  fighteth  as  "to 
receive  the  crown,"  which  so  watcheth  as  to  secure  our  everlasting  interest  to  us. 
Thus  do  the  choicest  good  things  of  which  we  are  capable  spring  from  industry, 
or  depend  on  it ;  and  no  considerable  good  can  be  attained  without  it :  thus  all 
the  gifts  of  God  are  by  it  conveyed  to  us,  or  are  rendered  in  effect  beneficial  to  us; 
for  the  gifts  of  nature  are  but  capacities,  which  it  improveth;  the  gifts  of  fortune 
or  providence  are  but  instruments,  which  it  employ eth  to  our  use;  the  gifts  of 
grace  are  the  supports  and  succours  of  it;  and  the  very  gift  of  glory  is  its  fruit 
and  recompense.     (Isaac  Barrow,  D,D.)    Indutiry,  which  is  recommended  in  the 
text,  is  a  virtue  of  a  very  diffusive  nature  and  influence,  so  that  no  business  or 
design  can  be  well  managed  without  it :  we  ought,  therefore,  to  conceive  a  high 
opinion  of  it,  and  inure  ourselves  to  the  practice  of  it  on  all  occasions.    1.  We  may 
consider   that  industry   is  productive  of  ease  itself,   and   preventive  of   trouble. 
Sloth,  indeed,  affects  ease  and  quiet,  but  by  affecting  loses  them  :  it  hates  labour 
and  trouble,  but  by  hating  incurs  them;  but  industry,  by  a  little  voluntary  labour, 
in   due   place   and   season,   saves   much   labour   afterwards   and   great   distress. 
2.  Industry  begets  ease  by  procuring  good  habits,  and  a  facility  of  transacting 
things  expedient  to  be  done:   it  breeds  assurance  and  courage  needful  for  the 
prosecution  of  business  and  the  performance  of  duties.    8.  We  may  consider  that 
it   will   sweeten   all  our   enjoyments,   and   season   them   with   a   grateful   relish. 
4.  Especially  those  accommodations  prove  most  delightful  which  our  industry  hath 
procured  to  us;  for  we  look  on  them  with  a  special  affection,  as  the  children  of 
our  endeavours.   6.  The  very  exercise  of  industry  immediately  in  itself  is  delightful ; 
the  very  settlement  of  our  mind  on  fit  objects,  whereby  we  are  freed  from  doubt 
and  distraction,  ministers  content;  the  consideration  that  we  are  spending  our 
time  and  talents  to  good  advantage,  in  serving  God,  benefiting  our  neighbour, 
and  bettering  our  own  state,  is  very  cheering  and  comfortable.    6.   Industrjr 


CHAP.  IX]  ECCLESIASTES.  SZl 

affords  a  lasting  comfort,  deposited  in  the  memory  and  conscience  of  him  that 
practises  it.  7.  Industry  argues  a  generous  and  ingenuous  complexion  of  soul : 
it  implies  a  mind  not  content  with  mean  and  vulgar  things,  but  aspiring  to  things 
of  high  worth  and  pursuing  them  with  courage :  it  signifies  a  heart  not  enduring 
to  owe  the  sustenance  and  convenience  of  life  to  the  liberality  of  others. 
8.  Industry  is  a  fence  to  innocence  and  virtue;  a  bar  to  all  kinds  of  sin  and 
vice,  guarding  the  avenues  of  the  heart,  and  keeping  o2  occasions  and  temptations 
to  vicious  practices;  whilst  idleness  is  the  nursery  of  sin.  9.  Industry  prevents 
the  sins  of  vain  curiosity,  pragmatical  troublesome  impertinence,  and  the  liko 
pests  of  common  life,  into  which  persons  not  diligently  following  their  own 
business  will  assuredly  fall.  10.  Industry  is  needful  in  every  condition  and 
calling  of  life;  in  all  relations  for  our  good  behaviour  and  right  discharge  of  our 
duty  in  them.  Are  we  rich?  then  is  industry  requisite  for  keeping  and  securing 
our  wealth,  or  managing  it  wisely.  Are  we  conspicuous  in  dignity,  honour,  and 
good  repute  amongst  men?  then  is  industry  requisite  to  keep  us  fast  in  that  state; 
since  nothing  is  more  frail  than  honour,  which  must  be  nourished  by  worthy 
actions;  otherwise  it  will  languish  and  decay.  On  the  other  hand,  are  we  poor 
and  low  in  the  world?  then  do  we  much  need  industry  to  shun  the  extremes  of 
want  and  ignominy,  and  to  improve  our  condition.  11.  It  may  also  deserve  our 
consideration,  that  it  is  industry,  to  which  the  public  state  of  the  world,  and  of 
each  commonweal  therein,  is  indebted  for  its  being  advanced  above  rudo 
barbarism  :  also  for  the  invention  and  perfection  of  useful  arts  and  sciences,  tha 
stately  fabrics  which  we  admire,  and  the  commodious  habitations  which  we  enjoy. 
12.  Industry  is  commended  to  us  by  all  sorts  of  examples,  deserving  our  regard 
and  imitation :  all  nature  is  a  copy  thereof,  and  the  whole  world  a  glass,  wherein 
we  may  behold  this  duty  represented  to  us :  examples  of  all  the  creatures  around 
us,  of  rational  and  intelligent  natures,  of  our  blessed  Saviour,  of  the  inhabitants 
of  heaven,  yea  of  God  Himself.  And  shall  we  alone  be  idle,  whilst  all  things  are 
BO  busy?  13.  If  we  consider,  we  shall  find  the  root  and  source  of  all  the  incon* 
venienoes,  the  mischiefs,  the  wants  of  which  wo  complain,  to  be  our  sloth;  and 
there  is  hardly  one  of  them  which  commonly  we  might  not  prevent  or  remove  by 
industry.     (Ibid.)     On  diligence  in  our  general  and  particular  calling: — I.  CoN- 

SIDEB  THE   MATTER  OF  THIS   COUNSEL  AND  EXHOBTATION  ;   and  that  is,  that   We  WOUld 

use  great  diligence  and  industry  about  that  which  is  our  proper  work  and  businesi 
in  this  life;  and  this  may  very  probably  comprehend  in  it  these  two  things— 
1.  Diligence  in  our  great  work  and  business,  that  which  equally  concerns  every 
man ;  I  mean  the  business  of  religion,  in  order  to  the  eternal  happiness  and  salva« 
tion  of  our  souls.  This  consists  in  these  two  things — (1)  In  a  sincere  care  and 
endeavour  of  universal  obedience  to  God  by  the  conformity  of  our  lives  and  actions 
to  His  laws.  (2)  In  case  of  sin  and  miscarriage,  in  a  sincere  repentance  for  our 
sins,  and  a  timely  care  to  be  reconciled  to  God.  2.  Diligence  in  that  province 
and  station  which  God  hath  appointed  us,  whatever  it  be;  whether  it  consists  in 
the  labour  of  our  hands,  or  in  the  improvement  of  our  minds,  in  order  to  the 
gaining  of  knowledge  for  our  own  pleasure  and  satisfaction,  and  for  tlie  use  and 
benefit  of  others ;  whether  it  lie  in  the  skill  of  government,  and  the  administration 
of  public  justice;  or  in  the  management  of  a  great  estate,  of  an  honourable  rank 
and  quality  above  others,  to  the  best  advantage,  for  the  honour  of  God,  and  the 
benefit  and  advantage  of  men,  so  as,  by  the  influence  of  our  power  and  estate, 
and  by  the  authority  of  our  example,  to  contribute  all  we  can  to  the  welfare  and 
happiness  of  others.  II.  Some  oonsidebations  to  excite  cub  oabe  and  diligence 
IN  this  great  work  which  God  hath  given  vb  to  do  in  this  world,  I  mean 
ohiefiy  the  business  of  religion,  in  order  to  the  eternal  happiness  and  salvation  of 
our  souls.  1.  Consider  the  nature  of  our  work,  which  is  such  as  may  both  excite 
and  encourage  our  diligence  and  care  about  it.  It  is  indeed  a  service,  but  such 
as  is  our  perfect  freedom;  it  is  the  service  of  God,  whom  to  serve  is  the  greatest 
honour  that  man  or  any  other  creature  is  capable  of;  it  is  obedience,  but  even 
obedience,  considering  our  ignorance  and  frailty,  is  much  wiser  and  safer  for  us 
than  a  total  exemption  from  all  law  and  rule;  for  the  laws  which  God  hath  given 
us  are  not  imposed  upon  us  merely  for  His  will  and  pleasure,  but  chiefly  for  our 
benefit  and  advantage.  So  that  to  obey  and  please  God  is  in  truth  nothing  else 
but  to  do  those  things  which  are  really  best  for  ourselves.  2.  Consider  how  great 
our  work  is,  and  then  we  shall  easily  be  convinced  what  care  it  requires,  what 
diligence  it  calls  for  from  us.  3.  Consider  what  incredible  pains  men  will  take, 
what  diligence  they  will  use,  for  bad  piurposes,  and  for  ends  infinitely  less  con- 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ec 

siderable.  "  Thieves  wUl  rise  and  travel  by  night  to  rob  and  kill,  and  shall  w» 
ixse  no  care,  no  vigilance,  to  save  ourselves?"  4.  Consider  that  when  we  oome  to 
die,  nothing  will  yield  more  true  and  solid  consolation  to  us  than  the  remembrance 
of  a  useful  and  well-spent  liie,  a  life  of  great  labour  and  diligence,  of  great  zeal 
and  faithfulness  in  the  service  of  God;  and,  on  the  contrary,  with  what  grief  and 
regret  shall  we  look  back  upon  all  thofle  precious  hours  which  we  have  so  fondly 
misplaced  in  sin  and  vanity  1  6.  Consider  that  the  degrees  of  our  happiness  in 
another  world  will  certainly  bear  a  proportion  to  the  degrees  of  our  diligence  and 
industry  in  serving  God  and  doing  good.  And  it  is  an  argument  of  a  mean  spirit 
not  to  aspire  after  the  best  and  happiest  condition  which  is  to  be  attained  by  us. 
6.  Consider  that  this  life  is  the  time  of  our  activity  and  working,  the  next  is  the 
season  of  retribution  and  recompense ;  we  shall  then  have  nothing  to  do,  but  either 
to  reap  and  enjoy  the  comfort  of  well-doing,  or  to  repent  the  folly  of  an  ill-spent 
life,  and  the  irreparable  mischief  which  thereby  we  have  brought  upon  ourselves. 
(J.  Tillot$on,  D.D.)  A  home  miation  sermon: — If  God  had  willed  it  we  might 
each  one  of  us  have  entered  heaven  at  the  moment  of  our  conversion.  He  might 
have  changed  us  from  imperfection  to  perfection.  He  might  have  cut  out  the  very 
roots  of  sin,  and  have  destroyed  the  very  being  of  corruption,  and  have  taken  ua 
to  heaven  instanter,  if  so  He  had  willed  it.  Notwithsanding  that,  we  are  here. 
And  why  are  we  here?  Does  God  delight  to  tantalize  His  people  by  keeping  them 
in  a  wilderness  when  they  might  be  in  Canaan?  The  answer  is,  they  are  here  that 
they  may  glorify  God,  and  that  they  may  bring  others  to  know  His  love.  Taking 
it,  therefore,  as  granted  that  the  people  of  God  are  here  to  do  something  to  bless 
their  fellow-men,  our  text  comes  in  very  pertinently  as  the  rule  of  our  life. 
I.  First,  I  shall  explain  the  pkeaoheb's  exhobtation.  I  shall  do  so  by  dividing 
it  into  three  parts.  What  shall  I  do? — "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth."  How 
shall  I  do  it?— "Do  it  with  thy  might."  And  then,  why  shall  I  do  it?— "  For 
there  is  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowledge,  nor  wisdom  in  the  grave,  whither 
thou  goest."  1.  Are  there  not  some  who  say,  "  I  hope  I  love  Christ;  I  desire  to 
serve  Him,  for  I  have  been  saved  by  Hie  work  upon  the  cross;  what  then  can  I 
do?"  The  answer  is — "  whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do."  Here  we  will 
observe,  first,  that  this  refers  us  to  the  works  that  are  near  at  hand.  Many  a 
young  man  thinks  if  he  could  stand  up  under  a  banyan  tree,  and  discoiu'se  to  ths 
black  faces  in  India,  how  eloquent  he  might  be.  My  dear  fellow,  why  don't  you 
try  the  streets  of  London  first,  and  see  whether  you  are  eloquent  there?  Many 
a  lady  imagines  that  if  she  could  move  in  a  high  circle  she  would  no  doubt  become 
another  Lady  Huntingdon,  and  do  wonders.  But  why  cannot  you  do  wonders  in 
the  circle  in  which  God  has  placed  you?  He  does  not  call  you  to  do  that  which  is 
leagues  away,  and  which  is  beyond  your  power;  it  is  that  which  your  hand  findeth 
to  do.  I  am  persuaded  that  our  home  duties — the  duties  which  come  near  to  us 
in  our  own  streets,  in  our  own  lanes  and  alleys — are  the  duties  in  which  we  ought 
most  of  us  mainly  to  glorify  Christ.  Many  say,  "  I  wish  I  could  become  a 
preacher."  Yes,  but  you  are  not  called  to  be  a  preacher,  it  may  be.  Serve  God 
in  that  which  your  hand  findeth  present.  Serve  Him  in  your  immediate  situation, 
where  you  now  are.  Begin  at  home.  When  Jerusalem  was  built,  every  man 
built  before  his  own  house.  Do  you  the  same.  Again,  **  whatsoever  thy  hand 
findeth  to  do,"  refers  to  works  that  are  possible.  There  are  many  things  which 
our  heart  findeth  to  do  that  we  never  shall  do.  It  is  well  it  is  in  our  heart;  God 
accepts  the  will  for  the  deed.  But  if  we  would  be  eminently  useful,  we  must  not 
be  content  with  forming  schemes  in  our  heart,  and  talking  of  them  with  our  lips. 
We  must  get  plans  that  are  tangible,  schemes  that  we  can  really  manage,  ideas 
that  we  can  really  carry  out;  and  so  we  shall  fulfil  the  exhortation,  **  Whatsoever 
thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it."  Do  what  you  can,  in  your  workshop,  or  shed,  or 
with  a  needle  in  your  hand;  and  if  ever  you  have  a  sceptre — which  is  not  likely — 
and  you  use  your  needle  well,  you  would  be  the  most  likely  person  to  use  your 
sceptre  well  also.  There  is  another  word  of  exhortation  which  seems  to  strike  ma 
as  being  very  necessary  when  addressing  God's  people,  it  is  this  :  '*  Whatsoever 
thy  hand  findeth  to  do."  Whether  it  be  the  visitation  of  the  poorest  of  the  poor 
or  the  teaching  of  the  most  ignorant,  whether  the  hewing  of  wood  or  the  drawing 
of  water,  the  very  lowest  work  in  the  Lord's  house,  if  thy  hand  findeth  it  to  do, 
do  it.  There  is  a  story  told  in  the  old  American  war,  that  once  upon  a  time 
George  Washington,  the  commander-in-chief,  was  going  around  among  his  soldiers. 
They  were  hard  at  work,  lifting  a  heavy  piece  of  timber  at  some  fortification. 
There  stood  the  corporal  of  the  regiment  calling  out  to  his  men,  "  Heave  there^ 


'  CHAP.  IX.]  ECCLESIASTES.  229 

heave  ahoyl"  and  giving  them  all  kinds  of  directions.  As  large  as  poesible  the 
good  corporal  was.  So  Washington,  alighting  from  hia  horse,  said  to  him,  **  What 
is  the  good  of  your  calling  out  to  those  men,  why  don't  you  help  them  yourself 
and  do  part  of  the  work."  The  corporal  drew  himself  up  and  said,  "  Perhaps  you 
are  not  aware  to  whom  you  are  speaking,  sir;  I  am  a  corporal."  "  I  beg  your 
pardon,"  said  Washington;  "you  are  a  corporal,  are  you;  I  am  sorry  I  should 
have  insulted  you."  So  he  took  oS  his  own  coat  and  waistcoat  and  set  to  work 
to  help  the  men  build  the  fortification.  When  he  had  done  he  said,  "  Mr. 
Corporal,  I  am  sorry  I  insulted  you,  but  when  you  have  any  more  fortifications 
to  get  up,  and  your  men  won't  help  you,  send  for  George  Washington,  the  com- 
mander-in-chief, and  I  will  come  and  help  them."  The  corporal  slunk  away 
perfectly  ashamed  of  himself.  And  so  Christ  Jesus  might  say  to  us,  "  Oh,  you 
don't  like  teaching  the  poor;  it  is  beneath  your  dignity;  then  let  your  Commander« 
in-Chief  do  it;  He  can  teach  the  poor,  He  can  wash  the  feet  of  the  saints.  Ha 
can  visit  the  sick  and  afflicted — He  came  from  heaven  to  do  this,  and  He  will  set 
you  the  example."  Surely  we  should  each  be  ashamed  of  ourselves,  and  declare 
from  this  time  forward  whatever  it  is,  be  it  great  or  little,  if  it  comes  to  our  hand, 
and  if  God  will  but  give  us  help  and  give  us  grace,  we  will  do  it  with  all  our 
might.  2.  How  are  we  to  do  it?  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with 
thy  might."  First,  "  do  it."  That  is,  do  it  promptly;  not  fritter  away  your  lives 
in  setting  down  what  you  intend  to  do  to-morrow  as  being  a  recompense  for  the 
idleness  of  to-day.  No  man  ever  served  God  by  doing  things  to-morrow.  If  we 
have  honoured  Christ  and  are  blessed,  it  is  by  the  things  which  we  do  to-day. 
For  after  all,  the  ticking  of  the  clock  saith — to-day  1  to-day  1  to-day !  We  have  no 
other  time  in  which  to  live.  The  past  is  gone;  the  future  hath  not  come;  we  have, 
we  never  shall  have,  anything  but  the  present.  This  is  our  all ;  let  us  do  what  our 
hand  findeth  to  do.  "  Procrastination  is  the  thief  of  time."  Let  him  not  steal 
thy  time.  Do  it,  at  once.  Serve  thy  God  now;  for  now  is  all  the  time  thou  canst 
reckon  on.  Then,  the  next  words,  "  Do  it  with  thy  might."  Whatever  you  do 
for  Christ,  throw  your  whole  soul  into  it.  Christ  wants  none  to  serve  Him  with 
their  fingers  :  He  must  have  their  hands,  their  arms,  their  hearts.  We  must  not 
give  Christ  a  little  slurred  labour,  which  is  done  as  a  matter  of  course  now  and 
then;  but  when  we  do  serve  Him,  we  must  do  it  with  all  our  heart,  and  soul,  and 
strength,  and  might.  Serve  the  Master  and  spend  yourself  in  your  strength. 
"  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might."  But  where  is  the 
might  of  a  Christian?  Let  us  not  forget  that.  The  might  of  a  Christian  is  not 
in  himself,  for  he  is  perfect  weakness.  His  might  lieth  in  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  It 
will  be  well  for  us  if  all  we  attempt  to  do  is  done  in  God's  strength,  or  else  it 
will  not  be  done  with  might :  it  will  be  feebly  and  badly  done.  3.  Why?  We  are 
to  do  it  with  all  oiir  might  because  death  is  near ;  and  when  death  comes  there  will 
be  an  end  to  all  our  serving  God  on  earth,  an  end  to  our  preaching,  an  end  to 
our  praying,  an  end  to  our  doing  aught  for  God's  glory  among  the  perishing  souls 
of  men.  "There  is  an  old  monkish  legend  told  of  a  great  painter,  who  had  begun 
&  painting,  but  did  not  finish  it;  and,  as  the  legend  went,  he  prayed  that  he  might 
come  back  on  earth  that  he  might  finish  that  painting.  There  is  a  picture,  now 
extant,  representing  him  after  he  had  come  back  to  finish  his  picture.  There  is  a 
solemnity  about  that  man's  look,  as  he  paints  away  with  all  his  might,  for  he  had 
but  little  time  allowed  him,  and  a  ghastliness,  as  if  he  knew  that  he  must  soon 
go  back  agala,  and  wanted  his  labour  to  be  finished.  If  you  were  quite  sure  of 
the  time  of  your  death,  if  you  knew  you  had  but  a  week  or  two  to  live,  with  what 
haste  would  you  go  round  tmd  bid  farewell  to  all  your  friends;  with  what  haste 
would  you  begin  to  set  all  matters  right  on  earth,  supposing  matters  are  all  right 
lor  eternity.  II.  I  endeavour  to  stir  dp  all  professors  of  religion  herb  present 
TO  do  whatsoever  their  hand  findeth  to  do,  to  do  it  now,  and  with  all  their 
ifiGHT.  If  Christ  Jesus  should  leave  the  upper  world,  and  come  into  the  midst  of 
this  hall  this  morning,  what  answer  could  you  give,  if,  after  showing  you  His 
wounded  hands  and  feet,  and  His  rent  side.  He  should  put  this  question,  "  I  have 
done  all  this  for  thee,  what  hast  thou  done  for  Me?"    Let  me  put  that  question 

for  Him,  and  in  His  behalf.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)     Life  the  $ea8on  for  action: 

I.  Am  bxhobtation  to  present  activity — **  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth,"  etc. 
1.  Based  on  the  fact  that  particular  work  is  allotted  to  each  life.  In  the  Divine 
economy  nothing  has  been  created  without  some  sphere  of  usefulness.  2.  Urged 
by  the  fact  that  opportunity  once  lost  can  never  be  regained.  8.  Limited  by  the 
jtruth  thftt  the  work  appointed  to  each  will  take  the  whole  season  of  life;  hence 


i830  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 


no  man  can  do  another's  work.  II.  A  eecommendation  to  eaenestnbss — "  Do  it 
with  thy  might."  Because — 1.  To  the  earnest  life  the  forces  of  darkness  yield. 
2.  The  work  of  life  is  of  such  infinite  importance.  3.  The  workers  of  iniquity 
labour  in  this  spirit,  and  set  an  example.  4.  In  proportion  to  our  earnestness  ia 
our  real  success  in  life.  5.  By  this  means  will  human  attention  be  excited,  and 
men  be  brought  to  though tfulness.  6.  In  proportion  as  we  are  earnest  shall  we 
be  imitators  of  the  perfect  life.  "  I  have  finished  the  work,"  etc.  III.  A  solemn 
CONSIDERATION — "  There  is  no  work,"  etc.  1.  The  season  for  active  work  ia 
limited.  2.  In  what  state  death  finds  our  work  will  it  be  sealed,  after  which  no 
alteration  can  be  made.  If  incomplete,  so  will  it  remain  to  all  eternity.  3.  This 
life  is  a  season  of  probation;  hence  our  everlasting  weal  or  woe  depends  upon 
its  actions.  (J.  F.  Pridgeon.)  The  improvement  of  present  time: — I.  A  SBEiopa 
EXHORTATION.  1.  The  extent  of  the  duty.  2.  The  manner  of  performing  it. 
II.  The  arguments  to  enforce  this  exhortation.  1.  From  the  incapacities  that 
will  befall  us  in  the  grave.  2.  From  our  hastening  to  it.  (J.  Quyae,  D.D.) 
Diligence  in  our  spiritual  concerns: — I.  The  singular  moment  and  vast  impoet- 
ance  of  this  work.  It  is  not  possible  for  the  mind  of  man  to  conceive  a  more 
important  event  than  the  gain  or  loss  of  a  blesssed  immortality.  II.  The  extent 
AND  compass  of  IT.  It  comprehends  a  great  variety  of  particulars,  none  of  which 
can  safely  be  neglected;  and  requires  constancy  and  perseverance  to  oiu:  lives' 
end.     III.  The  shortness  and  dnceetaintt  of  this  present  life.    IV.  How 

PRONE  WE  ABE  TO  DECEIVE  OURSELVES  DOUBLY  IN  THIS  IMPORTANT  AFFAIR — ^DOt  Onlj 

about  the  sufficiency  of  our  preparation,  but  also  concerning  the  security  of  our 
title.    V.  Let  it  be  supposed  that  a  man  has  gone  furthee  in  the  practice  or 

VIRTUE    than    WAS    STRICTLY    NECESSARY    TO    SECURE    HIS    SALVATION;    how    will    the 

consequence  affect  him :  has  he  misspent  his  time,  and  lost  his  labour?  No 
worthy  action  can  be  fruitless  to  the  agent,  whatever  it  may  be  in  other  respects. 
Not  even  a  pious  thought  or  a  benevolent  wish  can  fail  of  some  good  effect. 
(J.  Balguy.)  The  duty  of  diligence  and  earnestness  in  religion: — Soul-work  is  at 
once  the  most  diflBcult,  the  most  important,  and  the  most  urgent.  I.  Op  thh 
THINGS  WHICH  YOUR  HANDS  SHOULD  FIND  TO  DO.  1.  The  first  thing  that  should 
engage  our  attention,  because  it  is  the  most  momentous  of  all,  is  the  salvation 
of  our  souls.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,"  is  a 
Divine  command.  There  is  indeed  something  for  you  to  do,  to  secure  the  salva- 
tion of  your  soul  from  misery  and  ruin.  2.  The  next  consideration  relates  to  the 
covenant  of  redemption.  Have  you  paid  close  and  serious  attention  to  this?  Do 
you  know  what  it  expresses  and  conveys  of  the  Divine  mercy  to  sinful  men  who 
repent  and  believe?  What  it  reveals  of  the  Divine  will  for  our  salvation? 
8.  Observe,  you  have  much  to  do  for  the  glory  of  God,  for  the  advancement  of 
your  Saviomr's  honour,  and  for  the  good  of  your  fellow-men.  You  must  not  live 
to  yourselves,  but  unto  Him  who  died  for  you  and  rose  agam.  You  must  strive 
to  become  examples  imto  others,  patterns  of  piu-ity  and  goodness.     11.  Let  mi 

NOW   EXPLAIN   AND   APPLY  THE  EXHORTATION  TO  DO  THESE   THINGS   WITH   YOUE  MIGHT. 

1.  Do  them  cordially.  Put  your  heart  into  them.  2.  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth 
to  do,  do  it  promptly.  Why  should  you  delay?  There  is  no  promise  of  Divine 
assistance,  no  certainty  of  success,  unless  you  begin  at  once  to  act  with  decision 
and  earnestness.  III.  Considee  the  solemn  and  irresistible  argument  by 
WHICH  THE  admonition  OP  THE  TEXT  18  ENFORCED — "  for  there  is  no  work,  nor 
device,  nor  knowledge,  nor  wisdom,  in  the  grave,  whither  thou  goest."  If  in  the 
day  of  life  you  will  not  do  your  proper  work  for  your  salvation,  then  night  cometh 
—the  dark  night,  when  no  man  can  work.  (The  Evangelist.)  Life's  duty  (with 
John  ix.  4) : — I  have  taken  these  parallel  texts  because  the  second  supplements 
and  completes  the  first.  1.  I  want  to  dwell  upon  the  first  verse:  "Whatsoever 
thv  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might,"  etc.  We  cannot  read  these  words 
without  feeling  that  they  dwell  very  forcibly  upon  man's  capacity  for  work,  and 
his  opportunities  for  service,  in  this  life.  The  very  mention  of  the  word  "  hand  " 
is  significant.  The  hand  is  one  of  the  distinguishing  gifts  of  man.  It  is  his  hand 
that  represents  much  of  his  power  and  the  secret  of  many  of  his  triumphs.  The 
hand  is  pre-eminently  the  instrument  for  work :  that  with  which  a  man  tuimels 
the  mountains,  steers  the  ships  across  the  mightiest  seas,  buUds  his  monuments, 
•wields  the  pen.  The  hand  ought  to  be  restless  imtil  it  has  found  its  work.  It 
has  been  given  to  man  wherewith  to  work.  The  "  loafer  "  tells  us  that  he  has  not 
been  able  to  find  work.  Yet,  after  all,  even  his  hollow  excuse  tells  us  that  down 
deep  in  his  heart  is  the  consciousness  that  there  is  a  work :  that  it  is  his  duty  to" 


CHAT,  n.]  ECCLESIASTE3.  2S1 

be  diseatisfied  until  he  finds  it;  and  that  the  hand  is  that  which  should  find  it. 
It  is  the  instrument  not  only  for  work,  but  that  of  exquisite  feeling  and  touch. 
Thus  the  figure  is  doubly  used  here — "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,"  or, 
"  reacheth  out  so  as  to  find."  The  human  arm  comes  in  here  in  its  usefulness. 
"  Reacheth  out  so  as  to  find  " — whatsoever  work  that  hand  of  yours,  with  all  the 
advantage  that  the  human  arm  gives  to  it,  can  find  in  its  search  for  toil  and 
service,  do  it,  and  "do  it  with  thy  might."  Now,  man's  energy  or  might  can 
express  itself  in  the  hand  as  it  cannot  in  any  physical  part  of  his  natiure.  No 
member  of  man's  body  can  express  human  might  like  the  hand.  The  hand  with 
the  arm  as  its  lever  is  the  universal  symbol  of  power.  This  is  applied  even  to 
God.  The  inspired  writers  do  not  hesitate  to  speak  of  "  the  right  hand  of  the 
Most  High  ";  and  no  one  can  mistake  what  is  meant  by  that.  Again,  the  phrase 
"  thy  might  "  is  significant.  It  is  the  strength  of  your  body,  the  force  that  is 
behind  the  hand,  and  to  which  the  hand  gives  expression.  Only  by  the  dignity  of 
labour  can  man  rise  to  the  true  level  of  manhood;  only  by  using  the  hand  as  the 
instrument  of  human  industry  and  toil  can  he  fulfil  his  mission.  Observe  next 
the  hint  given  here  concerning  the  transient  opportunities  of  life  in  respect  to 
life's  work — "  For  there  is  no  work  nor  device  in  the  grave  whither  thou  goest." 
We  are  here  urged  to  work  while  we  have  the  opportunity.  The  opportunity  is 
transient  and  will  soon  be  gone.  When  once  allowed  to  slip,  it  never  comes  again 
in  the  same  form.  The  greatest  sorrow  possible  to  man  at  the  close  of  life  is  to 
realize  that  he  has  done  nothing  worth  the  doing,  that  his  life  is  worse  than  a 
failure,  and  that  the  record  of  so  many  years  does  not  include  any  service  which 
has  enriched  his  nature  and  prepared  him  for  the  higher  and  nobler  service 
yonder.  2.  I  have  taken  the  first  words  as  an  introduction  to  those  still  nobler 
words  uttered  by  our  Lord  Himself :  "  I  must  work  the  works  of  Him  that  sent 
Me  while  it  is  day;  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  can  work."  Jesus  Christ  here 
identifies  Himself  with  man  in  view  of  this  common  responsibility  of  toil.  He 
does  not  claim  exemption.  When  we  view  the  life  of  Christ,  even  as  a  human 
life  among  men,  we  are  greatly  impressed  with  the  amount  of  work  which  Ha 
condensed  into  so  brief  a  space  of  time.  Here  and  there,  in  the  record  of  one 
day's  toil,  we  gain  a  truer  conception  than  we  'otherwise  should  have  had  of  the 
nature  of  that  ministry  that  extended  over  a  few  brief  years;  but  which  was  so 
full  of  activity  and  so  rich  in  toil.  Moreover,  we  learn  that  in  all  this  Christ 
idtotified  Himself  with  o\ir  race,  and  thus  left  us  an  example  that  we  should 
foUow  His  steps.  When  the  Son  of  God  became  the  Son  of  Man,  in  no  instance 
did  He  more  fully  identify  Himself  with  us  than  in  His  consecration  to  duty  and 
His  consciousness  of  the  incessant  claims  of  service.  This  brings  us  to  a  new 
truth  which  is  here  brought  into  prominence  by  oiir  Lord — ^namely,  the  conscious- 
ness of  a  mission — *'  I  must  work  the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Me  while  it  is  day." 
Now,  the  consciousness  of  a  mission  is  a  different  thing  even  from  the  conscious* 
Bess  of  labours  crowding  upon  one  and  demanding  one's  attention.  Our  Lord  here 
emphasized  the  truth  that  there  was  One  who  had  sent  Him.  There  was  not  only 
a  work  awaiting  Him,  but  that  work  awaited  Him  which  the  Father,  who  had 
sent  Him,  had  given  Him  to  do.  And  so  there  is  given  to  life  a  motive  force 
which  otherwise  it  would  lack.  Now  it  is  this  consciousness  of  a  mission — ^not 
only  the  consciousness  that  there  is  a  work  to  do,  but  also  that  this  work  is  that 
which  the  Master  has  appointed  for  him — that  gives  an  irresistible  power  to  the  life  of 
every  consecrated  man.  It  behoves  us,  therefore,  not  only  to  realize  the  truth 
which  is  enforced  in  the  verse  taken  from  Ecclesiastes,  but  also  the  supplementary 
truth  given  us  by  Jesus  Christ  in  the  second  text — that  we  must  not  only  work, 
but  also  do  the  works  of  Him  who  has  sent  us.  Now  what  follows?  If  the  work 
that  we  have  to  do  is  the  work  of  Him  who  has  sent  us  into  this  world;  if  the 
service,  therefore,  that  we  have  to  render  is  a  Divine  service,  or  is  a  human 
response  to  a  Divine  claim,  then  how  dignified  does  life  become,  and  how  noble 
does  all  labour  appear  I  Now  if  you  and  I  could  only  master  this  one  truth,  all 
our  grumblings  at  the  hardness  of  work  would  vanish;  and  we  should  for  ever 
cease  to  talk  about  our  self-denials.  (D.  Davies.)  The  labour  of  life: — I.  Life  is 
FOB  LABOUB.  We  aro  not  here  merely  to  theorize,  sentimentalize,  dream — but  to 
work.  1.  The  training  of  our  own  spirits  for  heaven.  2.  The  training  of  others 
for  heaven.  11.  Lipb  is  fob  earnest  laboub.  "  With  all  thy  might."  1.  This 
work  of  all  works  is  the  most  momentous.  2,  This  work  cannot  be  performed  in 
eternity.  8.  Man  is  on  his  journey  to  eternity.  (Homilist.)  InduBtry: — It  is 
not  in  his  fallen  state  alone  that  industry  is  required  of  man.     It  may  more 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ix, 

\ , 

properly  be  said  to  be  the  law  imposed  upon  every  creature;  80  that,  of  whatsoever 
God  hath  made,  in  earth,  sea  and  air,  He  hath  made  nothing  to  be  idle.  A  world 
without  labour  might  be  adapted  to  a  race  of  angels ;  but  we  are  sure  that  a  world 
with  much  toil  is  the  only  fit  one  for  a  race  of  men.  There  are  considerations 
in  abundance  which  might  furnish  any  thinking  mind  with  matter  for  a  eulogy  on 
industry.  It  is  industry  alone  which  will  preserve  anything  like  a  healthful 
content  in  the  spirits.  The  unemployed  man  is  always  dissatisfied  and  restless; 
time  is  a  burden;  and  after  all,  he  is  forced  to  be  industrious — industrious  in 
squandering  what  he  will  live  to  regret  his  not  improving.  And  whilst  so  much 
may  be  said  as  to  the  advantages  of  industry,  there  are  not  wanting  examples 
and  patterns  of  the  existence  and  culture  of  this  virtue — the  parent  of  every  other, 
or  indeed  the  main  ingredient  in  every  other.  Turn  where  you  will,  and  all  is 
industry.  Of  course,  we  must  limit  the  direction  to  lawful  employment;  we  are 
not  to  "do  with  our  might  " — for  we  are  not  to  do  at  all — what  is  in  any 
sense  or  measure  opposed  to  the  known  will  of  God.  But  the  phrase  must 
certainly  include  our  various  worldly  callings.  1.  It  has  passed  into  a  kind  of 
proverb  amongst  us  that  whatsoever  is  worth  doing  at  all,  is  worth  doing  well. 
You  frequently  meet  with  persons  who  on  extraordinary  occasions,  or  stimulated 
by  some  special  inspection,  will  exert  much  diligence  and  take  great  paina  to 
produce  something  excellent  and  commendable,  but  who  at  all  other  times  ara 
slatternly  and  indolent,  caring  nothing,  so  long  as  a  duty  be  performed,  how 
slovenly  may  be  the  performance.  It  is  against  this  temper  that  our  text  delivers 
its  injunction,  requiring  the  putting  forth  of  "  might,"  whether  it  be  a  great 
thing  or  a  small  which  "  the  hand  findeth  to  do."  In  place  of  being  content, 
provided  there  be  diligence  where  there  is  a  loud  call  for  diligence,  it  demands 
that  the  diligence  should  be  actually  the  habit,  and  seems  to  argue  that  indolence 
must  be  wickedness,  let  it  be  ever  such  trifles  on  which  we  are  employed.  And  it 
is  not  by  reasons  of  mere  human  policy  that  we  must  defend  this  position;  for 
our  text  reasons,  as  you  perceive,  exclusively  from  the  future.  But  there  is  no 
difficulty  in  making  the  future — the  world  beyond  the  grave — demand  diligence 
and  denounce  indolence  even  in  trifles.  The  truth  is  that  what  a  man  is  in  one 
thing,  that  in  the  main  will  he  be  in  another.  If  industrious  only  by  fits  and 
starts  in  business,  he  will  be  industrious  only  by  fits  and  starts  in  religion.  The 
habits  which  he  contracts  in  an  unconverted  state  will  be  almost  sm-e  to  stamp 
on  him  corresponding  habits  when  he  is  brought  to  the  providing  for  eternity ;  so 
that  having  become  sluggish  and  desultory,  except  on  great  occasions,  in  his 
worldly  employments,  he  will  in  the  main  be  sluggish  and  desultory  in  the  high 
duties  of  piety.  There  cannot  be  an  individual  less  fitted  for  the  message  or  the 
business  of  religion  than  one  who  has  formed  habits  of  indolence  and  sloth;  for 
the  message  is  one  which  asks  for  its  auditory  a  gathering  and  a  centring  of  the 
mental  faculties,  which  can  hardly  be  obtained  from  the  habitually  indolent; 
and  the  business  is  one  which  is  wholly  impracticable,  unless  there  be  that  indi- 
vidual putting  forth  of  industry,  which  it  is  a  contradiction  in  terms  to  expect 
from  the  slothful.  There  cannot,  we  are  persuaded,  be  a  greater  mistake  than 
that  of  dividing  employments  into  secular  and  spiritual,  if  we  mean  by  the  division 
that  the  secular  has  no  mixture  of  the  spiritual,  or  that  the  spiritual  would  be 
defiled  through  association  with  the  secular.  The  ordinance  of  labour,  as  we  have 
shown  you,  is  of  Divine  institution;  and  though,  beyond  question,  our  chief  busi- 
ness on  earth  is  the  seeking  the  salvation  of  the  soul,  it  is  utterly  insupposable 
that  God  would  have  imposed  on  us  the  necessity  of  labouring  for  the  support  of 
the  body,  if  this  business  were  unavoidably  a  hindrance  to  the  chief — nay,  if  it 
were  not  even  an  auxiliary  and  an  instrument.  There  cannot  be  inconsistency — 
there  must  be  thorough  harmony  between  the  Divine  appointments.  God  is  served 
through  the  various  occupations  of  life  as  well  as  through  the  more  special  insti- 
tutions of  religion.  It  needs  only  that  a  man  go  to  his  daily  toil  in  simple 
obedience  to  the  will  of  his  Maker,  and  he  is  as  piously  employed,  aye,  and  is 
doing  as  much  towards  securing  for  himself  the  high  recompenses  of  eternity,  as 
when  he  spends  an  hour  in  prayer,  or  joins  himself  gladly  to  the  Sabbath-day 
gathering.  I  love  to  consider  the  manufacturer  as  he  plies  the  shuttle,  the 
statesman  as  he  guides  the  wheel  of  government,  the  tradesman  as  he  serves 
his  customers,  the  sailor  as  he  steers  his  vessel,  the  ploughman  as  he  turns  the 
ground,  as  each  busied  with  an  employment  which  may  be  virtually  spiritual 
if  he  do  not  perversely  frustrate  its  design :  employment,  which  may  be  followed 
iirith  a  spiritual  mind,  and  which,  if  so  followed,  has  about  it  all  the  sanctity. 


CHAP.  IX.]  ECCLESIA8TES. 

and  prepares  for  all  the  glory  of  heaven.  2.  There  are,  unquestionably,  dutie« 
which  are  more  openly  and  visibly  connected  than  others  with  the  saving  of  the 
Boul;  and  we  may  justly  employ  our  concluding  remarks  in  urging  our  hearers  to 
induiitry  in  these.  It  is  not  the  representation  of  Scripture,  however  it  may  be  the 
imagination  of  numbers  in  the  world,  that  religion  is  an  easy  thing :  so  thai 
immortality  may  be  secured  with  no  great  effort  on  the  psirt  of  the  sinner.  Th« 
Christian  life  is  likened  to  a  battle,  in  which  we  may  be  defeated;  to  a  race,  in 
which  we  may  be  outstripped;  to  a  stewardship,  in  which  we  may  be  imfaithful. 
Who,  indeed,  that  thinks  for  a  moment  of  the  virtues  required  from  us  as  ChriB- 
tians — charity,  temperance,  meekness,  patience,  humility,  contentment — will 
imagine  that  a  believer  may  be  idle,  finding  nothing  in  his  spiritual  calling  to 
exercise  his  diligence?  These  virtues,  we  may  venture  to  say,  are  all  against 
nature;  only  to  be  acquired  through  strife  with  ourselves,  and  preserved  by 
continued  war.  "  Whatsoever,"  then,  "  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy 
might."  Is  temptation  to  be  resisted?  Eesist  it  "with  thy  might":  a  hall 
resistance  courts  defeat.  Is  prayer  to  be  offered?  Pray  "with  thy  might":  a 
languid  prayer  asks  to  be  unanswered.  Is  a  sacrifice  to  be  made?  Make  it  "  with 
thy  might  " :  a  tardy  surrender  is  next  akin  to  a  refusal.  Be  industrious  in 
religion.  We  can  tolerate  indolence  anywhere  rather  than  here — here  where  an 
eternity  is  at  stake,  here  where  an  hour's  sluggishness  may  be  fatal.  An  indolent 
Christian — it  is  a  sort  of  contradiction.  Christianity  is  industry  spiritualized.  The 
sluggard  in  religion  would  be  the  sluggard  in  escaping  from  the  burning  house  or 
(he  sinking  ship;  and  who  ever  loiters  when  death  is  at  the  door?  Work,  then, 
"with  your  might,"  if  you  profess  to  work  St  all;  "giving  diligence"  as  an 
apostle  exhorts,  "  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure."  "  There  is  no  work, 
no  wisdom,  no  device,  in  the  grave."  The  separate  state,  into  which  you  will 
enter  at  death,  is  a  state,  whatever  its  employment,  whatever  its  happiness,  in 
which  nothing  can  be  done  towards  gaining  heaven  or  avoiding  hell.  Your  portion 
must  be  fixed  here;  your  actions  here,  and  these  alone  must  determine  on  which 
side  of  the  Judge  you  shall  stand,  and  what  your  exact  place  in  the  kingdom,  if 
you  inherit  it  at  all.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Earnestneis : — I  want  to  show  you  that 
our  great  need  is  more  earnestness  in  the  spiritual  life.  1.  We  want  more  earnest* 
ness  in  the  reading  of  the  Bible.  What  is  the  Bible?  It  is  a  prescription  for  the 
worst  of  all  illness.  Here  is  a  Divine  prescription.  Take  it  and  live;  refuse  it 
and  die.  How  we  ought  to  hold  on  to  it,  and  with  what  earnestness  we  ought 
now  to  take  it.  It  is  more  than  that.  Suppose  a  captain  is  awakened  in  the 
night.  The  men  who  have  had  the  management  of  the  ship  have  been  asleep, 
and  not  minding  their  business.  The  vessel  is  among  the  breakers.  The  captain 
comes  on  deck  with  the  chart.  With  what  earnestness  he  looks  at  it  now.  Here  is 
a  rook  and  there  is  a  rock ;  there  is  a  lighthouse ;  here  is  a  way  of  escape.  So  hero 
ie  a  map  setting  forth  the  perils  of  the  sea  in  which  we  are  voyaging :  there  are 
dangers  all  round  about  us.  If  the  following  of  that  chart  does  not  get  ub  out 
of  the  breakers,  nothing  will.  With  what  earnestness  we  ought  to  examine  it, 
and  feel  that  it  is  a  matter  of  heaven  or  hell  whether  or  not  we  read  it,  and 
whether  we  read  it  right  or  wrong.  2.  We  need  more  earnestness  in  the  matter 
of  prayer.  3.  We  want  more  earnestness  in  the  matter  of  Christian  work. 
(T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Much  work  to  be  done  on  earth,  and  short  time  to  do 
it: — I.  Wb  have  much  woek  to  do.  "  Yee,"  some  may  be  ready  to  say,  **  w» 
have  to  labour  for  our  temporal  subsistence,  we  have  to  provide  for  our  families, 
we  have  to  push  oxu:  way  to  wealth  and  station  in  the  world,  and  that  in  the  face 
of  many  obstacles,  so  that  there  is  no  room  for  trifling.  But  there  is  a  work 
greater,  more  worthy  of  the  powers  of  a  rational  and  immortal  being;  it  is  that 
by  which  we  may  obtain  deliverance  from  future  and  endless  woe,  and  an  entranca 
into  the  rest  and  blessedness  of  heaven.  1.  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
There  is  here  no  work  to  be  done  by  you,  as  that  by  which  you  may  merit 
reward.  There  is  nothing  but  the  acceptance  of  a  free  gift.  It  does  not,  however, 
follow  that  faith  in  Christ  is  not  in  any  sense  a  work,  because  it  is  not  in  reward 
of  its  performance,  but  on  the  ground  of  the  righteousness  which  it  receives,  that 
we  are  justified.  Must  we  not  labour  to  get  right  views  and  humbling  impressions 
of  our  wretchedness  and  danger  as  sirmers?  Will  it  cost  us  no  struggle  with  our 
pride,  self-confidence,  or  indifference  about  our  spiritual  interests,  no  watchful 
care  lest  we  take  up  with  any  refuge  of  lies,  no  inward  and  earnest  exertion  of 
Boul  to  place  an  enlightened  and  firm  and  entire  reliance  on  Him  who  hath  made 
atonement  by  His  blood?     "  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  Him 


SSI  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  nt. 

whom  He  hath  sent."  The  avenger  of  blood  is  behind  you — hasten  to  the  city  ol 
refuge.  2.  Endeavour  to  make  progress  in  holiness.  Labour  to  get  a  deeper, 
more  contrite  sense  of  sin,  of  your  own  sins,  and  a  heart  turned  to  hate  and  to 
forsake  it  in  all  its  ways,  and  at  the  same  time  labour  to  call  into  exercise  holy 
principles.  Is  there  not  much  here  which  you  may  find  to  do?  This  work  and 
warfare  is  within;  there  let  the  fervent  spirit  labour.  3.  Give  yourselves  to  the 
works  of  piety  and  benevolence.  Is  there  not  yet  much  knowledge  to  be  acquired? 
Should  you  not  then  give  yourselves  to  the  study  of  God's  Word?  Is  there 
nothing  to  do  in  your  families,  by  the  religious  instruction  of  children  and  servants, 
by  the  Christian  discipline  maintained,  by  the  just  and  equal  yet  affectionate 
treatment  of  all  vmder  your  care?  Are  there  no  poor  or  afflicted  by  you  to  whose 
wants  you  can  in  any  way  minister,  or  whom  you  may  cheer  by  your  sympathy 
in  their  sorrow?  II.  We  ha.ve  bct  a  limited  time  fob  the  peefobmance  of  this 
woBK.    III.  If  dub  wobk  be  not  done,  the  wobk  given  ds  to  do  on  eabth, 

BEFOEK  WE  COMB  TO  THE  GBAVE,  IT  MUST  BEMAIN  FOE  EVEB  UNDONE.  {Jatntt 

Henderson,  D.D.)     The  true  idea  of  life: — Some  errors  are  harmless  and  hardly 
worth  the  trouble  of  refuting;  but  an  error  about  the  nature  and  the  uses  of  this 
present  life  is  harmful,  and  worth  an  angel's  powers  to  refute.    Why  have  some 
persons   gone   oS   into   sensualism,   deriding   and   disregarding   all   the   claims   of 
religion?    Because  they  have  misunderstood  life.     Why  have  others  renounced  the 
world,  and  sought  in  the  heart  of  the  desert,  or  the  solitude  of  a  religious  house, 
freedom  from  the  temptations  of  the  world,  and  the  agitations  of  society?   Because 
they  have   misunderstood   life.     I.  This   is   the   woeld   of   seevice.     This   idea 
involves  necessarily  these  things — 1.  Subordination.     I  remember  that  mine  is  » 
subordinate  position.     I  am  here  to  do  something,  and  not  to  talk  about  doing  it. 
**  I  must  work  the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Me  while  it  is  day :  the  night  cometh 
when  no  man  cam  work."    2.  Work.     "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do 
it."     It  is  a  doing  world.     *'  Man  goes  forth  to  his  labour,  and  to  his  work,  from 
the  morning  until  the  evening."     Spiritually  we  need  this  world;  all  the  varied 
scenes  which  make  up  our  life  were  needful  to  the  right  training  of  our  minds 
into  that  attitude  of  creaturely  dependence,  which  not  only  befits  us,  but  into 
which,  by  the  very  force  of  circumstances,  we  shall  sooner  or  later  be  driven;  and 
which,  therefore,  we  had  better  make  our  own  by  voluntary  choice.     II.  Thb 
BEEViCB  OF  this  woeld  IS  BCT  FOB  A  SHOBT  TIME.     Leam,  then :  1.  Moderation 
in  all  our  earthly  pursuits.     2.  Earnestness  in  our  religious  life.    Let  us  not  throw 
our  souls  into  our  business,  and  our  sleep  into  our  religion.     (W.   0.   Barrett.) 
The  spur: — It  is  an  address  to  men,  commending  to  them  promptness,  determina- 
tion, and  practical  earnestness :  inasmuch  as  they  have  but  one  life  here  on  earth, 
they  should  give  diligence  to  accomplish  all  the  right  purposes  which  they  have 
formed  for  this  world;  seeing  that  once  dead  they  cannot  return,  neither  in  the 
grave  can  they  carry  out  any  of  their  resolves,  they  should  do  quickly  what  they 
mean  to  do.     I.  First,  we  shall  give  this  passage  an  evangelical  voice  to  the 
cnconvbeted;  and  it  will  be  necessary  for  tis  to  say  that  there  is  nothing  for  the 
unconverted  man  to  do,  by  way  of  work  or  device  with  his  hand,  in  order  to  his 
being   saved.     Salvation   from   sin   and   justification  before   God  come  to  us   in 
connection  with  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  within  us  leading  us  to  faith  in 
Jesus;  and  so  salvation  is  entirely  and  alone  of  the  grace  of  God.     We  would 
say  to  every  imcon verted  person,  "  It  is  high  time  that  you  should  begin  to  think 
about  the  solemn  interests  of  your  soul,  for  you  will  soon  pass  from  the  place  of 
saving  knowledge  and  heavenly  wisdom  into  the  shades  of  forgetf ulness. "     II.  But 
now  I  have  another  task,  and  that  is,  to  set  forth  my  text  as  A  stimulating  voice 
TO  God's  own  people.     You  have  not  the  work  to  do  of  saving  yourselves.    "  It 
ie  finished,"  says  the  Saviour,  and  that  is  joy  for  you :  but  now  you  have  another 
work  to  do  because  you  are  saved.     The  love  of  Jesus  to  us  must  provoke  love  in 
our  heart  to  Jesus,  and  that  love  must  show  itself  by  deeds  of  service  for  His 
name.    Our  text  indicates  the  wisest  course  to  follow.     It  is — Do  it,  do  it  at  once. 
If  you  have  not  done  what  you  should,  up,  man,  and  do  what  you  can  I    Our  text 
exhorts  us  to  do  our  work  now.     Do  not  talk  about  doing  it  to-morrow,  do  it  at 
once.     The  impetus  of  the  text  carries  the  thought  as  far  as  that;  seeing  that 
death  may  come  to-night,  do  it  now,  even  now.    But  Solomon  says,  "Do  it  with 
thy  might."    There  are  several  ways  of  doing  the  same  action.     One  man  will  do 
a  thing,  and  he  has  done  it;  another  has  performed  the  same  action,  but  has 
practically    done   nothing.     Jesus    Christ   ought   never   to   have   our   second   best 
things — never.     Our  best  is  all  too  poor  for  Him,  let  us  never  put  Him  off  with 


«HAT.  TX."]  ECCLESIJSTES.  235 

our  inferior  fruits.  Do  it — **  do  it  with  thy  might."  And,  once  more,  do  it  all; 
for  the  text  saya,  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  ";  that  is  to  say,  do 
it  all.  The  pith  of  the  text  lies  in  the  next  thought,  namely,  that  there  is  an 
argument  to  every  earnest  Christian  for  intense  zeal  in  the  fact  of  the  certain 
approach  of  death;  "  for  there  is  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowledge,  nor  wisdom 
in  the  grave,  whither  thou  goest."  I  have  read  of  Dr.  Chalmers  that  one  evening 
be  stayed  with  a  company  of  friends  at  a  gentleman's  house,  and  they  spent  the 
evening,  as  we  are  too  much  in  the  habit  of  doing,  very  pleasantly,  but  not  very 
profitably,  talking  upon  general  subjects,  not  at  all  to  be  forbidden,  but  at  the 
same  time  not  much  to  be  commended.  There  was  among  the  number  a  Highland 
chief,  who  had  attracted  Dr.  Chalmers'  notice,  and  he  had  talked  with  him, 
but  nothing  was  said  about  the  things  of  God.  In  the  middle  of  the  night  a  bitter 
cry  was  heard  in  the  hospitable  habitation,  and  there  was  a  rush  to  the  bedroom, 
where  it  was  found  that  the  Highland  chief  was  in  the  agonies  of  death.  Dr. 
Chalmers  expressed  (and  he  was  not  the  man  whom  we  could  blame  for  laxity  in 
that  direction)  his  bitter  regret  that  he  had  allowed  that  last  evening  of  the  man's 
life  to  pass  over  without  having  spoken  to  him  concerning  the  things  of  God.  The 
regret  was  most  proper,  but  it  had  been  better  if  it  had  never  been  necessary.  Such 
a  regret  may  have  occurred  to  ourselves;  do  not  let  it  occur  again.  If  you  do 
not  die,  the  person  whom  you  are  concerned  about  may  die,  therefore,  "  What- 
soever thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it,"  for  death  may  come  on  a  sudden.  (G.  H. 
Bpurgeon.)  Impulse,  will,  and  habit: — Connected  with  activity  and  practical  life 
there  are  three  modes  or  conditions  of  mind — ^impulse,  will  or  purpose,  and  habit. 
These  represent  three  stages  of  experience,  and  a  good  deal  more.  Impulse  is  a 
sudden  development  of  feeling  with  degrees  of  force.  The  term  itself  carries  with 
it,  latently,  an  idea  of  outspring,  of  force.  It  is  the  clear,  distinct  working  of  a 
desire,  of  whatever  kind,  primarily  of  the  lower  form,  and  at  last  of  the  higher. 
In  the  order  of  time  impulse  is  primitive.  It  was  with  the  race  primitive.  There 
was  a  time  when  men  were  animals  of  impulse.  As  civilization  dawned,  and  the 
civilizing  elements  were  more  and  more  mixed  with  the  waywardness  of  life,  they 
became  creatures  of  purpose,  of  design,  of  will.  The  higher  and  the  better  of 
them  after  a  time  learned  the  secret,  empirically,  perhaps  practically,  of  com- 
muting a  definite  purpose  into  a  fixed  habit,  which  is  the  last  step  of  evolution^ 
unless  you  make  the  final  step  the  inclusion  of  them  altogether  in  still  a  higher 
sphere.  Impulse  comes  in  the  children  before  will,  and  a  long  way  before  habit. 
In  rude  and  early  national  life  we  see  the  same  thing.  Design  is  casual :  impulse 
is  universal.  It  works  in  the  lower  forms  of  national  life,  in  the  history  of  the 
unfolding  of  the  race,  as  it  works  in  the  household  in  children.  It  works  with 
fear,  with  combativeness,  with  pleasiure,  with  mirth,  and  with  love  in  its  more 
oiroumsoribed  forms.  Thus  the  household,  being  itself  a  miniature  of  that  which 
is  taking  place  upon  national  life  everywhere,  we  see  that  in  the  earlier  stage* 
we  are  children  of  feeling,  of  impulse.  The  second  element  is  will  or  purpose. 
What  is  will?  I  do  not  know.  I  recognize  it  when  I  see  it  or  feel  it;  but  what 
its  component  elements  are,  psychologically,  I  do  not  know;  and  after  reading 
multitudes  of  books,  I  do  not  think  anybody  else  does.  But  that  there  is  a 
determining  state  of  feeling,  together  with  intellect,  in  the  soul,  there  can  be  no 
doubt :  and  we  may  as  well  call  it  will,  or  purpose,  or  anything  else.  1$  is  that 
which  gives  direction  to  the  mind,  and  is  itself  directed  by  the  impulses  out  of 
which,  or  by  the  combinations  of  which,  it  lives.  In  the  state  of  will  emotion 
turns  to  intellect,  and  uses  experience.  Now,  the  will,  that  it  may  not  fade  out, 
forms  itself  into  habit.  What  is  habit?  It  is  to  be  described,  but  not  to  be 
defined.  When  a  man  first  sets  type  he  knows  what  he  wants  for  a  letter.  That 
is  one  process.  He  is  aware  that  it  is  in  a  particular  compartment  of  the  case, 
and  he  takes  it  out,  and  feels  for  the  nick,  to  know  which  end  up  to  put  it,  and 
puts  it  that  way,  performing  three  several  operations.  Little  by  little,  as  he  goes 
on  through  the  weary  days,  the  process  becomes,  as  it  were,  absorbed  into  itself, 
till  seeing  an  expert  compositor  at  the  case  to-day,  there  is  no  will,  no  intelligence 
in  it.  What  is  there  in  it?  Habit.  What  is  that  habit?  It  is  the  parts  that  are 
operating  it,  doing  it  out  of  themselves.  Without  the  recognition  of  the  will,  or 
the  purpose  of  the  will,  it  is  automatic,  self-done.  And  when  an  expert  puts  his 
hand  to  the  case,  your  eye  cannot  follow  the  rapidity  with  which  he  will  compose 
in  this  way.  The  beginning  of  it  was  at  every  step  a  thought  and  a  purpose,  but 
the  completion  of  it  has  abolished  thought  and  piurpose.  The  muscle  and  the 
mind  work  together  automatically.    The  complex  elements,  then,  necessary  foe 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tx, 

the  purpose  and  the  will  acquire  a  tendency  to  go  on  without  special  stimulus. 
The  mind,  acting  of  itself,  greatly  condenses  action  and  greatly  augments  facility 
and  power.  This  automatic  condition  which  lies  at  the  root  of  habit  is  of  tran- 
scendent importance  in  physical  things,  in  all  industrial  matters,  in  art,  in  moral 
relations.  The  mind  becomes  like  a  machine,  which,  when  first  started,  must 
have  the  valves  opened  by  the  engineer's  hand,  but  which  has  inter-connecting 
rods,  such  that  when  once  it  has  begun  it  opens  and  shuts  its  own  valves,  and 
runs  night  and  day,  so  long  as  it  is  supplied  with  water  and  fuel.  Habit,  as  in 
the  case  of  mechanical  actions,  should,  when  applied  to  the  foot,  to  the  hand,  ta 
the  head,  or  to  the  mind,  condense  in  itself  both  emotion  and  will.  It  does.  But 
where  most  we  need  habit  is  in  the  development  of  moral  qualities.  A  true  Chris- 
tian is  like  a  well-plumbed  house.  He  has  but  to  turn  on  the  light,  and  it  is  there 
always.  He  has  but  to  turn  on  the  faucet,  and  rivers  and  wells  are  at  his  service. 
An  untrained  man  is  like  a  family  in  the  lower  coimtries,  where  he  has  to  go  to  a 
distant  spring  to  bring  in  every  bucket  of  water  that  he  uses  for  culinary  purposes ; 
and  what  we  want  is  not  to  have  to  pump  up  right  feeling  at  the  right  time,  but 
to  have  the  right  feeling,  as  it  were,  in  the  very  structure  of  the  soul,  so  that  we 
have  it  always  when  needed.  A  man  who  has  no  patience  but  that  which  comes 
from  instant  reflection  will  have  very  little ;  but  a  man  who  has  trained  his  patience 
so  that  it  acts  through  habit  automatically  will,  perhaps,  not  have  the  reputation 
of  being  patient;  but  if  not,  it  is  because  the  work  is  so  perfect.  It  is  the  art  of 
art  to  conceal  art.  If  this  is  true  in  regard  to  that  part  of  our  emotion  which 
develops  itself  in  society,  how  much  more  important  is  it  that  we  should  recognize 
its  truth  in  regard  to  conscience,  the  spirit  of  generosity,  benevolence,  humility, 
and  meekness  1  Now,  a  word  or  two  of  criticism  and  of  suggestion  arising  out  of 
this  distinction  between  impulse,  will,  and  habit.  A  revival  of  religion  is  a  revival 
of  impulse  in  its  earlier  stages.  If  emotion,  however,  is  taught  in  any  church  to 
lead  on  to  a  higher  state,  and  the  church  is  drilled  to  it,  if  the  extraordinary  work 
that  is  performed  in  a  revival  of  religion  is  a  part  of  the  daily  and  weekly  routine 
of  church  life,  we  can  conceive  that  a  church  may  be  in  such  a  state  that,  so  far 
as  its  own  self  is  concerned,  it  will  always  live  in  what  is  better  than  a  revival. 
The  term  revival  is  usually  attached  to  the  freshness  of  the  beginning  impulse; 
whereas  a  condensed  methodical  church-life  ought  to  have  it  in  the  whole  force 
and  continuity  of  habit.  I  hold  that  where  a  church  is  living  a  really  Christian 
life  there  is  nothing  so  converting  as  for  parsons  from  without  to  come  into  the 
community  of  that  church  and  see  its  piety.  A  man  listening  to  the  actuality  of 
real  religion  has  a  work  performed  on  him  that  no  amoimt  of  pulpit  exhortation 
oould  ever  secure.  So,  impulse  ripened  is  better  than  impulse  raw;  but  impulse 
raw  is  better  than  nothing;  and  through  every  stage  of  unfolding  impulse  ought 
to  be  continued;  there  are  certain  elements  in  it  that  are  like  the  leaves  of  a  tree. 
The  fruit  could  not  ripen  if  it  were  not  for  the  freshly -coming  leaves.  When,  on 
the  other  hand,  training  without  impulse  is  resorted  to,  where  men  have  fixed 
habits  of  belief,  of  conduct,  and  of  duty,  they  are  apt  to  become  hard,  mechanical, 
tminteresting,  their  life  being  all  routine,  and  no  innovation.  Indeed,  they 
become  afraid  of  new  things.  They  fear  variety.  They  love  to  hear  the  old 
soimds.  They  like  what  is  called  "  sound  doctrine,"  which,  half  the  time,  is  the 
doctrine  of  sound.  They  are  afraid  of  any  variation  for  they  do  not  know  where  it 
will  lead  to.  It  will  not  lead  to  somnolency,  as  what  may  be  called  the  hard 
and  fixed  methods  do  too  frequently.  What  we  want  is  to  unite  the  advantages 
that  come  from  all  these  three  elements  in  the  machinery  of  the  mind — ever-fresh 
variety,  springing  from  impulse;  then  fixity,  or  the  organization  of  impulse  into 
practical  results;  and  then  will,  in  the  form  of  automatic  conduct.  When  a  man 
has  these  he  is  built  up  in  all  the  departments  of  life,  so  that  he  serves  himself 
with  the  greatest  ease,  and  exerts  the  widest  influence  upon  others — and  that,  too, 
with  agreeablenesB,  with  cheer,  which  is  one  of  the  most  beneficent  elements  of 
Christian  life.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Entire  devotion  to  duty: — I.  How  hen  ought 
TO  FIND  OUT  THBiB  DDTT.  1.  By  reading  the  Word  of  God,  which  points  out  the 
duty  of  all  persons  in  every  relation  of  life,  and  is  able  to  make  all  wise  unto 
salvation.  2.  By  hearing  the  Word  of  God  explained  and  enforced  by  religious 
Instructon.  8.  By  duly  regarding  the  dispensations  of  Divine  providence  towards 
them.    4.  By  asking  oounsel  of  Ood  in  prayer.     11.  What  is  implued  ih  hen's 

DOING    TBim    DX7TT,    WHEN    THBT    DISOOTEB    IT,    "  WITH    TBKIB    HIOHT."        Might 

signifies  power,  strength  and  ability  of  every  kind.     1.  Men  ought  to  employ  all 
,  Ihsir  powers  snd  faoultias  in  doing  what  they  find  they  have  to  do.    If  it  requires 


CBAt.  n.]  ECCLE8IASTES.  837 

bodily  strength,  then  they  must  exert  their  bodily  strength;  if  it  requires  know- 
ledge, then  they  must  exercise  the  knowledge  they  possess;  if  it  requires  wisdom, 
then  they  must  exercise  their  wisdom;  if  it  requires  prudence,  then  they  must 
exercise  prudence;  if  it  requires  authority,  then  they  must  exercise  authority;  if  it 
requires  influence,  then  they  must  exercise  all  the  influence  they  have;  or  if  it 
requires  the  exertion  of  all  their  natural  and  moral  abilities,  then  they  must  exert 
them  all  to  their  utmost  extent.  2.  Men's  doing  with  their  might  what  they  find 
to  do  implies  that  they  should  surmount  all  the  difficulties  that  lie  in  the  way  of 
doing  their  duty.  III.  Wht  men  should  thds  exbrt  themselves  to  do  what- 
80EVEB  they  FIND  TO  DO  IN  THE  woBLD.  1.  Bccausc  Ood  has  given  them  all  their 
mental  and  corporeal  powers  and  faculties  for  use.  2.  Because  He  has  a  great  deal 
for  them  to  do  on  the  stage  of  life — for  Him,  for  their  fellow-men,  and  for  them- 
selves. 8.  Because  they  have  but  a  short  and  uncertain  time  to  do  it  in.  They 
have  no  time  to  lose,  nor  talents  to  bury.  Let  them  work  while  it  is  day,  for  the 
night  of  death  is  at  hand.  IV.  Impbovembnt.  1.  If  men  may  always  find  out 
what  they  have  to  do  in  this  world,  then  they  have  no  right  to  plead  ignoranco 
for  the  neglect  of  a  duty.  2.  If  men  ought  to  employ  all  their  powers  and  faculties 
in  doing  what  they  find  to  be  duty,  then  they  have  no  right  to  do  anything  but 
what  they  know  to  be  duty.  Whatsoever  is  not  of  duty  is  of  sin.  8.  If  God 
requires  men  always  to  know  and  do  their  duty,  then  they  can  never  retrieve  any 
of  their  lost  time,  opportunities,  or  advantages  of  doing  good.  4.  If  God  requires 
men  to  employ  all  their  time  and  talents  in  doing  their  duty,  then  none  can  bs 
released  from  duty  as  long  as  their  active  powers  and  faculties  are  graciously 
continued  to  them.  6.  If  God  requires  men  to  employ  all  their  time  and  talents 
in  doing  their  duty,  then  there  is  reason  to  think  they  are  guilty  of  more  sins  of 
omission  than  of  commission.  6.  If  men  can  do  nothing  for  this  world  after 
death,  then  they  ought  to  do  all  they  can  while  they  live,  to  leave  it  in  a  better 
state  than  they  found  it.  7.  This  subject  now  calls  upon  all  to  inquire  whether 
they  are  prepared  to  leave  the  world,  and  to  commit  their  bodies  to  the  grave,  tha 
house  appointed  for  all  living,  and  where  there  is  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  know* 
ledge,  nor  wisdom,  but  darkness  and  oblivion.  (N.  EmmonB,  D.D.)  With  your 
might: — The  injunction  to  put  our  might  into  our  work  may  very  easily  bs 
misimderstood,  and  that  especially  by  yoimg  people.  It  does  not  mean  that  wo 
are  to  work  feverishly,  with  hot  haste,  and  without  preparation.  It  means  work 
done  with  deliberation,  with  piu-pose,  with  calmness,  and  with  strength.  All 
these  qualities  are  eminently  illustrated  in  the  life  of  Christ.  1.  Christ  prepared 
for  His  work.  The  obscure  years  were  many  in  comparison  with  the  brief  period 
of  His  public  ministry.  Yet,  when  at  last  the  time  came,  it  was  found  they  were 
not  lost.  Every  word  He  spoke  then,  and  every  deed  He  did,  tells,  and  will  tell 
upon  the  universe  for  ever.  Many  young  people  who  wish  to  give  themselves  to 
Christian  work  are  in  too  much  haste.  Let  them  remember  how  grandly  Christ 
waited.  Let  them  remember  that  there  is  no  true  call  to  the  ministry  which  is 
not  also  a  call  to  full  and  zealous  preparation  for  the  ministry.  2.  We  must  do 
with  our  might  the  things  that  seem  small  as  well  as  great,  for  in  truth  we  do  not 
really  know  what  is  small  or  what  is  great.  Bather,  in  the  work  of  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  everything  is  great.  8.  In  order  to  do  work  with  our  might  we  must  rest 
as  well  as  work.  If  we  are  to  work  with  our  might  the  energies  of  the  body  and 
soul  must  not  be  dulled  or  blunted,  and  for  that  rest  is  needed.  4.  There  is  all 
the  difierence  in  the  world  between  work  done  with  the  might  and  work  that  is 
not.  John  Buskin  says :  '*  We  are  not  sent  into  this  world  to  do  anything  into 
which  we  cannot  put  our  hearts  "  Charles  Kingsley's  testimony  is:  "I  go  at 
what  I  am  about  as  if  there  were  nothing  else  in  the  world  for  the  time  being. 
That  is  the  secret  of  all  hard-working  men."  6.  We  may  apply  this  principle  to 
preparation  and  study.  There  is  all  the  difference  in  the  world  between  reading 
with  your  might  and  reading  without  it.  The  concentration  of  the  mind  on  the 
subject  enables  us  to  take  possession  of  something  new,  and  to  make  it  part  ol 
ourselves.  When  the  mind  is  relaxed  and  wandering  there  is  no  permanent  gain. 
6.  This  applies  eminently  to  preaching.  Preaching  in  every  form  is  impressive 
just  in  proportion  as  a  man  puts  his  soul  into  it.  7.  Perhaps  there  is  no  mora 
needed  application  of  this  lesson  than  to  the  business  of  prayer.  Prevailing  prayer 
is  wrestling  prayer.  **  The  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  avatleth' 
much."  True  intercession  is  the  costliest  of  all  things.  Intercede  for  a  soul  in 
peril,  and  God  will  answer  your  petition  by  suggesting  to  you  something  you  must 
do  or  give  up  for  the  sake  of  that  soul.    8.  For  after  all  it  is  not  with  our  mighl 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  ir. 


that  we  work.     It  is  with  God's  might.     Everything  we  do  that  is  really  v?orth 
doing  is  in  the  strength  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     Yet  we  are  to  put  effort,  and  sacrifice, 
and  longing,  and  intensity,  and  fervour,  and  whole-heartedness,  and  allegiance 
into  our  work  just  as  if  it  depended  upon  ourselves.     (TF.  R.  Nicoll,  LL.D.)     An 
earnest  life: — In  the  Peruvian  Exhibit  at  the  World's  Fair  there  were  a  number 
of  mummies  and  relics  of  the  Incas  supposed  to  be  more  than  three  thousand  years 
old.     It  is  plain  that  these  ancient  people  never  heard  the  words  of  this  text — 
"There  is  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowledge  in  the  grave."     They  buried  the 
warrior  and  his  bows  and  arrows  together.     Beside  the  workman  his  tools  were 
carefully  placed,  and  with  the  housewife  long  wooden  needles  and  coarse  yarn 
were  laid,  that  they  might  be  enabled  to  go  on  with  their  work.     Hunger  and 
thirst  were  expected  and  provided  for.    Food  and  drink  were  placed  in  the  graves 
with  the  bodies.     Treasures  were  buried  with  the  owners.     Immense  wardrobes 
are  found  incased  with  the  body  of  some  princess  of  fashion.    But  the  weapons, 
the  tools,  the  food,   the  ready   material,  the  rich  toilets,  the  wealth,   have  all 
remained  absolutely  unused  since  the  day  of  burial.     Vanity  of  vanities,  was  it 
not?     How  fruitless,  how  vain  all  their  ignorant  expectations!     Now  let  us  ba 
exue  of  this — that  no  living  man  or  woman  will  have  a  chance  to  use  these  earthly 
tools  but  once.     The  present  is  the  "  nick  of  time  "  with  us  all.     None  of  us  can 
pass  through  this  life  and  then  begin  and  try  it  over  again.     We  cannot  do  that 
with  a  single  day  or  even  an  hour.    Ten  minutes  lost  are  lost  for  ever;  and  a  day's 
work  undone  is  imdone  for  ever.    Now  it  is  this  very  lesson,  and  the  effect  which 
it  should  have  upon  us,  which  God  meant  to  teach  us^all  by  this  text.    The  effect 
is  put  first :  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  It  with  thy  might;  for  there 
is  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowledge,  nor  wisdom  in  the  grave  whither  thou 
goest."     That  is,  whatsoever  thy  hands  find  to  do,  do  it;  do  it  now;  do  it  with 
thy  might,  and  do  it  for  this  very  reason — that  you  will  never  have  another  chance. 
Therefore,  like  the  good  old  Quaker,  it  is  for  every  one  of  us  to  say  :  "  I  expect 
to  pass  through  this  life  but  once;  if,  therefore,  there  is  any  kindness  I  can  show, 
or  any  good  thing  I  can  do  to  my  fellow  human  beings,  let  me  do  it  now  :  let  me 
not  defer  or  neglect  it;  for  I  shall  not  pass  this  way  again."    I.  The  elements  of 
AN  BAENE3T  LIFE.     They  are  just  these  two  things,  earnest  faith  and  earnest  love. 
A  man's  visible  life  is  but  the  expression  of  his  invisible  modes  of  thought  and 
feeling — the  outcome  of  his  convictions  and  his  affections — in  other  words,  of  his 
faith  and  love.     As  a  man  loves  so  he  lives;  as  he  believes  so  he  behaves.     If  he 
loves  God  he  is  godly;  if  he  loves  the  world  he  is  worldly.     If  his  faith  be  bright 
his  life  will  be  shining ;  if  his  faith  be  dim  his  life  will  be  dark.    Earnest  faith  and 
earnest  love — these  are  the  mightiest  principles  that  underlie  every  true  and  noble 
life.     For  example — given  earnest  faith  in  God  and  earnest  love  for  God,  and 
what  a  devoted  follower  of  God  will  any  man  become  I     Given  earnest  faith  in  the 
truth  and  earnest  love  for  the  truth,  and  what  a  truth-seeker  and  truth-spreader 
will  any  man  become  1     Given  earnest  convictions  of  man's  ruin  and  earnest  love 
for  man's  redemption,  and  what  a  Christian  worker  and  soul-winner  will  surely 
develop!     Given  earnest  faith  in  the  mission  of  the  Church  and  earnest  love  for 
that  mission,  and  to  what  a  degree  of  heroic  self-sacrifice  and  endeavour  will  we 
not  go  1     Earnest  faith  and  earnest  love !     These  are  the  combined  elements  which 
make  up  an  earnest  life — that  is  \j'hen  they  are  living,  active  union  and  com- 
munion.    But  let  us  bear  in  mind  that  they  must  be  combined.     By  itself  alone 
neither  will  sufiBce.    Faith  alone  makes  the  bigot ;  love  alone  the  fanatic.    The  one 
is  the  engine  without  the  balance-wheel;  the  other  is  the  balance-wheel  without 
the  engine.     The  one  is  the  head  without  the  heart ;  the  other  is  the  heart  without 
the  head.     Neither  of  itself  produces  the  desirable  character — neither  all  faith 
nor  all  love,  but  both.      Only  in  the  union  and  communion  of  the  two  will  an 
earnest  life  result.     There  was  Paul,  for  example.    He  believed  man's  ruin  and  he 
believed  God's  remedy.     He  believed  the  inevitable  and  irreparable  destruction 
that  hung  over  the  sinner,  and  he  believed,  too,  the  atonement  of  Christ  as  the 
full  and  free  and  only  possible  salvation  for  him.    And  what  then?     Why,  "  the 
love   of   Christ   constrained   him "   to   most   unceasing   and   almost   superhuman 
efforts  for  man's  salvation.     These  combined  elements — earnest  faith  and  earnest 

loYQ gave  strength  to  his  weakness,  courage  to  his  timidity,  point  to  his  logic  and 

fervour  to  his  eloquence.  They  enlisted  him,  body,  mind,  and  soul,  so  that  he 
was  willing  to  become  all  things  to  all  men  that  he  might  by  any  means  save 
some.  And  so  must  it  be  with  us  all  if  we  would  accomplish  much — if  we  would 
make'  our  lives  tell  for  God  and  humanity.     We  must  have  faith  in  somatbing. 


CHAP.  IX.]  ECCLESIASTES.  239 

We  must  have  love  for  something.  II.  The  motives  leading  to  an  earnest  life. 
What  are  they?  1.  Well,  first,  as  was  intimated  in  the  beginning,  is  that  thought 
of  no  repair.  **  There  is  no  work,"  no  doing  this  life's  unfinished  work,  "  in  the 
grave."  Surely  if  any  one  thought  more  than  another  could  make  life  seem 
real  and  earnest  to  us  it  must  be  found  in  this  fact,  that  we  can  never  go  over 
the  ground  again  to  do  unfinished  work  or  rectify  mistakes.  As  Jehovah  spoke 
to  Israel  out  on  the  road  from  Egypt,  so  He  says  to  each  of  us,  '*  Ye  shall  hence- 
forth return  no  more  that  way."  We  are  told  that  in  one  of  those  splendid 
pageants  in  Berlin,  not  long  ago,  the  wife  of  the  English  ambassador  unfortunately 
unfastened  the  necklace  she  was  wearing  and  lost  a  costly  pearl  somewhere  in  the 
roadway.  Perhaps  it  might  have  been  regained  if  a  serious  search  had  been  in  order 
at  such  a  time.  But  the  grand  procession  must  hurry  along,  and  a  lost  place  in 
the  ranks  was  of  more  account  than  a  lost  pearl.  They  did  not  return  the  same 
way.  Lost  things  are  lost.  Undone  work  is  undone.  Broken  things  are  broken 
beyond  repair,  for  there  is  no  work,  nor  knowledge,  nor  device  in  the  grave  whither 
thou  goest.  That  dropped  pearl  of  opportunity,  lost  in  the  procession  of  our  years, 
lies  far  back  there  in  the  dusty  roadway,  and  we  shall  not  return  that  way.  2.  The 
second  motive  is  the  need  of  haste.  If  there  is  no  finishing  up  of  this  life's  work 
in  the  next,  then  how  rapidly  ought  we  to  work  now.  Like  the  needle-woman 
sitting  by  her  last  bit  of  candle,  bow  rapidly  ought  we  to  labour  lest  the  light  burn 
down  to  its  socket  ere  the  work  be  finished.  "  The  King's  business  requires 
haste."  •*  The  night  oometh."  (G.  B.  F.  Hallock.)  The  Oo$pel  of  hard 
work: — Keligion  won't  spoil  you  in  any  kind  of  secular  work,  it  will  make  you 
sacred  in  the  midst  of  all  the  dangers  of  secularity.  As  I  said  to  a  company  of 
working-men's  wives,  not  long  ago,  so  I  say  here :  there  is  more  polishing-paste 
in  this  text  than  we  have  ever  taken  out  of  it.  It  would  wonderfully  scour  and 
brighten  everything  if  we  could  get  it  extracted  and  applied.  It  is  a  perfect 
battery  of  energy ;  would  God  it  might  get  into  us  1  When  we  go  back  to  our  daily 
task — whatever  you  are  going  to  do,  in  work,  in  purpose,  in  enterprise,  do  it— 
up  and  do  it.  Do  not  merely  think,  don't  dawdle,  do  not  idle,  do  not  dream. 
Young  or  old,  rich  or  poor,  mistress  or  maid,  master  or  man,  do  not  spend  thy 
time  in  day-dreaming,  in  star-gazing,  in  hatching  schemes  in  your  imagination, 
and  in  thinking  marvellous  things — of  a  benevolent  nature,  for  example — that  are 
only  castles  in  the  air,  and  "  wee  bit  fuffin'  lowes  "  (flickering  flames),  as  our 
Scotch  song  says.  The  Bible  gives  the  best  rein  to  every  legitimate  ambition  and 
power  within.  Let  go;  drive  on  ahead  if  only  this  is  your  driving-power.  "  What- 
soever thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might."  Then  let  us  apply  it  to 
spiritual  work.  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,"  from  sweeping  under  the 
mats,  to  taking  thy  share  in  the  Sacrament,  "  do  it  with  thy  might."  For  daily 
toil — ^no  laziness,  no  mere  scheming,  and  no  jerry-building;  it  is  all  condenmed  in 
here.  And  for  express  spiritual  work,  the  same  injunction.  But  have  you  got 
the  spiritual  hand — have  you?  Let  me  illustrate  what  I  mean  by  that  man  in 
the  New  Testament — ^you  remember  him — the  man  with  the  withered  hand.  Do 
not  imagine  I  am  sending  you  to  spiritual  work,  if  you  have  not  the  hand  to  do 
it,  and  the  heart  behind  the  hand  to  drive  and  guide  it.  But  you  may  get  it  to- 
day. "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might,"  for  the  day 
is  hastening  to  its  close,  everything  is  passing  away.  Do  not  despair,  do  not  sigh, 
do  not  mope,  do  not  say,  "  This  takes  all  pith  and  stamina  out  of  me  " :  it  does 
not.  A  horse  never  runs  better  than  when  it  is  rimning  for  the  stable;  and  wa 
may  all  be  doing  that  through  Ood's  grace  and  mercy.  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand 
findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might,"  for  the  night  is  coming,  and  God  will  put  no 
man  on  the  night-shift,  not  one  of  us.  He  is  not  a  hard  taskmaster.  He  is  kind 
and  gracious,  only  He  knows  we  are  lazy,  my  brother,  and  that  is  why  He  speaks 
like  this.  He  knows  that  even  the  best  of  us  need  to  have  the  spur.  I  knew  a 
brother  student  once  who  dreamt  that  in  a  month's  time  he  was  going  to  die.  Ha 
dreamt  it  three  times  over  in  one  night,  and  although  he  was  naturally  as  prosaio 
and  matter-of-fact  as  anybody  I  ever  knew,  that  dream  stuck  to  him.  It  was 
burned  into  him.  Now,  people  would  say  that  that  stopped  that  man's  work,  that 
he  simply  eat  and  moped;  shut  himself  in,  and  sent  for  the  doctor.  He  did  not; 
he  never  put  in  such  a  month's  work  in  the  district  where  he  was  missionary, 
never.  It  was  a  pity  the  vision  faded  away.  It  b  a  pity  it  should  fade  away  from 
any  of  us.  It  did  him  no  harm,  he  never  had  such  a  month  of  personal  holiness, 
and  such  a  month  of  self-sacrifice;  doing  things  with  his  might,  both  secular  and 
«acred,  for  be  had  only  a  month,  and  then  the  judgment-seat,  and  Him  who  sits 


8M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbat.tx, 

thereon.     Thus  it  always  comes  out,  whatever  way  you  like  to  turn,  the  great 
lesson  from  eternity  is :  Be  diligent,  and  make  the  most  of  the  passing  day,  for 
yourself,  for  your  character,  for  your  neighbour,  for  your  God;  for  it  will  all  meet 
you,  and  be  part  and  parcel  of  you  through  eternity.     This  is  the  true  "  Carpa 
diem  "  philosophy.     Of  Turner,  his  servant  used  to  say,  "  I  never  knew  him  to 
be   idle."     Oh,    how   some   who   give   themselves   up   to   what   we   call   worldly 
ambitions  put  Christians  to  shame  I     When  he  got  an  order  for  a  picture,  he  went 
home,  and  the  same  day  on  which  he  got  the  order  he  spread  the  canvas,  and  ha 
had  the  whole  thing  in  dead  colour  before  he  went  to  bed.     Next  morning,  early, 
he  was  at  it  again.     The  Lord  put  into  us  the  Holy  Ghost  as  the  Spirit  of  hard 
work.     You  wUl  not  kill  yourself  by  hard  work  along  the  lines  of  God's  Book. 
"  The  more  the  marble  wastes,  the  more  the  statue  grows."      {John  McNeill.) 
The  lesson  of  diligence : — A  few  years  ago  a  gentleman  who  kept  a  large  drug-shop 
in  Boston  advertised  for  a  boy.     The  next  day  a  number  of  boys  applied  for  the 
situatioB.     One  of  them  was  a  queer-looking  little  fellow.    He  came  with  his  aunt, 
who  took  care  of  him.     Looking  at  the  poor  boy,  the  merchant  said  promptly, 
"Can't  take  him;  he's  too  small."     "I  know  he's  small,"  said  his  aunt,  "but 
he's  willing  and  faithful.     Please  try  him,  sir."     There  was  something  in  tha 
boy's  look  which  made  the  merchant  think  again.     A  partner  in  the  firm  cama 
forward  and  said  he  "  didn't  sea  what  they  wanted  with  such  a  boy — he  wasn't 
bigger  than  a  pint  pot."     Still  the  boy  was  allowed  to  stay,  and  put  to  work. 
Ifot  long  after  a  call  was  made  on  the  clerks  for  some  one  to  stay  through  tha 
night.     They  all  held  back  but  little  Charley,  who  instantly  oSered  his  services. 
In  the  middle  of  the  night  the  merchant  came  to  the  shop  to  see  if  all  was  right, 
and   was   surprised   to  find   Charley   busy  cutting   out   labels.     "  What   are  you 
doing?"  he  asked.     "  I  didn't  tell  you  to  work  all  night."     "  I  know  you  didn't, 
sir;  but  I  thought  I  had  better  be  doing  something  than  be  idle."     In  the  morning, 
when  the  merchant  came  into  his  office,  he  said  to  the  cashier,  "  Double  Charley's 
wages.     His  aunt  said  he  was  willing,  and  so  he  is."     A  few  weeks  after  this  a 
menagerie  passed  through  the  streets.     Naturally  enough,  all  the  hands  in  tha 
shop  rushed  out  to  see  it,  but  Charley  stayed  in  his  place.     A  thief  saw  his 
chance,  and  entered  by  the  back  door;  suddenly  he  found  himself  grabbed  by  tha 
young  clerk,  and  held  down  to  the  floor.     Not  only  was  he  prevented  from  steal- 
ing, but  thLogs  taken  from  other  shops  were  found  upon  him  and  returned  to  their 
owners.     "  What  made  you  stay  to  watch  when  all  the  others  quitted  their  work 
to  look?"  asked  the  merchant.     "  You  told  me  never  to  leave  the  shop,  sir,  when 
others  were  absent,  and  so  I  thought  I  ought  to  stay."     The  order  was  repeated, 
"  Double  that  boy's  wages.     His  aunt  said  he  was  faithful,  and  so  ha  is."     Before 
he  left  the  clerkship  he  was  getting  a  salary  of  JE500  a  year;  and  now  ha  is  a 
member  of  the  firm.     Here  is  an  example  of  diligence  leading  to  success.     And  no 
boy  or  girl,  man  or  woman,  will  be  long  out  of  a  place  who  learns  the  lesson  of 
diligence,  and  practises  it  in  this  way.     (B.   Newton,  D.D.)     Do  thy  best: — ^A 
young  painter  was  directed  by  his  master  to  complete  a  picture  on  which  tha 
master  had  been  obliged  to  suspend  his  labom-s  on  account  of  his  growing  infirm- 
ities.     "  I  commission  thee,  my  son,"  said  the  aged  artist,  "to  do  thy  best  upon 
this  work.     Do  thy  best."     The  young  man  had  such  reverence  for  his  master's 
skill  that  he  felt  incompetent  to  touch   canvas   which   bore  the   work   of  that 
renowned  hand.     But,  "  Do  thy  best,"  was  the  old  man's  calm  reply;  and  again, 
to  repeated  solicitations,  ha  answered,  "  Do  thy  best."     The  youth  tremblingly 
seized  the  brush,  and  kneeling  before  hit  appointed  work,  he  prayed  :  "  It  is  for 
the  sake  of  my  beloved  master  that  I  implore  skill  and  power  to  do  this  deed." 
His   hand   grew   steady    as   he   painted.     Slumbering   genius    awoke    in    his    eye. 
Enthusiasm  took  the  place  of  fear.    Forgetfulness  of  himself  supplanted  his  self- 
distrust,  and  with  a  calm  joy  he  finished  his  labour.     The  "  beloved  master  "  was 
borne  on  his  couch  into  the  studio  to  pass  judgment  on  the  result.     As  his  eye  fell 
upon  the  triumph  of  art  before  him,  he  burst  into  tears,  and  throwing  his  enfeebled 
arms  around  the  young  artist,  ha  exclaimed,  "  My  son,  I  paint  no  moret"    That 
youth,  Leonardo  da  Vinci,  became  the  painter  of  "  The  Last  Supper,"  the  ruins 
of  which,  after  the  lapse  of  800  years,  still  attract  annually  to  tha  refectory  of  an 
obscure  convent  in  Milan  hundreds  of  the  worshippers  of  art. 

Ver.  11.  I  retamed,  and  saw  noder  the  inn  that  the  race  is  not  to  the  swift, 
nor  the  battle  to  the  stronif. — The  event  of  things  not  always  answerable  to  second 
eautes: — Thar*  are  soma  persons  so  slothful  in  their  own  affairs,  so  hardly  pre* 


CHAP.  IX.]  ECCLESIASTES.  8U 

Tailed  upon  to  undertake  anything  that  requires  labour,  bo  easily  discouraged  by 
any  appearance  of  ill  success,  or  so  heedless  and  inactive  in  the  prosecution  ofl 
whatever  they  are  about;  as  if  they  were  of  opinion,  even  in  temporal  matters, 
what  in  some  systems  of  religion  has  been  absurdly  affirmed  concerning  spirituals, 
that  God  does  everything  in  men  and  for  men,  leaving  nothing  for  them  to  do  fof 
themselves;  or  as  if  they  thought  that  precept  to  be  literal  and  universal  which 
our  Saviour  spake  with  the  latitude  of  a  moral  admonition  to  the  apostles  only, 
and  upon  an  extraordinary  occasion,  "  Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,"  etc. 
There  are  others,  in  a  contrary  extreme,  who  rely  with  such  confidence  on  the 
efieots  of  their  own  wisdom  and  industry,  and  so  presumptuously  depend  upon 
the  natural  and  regular  tendencies  of  second  causes;  as  if  they  thought,  either 
there  was  no  superior  cause  at  all,  on  which  the  frame  of  nature  depended;  or  at 
least,  that  the  providence  of  God  did  not  condescend  to  direct  the  events  of  things 
in  this  lower  and  uncertain  world.  And  these  are  proved  in  the  words  of.  my 
text,  "I  returned."  Solomon  turned  his  thoughts  and  observations  from  one 
subject  to  another.  In  the  verse  before  the  text  he  views  the  careless  or  negligent 
part  of  mankind,  and  exhorts  them  to  diligence.  And  then,  "  I  returned,"  saith 
he;  that  is,  he  turned  his  view  the  other  way,  towards  the  confident  or  presumptu* 
ous;  and  them  he  bids  to  take  notice  that  the  race  is  not  always  to  the  swift,  nor 
the  battle  to  the  strong;  that  is,  that  the  events  of  things  do  not  always  answer  to 
Ihe  probabilities  of  second  causes,  unless  the  wisdom  of  God  thinks  fit  by  the  direo- 
tion  of  His  good  providence  to  make  those  causes  successful.  I.  Doctbinaii 
OBSSBVATIONS.  1.  What  men  vulgarly  call  chance  or  unforeseen  accident  is 
in  Scripture  always  declared  to  be  the  determinate  counsel  and  providence  of 
God.  And  it  is  strictly  and  philosophically  true  in  nature  and  reason  that  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  chance  or  accident;  it  being  evident  that  those  words  do  not 
signify  anything  really  existing,  anything  that  is  truly  an  agent  or  the  cause  of 
any  event;  but  they  signify  merely  men's  ignorance  of  the  real  and  immediate 
cause.  And  this  is  so  true,  that  very  many  even  of  those  who  have  no  religion, 
nor  any  sense  at  all  of  the  providence  of  God,  yet  know  very  well,  by  the  light  of 
their  own  natural  reason,  that  there  neither  is  nor  can  be  any  such  thing  ae 
chance,  that  is,  any  such  thing  as  an  eSect  without  a  cause;  and  therefore  what 
others  ascribe  to  chance,  they  ascribe  to  the  operation  of  necessity  or  fate.  But 
fate  also  is  itself  in  reality  as  truly  nothing  as  chance  is.  Nor  is  there  in  nature 
any  other  efficient  or  proper  cause  of  any  event,  but  only  the  free  will  of  rational 
and  intelligent  oreatiures  acting  within  the  sphere  of  their  limited  faculties;  and 
the  supreme  power  of  God,  directing,  by  His  omnipresent  providence  (according 
to  certain  wise  laws  or  rules,  established  by,  and  entirely  depending  upon,  Hia 
own  good  pleasure),  the  inanimate  motions  of  the  whole  material  and  unintelligent 
world.  2.  The  all-directing  providence  of  God,  which  governs  the  universe,  does 
not  superintend  only  the  great  events  in  the  world,  the  fates  of  nations  and  king- 
doms;  so  that,  without  the  direction  of  providence,  the  strongest  and  most 
numerous  armies  are  not  victorious  in  battle;  but  its  oare  extends  even  to  the 
concerns  of  single  persons,  so  that,  without  the  blessing  of  God,  neither  riches, 
nor  favour,  nor  any  temporal  advantage  can  certainly  be  obtained  by  anything 
that  man  can  do;  nay,  that  even  in  matters  of  still  smaller  moment,  not  so 
much  as  a  race  is  gained  by  the  swift  without  the  hand  of  Providence  directing 
the  event.  3.  Things  being  brought  about  according  to  the  course  of  nature  by 
second  causes  is  not  at  all  inconsistent  with  their  being  nevertheless  justly  and 
truly  ascribed  to  the  providence  of  God.  For  what  are  natural  causes?  Nothing 
but  those  laws  and  powers  which  God  merely  of  His  own  good  pleasure  has 
implanted  in  the  several  parts  of  matter,  in  order  to  make  them  instruments  of 
fulfilling  His  supreme  will.  Which  laws  and  powers,  as  He  at  first  appointed 
them,  so  nothing  but  the  same  good  pleasure  of  God  continually  preserves  them. 
And  they  neither  exist  nor  operate  in  any  moment  of  time,  but  by  influence  and 
action  derived  to  them  (mediately  or  immediately)  from  His  all-governing  will. 
80  that  He  foresees  perpetually  what  effect  every  power  and  operation  of  nature 
tends  to  produce;  and  could  (if  He  thought  fit)  exactly  with  the  same  ease  cause 
it  to  produce  a  different  effect  as  that  which  it  now  does.  From  whence  it  follows 
inevitably,  to  the  entire  confusion  of  atheists,  that  all  those  things  which  thej 
oal)  natural  effects  are  in  very  truth  as  much  the  operation  of  God  as  even 
miracles  themselves.  And  to  argue  against  Providence  from  the  observation  of 
the  regular  course  of  natural  causes,  is  as  if  a  man  should  conclude  from  the 
uniformity  of  a  large  and  beautiful  building  that  it  was  not  the  work  of  men's 

IS 


243  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

hands,  Bor  contrived  by  any  free  agent,  because  the  stones  and  the  timber  were 
laid  uniformly  and  regularly  in  the  most  constant,  natural,  and  proper  order. 
4.  Since  the  whole  course  of  nature  in  the  ordinary  method  of  causes  and  effects, 
and  all  thoee  unexpected  turns  of  things  which  men  vulgarly  call  chance  and 
accident  are  entirely  in  the  hand  of  God,  and  under  the  continual  direction  of  His 
providence;  it  follows  evidently  that  God  can,  whenever  He  pleases,  even  without 
a  miracle,  pimish  the  disobedient;  and  no  swiftness,  no  strength,  no  wisdom,  no 
artifice  shall  enable  them  to  escape  the  vengeance  which  even  natural  causes  only, 
by  the  direction  of  Him  from  whom  they  receive  their  nature,  bring  upon  offenders. 
He  can  punish  by  fires  and  famine,  by  plagues  and  pestilences,  by  storms  and 
earthquakes,  by  domestic  commotions,  or  by  foreign  enemies.    And  it  is  the  exceed- 
ing stupidity  of  profane  men  not  to  be  moved  hereby  to  repent  and  give  glory 
to  the  God  of  Heaven,  who  hath  power  over  these  plagues  (Eev.  xvi.  9).     The 
meaning  of  this  whole  observation  is,  not  that  these  judgments  are  always  certain 
signs  of  God's  displeasure  against  all  the  particular  persons  upon  whom  they  at 
any  time  fall.     But  whether  they  be  punishments  for  sin    (as  they  generally, 
though  not  always,  are);  or  whether  they  be  only  trials  of  men's  virtue  (as  they 
sometimes  are  designed  to  be);  or  whether  they  be  means  of  weanmg  them  from 
this  transitory  and  imcertain   world ;   or  whatever  other  end  Providence  brings 
about  thereby ;  still  they  are  always  effects  of  the  same  all- wise  Divine  providence, 
which  ought  to  be  acknowledged  and  submitted  to  as  such,  and  whose  designs 
no  power  or  wisdom  of  frail  and  vain  men  can  oppose  or  prevent.     II.  Practical 
iNFEfiENOKS.     1.  If  these  things  be  so,  then  let  the  greatest  and  most  powerfiJ 
of  wicked  men  consider  that  they  have  nothing  in  this  world  either  to  boast  of, 
or  to  rely  upon  (Jer.  vs..  23).     2.  If  nothing  happens  in  the  world  without  the 
Divine  providence,  then  good  men  have  a  sufficient  ground  of  trust  and  reliance 
upon  God,  at  all  times  and  under  all  dangers.     Not  that  God  will  always  deliver 
them,  or  cause  them  to  prosper  in  the  present  world;  for  He  often  sees  it  better  to 
determine  otherwise;  but  they  may  rely  with  assurance  that  nothing  can  befall 
them  but  what  He  judges  fit,  seeing  all  the  powers  of  nature  and  of  second  causes 
are  nothing  but  instruments  in  His  hand,  and  under  His  direction.     8.  From  this 
notion  of  Providence  may  be  given  a  plain  and  direct  answer  to  that  question  of 
the  profane  fatalist  (Job  xxi.  15).     Indeed,  if  the  course  of  nature,  and  those 
things  which   we  call  second  causes  were  independent  upon  Providence,  there 
would  be  good  reason  to  ask,  what  benefit  could  there  be  either  in  prayer  or 
thanksgiving?    But  if,  as  has  been  shown,  nature  is  nothing,  and  second  causes 
are  nothing  but  mere  instruments;  then  it  is  very  plain  that  prayer  and  thanks- 
giving are  as  much  due  to  God  for  whatever  is  brought  about  by  natural  causes, 
as  ii  He  had  done  the  thing  by  any  other  instruments  instead  of  these,  even  by 
the  most  miraculous  ones;  which,  m  that  case,  being  no  less  constant,  would  have 
been  no  more  miraculous   than  these.     (S.   Clarke,   D.D.)     Success   not  alway* 
answerable  to  the  probability  of  second  causes: — Next  to  the  acknowledgment  of 
God's  being,  nothing  is  more  essential  to  religion  than  the  belief  of  His  providence, 
and  a  constant  dependence  upon  Him  as  the  great  Governor  of  the  world  and  the 
wise  Disposer  of  all  the  affairs  and  concernments  of  the  children  of  men;  and 
nothing  can  be  a  greater  argument  of  providence  than  that  there  is  such  an  order 
of  causes  laid  In  nature,  that  in  ordinary  course  everything  does  usually  attain  its 
end;  and  yet  that  there  is  such  a  mixture  of  contingency  as  that  now  and  then 
we  cannot  tell  how  nor  why  the  most  likely  causes  do  deceive  us,  and  fail  of 
producing  their  usual  effects.     The  sum  of  the  Preacher's  advice  is  this  :   When 
thou  propovmdest  any  end  to  thyself,  be  diligent  and  vigorous  in  the  use  of  means; 
and  when  thou  hast  done  all,  look  above  and  beyond  these  to  a  superior  Cause 
which  overrules,  and  steers,  and  stops,  as  He  pleases,  all  the  motions  and  activity 
of  second  causes;  and  be  not  confident  that  all  things  are  ever  so  wisely  and 
firmly  laid  that  they  cannot  fail  of  success.    For  the  providence  of  God  doth  many 
times  step  in  to  divert  the  most  probable  event  of  things,  and  to  turn  it  quite 
another  way;  and  whenever  He  pleases  to  do  so,  the  most  strong  and  likely 
means  do  fall  lame,  or  stumble,  or  by  some  accident  or  other  come  short  of  their 
end.     The  words  thus  explained  contain  this  general  proposition — ^That  in  human 
affairs  the  most  likely  means  do  not  always  attain  their  end,  nor  does  the  event 
constantly  answer  the  probability  of  second  causes ;  but  there  is  a  secret  providence 
which  governs  and  overrules  all  things,  and  does,  when  it  pleases,  interpose  to 
defeat  the  most  hopeful  and  probable  designs.     I.  Fob  the  confirmation   and 
HXPSTBATIOM  or  THIS  PBOPCiiTiONji  that  the  most  likely  means  do  not  always  attain 


CHAP.  IX.]  ECCLE8IASTES.  J4s'' 


their  end;  but  there  is  a  secret  providence  which  overrules  and  governs  all 
events,  and  does,  when  it  pleases,  interpose  to  defeat  the  most  probable  anj 
hopeful  designs.  "  The  race  is  not  to  the  swift."  If  we  understand  this  literally, 
it  is  obvious  to  every  man  to  imagine  a  great  many  accidents  in  a  race  which 
may  snatch  victory  from  the  swiftest  runner.  If  we  understand  it  as  the  Chaldea 
paraphrase  does,  with  relation  to  war,  that  the  swiftest  does  not  always  overcoma 
or  escape  in  the  day  of  battle;  of  this  Asahel  is  an  eminent  instance,  who,  though 
he  was,  as  the  Scripture  tells  us,  "  light  of  foot  as  a  wild  roe,"  yet  did  he  not 
escape  the  spear  of  Abner.  "  Nor  yet  bread  to  the  wise,"  or  to  the  learned.  Tha 
poverty  of  poets  is  proverbial;  and  there  are  frequent  instances  in  history  oj 
eminently  learned  persons  that  have  been  reduced  to  great  straits  and  necessities, 
"Nor  yet  riches  to  men  of  understanding:"  by  which,  whether  we  understand 
men  of  great  parts,  or  of  great  diligence  and  industry,  it  is  obvious  to  every  man's 
observation  that  an  ordinary  capacity  and  understanding  does  usually  lie  mora 
level  to  the  business  of  a  common  trade  and  profession  than  more  refined  and 
elevated  parts;  which  lie  rather  for  speculation  than  practice,  and  are  better  fitted 
for  the  pleasure  and  ornament  of  conversation  than  for  the  toil  and  drudgery  of 
business :  as  a  fine  razor  is  admirable  for  cutting  hairs,  but  the  dull  hatchet  much 
more  proper  for  hewing  a  hard  and  knotty  piece  of  timber.  And  even  when  parts 
and  industry  meet  together,  they  are  many  times  less  successful  in  the  raising  ol 
a  great  estate  than  men  of  much  lower  and  slower  imderstandings ;  because 
these  are  apt  to  admire  riches,  which  is  a  great  spur  to  indubtry;  and  because 
they  are  perpetually  intent  upon  one  thing,  and  mind  but  one  business,  from 
which  their  thoughts  never  straggle  into  vain  and  useless  inquiries  after  know*  j 
ledge,  or  news,  or  public  affairs;  all  which  being  foreign  to  their  business,  they, 
leave  to  those  who  are,  as  they  are  wont  to  say  of  them  in  scorn,  more  curious, 
and  too  wise  to  be  rich.  "  Nor  yet  favour  to  men  of  skill."  All  history  is  full  of 
instances  of  the  casual  advancement  of  men  to  great  favour  and  honour,  whea 
others,  who  have  made  it  their  serious  study  and  business,  have  fallen  short  of  it^ 
n.  Some  ebason  and  account  op  this,  why  the  providence  of  God  doth  sometimes 
thus  interpose  to  hinder  and  defeat  the  moat  probable  designs  of  men : — To  bring 
men  to  an  acknowledgment  of  His  providence,  and  of  their  dependence  upon  Him, 
and  subordination  to  Him;  and  that  He  is  the  great  Governor  of  the  world,  and 
*'  rules  in  the  kingdoms  of  men."  God  hath  so  ordered  things  in  the  administra- 
tion of  the  aSairs  of  the  world  as  to  encourage  the  use  of  means;  and  yet  so  as  to 
keep  men  in  a  continual  dependence  upon  Him  for  the  eflGicacy  and  success  of 
them :  to  encourage  industry  and  prudence  God  generally  permits  things  to  their 
natural  course,  and  to  fall  out  according  to  the  power  and  probability  of  second 
causes.  But  then,  lest  men  should  cast  o£E  religion,  and  "  deny  the  God  that  \b 
above  ";  leet  they  should  "  trust  in  their  sword  and  their  bow,  and  say,  the  Lord 
hath  not  done  this  ";  lest  men  should  look  upon  themselves  as  the  creators  and 
framers  of  theur  own  fortune,  and  when  they  do  but  a  little  outstrip  others  ia 
wisdom  or  power,  in  the  skill  and  conduct  of  human  afifairs,  they  should  grow 
proud  and  presumptuous,  God  is  pleased  sometimes  more  remarkably  to  interpose, 
"  to  hide  pride  from  man,"  as  the  expression  is  in  Job;  to  check  the  haughtiness 
and  insolence  of  men's  spirits,  and  to  keep  them  within  the  bounds  of  modesty  ' 
and  humility;  to  make  us  to  know  "  that  we  are  but  men,"  and  that  the  reins  of 
the  world  are  not  in  our  hands,  but  that  there  is  One  above  who  sways  and 
governs  all  things  here  below.  III.  Some  infebenoes  fboh  what  hath  been  said  ' 
UPON  THIS  ABGUMENT.  1.  From  hence  we  may  learn  not  to  account  religion,  and 
time  spent  in  the  service  of  God,  and  in  prayer  to  Him  for  His  blessing  upon  our 
endeavours,  to  be  any  hindrance  to  our  affairs.  For  after  we  have  done  all  we 
can,  the  event  is  still  in  God's  hand,  and  rests  upon  the  disposal  of  His  providence. 
And  did  men  firmly  believe  this,  they  would  not  neglect  the  duty  of  prayer,  and  ■ 
behave  themselves  so  carelessly,  and  unconcernedly,  and  irreverently  in  it  as  wa 
see  too  many  do;  they  would  not  look  upon  every  hour  that  is  spent  in  devotion 
as  lost  from  their  business.  2.  From  hence  we  may  likewise  learn  so  to  use  tha 
means  as  still  to  depend  upon  God;  who  can,  as  He  pleases,  bless  the  counsels 
and  endeavours  of  men,  or  blast  them  and  make  them  of  none  effect.  For  as  God 
hath  promised  nothing  but  to  a  wise  and  diligent  use  of  means,  so  all  our 
prudence,  and  industry,  and  most  careful  preparations  may  miscarry,  if  He  do 
not  favour  our  design ;  for  without  Him  nothing  is  wise,  nothing  is  strong,  nothing 
is  able  to  reach  and  attain  its  end.  3.  The  consideration  of  what  hath  been  said 
upon  this  argunaent  should  keep  us  from  being  too  sanguine  and  confident  of  the 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

most  likelj  designs  and  undertakings;  because  these  do  not  always  answer  th« 
probability  of  second  causes  and  means ;  and  never  less  than  when  we  do  with  the 
greatest  confidence  rely  upon  them;  when  we  promise  most  to  ourselves  from 
them,  then  are  they  most  likely  to  deceive  us;  they  are,  as  the  prophet  compares 
them,  like  a  broken  reed,  which  a  man  may  walk  with  in  his  hand,  while  he 
lays  no  great  stress  upon  it;  but  if  he  trust  to  it,  and  lean  his  whole  weight  on  it, 
it  will  not  only  fail  him,  but  even  pierce  him  through.  (J.  Tillotton,  D.D.) 
Many  endeavours  of  the  creature  are  often  frustrated  of  their  end  when  there  is 
greatest  probability  of  success: — Here  Solomon  representeth  men — 1.  Under 
several  accomplishments  of  swift,  wise,  strong.  2.  As  addressing  themselves  to 
some  effect  to  obtain  success.  3.  As  in  the  issue  disappointed.  None  of  these 
accomplishments  alone  do  give  the  event  intended  and  hoped  for,  nor  doth  it 
depend  absolutely  and  infallibly  upon  them.  4.  That  all  things  intended,  desired, 
expected  by  us  depend  upon  time  and  chance,  namely,  as  they  depend  upon 
God's  providence,  as  and  when  God  wiU  order  and  determine  the  time  and  oppor- 
tunity, the  success  and  event.  Therefore  from  the  whole  it  appears  that  instru- 
ments most  fitted  and  furnished,  and  most  diligent  in  their  way,  are  frustrated  of 
the  event  which  they  so  earnestly  intended  and  hoped  for.  I.  The  best  instru- 
ments fail  out  of  their  ignorance,  oblivion,  and  inadvertency,  from  which  man 
cannot  altogether  free  himself  in  this  life,  not  only  in  matters  spiritual,  but 
secular,  whether  economical  in  the  disposing  of  ourselves  and  relations,  or  family 
interests  and  concernments.  II.  Because  if  we  have  sufficient  knowledge,  yet  God 
can  easily  put  some  impediment  from  within  or  without  to  hinder  the  use  of 
our  wisdom,  power,  and  knowledge.  1.  Within.  He  can  blast  our  excellencies 
in  an  instant,  or  obstruct  the  use  of  it  for  the  time.  As  though  He  did  not  destroy 
the  property  of  the  fire,  yet  he  suspended  the  burning,  when  the  three  children 
were  in  the  furnace.  So  of  a  sudden  can  He  blast  our  strength  (Ps.  xvi.  6,  6).  2.  From 
without.  By  casting  in  some  casual  event  which  we  foresaw  not  and  could  not  think 
of.  III.  The  most  able  instruments  do  often  provoke  God  to  disappoint  them,  whilst 
their  abilities  of  covmsel  and  strength  are  a  means  of  hardening  their  hearts  in 
carnal  confidence,  and  often  engage  in  business  that  proves  mischievous  to  them; 
I  say,  in  the  most  lawful  businesses  they  provoke  God  to  disappoint  them,  because 
they  undertake  them  without  God;  but  too  often  being  unrenewed  and  unsane- 
tified,  their  wit  and  power  is  used  against  God.  IV.  To  say  and  do,  or  to  maks 
a  thing  to  be,  is  the  act  and  name  of  Jehovah,  which  glory  He  will  not  oommimi- 
cate  to  any  other  (Lam.  iii.  37).  Therefore,  whatever  preparation  of  means  or 
likelihoods  there  are,  we  must  not  be  too  confident  of  future  events.  We  cannot 
bring  them  to  pass  by  our  own  power,  and  God  doth  not  always  work  by  likely 
means;  He  hides  events  from  men  (Isa.  xlviii.  7).  "Lest  thou  shouldst  say, 
I  knew  them."  Now  the  event  could  not  be  hidden  if  the  Lord  went  on  in  a 
constant  course,  giving  the  race  to  the  swift,  etc.  God  carrieth  on  His  providence 
BO  as  to  leave  no  footsteps  behind  Him.  He  goeth  not  one  way  so  often  as  to 
make  a  path  of  it,  that  men  may  see  the  plain  tendency  thereof.  The  uses  follow. 
It  teaches  us — I.  The  nothingness  of  the  creature,  and  the  all-sufficiency  of  God. 
II.  To  teach  us  in  this  lottery  of  human  affairs  to  look  after  sturer  comforts.  This 
is  the  whole  drift  of  this  book;  for  Solomon,  in  his  critical  search  and  observation 
of  all  things  done  under  the  sun,  aimeth  at  this,  to  direct  our  hearts  to  blessings 
which  are  more  stable  and  siure.  God  would  leave  these  things  at  uncertainty, 
that  omr  hearts  might  not  too  much  be  set  upon  them,  that  we  might  not  pursue 
after  favour,  riches,  and  credit  as  the  best  things.  HI.  What  need  there  is  God 
should  be  seen  and  sought  unto  in  all  our  designs  and  resolutions  about  the 
disposal  of  ourselves  and  ours.  1.  What  will  the  use  of  means  and  second  causes 
do  without  God?  2.  When  we  have  done  our  duty,  and  used  such  good  means  as 
God  affordeth,  then  we  may  quietly  refer  the  success  to  God,  in  whose  hands  are 
all  the  ways  of  the  children  of  men,  and  upon  whose  good  pleasure  the  issues  of 
all  things  depend  (Prov.  xvi.  13).  IV.  The  wisest  and  best  of  men  must  not 
expect  always  to  be  happy,  but  must  prepare  themselves  for  sinister  chances;  for 
the  words  are  brought  in  upon  this  occasion  of  rejoicing  in  our  comforts.  V.  Take 
heed  of  carnal  confidence,  or  depending  upon  the  sufficiency  of  any  means,  though 
never  so  likely  to  produce  their  effect.  VI.  To  keep  humble  men  of  the  best 
abilities  and  sufficiencies  for  any  work.  1.  Before  the  event;  for  many  times  they 
meet  with  mora  disappointments  than  those  that  want  them,  and  their  best 
designs  miscarry  when  meaner  persons  are  carried  through  their  difficulties  with 
less  ado.     2.  After  the  event  we  must  look  above  ■eoond  oauBes,  not  attribute 


CHAF.  n.]  ECCLESIASTES.  845 

anjthijQg  to  our  own  etrengtb  or  gifts,  but  to  God's  assiBtance  and  blessing  on  our 
labours.  VII.  To  prevent  the  discouragement  of  those  that  want  gifts,  or  parts, 
or  means.  Ood  many  times  passeth  over  the  strong,  wise,  and  understanding, 
and  gets  Himself  most  glory  in  protecting  the  weak,  and  providing  for  them.  The 
issue  of  all  is  this :  Let  us  bear  all  things  befalling  us  from  the  wise  hand  and 
providence  of  the  Lord,  and  encourage  ourselves  in  His  all-sufficiency  in  all  straits 
and  difficulties.     (T.  Manton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  Han  also  knoweth  not  hii  time. — Bleaaed  ignorance: — ^"  If  ignorance 
is  bliss,  'tis  folly  to  be  wise."  This  applies  to  our  ignorance  in  relation  to  the 
future.  It  is  mercy  that  has  woven  the  veil.  I.  If  we  knew  our  future,  snjoy- 
MBNT  would  be  IMPOSSIBLE.  Suppose  we  knew  all  the  bereavements,  sufferings, 
adversities  that  are  before  us,  and  the  time,  circumstances,  and  place  of  our 
death,  would  there  be  any  pleasure  for  us  on  this  earth?  II.  If  we  knew  our 
future,  ODTX  would  be  impbaoticable.  With  all  the  dark  events  of  our  future 
dearly  marked  out  before  us,  we  should  stand  aghast,  and  be  utterly  unfit  for  the 
ordinary  duties  of  life.  III.  If  we  knew  our  future,  life  would  be  intolebablb. 
It  would  be  utterly  impossible  for  our  fragile  natures  to  bear  such  a  vision. 
(Homiliat.)  Man't  ignorance  of  the  time  of  hit  death: — These  words  suggest  a 
few  thoughts  concerning  death.  I.  It  is  inevitable.  "His  time":  that  is,  his 
time  to  die;  fixed  by  an  irrevocable  decree  (Heb.  ix.  27).  Science,  art,  wealth, 
all  have  been  tried,  to  avoid  death;  but  all  have  failed.  II.  It  is  insidious.  "  The 
fish  is  pursuing  its  own  course  through  the  waters,  in  search  of  its  prey,  and 
unconscious  of  danger,  when,  all  at  once,  it  finds  itself  hopelessly  entangled  in 
the  folds,  or  caught  in  the  meshes  of  the  fisher's  net,  and  there  is  no  escape. 
The  bird  is  following  its  instinct,  in  quest  of  food,  when  the  limed  twig  or  the 
baited  trap,  on  which  it  alights,  robs  it  of  its  freedom,  and  consigns  it  into  the 
hands  of  the  fowler.  As  blind,  oftentimes,  is  man  himself  to  the  coming  stroke 
which  is  to  smite  him  to  the  dust."  III.  It  is  unexpected.  "  Boast  not  thyself 
of  to-morrow,"  etc.  **  Take  heed,  for  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not,"  etc. 
{Ibid.)  Man  knoweth  not  hit  time: — I.  Consideb  the  evidences  of  the  fact— 
that  "  man  knoweth  not  his  time."  1.  With  respect  to  men  in  general,  they  do 
not  know  the  time  of  their  visitation.  This  is  evidently  the  case  with  the  impeni- 
tent  and  imbelieving,  who  disregard  the  tokens  both  of  the  favour  and  displeasure 
of  God.  The  founder  melteth  in  vain,  and  the  wicked  are  not  plucked  away. 
The  day  of  opportunity  is  lost,  perhaps  never  to  be  regained.  Nor  can  Christians 
themselves  be  wholly  acquitted  of  the  charge  of  inattention.  Too  apt  are  we  to 
deprive  ourselves  of  the  gracious  presence  of  the  Saviour  for  the  want  of  a  little 
more  humility  and  self-denial.  2.  Man  knoweth  not  his  time  as  to  the  seasonable 
performance  of  various  duties.  Sometimes  we  have  had  loud  calls  to  humiliation 
and  prayer,  when,  like  Israel  of  old,  we  have  given  ourselves  up  to  joy  and 
gladness,  slaying  oxen,  and  killing  sheep,  eating  flesh,  and  drinking  wine  (Isa. 
zzii.  13).  Sometimes  we  have  had  a  favourable  opportunity  of  bearing  our  testi- 
mony to  the  important  doctrines  of  the  Gospel,  or  the  equally  important  duties  of 
practical  religion  :  yet  we  have  neither  had  a  heart  nor  a  tongue  to  speak,  when  a 
few  words  might  have  had  a  very  happy  effect.  8.  We  do  not  know  the  time 
when  afflictions  will  come,  or  when  we  shall  be  delivered  out  of  them.  God  has 
an  appointed  time  for  both.  All  events  are  safe  in  His  hands,  but  they  are  at  the 
same  time  concealed.  His  counsel  shall  stand,  and  He  will  do  all  His  pleasure. 
We  can  no  more  advance  or  retskrd  God's  work  than  we  can  hasten  the  rising  sun, 
or  hinder  its  going  down  (Isa.  Ix.  22).  4.  We  know  not  the  time  of  our  con- 
tinuance in  life  or  departure  out  of  it.  6.  We  know  not  the  day  of  judgment,  or 
the  final  period  of  all  things.  Our  ignorance  in  this  respect  is  best  suited  to 
that  state  of  subjection  to  the  wisdom  and  sovereignty  of  God  in  which  we  are 
placed,  and  to  the  nature  of  that  economy  which  He  has  established,  as  well  as 
to  the  limited  extent  of  our  frailties.  II.  Inquibb  the  season  why  man  is  left  in 
IQNOBANCE  OF  PABTioDLAB  TIMES  AND  SEASONS.  1.  It  tends  to  do  honouT  to  the  Divine 
government  (Prov.  xxv.  2).  2.  The  knowledge  of  times  and  seasons  would  be  injurious 
to  us  rather  than  advantageous.  Hereby  faith,  hope,  and  patience,  so  much 
adapted  to  a  probationary  state,  are  kept  in  continual  exercise;  and  by  being 
exercised  are  strengthened  and  increased.  Impeovement:  1.  This  subject  teaches 
ns  to  repress  a  prying  and  inquisitive  temper,  and  the  wish  of  being  wise  above 
what  is  written  (Deut.  xxix.  29;  John  xxi.  21,  22).  2.  Learn  to  be  thankful  for 
|hat  degree  of  information  which  Ood  has  been  pleased  to  impart.     All  that  is 


246  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nc 


neoeasary  to  be  known,  both  as  to  faith  and  practice,  is  sufficiently  revealed;  and 
the  more  necessary  the  knowledge,  the  clearer  is  the  revelation.  (B.  Beddome, 
M.A.)  Expectation  of  long  life  unwite: — I.  Wht  men  abe  so  apt  to  expect  to 
UVB  long  in  this  woeld.  It  needs  no  proof  that  they  are  apt  to  expect  that  their 
lives  will  be  prolonged  even  to  old  age.  It  is  the  inward  thought,  hope  and  expecta- 
tion of  those  in  the  morning,  in  the  meridian,  and  even  in  the  decline  of  life,  that 
they  shall  live  many  days,  if  not  many  years.  The  health  they  have  enjoyed,  the 
dan<Ters  they  have  escaped,  the  preservation  they  have  experienced,  the  mearu 
they  have  used  and  intend  to  use  to  lengthen  out  their  days,  all  serve  to  corroborate 
and  confirm  their  pleasing  expectation  that  their  lives  shall  be  long  continued. 
But  their  dread  of  death  is  another  strong  and  powerful  reason  why  they  cherish 
the  expectation  of  living  to  the  latest  period  of  human  life.    II.  Why  it  is  dnwisb 

IN  PERSONS  OF  ALL  AGES,  CBABACTEBS,  AND  CONDITIONS  TO  HAEBOUE  AND  OHKBISH 

THE  EXPECTATION  OF  LIVING  LONG  IN  THIS  WOELD.     1.  Bccause  God  haB  designedly 
concealed  the  length  of  their  days.     2.  Because  they  ore  continually  liable  to 
iimumerable  unknown  and  unavoidable  causes  of  death.    8.  Because  God,  in  His 
providence,  is  continually  and  solemnly  warning  them  agamst  such  vain  expecta- 
tions.    He  is  continually  taking  away  the  child  before  the  youth,  the  youth  before 
the  man,  the  man  of  twenty  before  the  man  of  forty,  the  man  of  forty  before  the 
man  of  fifty,  or  sixty,  or  seventy,  or  eighty,  or  any  of  a  greater  age.     He  pro- 
miscuously takes  away  the  useless  and  the  useful,  the  learned  and  unlearned,  the 
rich  and  the  poor,  the  religious  and  irreligious.     4.  It  will  appear  still  more  unwise 
and  absurd  for  men  to  form  and  cherish  high  hopes  and  expectations  of  living  long 
in  this  world,  if  we  consider  how  expressly  and  repeatedly  God,  in  His  Word, 
has  warned  and  admonished  them  against  it.     Improvement  :  1.  Since  mankind 
ftre  so  extremely  apt  to  harbour  and  cherish  expectation  of  the  long  continuance  of 
life,  there  is  reason  to  think  that  they  generally  die  unexpectedly  to  themselves. 
2.  It  appears  from  what  has  been  said  that  death  commonly  comes  to  men  in  an 
evil  time.     To  die  is  the  great  and  last  act  to  be  done  on  the  stage  of  life,  and 
extremely  solemn  and  interesting  to  the  dying  and  to  the  living;  and  a  sudden 
and   unexpected  time  is  certainly   a   very   evil   time   to   make  the  solemn   and 
important   transition   out   of   this   into   the   invisible   and   eternal    world.     8.    It 
appears  from  men's  undue  expectation  of  living  why  bereavements  are  often  so 
heavy  and  grievous  to  be  borne.    Those  who  habitually  expect  to  live  long  in  the 
world  themselves  are  almost  equally  prone  to  expect  that  their  relatives  and 
friends  will  be  long-lived ;  and  therefore  their  sudden  and  unexpected  death  brings 
with  it  a  sudden  and  unexpected  bereavement,  which  often  gives  a  treble  and 
sometimes  a  tenfold  weight  to  it.     4.  Since  death  so  generally  comes  suddenly 
and  imexpectedly  to  the  living,  we  learn  the  wisdom  and  importance  of  early  piety. 
6.  We  learn  from  what  has  been  said  why  God  does  cause  so  many  sudden  and 
unexpected  deaths  to  take  place  in  the  world.     It  is  undoubtedly  designed  more 
for  the  benefit  of  the  living  than  for  the  dying.     (N.  Emmons,  D.D.)     The  uncer- 
tainty of  human  life: — It  is  an  ancient  aphorism  that  every  man  thinks  all  men 
mortal  but  himself.     Rather  than  encounter  a  realizing  view  of  death,  and  engage 
in  a  serious  preparation  to  meet  it,  men  will  hazard  all  consequences.     They  are 
like  soldiers  marching  up  to  the  battery  of  an  enemy  with  their  eyes  and  ears 
closed,  and  dreaming  of  safety  because  they  neither  see  nor  hear  the  motions  of 
the  foe.     Death  will  come,  however  much  a  stranger  it  may  be  to  our  thoughts; 
and  it  will  come  with  double  ruin  for  having  been  kept  out  of  view  so  long.     It 
may  come  suddenly,  like  the  convulsions  of  an  earthquake  which  at  dead  of  night 
buries  whole  cities  in  ruins.     "  Man  also  knoweth  not  his  time;"  that  is,  he  is 
ignorant  of  the  time  of  his  death  and  the  time  when  overwhelming  calamities 
may  come  upon  him.     He  may  be  stripped  naked  in  one  day  like  Job;  or  in  the 
midst  of  his  dreams  of  earthly  happiness  he  may  open  his  astonished  eyes  in  the 
vorld  of  spirits.     '*  As  the  fishes  that  are  taken  in  an  evil  net  " — while  they  are 
wandering  securely,  or  sporting  among  pearls,  or  rushing  together  for  food,  little 
thinking  of  being  suddenly  drawn  up  in  the  concealed  net.     "  And  as  the  birds 
that  are  caught  in  the  snare,"  while  they  are  skipping  sportively  without  appre- 
hension, or  are  eager  to  pick  up  the  grain  which  is  spread  to  decoy  them  to  death. 
I"  So  are  the  sons  of  men  snared  in  an  evil  time  " — while  they  are  sporting  and 
feeding   themselves,   secure    in    conscious   health,    ignorant   of   the   shaft    that   is 
festering  in  their  breast.     "When  it  falleth  suddenly  upon  them."     While  they 
are  most  secure  the  arrow  of  the  Almighty  reaches  their  heart.     While  they  are 
saying,  "  Soul,  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry,"  the  word  comes. 


CHAP,  n.]  ECCLESIASTES.  347 

"  Thou  fool,  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  required  of  thee."  Where  are  now  the 
ancient  empires  of  Assyria,  and  Babylon,  and  Persia,  and  Greece,  and  Rome? 
Where  are  the  emperors,  statesmen,  philosophers,  and  bards  of  antiquity?  Where 
is  now  the  immense  army  of  Xerxes,  which  seemed  to  darken  Asia,  and  to  sink 
with  its  weight  the  land  of  Greece?  Whore  are  now  the  many  millions  who  have 
filled  the  world  with  noise  and  contention,  with  fame  and  folly  for  a  hundred 
generations?  Kingdom  has  trodden  on  the  heel  of  kingdom,  and  nation  has 
followed  nation  down  to  the  land  of  forgetfulness.  You  hang  over  the  grave  by 
a  thread  on  which  the  flame  has  seized,  and  you  may  look  every  moment  to  fall 
to  riae  not  again  "  till  the  heavens  be  no  more."  Gould  the  veil  be  drawn  from 
eternity  and  discover  to  your  astonished  eyes  the  infinitely  glorious  or  dreadful 
consequences  depending  on  the  present  life;  could  then  the  veil  be  drawn  from  the 
many  agents  which  are  constantly  striving  within  you  to  keep  in  order  your  com- 
plicated machine,  and  discover  to  you  the  many  critical  junctures  which  are  daily 
occurring,  which,  without  making  you  sensible  of  it,  bring  you  within  a  hair's 
breadth  of  death;  could  the  veil  be  also  drawn  from  the  course  of  nature  around 
you,  and  disclose  the  dangers  among  which  you  walk  by  day  and  sleep  by  night; 
could  you  thus  have  a  view  of  your  hourly  exposures  and  of  the  eternal  interests 
at  stake,  you  would  start  from  your  dream  like  a  man  awoke  in  a  burning  house, 
and  flee  for  your  life — ah,  whither?  whither  but  to  the  arms  of  Ciurist?  (£.£>. 
Griffin,  D.D.)  So  are  the  sons  of  men  ensnared. — Snarea  in  the  path  of  th» 
young: — The  sad  truth  here  declared  has  been  experienced  thousands  of  times, 
not  only  by  those  who  are  now  alive,  but  by  others  who  have  passed  away  to  their 
great  accoimt.  No  one  likee  to  be  deceived  in  any  matter;  and  yet  bow  sin  ia 
constantly  deceiving  us  I  No  man  is  willing  to  be  ensnared  by  an  enemy ;  and  yet 
how  Satan  leads  us  captive  at  hie  will  I  and  what  a  disclosure  will  the  judgment- 
day  present,  of  fraud  and  subtlety  on  the  side  of  sin  and  Satan — of  weakness  and 
compliance  on  the  part  of  sinners  1  From  among  the  many  sources  of  danger  now 
presenting  themselves  to  my  mind  I  must  select  several  of  the  most  prominent 
and  powerful.  1.  There  is  the  danger  of  speculativeness  in  matters  of  religion. 
Eemember,  speoulativeness  proves  nothing — faith  "  proves  all  things  ";  speculative- 
Bess  deceives — faith  cannot;  speculativeness  enfeebles  the  mind — faith  strengthens 
it;  speculativeness  receives  nothing  truly — faith  grasps  and  retains  that  which  is 
revealed  to  faith;  speculativeness  is  the  false  light  of  a  carnal  state — faith  is  the 
beacon-blaze  of  God  set  up  in  the  soul;  and  this  the  apostle  knew  full  well,  when 

,  he  said — "We  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight."    2.  Another  source  of  danger  ia 

[indecision  with  regard  to  personal  religion.  Multitudes  of  young  men,  we  believe, 
who  neither  speculate  upon  the  Bible,  nor  deny  or  even  question  its  authority,  but 
yield  a  full  respect  to  religion  itself  and  to  the  religion  of  religious  friends,  are  in 

;4hi£  sad  state  of  personal  indecision.     No  step  of  a  positive  kind  has  been  taken. 

■  They  wish  to  be  religious — we  give  them  credit  for  that ;  but  then  they  are  not. 

,  They  hope  to  be  so  by  and  by — we  believe  they  do ;  but  where  is  the  sustained 
effort  that  evidences  the  reality  both  of  wishes  and  of  hope?  Indecision,  long 
persevered  in,  may  at  length — and  it  is  a  solemn  thought — acquire  the  force  of 

'  decision,  but  acting  in  a  wrong  direction.  It  may  be  decision  on  the  side  of  ruin, 
aimply  because  the  young  man,  knowing  in  a  truth,  may  not  have  firmness  to  act 
on  what  he  knows,  nor  grace  enough,  sought  in  persevering  prayer,  to  decide  at 
once  for  life,  salvation  and  a  glorious  immortality,  accessible  to  him  at  any 
moment,  through  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  by  the  Spirit.  8.  I  have  next  to  set  before 
you  the  danger  of  worldly  conformity,  even  when  you  have  been  enabled  to 
overcome  your  natural  indecision,  and  have  cast  in  your  lot  with  the  true  people 
of  God.  Before  this  occurs,  you  are  of  necessity  conformed  to  the  world ;  it  cannot 
be  otherwise;  you  have  no  motive  for  separation  from  the  world  till  then.  In 
vrhatever  degree  a  Christian  conforms  to  the  habits  and  principles  which  govern 
the  world  around  him,  in  the  same  degree  is  his  spirituality  in  danger  of  deteriora- 
tion. And  yet  how  many  Christian  professors  live  as  like  the  rest  of  the  world, 
as  if  they  had  never  professed  to  come  to  a  decision  on  the  side  of  Christ  1  The 
truth  is,  that  the  world  makes  concessions  to  religion;  and  the  religion  of  these 
modern  days  is  too  liberal  to  withhold  compliance  to  the  demands  which  the  world 
makes  in  return  for  its  concession.  Contact  with  the  world  is  unavoidable;  it  ie 
one  thing,  however,  for  us  to  submit  to  that  which  must  be,  but  quite  another 
to  conform  to  that  which  should  not  be,  just  because  it  invites  and  pleases,  or 
because  it  threatens.  I  know  it  is  difficult  to  maintain  your  ground  when  the 
intercourse  between  Christians  and  the  world  Lb  bo  familiar;  but  are  you  to  give 


948  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ckap.  ir. 


way  when  a  difficulty  crosses  you  in  the  path,  and  looks  you  in  the  face?  Are  you 
accustomed  to  do  bo  in  the  ordinary  pursuita  of  life?  Is  there  not  difficulty  in  the 
way  of  everything  that  is  worth  doing?  Does  not  difficulty  generally  stimulate 
perseverance?  To  be  aware  of  difficulty  arising  from  the  character  of  worldly 
■ociety,  with  which  you  cannot  perhaps  at  all  times  avoid  mingling,  is,  if  you  will 
have  it  so,  to  be  partly  armed  against  it.  If  you  fail  in  this,  the  worldly  spirit 
around  you  will  soon  cast  a  successful  snare;  and  you  may  find  by  bitter  and 
humbling  experience  that,  "  as  the  fishee  are  taken  in  an  evil  net,  and  as  the  birds 
•re  caught  in  the  snare,  so  are  the  sons  of  men  anared  in  an  evil  time,  when  it 
falleth  suddenly  upon  them."     (Q.  Fi$k,  LL.B.) 

Vera.  14-18.  There  was  a  little  city,  and  few  men  within  it. — The  little  oity 
und  the  poor  viie  man: — The  little  city,  as  first  introduced  to  our  notice,  is  in 
■ore  straits.     The  legion   of   the  foe   seem   innumerable,   while  the  garrison   is 
reduced  to  a  mere  handful.     They  are  fast  being  brought  to  extremities,  and  in  a 
few  short  hours  the  unfortunate  little  city   will   be,   in  all  human  probability, 
iubjected  to  all  the  horrors  of  capture  by  storm,  and  will  be  ultimately  rased  to 
the  ground.     At  first  sight  it  may  seem  rather  paradoxical  to  compare  this  great 
world  of  ours,  with  its  almost  innumerable  inhabitants,  its  vast  area,  its  enormous 
resources,  to  the  little  city  with  few  men  within  it.    But  do  we  not,  comparatively 
■peaking,  take  too  exalted  a  view  of  this  little  world?    For  relatively  little  it  is, 
•fter  all — but  an   insignificant  fraction   of   God's   great   universe.     But   further, 
inasmuch  as  the  city  spoken  of  here  is  represented  as  being  ultimately  delivered 
from  its  peril,  we  are  hardly  justified  in  applying  the  figure  to  humanity  at  large, 
for  whom  indeed  deliverance  has  been  provided,  but  has  not  by  it  been  accepted. 
The  little  city  joyfully  accepting  the  benefit  of  deliverance  is  a  much  fitter  type  of 
the  spiritual  Church  of  Christ,  viewed  in  the  foreknowledge  of  God  as  a  complete 
whole,  redeemed  and  delivered  by  the  wisdom  and  love  of  the  poor  wise  man  who 
has  cast  in  his  lot  with  her :  and  this  is  indeed  "  a  little  city,  and  few  men  within 
her."     So  that  the  parallelism  thus  limited  is  by  no  means  strained  or  unintel- 
ligible.     Now,  we  know  nothing  of  the  circumstances  to  which  the  little  city 
owed  its  danger — it  may  or  may  not  have  been  its  own  fault;  but  we  do  know 
the  cause  of  the  peril  in  which  the  human  family  has  been  involved,  and  that  the 
blame  rests  entirely  with  ourselves.     Man  has  rebelled  against  the  sovereign  will 
of  God;  the  defiant  cry  of  humanity  through  the  long  dark  ages  has  still  been, 
"  We  will  not  have  this  Man  to  reign  over  us."     The  result  of  all  has  been  that 
I  we  have  forced  God  into  the  position  of  a  foe,  although  He  is  in  His  heart  our 
best  and  truest  friend.     God  would  be  false  to  His  own  position  in  the  universe 
I  were  He  to  permit  rebellion   against   His   authority :    He  would   be   practically 
;  abdicating  His  throne,  and  this  He  will  never  do.    Do  you  know  what  it  is  to  have 
\  reached  the  point  of  self -despair?  have  you  found  yourself  surrounded  by  the 
mighty  bulwarks?  have  you  felt  what  it  is  to  have  no  escape?     Not  until  then, 
\  believe  me,  will  you  be  disposed  to  value  the  deliverance  procured  by  "  the  poor 
!  wise  man."     To  him  we  will  now  turn  our  attention.     He  was  but  a  poor  man; 
!  but  he  had  a  patriot's  heart  and  a  wise  man's  head;  and,  moved  doubtless  by 
love  for  his  compatriots,  by  some  extraordinary  and  unlooked-for  effort  of  wisdom, 
be  delivered  the  city.     How  did  he  do  it?     Here  again  we  have  no  information, 
but  it  is  suggestive  to  notice  that  an  incident  very  similar  to  the  one  described 
here  actually  took  place  in  the  time  of  Solomon's  father,  and  must  in  all  proba- 
bility have  made  so  deep  an  impression  on  his  own  mind  that  it  is  scarcely  possible 
that  his  mind  did  not  recur  to  it  as  he  wrote  these  words,  though  in  this  case  the 
humble  deliverer  was  a  woman,  not  a  man  (2  Samuel  xx.  16).     The  guilt  of  one 
man  here  had  involved  the  whole  town  in  peril,  because  his  guilt  was  imputed  to 
them;  but  at  the  suggestion  of  the  wise  woman,  the  guilt  was  laid  on  the  head 
of  one,  himself  the  guilty  party,  and  one  man  died  for  the  people,  and  the  whole 
city  perished  not.     But  our  Wise  Man,  Himself  the  Innocent,  offered  Himself, 
with  a  wisdom  which  was  the  child  of  love,  that  the  guilt  of  our  city  might  first 
be  imputed  to  Him  the  Innocent,  and  that  further  His  iimooence  might  be  imputed 
to  our  city,  so  that  by  His  own  voltintary  self-sacrifice  one  man  might  die  for  the 
I  eity,  and  the  city  itself  might  be  safe.     The  wise  woman  saved  the  city  at  the  cost 
I  of  another's  life;  but  our  poor  Wise  Man  has  saved  His  Church  at  the  cost  of  His 
{  own;  and  in  the  moment  of  our  despair  we  see  the  hostile  bulwark  withdrawn,  the 
engines  of  war  removed.     We  too  are  saved  by  the  interposition  of  One  who, 
!••  though  He  wm  rioh,  yet  lor  our  sakee  became  poor^  that  we  through  His 


CHAP.  IX.]  ECCLESIASTES,  249 


poverty  might  be  made  rich."    He  too  was  found  in  the  city  with  no  outward 
distinction  of  rank  or  title.    "  He  was  in  the  world,  and  the  world  was  made  by 
Him,  and  the  world  knew  Him  not."    Born  in  a  remote  province,  in  an  obscure 
town,  brought  up  in  retirement  as  a  peasant's  son,  what  was  He  to  the  Csesara 
and  Herods  of  His  day?    But  now  I  hasten  on  to  the  sequel,  for  I  am  speaking  to 
the  delivered  ones  to-day.     What  became  of  the  poor  wise  man?    Did  they  make 
him  king  or  governor?     Did  he  continue  to  be  the  most  prominent  figure  in  the 
little  commonwealth  which  he  had  saved?     Nay,  but  he  disappears  again  into  his 
old  obscurity,  he  retires  to  the  back  street — to  his  cellar  or  his  garret.    "  No  man 
remembered  that  same  poor  man."    Ah,  blood-bought  souls,  ye  ransomed  from 
ruin  by  the  death  of  the  Deliverer,  is  this  true  of  any  of  us?    Having  been  deliv* 
ered  from  impending  ruin  by  the  Christ,  have  we  learned  to  forget  the  Deliverer, 
and  to  live  very  much  as  if  we  had  delivered  ourselves?     (W.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken, 
M.A.)     The  poor  wise  man: — A  very  remarkable  case  this  is  indeed.     Here  is  a 
little  city,  with  few  inhabitants,  in  a  weak  defenceless  condition,  and  a  powerful 
army  at  the  gates;  which  is  rescued  out  of  the  hands  of  its  enemies,  and  snatched 
from  the  jaws  of  destruction  just  opened  to  devour  it :   war   and   slavery   are 
driven  far  away,  and  peace  and  liberty  at  once  restored.     And  all  this  is  effected 
by  one  "  poor  wise  man."    What  would  the  behaviour  of  the  people  be  in  such  a 
case?     Would  not  their  hearts  overiiow  with   gratitude  toward  their  deliverer? 
Would  they  not  render  to  him  all  their  service  who  had  rendered  to  them  all  his; 
and  vie  with  each  other  who  should  do  him  most  honour  ?     Nothing  less  1  they  did 
not  BO  much  as  thank  him.     Nay,  after  the  thing  was  over,  he  did  not  even  enter 
into  their  thoughts — "  No  man  remembered  that  same  poor  man."     This  is  a 
very  affecting  story,  considered  only  in  itself :  but  if  we  can  find  an  interest  in  it, 
and  make  the  case  our  own,  it  will  be  much  more  so.     Let  us  ask,  then,  what  is 
to  be  understood  by  the  city,  the  great  king  that  besieged  it,  and  the  poor  wise 
man  that  delivered  it?     The  first  thing  we  meet  with  is  "  a  little  city  with  few 
men  in  it."    Is  not  this  a  description  which  suits  well  with  the  Church,  or  society 
of  believers?  (Matt.  v.  14;  Heb.  xi.  10;  Ps.  Ixxxvii.  3).   And  few  and  weak  indeed  we 
are,  in  comparison  of  those  that  besiege  and  encompass  us  roimd  about  to  destroy 
us.    Who  these  are,  we  are  next  to  consider.     "  There  came  a  great  king  against 
it,  and  besieged  it,  and  built  great  bulwarks  against  it."     That  the  Christian  state, 
of  which  this  besieged  city  is  a  picture,  is  a  state  of  warfare  is  known  and  acknow- 
ledged, when  it  is  called  the  Church  militant;  and  who  it  is  that  attacks  it  we  all 
declare  at  our  baptism,  when  we  promise  to  fight  manfully  against  '*  sin,  the 
world,  and  the  devil."    Sin  and  the  world  are  but  two  instruments  in  this  war :  it 
is  the  devil  who  uses  them;  and,  therefore,  he  is  the  great  king  that  besieges  this 
city  and  builds  bulwarks  against  it.     The  bulwarks  are  raised ;  the  city  is  ready  to 
fall;  and  the  enemy  is  about  to  enter :  when  lo,  there  is  found  in  the  city  a  poor 
wise  man;  and  who  is  he?    If  we  are  the  city,  he  that  saves  the  city  must  be  he 
that  saves  us;  even  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  than  whom  none  ever  was  poorer  or 
wiser :  He  was  made  poor  for  our  sakes ;  and  in  Him  were  all  the  treasures  of 
wisdom.     This  is  He  who  by  His  wisdom  delivers  the  city;  who  places  Himself  in 
the  breach,  as  Moses  did.     At  the  sight  of  Him  the  infernal  host  was  in  an  uproar; 
and  for  a  time  they  seemed  to  overwhelm  Him;  they  shouted  for  victory,  and 
were  hasting  forward  to  the  prey :  the  enemy  of  Israel,  the  spiritual  Pharaoh, 
said,  "  I  will  pursue,  I  will  overtake,"  etc.     And  here,  **  except  the  Lord  had 
kept  the  city,  the  watchman  had  waked  but  in  vain."    Had  he  been  an  earthly 
conqueror,  the  day  had  been  lost.   For,  to  the  everlasting  confusion  of  His  enemies, 
He  who  lay  down  in  his  grave  the  poor  wise  man,  the  despised  and  afflicted 
Galilean,  arose  from  the  dead  "  the  Lord  mighty  in  battle;  and  of  the  subject  of 
death  became  the  King  of  Glory."     And  now,  would  you  think  it  possible  that 
after  all  this  no  man  should  remember  that  same  poor  man?  that  they  should 
entirely  forget  him?  that  they  should  all  forget  him?    Who  at  the  hearing  of  this 
monstrous  act  of  ingratitude  is  not  filled  with  indignation?    Yet  we  have  done  all 
this :    we   have  had   this   mighty   deliverance   vouchsafed   to   us — and   we   have 
forgotten  it  I     We  have  forgotten  Him,  who  so  remembered  us  that  He  forgot 
Himself,  and  made  no  accoimt  of  all  those  sorrows  and  sufferings,  from  His  birth 
in  the  manger  to  His  death  upon  the  cross,  which  He  underwent  for  us  men  and 
our  salvation.     The  first  thing  we  ought  to  remember  and  confess  is  this,  "  That 
^e  got  not  the  land  in  possession  by  our  own  sword,"  etc.     You  have  now  seen 
how  well  this  parable  of  Solomon  bears  an  application  to  the  salvation  of  us 
aitizena  of  the  Cliurch  by  Jesus  Christ;  and  how  it  agrees  with  the  same  in  every 


WC  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rx.  ' 

|>artioular.  There  is  another  case  of  the  kind,  in  which  the  event  was  quite  con> 
trary;  and  the  case  of  the  one  city  should  never  be  thought  of  without  the  other. 
You  have  seen  the  example  of  a  ciby  saved  by  a  poor  wise  man.  I  can  tell  you  of 
another  city  lost  for  want  of  him.  The  city  of  Jerusalem  fell  into  the  condition 
of  our  city  in  the  parable.  A  great  king  came  against  it  and  encompassed  it  with 
armies,  and  built  great  bulwarks  against  it,  and  prevailed  so  as  to  overthrow  it  to 
its  very  foundations,  and  scatter  all  its  inhabitants.  There  was  found  in  it  none 
to  save;  no  poor  wise  man  to  prevent  its  destruction.  There  had  been  one;  but 
they  had  cast  him  out,  and  refused  to  be  saved  by  him :  for  the  sake  of  his 
poverty  they  had  despised  his  wisdom;  so  their  destruction  was  inevitable.  And 
BO  will  it  be  of  all  those  who  cast  out  their  Saviour:  yea,  the  time  will  come 
when  the  whole  world  shall  perish  for  want  of  Him.     (W.  Jonet,  M.A.) 

Vers.  17, 18.  The  words  of  wise  men  are  heard  in  quiet. — The  auperionty  of  moral 
to  military  force: — "The  words  of  wise  men  are  heard  in  quiet":   words  of 
thoughtfulness  and  conviction,  silently  dropping  from  the  lips  or  the  pen,  are  more 
mighty  than  the  boisterous  bombastic  utterances  of  those  who  rule   by  force. 
I.  The  one  develops  the  highest  elements  of  mind  and  ohabacteb,  the  other 
does  not.     In  what  does  moral  power  consist?    1.  In  a  correct  apprehension  of 
moral  truth.    2.  An  indomitable  sympathy  with  moral  truth;  such  a  sympathy 
•8  Job  had  when  he  said,  "  Though  He  slay  me,"  etc.     And  as  Paul,  "  I  count 
not  my  life,"  etc.     3.  A  practical  embodiment  of  moral  truth.    But  what  have 
you  in  military  power?    No  deep  moral  conviction,  no  high  sympathies;  nothing 
but  tact,  cimning,  brute  courage.    II.  The  one  affoeds  full  scope  fob  all  the 
belligeeent  instincts  in  man,  the  other  does  not.     1.  Military  force  can  only 
bring  man  into  contact  with  the  mere  forms  of  his  enemies.     It  does  not  touch  the 
spirit  of  enmity;  moral  force  does.     The  words  of  true  moral  power,  heard  in 
''  quiet,"  smite  dishonesties,  enmities,  falsehoods.     2.  There  are  hosts  of  enemies 
Ihat  military  force  cannot  meet  at  all.     What  can  military  force  do  with  ignor- 
ance, poverty,  carnality,  selfishness,  diseases  of  all  kinds?     Nothing.     III.  The 
one  0VEB00ME3  its  enemies  effectively,  the  other  does  not.     Man  is  made  to  be 
Bubdued  and  swayed  by  the  appeals  of  truth,  justice,  and  kindness.     We  are  told 
that  in  the  East  there  are  people  who,  by  music,  can  so  influence  some  species  of 
Berpent  that,  while  under  its  spell,  the  deadly  cobra  may  be  handled  as  if  it  were 
utterly    harmless.     But    if    the    charmer    tread    on    the    snake    unawares,    he    is 
1  poisoned  like  any  other  man.     This  is  something  like  the  influence  of  moral  force, 
of  moral  truth  and  love;  it  can  subdue  malignant  minds.     But  military  power 
cannot  do  this,  it  cannot  touch  the  soul :  no  shot  nor  steel  can  reach  the  arena 
of  soul.    IV.  The  one  achieves  its  conquests  without  injuey  to  self  ob  object, 
'  the  other  does  not.    The  moral  force  employed  in  moral  campaigns,  either  in  self- 
'  defence  or  in  conquest,  does  not  injure,  but  blesses  the  fighter.     By  it  he  gets 
good,  his   energy   is  renewed  by   exercise.     Nor   are  others   injured;  no  wealth 
i  is  sacrificed,  no  sufferings  are  produced.     But  in  military  force  all  is  ruined : 
commerce,  governments,  wealth,  towns,  cities,  as  well  &s  millions  upon  millions  of 
I  human  life.    V.  The  one  is  sanctioned  bt  the  example  of  Christ,  the  other  ii 
!  cot.     When  "  He  was  reviled.  He  reviled  r   t.  again."    From  the  subject  learn: 
i  1.  The  fearful  moral  ignorance  of  the  world.     Kings,  statesmen,  all  have  more 
faith  in  swords  and  bayonets  than  in  moral  truth.     2.  The  encouragement  to  use 
moral  force  in  the  correction  of  wrong.     8.  The  men  who  are  destined  to  become 
the  heroes  of  the  future.     (Homilist.)    One  sinner  destroyeth  much  good. — The 
destructiveneee  of  sin: — 1.  Sin,  in  itself,  is  a  moral  force  of  tremendous  potency. 
Nothing  finite  or  human  can  resist  it,  or  counteract  its  malign  influence.     Sin, 
when  it   is  finished,  brings  forth  death.     Ah  1   that   is  the  terrible  law  of  sin. 
2.  As  a  social  moral  force  ein  works  on  a  broader  field,  and  with  the  sweep  and 
destructiveness  of  a  cyclone,  uprooting  and  destroying  everything  in  its  path.     One 
cholera  or  fever-stricken  man  may  infect  a  whole  city :  so  one  moral  leper  may 
impart  the  plague  to  all  within  the  circle  of  his  influence  while  living,  and  send 
the  death-current  down  through  many  generations.     One  scoffer  or  infidel  may 
blast  the  faith  of  a  thousand  souls.     One  bad  book,  the  progeny  of  a  single  brain, 
may  taint  the  morals  of  a  nation,  and,  like  Paine 's  "  Age  of  Reason,"  sweep 
down  through  the  centuries  with  the  destructiveness  of  a  moral  sirocco.     3.  Con- 
fine the  view  to  a  narrower  social  field — say  the  family,  or  the  little  neighbour- 
hood, or  the  single  church — and  the  same  alarming  fact  is  brought  to  light.     Th» 
narrower  the  sphere  the  more  intimate  and  constant  the  contact,  as  a  rale,  the  -* 


CB&T.  X.]  ECCLESIASTES.  J5l 

stronger  the  influence  exerted.  One  evil  child  often  leads  astray  a  whole  family 
group;  one  evil  companion  corrupts  a  whole  circle;  one  bad  example  suffices  to 
destroy  the  integrity  of  the  whole  body.  Lessons :  1.  Be  watchful  and  vigilant 
in  regard  to  the  first  appearance  of  evil — (1)  in  the  individual  himself.  Timely 
rebuke,  faithful  admonition,  earnest  prayer  and  effort  may  arrest  the  tide  of  evU 
and  save  a  sinner  from  the  doom  which  he  courts,  tmd  save  society  from  tha 
dreadful  effects  of  an  abandoned  career.  (2)  In  the  community  in  which  he 
moves,  in  the  way  of  warning,  and  in  the  way  of  hedging  in  and  counteracting  his 
destructive  influence.  2.  Eemember,  and  act  on  the  fact,  that  while  "  one  sinner 
destroyeth  much  good,"  one  devout,  earnest  praying  Christian  may  set  in  motion 
moral  influences  and  forces  that  shall  "  turn  many  to  righteousness."  {Homilttio 
Review.) 


CHAPTEB  X. 

Yeb.  1.  Dead  flies  cause  the  ointment  ...  to  send  forth  a  stinking  savour.— 
Dead  ftiet: — ^Among  the  Jews,  oil  rendered  fragrant  by  being  mixed  with  preoioot 
di'ugs  was  used  for  many  different  purposes.  With  it  priests  and  kings  were 
anointed  when  they  entered  upon  their  offices,  guests  at  the  tables  of  the  rich 
were  treated  to  it  as  a  luxury.  It  was  used  medicinally  for  outward  application 
to  the  bodies  of  the  sick;  and  with  it  corpses,  and  the  clothes  in  which  they 
were  wrapped,  were  besprinkled  before  burial.  Very  great  care  was  needed  in 
the  preparation  of  the  material  used  for  such  special  purposes.  Elaborately  con* 
fected  as  the  ointment  was,  it  was  easily  spoiled  and  rendered  worthless.  It  was 
accordingly  necessary  not  only  to  take  great  pains  in  making  it,  but  also  in 
preserving  it  from  contamination  when  made.  A  dead  fly  would  soon  corrupt  tha 
ointment,  and  turn  it  into  a  pestilent  odour.  So,  says  the  Preacher,  a  nobla 
and  attractive  character  may  be  corrupted  and  destroyed  by  a  little  folly;  an 
insignificant-looking  fault  or  weakness  may  outweigh  great  gifts  and  attainments. 
The  fault  which  shows  itself  in  a  character  is  not  like  a  stain  or  flaw  in  a  marble 
statue,  which  is  confined  to  one  spot,  and  is  no  worse  after  the  lapse  of  years* 
but  like  a  sore  in  a  living  body,  which  weakens  and  may  destroy  the  whole 
organism.  One  cause  why  the  evil  influence  spreads  is  that  we  are  not  on  our 
guard  against  it,  and  it  may  grow  to  almost  ungovernable  strength  before  we  ara 
really  convinced  that  there  is  any  danger.  We  can  recognize  at  once  great  errors 
and  heinous  vices,  and  the  alarm  and  disgust  they  excite  prepare  us  to  resist 
them;  but  little  follies  and  weaknesses  often  fill  us  with  an  amused  contempt  for 
them,  which  blinds  us  to  their  great  power  for  evil.  So  numerous  are  the  sources 
from  which  danger  arises,  that  a  long  list  might  be  made  of  the  little  sine  by  which 
the  characters  of  many  good  men  and  women  are  often  marred :  indolence,  selfish* 
cess,  love  of  ease,  procrastination,  indecision,  rudeness,  irritability,  over-sensi* 
tivenese  to  praise  or  blame,  vanity,  boastfulness,  talkativeness,  love  of  gossip, 
undue  laxity,  undue  severity,  want  of  self-control  over  appetites  and  passions, 
obstinacy,  parsimony.  Numerous  though  these  follies  are,  they  may  be  reduced 
into  two  great  classes — faults  of  weakness  and  faults  of  strength.  I.  Faults  of 
WEAKNESS.  This  class  is  that  of  those  which  are  largely  negative,  and  consist 
principally  in  omission  to  give  a  definite  and  worthy  direction  to  the  nature;  want 
of  self-control,  love  of  ease,  indolence,  procrastination,  indecision,  selfishness, 
unfeelingness.  Want  of  self-control  over  appetites  and  passions  led  David  into 
the  foulest  crimes,  which,  though  sincerely  repented  of,  were  most  terribly 
avenged,  and  have  for  ever  left  a  stain  upon  his  name.  Love  of  ease  is  the  only 
fault  which  is  implied  in  the  description  of  the  rich  man  in  the  parable  (Luke 
xvi.  19),  a  desire  to  be  comfortable  and  avoid  all  that  was  disagreeable,  but  it 
led  him  to  such  callous  indifference  to  the  miseries  of  his  fellows,  as  disqualified 
him  for  happiness  in  the  world  to  come.  A  very  striking  illustration  of  the 
deterioration  of  a  character  through  the  sin  of  weakness  and  indecision  is  to  be 
found  in  the  life  of  Eli.  His  good  qualities  have  not  preserved  his  memory  from 
contempt.  This  is  the  sting  of  the  rebuke  addressed  to  the  Church  of  Laodicea 
(Rev.  iii.  16,  16).  In  Dante's  description  of  the  lower  world  special  infamy  is 
attached  to  this  class  of  offenders,  that  of  those  who  have  never  really  lived, 
who  have  never  awakened  to  take  any  part  either  in  good  or  evil,  to  care  lor 


S52  TffE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

anything  but  themselves.  They  are  unfit  for  heaven,  and  hell  scorns  to  receive 
them.  "  This  miserable  mode  the  dreary  souls  of  those  sustain  who  lived  without 
blame  and  without  praise."  II.  Faults  of  strength.  Thia  class  includes  those 
faults  which  are  of  a  positive  character,  and  consist  largely  in  an  abuse  of  quali- 
ties which  might  have  been  virtues.  The  very  strength  of  character  by  which 
men  and  women  are  distinguished  may  lead  by  over-emphasis  into  very  offensive 
deterioration.  Thus  firmness  may  degenerate  into  obstinacy,  frugality  into  par- 
simony, liberality  into  extravagance,  light-heartedness  into  frivolity,  candour  into 
rudeness,  and  so  on.  And  these  are  faults  which  disgust  and  repel,  and  cause  us 
to  overlook  even  very  great  merits  in  a  character;  and  not  only  so,  but,  if  un- 
checked, gradually  nullify  those  merits.  We  may  find  in  the  character  of  Christ 
all  the  virtues  which  go  to  make  up  holiness  so  admirably  balanced  that  no  one  is 
over-prominent,  and  therefore  no  one  pushed  to  that  excess  which  so  often  mars 
human  excellence.  "  His  tender  tone  was  the  keen  edge  of  His  reproofs,  and 
His  unquestionable  love  infused  solemnity  into  every  warning."  (Homiletic 
Magazine.)  Dead  flies: — Our  instances  must  be  taken  almost  at  random;  for» 
like  their  Egyptian  prototypes,  these  flies  are  too  many  to  be  counted.  I.  Rdde- 
NESS.  Some  good  men  are  blunt  in  their  feelings,  and  rough  in  their  manners; 
and  they  apologize  for  their  coarseness  by  calling  it  honesty,  downrightness,  plain- 
ness of  speech.  They  quote  in  self-defence  the  sharp  words  and  shaggy  mien  of 
Elijah  and  John  the  Baptist,  and,  as  affectation,  they  sneer  at  the  soft  address 
and  mild  manners  of  gentler  men.  The  question,  however,  is  not  between  two 
rival  graces — between  integrity  on  the  one  side,  and  affability  on  the  other;  but 
the  question  is.  Are  these  two  graces  compatible?  Is  it  possible  for  a  man  to  be 
explicit,  and  open,  and  honest,  and,  withal,  courteous  and  considerate  of  the 
feelings  of  others?  Is  it  possible  to  add  to  fervour  and  fidelity,  suavity,  and 
urbanity,  and  brotherly  kindness?  There  never  was  one  more  faithful  than  the 
Bon  of  God,  but  there  never  was  one  more  considerate.  And  just  as  rudeness  is 
not  essential  to  honesty,  so  neither  is  roughness  essential  to  strength  of  character. 
The  Christian  should  have  a  strong  character;  he  should  be  a  man  of  remarkable 
decision.  And  he  should  be  a  man  of  inflexible  purpose.  When  once  he  knows 
his  Lord's  will,  he  should  go  through  with  it,  aye,  through  fire  and  water.  But 
this  he  may  do  without  renouncing  the  meekness  and  gentleness  which  were  in 
Christ.  He  may  have  zeal  without  pugnacity,  determination  without  obstinacy. 
II.  Irritability.  One  of  the  most  obvious  and  impressive  features  in  the 
Saviour's  character  was  His  meekness.  In  a  patience  which  ingenious  or  sudden 
provocation  could  not  upset;  in  a  magnanimity  which  insult  could  not  rufi3e;  in  a 
gentleness  from  which  no  folly  could  extract  an  unadvised  word,  men  saw  what 
they  could  scarcely  understand,  but  that  which  made  them  marvel.  But  many 
Christians  lack  this  beauty  of  their  Master's  holiness ;  they  are  afflicted  with 
evil  tempers,  they  cannot  rule  their  spirits,  or  rather  they  do  not  try.  Some 
indulge  occasional  fits  of  anger;  and  others  are  haunted  by  habitual,  daily,  life-long 
fretfulness.  The  one  sort  is  generally  calm  and  pellucid  as  an  Alpine  lake,  but 
on  some  special  provocation  is  tossed  up  into  a  magnificent  tempest;  the  other  is 
like  the  Bosphorus,  in  a  continual  stir,  and  even  when  not  a  breath  is  moving, 
by  the  contrariety  of  its  internal  currents  vexing  itself  into  a  ceaseless  whirl  and 
eddy.  But  either  form,  the  paroxysmal  fury,  and  the  perennial  fretfulness,  is 
inconsistent  with  the  wisdom  from  above,  which  is  peaceable,  gentle,  easy  to  be 
entreated.  III.  Selfishness.  The  world  expects  self-denial  in  the  Christian; 
and  with  reason,  for  of  all  men  he  can  best  afford  it,  and  by  his  profession  he  is 
committed  to  it.  Attention  to  the  wants  of  others,  care  for  their  welfare,  and 
consideration  for  their  feelings  are  Scriptinral  graces  for  which  all  Christians 
ought  to  be  conspicuous.  Christianity  allows  us  to  forget  our  own  wants,  but  it 
does  not  permit  us  to  forget  the  necessities  of  our  brethren.  It  requires  us  to  be 
careless  of  our  own  ease,  but  it  forbids  us  to  overlook  the  comfort  and  convenience 
«f  other  people.     (J.  Hamilton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.   A  wise  man's  heart  is  at  Ms  right  hand,  Taut  a  fool's  heart  at  his  left. — 

Heart  and  hand: — I.  The  wise  man's  heart  at  his  right  hand  means  that  his 

AFFECTIONS  ARi  AT  THEIR  PROPEB  OBJECTS.     The  heart  is  the  moral  power  or  seat 

:  of  principle.     "  With  the  heart  man  believeth."     **  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give 

unto  you."    Then  the  hand  is  the  active  power,  the  faculty  by  which  principles 

,  ere  carried  into  action.     *'  Cleanse  your  hands,  ye  sinners."    "  I  will  that  men 

,  pray  everywhere,  lifting  up  holy  hands  to  God."     The  right  hand,  again,  is  the 


CTAP.  X.]  ECCLESIASTES.  253 

ideal  hand.  '*  The  Lord  hath  sworn  by  His  right  hand."  Thus  whatever  a  hand 
is  or  does,  the  right  hand  is  and  does  pre-eminently.  It  is  the  perfection  of  all 
that  is  characteristic  in  a  hand.  When  therefore,  a  wise  man's  heart  is  said  to 
foe  at  his  right  hand,  it  is  said  by  way  of  commendation.  It  means  that  his  moral 
nature  is  as  it  ought  to  be.  It  occupies  its  right  place.  It  sustains  its  right 
relations.  It  discharges  its  proper  functions.  It  is  altogether  a  heart  right  ia 
God's  sight.  Now,  the  heart  is  a  most  important  portion  of  the  body.  It  is  the 
very  seat  and  citadel  of  its  life.  Derangement  in  it  means  instantaneous  derange- 
ment  in  every  vital  process.  And  in  the  spiritual  life  the  thing  we  call  the  heart 
is  no  less  essential.  Out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life.  It  is  the  seat  of  principle. 
It  is  the  home  of  the  aSections.  It  is  the  source  of  all  the  moral  actions.  Tha 
other  powers  are  the  heart's  executive  to  obey  its  rule  and  carry  out  its  high 
behests.  II.  The  wise  man's  heart  at  his  right  hand  means  that  his  pbinciples 
ABE  AT  THE  BACK  OF  PBACTiCAL  POWER.  All  through  Scripture  the  right  hand  ia 
the  emblem  of  power.  Our  Lord  styles  the  Father's  right  hand  **  the  right  hand 
of  power."  God  is  declared  to  have  led  Israel  "by  the  right  hand  of  Moses," 
and  Israel  to  have  obtained  the  Land  of  Promise  by  '*  God's  right  hand,  and  His 
arm,  and  the  light  of  His  countenance."  So  men  are  spiritually  saved  by  God's 
"  right  hand,"  and  Christ  in  His  resurrection  was  **  by  the  right  hand  of  God 
exalted."  The  right  hand  of  God,  the  right  hand  of  man,  is  the  organ  of  power 
in  each.  In  the  body  the  heart  is  in  closest  connection  with  the  strongest  hand.^ 
And  in  the  spiritual  department  the  same  law  holds.  The  godly  man  in  whom 
exists  the  most  perfect  connection  between  heart  and  life,  has  for  this  reason  a 
power  all  his  own.  That  power  is  spiritual  power,  the  mightiest  power  there  ia. 
it  is  an  aspect  of  the  force  that  regenerates  hearts,  that  illuminates  minds,  that 
changes  characters,  that  adorns  lives  with  the  transcendent  beauties  of  holiness. 
Not  more  siirely  does  a  right  hand  of  power  connect  itself  with  a  healthy  nourish- 
ing heart,  than  a  forceful  Christian  life  attends  on  and  expresses  the  energies  o£ 
a  heart  renewed  by  grace.     III.  The  wise  man's  heart  at  his  right  hand  means 

that  HIS  PDEPOSES  ABB  AT  THE  FITTEST  AGENCY  FOB  CABRTING  THEM  OUT.      When  the 

heart  chooses  God's  will,  the  hand  chooses  His  way.  It  perceives  the  fitness  oi 
it.  It  believes  in  the  policy  of  it.  It  would  argue  the  suitableness  of  it  in  any 
case  from  the  fact  that  it  is  His  way.  This  is  true  wisdom.  No  stronger  reason 
for  adopting  a  way  than  that  it  is  God's  way.     IV.  His  resolutions  are  at  k 

DEGREE  OF  STRENGTH  IN  WHICH  THEY  PROMPTLY  TAKE  THE  FORM  OF  ACTION.   There 

is  a  constitutional  unreadiness  in  some  people.  They  cannot  be  prompt.  This 
unreadiness  which  distinguishes  the  dull  from  the  smart,  distinguishes  also  the 
left  hand  from  the  right.  It  responds  more  slowly  to  the  will.  It  acts  lesa 
readily  in  almost  every  work.  The  right  hand  is  the  hand  of  promptitude  as  well 
as  the  hand  of  skill.  Now,  in  life,  as  every  young  man  should  consider,  tha 
element  of  promptitude  has  an  important  place.  The  few  who  succeed  are  tha 
wise  men  who  have  their  boat  of  action  ready  to  launch  on  the  advancing  wave 
of  opportunity.  The  many  who  fail  are  the  foolish  who  are  indolently  unobservant, 
and  therefore  always  off  their  guard.  There  is  a  perfectly  identical  treatment  of 
the  question  of  personal  godliness.  Religion  has  its  times  of  opportunity  which 
are  its  decisive  hours.  Some  saving  truth  comes  homo.  There  are  stings  of  con- 
viction. There  are  half-formed  resolves  that  choice  shall  be  made  of  eternal 
things.  But  here  the  curse  of  spiritual  unreadiness  comes  in.  The  man  is  not 
prepared  for  immediate  action.  He  is  a  spiritual  "  Athelstone  the  Unready."  To 
God's  "now"  he  answers  "soon."  To  God's  "begin"  he  answers  "wait." 
The  man  whose  heart  is  where  and  how  it  ought  to  be  is  a  mtai  who  takes  God 
directly  at  His  word.  The  Divine  "  come  "  he  takes  to  be  the  essence  of  duty, 
and  the  Divine  "  now  "  to  be  never  untimely.  And  so,  like  doves  to  their  win- 
dows, he  flies  for  refuge  to  Christ.  Then  darting  forth  an  eager  hand,  he  lays 
hold  on  the  hope  set  before  him.  (J.  E.  Henry,  M.A.)  Influence  of  a  good 
heart: — I.  A  good  heart  is  something  which  comprises  all  moral  goodness  or 
everything  truly  virtuous  and  excellent.  "  God  is  love."  His  love  comprises 
holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth.  So  a  good  heart  in  man  consists  in  true 
benevolence,  and  comprises  every  holy  and  vu^iuous  affection.  And  for  this  reason 
the  Scripture  calls  a  good  heart  a  perfect  heart,  a  pure  heart,  an  honest  heart, 
an  upright  heart,  a  wise  and  understanding  heart.  II.  A  good  heart  fits  mbji 
FOB  every  kind  OF  DUTY.  1.  A  good  heart  fits  men  for  all  religious  duties.  (1)  A. 
good  heart  evidently  fits  men  to  read  the  Scriptures.  These  were  indited  by  the 
spirit  of  holiness,  and  ought  to  be  read  with  the  same  spirit  with  which  theji 


J54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 


were  written.     (2)  Devout  meditation  is  a  religious  duty;  and  a  good  heart  fits 
men  to  meditate  upon  God  and  Divine  things  with  peculiar  pleasure  and  gatisfac- 
tion.     (8)  Prayer  is  another  religious  duty  of  the  first  importance,  and  a  good 
heart  is  the  very  spirit  of  grace  and  supplication.     (4)  God  looks  at  the  heart  in 
all  religious  services;  and  it  is  only  a  pure  and  upright  heart  that  can  prepare 
men  to  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth,     2.  A  good  heart  fits  men  for  all 
secular  as  well  as  religious  duties.     It  disposes  them  to  propose  a  right  end  in  all 
their  secular  concerns,  which  is  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  their  fellow- 
creatures.     So  far  as  men  are  guided  by  a  good  heart,  they  act  from  noble  and 
benevolent  motives  in  all  their  pursuits.     "Whatever  they  do,  they  do  it  heartily, 
as  to  the  Lord  and  not  unto  men.     8.  A  good  heart  fits  men  for  all  social  duties. 
It  naturally  prompts  those  who  possess  it  to  speak  and  act  with  propriety  in  all 
companies,  in  all  places,  in  all  stations,  and  in  all  relations  of  life.     It  makes 
men  quick  to  discover  and  practise  the  duties  which  they  owe  to  each  other.     4.  A 
good  heart  fits  men  for  doubtful  duties,  or  duties  in  doubtful  cases.     If  any  are 
at  a  loss  whether  to  embrace  or  reject  any  religious  sentiment  proposed,  they  have 
•  standard  in  their  own  breasts  by  which  to  try  it.     It  is  only  to  appeal  to  their 
own  conscience,  and  ask,  What  says  benevolence  in  this  case?    Is  this  doctrine 
agreeable  to  disinterested  benevolence,  or  is  it  an  expression  of  selfishness?     And 
therefore  the  good  man's  heart  is  always  at  his  right  hand,  and  ready  to  decide 
what  is  true  and  what  is  false.     6.  A  good  heart  fits  men  for  difficult  duties. 
There   is   a   great   variety   of    difficult   duties,    but   I   shall    mention   only   tw& 
sorts;    dangerous    duties    and    self-denying    duties.      These    have    always    been 
difficult   to  perform.     But   a  good   heart   will   make   them   easy   and   pleasant, 
and  dispose  men  to  perform  them  with  a  degree  of  alacrity  and  delight.     Im- 
PBOVEMENT !  1.  If  a  good  heart  fits  men  for  every  kind  of  duty,  then  they  can 
never  find  a  solid  and  satisfactory  excuse  for  their  ignorance  or  neglect  of  duty. 
2    If  a  good  heart  fits  men  for  all  kinds  of  duty,  then  those  who  have  a  good 
heart  will  be  very  apt  to  make  it  appear  that  their  heart  is  good.     8.  If  a  good 
heart  fits  men  for  every  kind  of  duty,  then  those  who  have  a  bad  heart  will  be 
very  apt  to  show  it.     Men  are  as  apt  to  discover  their  left  hand  as  their  right 
hand.     They  discover  it  both  by  not  using  it  and  by  attempting  to  use  it  without 
ease  and  dexterity.     As  a  good  heart  fits  men  for  duty,  so  a  bad  heart  unfits  them 
for  duty.    It  sometimes  prevents  their  understanding  their  duty,  but  more  fre- 
quently prevents  their  doing  what  they  know  to  be  their  duty.     Both  their  ignor- 
ance and  neglect  discover  an  evil  heart  at  their  left  hand.     4.  If  a  good  heart  fits 
men  for  all  kinds  of  duty,  then  those  who  are  destitute  of  it  do  no  duty  at  all  in 
the  sight  of  God.     5.  If  a  good  heart  fits  men  for  all  kinds  of  duty,  then  good 
men  find  a  pleasure  in  performing  every  kind  of  duty.    6.  If  a  good  heart  fits 
men  for  every  duty,  then  all  good  men  desire  to  grow  in  grace.     They  desire 
grace,  not  merely  on  account  of  the  spiritual  enjoyment  that  grace  affords  them, 
but  principally  because  it  fits  them  for  every  duty  towards  God  and  man.     7.  If 
a  good  heart  fits  men  for  every  duty,  then  those  who  are  destitute  of  it  continually 
live  in  darkness.     This  is  certainly  a  very  deplorable  situation.     (N.  Emtnon$r 
^D.D.)    Heart  and  hand: — ^In  the  physical  system  the  heart  and  the  head  are 
alike  related  to  the  hand.     We  associate  the  heart  with  feeling,  the  head  with 
thought,  and  the  hand  with  movement  or  action.    Life  is  made  up  of  feeling, 
thought  and  action.     The  motive  power  may  be  said  to  lie  in  the  heart;  the 
guiding  principle  in  the  head;  and  the  efficient  working  element  in  the  hand.     But 
in  the  Scriptures  the  heart  is  almost  always  used  to  denote  the  whole  inner  being, 
SB  including  the  mental  and  moral  nature,  the  intellect  and  the  affections.    Wisdom 
is  the  right  direction  of  all  our  faculties  and  powers  towards  a  given  end,  and  it 
demands  their  harmonious  co-operation.     We  want  first  of  all  to  have  concentra- 
tion of  power,  and  after  that  the  direction  of  it  along  the  right  lines.     In  the 
',  harmony  of  head  and  heart  we  have  wisdom  in  thought  and  action.     In  their 
contrariety  we  have  folly.     The  heart  or  soul  ought  to  control  the  hand.     It  is 
the  business  of  a  wise  man  to  know  what  he  can  do  and  what  he  cannot  do.     A 
'  man  need  be  in  no  doubt  as  to  the  end  of  his  existence.     If  it  is  one's  deepest 
desire  really  to  serve  the  Lord,  He  will  lead  one  in  the  right  way,  and  show  one 
in  specific  form  what  he  ought  at  all  times  to  do.     A  wise  man's  heart  is  at  his 
right  hand  in  this  sense,  that  he  always  acts  from  within  himself,  or  from  the 
ground  of  his  own  personal  feeling.     This  sentence  of  Solomon  means  that  the 
wise  man  is  a  practical  man — a  man  of  action  as  well  as  of  thought.     The  foolish 
'  man  whose  heart  is  at  bis  left  hand  has  separated  thought  from  action.    If  he  has 


CHAP.  X.]  ECCLESIA8TES.  255 

a  theory  of  life  at  all,  his  actual  life  is  out  of  harmony  with  it.  It  is  so  with 
the  religion  of  many :  they  have  separated  between  their  theory  of  the  life  to 
eome  and  their  practice  in  the  present  life.  The  man  whose  heart  is  at  his  right 
hand  is  always  ready  for  action,  and  specially  prepared  to  seize  the  opportunity 
when  it  comes.  There  is  a  general  preparedness  for  action  which  always  char- 
acterizes him,  and  makes  him  equal  to  the  occasion,  his  mind  being  constantly 
made  up  to  a  very  large  extent.  The  true  soldier  is  always  ready  for  action. 
One's  facts  and  principles  must  always  be  at  hand,  ready  for  the  occasion.  To 
have  one's  heart  at  his  right  hand  is  to  do  one's  work  with  his  whole  heart.  He 
puts  his  mind  and  conscience  into  it,  and  really  enjoys  it.  His  motto  is  that 
what  is  worth  doing  at  all  ought  to  be  done  well.  There  is  nothing  so  miserable 
as  to  have  a  work  to  do  for  which  one  has  no  heart.  But  to  have  as  one's  daily 
work  that  in  which  he  finds  his  highest  happiness  and  culture  is  surely  a  most 
enviable  condition.  In  opposition  to  all  this,  the  man  whose  heart  is  at  his  left 
hand  is  living  an  essentially  idle  life.  There  is  no  unity  of  purpose  in  his  exist- 
ence. The  deep  spiritual  forces  of  his  being,  separated  from  all  that  is  practical 
and  profitable,  are  wasted.  Let  us  seek  by  all  means  the  concentration  of  our 
powers,  and  the  direction  of  them  to  the  one  true  end  of  life.  Our  heart  is  in 
the  right  place  when  our  supreme  affection  is  that  love  to  God  in  Christ  which 
goes  continually  forth  in  earnest  and  prayerful  endeavour  for  the  good  of  others. 
"When  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  had  laid  his  head  upon  the  block,  he  was  asked  by  the 
executioner  whether  it  lay  aright;  whereupon,  with  the  marvellous  calmness  of  a 
man  whose  heart  was  fixed,  he  replied,  "  It  matters  little,  my  friend,  how  the 
head  lies,  provided  the  heart  be  right."     (Fergu$  Ferguton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  I  have  seen  servants  upon  horses,  and  princes  walking  as  servant! 
upon  the  earth. — A  tocial  tcene  in  human  life: — I.  This  social  scene  is  common. 
1.  In  the  political  realm.  "We  see  small-minded  men  occupying  influential  oflBces 
in  the  State.  2.  In  the  ecclesiastical  department.  8.  In  the  commercial  depart- 
ment. How  often  do  we  see  little  men  by  trickery,  fraud  and  lucky  hits  become 
the  great  men  of  the  market.  4.  In  the  literary  department.  II.  This  social 
SCENE  IS  INOONGEOO08.  1.  It  docs  not  agree  with  what  we  might  have  expected 
under  the  government  of  a  righteous  God.  That  the  race  is  not  always  to  the 
morally  swift  and  the  battle  to  the  morally  strong  is  an  undoubted  anomaly  in 
the  government  of  God.  2.  It  does  not  agree  with  the  moral  feelings  of  humanity. 
"Whilst  there  is  a  perversity  in  man  which  leads  him  to  hurrah  the  successful 
and  the  prosperous,  there  is,  nevertheless,  down  deep  in  the  heart  of  all  men  a 
feeling  that  such  a  scene  as  that  indicated  in  the  text  is  something  terribly 
incongruous,  a  great  moral  enormity.  III.  This  social  scene  is  temporart. 
1.  Such  a  social  scene  does  not  exist  in  the  other  world.  Death  destroys  all  these 
adventitious  distinctions  and  moral  incongruities.  2.  Such  a  social  scene  will  not 
always  exist  here.     (D.  Thomat,  D.D.) 

"Ver.  8.  "Whoso  hreaketh  an  hedge,  a  serpent  shall  bite  him. — Re$pect  the 
hedge: — We  covet  the  apple  on  the  tree  and  forget  the  snake  in  the  grass;  the 
consequence  being,  that  when  we  essay  to  bite  the  apple,  the  snake  bites  us. 
Now,  there  are  many  protective  hedges  about  us;  and  the  trouble  is,  that  we  are 
variously  tempted  to  play  tricks  with  these,  and  upon  occasion  to  set  them  at 
naught.  Therein  we  usually  discover  how  great  is  the  mistake  we  have  made. 
I.  GuABD  THE  sense  OF  SHAME.  Whatever  tends  to  lessen  the  acuteness  of  the 
soul  to  things  false,  ugly,  or  foul  is  sharply  to  be  shunned.  Beware  of  the 
literature  that  tends  to  reconcile  to  odious  things  1  If  the  soul  is  to  keep  its 
virgin  purity,  it  must  turn  away  even  from  the  reflection  of  foulness  in  a  mirror. 
Beware  of  the  company  whose  conversation  and  fellowship  in  some  way,  not  per- 
haps very  apparent,  blights  the  bloom  and  dims  the  lustre  of  pure  f eejing  1 
Beware  of  the  amusements  that  filch  away  the  quick  delicacy  which  has  been 
evolved  in  our  nature  at  an  infinite  expense  I  Beware  of  the  fashion  that  sets 
lighter  store  by  old-fashioned  modesty  I  Better  pluck  out  as  useless  appendages 
the  tender  eyelashes  which  guarantee  the  sight  than  consent  to  destroy  the 
instincts  of  purity  which  preserve  the  spirit.  The  sense  of  shame  is  a  sacred 
thing;  it  is  the  saintliness  of  nature,  and  we  ought  sedulously  to  guard  and 
heighten  it  in  the  fear  of  God.  The  man  or  woman  who  heedlessly  violates  this 
ethereal  hedge  puts  himself  or  herself  outside  what  is  elsewhere  called  a  waJl  of 
fire.     n.  Besfeot  the  code  of  oourtest.    Even  in  domestic  life  and  between 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «. 


chief  friends  are  interposed  hedges,  if  they  be  not  rather  flower  borders,  which 
must  be  respected,  if  mutual  regard  and  veneration  are  to  continue.  United  most 
closely  as  we  are,  certain  delicate  observances  and  deferences  fix  the  isolation  of 
our  personality,  and  imply  the  attention  that  must  be  paid  to  our  rights  and 
feelings.  The  grievous  misunderstandings  and  animosities  which  wreck  the  peace 
and  prosperity  of  households  not  uncommonly  originate  in  excessive  familiarities 
between  brothers  and  sisters;  these  fail  to  see  that  refined  proprieties  guard  the 
several  members  of  a  family  as  a  scarlet  cord  reserves  special  places  in  great 
assemblies,  and  that  "  good  form  "  must  be  observed  in  private  as  well  as  in 
public.  Some  one  has  wisely  said,  "  It  is  no  worse  to  stand  on  ceremony  than 
to  trample  on  it."  No,  indeed,  it  is  often  a  great  deal  better;  for  social  ceremonial 
is  the  fence  that  protects  the  delicate  forms  and  flowers  which  are  so  difficult  to 
rear.  Let  young  people  revere  the  pale  of  ceremony,  for  when  it  is  broken  down 
beauty,  purity  and  peace  are  at  the  mercy  of  a  ruthless  world.  III.  Obey  thh 
RCLES  OF  BUSINESS.  Eegulations  touching  hours  of  going  out  and  coming  in, 
minute  directions  for  household  conduct,  rules  about  the  handling  of  cash,  usagea 
in  keeping  accounts,  and  petty  laws  directing  twenty  other  details  of  duty,  are 
based  in  an  expediency  which  really  and  simultaneously  conserves  the  rights  and 
safety  of  masters  and  servants  alike.  The  beginner  may  not  see  the  reasonable- 
ness of  a  system  of  delicate  network  which  comprehends  eating,  drinking  and 
sleeping,  and  the  almost  infinite  ramifications  of  daily  duty;  but  there  is  more 
reasonableness  in  all  these  worrying  precepts  than  he  sees.  The  laws  of  business 
are  the  outcome  of  the  experience  of  generations,  and  are  not  lightly  to  be  set 
aside.  A  young  man  can  hardly  pay  too  much  deference  to  the  customs  and 
traditions  of  the  establishment  in  which  his  lot  is  cast;  he  cannot  be  too  exactly 
conscientious  about  the  prescribed  obligations  of  time,  usage,  method,  goods  and 
cash  :  to  tamper  here  is  to  be  lost.  Beware  of  the  slightest  infraction  of  your 
official  duty,  of  all  informality  and  unauthorized  action,  of  all  illicit  and  contra- 
band ways  and  things,  deadly  serpents  without  rattles  wait  behind  the  violated 
precepts  I  Whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  if  you  keep  the  least  of  these  command- 
ments, it  shall  keep  you,  and  the  discipline  of  obedience  on  a  lower  level  will 
strengthen  you  to  comply  with  the  sublimest  laws  of  all  on  the  highest  levels  of 
thought  and  conduct.  {W.  L.  Watkinaon.)  Fences  and  terpentt: — What  is  meant 
here  is,  probably,  not  such  a  hedge  as  we  are  accustomed  to  see,  but  a  dry  stone 
wall,  or,  perhaps,  an  earthen  embankment,  in  the  crevices  of  which  might  lurk 
a  snake  to  sting  the  careless  hand.  The  '*  wall  "  may  stand  for  the  limitations 
and  boundary  lines  of  our  lives,  and  the  inference  that  wisdom  suggests  in  that 
application  of  the  saying  it,  "  Do  not  pull  down  judiciously  but  keep  the  fence  up, 
and  be  sure  you  keep  on  the  right  side  of  it."  For  any  attempt  to  pull  it  down — 
which,  being  interpreted,  is  to  transgress  the  laws  of  life  which  God  has  enjoined — 
is  sure  to  bring  out  the  hissing  snake  with  its  poison.  I.  All  life  is  given  ds 
BioiDLT  walled  UP.  The  first  thing  that  the  child  learns  is  that  it  must  not  do 
what  it  likes.  The  last  lesson  that  the  old  man  has  to  learn  is,  you  must  do  what 
you  ought.  And  between  these  two  extremities  of  life  we  are  always  making 
attempts  to  treat  the  world  as  an  open  common,  on  which  we  may  wander  at  our 
will.  And  before  we  have  gone  many  steps  some  sort  of  keeper  or  other  meets  us 
and  says  to  us,  "  Trespassers  I  back  again  to  the  roadl"  Life  is  rigidly  hedged  in 
and  limited.  There  are  the  obligations  which  we  owe,  and  the  relations  in  which 
we  stand,  to  the  outer  world,  the  laws  of  physical  life,  and  all  that  touches  the 
external  and  the  material.  There  are  the  relations  in  which  we  stand,  and  the 
obligations  which  we  owe  to  ourselves.  And  God  has  so  made  us  as  that  obviously 
large  tracts  of  every  man's  nature  are  given  to  him  on  purpose  to  be  restrained, 
curbed,  coerced,  and  sometimes  utterly  crushed  and  extirpated.  God  gives  us 
our  impulses  under  lock  and  key.  All  our  animal  desires,  all  our  natural  ten- 
dencies, are  held  on  condition  that  we  exercise  control  over  them,  and  keep  them 
well  within  the  rigidly  marke'd  limits  which  He  has  laid  down,  and  which  we  can 
easily  find  out.  We  sometimes  foolishly  feel  that  a  life  thus  hedged  up,  limited 
by  these  high  boundaries  on  either  side,  must  be  uninteresting,  monotonous,  or 
unfree.  It  is  not  so.  The  walls  are  blessings,  like  the  parapet  on  a  mountain 
road  that  keeps  the  traveller  from  toppling  over  the  face  of  the  cliff.  They  ara 
training-walls,  as  our  hydrographical  engineers  talk  about,  which,  built  in  the 
bed  of  a  river,  wholesomely  confine  its  waters  and  make  a  good  scour  which 
gives  life,  instead  of  letting  them  vaguely  wander  and  stagnate  across  great  fields 
of  mud.     Freedom  consists  in  keeping  willingly  within  the  Limits  which  Ood  ha* 


CHAP.  X.]  ECCLESIASTES.  25T 

traced,  and  anything  except  that  is  not  freedom,  but  is  licence  and  rebellion,  and 
at  bottom  servitude  of  the  most  abject  type.  II.  Evert  attempt  to  break  down 
THE  limitations  BRINGS  POISON  INTO  THE  LIFB.  We  live  in  a  great  automatic 
system  which,  by  its  own  operation,  largely  avenges  every  breach  of  law.  I  need 
not  remind  you,  except  in  a  word,  of  the  way  in  which  the  transgression  of  the 
plain  physical  laws  stamped  upon  our  constitutions  avenges  itself;  but  the  cer- 
tainty with  which  disease  dogs  all  breaches  of  the  laws  of  health  is  but  a  type 
in  the  lower  and  material  universe  of  the  far  higher  and  more  solemn  certainty 
with  which  "the  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  The  grosser  form  of  trans- 
gression of  the  plain  laws  of  temperance,  abstinence,  purity,  brings  with  itself,  in 
like  manner,  a  visible  and  palpable  punishment  in  the  majority  of  cases.  Some 
serpents'  bites  inflame,  some  paralyze;  and  one  or  other  of  these  two  things — 
either  an  inflamed  conscience  or  a  palsied  conscience — is  the  result  of  all  wrong- 
doing. I  do  not  know  which  is  the  worst.  III.  All  the  poison  may  bb  got  odt 
OF  YOUR  VEINS  IF  YOU  LIKE.  Christ  has  received  into  His  own  inmost  life  and  self 
the  whole  gathered  consequences  of  a  world's  sin;  and  by  the  mystery  of  His 
sympathy,  and  the  reality  of  His  mysterious  union  with  us  men.  He,  the  sinless 
Son  of  God,  has  been  made  sin  for  us,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness 
of  Ood  in  Him.  For  sin  and  death  launched  their  last  dart  at  Him,  and,  like 
some  venomous  insect  that  can  sting  once  and  then  must  die,  they  left  their 
sting  in  His  wounded  heart,  and  have  none  for  them  that  put  their  trust  in  Him. 
{A.  Maelaren,  D.D.)  The  hedget  of  life: — I  look  around  upon  the  universe.  It  ia 
a  place  of  hedges.  It  is  not  barren  moorland  about  which  we  are  doubtful  if  it 
has  an  owner,  for  He  has  everywhere  defined  His  rights  and  established  His 
bounds.  I.  Bead  it  in  the  light  of  history,  and  take  it  as  a  piece  of  experi- 
ence. It  is  given  us  by  a  man  who  brings  it  out  of  his  own  heart,  for  he  had 
felt  the  bite  of  the  serpent  himself.  There  was  scarcely  a  hedge  upon  which  he 
did  not  set  his  foot,  and  there  were  few  penalties  of  sin  which  he  did  not  feel. 
Although  every  means  was  at  his  command  for  avoiding  sin's  consequences,  he 
felt  the  serpent's  sting;  and  if  you  will  take  his  experience  of  ein,  and  rest 
satisfied  in  his  verdict  on  it,  it  will  save  you  from  untold  sorrow  and  infinite 
regrets.  But  this  is  not  the  experience  of  one  man.  Look  around  society  and 
question  men  for  yourselves.  Hear  the  intemperate  man  express  the  shame  and 
contempt  which  follow  his  intemperance;  hear  the  worldly  man  as  the  day  of 
life  draws  to  its  close  bemoan  the  hollow  cheat  the  world  has  played  upon  him; 
listen  to  the  experience  of  those  who  have  climbed  out  of  the  mire  and  have  now 
their  feet  set  upon  the  rock;  and  the  unqualified  answer  you  will  get  will  be  that 
this  language  is  true.  Or  open  the  volume  of  history,  and  mark  the  solemn 
retributions  of  God  upon  every  page.  Eead  the  history  of  Jacob,  of  Haman,  of 
Ahab  and  Jezebel.  Or  open  the  book  of  secular  history.  Glance  at  the  history  of 
Greece  and  Home,  or  any  nation  under  heaven.  Thrones  gained  by  the  sword 
have  been  lost  by  it.  Fortunes  won  by  fraud  have  cursed  in  turn  every  one  that 
has  held  them;  and  tear  at  random  any  page  from  the  archives  of  the  world,  and 
it  will  comment  to  you  on  these  words,  for  the  experience  of  men  through  6,000 
years  has  confirmed  these  truths,  and  they  express  the  settled  experiences  of  man- 
kind. II.  Read  this  not  only  in  the  light  of  history,  bdt  in  thf  light  of 
REVELATION,  and  take  it  not  only  as  a  piece  of  experience,  but  as  the  revelation 
of  a  Divine  law.  God's  government  has  another  world  as  its  theatre  as  well  as 
this.  Men  may  sin  here  and  in  some  cases  be  comparatively  free  from  any 
terrible  outward  consequences;  in  that  other  domain  of  God's  the  effects  of  their 
sin  will  reveal  themselves  in  all  their  tearfulness  and  terror.  Poison  does  not 
always  work  immediately,  but  sometimes  after  days  of  health  and  happiness  the 
serpent's  bite  begins  to  show  itself.  And  so  although  violation  of  moral  order 
may  bring  with  it  no  instantaneous  punishment,  punishment  for  all  that  will 
follow.  It  ia  a  law  of  the  eternal  universe.  Now,  these  hedges  are  both  physical, 
social  and  moral.  Break  one  of  the  laws  of  health,  and  you  will  induce  disease; 
and  that  disease  is  the  bite  of  the  serpent.  Or  break  one  of  the  laws  of  society, 
and  society  will  distrust  you,  and  that  distrust,  that  loss  of  respect  and  position, 
is  the  bite  of  the  serpent.  But  break  one  of  the  higher  laws — ^the  laws  of  morality 
— and  what,  probably,  will  follow?  "Why,  penalties  severe  and  terrible.  Even 
in  this  world  the  resources  of  God  to  pimish  are  infinite.  He  may  punish  you  in 
yourself,  in  your  circumstances,  by  means  of  your  children.  He  can  punish  you 
through  prosperity  as  well  as  through  adversity.  III.  Take  these  words  and 
RBAD  THEM  IN  THK  LIGHT  OF  THE  Cross.     God,  in  His  infinite  love,  has  provided 

17 


258  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbap.  x. 

EaWatioD  in  Christ.  The  temporal  effects  of  sin  He  does  not  remove — Divine 
forgiveness  will  not  repair  the  shattered  constitution,  or  mend  the  broken  fortune. 
The  bite  of  the  serpent  works  death;  but  God  suffers  it  not  to  work  the  second 
death.  Yet  do  not  misunderstand  this,  as  though  it  were  a  light  thing  to  see  now 
that  salvation  through  Christ  is  offered  to  all.  You  can  never  be  what  you  might 
have  been  but  for  its  committal.  The  damage  you  do  to  the  sapling  appears  in 
the  massive  trunk  of  the  oak,  and  all  your  machinery  cannot  straighten  it.  And 
though  sin  may  be  forgiven,  the  very  omnipotence  of  God  cannot  undo  that  which 
has  been  done;  and  though  in  future  ages  you  ultimately  burn  as  a  seraph  or 
worship  as  an  archangel,  you  can  never  be  what  you  might  have  been.  (H. 
Wonnacoti.)  Sin;  and  the  $erpenV$  bite: — ^We  are  supplied  with  motives  to  help 
the  right-doing.  But  that  is  not  all  I  Our  humanity  is  surrounded,  as  it  were, 
with  a  wall  of  fire.  Of  God's  great  mercy  we  do  not  suffer  for  wrong-doing 
merely,  but  in  wrong-doing  also.  Neither  heavenly  bliss  on  the  one  hand,  nor 
the  pimishment  of  evil  on  the  other,  are  exclusively  matters  of  faith,  for  God  has 
written  the  truth  of  his  Divine  utterances  on  the  page  of  our  daily  history  and 
experience.  I.  God's  laws.  1.  If  we  go  for  a  moment  into  the  natural  world, 
we  find  there  are  certain  principles,  or  laws,  received  and  acted  upon.  The  law 
of  the  centre  of  gravity;  even  the  clown  knows  that  if  he  guides  his  vehicle  to 
the  edge  of  the  precipice,  so  that  the  centre  of  gravity  falls  beyond  the  bounds 
of  safety,  his  conveyance  will  fall  over  and  be  destroyed  I  In  relation  to  our 
physical  being,  there  are  laws  which  we  must  keep,  or  the  grave  will  receive  us 
before  due  time.  A  Hercules  must  take  no\irishment ;  every  man  must  inhale 
air,  and  that  air  must  be  composed  of  certain  ingredients.  2.  Consider  man 
morally,  and  the  same  principles  apply.  II.  Man's  lawlessness.  1.  Suppose  • 
man  were  to  reach  a  dangerous  spot,  and  were  to  see  a  warning  to  that  effect,  but 
yet  persisted  in  going  right  into  destruction,  he  would  be  regarded  as  not  com- 
petent to  take  care  of  himself;  still  in  such  a  man  we  have  an  illustration  of  the 
folly  of  the  lawless  conduct  of  the  unbeliever.  God,  by  His  providence,  in  His 
Word,  and  by  His  Spirit's  teaching,  has  set  up  a  warning,  in  every  by-path; 
plain  enough  to  be  read.  "  Trespassers  shall  be  punished,"  meets  us  everywhere. 
Would  that  men  read,  understood  and  obeyed  I  2.  We  see  in  human  nature  the 
mischievous  tendency  developed  in  daily  acta  of  folly.  If  we  were  compelled  to  do 
what  we  often  choose  to  do,  heaven  would  be  besieged  by  lamentations,  and  the 
multitude  would  mourn  over  the  hardness  of  their  lot.  III.  The  rktribdtion. 
1.  Present  retribution.  Look  at  the  debauched;  his  face  is  a  sign-board  of  hell, 
hie  heart  a  seat  of  woe.  2.  Future  retribution.  (H.  Parrish,  B.A.)  The  eerpent 
behind  the  hedge: — I.  The  hedges  which  God  has  placed  abound  us.  1.  God's 
commandments.  2.  Parental  restraints.  Hedges  with  respect  to  associates,  books, 
habits,  and  places  of  amusements.  8.  Imparted  principles.  Teachers  are  anxious  to 
fix  truths,  sentences  from  Scriptiire,  holy  maxims,  in  the  minds  of  the  young,  that 
they  may  be  in  them  as  moral  hedges  in  the  time  of  temptation.  II.  The  touno 
WILL  BE  TEMPTED  TO  BREAK  THESE  HEDGES.  1.  By  their  own  evil  hearts.  2.  By 
evil  companions.  8.  By  the  evil  one.  III.  Theeb  is  a  sebpent  behind  thb 
HEDGE.  If  we  do  wrong  we  shall  certainly  suffer.  The  path  of  sin  is  full  of 
serpents.  The  way  of  transgressors  is  hard.  Punishment  not  always  visible,  but 
surely  follows  the  deed.  In  the  sense  of  shame,  in  the  stings  of  conscience,  in 
the  displeasure  of  God,  the  serpent's  bite  is  felt.     {W.  Otbome  Lilley.) 

Vex.  9.  Whoso  removeth  stones  shall  be  hart  therewith;  and  he  that  cleaveth 
wood  shall  he  endangered  thereby. — Raising  stones  and  cleaving  wood: — The 
precise  meaning  of  the  maxim  is  not  quite  clear.  Some  think  the  stone  is  part 
of  a  cairn  that  marks  a  neighbour's  property,  which  a  man  tries  to  move.  The 
tree,  likewise,  belongs  to  a  neighbour;  and  the  teaching  is,  that  one  who  commits 
acts  of  aggression  upon  the  property  of  others  will  receive  his  punishment  out  of 
the  acts  themselves.  Others  find  a  political  reference.  The  reformer  tries  to 
move  stones,  to  remove  ancient  grievances,  or  to  cut  down  trees,  the  upas-trees  of 
hoary  abuses,  and  finds  that  ancient  and  deep-seated  evils  have  a  deadly  power 
of  striking  at  those  who  dare  to  meddle  with  them.  Or,  again — and  this,  the 
simplest  explanation,  is  to  me  at  least  as  likely  as  any  other — ^the  cynical  author 
who  has  found  vanity  of  vanities  in  every  successive  sphere  of  human  life  observes 
in  these  homely  words  that  ordinary  honest  labour  must  pay  its  due  of  miefortuns 
in  this  sad  world  :  a  man  cannot  quarry  stones  to  build  his  house,  or  cut  logs  to 
make  up  his  fire,  without  risking  the  misfortune  which  a  cruel  fate  seems  to  bring 


esAP.  X.]  ECCLESIASTE8.  8» 


alike  on  the  evil  and  the  good.  This  interpretation  fits  in  well  with  the  Preacher't 
▼lew  of  life.  Christ  came  to  teach  that  in  His  right  hand  were  pleasures  for  ever- 
more. He  came  to  join  in  every  kind  of  innocent  enjoyment,  to  teach  men  that 
the  Father  in  heaven  rejoiced  in  His  children's  joy.  He  lifted  stones  and  cleft 
wood  in  the  builder's  workshop  at  Nazareth  for  more  than  twenty  years  out  of 
His  short  life,  to  show  that  honeet  toil  brought  something  else  besides  danger— 
that  the  stone  could  become  a  Bethel,  and  the  wood  an  altar  which  raiseth  the 
consecrated  soul.     (J.  H.  Moulton,  D.D.) 

Vat.  10.  If  the  iron  be  blimt,  and  he  do  not  whet  the  edge,  then  most  he  pat 
to  more  Itrength. — The  iron  blunt,  and  the  iron  whetted: — I.  Thb  less  facilities 

IN  WOBK,  THE  OBEATBB  IB  THE  STBENGTH  REQUIBED.      The  WOodmaU  who  haS  tO  hcW 

the  old  oak  with  a  blimt  axe  must  throw  more  muscular  energy  into  the  stroke 
than  if  his  instrument  were  keen.  1.  This  principle  applies  to  secular  work.  The 
men  who  are  placed  in  such  temporal  circumstances  as  seem  to  doom  them  to 
destitution,  must,  if  they  would  overcome  difficulties  and  rise,  be  strenuous  in 
effort.  2.  This  principle  applies  to  educational  work.  Thousands  have  so  em- 
ployed the  bluntest  iron,  that  they  have  become  the  greatest  apostles  in  science, 
and  the  most  distinguished  masters  in  art.  Do  not  find  fault  with  thy  mental 
tools.  Use  the  bluntest  iron  with  all  thy  might,  and  thou  shalt  rise.  8.  This 
principle  applies  to  religious  work.  Most  unfavourable  are  the  circumstances  in 
which  the  millions  are  placed  for  the  cultivation  of  •  truly  godly  life.  Albeit, 
though  the  "  iron  "  of  such  a  man  be  blunt,  let  him  use  it,  and  he  will  succeed. 
4.  This  principle  applies  to  evangelizing  work.  II.  Pbaotioal  saoaoitt  in  wobk 
SBBVss  TO  aooNOHiKE  STBENGTH.  "  Wisdom  IS  profitable  to  direct."  1.  Strength 
may  be  saved  in  commercial  pursuits  by  a  wise  system  of  management.  It 
is  not  the  sweating  bustler  who  does  the  most  work  in  the  world's  trade; 
it  is  the  man  of  forecast  and  philosophical  measures.  2.  Strength  may 
be  saved  in  governmental  action  by  a  wise  policy.  8.  Strength  may  be 
saved  in  self-improvement  by  a  philosophic  method.  4.  Strength  may  be  saved 
In  the  work  of  diffusing  the  Gospel  by  an  enlightened  policy.  (HomiliBi.)  Ood't 
provision  concerning  labour: — 1.  It  may  have  often  struck  you,  as  a  very 
surprising  feature  in  God's  dealings  with  this  earth,  that  though  He  has  abun- 
dantly stored  it  with  all  the  necessaries  and  comforts  of  civilized  life,  He  haa 
left  both  the  discovery  and  employment  of  such  materials  dependent  upon  human 
industry  and  human  ingenuity.  The  very  metal  mentioned  in  the  text,  to 
deprive  the  world  of  which  would  be  to  produce  starvation,  and  which  with 
mighty  toil  is  wrung  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  underwent  many  curious  and 
necessary  processes  ere  it  came  to  the  husbandman  in  the  form  of  a  plough.  God 
no  more  directed  men  where  to  find,  than  how  to  prepare  the  iron.  He  only  fur- 
nished them  with  faculties  to  discover  the  substance,  and  placed  them  in  circum- 
stances favourable  to  their  development.  Each  man  was  left  to  his  own  ingenuity 
and  industry;  and  after  having  experienced  the  benefit  of  these  discoveries  them- 
selves, they  naturally  communicated  them  to  others.  And  how  marvellously  has 
discovery  gone  on  from  age  to  age  I  how  have  new  properties  been  discovered, 
new  errors  been  exploded,  new  theories  established  1  But  with  all  our  admiration, 
which  the  boundless  stores  thus  laid  open  to  us  are  calculated  to  exercise,  there 
does  seem  room  for  something  of  surprise  that  God  should  have  allowed  a  vast 
amount  of  the  most  beneficial  productions  to  be  brought  to  light,  not  merely  by 
patient  investigation  but  entirely  by  accident,  so  that  the  world  has  long  been 
actually  ignorant  of  many  blessings  which  lay  within  its  reach.  This  has  been 
singularly  the  case  with  medicines.  You  might  have  expected  that,  having  made 
eo  merciful  provision  for  the  alleviation  of  human  pain,  God  would  not  have  left 
the  world  so  long  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  such  antidotes  and  remedies.  Tet 
it  is  very  observable  how  close  an  analogy  there  is  between  God's  dealings  in  this 
respect,  and  those  which  relate  to  the  scheme  of  salvation;  for  many  ages  God 
did  not  guide  men,  at  least  only  a  few,  to  the  fountain  open  for  sin  and  for  unclean- 
ness,  and  even  now  how  many  of  the  great  mass  of  our  race  are  kept  in  ignorance 
of  the  balm  that  is  in  Gilead.  We  may  be  sure  there  are  some  very  wise  ends, 
though  not  discoverable  by  us,  subserved  by  this  protracted  concealment.  And  we 
cannot  but  observe  a  display  of  wisdom  and  benevolence  in  the  arrangement  by 
which  our  world  has  been  peopled,  by  no  means  inferior  to  that  which  furnished 
na  with  the  treasures  of  the  earth.  If  thousands  of  our  race  had  been  called 
into  existence  before  science  had  been  discovered,  and  the  arts  been  invented. 


260  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

yfh&i  could  have  resulted  but  universal  wretchedness,  inasmuch  as  every  indi- 
vidual must  have  struggled  with  the  ground  for  a  disastrous  subsistence,  and  have 
perpetually  devoted  himself  to  the  warding  off  starvation  I  A  beautiful  thing  in 
the  present  economy  is  that  the  labour  of  one  man  raises  a  sufiBciency  for  numbers, 
and  thus  others  devote  themselves  to  various  pursuits,  and  bring  about  the 
spectacle  of  a  stirring  and  well-ordered  community.  But  this  is  owing  to  the  fact 
that  the  husbandman  had  the  implements  with  which  to  work,  whose  manufacture 
is  not  to  be  procured  and  effected  without  much  toil  and  thought  and  time.  Man 
has  not  been  left  merely  to  his  animal  strength,  but  having  been  taught,  as  it 
were,  not  only  to  use  the  iron,  but  also  to  "  whet  its  edge,"  he  is  enabled  to 
accomplish  single-handed  what,  on  any  other  supposition,  must  have  required  the 
joint  energies  of  a  multitude  of  his  kind.  And  as  it  was  God's  beneficent  purpose 
to  throw  man,  as  it  were,  on  his  own  industry  and  ingenuity,  must  we  not  always 
ftdmit  the  goodness  as  well  as  the  mercy  of  the  appointment,  through  which  it 
was  ordered  that  there  should  be  no  excessive  pressure  on  our  race,  but  that  we 
have  been  afforded  time  to  advance  in  knowledge,  equivalent  to  the  increase  and 
necessities  of  population?  We  have  now  taken  a  general  view  of  the  text,  and 
one,  we  think,  which  has  enabled  us  to  survey  Divine  providence  under  a  very 
interesting  aspect.  We  will  now  bring  before  you  more  precise  illustration  of  the 
passage,  but  still  under  such  views  as  may  best  excite  you  to  the  observing  the 
benevolence  of  God.  It  is  a  property,  or  we  might  rather  say  an  infirmity  ol 
man,  that  he  cannot  give  himself  to  incessant  labour,  whether  it  be  bodily  or 
mental,  but  what  it  soon  causes  him  to  seek  relaxation  and  repose.  The  iron 
will  grow  blunt,  if  used  a  certain  time;  and  if  a  man  will  then  go  on  persevering 
in  the  using  it,  he  must  be  prepared  to  the  putting  to  more  strength,  which  will 
certainly  ere  long  bring  about  a  total  prostration.  But  if  wisdom  directeth  him, 
eo  that  he  daily  whet  the  edge  by  some  lawful  recreation,  he  may  by  God's  help 
be  enabled  for  a  long  time  to  retain  both  his  strength  and  his  usefulness.  And 
however  it  may  be  in  general,  there  is  far  more  cause  for  fear  that  men  will  be 
too  inert  rather  than  too  active,  though  cases  of  a  contrary  nature  frequently 
occiur,  in  which  the  caution  most  needed  is,  that  they  always  "  whet  the  edge." 
The  proverbial  saying  which  one  so  commonly  hears,  and  which  involves  a  great 
fallacy,  "  Better  wear  than  rust,"  would  almost  seem  to  contradict  the  great  prin- 
ciple of  our  text;  just  as  though  it  were  necessary  that  iron  should  rust  out,  if  it 
is  not  rapidly  worn  out,  whereas  the  truth  is,  that  though  by  putting  to  mora 
strength,  the  iron  will  be  worn  out,  it  will  not  be  rusted  out  through  whetting 
the  edge,  seeing  that  the  whetting  of  the  edge  brightens  what  it  sharpens.  And 
it  is  melancholy  to  think  of  what  frequently  happens  in  our  seminaries  of  learning, 
where  youths  of  high  promise,  of  fine  powers  of  imagination,  and  large  capacities 
for  science,  sink  beneath  the  pressure  of  an  overtasked  mind,  working  out  for 
themselves  an  early  grave,  and  depriving  the  world  of  the  benefit  which  they 
might  have  conferred  on  it  by  their  literature  or  their  piety,  through  that  constant 
and  incessant  use  of  the  iron,  and  continued  neglect  of  whetting  the  edge.  And 
it  is  yet  more  melancholy  to  think  how  many  of  the  ministers  of  Christ  have 
destroyed  themselves  by  devoting  themselves  to  work  with  an  uncalculating  ardour. 
We  have,  therefore,  to  derive  an  important  lesson  from  the  text;  a  lesson,  that  it 
is  as  much  our  duty  to  relax  when  we  feel  our  strength  overtasked,  as  it  is  to 
persevere  when  we  feel  that  strength  sufficient.  2.  The  man  who  spends  his 
Sabbath  religiously,  remembering  that  it  ia  God's  day,  and  therefore  to  be  devoted 
to  God's  service,  necessarily  abstracts  his  mind  from  secular  cares,  and  thus 
allows  it  to  recover  that  tone  and  elasticity  which  must  have  been  greatly  injured 
under  one  continued  uniform  pressiure.  And  far  more  than  this ;  in  studying  the 
Scriptures  and  meditating  on  heaven,  in  attending  the  ministrations  of  the  sanc- 
tuary, praying  with  all  fervency  of  purpose,  the  man  is  securing  to  himself  fresh 
supplies  of  grace,  which  may  strengthen  him  for  the  trials  and  duties  of  the  week. 
The  iron  was  blunt,  and  had  he  attempted  to  proceed  without  interruption  in  his 
labour,  he  must  then  have  put  to  more  strength,  and  thus  have  disabled  himself 
for  the  fulfilment  of  his  duties;  but  he  possesses  wisdom,  that  wisdom  which 
oometh  from  above,  and  this  taught  him  to  withdraw  himself  to  God,  and  bidding 
farewell  to  earthly  concerns,  forget  time  in  his  anxiety  for  eternity.  He  has  been 
brought  into  contact  with  heavenly  things,  and  the  attrition  has  sharpened  him 
again  for  his  earthly  occupations,  so  that  when  "  the  iron  "  is  brought  into  use, 
"  its  edge  "  is  so  powerfully  sharp,  that  what  seemed  adamantine  was  divisible, 
•nd  what  seemed  inseparable  might  be  cleft.     (H.  Melvtll,  B.D.)     Blunt  iooU:, 


CHAP.  X.]  ECCLESIASTES.  2«1 

a  counsel  and  consolation: — The  writer  of  this  book  had  gone  where  the  Blessed 
Master  went,  into  the  carpenter's  shop.  And  there  as  he  looked  about  him  ha 
eaw  this — that  it  is  not  always  the  man  who  works  hardest  who  does  most :  that 
the  workman  who  had  a  blunt  tool  must  sharpen  it,  or  he  must  work  huder  if 
he  would  keep  pace  with  the  others.  I.  Hebs  is  a  lesson  on  sebvice.  Iron  is 
the  very  emblem  of  service.  The  stone  age  is  prehistoric,  uncivilized  and  savage; 
the  golden  age  is  but  a  dream;  the  iron  age  is  the  true  age.  Think  of  the  plough, 
the  sword,  the  thousand  uses  of  iron;  the  huge  machinery  with  which  men  master 
the  earth  and  lighten  labour,  the  modern  shipping,  and  above  all,  in  these  later 
times,  the  pen.  These  things  build  up  our  civilization  and  our  strength.  Iron 
may  stand  as  the  fittest  emblem  of  service.  Shall  the  dead  stones  be  capable  of 
such  high  uses  and  such  gracious  ends,  and  are  we  alone  to  be  of  no  account?  Is 
there  no  power  that  can  uplift  us  and  enrich  us  for  worth  and  blessedness?  For 
us  there  must  be  possibilities  of  good  and  blessing.  For  us  somewhere,  some- 
how, there  must  be  high  ends  and  glorious  purposes — the  dullest,  darkest,  deadest 
of  ue.  The  iron  is  enough  to  proclaim  it.  II.  Herb  is  a  lesson  on  fitness  fob 
SERVICE.  The  iron  gets  blunt — that  you  cannot  help.  What  you  can  help  ani 
must  help  is  this — that  it  do  not  remain  blunt.  Let  it  be  a  matter  of  conscience 
with  us  that  we  be  ever  at  our  best  for  our  Lord.  Do  you  ask  how  shall  the 
iron  be  sharpened?  The  wise  man  gives  us  the  method.  "Iron  sharpeneth 
iron;  so  a  man  sharpeneth  the  countenance  of  his  friend."  In  this  lonely  London 
the  sight  of  a  friendly  face,  the  touch  of  a  kindly  hand,  the  sound  of  a  cheery 
voice  is  a  very  whetstone  of  the  spirit.  Yet  better  than  the  man's  prescription 
for  dulness  is  contact  and  communion  with  the  Friend  of  Friends,  the  Lord 
Himself.  Nothing  else  will  keep  us  fit  for  service.  I  can  do  all  things  through 
Christ  which  strengtheneth  me.  Contact  and  communion  with  Jesus  Christ  alone 
can  keep  us  fit  for  service.  Then,  again,  let  there  be  a  daily  surrender  of  ourselves 
to  Him  for  service.  III.  Some  consolation  foe  blunt  folks.  If  the  iron  be 
blunt,  what  then?  Well,  you  must  use  more  strength.  Alas,  some  of  us  sigh 
within  ourselves,  "  I  am  not  made  of  fine  material :  I  cannot  take  a  keen  edge : 
I  am  not  one  of  your  very  clever  people.  No  genius  am  I  at  anything, 
but  only  a  plain  blunt  tool.  I  see  the  steel  polished  and  graven ;  the 
flashing  sword:  and  I  know  I  shall  never  be  like  that."  Well,  make  up 
for  your  dulness  by  your  energy;  and  say,  "  If  I  have  not  so  many  gifts,  I  must 
get  more  grace.  If  I  am  lacking  in  skill  and  learning,  I  will  be  richer  in  love." 
Some  tools  are  the  better  for  not  being  oversharp.  He  who  was  the  carpenter 
still  needs  hammers  as  well  as  chisels  and  planes.  Only  give  thyself  to  Him. 
(Af.  0.  Pearse.)  Blunt  axes: — Solomon  desires  to  impress  upon  us  the  truth  of 
what  a  load  of  trouble  a  man  may  save  himself  by  a  little  forethought.  A  little 
preparation,  a  little  contrivance,  will  prevent  in  the  end  an  enormous  amount  of 
work,  whereas  the  neglect  of  common  foresight  must  entail  the  waste  of  strength 
and  time  and  toil.  I.  Take  education.  An  uneducated  child  growing  up  into 
man's  estate  is  a  dull,  stupid  individual.  He  may  get  through  a  certain  amount 
of  labour,  but  it  is  only  at  the  cost  of  a  great  expenditiye  of  bodily  strength. 
There  are  about  him  all  the  rules  of  science  and  mechanical  laws,  but  not  knowing 
them  they  cannot  be  used.  A  man  who  knows  general  principles  can  with  a  very 
little  contriving  apply  those  principles  to  almost  everything  he  comes  across.  It 
ie  the  man  who  knows  the  most  who  will  make  the  best  workman  when  he  has 
learnt  the  trade.  There  is  not  a  calling  in  life,  from  the  ploughboy  to  the  states- 
man, that  may  not  be  made  more  effective  by  the  worker  being  educated  in  the 
general  details  of  learning  and  science.  The  great  error  of  the  day  is  to  suppose 
that  general  education  may  supersede  particular  training,  and  that  if  a  child  has 
been  to  school  that  therefore  that  child  can  turn  his  hand  to  anything.  II.  Take 
mechanical  appliances.  There  is  just  as  much  work  done  in  England  in  one 
day  by  the  help  of  machinery  as  it  would  take  five  hundred  millions  of  men  to 
perform  without.  The  reason  is  that  as  a  nation  we  sharpen  our  axes  before  we 
begin  to  work.  The  perfection  of  mechanical  appliances,  the  power  o'f  steam, 
impresses  into  man's  service  the  forethought  and  preparation.  III.  Take  the 
PBINCIPL88  OP  rblioion.  Some  may  say.  What  has  all  this  subject  to  do  with 
religion?  Much  every  way.  Beligion  teaches  us  how  to  live  hero  as  well  as  to 
be  saved  hereafter.  There  is  one  notable  thing  which  we  should  do  well  to  lay 
to  heart,  and  that  is  that  it  is  in  Christian  nations,  and  in  Christian  nations  only, 
that  true  progress  in  arts  and  soience  and  knowledge  has  its  being.  Heathen 
sations,  such  as  China  and  India,  are  the  same  as  they  were  8,000  years  ago. 


162  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Semi-heathen  nations,  such  as  Italy,  Spain,  and  Turkey,  are  careless,  diseolute, 
and  remain  as  they  were.  But,  more  than  this,  the  subject  applies  to  the  welfare 
and  salvation  of  our  souls  to  a  larger  extent  than  we  should  at  first  suppose.  If 
men  go  about  the  world — as,  alas  I  too  many  do — like  a  lot  of  blunt  axes,  annoying 
their  fellow-creatures  with  the  unnecessary  toil  they  take  to  accomplish  the  most 
simple  acts,  they  do  not  exalt  the  religion  they  profess.  Learning  and  wisdom 
are  useful  to  the  Christian,  and  they  are  necessary  to  the  Christian.     (Homiliat.) 

Ver.  16.  Woe  to  thee,  0  land,  when  thy  king  is  a  child,  and  thy  princes  eat  in 
the  morning! — Wickedness  in  high  placet  (with  Ps.  xxvi.  10) : — Those  two  passages 
are  descriptive  of  wickedness  in  high  places.  The  morals  of  a  nation  hardly  ever 
rise  higher  than  the  virtue  of  the  rulers.  Henry  VIII.  makes  impiurity  national 
and  popular.  A  William  Wilberforce  in  the  Parliament  ennobles  an  empire.  Sin, 
epauletted  and  bestarred,  comes  to  respect  and  canonization;  vice,  elevated,  is 
recommended.  Malarias  rise  from  the  marsh,  float  upward  and  away;  but  moral 
distempers  descend  from  the  mountain  to  the  plain.  1.  In  unrolling,  then,  this 
scroll  of  wickedness  in  high  places,  the  first  thing  that  I  mark  especially  is  incom- 
petency for  ofSce.  If  a  man  seeks  for  a  place  and  wins  it  when  he  is  incompetent, 
he  is  committing  a  crime  against  God  and  a  crime  against  man.  It  is  not  a  sin 
for  me  to  be  ignorant  of  medical  science;  but  if,  without  medical  attainment,  I 
set  myself  up  among  professional  men,  and  trifle,  in  my  ignorance,  with  the  lives 
of  those  whose  confidence  I  have  won,  then  my  charlatanism  becomes  high-handed 
knavery.  The  ignorance  that  in  the  one  case  was  innocence,  in  the  other  caee 
becomes  a  crime.  It  is  not  a  sin  for  me  to  be  ignorant  of  machinery;  but  if  I 
attempt  to  engineer  a  steamer  across  the  Atlantic,  amid  darkness  and  hiu-ricane, 
holding  the  lives  of  hundreds  of  people  in  my  grasp,  then  the  blood  of  all  the 
shipwrecked  is  on  my  garment.  But  what  shall  we  say  of  men  who  attempt  to 
engineer  our  State  and  national  affaire  over  the  rough  waters  without  the  first 
element  of  qualification? — men  not  knowing  enough  to  vote  "aye"  or  "no" 
until  they  have  looked  for  the  wink  of  others  of  their  party?  2.  I  unroll  the 
scroll  a  little  further  and  find  intemperance  and  the  co-ordinate  crimes.  Oh  I  it 
is  a  sad  thing  to  have  a  hand  tremulous  with  intoxication  holding  the  scales  of 
justice,  when  the  lives  of  men  and  the  destinies  of  a  nation  are  in  the  balance; 
to  have  a  charioteer  with  unskilful  hands  on  the  reins  while  the  swift  destinies 
of  governments  are  harnessed  on  a  road  where  governments  have  been  dashed  to 
pieces,  and  empires  have  gone  down  in  darkness  and  woe  I  8.  I  unroll  the  scroll 
of  wickedness  in  high  places  still  further,  and  I  see  the  crime  of  bribery.  It  was 
that  which  corrupted  Lord  Bacon  in  his  magnificent  position — it  was  that  which 
led  Chief  Justice  Thorpe  to  the  gallows.  There  are  fo\ir  things  for  you 
to  do: — 1.  First,  stand  off  from  all  political  office  unless  your  own  prin- 
ciples are  thoroughly  settled.  Do  not  go  into  the  blaze  of  temptation 
unless  you  are  fire-proof.  2.  The  second  thing  to  do  is  to  take  the  counsel 
of  Paul,  and  pray  for  your  rulers;  pray  for  all  in  authority.  Do  you  know 
that  Shadrach  and  Abednego  did  not  need  the  Son  of  God  beside  them  in  the  fire 
so  much  as  your  rulers  do?  3.  In  the  next  place,  be  faithful  at  the  ballot-box. 
Make  up  your  mind  in  a  Christian  way  as  to  who  are  the  best  men  for  office ;  then 
vote  for  the  man  who  loves  God  and  hates  rum,  and  believes  in  having  the  Bible 
read  every  day,  as  long  as  the  world  stands,  in  all  our  common  schools.  But  I 
have  a  better  prescription  than  all.  4.  It  is  the  fourth  thing  that  I  have  to  say 
in  the  way  of  counsel,  and  that  is,  evangelize  the  people.  Gospelize  this  country, 
and  you  will  have  pure  representatives  and  pure  men  srerywhere.  (T.  D»  Witt 
Talmage.) 


CHAPTER   XI. 


Veb.  1.  Cast  thy  bread  npon  the  waters;  for  thoa  shalt  find  it  after  many 

days. — Cast  thy  bread  upon  the  waters: — This  saying  takes  us  to  the  banks  of  the 
Nile,  where,  every  year,  ae  the  flood  subsided,  while  the  level  lands  were  still  all 
ooze  and  mud,  the  farmer  went  forth,  and,  without  any  ploughing,  just  east  the 
grain  over  the  mud,  and,  simply  trampling  it  in  with  his  flocks  of  goats,  knew 
that  he  should  "  find  it  after  many  days  "  in  those  fruitful  harvests  which  made 


CHAP.  XI.]  ECCLESIASTES.  363 

Egypt  the  granary  of  the  ancient  world.  Only,  mark  what  it  means.  It  is  not 
a  mere  lesson  of  sowing.  It  is  not  cast  thy  "  seed  "  upon  the  waters.  It  is  cast 
thy  "  bread  " — cast  of  thy  bread-corn,  that  which  you  might  ixse  for  bread — cast 
that  on  the  waters,  spare  even  of  that  to  sow  for  the  days  to  come.  You  see,  it 
is  a  lesson  not  merely  of  sowing,  but  of  self-denial  and  self-restraint  in  order  to 
sow.  There  is  a  lesson  here  which  is  always  needed,  but  which  was  never,  per- 
haps, more  needed  than  to-day.  For,  if  I  mistake  not,  the  marvellous  advances 
of  our  age,  the  quickening  of  the  whole  speed  of  life,  have  had  this  effect — to 
produce  a  sort  of  eager  impatience  and  eagerness  for  the  utmost  immediate  results, 
a  remorseless  sort  of  draining  of  the  present  of  everything  that  can  be  got  out  of 
it.  People  want  to  make  all  their  harvest  into  bread — yes,  or  into  cake,  if  it  can 
be — are  not  willing  to  forego  any  of  it  for  seed,  or  to  be  put  into  the  sinking  fund 
of  the  future.  Why,  look  at  this  even  in  what  one  may  call  the  using  up  of  life 
itself.  All  this  marvellous  advancement  of  our  age  should  have  given  people- 
even  the  hardest- worked  and  busiest — a  little  more  leisure  for  simple,  happy 
living — living  for  its  own  sake.  I  asked  a  dressmaker  once  if  the  invention  of  the 
sewing-machine  had  not  lightened  her  labour.  "  Not  in  the  least,"  she  replied. 
' '  Ladies  only  want  so  much  the  more  work  putting  on  to  their  dresses ;  and  so 
they  take  just  as  long  making  as  ever."  Is  not  that  a  good  deal  true,  all  through 
life?  Every  gain  of  time  has  been  used  up  right  away  in  new  wants — none  of  it 
saved  for  those  quieter  uses  and  higher  uses  which  would  be  the  seed  of  a  nobler, 
fuller  future.  You  see  illustrations  of  this  in  every  direction.  You  see  it  in  trada 
and  the  various  material  arts  of  life.  In  the  older  times  it  was  the  ambition  of  a 
business  man  to  establish  a  business, — a  concern  that  might  stand,  a  business 
that  his  sons  might  be  proud  to  take  up  and  maintain  the  prestige  of  it.  But 
such  an  ambition  involves  some  foregoing  of  present  advantage;  and  that  is  where 
modern  life  is  so  weak.  Besides,  men  do  not  look  to  their  sons  to  take  up  their 
business  as  they  used  to  do.  If  they  are  successful  their  eons  will  hardly  need 
any  business  I  So  what  able  men  try  to  do  is  to  make  the  utmost  possible  for  a 
few  years;  and,  to  do  this,  there  cannot  be  much  sparing  of  bread-corn  to  cast 
on  the  waters,  not  much  restraint  in  the  use  of  opportunity.  They  must  just 
drive  the  keenest  trade  they  can,  wring  the  last  cent  out  of  all  dealings.  It  is 
all  this  excessive  living  for  to-day :  men  haven't  patience,  they  haven't  faith,  for 
the  steadier,  slower  business  which  would  build  up  character  and  reputation  and 
last  into  long  years  to  come.  Or  take  another  illustration,  in  the  houses  which 
are  everywhere  being  built  about  our  cities,  for  the  housing  of  this  hand-to-mouth 
generation.  The  building  of  a  house  was  a  serious  business  in  our  grandfathers' 
time.  What  strong  foundations  they  laid  I  What  massive  timbers  you  find  in 
those  old  houses  I  Something  to  last,  there !  But  now — well,  to  begin  with, 
there  \b  not  the  same  desire  to  have  a  house;  there  is  not  the  same  idea  of  living 
steadily  on  in  one  place.  So  houses  are  built  less  solidly,  but  more  showily.  It 
seems  to  me  that  it  is  not  houses  only,  but  the  whole  fabric  of  society  which  is 
being  built  up  thus  flimsily  and  temporarily.  Look  at  literature.  There  is  such 
a  demand  as  never  in  the  world  before  for  light  sketches,  superficial  reading.  It 
is  not  any  lasting  good  that  men  want  from  books,  but  an  hour's  excitement  or 
relaxation.  These  are  some  of  the  conspicuous  ways  in  which  the  hand-to-mouth 
spirit  of  the  time  is  shown.  But  the  thing  to  take  to  heart  is  this  :  that  it  appears 
in  these  greater  ways,  because  it  is  in  common  life  in  all  sorts  of  lesser  things. 
You  see  it  in  home  life,  in  society,  in  the  education  of  children.  The  greatest 
lack  of  DDodern  society,  I  do  believe — all  through,  from  children  up  to  grown  men 
and  women — is  thoughtful  self-restraint,  the  willingness  to  forego  the  gratification 
of  to-day  for  the  sake  of  the  days  to  come.  People  will  go  to  the  opera,  even  if 
they  don't  know  how  they  will  pay  next  week's  board-bill — ^yes,  often  enough, 
even  if  they  can't  pay  last  week's  I  Now,  if  there  is  one  thing  which  our  religion 
ought  to  teach  us,  it  is  this  spirit  I  have  been  trying  to  show  the  need  of — of 
living  not  just  for  to-day,  but  for  days  to  come,  of  casting  one's  bread  upon  the 
waters — the  spirit  of  patient,  thoughtful  permanence  in  life  and  doings.  Why 
does  "  the  law  "  stand  in  that  noble  emphasis  at  the  beginning  of  the  Hebrew 
religion?  Simply,  that  is  the  first  thing — thoughtful  obedience  and  self-restraint. 
80  spare  even  of  thy  bread-corn  to  cast  upon  the  waters;  "  for  thou  shalt  find  it 
after  many  days."  Yes  I  we  shall  find  it.  I  do  not  believe  we  ever  sow  for  future 
life:  I  do  not  believe  men  ever  exercise  a  noble  reserve  in  the  use  of  comfort  or 
luxury,  or  put  their  manhood  into  thoughtful  efforts  for  mankind,  without  finding 
the  harvest  of  it  after  many  days,  perhaps — ^yet  still  they  find  it,  and,  after  the 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

law  of  God's  true  harvest,  "  thirty  **  or  "  sixty  "  or  "  a  hundred-fold."  So  with 
all  pleasures,  all  indulgences — use  them  not  to  the  uttermost,  not  as  many  as 
ever  you  can  get  hold  of :  let  your  principle  in  such  things  be  a  noble  reserve. 
And,  in  all  work,  faith  and  patience  1  {Brooke  Herford.)  Uninviting  work: — This 
passage  may  be  regarded  as  an  invitation  to  work  of  a  special  kind — work  not 
likely  to  be  popular,  but,  nevertheless,  essential.  I.  It  is  a  call  to  dnappeeoiated 
WORE.  Our  bread  is  to  be  cast  upon  the  waters.  We  are  to  render  service — 
service  that  often  costs  much — to  thankless  people.  We  must  be  content  to  work 
when  our  work  is  unacknowledged,  unrequited — nay,  when  it  is  despised.  Much 
of  the  highest,  painfulest  service  wrought  for  the  good  of  men — work  of  brain 
and  heart — is  least  appreciated.  Let  us  work  in  the  spirit  of  a  noble  faith  and 
consecration,  knowing  that  what  we  give  and  suffer  will  be  lightly  esteemed  among 
men,  and  knowing  also  that  it  will  be  accepted  before  God  and  become  immortal 
in  the  life  of  the  world.  II.  It  is  a  call  to  unobtrdsivb  work.  Seed  sown  on  the 
waters  suggest  silent  forms  of  service.  Mark  the  way  of  the  Master.  In  all  His 
work  there  was  an  utter  absence  of  theatricality  and  advertisement.  Said  His 
brethren:  "If  Thou  do  these  things,  show  Thyself  to  the  world."  How  truly 
human  such  a  request,  as  if  all  was  lost  that  was  not  shown  1  But  Christ  declined 
the  tempting  publicity.  He  sowed  the  bread  of  heaven  on  dark  waters  so  softly 
that  history  hardly  noticed  Him  or  His  sowing.  Did  not  our  Lord,  in  following 
this  course,  intend  to  teach  His  people  that  the  establishment  of  His  kingdom 
would  depend  most  of  all  upon  modest  evangelism?  And,  indeed,  ever  since 
Christ's  day  His  cause  has  chiefly  grown  out  of  noiseless,  unobtrusive  work.  The 
history  of  the  Christian  Church  wonderfully  corresponds  with  geological  history; 
it  is  the  history  of  the  snowflake,  the  demonstration  of  the  prevailing  efficacy  of 
modest  personal  sacrifice  and  influence.  All  tourists  love  to  tell  of  the  cataract  of 
Niagara,  of  its  thunder,  foam  and  rainbows;  but,  after  all,  cataracts  like  Niagara 
do  little  for  the  fertility  of  the  world.  The  thousand  little  streams  that  go  softly 
in  the  grass  fill  the  earth  with  fruit  and  beauty.  III.  It  is  a  call  to  unpromising 
WORK.  To  sow  the  seed  upon  the  waters  looks  hopeless;  little  good  seems  likely 
to  come  of  such  toil  and  sacrifice.  So  work  for  the  world's  good  sometimes 
seems  sadly  unpromising;  the  giving  of  money,  time,  influence,  feeling,  seem  only 
like  ploughing  the  sands,  throwing  treasure  into  the  sea.  But  we  must  hope  in 
hopeless  work,  or  what  to  the  carnal  eye  looks  like  hopeless  work.  The  most 
unpromising  ground  sometimes  yields  the  richest  results.  The  finest  grapes  in 
the  world  are  not  grown  on  fat  soil,  but  on  sand  deserts  and  barren  shingle  that 
would  not  afford  nourishment  to  a  patch  of  oats;  and  the  lover  of  man  not  rarely 
gets  his  richest  clusters  on  the  most  unpromising  ground.  It  has  often  been  so 
with  the  missionary.  Who,  looking  at  ancient  Britain,  would  have  thought  that 
it  would  become  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord?  It  is  often  thus  in  families — the 
careless,  undutiful  children  turning  out  the  parents'  strength  and  joy.  (17.  L. 
Watkinson.)  Faith  and  duty: — There  are  in  this  book  aspects  of  truth  that  we 
are  very  apt  to  forget,  an  emphasis  put  upon  certain  out-of-the-way  duties  that  are 
as  essential  to  a  proper,  natural,  and  religious  life  as  those  doctrines  and  prin- 
ciples that  we  bring  to  the  forefront  of  our  evangelical  preaching.  Prudence  is  a 
virtue,  but  a  man  may  be  too  prudent.  Economy  is  an  excellent  habit,  but  a 
man  may  by  penuriousness  spoil  his  fortunes  as  much  as  if  he  were  a  spendthrift. 
There  is  a  certain  audacity  in  business,  in  love,  and  in  religion  that  is  essential 
to  success.  There  is  a  certain  scattering  that  brings  increase,  and  there  is  a 
withholding  more  than  is  meet  that  tends  to  poverty.  It  is  true  of  the  world, 
it  is  true  of  the  Church;  true  of  your  body,  true  of  your  fortune,  true  of  your 
soul.  Cast  thy  bread  upon  the  water.  Put  your  money  into  a  number  of  ven- 
tures; do  not  be  too  timid,  do  not  be  too  cautious;  use  a  large-hearted,  statesman- 
like breadth  and  liberality  in  your  enterprise  and  in  your  activity,  and  in  the  end 
your  bread  will  come  back  to  you — it  will  come  back  in  large  and  wide  profit. 
Again,  in  your  benevolence,  in  your  readiness  to  help  a  partner  or  a  client,  or 
even  to  do  a  good  turn  to  a  poor  neighbour,  do  not  be  calculating  just  whether 
you  must  do  it  or  whether  you  must  not.  Ecclesiastes  says,  "  Give  to  the 
seventh,  do  a  good  tiu'n  to  the  eighth."  And  it  appeals  to  common  sense.  Do 
not  call  it  unevangelical,  do  not  call  it  selfish.  There  is  a  reasonable  recognition 
of  the  law  that  connects  causes  and  effects,  results  and  those  forces  and  actions 
that  lead  to  them,  that  is  of  the  very  essence  of  nature,  and  it  is  perfectly  justifi- 
able that  a  man  should  look  to  it.  Says  Ecclesiastes  :  If  you  go  always  looking 
•t  the  clouds,  if  you  are  always  peering  out  to  see  where  the  cat's-paw  wind  is 


CHAP.  XI.]  ECCLESIASTE8.  265 

ooming,  you  will  never  sow  yoxir  field,  and  you  will  never  reap.  Tou  had  better 
sow  every  year.  Sow  when  the  spring  looks  black;  sow  when  the  early  summer 
seems  to  forecast  a  stormy  autumn;  sow  year  by  year — that  is  the  right  thing  to 
do.  Some  years  you  will  lose,  but  at  the  end,  when  your  life  is  done,  you  will 
have  made  a  large  gain,  a  great  profit.  Yes;  there  is  a  looking  at  that  part  and 
side  of  the  world  that  is  out  of  omi  control,  that  God  holds  in  His  own  hands, 
that  paralyzes  human  endeavour;  and  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  warns  us,  as  men 
of  the  world,  as  men  of  religion,  against  concerning  ourselves  with  God's  share 
in  the  transaction.  Send  your  ships  there  and  there,  send  them  far  and  wide 
over  the  world,  and  in  the  end — that  is  yoiu:  wisdom — leave  the  results  to  God. 
Do  your  duty  at  God's  bidding.  Strike  out  into  the  world;  sow  on  all  waters, 
cast  your  bread  far  and  wide;  do  good  deeds  here,  do  them  there,  and  in  the  end 
you  will  reap  a  rich  harvest.  It  is  not  difficult  to  get  people  to  make  up  their 
minds  to  be  good;  the  real  difficulty  is  to  get  them  to  carry  it  out.  Nothing 
more  easy  than  to  stir  men  and  women  to  start  well  in  life;  the  job  is  to  keep 
them  going  on.  It  is  not  just  the  first  volley  of  cannon-balls  against  the  fortifica- 
tion that  will  break  the  wall  down;  it  is  keeping  at  it  day  after  day  till  the  breach 
is  made  and  the  stronghold  can  be  taken.  You  know  what  momentum  is.  Aye, 
a  man  has  got  to  be  good;  he  has  to  speak  the  truth  to-day,  to-morrow,  the  day 
after,  the  week  after  that,  and  on  and  on,  if  he  is  going  to  form  within  himself 
such  a  mass  of  light  and  honourableness  that  men  may  speak  as  if  some  great 
and  noble  monument  had  fallen:  "That  man's  word  was  better  than  his  bond; 
that  man  never  spoke  a  dishonest,  untruthful  word."  Oh,  the  power  of  mo- 
mentiunl  the  thinness,  the  weakness,  and  the  poverty-stricken  character  of  that 
goodness  that  comes  in  gushes,  and  then  stops  in  fragments,  in  shreds  and 
patches  I  What  is  it  that  makes  our  goodness  so  broken,  so  interrupted,  so 
parenthetical?  I  think  the  commonest  and  chief  cause  is  that  we  do  good  upon 
impulse,  not  upon  principle.  We  set  out  to  do  right,  riding  upon  a  great  wave 
of  ardent  emotion,  not  upon  a  serious,  calm,  earnest  determination  of  will.  A 
great  many  of  us  make  another  mistake.  We  misunderstand  a  wise  principle;  wa 
say  to  ourselves  that  we  ought  to  calculate  profit,  that  we  ought  to  look  out  for 
results;  and  so,  mistaking  this  fact  that  we  ought  to  choose  to  do  our  goodness 
in  the  wisest  and  likeliest  way,  we  mistake  that  wise  habit  of  prudence,  judgment, 
and  we  turn  it  into  a  petty  trafficking  attempt  to  secure  certainty  that  every  little 
thing  we  niggardly  do  is  going  to  bring  us  a  definite  and  special  return.  Now, 
you  cannot  do  that  in  business.  Fancy  a  farmer  as  he  goes  across  the  field 
■owing  corn,  taking  it  out  grain  by  grain,  and  saying,  "  I  wonder  whether  this 
grain  will  be  eaten  up  by  a  bird,  whether  this  will  rot  in  the  ground;  I  do  not 
know,  and  therefore  I  will  not  sow  it."  That  would  be  about  as  silly  as  to  be 
always  calculating  whether  the  penny  you  put  into  the  plate  is  going  to  convert 
•  heathen,  or  whether  that  fiible  is  going  to  convert  a  sinner,  or  whether  going 
to  that  meeting  will  do  any  definite  good.  My  friend,  you  have  got  to  sow  in 
faith,  with  a  great  prodigal  generosity.  Blessed  those  busy  lives  that  are  always 
at  it,  always  working — working  when  it  promises  well,  working  when  it  promises 
ill,  standing  in  the  pathway  of  duty,  of  Divine  service,  in  the  pathway  of  blessing 
to  others,  in  the  pathway  of  certain  blessing  to  themselves  1  It  is  not  easy  to  be 
good;  it  is  terribly  hard  to  keep  on  doing  right;  you  get  awfully  tired  of  it,  and 
then  you  wonder  and  think  that  you  cannot  be  really  good  when  you  are  so  sick 
of  being  so  self-sacrificing,  so  sick  of  forgiving  that  brother  or  sister  that  always 
irritates  you,  and  you  feel  that  you  really  ought  to  get  a  little  rest  from  it,  to 
take  an  interval  of  not  being  good;  and  then  you  turn  upon  yourself  and  upbraid 
yourself.  Not  a  bit  of  it,  my  friend.  There  is  nothing  more  fatiguing  and  weari- 
some than  being  good.  It  is  a  crucifying  of  oneself  to  be  good.  How  could  it 
be  but  that  you  should  be  weary  many  a  day?  St.  Paul  says,  **  Be  not  weary," 
because  he  knows  you  will  feel  it — "  Be  not  weary  in  well  doing;  if  you  are  weary 
keep  on  doing  right;  if  you  faint  not,  in  the  end  you  shall  reap."  Lift  up  thy 
heart  and  do  not  faint.  In  the  morning  sow  thy  seed  and  in  the  evening  withhold 
not  thy  hand;  for  thou  canst  not  tell  whether  shall  prosper,  this  or  that,  or 
whether,  since  all  rests  at  last  with  the  great,  big-hearted,  loving  God,  both  alike, 
beyond  your  very  utmost  dreams  and  hopes,  shall  be  prosperous.  {Prof.  Elmslie.) 
Excitements  to  misaionary  effort: — The  text  applies  to  all  attempts  which  are 
made  to  benefit  the  immortal  part  of  man.  In  our  charities  towards  the  soul,  we 
have  need  of  patience;  and  it  is  evident  that  spiritual  benefit  is  chiefly  here 
intended.     I  wish  to  direct  your  attention  to  some  of  the  important  objects  which 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

the  text  places  before  us.  I.  A  labgb  and  liberal  benevolence  is  enjoined  upon 
vs.  Sel^ehnesB  is  at  once  the  degradation,  and  part  of  the  misery,  of  our  nature. 
It  shuts  up  some  of  the  finest  feelings  of  which  we  are  capable.  That  which  has 
separated  man  from  God  has  also  separated  man  from  man.  The  doctrine  of 
stewardship  is  peculiar  to  our  religion.  This  is  a  fine  principle  which  the  Gospel 
has  brought  to  light :  it  teaches  us  that,  though  God  is  the  fountain  of  all  good. 
He  has  made  creatures  the  instruments  of  good  to  man.  II.  Some  motives  to  thi 
EXERCISE  OF  BENEVOLENCE.  1.  Here  is  a  motive  addressed  to  our  hope.  What 
appalling  spectacles  presented  themselves  to  the  view  of  the  missionary  who  first 
trod  our  shores  I  He  listened  to  the  din  of  noisy  festivals ;  he  beheld  obscene  and 
lascivious  rites;  he  saw  the  effect  of  the  whole  system  of  worship  on  the  wretched 
people  by  whom  he  was  surrounded;  but  he  cast  in  the  seed;  and  has  it  not  been 
found  "after  many  days"?  You,  with  your  religious  assemblies,  your  faith  in 
God,  your  love  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  your  hope  in  heaven — ^you  are  proofs 
that  seed  cast  upon  the  waters  may  be  found  "  after  many  days."  Oh,  then, 
go  on :  future  ages  shall  call  you  blessed ;  and  the  glorious  results  of  your  labour 
shall  be  found  in  that  day,  when  "  they  shall  come  from  the  east,  and  the  west," 
etc  2.  A  motive  addressed  to  our  prudence  and  foresight :  "  Thou  knowest  not 
what  evil  shall  be  upon  the  earth."  This  may  apply,  first,  to  ourselves.  Who 
can  tell  how  near  evil  may  be  to  us,  how  near  may  be  sickness,  how  near  the  final 
call  of  death?  Well,  then,  *'  cast  your  bread  upon  the  waters."  If  your  tongues 
must  be  so  soon  employed  in  groaning  and  in  complaints,  let  them  now,  at  least, 
be  employed  for  God.  But  let  us  view  the  subject  on  a  larger  scale.  The  prospect 
of  evil  has  always  been  a  motive  for  exertion  to  good  men.  They  have  endeavoured 
to  meet  the  coming  evil  by  laying  up  a  store.  The  apostles,  in  the  midst  of  their 
great  and  successful  exertions,  prophesied  a  fatal  apostasy.  It  might  be  supposed 
that  this  would  have  operated  to  check  their  exertions.  But  they  acted  on  the 
principle  of  the  text;  they  "cast  their  bread  upon  the  waters";  they  "gave  • 
portion  to  seven,  and  also  to  eight  ";  they  spread  the  seed  freely  and  largely;  and, 
amidst  a  great  apostasy,  seed  sprang  up,  of  which  we  are  now  some  of  the  pleasing 
fruit.  3.  A  motive  drawn  from  the  fitness  of  the  thing.  "  If  the  clouds  be  full 
of  rain,"  etc.  Like  the  clouds  in  the  spring  of  the  year,  which  require  no  great 
effort  to  make  them  pour  forth  their  waters,  but  tremble  at  the  lightest  breese, 
and  impart  their  living  springs  to  the  earth ;  so  let  Christian  men  be  to  the  thirsty 
soils  of  this  parched  world.  4.  A  motive  drawn  from  the  consideration  of  human 
mortality.  "  If  the  tree  fall  toward  the  south,"  etc.  If  those  who  are  now 
within  our  reach,  if  those  who  are  now  in  darkness,  be  not  benefited  by  an  applica- 
tion of  the  means  God  has  given  us  in  His  providence,  "  a  great  gulf  "  will  soon 
be  fixed,  over  which  no  pity,  no  exertion,  can  step.  How  important  it  is  to  do 
the  work  of  the  day  in  the  day  I  to  "  cast  our  bread  upon  the  waters  "I  to  "  give 
a  portion  to  seven,  and  also  to  eight  "  1  to  sow  our  seed  "  in  the  morning  and  in 
the  evening"!  We  are  dying,  and  the  world  is  dying  around  us  1  III.  Several 
OBJECTIONS  ARE  IMPLIED  IN  THE  TEXT.  1.  The  first  secms  to  be,  that  the  oppor- 
tunity is  not  favotirable  to  such  exertions  (ver.  4).  What  then?  Are  we  to 
withhold  the  seed,  or  to  sow  it?  We  are  to  sow  it— to  sow  it  in  faith — faith  in 
the  commission  of  Christ,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  Gospel  to 
•very  creature  ";  faith  in  the  promise  of  the  Saviour,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always, 
even  to  the  end  of  the  world  ";  faith  in  the  irreversible  covenant,  "  Ask  of  Me, 
and  I  shall  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance,"  and  all  these  dtu-k, 
ferocious  savages,  all  these  unwholesome,  inhospitable  climes,  yea,  "  and  the 
uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  thy  possession."  2.  A  second  objection  seems 
to  be  that,  even  if  we  apply  ourselves  to  works  of  this  kind,  very  frequently  the 
manner  in  which  God  carries  on  His  work  is  very  different  from  the  conceptions 
which  we  had  formed  (ver.  6).  God  acts  not  by  any  man's  plans,  but  leaves  it 
to  us  to  say,  "Thou  knowest  not  the  works  of  God."  3.  A  third  objection  is, 
that  there  will  be  a  partial  failure.  "  Thou  knowest  not  whether  shall  prosper, 
either  this  or  that."  Part  of  the  seed  will  perish.  We  admit  this;  it  is  a  fact 
that  part  of  the  seed  will  perish,  and  that  the  condemnation  of  men  is  increased 
by  the  hearing  of  the  Gospel.  But  what  is  your  duty?  Why,  as  to  yourselves,  it 
is  to  "  give  the  more  earnest  heed  to  the  things  that  you  have  heard,  lest  at  any 
time  you  should  let  them  slip  ";  and,  as  to  others,  to  do  all  you  can  to  give  effect 
to  the  administration  of  the  Gospel,  by  renewed  exertions,  and  by  more  fervent 
prayers.  IV.  Somb  reasons  foe  diligence  and  constancy.  1.  The  first  reason  is 
taken  from  the  quality  of  the  seed  (ver.  6).    The  seed  you  sow  is  good.     Ths 


CHAP.  XI.]  ECCLESIASTES.  26T 

seed  here  referred  to  ie  that  of  bread,  in  which  man's  vitality,  nourishment  and 
strength  all  seem  to  be  bound  up.  So  in  the  Word  of  God  there  is  all  that  can 
blese  and  dignify  man  here,  and  prepare  him  for  everlasting  glory.  2.  Consider 
the  small  portion  of  the  world  which,  after  all,  has  been  sown  with  this  blessed 
seed.  3.  Kemember  that  you  all,  without  exception,  have  it  in  your  power  still 
more  largely  to  promote  this  good  work.  (iJ.  Watton,  M.A.)  The  poor  man'i 
portion: — I.  Thb  duty  recommended.  In  general  it  is,  to  do  good  with  our 
property.  It  is  the  glory  of  true  religion  that  it  inspires  and  inculcates  a  spirit 
of  benevolence.  Christ  went  about  doing  good.  1.  That  with  which  we  do  good 
must  be  oiu:  own.  "Cast  thy  bread."  As  there  are  some  who  withhold  more 
than  is  meet,  so  there  are  others  who,  from  ostentation,  give  what  is  not  their 
own.  2.  We  are  to  do  good  liberally.  "  Give  a  portion  to  seven,  and  also  to 
eight."  It  is  a  great  obstacle  to  many,  and  a  common  objection,  that  cases  are 
so  numerous.  8.  For  the  sake  of  doing  good  we  should  deny  ourselves.  "  Thy 
bread."  It  is  a  notion  of  many  that  they  are  required  to  give  only  superfluities; 
but  this  is  treating  God  and  the  poor  with  only  a  dog's  portion — the  cnimbs,  as 
it  were,  which  fall  from  their  table.  Emulate  the  Churches  of  Macedonia  (2  Cor. 
viii.),  whose  deep  poverty  abounded  to  the  riches  of  their  liberality.  4.  We  are 
to  do  good,  notwithstanding  discouraging  appearances  in  Providence.  Give  as  th« 
Lord  hath  prospered  you,  and  leave  another  day  or  another  year  to  take  care  for 
itself,  n.  Thb  motives  bt  which  this  ddtt  is  enfobcbd.  1.  The  reward  which 
awaits  you.  "  Thou  shalt  find  it  again."  What  we  do  for  the  poor  is  not  thrown 
•way,  though  it  may  seem  to  be  so.  It  is  sowing  the  seeds  of  immortality,  and, 
if  done  right,  we  shall  find  it,  though  it  may  be  '*  many  days  "  first.  God  so 
orders  it,  that  merciful  men  meet  with  mercy  in  this  life,  and  their  children  after 
them  (Ps.  cxii.  20);  and  who  knows  what  ours  may  need?  Or,  if  we  never 
find  it  here,  we  shall  find  it  in  a  dying  hour,  and  still  more  at  the  judgment  (Matt. 
zxv.  81-46).  Yea,  it  will  add  to  our  joy  hereafter,  else  it  could  not  be  called 
"  laying  up  treasure  in  heaven."  2.  The  impending  ills  that  threaten  us.  "  Thou 
knowest  not  what  evil  shall  be  upon  the  earth."  Covetousness  would  turn  this  to 
another  use:  "We  know  not  what  we  shall  want;  we  must  every  one  look  to 
himself."  No  I  that  which  you  now  possess  may  be  taken  from  you:  foes  may 
consume  it,  floods  may  sweep  it  away,  enemies  may  invade  it,  or  internal  changes 
may  strip  you  of  your  all.  Do  good  while  you  have  it  in  your  power — by  and  by 
you  may  be  unable.  8.  The  design  of  God  in  affording  us  what  we  have — not  that 
it  may  be  hoarded,  but  communicated.  "  If  the  clouds  be  full  of  rain,  they  empty 
themselves  on  the  earth."  Inanimate  nature  is  brought  in  to  provoke  us.  We 
•re  but  stewards  after  all,  and  must  give  account  of  our  stewardship.  4.  The  near 
approach  of  death,  when  all  our  opportunities  will  be  for  ever  at  an  end.  {A.  Fuller.) 
Sowing  on  the  waters: — This  line  contains  a  noble  principle,  which  admits  of 
many  applications;  we  shall  select  one,  and  apply  it  to  the  Christian  instruction 
of  the  young.  I.  The  ohaboe  is,  "Cast  thy  bread  upon  the  waters  I"  1.  Its 
first  reference  is  to  seed,  for  this  is  what  is  meant  by  "  bread."  Seed  supplies 
poetry  with  a  fit  figure  to  illustrate  anything  mean  which  gives  existence  to  any- 
thing  magnificent.  A  seed  is  but  a  solitary  grain,  or  a  soft  and  trembling  flake 
of  vegetation;  yet  from  the  seed  gushes  the  bright  flower — from  the  seed  starts 
the  towering  tree — from  the  seed  springs  the  bread  of  life.  "  Now,  the  seed  ie  the 
Word  of  God."  Christ  supplies  it.  "  Christ,"  writes  John  Milton,  "  gives  no 
full  comments,  or  continued  discourses,  but  speaks  oft  in  monosyllables,  as  a 
Master  scattering  the  heavenly  grain  of  His  doctrine,  like  pearls,  here  and  there, 
requiring  a  skilful  and  laborious  gatherer."  2.  A  second  reference  in  the  charge 
is  to  the  sowing  :  "  oast  "  the  seed.  Weeds  are  self -dispersive,  and  have  a  frightful 
facility  of  growth;  but  fruits  are  God's  blessing  on  labour  A  distinction  has  been 
made  between  a  radical  reformer  and  a  seminal  reformer.  The  one  strikes  the  axe 
st  the  roots  of  evil;  the  other  sows  the  seeds  of  good.  The  first  mode  of  action, 
though  often  a  necessity,  is  frequently  connected  with  disadvantage ;  for,  in  tearing 
up  the  ravelled  roots  of  an  ancient  grievance,  growing  in  a  tangled  place,  we  may 
rend  and  wither  delicate  interlacings  that  we  wish  to  live;  but  sowing  seed  dis- 
turbs nothing — injures  nothing;  frets  no  weakling — startles  no  alarmist;  and 
works  a  change  the  most  complete,  by  a  process  soft  as  the  flush  of  spring,  and 
noiseless  as  the  laws  of  nature.  "Work  while  it  is  called  to-day;"  sow  ideas, 
BOW  truths,  sow  thoughts  suggested  by  God's  own  Spirit,  whose  blossoms  will  soon 
**  make  the  wilderness  rejoice,  and  solitary  places  glad."  8.  The  third  reference  in 
the  charge  ie  io  the  place  where  the  seed  is  to  be  cast :  "  Cast  it  upon  the  waters." 


868  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 


As  the  seed  fell  on  the  soft  and  porous  soil  beneath  the  water,  your  hints  may 
drop  into  yielding  and  receptive  natures.  Part  with  youj  most  precious  know- 
ledge, then;  venture  to  sow  it  in  faith  on  the  waters  of  thought;  it  may  find  ai 
lodgment,  dart  the  fibres  of  life  in  secrecy,  and  in  due  time  reappear  in  thoee 
practicalities  which  most  beautify  and  bless  the  world.  II.  The  peomise,  "  Thou 
shalt  find  it  after  many  days."  "  Thou  shalt  find  it;"  therefore  you  may  be  at 
first  inclined  to  think  it  lost; — after  many  days;  therefore  you  need  not  be 
atrengthless  with  the  chill  of  discouragement  if  it  should  not  be  found  at  once. 
Here  and  there  the  spiritual  life  may  spring  and  mellow  early,  but  in  most 
instances  its  appearance  will  be  "  after  many  days."  While  you  speak  in  agony 
to  save,  you  may  seem  speaking  to  vacancy — the  young  spirit  is  not  listening — it 
is  far  away  in  chase  of  a  merry  fancy.  Yet  when,  "  after  many  days,"  that  boy 
reaches  some  crisis  of  being,  the  sudden  remembrance  of  this  very  word  may 
startle  him  as  if  a  sweeping  spectre  spoke,  and  save  him  from  a  crime.  III. 
What  bffeots  should  this  charge  and  this  promise  have  on  our  faith  and  practice? 
1.  We  must  aim  to  sow  the  right  seed.  We  should  make  unceasing  search  for 
this  till  we  find  it,  and  be  anxious  not  to  fall  into  a  mistake  with  reference  to 
such  a  primary  condition  of  success.  What,  then,  is  the  right  seed?  It  appears 
to  be  this  alone — ^teaching  in  its  history  and  its  connections  the  fact  that  "  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  Saviour  of  sinners."  2.  We  should  aim  at  the  best  way  of  teaching. 
The  main  and  master  principle  is  love.  The  secret  of  Dr.  Arnold's  ascendency  as 
a  teacher  was  the  love  that  charmed  his  pupils  into  friends.  Shining  through 
many  natural  disqualifications  for  teaching,  love  will  enlighten  and  enchant. 
Love  will  also,  more  than  anything  else,  tend  to  overpower  what  disqualifies,  and 
create  efficiency.  It  will  set  mind  in  motion.  It  will  "  endow  the  plain-tongued 
man  with  heavenly  eloquence."  3.  We  should  aim  to  look  to  the  right  quarter 
for  success.  We  are  not  to  forget  that  "  God  gives  the  increase,"  and  that  man 
alone,  like  the  cypher  alone,  is  nothing.  He  is  not  able  to  manufacture  a  single 
seed,  nor  to  give  it  a  particle  of  vitality,  but  only  to  sow  it.  4.  We  should  aim 
to  use  the  right  rule  for  estimating  success.  It  is  true  that  "  Bread  cast  upon  the 
waters  will  be  found  after  many  days  ";  but  these  words  contain  no  assurance  that 
it  will  be  found  on  earth.  It  may  not  reappear  in  the  earthly  lifetime  of  the 
sower,  but,  as  an  unseen  spirit,  he  may  watch  it  spring  from  age  to  age. 
(C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  Certaintiei  and  uncertaintie$ : — ^I.  There  abb  certainties 
AND  CNCEBTAiNTiES  IN  BEFERENCX  TO  GoD.  1.  God  worketh  all.  His  wisdom 
plans,  His  power  executes,  and  His  love  reigns  over  all.  2.  The  method  is 
unknown.  II.  There  are  certainties  and  uncertainties  in  reference  to  Provi- 
DBNOB.  1.  Man's  agency  is  subordinate.  There  are  things  certain  belonging  to 
man  as  the  subject,  minister,  interpreter,  symbol  of  God  and  of  Providence. 
(1)  Activity  is  the  distinction  of  man.  (2)  The  world  must  go  back  unless  man 
will  work.  2.  Man  must  work  according  to  certain  laws.  "  Cast  thy  bread  upon 
the  waters,"  etc.  It  is  not  certain  you  shall  reap  all  you  sow,  but  it  is  absolutely 
certain  you  cannot  reap  unless  you  sow.  III.  Thbrb  abb  certainties  in  refeb- 
ENCB  to  societt.  "  Give  a  portion  to  seven,  and  also  to  eight,"  etc.  1.  That 
men  have  certain  moral  and  spiritual  duties  to  discharge.  2.  That  the  latent  evil 
of  the  human  heart  is  liable  to  explosion.  Conclusion : — 1.  Cultivate  as  much 
as  possible  your  thinking  powers.  2.  Let  not  the  uncertainties  connected  with 
Providence  tempt  you  either  to  indolence  or  to  despondency.  8.  Work  in  faith 
through  the  power  of  God.  (Caleb  Morrit.)  Th$  social  agency  of  good  men: — 
All  men,  whatever  their  creed,  character,  or  conduct,  have  a  social  agency.  *'  No 
man  liveth  unto  himself."  The  text  indicates  the  kind  of  agency  that  a  thoroughly 
good  man  exerts  upon  his  race.  I.  Divinely  trustful.  Faith  in  God  and  His 
eternal  laws  is  the  mainspring  in  all  the  efiorts  of  a  good  man's  life.  He  is  ruled 
by  principles,  not  by  results.  He  looks,  **  not  at  the  things  that  are  temporal, 
but  at  those  things  that  are  eternal  ";  he  *'  walks,  not  by  sight,  but  by  faith." 
n.  Eminently  beneficent.  What  he  gives  out  is  not  stones  or  chaff,  but  bread, 
corn,  the  life  of  the  world.  Like  a  seed — 1.  His  every  act  has  life  in  it.  His 
every  effort  is  an  embodiment  of  a  livmg  conviction.  The  efforts  of  others  are 
mere  chaff.  2.  His  every  act  has  propagating  power  in  it.  It  is  a  seed  that  will 
germinate,  multiply.  One  really  good  act  has  proved  the  seed  of  millions  of  noble 
efforts.  3.  His  every  act  has  a  helpful  power  in  it.  It  supplies  moral  bread  for 
the  world.  III.  Inbvitablt  bxmunbrativb.  "  Thou  shalt  find  it  after  many 
days."  The  reward  will  not  oome  at  once.  You  cannot  force  moral  vegetation. 
But,  though  slow,  it  will  come.    "  Thou  shalt  find  it."    "  A  good  man,"  says  ' 


CHAP.  XI.]  ECCLESIASTES.  2fl9 

Carlyle,  "  is  ever  a  creative  mystic  centre  of  goodness.  A  good  thing  done  8,000 
years  ago  works  now,  and  will  work  through  all  endless  times  and  years."  No 
good  efiori  has  ever  been  lost,  or  ever  can  be.  It  is  a  Divine  incarnation,  and 
more  imperishable  than  the  stars.  (HomiliBt.)  Sowing  on  the  uiatert;  or,  the 
reward  of  untelfieh  beneficence: — I.  A  precious  obposit.  That  which  is  to  be 
parted  with  is  not  "seed"  merely,  but  "bread,"  i.e.  in  an  anticipative  and 
inclusive  sense.  If  the  husbandman  would  have  increase  he  must  sow  again  in 
faith,  and  commit  himself  to  a  watchful  Providence.  In  commerce,  too,  it  is 
exemplified :  a  man  invests  in  land  or  in  bonds  which  have  no  present  market 
value;  but  his  business  sagacity  tells  him  they  will  have  in  the  course  of  years, 
and  if  he  himself  may  not  benefit  by  the  venture,  his  son  will.  The  capital  the 
manufacturer  sinks  in  plant,  etc.,  has  the  same  significance.  It  is  in  the  realm 
of  ideas,  in  fact,  that  the  saying  is  most  manifestly  verified.  The  thinker  stakes 
bis  reputation,  comfort,  life  even,  upon  the  realization  of  his  doctrines,  which  are 
the  most  cherished  embodiment  of  his  spirit.  II.  An  unoebtain  beceptaolb. 
"  Upon  the  waters."  The  text  seems  to  encourage  an  almost  wanton  open* 
handedness  in  beneficence.  Is  it  so?  If  there  is  one  phase  of  traditional  alms- 
giving which  the  modern  spirit  deprecates  more  than  another,  it  is  its  indiscriml- 
natenesfi.  We  not  only  desire  to  certify  to  ourselves  the  fitting  objects  of  our 
compassion,  but  to  follow  them  into  the  actual  surroundings  of  their  daily  life, 
that  the  ultimate  aim  of  our  assistance  may  be  secured.  "  When  the  starving 
man  has  been  relieved,  modern  charity  inquires  whether  any  fault  in  the  sociid 
system  deprived  him  of  his  share  of  nature's  bounty,  any  unjust  advantage  taken 
by  the  strong  over  the  weak,  any  rudeness  or  want  of  culture  in  himself  wrecking 
his  virtue  and  his  habits  of  thrift."  To  this  we  have  to  reply  that — 1.  Neither 
this  nor  any  other  Scripture  forbids  inquiry.  It  would,  on  the  contrary,  be  true 
to  the  genius  of  Christianity  to  satisfy  ourselves  as  far  as  possible  that  our  alms 
is  well  bestowed,  and  that  it  is  given  in  such  a  way  as  to  secure  the  utmost 
advantage  to  the  recipient.  2.  When  every  practicable  security  has  been  taken 
charitable  help  and  spiritual  service  will  still  be  attended  with  much  uncertainty. 
The  methods  of  the  mathematician  are  not  applicable  to  Christian  enterprise  to 
any  appreciable  extent.  No  one  can  pretend  to  be  an  infallible  reader  of  ohar« 
aoter.  8.  It  is  often  the  duty  of  the  Christian  to  work  and  to  give  even  when  he 
oannot  be  certain  as  to  results.  III.  A  cebtain  betubn.  1.  "  After  many  days  " 
— a  sober  promise,  but  true  to  the  law  of  Moses.  Even  in  this  life,  according  to 
the  Decalogue,  the  reward  was  at  least  to  begin.  Late  or  soon  it  is  sure  to  coma 
to  all  who  are  earnest  and  unselfish.  Ood  never  loses  eight  of  our  "  work  of 
faith."  2.  "  Shall  find  " — therein  consists  the  romantic  interest  of  the  spiritual 
▼enture.  What  will  it  be  for  some  who  have  laboured  in  the  Church  on  earth 
with  scarce  any  visible  result,  but  whose  welcome  to  heaven  will  be  from  the  lips 
of  one  born  here  and  another  born  there  through  services  that  seemed  without 
fruit  I  {A.  F.  Muir,  M.A.)  Spiritual  efforts  not  loet: — There  can  be  nothing 
clearer  from  the  Bible  than  that,  though  man  can  deserve  nothing  from  the 
Creator,  so  that  his  best  actions,  if  tried  by  their  own  worth,  would  procure  him 
only  wrath,  nevertheless  he  will  be  tried  by  his  works,  and  receive  a  recompense 
of  which  those  works  shall  determine  the  extent.  Ood,  in  His  infinite  condescen- 
sion and  love,  has  resolved  to  deal  with  us  as  though  we  had  been  able  to  deserve 
at  His  hands;  proportioning  what  He  bestows  to  what  we  have  done  in  His  cause, 
though  all  the  while  it  is  only  as  a  free  gift  that  we  receive  the  least  of  those 
elements  which  constitute  future  happiness.  And  when  this  principle  has  been 
settled — the  principle  that,  though  we  cannot  merit  from  God,  our  actions  are  to 
decide  our  condition — we  may  speak  of  good  works  as  hereafter  to  be  rewarded, 
because  they  are  as  inevitably  to  regulate  our  portion  as  though  that  portion  were 
a  recompense  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  term.  And  if,  then,  it  be  lawful  to 
speak  of  reward,  we  may  certainly  speak  of  the  bread  "  cast  upon  the  waters  "  as 
*'  found  after  many  days."  It  will  very  frequently  happen  that  we  have  no 
means  whatever  of  ascertaining  that  any  beneficial  results  have  been  produced  by 
our  most  earnest  and  disinterested  labours;  and  it  is  quite  possible,  moreover,  that 
no  suoh  results  have  yet  followed,  and  that  none  will  follow.  The  utmost  which 
many  of  the  most  devoted  servants  of  God  ean  affirm  when  they  come  to  die  is, 
that  they  have  been  diligently  casting  bread  upon  the  waters.  They  have  received 
no  testimony  of  the  usefulness  of  the  bread  which  they  have  thus  cast — no  testi- 
mony that  the  examples  they  have  set,  the  exhortations  they  have  uttered,  the 
Bibles  tb«7  bara  distributed,  have  been  instrumental  to  the  adding  •  siogU 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 


member  to  the  visible  Church.     And  are  they  on  this  account  to  conclude  that 
they  have  made  a  wholly  fruitless  outlay  of  zeal  and  exertion?    It  were  indeed  a 
most  erroneous  impression.     The  attempt  to  benefit  others,  even  if  it  spring  from 
a  pure  love  to  God,  may  utterly  fail,  as  far  as  its  professed  objects  are  concerned; 
but  it  cannot  fail  to  be  beneficial  to  ourselves.     And  when  at  the  last  those  who 
have  gladly  spent  and  been  spent  in  the  service  of  God,  and  whose  toils  and 
Bacrifices  have  never  been  sweetened  by  the  knowledge  that  they  were  effectual  in 
accomplishing  the  ends  for  which  they  were  endured — when  these  men  shall  receive 
their  portion  from  their  Judge,  there  will  be  given  the  most  effectual  demonstration 
that   "  God  is  not  imrighteous   to  forget  their   work  of  laboiu:   and   love."     To 
every  man  will  be  allotted  a  recompense,  to  every  sacrifice  a  compensation.     But 
we  have  thus  only  vindicated  the  statement  of  our  text  on  the  extreme  supposi- 
tion, namely,  that  our  labours  to  do  good  are  so  wholly  ineffectual,  that  they 
produce  no  advantageous  results  to  those  whose  benefit  was  their  object.     And  we 
call  this  the  extreme  supposition,  because  we  believe  that  ordinarily  where  God 
has  prompted  to  exertion  and  to  sacrifice  He  crowns  them  with  some  measure  of 
success,  though  He  may  not  always  allow  that  success  to  be  known.     The  quantity 
of  good  wrought  by  this  or  that  agency  is  commonly  amongst  those  secrets  which 
only  the  future  can  unfold.     And  we  can  believe  that  this  unfolding  will  be  one 
of  the  most  surprising  and  animating  transactions  of  the  last  judgment.     The 
minister  who  has  been  oppressed  up  to  his  dying  hour  by  the  melancholy  con- 
viction that  his  warnings,  his  entreaties,  his  expostulations,  have  been  lost  on 
his  congregation,  may  be  hailed  by  many,  as  the  instrument  of  their  conversion. 
And  parents  who  have  had  to  struggle  with  that  heaviest  of  trials,  the  ungodlines* 
of  children,  and  who  have  not  had  the  least  ground  to  hope  that  their  remon- 
strances and  tears  and  prayers  have  wrought  any   effect  upon  their   reprobate 
offspring,  they  may  be  met  hereafter  by  the  sons  or  the  daughters  whose  contempt 
of  religion  entered  as  iron  into  their  souls,  but  into  whose  hearts  their  admonition 
had  sunk  notwithstanding  the  apparent  insensibility.     Now,  this  naturally  leads 
to  our  taking  that  view  of  the  text  which  is  practically  of  the  greatest  importance. 
^  We  wish  you  to  regard  the  text  as  a  promise — a  promise  which  is  admirably  fitted 
to  guard  you  against  becoming  "  weary  in  well-doing."    'When  considered  under 
this  point  of  view,  the  words  are  of  extraordinary  value,  for  they  just  meet  that 
feeling  of  despondency  which  those  who  labour  for  God   are   often  tempted  to 
entertain.     It  is  evident  that  we  might  apply  the  words  to  every  endeavour  to 
benefit  our  fellow-men  by  imparting  to  them  that  bread  which  came  down  from 
heaven.     The  text  contains  a  decisive  assertion  that  such  endeavours  shall  not  be 
unavailing.     But,  at  the  same  time,  by  speaking  of  "  many  days,"  it  warns  us 
alike  against  impatience  and  despondency.     And  it  should  lead  us,  in  every  case 
ill  which  there  seems  to  be  no  result  from  our  labours,  to  examine  whether  we 
have  faithfully  complied  with  its  precept;  whether  there  have  been  diligence  in 
casting  the  bread;  and  whether  it  has  really  been  bread  that  we  have  cast.     Of 
course  if  there  have  been  a  defect  in  either  of  these  particulars,  it  is  no  marvel 
that  the  promise  has  not  been  made  good,  and  we  cannot  but  think  it  in  a  high 
degree   probable   that   much   of   the   apparent   failure    in    the    fulfilment   of   this 
promise  must  be  traced  to  non-compliance  with  its  conditions.     (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
After  many  days: — It  does  not  seem  to  be  a  very  lofty  precept  in  the  Preacher's 
sense  of  it.     He  does  not  intend  by  it  what  we  might  mean  by  Christian  charity, 
but  rather  a  doing  what  you  can  with  your  own  interests  in  view.     Make  your 
kindness  a  sort  of  investment.     Be  kind  in  every  way  you  can,  even  in  most 
unlikely  ways,  because  they  may  turn  out  unexpectedly  to  be  profitable  to  your- 
self.    But  we  shall  take  the  precept  in  a  higher  light,  in  the  light  of  our  Lord's 
teaching,  as  when  He  said,  for  example,  "  He  that  loseth  his  life  for  My  stJte 
shall  find  it."     1.  No  work  done  in  Christ's  name  is  ever  in  vain.     The  tenor 
of  all  Scripture  is  in  harmony  with  that.     God's  word  shall  not  return  unto  Him 
void.     And  Jesus  said  that  the  giver  even  of  a  cup  of  cold  water  in  His  name 
should  not  be  without  his  reward.     The  great  waste  of  loving  labour  in  human 
history,  labour  spent  on  unworthy  causes,  has  often  been  remarked  upon.     Mark 
Butherford  gives  as  an  instance  the  love  and  sacrifice  that  were  lavished  on  the 
Jacobite  cause.     The  devotion  to  that  cause  on  the  part  of  many  was  wonderful. 
The  Jacobite  songs  still  live  because  they  breathe  a  fervour  of  loyalty  and   a 
strength  of  attachment  which  were  vividly  real  in  their  day.     But  the  cause  is  a 
lost  one.    It  is  all  love's  labour  lost,  and  it  is  pathetic  to  think  of  the  waste  of 
love  ooQoeoted  with  it.     Not  so  is  it  with  the  cause  of  Christ.     What  an  amount 


CHAP.  XI.]  ECCLESIASTES.  271 

has  been  spent  on  that  cause  in  the  course  of  the  ages  I  What  an  amount  ol 
■acrifice  made  and  suffering  borne  and  loving  labour  endured  I  Useless,  fruitless, 
we  might  have  said  many  a  time  and  oft.  But  not  one  of  Christ's  countless 
followers  would  have  recalled  one  jot  or  tittle  of  it  all — not  in  the  midst  of  their 
toil  and  travail,  not  in  their  final  hour,  and  not  assuredly  now  when  they  stand 
around  the  throne.  From  the  very  first  it  brought  to  them  an  immediate  return 
in  soul-satisfaction.  It  brought  what  the  world  could  neither  give  nor  take 
away.  It  was  a  saying  of  Cromwell's  that  "  he  goes  furthest  who  knows  not 
where  he  is  going."  It  is  not  business-like  to  know  not  whither  you  are  going, 
and  he  is  not  Ukely  to  go  far  who  should  enter  upon  business  in  that  fashion. 
But  in  the  spiritual  realm  it  is  different.  The  great  thing  there  is  to  follow  the 
Divine  leading,  and  to  sow  even  though  it  be  in  tears,  trusting  Him,  who  gives 
the  command,  that  all  will  be  well,  and  that  in  His  own  good  time  there  shall 
come  a  reaping  time  of  joy.  2.  The  text  suggests  to  us  also  the  blessing  that 
may  be  hid  in  delay.  It  is  not  best  for  our  spiritual  life  that  we  should  always 
get  immediate  returns  for  our  labours.  The  transaction  which  is  done  to-day, 
and  whose  results  can  be  pocketed  to-morrow,  is  not  usually  of  the  kind  that 
gives  strength  and  beauty  to  the  character.  Macaulay  objected  to  school-prizes 
because  the  reward  was  too  immediate.  The  true  reward  of  hearty  study  cornea 
to  be  realized  only  after  many  days.  Is  it  not  so  also  in  business?  The  man 
who  prospers  top_  easily  is  not  likely  thereby  to  develop  the  finest  type  of  char-  , 
actM.  In  spiritual  work  immediate  and  abimdant  reaping  tends  sometimes  to  be  ; 
productive  of  spiritual  pride,  to  a  man's  own  undoing  and  to  the  undoing,  probably, 
of  the  work  itself.  The  noblest  Christians  are  those  who  most  markedly  have  in 
their  patience  won  their  souls.  (/.  S.  Maver,  M.A.)  Cast  thy  bread  upon  the 
waters: — Some  think  that  this  image  is  borrowed  from  sea-trading.  The  merchant 
sent  his  ship  over  the  waters,  he  lost  sight  of  it  altogether,  and  in  those  days  the 
quickest  passage  on  record  was  unknown.  Solomon  had  a  navy,  and  once  in  three 
years  it  returned,  bringing  gold  and  silver,  apee  and  peacocks.  The  merchant  oi 
that  period  had  to  wait  long,  to  scan  the  horizon  oft,  before  he  was  greeted  with 
the  sight  of  his  returning  barque.  So  if  we  do  good  to  men,  it  is  like  launching 
some  precious  craft  on  the  deep,  which  at  best  must  be  long  before  its  return 
gladdens  the  eye.  And  some  of  the  work  we  do  seems  specially  doubtful,  and 
calls  for  exceptional  patience;  it  is  not  so  much  as  if  we  sent  a  ship  to  India  or 
China,  but  rather  as  if  we  put  our  heart  and  treasure  into  a  fleet  which  must  dare 
the  dark  and  icy  seas  of  the  North  Pole.  But  even  then  it  shall  return.  "  Thou 
ehalt  find  it  after  many  days."  Yovir  work  shall  not  be  unavailing,  your  barque 
shall  not  be  shipwrecked.  To  do  any  work  with  ardour  and  thoroughness  and 
perseverance  we  must  have  a  strong  assurance  that  it  will  succeed,  and  in  the 
noblest  work  we  have  that  assurance.  The  seed  that  was  sown  generation*  ago 
is  bearing  fruit  to-day,  and  it  shall  be  so  once  more  with  the  seed  we  sow.  The 
ship  we  send  forth  with  trembling,  that  is  never  reported  from  any  foreign  port, 
that  is  never  spoken  with  by  a  passing  sail,  that  sends  no  message  in  sealed  bottle 
on  the  waves,  that  is  frozen  fast  in  abysses  of  frost  and  darkness,  shall  nevertheless 
return,  bringing  treasure  beyond  all  ivory,  pearls,  or  gold.  On  celestial  cliffs  we 
shall  hail  argosies  that  we  fitted  out  and  sent  over  stormy  seas.  Every  kind 
word,  every  unselfish  act,  every  true  prayer,  tells,  and  tells  deeply,  abidingly. 
(W.  L.  Watkinson.) 

Ver.  8.  If  the  clouds  be  full  of  rain,  they  empty  themseWeB  upon  the  earth. — 
BlacTc  clouds  and  bright  blessings: — It  was  raining  very  heavily  when  I  was  think- 
ing over  this  text.  When  I  came  here  I  found  that  you  had  not  had  a  drop  of 
rain.  This  seemed  to  me  like  an  example  and  an  illustration  of  the  sovereignty 
of  God's  dispensations.  In  one  part  of  the  Church  God's  grace  descends  in  a 
flood,  while  another  part  remains  as  dry  and  arid  as  the  wilderness  itself.  He 
hath  the  key  of  the  rain,  and  it  is  for  us  to  ask  Him  to  give  us  of  the  iew  and  the 
rain  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  I.  Comfort  fob  the  timid.  The  clouds  are  black,  they 
lower;  they  shut  out  the  sunlight;  they  obscure  the  landscape.  The  timid  one 
looks  up  and  says,  "  Alas  I  how  black  they  are,  and  how  they  gather,  fold  on 
foldl"  What  makes  them  black?  It  is  because  they  are  full,  and  hence  light 
cannot  pierce  them.  And  if  they  be  full,  what  then?  Why,  then  it  will  rain, 
and  then  the  hot  earth  will  be  refreshed,  and  every  little  plant,  and  every  tiny 
leaf  and  rootlet  of  that  plant  will  suck  up  moisture,  and  begin  to  laugh  for  joy. 
If  the  clouds  were  not  black,  you  might  not  expect  rain.     If  your  sfllictions  were 


272  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xt. 


not  grievous,  they  would  not  be  profitable.  If  your  adveraitiea  did  not  pain  and 
trouble  you,  they  would  not  be  blessed  to  you.  We  have  heard  some  people  say, 
**  If  this  trouble  had  come  in  such  and  such  a  shape,  I  would  not  hava 
minded  it."  But  God  meant  you  to  mind  it,  for  it  was  in  your  minding  it  that 
it  was  blessed  to  you.  I  do  not  know — how  can  I  tell — what  is  your  particular 
trouble ;  but  you  may  well  believe  that  He  who  appointed  it.  He  who  measured  it, 
He  who  has  set  its  bounds,  will  bring  you  to  the  end  of  it,  and  prove  His  gracious 
design  in  it  all.  Do  not  think  that  God  deals  roughly  with  His  children,  and 
gives  them  needless  pain.  It  grieves  Him  to  grieve  you.  It  is  easy  to  have  m 
faith  that  acte  backwards,  but  faith  that  will  act  forwards  from  the  point  of  your 
present  emergency  is  the  true  faith  that  you  want  now.  Hath  God  helped  you 
out  of  one  trouble  after  another,  and  is  it  to  be  supposed  that  He  will  leave  you 
in  this?  Do  ask,  then,  for  grace  that  you  may  believe  while  you  are  still  under 
the  cloud,  black  as  it  looks,  that  it  will  empty  itself  in  blessed  rain  upon  you. 
So  will  it  be  on  the  largest  possible  scale  in  the  whole  Church  of  Christ.  Thera 
are  many  clouds  surrounding  the  Church  of  God  just  now,  and  I  must  confess 
that,  with  all  the  religious  activity  there  is  abroad,  there  is  very  much  to  cause 
us  great  sorrow.     But  we  must  not  yield  to  fear.     The  Master  knows.     II.  Aw 

ABGDMENT    WITH    THB    DODBTING   AND   THE    DESPONDING.      It    is    a  law    of    nature   thst 

a  full  thing  begins  to  empty  itself.  When  the  cloud  gets  full,  it  no  longer  has 
the  power  of  retaining  ito  fluid  contents,  but  it  pours  them  down  upon  the  earth. 
Well  now,  I  want  you  to  draw  an  argument  from  this.  Our  gracious  God  never 
makes  a  store  of  any  good  thing,  but  He  intends  to  give  it  to  us.  Just  think  for 
a  moment  of  God,  our  gracious  Father.  He  is  love.  He  is  all  goodness.  He  is 
a  bottomless,  shoreless  sea,  brimful  of  goodness.  He  is  full  of  pardoning  goodness 
to  forgive  sin.  He  is  full  of  faithful  goodness  to  watch  over  His  children; 
full  of  bounteous  goodness  to  bestow  upon  them  all  that  they  want.  Now,  if 
there  be  such  a  plenitude  of  goodness  in  the  Father,  it  must  be  for  some  object — 
not  for  Himself.  Why  should  it  be  given  to  Himself?  It  must  be  there  for  His 
creatures.  Is  it  not  written  that  He  delighteth  in  mercy?  We  know  that  He 
maketh  the  sun  to  shine  upon  the  evil  as  well  as  upon  the  just.  Then  I,  even 
though  I  be  evil,  will  hope  that  this  store  of  goodness  in  the  heart  of  the  ever- 
lasting Father  is  intended — some  of  it,  at  any  rate — to  be  poured  out  upon  me, 
poor  unworthy  me.  Ah,  troubled,  doubting  soul  I  think  again;  let  me  ask  you 
this  time  to  muse  a  little  upon  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  the  Father.  Now,  if  thou 
believest  Christ  to  be  a  cloud  that  is  full  of  rain,  for  what  reason  is  He  full?  Why, 
that  He  may  empty  Himself  upon  the  earth.  To  proceed  yet  further,  I  would  ask 
the  doubter  to  look  at  the  infinite  fulness  of  power  which  is  treasured  up  in  tha 
Holy  Spirit.  Is  thy  heart  hard?  He  will  empty  His  softening  influence  upon  it. 
Is  it  dead?  His  quickening  power  shall  there  find  a  congenial  sphere.  Art  thou 
dark?  Then  there  is  room  for  His  light.  Art  thou  sick?  Then  is  there  a  pro- 
vince for  His  healing  energy.  III.  The  text  furnishes  a  lesson  to  Cheistianb. 
The  drift  of  the  passage  is,  of  course,  to  be  gathered  from  the  connection,  and  it 
was  intended  by  Solomon  to  teach  us  liberality.  "  If  your  pocket  is  full,  empty 
it  out  upon  the'  poor  and  needy ;  and  if  God  has  endowed  you  with  much  of  this 
world's  substance,  look  out  for  cases  of  necessity,  and  consider  it  as  much  the 
object  of  your  existence  to  bestow  help  upon  the  needy,  as  it  is  the  design  in  the 
creation  of  a  cloud  that  it  should  empty  itself  upon  the  earth."  When  a  man 
once  gets  into  the  habit  of  giving  to  the  cause  of  God,  it  becomes  as  much  a  delight 
to  contribute  of  his  substance  as  to  pray  for  God's  bounty,  or  to  drink  in  the  promise. 
Let  the  wealthy  empty  themselves  upon  the  earth,  and  this  shall  be  the  way  to 
fill  themselves.  But,  though  not  many  of  us  are  entrusted  with  much  wealth, 
we  have  other  aptitudes  to  be  useful.  Some  Christians  have  a  considerable  amount 
of  ability  to  serve  the  Lord.  They  are,  perhaps,  able  to  speak  for  the  Master. 
Now,  I  think  that  wherever  there  is  some  knowledge  of  God's  Word,  a  personal 
acquaintance  with  its  power,  and  a  facility  to  speak,  we  should  exercise  our 
talent,  if  it  be  but  one;  and  if  we  have  ten,  we  should  not  keep  one  of  the  tea 
to  ourselves.  Some  Christians  have  a  large  amount  of  experimental  knowledge. 
They  are  not  eloquent,  they  are  not  educated,  but  they  are  wise.  If  you  have 
any  experience,  let  me  say  to  you — do,  as  you  have  opportunity,  tell  it  out; 
empty  it  upon  the  earth.  If  you  have  gained  some  knowledge  of  God,  communi- 
cate it.  If  you  have  proved  Him,  confess  to  a  generation  about  you  that  He  ia 
a  faithful  God.  Observe,  lastly,  when  it  is  that  the  clouds  do  empty  themselves. 
The  text  says,  when  they  are  full.    This  is  a  broad  hint,  I  think,  to  the  Christian; 


CBAP.  XI.]  ECCLESIA8TES.  27J 

it  tells  him  when  to  work.  David  was  to  attack  the  Philistines  at  a  certain 
fiignal.  "  When  thou  hearest  the  sound  of  a  going  in  the  tops  of  the  mulberry- 
trees,  then  thou  shalt  bestir  thyself."  Take  this  as  a  Divine  signal;  when  you 
are  full,  it  is  time  for  you  to  set  about  doing  good,  emptying  yourselves  upoa 
the  earth.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  4.  He  that  observeth  the  wind  ahall  not  sow;  and  he  that  regardeth  the 
clouds  shall  not  reap. — Difficulties  vanquished: — The  principle  of  the  text  is,  that 
we  ought  not  to  be  deterred  from  discharging  our  duties  by  trivied  difSculties. 

1.  The  nature  of  the  duties  to  be  dischabged — sowino  and  beapino.  1.  They 
must  be  attended  to  in  their  own  proper  season.  It  would  be  useless  for  the 
husbandman  to  scatter  the  seed  upon  the  ground  in  midsummer,  or  to  go  to  reap 
at  Christmas.     It  must  be  attended  to  in  season  or  never.     Now  is  the  time. 

2.  They  have  but  a  short  time  allotted  for  their  discharge.  What  is  our  life? 
A  vapour,  etc.  Do  not  sell  certainty  for  a  perhaps.  3.  They  are  works  done  with 
a  view  to  futurity.  No  man  scattereth  the  seed  to  the  ground  for  the  sake  of 
scattering  it — no  man  reaps  for  the  sake  of  reaping;  but  the  man  sows  for  the 
sake  of  harvest,  and  reaps  for  his  support  during  the  year.  The  whole  of  life 
has  a  regard  to  futurity.  II.  The  difficulties  in  cue  way  whilst  oischabgino 
THESE  DUTIES.  Winds,  clouds,  difficulties  within,  without,  from  the  world,  from 
the  devil.  Doubts,  fears,  weakness.  1.  They  are  the  common  lot  of  himianity. 
2.  They  are  powerful  in  their  resistance  against  us.  8.  They  are  changeable  in 
the  nature  of  their  resistance.  The  wind  blew  to-day  from  the  south,  it  may 
be  to-morrow  from  the  north;  to-day  from  the  east,  to-morrow  from  the  west. 
To-day  it  may  be  a  tempestuous  wind,  to-morrow  a  salubrious  breeze.  So  with 
the  Christian;  the  tempest  does  not  always  blow  in  the  same  direction,  nor  with 
the  same  force.  4.  TTiey  are  all  under  the  control  of  our  Heavenly  Father.  III. 
The  resolute  mind  with  which  these  difficulties  must  be  overcome,  and  thb 
DUTIES  discharged.  1,  We  must  not  look  upon  the  difficulties  as  things  insur- 
mountable. The  wind,  though  it  troubles  the  sower,  does  not  actually  prevent 
him  from  sowing,  and  the  cloud,  though  it  threatens  to  pour  its  contente  upon  the 
reaper,  does  not  stop  him.  Our  difficulties  are  not  such  as  cannot  be  overcome. 
2.  We  ought  to  add  fresh  vigour  because  of  the  difficulty.  3.  In  all  our  exertions 
we  ought  to  depend  upon  God  for  strength  and  prosperity.  Let  us  act  and 
pray.  {David  Hughes,  B.A.)  Optimism  and  pessimism  versus  Christianity:— 
Here  we  have  a  rule,  or  principle  of  life  and  conduct,  which  corresponds  with, 
but  which  is  more  imt)ortant  than,  the  rules  of  good  farming.  We  are  not  to 
spend  the  brief  day  of  life  in  wistfully  surveying  those  evil  conditions  or  those 
calamities  which  surround  our  existence.  We  are  to  go  forward;  we  are  to  do 
the  utmost  in,  and  to  make  the  best  of,  that  certain  duty  in  that  state  of  life  to 
which  it  has  pleased  God  to  call  us.  If  we  suppose  a  man  placed  in  this  world 
without  the  light  of  revelation,  how  is  he  likely  to  look  upon  his  existence — aa 
an  existence  of  happiness  or  misery,  a  blessing  or  a  curse?  This  question  will 
probably  be  answered  in  accordance  with  the  deep-seated  tendencies  of  individual 
temperament,  but  these  tendencies  when  prolonged  become  a  system  of  doctrines, 
and  so  it  is  there  are  two  main  ways  of  looking  at  human  life  and  its  surrounding 
liabilities.  First  of  all,  there  is  what  is  called  Optimism — a  production  of  the 
temperament  which  refuses  to  see  in  earthly  human  existence  anything  but  sun- 
shine. This  kind  of  optimism  lives  at  the  West  End  of  London,  and  forgets  that 
the  East  End  exists  at  all.  It  draws  a  veil  over  the  miseries,  the  poverty  and 
pain;  it  draws  its  curtains  and  pokes  up  its  fire;  it  has  no  patience  with  people 
who  have  hximan  sorrows,  and  when  they  are  forced  on  their  attention,  it  pro- 
teste  with  a  good-natured  smile  that  things  do  not  look  so  gloomy  as  some  people 
think,  and  it  whispers  to  iteeU  the  familiar  words,  **  Soul,  thou  hast  much  goods 
laid  up  for  many  years;  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry,"  and  perhaps 
it  fancies  that  it  has  got  hold  of  the  true  meaning  of  Solomon  and  it  is  obeying 
him  in  not  regarding  the  clouds.  The  objection  to  this  optimistic  theory  is,  that 
it  is  inconsistent  with  hard  facts ;  it  only  belongs  to  the  man  who  has  good  health, 
fair  abilities,  and  sufficient  income.  Such  a  man  may,  for  a  certain  time,  keep 
the  sterner  realities  of  existence  at  bay,  may  dream  that  this  is  the  best  of  pos- 
sible worlds  in  which  to  live.  But  for  the  immense  majority  of  human  beings 
the  language  of  optimism  can  never  sound  other  than  heart-deceiving.  It  has  no 
will  to  play  the  fiddle  like  the  Emperor  of  Bome,  while  Rome  ie  burning,  or  to 
danoe  upon  the  deck  of  a  sinking  ship;  even  the  buoyant  spirits  of  the  Greeks 

18 


274  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ru 


gave  way  before  great  calamities.     In  the  solemn  event  of  death  there  is  needed 
some  theory  apart  from  this  temper  of  refined  and  cultivated  selfishness.     lo 
view  of  sights  to  be  seen  in  this  great  city,  with  its  vast  accumulated  misery, 
poverty  and  pain,  the  optimist  well  knows  that  there  are  things  on  earth,  if  not 
m  heaven,  which  have  not  been  duly  allowed  for  by  his  smiling  philosophy.     And 
here  the  opposite  estimate  of  human  existence  claims  a  hearing.     We  have,  all 
of  us,  met  with  people  who  make  a  point  of  looking  at  everything  on  the  darkest 
tide,  who  fondle  jealousy,  and  prize  their  groanings ;  who,  as  if  under  some  strange 
pressure  of  conscience,  do  not  allow  themselves  to  recognize  the  happier  features 
of  their  life  or  of  the  circumstances  in  which  God  has  placed  them.    For  them 
the  sun  never  shines,  the  flowers  never  open,  the  face  of  man  never  smiles;  they, 
Bee  everything  through  a  thick  atmosphere  of  depression  and  gloom.    The  pessi- 
mist has  no  eye  for  the  creative  and  recuperative  powers  of  nature.     He  lingers 
over  lis  tendency  to  corruption  and  decay.     He  sees  before  him  only  death  in  life— 
never  life  in  death;  for  him  man's  history  is  made  up  of  tinprofitable  emerging 
from  and  sinking  back  into  barbarism  without  any  lasting  gains  for  human  pro- 
gress and  improvement.     One  of  the  incidental  proofs  of  the  Divine  greatnesB  of 
Christianity  is  to  be  found  in  its  attitude  towards  these  opposing  estimates  of 
human  life.     For  the  religion  of  Christ  is  by  turns  pessimist  and  optimist.     Chris- 
tianity quarrels  not  with  the  principles  of  these  two  ways  of  looking  at  life,  but 
with  their  misapplication.     Christ  could  not  allow  that  human  nature  weakened 
and  degraded  by  the  Fall,  exposed  to  the  inroads  of  temptation  and  sin,  subjecb 
to  invasion  by  sickness  and  by  death,  is  s  fitting  subject  for  light-hearted  self- 
eongratulation.     Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  it  consistent  with  faith  in  and  respect 
for  His  finished  work,  to  despair  of  souls  or  to  despair  of  societies  which  He  hat 
redeemed,  in  forgetfulness  of  the  new  force  with  which  He  has  endowed  them. 
8t.  Paul  is  pessimist  in  his  description  of  the  state  and  prospects  of  the  heathen 
world  at  the  beginning  of  his  Epistle  to  the  Bomans;  but  who  more  optimist 
than  he — ^who  more  buoyantly  confident  of  the  splendid  destinies  reserved  for  the 
tervants  of  Christ  than  this  same  apostle  when  he  describee  the  eSecte  working 
in  the  soul,  and  the  working  of  the  Spirit  of  Life,  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans; , 
or  of  our  incorporation  with  the  Redeemer,  in  the  Epistles  to  the  Coloesiane  and 
the  Ephesians?    With  human  nature  left  to  itself  he  could  hope  for  nothing;  with  i 
human  nature  redeemed  and  invigorated  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  he  could  despair  | 
of  nothing.    Of  the  one  he  says,  "  I  know  that  in  me,  that  is  in  my  flesh,  dwelleth 
no  good  thing."     Of  the  other  he  cries,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  who 
strengtheneth  me."    And  then  we  see  how  the  birth  of  our  Divine  Lord  into  thit : 
human  world  was  the  consummation  of  optimism  and  the  condemnation  of  pessi-  i 
mism.     Pessimism,  which  is  common  sense  in  the  heathen,  is,  in  the  Christian,  i 
disloyalty  to  Christ.     Optimism,  unlike  that  in  the  heathen,  is  in  the  Christian,  i 
who  knows  what  Christ  has  done  for  him,  mere  common  sense.     The  reason  it  ] 
because  he  knows  that  the  Divine  power  has,  at  the  birth  of  Christ,  entered  into  | 
human  nature,  has  reversed  his  own  downward  inclination  in  his  character,  the  J 
warp  towards  evil,  and  that  faith  has  endowed  it  with  a  vigour  which  comes  from  | 
heaven.     The  Christian  who  regardeth  the  clouds,  who  looks  long  and  wistfully  at  ; 
evils,  or  at  threatenings  of  evil,  which  are  beyond  his  power  to  remove  or  to  i 
correct,  shall  not  reap  the  harvest  of  joy  or  work  which  lies  already  to  his  hand.  | 
For  so  regarding  the  clouds  takes  time  and  thought  and  efifort,  and  otir  stock  of 
these  things  is  too  small  to  admit  of  any  wasteful  expenditure.     So  to  regard  the 
clouds  depresses  the  spirit,  enfeebles  the  heart,  and  takes  away  the  strength  of 
purpose  and  resolute  exertion  which  are  wanted  for  the  work  of  God.     There  are 
evils  enough  nearer  the  earth  than  the  clouds,  evils  of  our  own  causing,  and  evils 
springing  from  our  own  heart,  evils  lying  right  across  our  path,  or  by  the  side  of 
it,  and  on  these  we  cannot  bestow  too  much  attention.    But  the  clouds,  however 
much  we  may  gaze  at  them,  and  wish  they  were  really  rain,  or  the  reverse,  the 
clouds  are  after  all  out  of  our  reach.    Let  us  not  regard  them;  let  us  leave  them 
to  God.     (Canon  Liddon.)     Too  late: — The  writer  of  this  book  is  unquestionably 
tempted  to  a  sceptical  and  despondent  spirit.     But  there  is  something  within 
him  besides  which  eaves  him  from  hopelessness.     And  in  the  words  before  us  ha 
warns  hie  hearers  against  that  very  habit  of  mind  to  which  we  might  have  sup- 
posed he  was  himself  peculiarly  inclined;  the  habit  of  observing  the  wind  when 
it  was  time  to  sow,  and  of  looking  at  the  clouds  when  it  was  time  to  reap — i.  e.  in 
words  divested  of  the  figurative,  to  falter  in  the  presence  of  duty  from  an  exagger- 
ated sense  of  the  difficulties  which  beset  it,  to  pause  and  tpeculate  when  the  time 


CHAP.  XI.]  ECCLESIASTES.  275 

has  arrived  to  obey  and  to  act.  Now,  this  evil  tendency  takes  one  of  two  forms. 
First,  it  has  a  grosser  and  a  commoner  form,  viz.  when  men  falter  and  spend 
their  time  weighing  and  measuring  difficulties,  merely  from  the  power  of  aa 
indolent  and  self-indulgent  nature.  To  them  religion  and  duty  seem  chilling  and 
gloomy,  and  they  put  ofi  the  decisive  effort  to  the  last  possible  instant,  often, 
alas,  so  long  that  they  bear  the  words  "  too  late,"  at  the  journey's  end.  Of  one 
thing  I  am  quite  sure,  that  amidst  the  blessings,  so  many  and  so  undeserved, 
which  God  bounteously  reserves  for  the  sons  of  men,  there  are  absolutely  none 
for  the  indolent.  I  cannot  conceive  any  fault  of  character  so  essentially  fatal  as 
indolence.  But  this  tendency,  condemned  in  my  text,  frequently  takes  a  less 
contemptible,  but  not  less  injurious,  form.  Persons  by  no  means  addicted  to  self- 
indulgence  waver  in  the  presence  of  duty,  and  when  there  is  a  call  to  action,  from 
•  timid  anticipation  of  difficulty.  After  all,  it  is  very  few  of  us  who  keep  up  the 
due  balance  between  thought  and  action.  It  has  sometimes  occurred  to  me  that 
thought  and  action,  speculation  and  practice,  are  related  to  each  other  as  melody 
and  time  in  music.  Beautiful  sounds  may  by  accident  fall  into  beautiful  com- 
binations, and  the  breathings  of  an  ^olian  harp  have  a  charm  of  their  own;  bufe 
until  the  element  of  time  be  added  it  is  not  music.  Even  so  the  unpractical 
speculator  may  have  fine  thoughts  and  fascinating  experiences;  his  mental  exer- 
eises  may  be  as  sweet  as  the  notes  of  an  ^olian  harp;  but  they  are  as  wild  and 
meaningless.  Time  it  is  that  makes  music,  and  even  so  the  music  of  life  is  beatea 
out  by  action  as  well  as  thought.  Speculation  and  inquiry  are  safe  and  healthy, 
as  far,  and  only  as  far,  as  they  are  conducted  in  connection  with  action.  There 
Deed  be  no  fear  of  courageous  and  unflinching  investigation,  if  it  go  hand  in  hand 
with  devotion  to  duty,  and  obedience  to  the  light  within,  and  work  for  others. 
We  must,  to  use  a  forcible  Scripture  phrase,  "  do  the  truth,"  as  well  as  think 
the  truth,  if  we  are  to  be  true.  Dreaming  is  a  dangerous  thing  in  this  working 
and  struggling  world  under  any  circumstances,  most  dangerous  of  all  when  it  is 
indulged  in  to  the  neglect  of  duty,  and  when  it  is  but  a  form  of  criminal  idleness. 
But  I  must  try  to  bring  these  thoughts  to  a  point,  and  so  I  shall  warn  you 
against  this  purposeless  disposition — 1.  In  the  greatest  matter  of  all,  our  closing 
with  the  offers  of  God's  love,  and  the  surrender  of  ourselves  to  His  service.  The 
gloriousness  of  the  prize  will  make  the  toil  of  winning  it  seem  light.  An  enthu* 
siasm,  wrought  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  will  bear  us  along;  we  shall  count  the  hia< 
drances  along  the  road  but  trifling,  because  heaven  and  victory  and  Christ  are  at 
the  end.  Believe  it.  Accept  God's  salvation,  and  leave  the  future  to  Him. 
Start  upon  the  way  that  leadeth  to  life,  and  trust  Him  that  **  as  your  day  so  will 
your  strength  be."  But  guard  against  this  wavering  and  procrastinating  temper— 
2.  In  fulfilling  the  details  of  duty,  and  in  the  conduct  of  life.  After  all,  life 
•hould  be  an  economy;  an  economy  of  strength,  of  time,  of  opportimity.  But 
we  must  watch  against  this  wavering  and  procrastinating  temper-— 3.  In  our  work 
lor  others.  I  do  from  my  heart  wish  that  in  our  efforts  for  the  souls  and  bodiea 
of  men  we  would  bear  in  mind  two  very  elementary  considerations.  First  that 
it  is  better  to  work  with  the  tools  we  have  than  to  spend  our  time  in  lamenting 
that  they  are  not  better;  and  next,  that  it  is  not  permitted  to  us  to  dictate  to 
God  what  amoimt  of  success  shall  follow  our  efforts,  that  our  right  state  of  mind 
is  rather  to  be  thankful  that  we  have  any  success  whatever.  (/.  A.  Jacob,  M.A.) 
Sowing  in  the  wind;  reaping  under  cloude: — I.  Natubal  difficulties  mat  bs 
VNDDLX  OONSIOEBED.  A  man  may  observe  the  wind,  and  regard  the  clouds  a 
great  deal  too  much,  and  so  neither  sow  nor  reap.  1.  Note  here,  first,  that  in 
any  work  this  would  hinder  a  man.  It  is  very  wise  to  know  the  difficulty  of  your 
calling,  the  trial  which  arises  out  of  it,  the  temptation  connected  therewith;  but 
if  you  think  too  much  of  these  things,  there  is  no  calling  that  will  be  carried  on 
with  any  success.  Well  now,  if  there  be  these  difficulties  in  connection  with 
earthly  trades,  do  you  expect  there  will  be  nothing  of  the  kind  with  regard  to 
heavenly  things?  Do  you  imagine  that,  in  sowing  the  good  seed  of  the  kingdom, 
and  gathering  the  sheaves  into  the  garner,  you  will  have  no  difficulties  and  dis- 
appointments? 2.  But,  next,  in  the  work  of  liberality  this  would  stay  us.  This 
is  Solomon's  theme  here.  "  Cast  thy  bread  upon  the  waters;"  "  Give  a  portion 
to  seven,  and  also  to  eight;"  and  so  on.  He  means,  by  my  text,  that  if  anybody 
occupies  his  mind  unduly  with  the  difficulties  connected  with  liberality,  he  will 
do  nothing  in  that  line.  8.  Going  a  little  further,  as  this  is  true  of  common 
occupations  and  of  liberality,  so  is  it  especially  true  in  the  work  of  serving  God. 
Now,  if  I  were  to  consider  in  my  mind  nothing  but  the  natural  depravity  of  man. 


276  THE  BIl^'JCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

I  should  never  preach  again.  4.  You  may  unduly  consider  circumstancee  in 
reference  to  the  business  of  your  own  eternal  life.  You  may,  in  that  matter, 
observe  the  winds,  and  never  sow;  you  may  regard  the  clouds,  and  never  reap. 
**  I  feel,"  eays  one,  *'  as  if  I  never  can  be  saved.  There  never  was  such  a  sinner 
as  I  am.  My  sins  are  so  peculiarly  black."  Yes,  and  if  you  keep  on  regarding 
them,  and  do  not  remember  the  Saviour,  and  His  infinite  power  to  save,  you  will 
not  sow  in  prayer  and  faith.  "  I  do  not  feel  like  praying,"  says  one.  Then  is 
the  time  when  you  ought  to  pray  most,  for  you  are  evidently  most  in  need;  but 
if  you  keep  observing  whether  or  not  you  are  in  a  proper  frame  of  mind  for  prayer, 
you  will  not  pray.  "I  cannot  grasp  the  promises,"  says  another;  "I  should 
like  to  joy  in  God,  and  firmly  believe  in  His  Word;  but  I  do  not  see  anything  in 
myself  that  can  minister  to  my  comfort."  Suppose  you  do  not.  Are  you,  after 
all,  going  to  build  upon  yourself?  Are  you  trying  to  find  your  ground  of  consola- 
tion in  your  own  heart?  If  so,  you  are  on  the  wrong  tack.  Oiu-  hope  is  not  in 
self,  but  in  Christ;  let  us  go  and  sow  it.  Our  hope  is  in  the  finished  work  of 
Christ;  let  us  go  and  reap  it;  for,  if  we  keep  on  regarding  the  winds  and  the 
clouds,  we  shall  neither  sow  nor  reap.  II.  Such  unwise  consideration  intolvbs 
cs  IN  SEVERAL  SINS.  1.  If  we  keep  on  observing  circumstances,  instead  of  trusting 
Ood,  we  shall  be  guilty  of  disobedience.  Ood  bids  me  sow :  I  do  not  sow,  because 
the  wind  would  blow  some  of  my  seed  away.  God  bids  me  reap :  I  do  not  reap, 
because  there  is  a  black  cloud  there,  and  before  I  can  house  the  harvest,  some  of 
it  may  be  spoiled.  I  may  say  what  I  like;  but  I  am  guilty  of  disobedience.  I 
have  not  done  what  I  was  bidden  to  do.  2.  Next,  we  are  guilty  also  of  unbelief, 
if  wa  cannot  sow  because  of  the  wind.  Who  manages  the  wind?  You  distrust 
Him  who  is  Lord  of  north,  and  south,  and  east,  and  west.  If  you  cannot  reap 
because  of  a  cloud,  you  doubt  Him  who  makes  the  clouds,  to  whom  the  clouds 
are  the  dust  of  His  feet.  Where  is  your  faith?  8.  The  next  sin  is  really 
rebellion.  So  you  will  not  sow  unless  God  chooses  to  make  the  wind  blow  your 
way;  and  you  will  not  reap  unless  God  pleases  to  drive  the  clouds  away?  I  call 
that  revolt,  rebellion.  An  honest  subject  loves  his  king  in  all  weathers.  The 
true  servant  serves  his  master,  let  his  master  do  what  he  wills.  4.  Another  sin 
of  which  we  are  guilty,  when  we  are  always  looking  at  our  circumstances,  is  this, 
foolish  fear.  God  has  commanded  His  people  not  to  fear;  then  we  should  obey 
Him.  There  is  a  cloud;  why  do  you  fear  it?  It  will  be  gone  directly;  not  a  drop 
of  rain  may  fall  out  of  it.  You  are  afraid  of  the  wind;  why  fear  it?  It  may 
never  come.  Even  if  it  were  some  deadly  wind  that  was  approaching,  it  might 
shift  about,  and  not  come  near  you.  If  you  get  fearing  about  nothing,  the 
probability  is  that  you  will  get  something  really  to  fear,  for  God  does  not  love 
His  people  to  be  fools.  6.  There  are  some  who  fall  into  the  sin  of  penuriousness. 
Observe,  that  Solomon  was  here  speaking  of  liberality.  He  that  observeth  the 
elouds  and  the  winds  thinks  "  That  is  not  a  good  object  to  help,"  and  that  he 
will  do  harm  if  he  gives  here,  or  if  he  gives  there.  It  amounts  to  this,  poor  miser, 
you  want  to  save  your  money  1  6.  Another  sin  is  often  that  of  idleness.  The 
man  who  does  not  sow  because  of  the  wind  is  usually  too  lazy  to  sow;  and  the 
man  who  does  not  reap  because  of  the  clouds  is  the  man  who  wants  a  little  more 
sleep,  and  a  little  more  slumber,  and  a  little  more  folding  of  the  hands  to  sleep. 
If  we  do  not  want  to  serve  God,  it  is  wonderful  how  many  reasons  we  can  find. 
Oh,  yes,  yes,  yes,  we  are  always  making  these  excuses  about  winds  and  clouds, 
and  there  is  nothing  in  either  of  them.  It  is  all  meant  to  save  our  corn-seed,  and 
to  save  us  the  trouble  of  sowing  it.  Do  you  not  see,  I  have  made  out  a  long  list 
of  sins  wrapped  up  in  this  observing  of  winds  and  clouds?  If  you  have  been 
guilty  of  any  of  them,  repent  of  your  wrong-doing,  and  do  not  repeat  it.     III. 

liET  us   PROVE  THAT   WB  HAVE   NOT  FALLEN  INTO  THIS   EVIL.      HoW  Can  we  prOVe  it? 

1.  Let  us  prove  it,  first,  by  sowing  in  the  most  unlikely  places.  Cast  your  bread 
upon  the  waters;  then  it  will  be  seen  that  you  are  trusting  God,  not  trusting  the 
soil,  nor  trusting  the  seed.  2.  Next,  prove  it  by  doing  good  to  a  great  many. 
**  Give  a  portion  to  seven,  and  also  to  eight."  Talk  of  Christ  to  everybody  yoa 
meet  with.  If  God  has  not  blessed  you  to  one,  try  another;  and  if  He  has  blessed 
you  to  one,  try  two  others;  and  if  He  has  blessed  you  to  two  others,  try  four 
others;  and  always  keep  on  enlarging  your  seed-plot  as  your  harvest  comes  in. 
8.  Further,  prove  that  you  are  not  regarding  winds  and  clouds  by  wisely  learning 
from  the  clouds  another  lesson  than  the  one  they  seem  made  to  teach.  Learn 
this  lesson:  "If  the  clouds  be  full  of  rain,  they  empty  themselves  upon  ths 
earth  ";  and  say  to  yourself,  "  If  God  has  made  me  full  of  His  grace,  I  will  go 


caxp.  XI.]  ECCLESIASTE8.  27t 

and  pour  it  out  to  others.  I  will  empty  myself  for  the  good  of  others,  even  m 
the  clouds  pour  down  the  rain  upon  the  earth."  4.  Then  prove  it  still  by  not 
wanting  to  know  how  God  will  work.  Go  out  and  work;  go  out  and  preach;  go 
out  and  instruct  others.  Go  out  and  seek  to  win  souls.  Thus  shalt  thou  prove, 
in  very  truth,  that  thou  art  not  dependent  upon  surroundings  and  circumstances. 
6.  Again,  prove  this  by  constant  diligence.  "  Be  instant  in  season,  out  of  season." 
Sow  in  the  morning,  sow  in  the  evening,  sow  at  night,  sow  all  day  long,  for  you 
oan  never  tell  what  God  will  bloss;  but  by  this  constant  sowing,  you  will  prove 
to  demonstration  that  you  are  not  observing  the  winds,  nor  regarding  the  clouds. 

lY.    LbT   us    KEEP   THIS    EVIL    OUT    OF   OUB   HEABTS    AS    WELL    AS    OUT    OF    OUB    WOBK. 

1.  And,  first,  let  us  give  no  heed  to  the  winds  and  clouds  of  doctrine  that  are 
everywhere  about  us  now.  Blow,  blow,  ye  stormy  winds;  but  you  shall  not  move 
me.  Clouds  of  hypotheses  and  inventions,  come  up  with  you,  as  many  as  you 
please,  till  you  darken  all  the  sky;  but  I  will  not  fear  you.  Such  clouds  have 
oome  before,  and  have  disappeared,  and  these  will  disappear,  too.  Give  yourself 
to  your  holy  service  as  if  there  were  no  winds  and  no  clouds;  and  God  will  give 
you  such  comfort  in  your  soul  that  you  will  rejoice  before  Him,  and  be  confident 
in  His  truth.  2.  And  then,  next,  let  us  not  lose  hope  because  of  doubts  and 
temptations.  When  the  clouds  and  the  winds  get  into  your  heart,  when  you  do 
not  feel  as  you  used  to  feel,  when  you  have  not  that  joy  and  elasticity  of  spirit 
you  once  had,  when  your  ardour  seems  a  little  damped,  and  even  your  faith 
begins  to  hesitate  a  little,  go  you  to  God  all  the  same.  Trust  Him  still.  3.  Lastly, 
let  ua  follow  the  Lord's  mind,  come  what  will.  In  a  word,  set  your  face,  like  a 
flint,  to  serve  God,  by  the  maintenance  of  His  truth,  by  your  holy  life,  by  the 
■avour  of  your  Christian  character;  and,  that  being  done,  defy  earth  and  hell. 
Only  be  strong,  and  of  good  courage,  and  do  not  regard  even  the  clouds  from 
bell,  or  blasts  from  the  infernal  pit;  but  go  straight  on  in  the  path  of  right,  and, 
God  being  with  yoU|  you  shall  sow  and  you  shall  reap,  unto  His  eternal  glory. 
(0.  H.  Bpwgton.) 

Yer.  6.  Thoa  knowest  not  the  work  of  God,  who  doeth  all.^-Chn'«tian  agnoati- 
ettm  (with  James  i.  6,  6) : — The  favourite  intellectual  mood  of  unbelief  in  recent 
times  has  been  agnosticism.  It  declares  that  the  greatest  things  we  do  not  know, 
•hall  never  know.  Ecclesiastes  is  a  very  modern  book  in  respect  of  this  recog- 
nition  of  himian  ignorance.  And  it  is  more  than  modern  in  that  while  it  fully 
states  the  puzzle,  it  gives  the  key.  I.  Wb  know  nothinq.  There  is  a  farmer 
observing  the  wind  now,  saying,  "It  is  in  the  right  quarter;  I  will  put  in  my 
seed."  He  shall  not.  The  seed  is  six  miles  away,  and  a  cart-wheel  is  broken. 
To-morrow  the  land  will  be  flooded.  The  next  day  his  child  will  be  dying,  and  he 
will  postpone  everything.  Another  was  very  anxious  about  the  rainy  harvest;  ha 
"regarded  the  clouds,"  he  chose  a  good  week  and  set  the  men  on;  but  he  fell 
from  his  horse  and  died;  some  one  else  saw  the  harvest  home.  "  Thou  knowest 
cot  what  is  the  way  of  the  wind."  That  is  the  kind  of  experience  that  makes 
Tennyson  say,  "  Behold,  we  know  not  anything."  Of  course  there  is  very  much 
in  the  regularity  of  things  to  make  us  think  we  know.  A  shrewd  and  careful 
farmer  usually  gets  on  well.  The  wind  is  a  sign,  and  the  clouds  are  a  sign,  that 
any  man  of  common  sense  must  pay  attention  to.  Say  we  do  not  know  what 
God  doeth,  if  you  like.  But  lay  upon  Him  all  that  is  done.  If  a  man  sows  wild 
oats  it  is  God  who  makes  them  come  up.  Do  not  say  it  is  nature ;  it  is  God.  And 
then  if  they  seem  not  to  come  up — one  man  does  wrong  and  is  punished,  another 
does  wrong  and  is  not  punished — ^you  are  not  embarrassed  with  any  irregularity 
hard  to  account  for.  God  has  them  both  in  hand.  And  with  Him  is  no  variable- 
ness or  shadow  that  is  oast  by  turning.  II.  Wb  know  God.  The  unbelieving 
agnostic  says  we  can  know  everything  earthly,  but  nothing  heavenly;  we  cannot 
know  God.  The  Christian  agnostic  says,  "  We  are  not  certain  of  «my thing 
earthly;  but  we  are  certain  of  God.  We  know  whom  we  have  believed."  God 
•hinee  into  all  the  world  with  the  pure  light  of  goodness;  and  all  iniquity,  greed, 
▼iolenoe,  and  so  on,  of  which  we  say  the  earth  is  so  full,  is  really  a  vision,  too,  of 
Ood  by  contrast.  The  earth  is  full  of  the  glory  of  God,  and  that  is  why  the  bad 
things  about  us  show  up  so.  Christ  has  oome — a  human  character  up  against 
which  every  one  begins  to  feel  ashamed  by  sheer  contrast.  He  dares  to  say,  '*  I 
•m  the  light  of  the  world,"  and  men  have  to  recognize  it,  because  they  all  show 
np  dark  against  it.  The  character  of  God  is  there,  plain  enough,  in  touch  with  us. 
fn.  It  wb  know  God  wb  abb  in  thb  way  to  know  eveetthino — ^and  the  onlt 


278  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 


WAT.  Do  not  imagine  there  is  some  long,  toilsome  path,  as  the  Deists  used  to  say, 
"  thioiigh  nature  up  to  nature's  God."  It  is  not  far  to  get  through  nature.  It  i« 
as  thin  as  paper.  Put  the  two  texts  together — "  Thou  knowest  not  the  work  ot 
God,  who  doeth  all."  "  If  any  lack,  let  him  ask  of  God,  in  faith,  nothing  doubt- 
ing-" Sy  ^^^^^  ^^^  things  are  yours,  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's. 
(/.  H.  Stowell,  M.A.) 

Ver.  6.  In  the  morning  low  thy  wed. — The  teed-time  of  life: — ^The  morning, 
as  we  apply  it  to  Christian  youth,  stands  for  brightness,  freshness,  promise,  foe 
"  regenerate  hope,  the  salt  of  life,"  for  opportunity,  activity,  and  corresponding 
responsibility.  The  morning  is  pre-eminently  the  sowing  time.  Noon  and  even- 
tide will  take  their  complexion  from  the  morning,  and  morning,  whether  we 
improve  or  waste  it,  never  returns.  How  important,  then,  that  we  should  sow 
well,  that  our  aims  should  be  right,  that  we  should  lay  up  the  opportimity  and 
live  crowded  hours.  First,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  we  are  all  sowing.  God  has  so" 
constituted  our  nature  that  we  must  sow.  Every  thought,  emotion,  motive,  is  a  • 
seed;  all  our  words  and  deeds  are  seeds  which  must  generate,  spring  up,  and  bear 
fruit  in  our  hearts  and  lives,  in  the  hearts  and  lives  of  others,  in  time  and  in 
eternity.  Our  present  characters  are  the  harvests  of  seeds  sown  in  the  past  of 
our  livee.  The  seed  we  are  sowing  is  imperishable.  Be  the  winds  ever  so  high, 
be  the  frosts  ever  so  severe,  germinate  and  spring  up  the  seed  must.  Outward 
circumstances  may  hasten  or  check  the  growth,  but  cannot  kill  the  seed.  Like  the 
man  who  scatters  it,  it  is  immortal.  I.  Sow  in  the  morning  foe  yous  intbllectuai. 
ADVANTAGB.  "  My  mind  to  me  a  kingdom  is,"  sang  Edward  Dyer,  the  friend  of 
Bir  Philip  Sidney.  But  what  if  that  kingdom  is  enveloped  in  darkness,  or  peopled 
with  undisciplined,  not  to  speak  of  evU,  thoughts,  the  home  of  the  crude,  the 
distorted,  the  perverted  and  perverting  in  knowledge?  The  kingdom  of  the  mind, 
to  bring  joy  to  its  king,  need  be  luminous  with  knowledge,  peopled  with  wise  and 
pure  thoughts,  the  home  of  virtue,  beauty,  and  order — a  kingdom  in  which  are 
reaped  and  sown  harvest  after  harvest  of  sound  attainment  and  discreet  dissemina- 
tion as  life  advances.  I  need  hardly  say  that  one  of  the  best  instruments  of  manly 
cultmre  is  reading.  Young  people  should  make  companions  of  wise  and  good 
books.  Read  books  that  have  in  them,  if  I  may  so  speak,  mountains  of  strength, 
and  gardens  of  beauty,  and  wide  cornfields  of  knowledge,  and  fruits  of  ripe  wisdom; 
books  through  which  blow  winds  of  purity,  and  whose  pages  are  bright  with 
sunshine  of  unstained  joys.  Thus  will  you  be  sowing  in  the  morning  the  seed  of 
a  harvest  of  true  satisfaction.  Some  young  people  begrudge  the  time  and  pains 
which  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  demands.  II.  Sow  in  the  morning  thb  bbed  ot 
MOBLB  MANHOOD  AND  WOMANHOOD.  It  has  been  asserted  that  "  the  cardinal 
elements  of  national  greatness  are  robust  character,  independent  personality,  and 
sincere  religiousness."  May  not  the  same  be  said  of  individuals?  Noble  char- 
acter is  the  supreme  good.  "Without  character  even  earthly  knowledge  is  a  vain 
possession  in  view  of  the  highest  ends  of  life,  is  only  a  phantasm  of  the  brain,  • 
fugitive  mirage,  whose  illusive  tropical  gardens  turn  to  dry  sand.  Without  it, 
material  prosperity  is  the  soul's  deadly  snare.  Let  me  say,  in  what  may  seem  a 
commonplace  remark,  that  you  must  begin  to  sow  it  in  repentance  towards  God 
and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  are  the  seeds  of  the  new  life  in  the 
soul.  Prayer,  humility,  courage,  self-control,  and  kindness  are  precious  seeds. 
Scatter  them  with  no  miserly  hand.  Oh,  sow  for  character.  It  is  of  all  precious 
things  the  most  precious — ^the  diamond  among  jewels,  the  rose  among  flowers, 
the  throne  in  the  kingdom  of  man's  possessions.  For  value,  for  beauty,  for  service, 
lor  command,  it  is  the  one  thing  needful.  Keep  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  before  you. 
He  is  your  ideal  as  well  as  yoiur  Saviour.  Self -surrender,  faith,  love,  righteous 
living  and  good  companionship  will  lead  on  to  likeness  to  Him.  III.  Sow  in  the 
morning  thb  seed  of  usefulness.  The  morning  is  your  opportunity,  a  magnificent 
opportimity,  while  it  lasts.  Soon  manhood  and  womanhood,  with  the  cares  of 
life,  and  the  claims  of  lawful  duties,  will  overtake  you.  Then  there  will  be  little 
time  to  give  to  the  specific  task  of  scattering  the  seed  of  saving  truth.  Fill  the 
morning  hours  with  labour.  Let  pleasure  wait,  or  be  you  content  with  such  joys 
as  God  gives  the  husbandman ;  not  the  artificial  joys  of  the  crowded  resorts  of  the 
world's  pleasmres,  but  natural  joys  that  are  well  symbolized  by  the  babble  of  the 
brook  and  the  skylark's  song.  You  cannot  fling  abroad  a  handful  of  seed,  you 
cannot  speak  a  loving  word  for  your  Master,  or  do  a  serviceable  deed  without 
unsealing  in  your  own  heart  a  fountain  of  gladness.     Oh,  the  world  needs  you. 


CHAT.  XI.]  ECCLESIASTES.  279 

Give  yourselves  to  it.  Bestow  on  it  your  hopefulness  and  brightness,  your  purity 
and  tenderness,  your  best  thought  and  effort.  If  any  here  are  using  the  morning 
to  sow  evil  seed,  pause.  Kemember,  if  you  sow  the  wind,  you  will  reap  the 
whirlwind.  (R.  G.  Cowell.)  Thou  knowest  not  whether  shall  prosper,  either  this 
or  that. — Magnificent  failures: — Every  one  must  have  been  impressed  with  the 
curious  fact  that  Columbus  failed  in  most  of  the  things  that  he  tried  for.  He  made 
a  bad  mistake  at  first  in  his  reckonings.  He  never  knew  that  he  had  not  reached 
Asia.  He  looked  for  gold  and  wealth,  but  he  died  in  poverty.  Except  that  ha 
proved  that  the  earth  was  round,  which  had  already  been  satisfactorily  proved, 
everything  tiu-ned  out  differently  from  what  he  thought.  And  yet  we  celebrate 
him  as  though  he  had  completely  succeeded.  There  is  a  certain  kind  of  mag- 
nificent failure  that  takes  hold  of  our  imagiaation  and  sympathy  even  more 
effectively  than  unqualified  success.  The  most  thrilling  episodes  in  history  are 
stories  like  that  of  Columbus — of  men  who  essayed  vast  endeavoiu:s,  and,  after 
all,  proved  to  have  done  something  vastly  more  important  and  other  than  they 
expected.  The  Protestant  Reformation  is  such  a  story  of  magnificent  failure. 
Nothing  is  more  pathetic  than  the  last  weary  year  of  Luther's  life,  or  the  brave 
Zwingli  dying  in  battle.  The  reformers  had  set  out  only  to  go  a  little  way,  to 
reform  certain  abuses  and  to  correct  a  few  errors.  But  they  stirred  up  faction 
and  war,  they  divided  Germany,  they  let  loose  all  manner  of  free  thought.  A 
hundred  years  after  Luther  the  Eeformation  in  Germany  still  looked  like  a  failure. 
Now  at  last  we  enjoy  what  they  only  began  to  set  in  movement.  The  incoming 
religion  is  nobler,  sunnier,  more  philosophical,  more  comprehensive  than  the 
reformers  would  have  dared  to  accept.  The  story  of  the  famous  Savonarola  ii 
equally  instructive.  He  did  not  save  Florence.  He  could  not  work  miracles. 
His  visions  did  not  come  true.  They  put  him  to  death  like  his  Master.  But  the 
great  world  took  up  the  holy  impulse  of  his  life;  and  his  name,  his  passion  for 
justice,  his  instinct  for  purity,  passed  over  out  of  flames — a  vitalizing  spirit — into 
the  infinite  stream  of  our  human  destiny.  One  leaps  at  once,  without  citing  other 
examples,  to  the  great  primitive  Christ  story.  The  story  of  Jesus  is  that  of  the 
most  magnificent  failure.  As  far  as  the  records  go,  it  seems  clear  that  JesuA 
and  His  followers  alike  looked  for  what  did  not  come.  The  glorious  new  kingdom 
of  the  sons  of  God  was  not  ushered  in  before  that  generation  passed  away.  The 
Son  of  Man  did  not  appear  in  the  skies.  The  good  still  suffered,  the  wicked  and 
oppressors  were  not  oast  out.  Nevertheless,  we  see  that  no  one  in  Jesus'  place 
could  have  done  more.  No  one  ever  had  such  magnificent  success.  We  see  the 
brotherly  spirit  which  possessed  Jesus  going  into  all  the  world,  even  beyond 
where  Hie  name  goes,  slowly  but  surely  banishing  the  ancient  hate,  banding  men 
together,  turning  the  evil  into  good.  We  believe  that,  if  Jesus  could  see  the  travail 
of  His  soul,  he  would  be  satisfied.  In  the  story  of  Columbus  we  distinguish  two 
elements  working  out  the  events  of  his  life.  He  was  right,  on  the  whole,  in  the 
great  main  issue;  namely,  that,  the  earth  being  round,  one  voyaging  west  would 
find  land,  and,  going  far  enough,  the  continent  of  Asia.  All  his  greatness  and 
success  came  of  his  following  a  great  truth.  But  Columbus  was  mistaken  by 
thousands  of  miles  in  all  the  details  of  his  geography.  His  maps  were  drawn  by 
guess-work,  not  from  facts.  This  is  typical  of  what  has  happened  in  all  the 
pathetic  tragedies.  Thus  Luther,  brave  as  he  was,  only  partly  succeeded.  His 
maps  and  charts,  like  Columbus,  were  not  correct.  The  facts  about  this  world  by 
which  to  draw  the  maps  in  religion  were  not  yet  in.  And  the  early  Church,  too, 
was  right  in  its  main  direction.  It  started  out  toward  the  goal  of  a  world  religion. 
It  was  right  to  proclaim  a  good  God  and  a  righteous  world,  a  gospel  of  faith  and 
hope.  But  the  noblest  soul  that  ever  sailed  the  sea  of  life  had  to  work  from 
the  old  charts.  The  unknown  spaces  of  this  world  were  a  chaos  of  strange  demon - 
ology.  This  had  not  yet  been  discovered  to  be  a  universe.  Hence  disasters  and 
shipwrecks  even  to  those  who  rightly  sailed  west.  Here  we  stand  to-day  confront- 
ing pressing  questions  of  social  and  political  administration.  How  can  we  most 
fairly  orgtinize  society  and  humanize  the  relations  of  employers  and  the  employed? 
Or  take  the  gigantic  question  of  the  control  of  the  drink  trafBc  and  the  care  of 
the  intemperate.  Good  and  earnest  men  are  conscientiously  divided  over  these 
questions.  It  is  possible  to-day  that  men  are  setting  out  from  their  Palos,  and 
sailing  west  to  find  the  distant  lands  of  light.  But  others  are  also  sailing,  like 
Vasco  da  Gama,  another  and  seemingly  opposite  course.  It  is  possible  that  the 
men  of  neither  expedition  will  find  exactly  what  they  look  for.  It  is  possible 
to-day  that  the  bravest  and  noblest  may  be  mistaken  in  their  estimates  of  the 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ri. 

oontenta  of  the  seat  into  which  humanity  sails.  Ah,  w*  should  be  glad  to  know 
that  the  course  was  so  short  and  the  route  so  simple  and  straight  as  some  of 
our  friends  believe!  It  may  prove  again  that  the  world  is  larger  and  more  capes 
must  be  rounded  than  are  down  on  the  present  maps.  I  find  everywhere  that 
progress  is  a  resultant  of  many  forces  and  the  impulse  of  many  men.  I  find  that 
•U  misunderstanding,  narrowness,  prejudice,  and  bitterness,  lack  of  faith  in  Qod 
or  man,  on  the  part  of  any  of  us,  is  always  so  far  a  waste.  But  I  find  more 
notably  yet  that,  though  particular  methods  fail,  no  earnest  work  goes  quite  to 
waste,  that  all  is  taken  up  in  the  final  readjustment.  Every  movement  that  has 
the  true  sailing  direction — ^nay,  even  the  mishaps  and  wrecks,  so  be  they  lie 
toward  the  land  whither  we  sail — at  last  serve  the  world's  fleet  of  discovery. 
Vasoo  da  Gama  and  Columbus  each  proved  to  help,  and  moved  at  last  toward  each 
other.  It  does  not  trouble  me,  therefore,  that  the  good  and  wise  differ,  while 
yet  we  are  only  making  maps.  For  this  is  to  live  in  a  world  that  moves  and 
grows.  It  is  to  be  learners  and  seekers  of  truth.  It  is  to  be  ehildren  here  that  we 
may  be  sons  of  Ood  by  and  by.     (0.  P,  Dole.) 

Yer.  7.  Truly  the  light  is  nreet.— Th0  tw»et  Ught  of  Ufe:— The  light  of  the  sun 
is  at  all  times  sweet  and  pleasant.  Glorious  orbi  His  beams  not  only  reveal,'- 
but  create  ten  thousand  foims  of  beauty,  that  lift  the  soul  to  its  highest  moods  of 
thought  and  admiration.  But  there  are  other  lights  in  life  which  are  very 
**  sweet."  I.  There  is  the  "  light  "  of  an  amiable  tehpeb.  A  countenance  beam- 
ing with  good  nature  has  often  dispelled  the  gloom  of  a  disheartened  man  and 
earned  sunshine  into  his  heart.  Some  are  amiable  by  nature,  all  can  be  amiable 
by  cultivation.  II.  There  is  the  "  light "  of  a  noblb  ohabacteb.  Christ  said  of 
His  disciples,  "  Ye  are  the  lights  of  the  world,"  and  truly  he  whose  motives 
are  disinterested,  whose  honesty  is  incorruptible,  whose  spurit  and  aims  are 
Christly,  is  "  light  "  indeed,  a  "  sweet  light."  A  light  that  animates,  cheers,  and 
refreshes  the  observer.  III.  There  is  the  "  light  "  of  good  fellowship.  As  social 
beings  we  are  wondrously  influenced  by  the  character  of  the  circle  in  which  we 
move.  By  good  fellowship  is  not  meant  the  fellowship  of  the  wealthy,  the  fashion- 
able,  and  the  gay;  but  the  society  of  men,  the  fountains  of  whose  nature  are 
pure,  the  thoughts  of  whose  minds  are  fresh,  true,  and  exhilarating,  in  whose 
conversation  there  flows  ideas  to  enlighten,  and  humour  to  charm.  IV.  There  is 
the  "  light  "  of  BEDEMPTivi  TBUTB.  This  is  the  best  of  all  the  lights.  A  light  this 
that  not  only  scatters  moral  darkness,  and  makes  clear  God  and  His  universe, 
duty,  and  destiny,  but  quickens  with  the  highest  life  all  the  faculties  of  the  soul, 
and  brings  them  out  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  will.  It  is  what  Paul  calls  a 
"marvellous  light."  {Homili$t.)  The  aweetnett  of  light: — Sweetness  of  almost 
every  kind  is  an  evidence  of  the  Divine  goodness.  The  fragrance  of  flowers,  and 
of  many  plants  and  shrubs,  is  grateful  to  the  smell;  music  is  sweet  to  the  ear; 
the  whispering  of  the  gentle  breeze,  and  the  murmuring  of  the  purling  stream,  are 
■oft  and  soothing  to  the  soul;  and  specially  sweet  is  the  prattle  of  our  children,  the 
conversation  of  our  friends,  and  the  voice  of  the  preacher  in  the  house  of  God. 
And  our  sight,  which  Addison  justly  described  as  "  the  most  perfect  and  delightful 
of  all  our  senses,"  has  a  imiverse  of  enjoyment  peculiar  to  itself;  and  as  all  the 
pleasures  of  vision  are  dependent  on  light,  and  to  a  great  extent  on  solar  light,  it 
may  be  emphatically  said,  in  the  language  of  the  text,  "  Truly  the  light  is  sweet," 
etc.  I.  Artificial  light.  Were  the  world  to  be  henceforth  deprived  of  this, 
how  large  a  curtailment  of  human  comfort,  industry,  commerce,  study,  and  even 
divine  worship,  would  be  thereby  occasioned  through  the  half  of  every  year  I 
The  tiny  taper  in  the  widow's  cottage  is  not  only  essential  to  her  toil,  but  also 
the  companion  of  her  solitude.  The  floating  light  in  the  chamber  of  the  iuvalid 
cheers  his  solitary  midnight  hours.  The  sight  of  the  lighthouse  is  always  grateful 
to  the  imperilled  mariner.  II.  Natueal  light.  1.  Light  is  sweet  in  itself.  It  is 
so  admirably  adapted,  not  only  to  our  organs  of  vision,  but  also  to  the  whole  of 
our  nervous  system  as  to  be  the  source  of  no  small  part  of  the  pleasures  we  enjoy. 
2.  Light  is  sweet  on  account  of  the  manifold  and  varied  beauties,  magnificence,  and 
grandeur  which  it  imveils  to  us.  8.  Light  is  sweet  on  accoimt  of  the  cheerfulness 
and  confidence  which  it  inspires.  Gloom  and  dread  are  usually  spirits  of  darkness. 
Though  we  are  sometimes  afraid  of  things  we  see,  we  are  far  more  frequently 
afraid  of  what  we  merely  imagine.  Hence  fear  often  vanishes  at  the  dawn  of  day. 
This  is  one  reason  why  light  is  conducive  to  health  and  length  of  life.  Inspired 
penmen  frequently  associate  death  with  darkness  (Job  iii.  5;  z.  21,  22j  Ps.  xxiii.  4; 


«HAP.  XI.]  ECCLESIASTES.  281 


xlix.  19;  IxirdH.  12;  Jer.  xiii.  16);  light  with  life  (Job  xxxiii.  28,  80;  Ps.  IvL  18; 
Eooles.  TU.  11).  III.  Intellectual  light.  This  light  irradiates  the  chambers  oi 
the  soul,  and  thus  enables  reason  to  perform  her  high  and  important  fimctiona. 
It  shines  upon  the  balance-beam  of  judgment,  and  thus  enables  us  correctly  to 
decide.  By  the  aid  of  this  light  we  hourly  gather  up  ideas  from  without,  and 
■tore,  and  arrange,  and  amplify,  and  compare,  and  compound,  and  contrast  them 
in  the  laboratory  of  our  souls.  It  is  this  light  which  illumines  the  closet  of 
memory,  and  thus  enables  us  to  review  the  bygone,  recall  the  past,  and  revivify 
the  dead.  This  light  enables  us  to  anticipate  the  future,  and  thus  originates  and 
sustains  hope  within  our  bosoms.  To  this  light,  too,  we  are  indebted  for  the 
power  of  being  able  rationally  to  love,  and  thus  to  partake  the  sweetness  of  social 
converse  and  domestic  joy.  In  all  these,  and  in  numerous  other  ways,  it  is  a 
source  of  blessedness  to  us.  IV.  Sobiptdsal  light.  "  The  commandment  is  a 
lamp,  and  the  law  is  light."  "Thy  Word  is  a  lamp  unto  my  feet,  and  a  light 
unto  my  path."  By  this  light  we  discern  our  characters  and  their  shortcomings; 
our  hearts  and  their  desperate  wickedness;  our  sad  deserts  and  our  terrific 
prospects.  But  it  does  not  leave  mb  thus.  It  shows  us  God,  too;  not  merely  as 
the  God  of  holiness  and  justice,  but  also  as  the  God  of  mercy,  grace,  and  love, 
who  is  ready  to  pardon  our  transgressions,  receive  us  graciously,  and  love  us  freely. 
Moreover,  it  shows  us  Christ  as  the  brightness  of  His  Father's  glory,  God  over 
all,  blessed  for  ever.  It  shows  us  the  power  and  willingness  of  the  Eternal  Spirit 
to  enlighten  our  minds,  regenerate  oiur  hearts,  and  sanctify  and  save  our  souls. 
It  also  shows  us  the  world  in  its  vanity  and  vexatiousness,  its  sinfulness  and  its 
sorrows ;  and  it  shows  us  heaven  in  its  holiness  and  love,  its  glory  and  its  blessed* 
sees.  Truly  this  light  is  sweet,  and  a  pleasant  thing  it  is  thus  to  behold  the  Lord 
Ood  as  our  stin  and  shield.  And  there  are  times  in  the  experience  of  every 
Christian  when  this  light  has  special  sweetness.  1.  When  we  first  derive  therefrom 
s  soul-gladdening  hope  of  salvation.  2.  When  we  find  its  directions  specially 
suited  to  our  circumstances.  8.  When  we  find  its  promises  specially  suited  to  our 
wants.  4.  When  we  are  thereby  enabled  to  obtain  soul-reviving  views  of  God,  of 
Christ,  of  providence,  of  the  future  of  the  Church's  history,  and  of  heaven  at  last. 
Y.  Spibitdal  light.  The  same  Divine  Spirit  who  enkindled  the  lamp  of  revela- 
tion for  us  by  the  agency  of  His  inspired  servants  has  imparted  to  us  spiritual 
light  by  the  operation  of  Hia  grace.  It  is  sweet — 1.  On  account  of  the  discoveries 
it  makes  to  us.  It  shows  us  ourselves.  It  shows  what  monuments  of  Divine 
forbearance  we  have  been.  It  shows  us  the  way  to  the  throne  of  grace.  It  reveals 
to  us  the  way  of  acceptance  with  God.  2.  On  account  of  the  transforming  influ- 
ence it  exerts.  By  the  light  of  heaven  the  sick  are  often  restored  to  health,  and 
the  feeble  frequently  made  strong.  So  by  the  light  of  grace  the  sinner's  soul  is 
renovated,  strengthened,  sanctified,  and  saved.  VI.  Eternal  ught.  Heaven  is 
emphatically  termed,  "  The  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light."  "  There  shall  bo 
so  night  there."  In  closing  we  remark — 1.  How  abundant,  how  varied,  how 
precious,  how  suitable,  and  how  gratuitous  are  God's  bestowments.  2.  We  learn 
why  it  is  that  sinners  hate  Christ  and  His  Gospel,  the  Bible  and  its  teachings 
(John  iii.  19,  20).  But  surely  this  must  enhance  their  guilt,  and  will  aggravate 
their  doom.  8.  This  subject  will  enable  us  to  account  for  much  of  the  darkness 
and  distress  of  soul  in  which  even  true  believers  are  at  times  involved.  We  wander 
from  the  light,  or  are  too  distant  from  it  to  derive  the  full  pleasure  and  advantage 
which  it  is  designed  and  adapted  to  impart.  4.  It  assures  us  that  personal  religion 
b  a  truly  blessed  thing.  Our  sorrows  and  our  gloom  are  to  a  great  extent  the 
result  of  our  shortcomings;  but  the  light  of  grace  is  "  truly  sweet."  6.  It  shows 
the  necessity  of  faith.  That  which  sight  is  to  the  body,  faith  is  to  the  soul.  Light 
may  be  aroimd  us  in  all  its  beauty  and  effulgence,  but  without  the  power  of 
▼ision  we  can  make  no  discoveries  thereby.  6.  Be  thankful  for  the  light.  7.  Pity 
thoas  who  are  in  darkness.  Many  such  are  around  you ;  millions  are  in  other  lands. 
Carry  the  light  to  all  you  can;  send  it  to  those  to  whom  you  cannot  go.  Above  all, 
pray  God  to  "  send  out  His  light  and  His  truth,"  that  the  light  of  His  revealed 
will  may  be  universally  diffused,  ths  light  of  His  grace  universally  enjoyed. 
'^J.  J$nkin$on.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  Eeioice,  0  young  man,  in  thy  youth.— Joy  ami  judgment:— Our 
ftranslators  have  slipped  in  a  "  but "  where  there  ought  to  be  an  "  and,"  and 
bavB  thus  made  the  Preacher  set  the  joy  of  youth  and  the  judgment  of  God  over 
Ikgainst  each  other :  whereas,  in  fact,  the  judgment  is  put  as  part  of  the  rejoicing : 


S82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

"  Bejoioe  in  thy  youth;  and  know  that,  respecting  all  these,  God  will  bring  thee 
into  judgment."  Let  us  look  at  the  two  parts  of  the  text  separately — joy  and 
judgment;  and  then  we  shall  see  how  they  fit  into  each  other,  and  are  parts  of 
one  great  truth.  "  Rejoice,  0  young  man,  in  thy  youth;  and  let  thy  heart  cheer 
thee  in  thy  youthful  days,  and  pursue  the  ways  of  thine  heart,  and  the  things 
which  are  seen  by  the  eyes."  We  are  not  listening  to  a  Christian  moralist: 
nevertheless,  the  sentiment  is  Christian.  Childhood  and  youth,  or  youth  and 
manhood,  are  fleeting;  therefore,  "Banish  sorrow  from  thy  mind,  and  put  away 
Badness  from  thy  body."  He  evidently  does  not  think  that  the  brevity  and 
transitorlness  of  a  thing  is  a  reason  for  despising  it.  Neither  do  you  and  I,  when 
we  deal  with  ordinary  matters.  The  rose  which  you  pluck  in  the  morning  withers 
before  the  next  morning,  but  you  delight  yourself  with  its  colomr  and  perfume  none 
the  less  while  it  lasts.  Youth  and  fresh  manhood  are  things  only  of  a  few  years; 
but  their  brevity  is,  to  the  Preacher,  the  reason  why  they  should  be  enjoyed. 
*'  Bemember  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth."  Youth  is  pointed  back  to 
his  creation.  What  stamp  did  the  Creator  set  upon  it?  What  provision  did  Ha 
make  for  youth?  What  did  He  mean  youth  to  be?  Obedient,  reverent,  pure, 
diligent — all  that  certainly;  yet  as  certainly  fresh,  joyous,  vigorous.  A  joyless 
youth  is  as  imnatural  as  ice  in  August :  "  Eejoice,  0  yoimg  man,  in  thy  youth." 
It  may  be  said,  "  At  any  rate,  this  aspect  of  the  truth  does  not  need  pressing  in 
our  day,  and  it  were  better  to  warn  youth  against  the  coming  judgment."  And  it 
Beems  to  be  assumed,  moreover,  that  there  is  an  antagonism  between  these  two 
ideas  of  joy  and  judgment;  that  the  thought  of  judgment  is  enough  of  itself  to 
quench  all  rejoicing  in  youth.  But  the  peculiarity  of  our  text  is,  that  it  reject* 
this  antagonism,  and  makes  this  coming  judgment  a  cause  of  rejoicing — a  stimu- 
lant of  the  joy  of  youth  as  well  as  a  warning :  "  Bejoice,  and  know  that  God  will 
bring  thee  into  judgment.  Banish,  therefore,  sorrow  from  thy  mind,  and  put  away 
Badness  from  thy  body."  Whenever  this  book  may  have  been  written,  we  find  in 
it  numerous  allusions  to  a  state  of  society  which  give  these  words  about  a  future 
judgment  a  peculiar  meaning  and  force;  for  the  book  depicts  a  society  imder  a 
capricious  despotism,  with  all  its  corruptions  and  miseries.  And  as  the  book 
reveals  this  fearful  social  condition,  so,  likewise,  it  gives  expression  to  the 
temper  which  grows  up  in  men's  minds  after  a  long  course  of  such  oppressions — 
a  kind  of  fatalism  and  hopelessness  which  tempts  one  to  yield  passively  to  the 
current  of  affairs;  to  believe  that  God  has  ceased  to  rule,  and  that  order  and  right 
bave  vanished  from  the  world;  to  snatch  at  every  pleasmre;  to  drown  care  in 
Bensuality  rather  than  try  to  maintain  an  integrity  which  is  siu-e  to  be  rewarded 
with  personal  and  social  ruin.  That  kind  of  temper,  il  it  once  gained  headway, 
would  affect  all  classes  and  ages.  In  the  nobler  and  better-seasoned  characters 
it  would  become  a  proud  despair;  in  vulgar  minds  a  bestial  greed,  and  an  untram- 
melled selfishness;  in  youth  a  prompter  to  unbounded  sensuality.  You  can  see, 
therefore,  what  a  powerful  antidote  to  this  temper  would  be  furnished  by  the  truth 
of  a  futmre  judgment.  One  can  afford  to  be  cheerful,  even  amid  oppressions  and 
troubles  like  these,  if  the  time  is  short,  and  a  day  coming  in  which  wrong  shall 
be  righted,  and  worth  acknowledged  and  fidelity  rewarded.  The  judgment  is  a 
fact  which  confronts  us  ae  Christians — a  fact  emphasized  by  the  words  of  Christ 
end  of  the  apostles,  and  still  further  emphasized  by  the  relation  in  which  Christ 
puts  Himself  to  it  as  the  Judge  of  all  men.  And  the  attitude  of  even  our 
Christian  thought  towards  it  is  largely  that  of  terror  and  apprehension.  The 
element  of  solemnity  must,  in  any  case,  dominate  our  thought  of  the  last  day.  It 
cannot  be  other  than  a  serious  matter  to  appear  before  our  Creator,  and  to  give 
an  account  of  the  deeds  done  in  the  body.  And  assuredly  it  will  be  a  day  of  wrath 
to  rebels  against  God  and  to  rejecters  of  Christ.  But,  withal,  the  truth  has 
another  side.  It  is  not  mere  fancy  which  sees  in  the  Judgment  Day  a  day  of 
consolation  as  well  as  of  wrath.  The  Mediator  is  the  Judge,  and  the  blood  of 
sprinkling  has  taken  the  terror  out  of  judgment.  Why,  then,  should  a  man, 
young  or  old,  have  the  work  or  the  pleasure  peculiar  to  his  age  and  circumstances 
clouded  by  the  anticipation  of  judgment?  Why  may  not  the  young  man  lawfully 
rejoice  in  his  youth,  provided  he  remembers  his  Creator?  The  mistake  is  in 
divorcing  the  Creator  and  Judge  from  the  joy  of  life;  whereas,  God  is  the  true 
joy  of  life.  Whence  come  the  pure  pleasures  of  youth — its  hopefulness,  its 
energy,  its  mirth,  its  sense  of  beauty?  Do  they  not  come  from  God?  Is  He 
not  the  Creator  of  these  as  well  as  of  bone  and  muscle?  And  if  these  gifts  are 
recognized  as  God's,  are  they  not  at  once  sweetened,  and  guarded  against  abuB»- 


CHAP.  M.]  ECCLESIASTES.  283 

by  that  very  fact?  ChriBt  tells  us  that  one  office  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  "  con« 
viuce  of  judgment  ";  that  is,  to  show  men  clearly  that  all  sin  deserves  and  will 
receive  the  judgment  of  God.  Is  it  not,  then,  a  cause  of  rejoicing  that  Ood 
guards  our  pleasures  against  abuse,  that  He  teaches  us  what  true  pleasure  is,  that 
He  sets  up  a  sign  marked  "  judgment  "  at  the  border-line  of  excess?  Is  it  not  a 
real  cause  of  rejoicing  that  God  restrains  us  from  incurring  the  judgment  of  sin? 
Can  that  be  real  pleasure  which  ends  in  rebuke  and  punishment?  And,  therefore, 
when  we  recognize  our  legitimate  pleasures  as  God's  gift,  our  joy  in  them  is 
heightened.  We  may  enjoy  without  fear.  God  will  not  condemn  what  Himself 
has  ordained  and  created;  and  when  we  look  forward  to  the  great  judgment,  ths 
eternal  life  beyond,  these  very  pleasures  take  on  a  prophetic  character.  They 
are  foretastes,  earnests  of  something  better  beyond.  The  pleasure  at  His  right 
hand  here  promises  fulness  of  joy  at  His  right  hand  for  evermore.  (Af .  R.  Vineenif 
D.D.)  Advice  to  youth: — It  ie  in  this  healthy,  bracing  tone,  it  is  in  these  worda 
of  manly  wisdom,  that  the  Preacher  brings  to  a  close  the  volume  of  his  confessions. 
His  tone  has  not  always  been  thus  bright  and  hopeful.  It  has  sometimes  beea 
melancholy,  cynical,  sceptical,  all  but  despairing.  Bitterness,  disappointment, 
vanity,  these  had  been  the  burden  of  his  book.  But  he  has  learnt  by  God'i 
discipline  the  true  wisdom,  and  he  gives  you  the  benefit  of  his  experience.  Tha 
book  is  that  most  touching  of  all  autobiographies,  the  autobiography  of  a  heart. 
The  Preacher  is  a  layman  and  an  accomplished  man  of  the  world.  This  is  no  sour 
moralist  of  the  schools,  who  condemns  the  vices  to  which  he  has  felt  no  tempta* 
tion,  or  who  looks  askance  with  an  eye  of  something  like  half  regret  at  th« 
pleasures  on  which  he  frowns  or  the  follies  at  which  he  sneers.  Nor  is  he  tha 
stern  ascetic  who  can  make  no  allowance  for  human  frailty  and  bids  you  crush 
with  hand  of  iron  the  uprisings  of  human  passion.  Nor,  again,  is  he,  on  the  other 
hand,  merely  the  sated  voluptuary,  who  has  drained  the  cup  of  pleasure  to  tha 
dregs,  and  who,  tired  and  disgusted  with  his  own  excesses,  now  with  enfeebled 
frame  and  jaded  appetite  pronounces  the  mournful  condemnation  of  his  former  self. 
He  is  the  calm,  prudent,  philosophical  man  of  the  world.  Such  is  the  man. 
What  is  his  teaching?  What  does  this  wise  man,  this  man  of  knowledge  and 
experience  say,  as,  looking  back  at  the  end  of  the  years,  he  sees  others  setting  out 
on  the  voyage  of  life?  How  does  he  address  the  young?  "  Eejoice,  0  young 
man,  in  thy  youth."  This  is  not,  as  some  would  persuade  us,  the  language  of 
cynical  scorn.  The  Preacher  does  not  hold  up  to  you  the  empty  shrivelled  mask 
of  the  world  that  he  may  mock  your  joy.  He  does  not  take  off  the  kingly  crown 
and  the  robe  of  pride  and  show  you  the  grinning  death's  head  and  the  ghastly 
skeleton  beneath,  and  bid  you  rejoice  if  you  can.  He  means  what  He  says. 
There  is  the  full  sympathy  with  youth.  He  would  not  teach  you  else.  This  is 
the  secret  of  all  true  teaching.  You  can  never  win  others  if  you  are  not  in 
sympathy  with  them.  Your  words  may  be  wise  and  weighty;  but  they  will  not 
influence  men  unless  you  can  make  them  feel  that  you  and  they  have  something 
in  common.  And  above  all  this  is  true  with  the  young.  How  often  the  austere 
voice  of  age  chills  and  repels  the  youthful  heart.  It  has  bright  visions,  golden 
dreams,  a  future  which  seems  boundless.  It  has  no  patience  with  your  stern 
maxims  and  your  cold  preaching  about  duty.  But  go  to  it  as  the  Preacher  goes 
in  this  book,  go  to  it  with  the  frank  sympathy  and  the  affectionate  voice  which 
says,  Rejoice,  0  young  man,  in  thy  youth.  Be  happy  in  youth,  for  not  to  be 
happy  now  would  be  to  despise  one  of  God's  best  gifts  of  love.  But  will  you  go 
with  him  a  step  further?  How  would  he  ensure  you  this  blessed  gift  of  gladness 
and  innocent  mirth?  How  would  he  keep  your  heart  fresh  through  all  the 
coming  years?  By  casting  over  it  the  shadow  of  judgment  and  the  fear  of  God. 
"  Walk  in  the  way  of  thine  heart  and  in  the  sight  of  thine  eyes,  but  know  that  for 
all  these  things  God  will  bring  thee  into  judgment.  Remove  sorrow  from  thy 
heart,  and  put  away  evil  from  thy  flesh,  for  (without  God)  childhood  and  youth 
are  vanity."  "  Know  that  for  all  these  things  God  will  bring  thee  into  judgment. 
Remember  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth."  He  wants  to  see  you  happy. 
He  wants  you  to  put  away  sorrow  from  your  heart  and  evil  from  your  flesh.  He 
wants  you  to  spare  yourself  the  misery  of  a  wasted  life,  of  an  accusing  conscience, 
of  bitter,  abiding  remorse.  That  is  why  he  says  to  you.  Know  that  for  all  these 
things  God  will  bring  thee  into  judgment.  That  is  why  he  bids  you  remember 
your  Creator.  It  is  not  to  deny  you  one  innocent  pleasure,  it  is  not  to  make  you 
gloomy,  misanthropic,  unsociable.  It  is  to  lead  you  to  carry  everywhere  with 
jrou  the  thought  of  a  love  which  shall  be  as  music  in  your  hearts,   whatever 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xs. 


labour  may  be  given  you  and  whatever  sorrows  may  darken  your  path.  Thia  is  • 
very  simple  elementary  truth.  But  is  it  not  a  truth  that  is  too  much  forgotten? 
Do  we  not  need  to  make  this  the  fundamental  article  of  the  religious  teaching  of 
the  young?  Ought  we  not  to  endeavour  to  stamp  upon  their  hearts  that  old 
name  of  God,  Thou  God  seest  me?  It  is  the  appeal  to  the  conscience  before 
the  conscience  has  been  seared.  Will  you  still  say,  I  am  young,  let  me  enjoy 
myself,  there  is  time  enough  to  think  about  religion  by  and  by?  I  know  this  is  a 
common  delusion.  I  know  it  is  a  delusion  which  is  sometimes  fostered  by  per- 
nicious teaching.  I  do  not  limit  the  grace  of  God.  He  can  change  the  heart  of  a 
•inner  as  He  changed  that  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  or  of  the  robber  on  the  cross.  But 
such  changes  are  the  exception.  And  they  at  least  had  not  known  the  truth  and 
wilfully  turned  their  backs  upon  the  truth.  And  even  if  He  should  give  you 
repentance,  how  bitter  will  it  be.  Think  of  the  evil  habits  to  be  overcome.  Think 
by  how  sharp  and  painful  a  process  all  those  thick  layers  of  evil  which  have 
gathered  upon  you  must  be  cut  away.  How  hard  it  is  to  begin  late  in  life  a  habit 
of  prayer,  a  habit  of  reading  the  Scriptures,  a  habit  of  self-examination,  a  habit 
of  self-denial  and  self-sacrifice.  If  we  would  have  a  pure  conscience  and  a  strong 
faith  and  a  clear  hope,  if  we  would  save  ourselves  from  bitter,  bitter  tears  and  a 
remorse  which  is  agony,  we  must  remember  our  Creator  in  the  days  of  our  youth. 
But  once  more  the  Preacher  enforces  his  counsel,  not  only  by  the  thought  of 
judgment  to  come,  but  by  the  melancholy  picture  of  an  old  age  which  can  find 
no  pleasure  in  earthly  things  and  has  no  God  to  turn  to.  The  Preacher  does  not 
threaten  you  with  a  short  term  of  years,  he  does  not  dwell  on  the  uncertainty  ol 
life.  He  knew  well  how  easy  it  is  to  put  away  such  a  thought,  how  ready  we  all 
are  to  admit  the  possibility  in  every  case  but  our  own.  He  grants  you  the  four- 
score years  you  expect  to  reach.  And  he  puts  before  you  the  picture  of  your  then 
self.  With  that  palsied  frame,  with  those  decaying  facultiee,  with  that  impaired 
vigour,  will  you  serve  God  better?  Or  when  your  whole  life  has  been  one  long 
forgetfulness  of  Him,  will  you  find  it  pleasant  to  remember  Him?  can  you  change 
all  at  once  the  cmrrent  of  your  thoughts  and  your  affections?  "Remember  I" 
How  that  word  checks  the  heedlessness  and  thoughtlessness  of  youth.  "  Remem- 
ber I"  And  to  you  that  word  comep  with  a  sweeter  and  more  solemn  sound. 
You  are  invited  to  remember  not  One  only  whose  power  fashioned  you,  but  One 
whose  love  redeemed  you.  (Bp.  Perowne.)  A  warning  to  youth: — Youths  have 
often  been  compared  to  trees  in  their  bloom;  but,  like  beautiful  and  promising 
blossoms,  they  often  disappoint  the  hopes  they  inspu'e.  It  depends  upon  the 
principles  they  imbibe,  and  the  coxirses  they  pm:sue,  whether  they  shall  or  shall 
not  be  blessings  to  their  parents,  to  their  friends,  and  to  their  fellow-creatures. 
I.  The  tedb  import  of  the  address  to  youth  in  the  text.  1.  Some  suppose 
that  Solomon  means  to  express  his  approbation  of  young  people  in  pursuing  the 
innocent  recreations  and  amusements  of  life.  They  consider  him  as  representing 
religion  as  not  only  free  from  austerity  and  gloominess,  but  as  productive  of  the 
purest  happiness  in  the  present  as  well  as  in  the  future  state.  And  he  often  doea 
paint  virtue  and  piety  in  this  amiable  and  beautiful  form  (Prov.  iii.  17 ;  Eccles. 
viii.  15;  ix.  7).  2.  This  does  not  appear  to  be  Solomon's  meaning  in  the  text. 
He  is  speaking  to  a  careless,  secure,  unsanctified  youth,  who  has  no  fear  of  God 
before  his  eyes.  It  is  therefore  beyond  a  doubt  that  he  means  to  speak  ironically, 
and  to  convey  an  idea  directly  contrary  to  what  his  words  literally  express.  But 
now  those  who  are  in  the  morning  of  life  may  be  ready  to  ask.  Why  should  the 
wise  man  give  us,  in  particular,  such  a  solemn  warning  to  live  and  act  under  a 
realizing  view  of  the  great  and  last  day?  Did  he  not  know  that  such  a  view  of 
future  and  eternal  realities  would  disturb  our  peace  and  destroy  all  our  pleasing 
hopes  and  prospects?  Why  did  he  not  make  this  address  to  the  aged,  who  have 
gone  through  the  busy  scenes  of  life,  and  are  just  ready  to  appear  before  the 
supreme  tribunal  of  theu:  final  Judge?  II.  To  convince  you  who  are  ready  to 
think  and  speak  in  this  manner,  of  the  peopriett  of  the  wise  man's  address, 
and  of  the  importance  of  your  living  in  a  constant  preparation  for  your  final 
account,  I  will  suggest  the  following  things  to  your  most  serious  consideration. 
1.  Please  to  reflect  upon  your  hearts,  which  you  have  carried  about  with  you,  and 
which  you  have  found  to  be  extremely  corrupt  and  sinful.  Can  you  conceive  of 
any  safety  in  trusting  in  such  hearts,  which  you  have  found  have  so  often 
betrayed,  deceived,  and  well-nigh  ruined  you?  Can  you  set  any  bounds  to  your 
progress  in  sinning?  Is  there  any  evil  or  danger  to  which  you  are  not  exposed? 
Is  there  not,  then,  a  great  propriety  in  the  wise  man's  addressing  you  in  particular; 


CHAP.  XI.]  ECCLESIASTES.  285 

and  in  warning  you  not  to  walk  in  the  ways  of  your  hearts,  which  are  the  ways  to 
certain  and  endless  ruin?  2.  Consider  that  the  world  in  which  you  live,  and 
through  which  you  have  to  pass  to  your  long  home,  is  every  way  calculated  to 
corrupt  and  destroy  you.  (1)  The  things  of  the  world  are  full  of  poison,  and 
perfectly  suited  to  increase  and  draw  forth  the  native  corruption  of  your  hearts. 
(2)  Worldly  employments,  as  well  as  worldly  objects,  are  of  a  dangerous  and 
ensnaring  nature  to  your  hearts.  (3)  Besides,  you  are  in  no  less  danger  from  tha 
men  of  the  world  than  from  its  business  and  objects.  (4)  Farthermore,  the  god 
of  the  world  unites  with  the  men  of  the  world,  and  all  its  scenes  and  objects,  to 
lead  you  in  the  broad  road  to  ruin.  Do  you  not  need  the  admonition  in  the 
text;  and  all  other  friendly  admonitions  of  danger?  Can  any  thought  be  mora 
proper  to  lie  continually  on  your  minds  than  your  constant  exposedness  to  live  and 
die  impenitent?  3.  Bear  it  in  yom:  minds  that  you  are  now  in  a  state  of  trial, 
and  forming  your  characters  for  eternity.  4.  Kemember  that  God  not  only  may, 
but  must,  call  you  to  an  account  for  all  your  conduct  in  this  state  of  trial. 
6.  Consider  whether  your  hearts  can  endure,  or  your  hands  be  strong,  in  the  day 
that  God  shall  deal  with  you.  Improvement  :  1.  If  there  be  a  propriety  in  tha 
solemn  address  to  youth  in  the  text,  then  it  is  very  absurd  for  any  to  think  that 
young  people  in  particular  may  be  excused  for  neglecting  preparation  for  their 
futiure  and  eternal  state.  2.  If  there  be  a  propriety  in  the  solemn  address  to  youth 
in  the  text,  then  there  is  something  very  beautiful  and  amiable  in  becoming 
religious  early  in  life.  Piety  adorns  all  persons  who  possess  it;  but  it  shines  with 
peculiar  lustre  in  youth,  because  it  more  clearly  appears  to  be  the  effect  of  a 
change  of  heart  than  of  a  change  of  circumstances.  S.  If  there  be  a  propriety 
in  the  pathetic  address  to  the  youth  in  the  text,  then  there  is  a  peculiar  propriety 
in  young  persons  remembering  the  Sabbath  day  and  keeping  it  holy.  4.  If  it  ba 
proper  to  give  young  people  such  solemn  warnings  and  admonitions  as  Solomon 
does  in  the  text,  then  it  must  be  extremely  improper  to  provide  for  them  and 
allow  them  in  vain  and  sinful  amusements.  If  one  of  these  things  is  right,  then 
the  other  is  wrong.  6.  It  appears  in  the  view  of  this  subject  that  the  death  of 
young  people  is  a  very  solemn  and  interesting  event  to  the  living,  whether  they 
leave  the  world  prepared  or  unprepared.  (2V.  Emmona,  D.D.)  Youthful  plea- 
sures:— I.  Their  adthorization,  "  Kejoice,  0  young  man."  God  desires  the 
happiness  of  youth,  and  has  made  abundant  provision  for  it.  Cheerful  youth* 
hood  is  the  condition  of  a  healthy  and  vigorous  manhood.  II.  Their  moderation. 
*'  Know  thou."  Adam  in  his  innocence  had  a  limiting  law.  God  gives  vast  scope 
for  human  action  and  enjoyment;  but  not  unbounded.  1.  He  will  judge  you  at 
the  bar  of  yom:  own  experience.  The  young  man  who  gives  full  play  to  hia 
passions,  yields  himself  up  to  intemperance  and  self-indulgence,  will,  by  an 
immutable  law,  be  made  to  endure,  as  years  roll  on,  the  penalties  of  his  immodera* 
iion.  God  has  brought  him  to  judgment.  2.  He  will  judge  you  at  the  bar  of  your 
own  conscience.  (Homilist.)  Enow  thou  that  for  all  these  things  God  will 
bring  thee  into  judgment. — Remembrance  in  youth  of  judgment  to  come : — I.  Thb 
TRUB  INTERPRETATION  OP  THE  TEXT.  1.  It  has  been  Viewed  by  some  as  grave 
advice :  as  though  its  purport  were :  "  youth  is  the  time  for  gaiety  within  tha 
boxmd  of  moderation;  a  certain  decorum  attends  every  age;  there  is  a  becoming 
grace  and  spirit  in  the  gaiety  of  youth ;  let  it  be  indulged  only  in  consistency  with 
the  remembrance  of  God  and  judgment."  2.  But  to  this  interpretation  it  is 
objected  by  others  that  the  terms  used  are  too  broad  to  allow  of  this  passage  being 
applied  in  such  a  serious  meaning.  The  language  in  the  former  part  of  tha 
sentence  is  merely  ironical.  II.  Enforce  and  illustrate  this  solemn  warning. 
The  heart  of  youth,  if  it  goes  in  its  own  way,  must  go  in  a  way  full  of  moral 
disorder.  Even  if  disgrace  before  men  is  escaped,  there  will  be  infinity  of  evil 
before  God :  neglect  of  God,  of  prayer,  of  self-examination,  of  Scripture,  So 
much  ingratitude  and  apostasy  is  there  in  neglect  of  God  that  a  day  of  judgment 
is  appointed  for  its  punishment.  With  respect  to  this  judgment,  remember — 1.  Its 
extent.  "  All  these  things  "  are  involved  in  it.  2.  The  character  of  the  Judge. 
8.  The  severity  of  this  judgment.  4.  This  judgment  will  be  final  and  ultimate. 
6.  Its  certainty.  "  God  will  bring  thee  into  judgment."  Heaven  and  earth  may 
pass  away,  and  shall;  but  not  a  word  of  God  can  fail.  As  sure  as  death  is 
appointed  unto  all,  is  judgment  also,  (R.  Hall,  M.A.)  The  judgment  to  come:— 
I.  The  judgment  to  oome  is  certain,  and  cannot  be  avoided.  The  very  heathens 
had  some  notices  of  it;  and  the  consciences  of  mankind  in  general  forespeak  it 
(Ps.  Izziii.).     And  the  scriptures  of  truth  clearly  and  fully  confirm  the  certainty, 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  xh. 


of  the  future  judgment.    11.   Thb  judohemt  to  com  is  ▲  just,  stbiot,  a.no 

IMPAETIIL    JtJDOHENT.      UI.     The     CONSEQUKNOSS     OF    THAT    JTJDOUBNT     ABB     MOST 

IMPOBTANT  AND  BTSBNAL.  They  are  either  life,  or  death;  unutterable  joy  and 
blessedness,  and  that  not  for  a  year,  an  age,  or  but  a  few  ages,  but  for  ever  and 
•Ter.  IV.  This  awfcl  jttdohent  will  quickly  comb.  You  may  put  the  evil 
day  far  from  your  thoughts,  or  look  upon  it  as  at  a  vast  distance;  but  it  will 
quickly  overtake  you,  and  may  come  upon  you  before  you  are  aware.  There  will 
then  be  an  eternal  entire  end  of  all  your  sinful  pleasing  vanities;  but  not  an  end, 
happy  would  it  be  for  you  if  there  were,  of  your  bitter  remembrances  of  them ;  of 
your  stinging  reflections  upon  them,  and  of  your  overwhelming  sufferings  for 
them;  these  will  stick  close  by  you,  and  abide  for  ever  with  you.    (/.  Quy*,  D.D.) 


CHAPTEB  Xn. 


ViBB.  1-7.  Semember  now  thy  Creator  In  the  days  of  thy  yonth.— Tfc«  Creator 
remembered: — How  shall  we  understand  this?    Is  it  an  allegory  deeoribing  the 
weakening  of  the  body?    Is  it  a  description  of  the  Jews  in  captivity?    Is  it  a  dirge 
from  some  old  book  of  hyoms?    The  best  explanation  seems  this:   first,  the 
Preacher  describes  old  age  as  a  stormy  day;  secondly,  the  figure  changes  to  that 
of  a  palace  going  to  ruin;  then  there  is  a  reference  to  "  the  seven  evil  days  "  of 
spring   in   the  Orient,   which   are  thought   particularly   dangerous   to   the   aged; 
and    lastly    the    new    figures    of    the    lamp,    the    fountain,    and    the    cistern 
come   in.    It   is   surely   no   strange   thing   to   illustrate  an   idea    with  a  variety 
of  pictures.    We  may  make  a  regular  progression  of  the  lessons  taught  in  this 
passage.    1.  There  is  a  hereafter.     Man  is  not  made  only  for  this  l^e.     What 
would  we  think  of  the  pyramid  builders  if  they  scattered  pyramids  over  a  plain, 
but  intentionally  left  every  one  of  them  unfinished,  with  the  lines  sloping  together 
so  as  to  prophesy  of  an  apex  which  was  never  built?     Such  designed  incomplete- 
ness is  inconceivable,  the  human  mind  being  what  it  is.    No  more  can  we  conceive 
of  God's  having  scattered  over  the  world  all  the  beautiful  and  noble  lives  in 
history,  yet  so  that  none  of  them  shoiild  be  complete.    There  must  be  a  finishing 
some  time.     We  are  made  so  as  to  expect  it.     We  have  an  organ  whose  function 
it  is  to  anticipate  it.    And  that  organ  of  the  heart  would  be  as  inexplicable  without 
a  hereafter  as  an  eye  without  light.     Where  we  find  eyes  we  can  presume  the 
existence  of  light  at  some  time.     2.  Man  is  a  responsible  being.     He  can  do 
pretty  much  as  he  pleases,  but  he  cannot  by  any  possibility  exempt  himself  from 
the  consequences  of  what  he  does.    Sometime  the  score  must  be  settled.    3.  Death 
ends  man's  work  on  earth.     It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  terrors  of  death  are 
not  dwelt  upon  in  the  passage.     The  sombreness,  the  pain  of  it,  are  passed  by. 
Writers  often  gloat  over  death,  they  force  the  melancholy  of  it  home  upon  our 
hearts,  they  seem  to  say  (as  Dickens  is  accused  of  saying  in  effect  in  describing 
the  death  of  little  Nell),  "  Now  let  us  have  a  cry  together."     There  is  not  the 
slightest  touch  of  this  in  the  ending  of  Ecolesiastes.     If  we  have  any  plans  for 
good,  if  we  want  to  make  this  life  a  preparation  for  the  glories  of  the  future,  how 
busy  ought  the  thought  and  the  eight  of  death  to  make  us.     4.  Reverent  obedi- 
ence to  God  is  the  only  method  of  having  a  life  that  shall  be  worth  living.     God 
changes  not,  and  we  need  not  hope  to  change  Him.     He  is  a  God  of  love  always, 
but  His  love  brings  blessing  only  to  those  who  seek  to  do  His  will.     To  those 
who  disregard  Him  that  same  love  becomea  a  condemnation.    But  how  shall  we 
keep  God's  laws?     Above  all  commands,  He  has  given  to  us  our  final  command, 
by  keeping  which  we  are  led  to  keep  all  the  rest;  "  this  is  My  beloved  Son;  hear 
ye  Him."     Therefore,  trying  to  serve  God  while  rejecting  Christ  must  lead  to 
failure  in  God's  eyes.     5.  Youth  is  the  best  time  to  begin  serving  God.     (1)  It  is 
easier  to  begin  then.     Habits  are  unformed,  and  will  as  easily  take  one  shape  as 
another.     Once  they  are  made,  rearrangement  comes  only,  as  it  were,  by  fracture. 

(2)  It  is  important  to  have  the  trend  of  life  settled  in  favour  of  the  good.  You 
cannot  do  this  except  at  the  needless  expense  of  great  moral  upheaval,  at  any 
time  but  in  the  early  years.  (3)  The  more  years  of  life  consecrated  to  Christ, 
the  more  the  quantity  of  good  which  can  be  done  for  Him.  Every  year  away 
|iom  His  service  is  an  empty  year  from  the  point  of  view  of  eternity.     (4)  The 


CHAP,  zii.]  ECCLESIASTES.  287 

earlier  one  begins  in  the  Christian  life,  the  longer  time  he  hat  for  Christian 
growth.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  The  Creator  rememhtTed: — ^I.  An  eably  beooo* 
NiTiON  OF  God  will  become  the  fobmative  pbinoiplx  of  cbabacteb.  The  forma* 
tion  of  character  is  the  true  business  of  life.  Character  is  the  individual,  the  maa 
himself.  No  one  can  be  greater  than  his  character,  and  no  one  can  be  less.  Ak 
the  centre  of  character  there  is  always  a  governing  principle.  This  may  be  one 
thing  or  another — may  be  a  remembrance  of  God  or  a  regard  for  the  devil,  may 
be  a  holy  resolution  or  a  weak  sentiment.  Still,  it  is  there,  and  it  is  influential. 
It  resembles  the  point  of  crystallization  aroimd  which  cluster  the  strange  forms 
and  colours  of  Nature's  workmanship.  Character  will  surely  be  determined  by 
this  central  principle  or  supreme  choice.  Now,  to  "  remember  thy  Creator  in  tha 
days  of  thy  youth  "  is  to  yield  to  God  as  He  appears  in  Jesus  Christ,  or  to  become 
a  Christian.  This  surrender  enthrones  God  at  the  very  centre  of  character.  His 
word  then  becomes  law.  The  holy  life  of  His  Son,  otir  Eedeemer,  holds  th« 
attention.  The  formation  of  character  proceeds  as  we  "  grow  in  grace  and  in  tha 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  II.  Childhood's  bembmbbanob 
or  GoD  becomes  the  pebpetdal  beoompense  of  bebvics.  We  must  bear  one 
another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.  He  "  went  about  doing  good." 
He  "  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister."  Simple  fidelities  engaged 
Him.  An  hour  of  communion  with  His  Father  prepared  Him  for  any  conflict,  and 
He  often  looked  up  into  His  Father's  face  to  gain  new  inspiration  when  He  was 
weary  or  troubled.  The  possibility  of  this  consciousness  is  the  promise  of  the 
Bible.  Again  and  again  we  are  assured  that  God  is  interested  in  us.  He  wants 
to  help  us.  He  offers  the  confidence  which  Jesus  knew.  Now,  if  we  can  secure 
this  confidence  early  in  life,  we  shall  be  stronger  and  braver  than  we  could  other« 
wise  be,  for  in  every  honest  service  we  shall  have  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  thai 
Ood  is  pleased.  We  may  train  ourselves  to  "do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  If  wa 
undertake  any  service,  we  may  perform  it  as  unto  Him,  and  not  as  unto  our  fellow*  i 
men;  if  we  make  a  contribution  of  money,  we  may  present  it  first  of  all  to  Him, 
and  may  then  act  as  His  stewards  in  its  distribution;  if  we  contemplate  a  new 
work,  we  may  consult  Him  in  prayer;  if  we  are  burdened  with  care,  we  may  cast 
cur  care  upon  Him.  At  once  there  opens  before  us  many  rare  privileges.  Life 
with  God  in  it  moves  safely.  III.  The  secube  hope  of  sobbow  and  of  death  la 
OBTAINED  WHEN  THE  Cbbatob  IS  BEMEMBERED.  "  Hope  thou  in  God  "  is  the  psalmist's 
exhortation.  "  Now  the  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing, 
that  ye  may  abound  in  hope,  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  is  the  bene- 
diction of  Paul.  God  is  the  God  of  hope.  What  a  blessed  truth  that  is  I  He 
meets  us  with  hope,  and  He  continues  to  afford  hope  even  to  the  end  of  life.  When 
sorrows  come  we  are  not  shut  up  to  the  conviction  that  we  are  the  victims  of 
fate.  There  is  an  "  afterward  "  to  every  chastisement,  with  "  peaceable  fruit  oi 
righteousness."  The  end  has  not  been  reached.  We  are  still  at  school.  God  ia 
dealing  with  us  as  with  sons.  We  shall  bless  Him  by  and  by  for  life's  discipline. 
Meanwhile,  He  sustains  and  comforts  us  to  such  a  degree  that  a  man  has  even 
been  known  to  say,  "  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  a£9icted."  God  is  with 
us.  We  shall  surely  reach  port.  We  hope  in  Him.  And  when  we  approach 
death,  who  but  God  can  afford  hope?  (H.  M.  Booth,  D.D.)  The  Creator  retnem.' 
btred: — In  any  anthology  upon  old  age  this  would  easily  rank  first.  Its  cast  ia 
poetical,  its  substance  the  severest  prose.  In  it  the  verdict  of  experience  is  given 
by  one  who  has  set  himself  "  to  know  wisdom  and  to  know  madLess  and  folly." 
The  Preacher  has  simply  spoken  for  the  silent  multitudes.  Will  the  youth  be 
sane  and  listen  and  heed,  or  giddy  and  imbelieving,  till  at  the  end  he  too  will 
remorsefully  cry,  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity  "?  Certain  truths  and  principles 
ought  ever  to  be  boimd  about  his  neck  and  written  on  the  tables  of  his  heart. 
I.  The  totith  is  God's  cbeation.  If  he  doubts  or  denies  this  he  will  live  like  the 
beasts  that  perish,  and  be  ready  after  a  while  to  say  that  he  has  not  pre-eminence 
above  them.  The  spirit  of  the  age  is  hushing  the  demands  of  the  Creator  and 
magnifying  those  of  the  created.  While  it  professes  the  deepest  reverence  for  an 
insect  form  or  faultless  crystal  or  mote  of  star-dust,  it  shuts  the  senses  to  any 
call  to  penitence,  or  prayer,  or  trust,  or  sacrifice,  since  we  cannot  know  if  there 
be  One  supreme  who  has  uttered  it.  The  youth  is  in  peril.  God  is — ^no  question- 
no  perhaps.  He  is  thy  Creator.  Bemember  Him  and  that  thou  art  His,  not  thine 
own.  Thy  intuitions  are  correct;  they  point  thee  to  Him.  II.  In  the  natubal 
obdeb  of  life  age  must  come.  'The  lambs  that  gambol  over  the  fields,  the  birds 
Ibat  sing  among  the  branches  do  not  dream  they  will  ever  grow  old.     Not  a  hint 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

of  future  decay  comes  to  any  animal.     Only  the  present  has  any  fears  for  them. 
But  man  cannot  hide  from  himself  the  fact  of  limitations.     Even  the  child  per- 
ceives that  in  the  far  distant  time  its  steps  will  totter,  its  form  be  bowed,  and  its 
face  wrinkled.     The  youth  knows  that  enthusiasm  will  wane  as  the  evening  of 
life  deepens.     The  strong  man  is  aware  that  the  days  of  decline  are  nearing. 
The  house  in  its  every  part  seems  tumbling  in  pieces.      The  heart  labours   in 
beating,  like  a  worn  engine,  with  much  noise  and  frequent  calls  for  relief  and 
repair.     The  thread  of  life,  most  delicate,  is  parting  strand  by  strand,  and  the 
golden  bowl  which  hung  by  it,  in  which  the  light  has  burned  for  fourscore  years, 
is  soon  to  be  dashed  in  fragments.     And  so,  whether  it  be  the  pitcher  that  no 
longer  fetches  the  breath,  or  the  wheel  whose  tiresome  rounds  of  being  are  spent, 
and  which  has  broken  in  upon  itself,  it  is  the  end.     Life  has  gone,  as  death  has 
come,  and  each  to  its  own.     The  dust  claimfi  its  kindred ;  the  Lord  His.     III.  Thb 
CUBSB  OF  AGK  IS  WHAr  THB  YODTH  HAS  INVITED.     His  own  selfishness  has  robbed 
him  of  helpers.     Indolence  has  clothed  him  with  rags.     Deceit  has  made  all  wary 
and  suspicious  of  him.     The  cruel  tongue  has  slain  his  defenders.     Profligacy  has 
consumed  flesh  and  body,  surviving  a  little  to  be  tortured.     Hawthorne  said,  "  Th» 
infirmities  that  come  with  old  age  may  be  the  interest  on  the  debt  of  nature, 
which  should  have  been  more  seasonably  paid — often  the  interest  will  be  a  heavier 
payment  than  the  principal."     It  will  always  be  heavier  for  the  bad.     IV.  Thb 
BELioiocs  LIFB  IS  THB  TBDB  LIFE.     Man  by  birth  and  development  is  allied  to  God. 
He  fills  out  the  meaning  of  existence  only  by  heeding  the  laws  and  impulses  which 
the  Lord  gives.    He  shows  his  greatness  above  the  creation  simply  by  his  regard 
for  ideas  and  things  which  are  not  visibly  one  with  it.      Since  it  changes  and 
perishes,  he  reaches  up  and  grasps  the  unchangeable  and  eternal.     "  He  would  not 
be  the  most  distinguished  object  in  it  if  he  were  not  too  distinguished  for  it,"  said 
the  illustrious  German.     Along  his  divinely  marked  way  he  finds  joy  springing  out 
of  duties  performed.     The  zest  of  building  for  immortality  makes   his  slightest 
deed   sublime.     V.   The   religious   life   peepaees   foe  the  judgment.     Here   it 
would   seem   is   the  key   to  this   treatise.     Revelation   must   adapt   itself   to   the 
capacity  of  the  receiver.     A  gross  mind  and  heart  is  only  gradually  led  to  mors 
perfect  conceptions.    Material  things  and  events  filled  the  vision  of  them  to  whom 
the  message  from  heaven  first  came.     Rewards  and  punishments  were  of  a  very 
practical  nature.     Food,  offspring,  and  long  life  were  offered  to  the  dutiful  and 
taken  from  the  disobedient.     It  would  pay  to  heed  the  commands  of  Jehovah. 
The  Judge  is  the  Lord,  who  has  sustained  and  tested  and  known  the  doings  of 
every  one.     The  wicked  must  come  with  his  daring  crimes  and  his  hidden  deeds 
and  answer  therefor.     That  tribunal  need  have  no  terrors  for  the  obedienl.     It  is 
their  vindication  before  any  who  questioned  or  exulted  over  them.     And  all  shall 
see  that  the  adjustments  of  another  life  will  perfectly  satisfy  the  inconsistencies  of 
this.     {Monday    Club    SermonB.)     "Remember    thy    Crtator": — I.  Eemembee — 
WHOM?    *•  Thy  Creator."    As  we  are  indebted  to  God  for  our  life,  and  health,  and 
4or  the  powers  of  the  mind,  it  is  most  proper  that  we  should  remember  Him. 
"Will  you  not — 1.  Remember  Him  and  pray?    2.  Remember  Him  and  be  thankful? 
8.    Remember   Him   and   be   obedient?    4.    Remember   Him   and   be   watchful? 
II.  Remember — when?    1.  Youth  is  the  time  to  store  the  memory.    Life  is  now 
comparatively  free,  and  all  the  powers  of  body  and  mind  are  capable  of  easy 
development.     Now  is  the  time  when  you  may  get  into  the  habit  of  thinking  about 
God,  and  into  the  habit  of  praying,  and  into  the  habit  of  acting  from  principle 
and  for  the  glory  of  God.     If  you  form  the  habit  now  it  will  ever  after  be  easier 
to   do   right.      2.  Youthful    piety   will   save   you   from    many   sins    and    sorrows. 
8.  Youthful   piety   will   ennoble   and   beautify   your   life.     HI.  Remember — why? 
Because  evil  days  will  come,  and  a  time  draw  nigh  when  you  will  find  no  pleasure 
in  good  things.     0  how  sad  it  will  be  if  you  let  the  days  of  youth  pass  by  without 
giving  your  heart  to  Christ  I     (W.  Whale.)     The  remembrance  of  our  Creator: — 
I.  What  is  implied  in  the  injunction  to  remember  God  as  our  Creator.    1.  W« 
are  to  remember  that  He  has  made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves.    2.  We  are  to  bear  in 
mind  the  superintending  care   of   His   providence  and   the  riches   of  His  grace. 
8.  We  are  to  remember  the  authority  with  which,  by  the  right  of  creation,  God  is 
invested;  an  authority  to  call  us  to  account  for  the  use  we  make  of  the  privileges 
bestowed  upon  us.    To  Him  we  are  responsible,  and  He  will  bring  us  into  judg» 
ment.    II.  Somb  reasons  why  wb  ought  to  remember  our  Crbatob  in  thb  days 
OF  ODR  youth.     1.  And  here  it  may  fairly  be  demanded.  Can  we  remember  Him  at 
too  early  a  period?    Season  as  wcJl  as  Bavelation  point  out  to  us  that  the  sarvio* 


CHAT.  XII.]  ECCLESIASTE&  289 

of  God  cannot  begin  too  soon.  2.  This  duty  is  most  practicable  in  youth.  8.  A 
third  reason  for  remembering  our  Creator  in  youth  is  the  uncertainty  of  lifo. 
4.  The  remembrance  of  our  Creator  in  youth  will  provide  a  remedy  for  the  evils 
of  life.  S.  The  only  remaining  argument  I  shall  mention  for  early  piety  is  derived 
from  the  honour  which  will  thus  accrue  to  religion,  and  the  eSeot  it  will  have  ia 
promoting  the  glory  of  God.  III.  Thb  ueans  of  attainino  and  pessebvimo  thb 
BBMEMBBANCB  OF  CUB  Cbeatob.  1.  Since  we  are  by  nature  strangers  to  divina 
truth,  let  us  be  ready  to  receive  instruction  from  those  who  are  wiser  and  better 
than  ourselves.  2.  Let  us  search  the  Scriptures.  They  are  the  revelation  of  oiur 
Creator.  They  will  not  only  remind  us  of  Him,  but  they  contain  all  the  knowledge 
of  Him  which  it  is  essential  to  acquire,  and  "  are  able  to  make  us  wise  imto 
salvation,  through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  8.  Let  it  be  a  fixed  principle 
to  avail  ourselves  of  all  other  means  of  grace,  of  the  ministration  of  the  Word  of 
God,  of  public  and  domestic  worship.  4.  Let  us  endeavour  to  form  a  habit  of 
seeing  the  Creator  in  all  things;  of  recognizing  the  hand  of  God  in  the  works  oi 
nature  and  the  course  of  events.  If  we  make  a  right  use  of  these  great  volumes 
which  are  open  before  us,  we  shall  everywhere  behold  the  agency  of  the  Almighty. 
6.  We  mutt  keep  a  strict  watch  over  our  hearts  and  our  conduct.  (Christian 
Obterver.)  Remembering  Ood: — That  word  '*  remember,"  standing  where  it  does, 
must  mean  a  great  deal.  It  must  mean  to  keep  in  mind  the  thought  of  God  as 
the  shaping,  constructive,  sovereign  influence  in  life.  The  idea  of  beauty  the 
artist  paints  by;  the  idea  of  the  special  harvest  the  farmer  tills  the  fields  by;  the 
chart  the  mariner  sails  by.  So  of  the  idea  of  God.  We  are  to  think  by  it ;  we  are 
to  feel  in  reference  to  it;  we  are  to  work  under  its  inspiration;  we  are  to  live  by 
the  power  of  its  life  and  incentive.  The  idea  of  God  is  illumination  and  power. 
It  is  interpretation,  and  it  is  the  power  of  realization.  Now  for  two  or  three 
thoughts  urging  us  to  this  practice  in  youth.  1.  First  of  all,  youth  is  educable* 
If  a  man  wants  to  be  a  mechanic,  or  a  merchant,  or  a  physician,  he  begins  early. 
It  is  essential  to  the  trade  or  the  profession  that  it  shall  be  so.  If  a  man  wants 
to  Christianize  his  life,  to  make  that  life  religious,  ought  he  not  to  begin  early, 
in  analogy  with  other  things  which  he  does?  Just  as  the  hot  wax  receives  the 
impression  clearly  and  retains  it  lastingly,  so  the  impressionable  mind  of  youth 
receives  the  stamp  of  the  character  of  God  more  clearly  and  retains  it  more  last- 
ingly than  in  the  subsequent  periods  of  life.  2.  Then  consider,  too,  how  simple 
life  is  when  we  are  yoimg.  Look  at  the  business  man  of  forty,  and  see  how  hia 
life  has  left  its  original  simplicity.  He  is  no  longer  simply  a  son  and  a  brother,  a 
friend  and  a  student:  he  is  himself  a  husband  and  a  father,  and  a  business  man 
Trith  a  hundred  cares  and  responsibilities.  His  life  has  branched  out  into  wonderful 
complexity.  It  is  intricate,  complicated,  hard  to  manage.  Now,  suppose  that  the 
man  of  forty  begins  to  be  religious.  How  difficult  is  his  problem — to  take  that 
single  force  of  the  grand  idea  of  God  and  send  it  through  all  these  relationships  in 
which  he  stands  I  It  is  like  an  attempt  to  thread  not  one,  or  ten,  or  a  score,  but 
•  himdred  needles  at  once.  But,  if  the  man  begins  early,  it  is  different.  He  is  a 
son ;  and  he  lets  the  love  of  God  bear  upon  that  relation,  and  seeks  for  the  power 
of  God  to  realize  the  meaning  of  it.  He  is  a  brother,  a  friend,  a  student.  These 
are  the  simple  relations  in  which  he  stands.  Let  him  bring  these  imder  the 
divine  illumination,  open  his  heart  to  the  power  that  leads  him  to  realize  the 
divine  meaning  of  existence.  Then,  when  his  life  enlarges,  it  will  be  a  process  of 
assimilation.  Life  will  be  simply  the  growth  of  godliness.  8.  Then,  again,  if  a 
man  wants  to  make  any  high  attainment  in  religion,  he  must  begin  early.  What 
is  religion  but  the  consecration  and  the  perfection  of  human  life?  And,  if  it  be 
the  consecration  and  perfection  of  himian  life,  ought  not  the  passion  of  a  man's 
heart  to  be  for  eminence  in  it?  4.  If  we  begin  early,  we  may  expect  finally  the 
consummate  blessing  and  power  of  the  religious  life — spontaneity  in  work,  spon« 
taneity  in  noble  views  of  God,  in  noble  views  of  men  and  of  the  future  of  the 
world,  spontaneity  in  goodness.  (G.  A.  Oordon.)  Human  life: — I.  Thb  sdocbs- 
BIYB  STAGES  OF  HUMAN  LIFE.  1.  Here  we  have  the  growing  stage.  "  The  days  of 
thy  youth."  Beautiful  period  this  I  It  is  the  opening  spring,  full  of  germinating 
force  and  rich  promise.  2.  Here  we  have  the  declining  stage.  "  While  the  evU 
days  come,"  etc.  The  world,  looked  at  through  the  eye  of  age,  is  a  very  different 
thing  from  what  it  is  viewed  through  the  eye  of  youth.  There  is  no  glow  in  the 
landscape,  no  streaks  of  splendour  in  the  ekj;  there  is  a  deep  shadow  resting  over 
all.  8.  Here  we  have  the  dissolving  stage.  "  Man  goeth  to  his  long  home."  The 
grave  ia  the  long  home  of  his  body,  eternity  the  long  home  of  his  soul.    II.  Thb 

19 


290  THE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  mi. 


BOTXBBIOM  OBLIGATION  OF  HUMAN  LIFE.     There  is  an  obligation  which  runs  through 
all  these  stages,  meets  man  in  every  step  he  takes.     What  is  it?     "  Remembee 
now  thy  Creator."     Two  things  are  necessary  to  the  discharge  of  this  obligation^ 
1.  An  intellectual  knowledge  of  the  Creator.     Three  ideas  are  included  in  our 
conception  of  this  transcendent  character.      (1)  Absolute  origination.     We  think 
of  Him  as  one  antecedent  to  all  other  existences,  existing  in  the  unbroken  solitude* 
of  immensity,  having  in  Himself  the  archetypes  of  all  that  ever  has  been,  of  all 
that  ever  will  be;  and  the  power  of  giving  them  forms  of  existence  distinct  from 
Himself.     (2)  Absolute  proprietorship.     What  He  has  created  is  His  uncondition- 
ally, and  for  ever  His.     "  All  souls  are  mine,"  etc.     There  is  yet  another  idea 
included  in  the  conception  of  Creator.     (8)  Absolute  obedience.     If  we  all  hava 
and  are  EUs,  ought  we  not  in  all  things  to  be  regulated  by  His  will?     Ought  not 
His  will  to  be  our  sovereign  law  in  all  things?    2.  A  heart  sympathy  with  Him. 
What  has  Ood  done  for  us,  and  what  has  He  promised  to  do?     Let  the  heut  ba 
duly  impressed  with  gratitude  for  the  past,  and  with  hope  for  the  future,  and  we 
shall    assuredly    remember    Him.     III.    Thb    choicest   pibiod    of    human    lifi. 
*'  Bemember  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth."     1.  It  is  the  best  period 
for  cultivating  a  godly  life.    Lusts  lie  comparatively  dormant,  habits  are  unformed, 
prejudices  have  attained  no  power ;  the  conscience  is  susceptible,  the  heart  is  tender, 
the  intellect  is  free,  etc.     2.  The  cultivation  of  a  godly  life  in  youth  will  blesa 
every  subsequent  period  of  being.     Through  manhood,  through  old  age,  through 
death,  into  eternity,  and  through  all  future  timea  a  godly  life  will  ensure  true 
blessedness  of  being.     (Homilitt.)     The  irreligiout  youth: — "  Eemember  now  thy 
Creator."    I.  Because  those  powers  of  the  human  spirit  to  which  sbligion 
APPEALS  ABE  EXERCISED  AND  DEVELOPED  NOW.     The  youth  Cannot  be  in  the  same 
position  aa  the  infant  of  days,  who  cannot  think,  nor  judge,  nor  will.     The  rational 
youth  must  stand  on  a  footing  different  from  the  idiot  youth.    If  God  calls  us  to 
pursue  a  certain  course,  all  who  have  faculties  to  pursue  it,  are,  by  virtue  of  the 
possession  of  these  powers,  under  obligation;  the  possession  of  the  powers  being 
alike  the  foundation  and  the  evidence  of  the  claim.    II.  Because  God's  claims 
exist  now.    "  Thy  Creator."     III.  Because  the  season  of  youth  is  fleeting 
NOW.     Infancy  is  gone;  childhood  is  no  more;  but  youth,  even  if  but  just  come, 
is  really  going.     Soon,  therefore,  it  will  be  impossible  to  the  irreligious  youth  to  be 
a  religious  youth.    He  may  become  a  godly  man,  but  still  he  will  have  been  an 
ungodly  youth.    IV.  Because  dats  of  evil  are  coming  now.    1.  The  evil  day  of 
confirmed  sinfulness  is  coming.     Acts  repeated,  and  states  cherished,  are  habits. 
Oh,  how  mysterious  and  how  mighty  is  the  force  of  habit  I    It  is  a  silken  thread 
transformed  by  invisible  processes  into  an  iron  chain.     2.  The  evil  day  of  multi- 
plied  temptation  is  coming.     The  body  daily  grows,  ♦nd  with  its  growth  may 
spring  up  some  fleshly  lust — it  may  be  drunkenness,  or  grosser  vice.     The  mind 
is  gradually  developed,  and  with  its  development  may  arise  some  spiritual  tempta- 
tion— it    may    be    deceitfulness — scepticism — infidelity.     Satan    is    concentrating 
force  and  power  to  stamp  deep  and  clear  this  die — a  sinful  character.    3.  The  evil 
day  of  trouble  is  coming.     V.  Death  mat  be  vert  near,  and  is  surelt  coMiNa 
NOW.    VI.  Old  age  brings  oorrespondino  infirmities;  and  if  it  come  to  tou,  it 
WILL  seem  to  have  COME  BUT  NOW.     The  "  evening  of  life  "  is  a  common  phrase 
for  old  age;  let  not  this  poetical  phraseology  mislead  you.     If  old  age  be,  in  its 
calmness  and  stillness,  like  evening,  remember  that  it  has  the  duskiness  and  the 
ohilliuess  of  evening.   Years  blimt  the  bodily  senses,  and  equally  the  susceptibilities 
of  the  soul.     Who,  therefore,  in  his  right  mind,  will  wait  for  old  age,  that  in  it 
he  may   "  work  out   his  own   salvation  with  fear  and  trembling  "?     VII.  Thb 
GBEATEST  FACILITIES  EXIST  NOW.     I  speak  now  of  external  advantages,  I  refer  to 
the  state  of  the  spirit,  and  I  assert  that  more  aid  is  furnished  by  the  state  of  the 
soul  in  youth  than  by  the  state  of  the  soul  in  any  other  period  of  life.    Habits  are 
not  BO  confirmed  in  youth  as  in  more  advanced  years,  because  the  confirmation  of 
habits  requires  time,  and  much  time  has  not  yet  been  given.     VIII.  Beligion 

WILL   GIVE    MOST   JOT,   AND    IT   WILL    SECURE    MOST   USEFULNESS    IF    COMMENCED    NOW. 

1.  It  will  give  most  pleasure.  There  is  not  so  much  to  unlearn  as  when  persons 
become  godly  late  in  life;  and  unlearning  is  an  irksome  process.  If  there  be  any 
pleasure  in  religion,  the  amovmt  taken  is  increased  by  being  tasted  early.  2.  It 
will  secure  most  usefulness.  Youthful  piety  exerts  an  influence  peculiar  to  itself, 
and  God  seems  to  choose  for  usefulness  chiefly  those  who  are  godly  while  young. 
IX.  Ruin  mat  overtake  a  touth  now.  If  ruin  overtake  you,  it  were  better  for 
you  to  have  died  in  infancy j  nay,  it  were  better  never  to  bftve  been  born^ 


CHAP,  xii.]  ECCLESIASTE3.  801 

(8.  Martin.)     Young  perBont  exhorted  to  remember  their  Creator: — ^I.  Thi  dutt 
HERB  BNJOiNKD.     1.  The  object  is  our  Creator.     (1)  There  was  a  period  when  wo 
had  no  being;  had  we  always  been  in  existence  we  could  have  had  no  Creator; 
but  on  the  limited  period  of  mortal  life,  both  as  it  regards  its  commencement  and 
close,  the  Scriptures  are  explicit  (Job  viii.  9;  Ps.  xxxix.  5;  James  iv.  14).    (2)  We 
have  a  Creator,  and  therefore  did  not  make  ourselves;  could  we  have  given  our- 
selves   existence,    the   duty    enjoined    in    the   text    would    have   referred    only    to 
ourselves;  but  no  being  can  make  itself,  as  that  would  suppose  it  acted  prior  to 
its  existence,  which  is  a  manifest  contradiction.     (3)  Our  Creator  is  God;  this  is 
one  of  the  first  truths  of  revealed  religion  (Gen.  i.  27;  vi.  7;  Deut.  iv.  32;  Mai. 
ii.  10).     2.  The  act  of  remembrance.    To  "  remember  our  Creator  "  implies — (1)  A 
previous  knowledge  of  Him.     He  has  made  Himself  known  imto  us  by  the  works 
of  His  hands  (Ps.  zix.  1;  Bom.  i.  20);  by  the  acts  of  His  providence  (Ps.  civ. 
27,  28;  Matt.  x.  30;  Acts  xvii.  28).     But  more  especially  by  the  manifestations 
of  His  grace  (Exod.  zxxiv.  6).     As  a  God  of  grace  He  pardons  our  sins,  renews 
our  hearts ;  and  to  know  Him  in  this  character  is  to  have  a  consciousness  that  Ha 
has  actually  done  this  for  us.     This  knowledge  can  be  obtained  only  by  a  Divino 
influence  (Matt.  zi.  27;  zvi.  17).     (2)  The  frequent  recollection  and  actual  con- 
Boiousness  of  His  divine  presence;  to  set  the  Lord  always   before   us,   and  to 
consider  Him  as  a  Being  essentially  present  in  all  places.      This  remembrance 
should  be — (a)  Beverential;  His  eternal  Godhead,  terrible  justice,  and  wonderful 
acts  should  inspire  us  with  the  most  profound  sentiments  of  veneration.     (6)  ASeo- 
tionate;  His  infinite  love  in  the  gift  of  His  Son,  and  His  amazing  mercy  in  pardon- 
ing sin,  should  lead  us  to  remember  Him  with  feelings  of  the  most  ardent  attach- 
ment,    (c)  Operative;  we  should  evince  that  we  do  remember  Him,  by  shunning 
all  that  He  abhors,  and  following  all  that  He  enjoins.     II.  Thb  peculiab  pebioo 
WHBN    THIS    DDTT    18    TO    BB    PRACTISED — "  Now,    in    the    days    of    thy    youth." 
1.  Because  He  is  the  most  worthy  object  for  our  remembrance;  and  that  which  lb 
most  worthy  has  the  first  and  highest  claims  upon  our  attention.    2.  Because  such 
a  remembrance,  at  this  time,  is  peculiarly  acceptable  to  God.     0  how  lovely  ie 
youthful  piety  I     Under  the  law,  the  first-fruits  and  the  first-born   were  God'a 
sole  property;  and  the  buds  of  being,  and  the  earliest  blossoms  of  youth,  are  the 
most  acceptable  sacrifice  that  we  can  offer  to  our  Creator;  and  shall  we  neglect 
these   offerings?    3.   Because  of   the  comparative   ease  with   which   it   may    be 
performed.    4.  Because  the  present  is  the  only  certain  time  we  can  command  for 
doing  it;  the  past  is  gone,  the  future  may  never  be  ours.     6.  From  principles 
of  justice :  He  is  our  Creator,  and  therefore  justly  claims  the  whole  of  our  service. 
6.  From  principles  of  gratitude;  we  owe  our  all  to  Him;  He  remembered  us  in 
our  low  estate;  He  still  remembers  us;  on  the  wings  of  every  hour  we  read  His 
patience.     0  what  a  mighty  debt  of  gratitude  is  due  to  Him  t     7.  From  principles 
of  self-interest;  to  remember  our  Creator  is  the  way  to  true  wisdom,  substantial 
bonoin:,  and  unfading  happiness.     {Sketchee  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)     Day$  of 
youth': — We  have  here — 1.  The  successive  stages  of  human  life.     2.  The  primary 
obligation  of  human  life.     To  "remember  the  Creator."     This  remembrance  of 
the  Creator  should  be  intelligent,  loving,  practical,  permanent.     8.  The  choicest 
period  of  human  life.     "  The  days  of  thy  youth."     I.  The  days  of  youth  are  days 
of  peculiar  illusion.     They  live  in  romance.     Their  theory  of  life  bears  but  little 
resemblance  to  stern  reality.     Their  blooming  landscape  is  but  a  mirage  creation 
of  their  own  fancy.    Look  at  their  views — 1.  As  to  life's  happiness.    In  the  home 
which  they  have  painted  for  themselves  there  is  no  cloud,  no  storm,  no  blight.    But 
how  different  they  find  the  reality  as  they  move  on  through  the  different  stages 
to  old  age.     2.  As  to  life's  length.     Most  young  people  put  their  death  a  long 
way  further  off  than  it  is.     8.  As  to  life's  improvability.     Most  youths  feel  that 
they  ought  to  be  religious,  and  they  adjourn  the  work  of  spiritual  culture  till  a 
time  in  the  future,  which  they  consider  will  be  more  convenient.     But  such  a 
time  never   comes.     II.  The   days   of  youth   are   days   of   peculiar    temptation. 
1.  Credulity.     They  are  unsuspicious  and  confiding,  and  with  minds  but  partially 
informed  with  the  facts  of  existence,  and  untrained  to  the  weighing  of  evidence, 
they  are  ready  to  accept  almost  any  plausible  proposition,  especially  when   it  is 
agreeable    to    their    desires.     2.  Carnality.     In    the    first    stages    of    human    life 
animalism  is  the  regnant  power.     All  the  pleasures  are  the  pleasures  of  the  sense. 
8.   Vanity.     The  conceit  of  youth  is  proverbial.     They  are  vain   of  their  appear- 
ance,  their    talents,    if    they    have   no    wealth    or    ancestry.     4.    Gregariousness. 
Strong  is  the  tendency  in  young  natures  to  follow   and  to  blend  with  others. 


292  THE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

III.  The  dajB  of  youth  are  days  of  peculiar  value.  Whilst  all  the  years  and  hours 
of  man's  short  life  are  of  priceless  value  the  time  of  youth  is  pre-eminently 
preoious;  its  hours  are  golden.  It  is  pre-eminently  valuable — 1.  Because  of  ita 
fleetnees.  "  Youth,"  says  John  Foster,  "  is  not  like  a  new  garment  which  wa 
can  keep  fresh  by  wearing  sparingly,  we  must  wear  it  daily,  and  it  wears  fast 
away.  It  is  a  flower  that  soon  withereth."  2.  Because  of  its  possibilities.  The 
possibilities  of  flowers,  fruit,  affluent  orchards,  and  waving  fields  of  golden 
harvest  are  all  shut  up  in  the  spring ;  so  it  is  with  youth,  the  greatness  of  manhood 
is  in  youth.  He  who  wishes  to  be  a  great  citizen,  orator,  saint,  must  begin  in 
youth.  {Homilitt.)  Youthful  piety :  detcribed  and  inculcated : — I.  To  bat  whebein 
TOOTHFUL  PIETY  CONSISTS.  It  conslsts,  you  wUl  find,  in  a  ready,  filial,  and  grateful 
remembrance  of  Ood — a  remembrance  which  induces  acquiescence  in  the  Divine 
will  and  subjection  to  it.  II.  To  obviate  some  objections  to  it.  1.  It  is  time 
enough  yet,  say  some,  for  youth  to  think  seriously  and  to  be  pious.  This  objection 
proceeds  on  the  supposition  that  youth  have  yet  many  days  and  years  to  come; 
but  how  know  we  what  a  day  or  even  an  hour  may  bring  forth?  2.  Youth  is  the 
time  of  enjoyment,  say  others :  young  people  should  enjoy  themselves.  True;  and 
is  there  nothing  to  enjoy  in  the  favour  and  friendship  of  our  Creator?  Nothing  to 
enjoy  in  freedom  from  the  guilt  and  from  the  power  of  sin?  Nothing  to  enjoy  in 
being  good  and  doing  good?  And  is  there  any  time  comparable  to  youth  for  the 
enjoyment  of  these  things?  8.  Beligion  is  very  well  and  suitable  for  old  age  and 
infirmity  is  an  objection  to  youthful  piety  nearly  allied  to  the  foregoing.  So  it  is : 
but  is  it,  therefore,  unsuitable  to  health  and  youth?  4.  We  can  repent  and  ba 
religious  some  future  time,  will  young  people  themselves  sometimes  say,  when 
exhorted  to  remember  now  their  Creator.  But  to  repent  when  we  will  is  not  in 
our  power.  Repentance  is  the  gift  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  He  may  righteously 
withhold  to-morrow  what  we  ungratefully  refuse  to-day.  6.  Piety  induces  gloom 
and  melancholy,  it  is  often  further  urged.  Who  are  they  that  say  piety  induces 
depression  and  gloom  of  spirit?  Not  the  pious,  but  such  as  never  felt  the  power 
of  godliness  or  experienced  the  joy  of  faith.  Are  they,  then,  to  be  believed  who 
tell  us  of  what  they  cannot  possibly  be  judges?  6.  Piety  interferes  with  genteel 
and  polite  demeanour,  it  has,  too,  been  said.  This  objection  betrays  in  those  who 
advance  it  great  ignorance  of  Scripture  and  of  scriptural  character.  No :  the 
Gospel  which  we  preach  inculcates  morals  the  most  correct  and  chaste,  tempers 
the  most  gracious,  manner  the  most  afiable,  behaviour  the  most  courteous.  7.  It 
will  incur  reproach,  and  possibly  it  may  injiure  a  yoimg  man's  reputation;  and 
consequently  also  may  retard  his  advancement  in  life  to  be  pious  too  soon,  is  the 
final  objection  to  early  piety  we  shall  choose  to  notice.  How  sordid  must  be  the 
views  of  a  parent  who  seeks  first  for  bis  children  any  object  below  "  the  kingdom 
of  God  and  His  righteousness  "I  And  how  must  "  the  honour  which  cometh  of 
man  "  be  desired  and  valued  above  "  the  honour  which  cometh  of  God  only  " 
where  there  exists  the  fear  of  disrepute  on  accoimt  of  religion  I  III.  To  stati 
BOMB  REASONS  FOE  IT.  1.  It  ifi  reasonable  in  itself — that  a  creature  should 
remember  his  Creator;  a  redeemed  creature  his  Eedeemer;  and  an  immortal  crea- 
ture that  immortality  which  awaits  him.  We  execrate  ingratitude  one  towards 
another :  is  there  nothing  offensive  in  an  ungrateful  f orgetf ulness  of  our  Maker  ? 
2.  God  requires  it.  Yet,  **  ye  have  robbed  Me,"  may  God  justly  say  to  those 
of  our  youth  who  forget  Him  and  refuse  to  Him  the  homage  of  theu  hearts. 
8.  The  mind  is  more  susceptible  of  impression  when  young.  4.  Piety  in  youth  gives 
a  proper  bias  to  the  affections.  6.  The  world  will  be  viewed  in  a  true  light. 
6.  Piety  in  youth  lays  a  foundation  for  placidity  and  calmness  ia  age.  7.  Jesus 
Christ,  our  God  and  Saviour,  will  be  more  abundantly  honoured  by  the  devotion  of 
our  first  years  unto  His  service.  IV.  To  recommend  it  earnestly  to  the  yoono 
AMONG  YOU.  (W.  Mudge,  B.A.)  The  days  of  thy  youth: — I.  What  these  days 
ARE  IN  THEMSELVES.  1.  They  are  days  most  favourable  for  *'  remembering  "  the 
Lord.  It  was  an  appointment  of  the  olden  time  that  the  manna  was  to  be 
gathered  in  the  morning,  and  for  any  that  waited  till  late  in  the  day  there  waa 
none,  embodying  a  lesson  the  young  may  well  remember.  The  promise  of  the 
Lord  is  to  them  that  seek  Him  "  early  "  that  they  shall  find  Him.  2.  They  ara 
the  days  of  special  privilege  and  promise.  Think  of  some  of  the  inspired 
biographies  of  some  of  the  most  eminent  and  what  they  show  us  of  the  days  of 
their  youth.  Joseph,  for  iostance,  whose  early  days  must  have  revealed  tha 
kindling  purity  and  nobility  that  made  his  life  such  a  power  and  his  very  bonea 
an  inspuration.     Think  of  Samuel  in  the  days  of  his  youth,  in  which  the  mother'a 


CEAP.  xn.]  ECCLESIASTES.  298 

traming  and  the  Lord's  call  show  what  shall  be,  as  in  after  days  bis  name  stands 
upon  the  record  of  the  worthies  as  "  Samuel  among  them  that  call  upon  His 
name."  Turn  to  the  Hebrew  youths  in  Babylon,  and,  captives  as  they  were,  you 
see  the  power  that  gathered  around  them  as  in  their  self-denial  they  put  aside 
the  delicacies  of  the  king's  table  rather  than  incur  the  possibility  of  sin,  and  braved 
the  terrors  of  the  lions'  den  and  the  fiery  furnace  that  they  might  be  faithful  to 
Ood.  8.  The  days  of  youth  are  days  that  are  most  receptive  and  most  retentive 
of  what  may  influence  them.  It  follows  from  this  that  there  should  be  all  possible 
care  that  the  good  should  be  received  and  the  evil  excluded.  It  is  what  is  first 
taken  into  the  mind  that  sinks  the  deepest  and  lasts  the  longest.  II.  What  thet 
SHALL  BE  IF  BI6HTLT  USED.  1.  They  shall  be  days  of  real  and  rich  blessing.  (1)  In 
order  to  this,  however,  they  must  be  days  of  response  to  the  Divine  call.  (2)  There 
must  also  be  the  full  acceptance  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  your  portion.  It  may 
involve  self-denial,  and  it  will;  the  Lord  lays  it  down  at  the  very  beginning  of 
His  service;  but  that  is  a  noble  exercise  for  the  young  imder  any  conditions,  and 
in  ooimection  with  the  service  of  the  Lord  will  bring  a  rich  blessing.  2.  Being 
this,  the  days  of  your  youth  will  be  days  of  gracious  promise  for  all  the  days  after. 
The  inspired  description  of  the  course  is  as  "the  shining  light,"  and  not  that 
only,  but  "that  ehineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day."  III.  The  bight 
CSB  SHOULD  BK  UADB  OF  THESE  DAYS  AT  ONCE.  1.  It  should,  bccause  of  the  prone> 
sess  there  is  in  youth  to  put  off  these  things  to  the  future,  and  how  it  will  grow 
upon  the  man.  2.  It  should,  too,  because  there  are  so  many  will  seek  to  lead 
you  into  neglect  and  folly.  8.  It  should,  too,  because  it  will  fill  you  with  the 
divine  portion  from  the  beginning.  4.  It  should  be,  also,  because  it  will  not  only 
give  you  a  blessing  for  yourselves,  but  make  you  a  blessing  to  others.  {J.P, 
Chown.)  On  the  advantages  of  an  early  piety: — I.  The  natuee  op  the  act  OB 
DUTY  HEBB  ENJOINED;  which  is,  to  remember  our  Creator.  To  remember  God  is 
frequently,  and  in  oiu-  most  serious  and  retired  thoughts,  to  consider  that  there 
is  such  a  Being  as  Ood  is;  of  all  power  and  perfection,  who  made  us  and  all  other 
things,  and  hath  given  us  laws  to  live  by  suitable  to  our  natures;  and  will  call  ua 
to  a  strict  account  for  our  observance  or  violation  of  them,  and  accordingly  reward 
or  punish  us;  very  often  in  this  world,  and  to  be  siu-e  in  the  other.  It  is  to  revive 
often  In  our  minds  the  thoughts  of  God  and  of  His  infinite  perfections,  and  to 
live  continually   under  the  power   and  awe  of  these  apprehensions.     II.  What 

THEBE  IS  IN  THE  NOTION  OF  GOD  AS  OUB  CbEATOB  THAT  IS  HOBE  PABTICULABLY  AFT 
TO    AWAKEN    AND    OBLIGE    HEN    TO   THE    BEMEMBKANOE    OF   GOD.      1.    Creation    is   of    all 

others  the  most  sensible  and  obvious  argument  of  a  Deity.  Other  considerations 
may  work  upon  our  reason  and  understanding,  but  this  doth,  as  it  were,  bring 
God  down  to  our  senses.  2.  The  creation  is  a  demonstration  of  God's  infinite 
power.  And  this  consideration  is  apt  to  work  upon  our  fear,  the  most  wakeful 
passion  of  all  others  in  the  soul  of  man.  8.  The  creation  is  a  demonstration  of  the 
goodness  of  God  to  His  creatures.  This  consideration  of  God,  as  our  Creator, 
doth  naturally  suggest  to  oiu:  minds  that  His  goodness  brought  us  into  being;  and 
that,  if  being  a  benefit,  God  is  the  Foimtain  and  Author  of  it.     III.  The  beason 

OF  THE  LIMITATION   OF  THIS   DUTY  MOBE  ESPECIALLY  TO  THIS   PABTICULAK  AGE  OF   OUB 

LIVES.  "  Now,  in  the  days  of  thy  youth."  1.  To  engage  young  persons  to  begin 
this  great  and  necessary  work  of  religion  betimes,  and  as  soon  as  ever  they  are 
capable  of  taking  it  into  consideration.  2.  To  engage  young  persons  to  set  about 
this  work  presently,  and  not  to  defer  it  and  put  it  oS  to  the  future,  as  most  are 
apt  to  do.  8.  And  how  much  reason  there  is  to  press  both  these  considerations 
upon  young  persons  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  in  the  following  particulars, 
(1)  Because  in  this  age  of  our  lives  we  have  the  greatest  and  most  sensible  obliga- 
tion to  remember  God  our  Creator :  "  in  the  days  of  our  youth,"  when  the  blessing 
and  benefit  of  life  is  new,  and  the  memory  of  it  fresh  upon  our  minds.  (2)  The 
reason  will  be  yet  stronger  to  put  us  upon  this,  if  we  consider  that,  notwithstand- 
ing the  great  obligation  which  lies  upon  us  to  "  remember  our  Creator  in  the  days 
of  our  youth,"  we  are  most  apt  at  that  time  of  all  others  to  forget  Him.  For 
that  which  is  the  great  blessing  of  youth  is  also  the  great  danger  of  it,  I  mean, 
the  health  and  prosperity  of  it;  and,  though  men  have  then  least  reason,  yet  they 
are  most  apt  to  forget  God  in  the  height  of  pleasure  and  in  the  abundance  of  all 
things.  (3)  Because  this  age  is  of  all  others  the  fittest  and  best  to  begin  a 
religious  course  of  life.  And  this  does  not  contradict  the  former  argument,  though 
H  seems  to  do  so.  For  as  it  is  true  of  children  that  they  are  most  prone  to  be 
idle,  and  yet  fittest  to  learn,  so,  in  the  case  we  are  speaking  of,  both  are  true; 


SM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 


that  youth  ie  an  age  wherein  we  are  too  apt,  if  left  to  ourselves,  to  forget  Ood  and 
religion,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  fittest  to  receive  the  impressions  of  it.  (4)  This 
is  the  most  acceptable  time  of  all  others,  because  it  is  the  first  of  our  age.  Our 
blessed  Lord  took  great  pleasure  to  see  little  children  come  unto  Him ;  an  emblem 
of  the  pleasiu'e  He  takes  that  men  should  list  themselves  betimes  in  His  service. 
St.  John  was  the  youngest  of  all  the  disciples,  and  our  Saviour  had  a  very  par- 
ticular kindness  and  aSection  for  him;  for  he  is  said  to  be  "  the  disciple  whom 
Jesus  loved."  (5)  This  age  of  our  life  may,  for  anything  we  know,  be  the  only 
time  we  may  have  for  this  purpose;  and  if  we  cast  o2  the  thoughts  of  God  and 
defer  the  business  of  religion  to  old  age,  intending,  as  we  pretend,  to  set  about  it 
at  that  time,  we  may  be  cut  oft  before  that  time  comes,  and  turned  into  hell  with 
the  people  that  forget  God.  (J.  Tillotaon,  D.D.)  The  duty  and  advantages  of 
early  piety: — 1.  Though  we  should  begin  to  serve  God  even  from  our  youth,  our 
earliest  service  comes  long  after  His  favours.  Before  ever  we  come  to  years  of 
discretion  we  have  contracted  a  vast  debt  of  gratitude  to  our  Creator  and  Preserver ; 
a  debt  which  might  make  us  very  uneasy,  because  we  can  never  discharge  it, 
if  there  were  not  a  pleasure  in  endeavouring  to  pay  it,  and  if  such  endeavour  were 
not  all  that  God  requires  at  our  hands.  2.  We  should  serve  God  in  our  youth, 
because  that  is  the  way  to  make  the  practice  of  our  duty  easy  to  us;  and  because, 
if  we  set  out  wrong,  it  is  very  hard  afterwards  to  amend.  It  is  true  that  persons 
have  repented,  though  late,  and  have  delivered  themselves  from  the  bondage  of 
sin.  There  are  examples  of  it,  that  none  may  despair;  and  those  examples  are 
few,  that  none  may  presume.  3.  We  should  serve  God  in  our  youth,  because,  as 
virtue  will  have  the  first  possession  of  us,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  change  for  the 
worse  without  an  uncommon  resolution  to  do  ill.  The  first  love  is  usually  the 
strongest  and  the  most  lasting.  4.  Youth  is  also  the  time  when,  on  several 
accounts,  we  are  better  able  to  serve  God  than  we  are  in  a  more  advanced  age, 
if  we  have  neglected  our  duty  before.  There  are  good  qualities  and  favourable 
dispositions  which  often  accompany  it.  Thus,  in  youth  properly  educated,  there  is 
a  sincerity  not  yet  lost  by  the  practice  of  deceit  and  dissimulation;  there  is  a 
modesty  which  is  both  a  guard  to  virtue  and  a  check  to  sinful  actions;  there  is  a 
respect  for  parents  and  masters,  the  natural  result  of  a  state  of  dependence;  there 
is  a  flexibility  and  aptness  to  receive  instruction,  which  lessens  as  we  grow  up, 
if  self-love,  pride,  and  conceit  increase  faster  than  understanding  and  judgment, 
and  make  us  hasty,  obstinate,  and  perverse;  there  is,  lastly,  a  lively  heat  of 
temper,  an  activity  both  of  body  and  mind,  which,  as  it  is  dangerous  when  it  ia 
employed  in  the  service  of  vice,  so  it  can  make  a  speedy  progress  in  virtue.  6.  Yet 
youth,  with  all  its  advantages,  hath  its  disadvantages,  and  is  the  time  when  we 
are  the  most  tempted  to  forget  God;  and  therefore  ought  this  precept  to  be  incul- 
cated upon  that  thoughtless  age.  6.  If  there  be  joy  in  heaven  over  a  sinner  who 
repents,  and  God  in  the  Scriptiure  be  represented  under  the  image  of  the  father  in 
the  parable,  running  forth  to  meet  and  to  embrace  his  lost  son  as  soon  as  he 
returns,  yet  it  is  very  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  son  who,  from  his  youth, 
serves  and  never  leaves  his  heavenly  Father,  must  be  dearer  to  Him.  After  we 
have  sought  happiness  where  happiness  is  not  to  be  found,  then  to  condemn  our 
folly,  to  consider,  to  amend,  and  to  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  repentance  is  a  wise 
part.  But  it  is  a  wiser  and  a  more  generous  behaviour  to  serve  God  before  we 
have  served  other  masters,  not  driven  to  Him,  as  to  a  last  refuge,  by  afiflictions, 
or  disappointments,  or  by  an  immediate  sense  of  danger,  or  by  a  weariness  and 
dislike  of  the  world.  7.  Another  reason  for  which  youth  should  be  well  spent  is 
the  uncertainty  of  life.  8.  We  should  serve  God  in  our  earlier  days  with  a  view 
to  the  ensuing  days,  which  we  may  expect  in  the  cotirse  of  oiu*  life.  "  Kemember 
now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,"  says  Solomon,  "  while  the  evil  days 
come  not,  nor  the  years  draw  nigh,  when  thou  shalt  say,  I  have  no  pleasure  in 
them."  They  will  certainly  come  sooner  or  later,  unless  sudden  death  prevent 
them;  and,  therefore,  if  we  be  wise,  we  shall  in  our  youth,  before  they  overtake 
us,  prepare  to  meet  them,  and  provide  oiu-selves  all  the  assistance  which  we  can 
procure  to  lessen  those  evils,  and  to  support  and  comfort  us  imder  them.  And 
what  can  they  be,  imless  the  favour  of  God,  and  the  sense  of  a  life  spent  in 
laudable  industry,  in  acquiring  useful  knowledge,  in  discharging  our  duty  to  our 
Creator,  in  doing  kind  offices  to  oiu*  neighbour,  in  amending  our  faults,  and 
improving  in  virtue?  These  are  a  treasure  of  which  force  and  fraud  caimot 
deprive  us;  which  lies  out  of  the  reach  of  all  enemies  and  all  accidents.  The 
calamities  which  fall  upon  us  will  then  lose  much  of  their  weight;  old  age  will 


CHAP,  xii.]  ECCLESIASTES.  295 

be  unto  us  only  a  nearer  approach  to  everlasting  youth;  and  we  shall  meet  death, 
if  not  with  cheerfulnesa,  at  least  with  decency  and  resignation,  9.  To  these  con- 
vincing reasons  for  an  early  piety  I  shall  only  add  this,  that  it  is  in  no  respect  hard 
and  burthensome.  Youth  is  cheerful;  and  so  is  religion.  (J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  Early 
piety: — I.  It  is  the  first  advantage  of  early  piety,  and  our  first  obligation  to 
cultivate  it,  that  oub  duty  to  ode  Heavenly  Father  is  thereby  rendeeed  ea3Y 
AND  piuEAsiNG  TO  D8.  That  oustom  and  practice  render  everything  easy,  and  most 
things  pleasant  to  us,  is  universally  known  and  confessed;  and  will  in  a  peculiar 
degree  be  found  true  of  piety  towards  God.  In  this  case,  in  addition  to  the  delight 
naturally  arising  from  the  performance  of  what  is  familiar  to  us,  we  shall  have 
on  the  same  side  the  approbation  of  our  own  hearts ;  the  pleasure  of  habit  improved 
by  the  consciousness  of  duty.  II.  The  power  and  effects  of  custom  will  furnish 
yet  another  argument  in  favour  of  early  piety;  for  they  will  show  the  danger  ol 
contracting  opposite  habits  by  showing  the  difficulty  of  correcting  them.  The 
reproaches  of  a  wounded  conscience,  the  conviction  of  having  ofEended  God,  the 
anxiety  to  be  restored  to  His  favour,  and  the  uncertainty  whether  that  favour 
can  now  be  deserved  and  obtained;  all  these  considerations  alarm  and  oppress 
the  mind  of  him  who  is  grown  old  in  transgression;  and  form  so  many  difficulties 
in  the  way  of  his  returning  to  the  hallowed  paths  of  virtue  and  religion.  He  has, 
indeed,  a  double  task  to  perform,  to  cease  to  do  evil,  and  to  learn  to  do  well;  and 
the  abuse  of  his  youth  and  health  in  the  service  of  sin  has  left  this  task,  with  all 
its  difficulties,  to  infirmity  and  old  age.  III.  It  will  be  another  recommendation 
of  early  piety,  that  it  is  likely  to  beooms  thb  most  acceptable  to  its  object; 
because  the  most  suitable  to  his  character  and  our  own.  In  youth  is  generally 
found  a  sincerity  and  simplicity  of  heart,  which  recommend  every  part  of  human 
duty,  and  especially  our  duty  to  Him  to  whom  all  hearts  are  open.  In  youth,  while 
not  yet  corrupted  by  intercourse  with  a  corrupt  world,  are  generally  observed  • 
diffidence  and  modesty,  which  not  only  form  a  constant  guard  to  purity  and 
integrity,  but  which  bid  fair  to  ripen  into  humility  and  devotion.  In  youth  we 
find  the  greatest  aptness  to  learn.    IV.  Onb  unfoetdnatb  quality  in  oub  youth, 

BOWBVER,    too    OFTEN    COUNTEEACTS    THESB    FAVOUEABLB    DISPOSITIONS,    and    retards 

their  progress  in  piety.  Too  many  of  them  are  careless  and  thoughtless,  apt  to 
neglect  the  serious  consideration  of  their  Maker  and  His  laws.  Too  many  of  them 
show  a  levity  and  fickleness  of  mind  and  temper,  which  disinclines  them  to  the 
solemn  offices  of  religion,  and  prevents  the  performance  of  those  offices  with  due 
fervency  and  steadiness.  V.  It  is  another  recommendation  of  early  piety,  and 
another  obligation  to  the  practice  of  it,  that  we  shall  thereby  discharge,  as  far  as 

WE   ABB   REQUIRED   TO   DISCHABOE    IT,  A   DEBT  OF    OBATITUDB   AND   JUSTICE.      The  first 

tribute  of  our  faculties  is  naturally  due  to  Him  who  gave  them.  Children,  then, 
should  be  early  taught  to  meditate  upon  the  blessings  of  their  Maker.  VI.  Our  last 
recommendation  of  early  piety  shall  be  drawn  from  a  very  obvious,  but  very  inter- 
esting, so\u:ce,  the  shortness  and  uncertainty  of  human  life.  Youth  is  not  only 
the  most  proper  season  to  engage  in  the  service  of  our  God,  but  perhaps  the  only 
season  that  may  be  allowed  us.  (W.  Barrow,  LL.D.)  An  old  termon  for  young 
hearers: — I.  What  is  it  that  Solomon  counsels  young  people  to  remember? 
He  says,  "  thy  Creator  ";  but  what  about  God  does  he  desire  his  hearers  to  keep 
in  mind?  1.  His  existence,  as  He  proves  it.  And  He  proves  it  most  clearly  by 
creating  us;  He  is  our  Creator:  He  made  us,  every  one  of  us,  and  He  now  owns 
us  for  His  possession.  2.  God's  character,  as  He  exhibits  it.  The  heathen  think 
God  is  cruel;  so  they  insist  He  must  be  propitiated  and  pleased  by  bloody  sacrifices. 
3.  God's  providence,  as  He  exercises  it.  Not  a  moment  passes  without  our  having 
His  care.  There  was  one  very  pleasant  story  told  among  the  ancients  about  a 
person  called  Erichthoniua :  they  said  he  was  very  comely  in  his  body,  from  the 
waist  upwards,  but  he  had  his  thighs  and  legs  like  the  tail  of  an  eel,  small  and 
deformed;  for  a  long  time  he  did  not  understand  that  he  was  different  from  the 
rest  of  mankind,  but  as  soon  as  he  became  conscious  of  his  hateful  weakness,  he 
grew  so  melancholy  that  God  pitied  him;  and  then  He  showed  him,  in  a  dream, 
what  gave  him  a  fresh  and  splendid  idea;  that  is  to  say,  this  poor  shapeless  creature 
was  the  inventor  of  the  chariot  or  carriage,  whereby  his  own  want  could  be 
supplied;  so  God  benefited  him,  and  so  he  became  a  benefactor  himself  to  men. 
Once  when  this  story  was  related  to  a  child,  she  suddenly  said  :  "I  suppose 
it  ie  not  true  exactly;  but  if  it  had  been,  it  would  have  been  very  kind,  and 
just  like  God  to  do  it,  too."  4.  God's  Word,  as  He  has  revealed  it.  The  Bible  is  a 
message   sent  directly  from  our  Maker;  so  He  expects  us  all,  young  and  old,  to 


S96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

read  it,  and  find  out  what  it  means.  The  Scriptures  do  principally  teach  what 
we  are  to  believe  concerning  God,  and  what  duty  God  requires  of  man.  5.  God's 
Church,  as  He  has  organiized  it.  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son  that  He  might 
be  made  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church,  which  is  His  body,  "  the  fulness  of 
Him  that  fiUeth  all  in  all."  II.  When,  specially,  abe  wb  to  eemembeb  cub 
Cebator?  "  Now,  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,"  1.  In  the  beginning,  remember 
that  the  young  can  be  Christians.  Why  not?  All  they  have  to  do  is  to  come 
and  ask  Christ  to  take  them,  and  make  them  His  children.  2.  Kemember,  there- 
fore, that  it  is  easier  for  young  people  to  be  Christians  than  it  is  for  others. 
The  spirit  of  religion  is  precisely  that  of  a  little  child,  to  start  with;  and  a  religious 
career  is  exquisitely  in  accordance  with  a  youthful  disposition  (Matt,  zviii.  3). 
8.  Bemember,  once  again,  that  the  young  have  often  become  Christians.  In  the 
Scriptures  we  have  the  account  of  Jeremiah,  of  Paul's  sister's  son,  of  Timothy,  of 
John  Mark.  In  the  primitive  Church  the  names  come  to  us  of  Polycarp,  who  must 
have  loved  Christ  when  he  was  four  years  old;  and  Justin  Martyr  has  often  been 
quoted  as  saying  that  there  were  many  boys  and  girls  "  who  had  been  considered 
disciples  of  the  Lord  in  their  childhood,  and  continued  uncorrupted  all  their  lives." 
Later  in  history,  we  know  Jonathan  Edwards  was  converted  before  ha  was  seven, 
and  Matthew  Henry  before  he  was  eleven  years  old,  Isaac  Watts  before  he  reached 
nine.  4.  Bemember  that  the  young  ought  always  to  be  Christians.  Many  ara 
the  children  of  faithful  training  and  of  many  prayers.  God  is  true  to  His  covenant, 
and  "  the  promise  is  imto  you,  and  to  your  children,  and  to  all  that  are  afar  off, 
even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call."  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The 
warning  not  to  forget  God: — We  ought  to  mind  this  warning — I.  Foa  the  Loed's 
sake.  "  I  wish  I  could  mind  God  as  my  little  dog  minds  me,"  said  a  little  boy, 
looking  thoughtfully  at  his  shaggy  friend — "  he  always  seems  so  pleased  to  mind. 
And  I  don't."  That  little  dog  obeyed  his  young  master  for  his  master's  sake. 
He  really  loved  him,  and  tried  to  show  this  love  by  the  cheerful,  ready  way  in 
which  he  obeyed  him.  This  was  the  right  thing  for  him  to  do;  and  it  is  just  what 
God  expects  us  to  do.  II.  Foe  ode  own  sake.  When  we  really  begin  to 
remember  God,  and  to  keep  His  commandments,  God  says  to  each  of  us,  as  He 
•aid  to  the  Israelites  in  old  time — "  from  this  day  will  I  bless  you."  And  God's 
blessing  is  worth  more  to  us  than  all  the  world  besides.  "  Bemember  now  thy 
Creator,"  was  once  said  to  a  little  boy.  "  Not  yet,"  said  the  boy,  as  he  busied 
himself  with  his  bat  and  ball;  "  when  I  grow  older  I  will  think  about  it."  The 
little  boy  grew  to  be  a  young  man.  "  Bemember  now  thy  Creator,"  his  conscience 
said  to  him.  "  Not  yet,"  said  the  yoimg  man;  "  I  am  now  about  to  begin  my 
trade;  when  I  see  my  business  prosper,  I  shall  have  more  time  than  I  can 
command  now."  His  business  did  prosper.  "  Bemember  now  thy  Creator,"  hia 
conscience  whispered  to  him.  '*  Not  yet,"  said  the  man  of  business;  "  my  chil- 
dren must  now  have  my  care;  when  they  are  settled  in  life,  I  shall  be  better  able 
to  attend  to  the  claims  of  religion."  He  lived  to  be  a  grey-headed  old  man. 
"  Remember  now  thy  Creator,"  was  the  voice  which  conscience  once  mora 
addressed  to  him.  "Not  yet,"  was  still  his  cry;  "I  shall  soon  retire  from 
business,  and  then  I  shall  have  nothing  else  to  do  but  read  and  pray."  Soon 
after  this  he  died,  without  becoming  a  Christian.  He  put  o£E  to  another  time  what 
he  should  have  attended  to  when  young,  and  that  caused  the  loss  of  his  soul. 
Those  two  little  words — "  Not  yet  " — were  his  ruin.  III.  Fob  the  sake  of 
others.  God's  promise  to  Abraham,  when  he  began  to  serve  Him,  was  that  ha 
should  be  a  blessing.  And  God  says  the  same  thing  to  all  His  people.  And  not 
only  by  our  words,  but  by  our  actions,  and  by  our  prayers,  we  may  be  doing 
good,  all  the  time,  to  those  about  us.  (B.  Newton,  D.D.)  The  young  man'a 
task: — To  them  which  are  young  Solomon  shows  what  advantage  they  have 
above  the  aged;  like  a  ship,  which,  seeing  another  ship  sink  before  her,  looks 
about  her,  pulls  down  her  sail,  turneth  her  course,  and  escapes  the  sands  which 
would  swallow  her  as  they  had  done  the  other.  So  they  which  are  young  need 
not  try  the  snares  and  allurements  of  the  world,  or  the  issues  and  efEects  of  sin, 
which  old  men  have  tried  before  them,  but  take  the  trial  and  experience  of  others, 
and  go  a  nearer  way  to  obtain  their  wished  desires.  That  is  this,  saith  Solomon : 
if  thou  wouldst  have  any  settled  peace  or  heart  joy  in  this  vain  or  transitory  world, 
which  thou  hast  been  seeking  all  the  time  since  thou  wert  born,  thou  must 
"  remember  thy  Creator,"  which  did  make  thee,  which  hath  elected  thee,  which 
hath  redeemed  thee,  which  daily  preserveth  thee,  which  will  for  ever  glorify  thee. 
tMd  as  the  kind  remembrance  of  a  friend  doth  recreate  the  mind,  bo  to  think  and 


CHAP,  xu.]  ECCLESIASTES.  Vfl 

meditate  upon  God  will  supply  thy  thoughts,  dispel  thy  grief,  and  make  thea 
cheerful,  as  the  sight  of  the  ark  comforted  David;  for  joy,  and  comfort,  and 
pleasure  is  where  Ood  is,  as  light,  and  cheerfulness,  and  beauty  is  where  the  sun 
16.  Now  if  thou  wouldst  have  this  joy,  and  comfort,  and  pleasure  to  be  long, 
and  wouldst  escape  those  thousand  miseries,  vexations,  and  vanities,  which 
Solomon,  by  many  weary  and  tedious  trials,  sought  to  make  naked  before  thee,  and 
yet  held  all  but  vanity  when  he  had  found  the  way,  thou  must  "  remember  thy 
Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth  "  at  the  first  spring-time,  and  then  thy  happiness 
shall  be  as  long  as  thj  life,  and  all  thy  thoughts  while  thou  remainest  on  earth  a 
foretaste  of  the  glory  of  heaven.  This  is  the  sum  of  Solomon's  counsel.  Can  a 
child  forget  his  father?  Is  not  God  our  Father?  Therefore,  who  is  too  young 
to  remember  Him,  seeing  the  child  doth  know  his  father?  As  the  deepest  woundJs 
had  need  to  be  first  tended,  so  the  imstablest  minds  have  need  to  be  first  con- 
firmed. In  this  extremity  is  youth,  as  Solomon  shows  them  before  he  teacheth 
them;  for  in  the  last  verse  of  the  former  chapter  he  calleth  youth  "  vanity,"  as 
if  he  should  speak  all  evil  in  a  word,  and  say  that  youth  is  even  the  age  of  sin., 
Therefore,  when  he  had  showed  young  men  their  folly  imder  the  name  of  vanity, 
like  a  good  tutor  he  taketh  them  to  school,  and  teacheth  them  their  duty, 
"  Remember  thy  Creator,"  as  though  all  sin  were  the  forgetfulness  of  God;  and 
all  our  obedience  came  from  this  remembrance,  that  God  created  us  after  His  owa 
image,  in  righteousness  and  holiness,  to  serve  Him  here  for  a  while,  and  after  to 
inherit  the  joys  which  He  hath  Himself,  which,  if  we  did  remember,  doubtless 
it  would  make  us  ashamed  to  think,  and  speak,  and  do  as  we  are  wont.  It  is 
an  old  saying,  Bepentance  is  never  too  late;  but  it  is  a  true  saying,  Bepentanca 
is  never  too  soon.  Therefore,  we  are  commanded  to  run  that  we  may  obtain 
(1  Cor.  ix.  24),  which  is  the  swiftest  pace  of  man.  The  cherubims  were  portrayed 
with  wings  before  the  place  where  the  Israelites  prayed  (Exod.  xxv.  20),  to  show 
how  quickly  they  went  about  the  Lord's  business.  The  hound  which  runs  but 
for  the  hare,  girds  forth  so  soon  as  he  sees  the  hare  start;  the  hawk  which  fiieth 
but  for  the  partridge,  taketh  her  flight  so  soon  as  she  spieth  the  partridge  spring; 
so  we  should  follow  the  word  so  soon  as  it  speaketh,  and  come  to  our  Master  so 
soon  as  He  calleth.  If  our  children  be  deformed  in  their  youth,  we  never  look  to 
see  them  well  favoured;  so  if  the  mind  be  planted  in  sin,  seldom  any  goodness 
buddeth  out  of  that  stock.  For  virtue  must  have  a  time  to  grow,  the  seed  is  sown 
in  youth,  which  cometh  up  in  age.  Try  thy  strength  but  with  one  of  thy  sins,  and 
see  what  shifts,  what  excuses,  what  delays  it  will  find,  and  how  it  will  importune 
thee  to  let  it  alone,  as  the  devil  tormented  the  child  before  he  went  out;  if  thou 
canst  not  discharge  one  vice  that  thou  hast  accustomed  thyself  unto,  when  all  thy 
vices  are  become  ciistoms,  how  wilt  thou  wrestle  with  them?  Therefore  we  bend 
the  tree  while  it  is  a  twig,  and  break  the  horse  while  he  is  a  colt,  and  teach  th» 
dog  while  he  is  a  whelp,  and  tame  the  eagle  while  he  is  yoimg.  Youth  is  like  the 
day  to  do  all  our  works  in.  For  when  the  night  of  age  cometh,  then  every  man 
saith,  I  might  have  been  learned,  I  might  have  been  a  teacher,  I  might  have  been 
like  him,  or  him,  but  the  harvest  was  past  before  I  began  to  sow,  and  winter  ia 
come,  now  my  fruit  should  ripe.  Thus  every  man  that  is  old  saith,  he  cannot 
do  that  which  he  thought  to  do,  and  crieth  with  Solomon,  Catechize  the  child  in 
his  youth,  and  he  will  remember  it  when  he  is  old;  so  corrupt  him  in  his  youth, 
and  he  will  remember  that  too.  There  be  not  many  Lots,  but  many  linger  like 
Lot,  loath  to  depart,  imtil  they  see  the  fire  burn.  If  the  angel  had  not  snatched 
him  away,  Lot  had  perished  with  Sodom  for  his  delay.  There  be  not  five  foolish 
virgins  and  five  wise,  but  five  for  one  knock  when  the  door  is  shut.  There  be  not 
many  Simeons,  but  many  as  old  as  Simeon,  which  never  yet  embraced  Christ  in 
their  hearts.  They  thought  to  repent  before  they  were  so  old,  yet  now  they  doat 
for  age,  they  are  not  old  enough  to  repent  yet.  Is  this  to  seek  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  first,  or  last,  or  not  at  all?  Woe  to  the  security,  woe  to  the  stubbornness, 
woe  to  the  drowsiness  of  this  age.  (H.  Smith.)  While  the  evil  days  come  not,, 
nor  the  years  draw  nigh,  when  thou  shalt  say,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  them. — 
Preparation  for  old  age : — Old  age  is  a  distant  port  for  which  the  whole  human  race 
start,  toward  which  they  steer.  More  than  half  perish  at  the  commencement  of 
the  voyage.  Thousands  and  thousands  are  born  who  should  have  had  a  right  in 
life,  but  whose  hold  is  so  brittle,  that  the  first  wind  shakes  them,  and  they  fall 
like  untimely  fruit.  Some  fall  by  accident,  some  in  the  discharge  of  duties  which 
call  them  to  offer  up  their  lives  as  a  sacrifice  for  the  common  weal.  The  greatest 
number,  however,  are  deprived  of  a  good  old  age  by  their  own  ignorance  or  by  their 


888  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xh. 

own  misconduct;  and  thoee  that  reach  that  old  age  too  often  find  that  it  is  a 
land  of  sorrow.  Now  old  age  was  not  designed  to  be  mournful  but  beautiful.  It 
18  the  clofie  of  a  symphony,  beautiful  in  its  inception,  rolling  on  grandly,  an4 
terminating  in  a  climax  of  sublimity.  It  is  harmonious  and  admirable,  according 
to  the  scheme  of  nature.  The  charms  of  infancy,  the  hopes  of  the  spring  of 
youth,  the  vigour  of  manhood,  and  the  serenity  and  tranquillity,  the  wisdom  an4 
peace  of  old  age — all  these  together  constitute  the  true  human  life,  with  its  begin- 
ning, middle,  and  end — a  glorious  epoch.  Every  one  of  us,  but  especially  thoa* 
who  are  beginning  in  life,  is  aiming  at  a  serene  and  happy  old  age,  and  I  propose 
to  put  before  you  some  considerations  which  shall  direct  your  attention  to  th« 
methods  of  attaining  it.  1.  There  are  many  physical  elements  which  enter  into  Ibo 
preparation  for  a  profitable  and  happy  old  age.  The  human  body  is  an  instrument 
of  pleasure  and  use,  built  for  eighty  years'  wear.  His  body  is  placed  in  a  worU 
adapted  to  nourish  and  protect  it.  Nature  is  congenial.  Thero  are  elements 
enough  of  mischief  in  it,  if  a  man  pleases  to  find  them  out.  A  man  can  wear  his 
body  out  as  quickly  as  he  pleases,  destroy  it  if  he  will;  but,  after  all,  the  great 
laws  of  nature  are  nourishing  laws,  and,  comprehensively  regarded,  nature  ia  the 
universal  nurse,  the  imiversal  physician  of  our  race,  guarding  us  against  svl, 
warning  us  of  it  by  incipient  pains,  setting  up  signals  of  danger — ^not  outwardly, 
but  inwardly — and  cautioning  us  by  sorrows  and  by  pains  for  our  benefit.  Evai^ 
immoderate  draft  which  is  made  by  the  appetites  and  passions  is  so  much  sent 
forward  to  be  cashed  in  old  age.  You  may  sin  at  one  end,  but  God  takes  it  oC 
at  the  other.  I  do  not  object  to  mirth  or  gaiety,  but  I  do  object  to  any  man 
making  an  animal  of  himself  by  living  for  the  gratification  of  his  own  animal 
passions.  Excess  in  youth,  in  regard  to  animal  indulgences,  is  bankruptcy  in  oM 
age.  For  this  reason,  I  deprecate  late  hours,  irregular  hours,  or  irregular  sleep. 
People  ask  me  frequently,  "  Do  you  think  that  there  is  any  harm  in  dancing?*' 
Ko,  I  do  not.  There  is  much  good  in  it.  "  Do  you,  then,  object  to  dancing- 
parties?"  No;  in  themselves,  I  do  not.  But  whers  unknit  youth,  unripe  muscle, 
tmsettled  and  unhardened  nerves,  are  put  through  an  excess  of  excitement,  treated 
with  stimulants,  fed  irregularly  and  with  imwholesome  food,  surrounded  witk 
gaiety  which  is  excessive,  and  which  is  protracted  through  hours  when  they  should 
be  asleep,  I  object,  not  becaiise  of  the  dancing,  but  because  of  the  dissipation. 
But  there  are  many  that  I  perceive  are  wasting  their  lives  and  destroying  their  old 
age,  not  through  their  passions,  but  through  their  ambition,  and  in  the  pursuit  ot 
laudable  objects.  I  know  of  many  artists  that  are  wearing  out  their  lives,  day 
efter  day,  with  preternatural  excitement  of  the  brain;  yet  their  aims  are  transcend- 
ently  excellent.  I  know  of  musicians  that  are  wearing  out,  night  and  day;  yat 
their  ambition  is  upward  and  noble.  They  are  ignorant  that  they  are  wearing  out 
their  body  by  the  excitement  of  their  brains.  While  alcoholic  stimulants  waste  and 
destroy  life,  and  prevent  a  happy  old  age,  the  same  thing  is  also  done  by  morii 
stimulants.  The  latter  is  not  as  beastly,  but  it  is  just  as  wasteful  of  health. 
Whatever  prematurely  wears  out  the  thinking  machinery,  or  destroys  health 
prematurely,  carries  bankruptcy  into  old  age.  2.  There  ought,  also,  to  be  wisdom 
in  secular  affairs,  in  the  preparation  by  the  young  for  the  coming  of  old  age. 
Foresight  is  a  Christian  virtue.  Every  man  should  make  such  provision  tat 
himself  afi  that  he  shall  not  be  dependent  upon  others.  Provision  for  moderat* 
comfort  in  old  age  is  wise.  It  is  far  better  than  an  ambition  for  immoderate 
riches,  which  too  often  defeats  itself.  If  men  were  more  moderate  in  their  expecta- 
tions; if,  when  they  had  obtained  a  reasonable  competency,  they  secured  that  from 
the  perils  of  commercial  reverses,  more  men,  I  think,  would  go  into  old  ags 
serene  and  happy.  8.  In  looking  upon  old  age,  we  are  forcibly  struck  with  tha 
necessity  of  taking  pains  early,  and  all  the  way  through  life,  to  accutaulate  stores 
for  social  enjoyment.  Sociability  is  a  part  of  Christian  duty.  Every  man  should 
take  great  care  not  to  cut  himself  off  from  the  sympathies  of  hiiman  life.  Old 
men  should  take  care  that  they  be  not  deprived  of  enjoyment  in  the  society  of  th© 
young;  and  if  a  man  would  derive  comfort  from  the  young  in  his  old  age,  he  must 
cultivate  an  attachment  for  the  young  in  his  early  life.  In  youth  and  middle  age 
you  are  to  secure  the  provision  that  shall  supply  you  in  old  age,  if  you  are  to  be 
nourished  and  made  happy  on  such  joys  as  these.  Be  not,  then,  selfish  in  yoiir 
youth.  Grow  to  your  fellow-men,  instead  of  growing  away  from  them,  and  strive 
to  live  more  and  more  in  sympathy  with  them  and  for  them.  4.  Let  me  speak  of 
the  intellectual  resources  that  are  to  help  you  in  old  age.  Education  has  a  more 
important  relation  to  manhood  than  it  has  to  the  making  of  your  outside  forfcuna. 


OBAP.  xn.]  ECCLESIASTES.  280 

If  jou  are  to  be  *  lawyer,  a  physician,  a  minister,  or  a  teacher,  you  need  aa 
educatioa  in  order  to  aucoeed  in  your  calling;  but  if  you  belong  to  none  of  thea* 
callings,  you  need  an  education  to  succeed  in  your  manhood.  Education  meana 
the  derelopment  of  what  is  in  man;  and  every  man  ought  to  be  dereloped,  not 
beoause  he  can  make  money  thereby,  but  because  he  can  make  manhood  thereby. 
Education  is  due  to  your  manhood.  Eeep  your  lamp  full  of  oil,  and  lay  up  such 
stores  of  intellectual  provision,  that  when  you  go  into  old  age,  if  one  resource 
fails  you,  you  can  try  another.  If  you  have  learned  to  look  under  your  feet  every 
day  while  young,  and  to  cull  the  treasures  of  truth  which  belong  to  theology, 
natural  history,  and  chemistry;  if  every  fly  has  furnished  you  a  study;  if  the 
incrustation  of  the  frost  is  a  matter  of  interest;  if  the  trees  that  come  in  spring, 
and  the  birds  that  populate  them,  the  flowers  of  the  meadow,  the  grass  of  the 
field,  the  fishes  that  disport  themselves  in  the  water — if  all  of  these  are  so  many 
•ouvenirs  of  the  working  hand  of  your  God,  you  will  find,  when  you  come  into 
your  old  age,  that  you  have  great  enjoyment  therein.  Let  me,  therefore,  recom* 
mend  you  to  commit  much  to  memory.  Oh,  how  much  a  man  may  store  up 
against  old  age(  What  a  price  is  put  into  the  hands  of  the  young  wherewith  to 
get  wisdom!  What  provisions  for  old  age  do  they  squander  and  throw  away! 
It  ia  a  great  thing  so  to  have  lived  that  the  best  part  of  life  shall  be  its  evening., 
October,  the  ripast  month  of  the  year,  and  the  richest  in  colours,  is  a  type  of  what 
old  age  should  ba.  6.  I  have  reserved  for  the  last  the  most  important,  namely, 
the  spiritual,  preparation  for  old  age.  It  is  a  beautiful  thing  for  a  man,  when  ha 
eomes  into  old  age,  to  have  no  more  preparation  to  make.  If  piety  is  the  garment 
you  have  worn  through  a  long  and  virtuous  life,  you  may  stand  in  your  old  aga 
in  the  certainty  of  faith,  waiting  only  that  you  may  pass  from  glory  to  glory.  A 
part  of  this  spiritual  preparation  consists,  I  think,  in  living  all  the  time  with  tha 
distinct  consciousness  that  our  life  ia  a  joined  one;  that  the  best  part  of  it  is  that 
which  lies  beyond;  and  that  we  are  not  to  live  for  the  life  that  lies  between  ona 
and  eighty,  but  for  that  which  lies  between  one  and  eternity.  Tha  habit  of 
associating  all  your  friends  and  friendships  with  this  future  life,  while  it  will 
afford  you  great  eomfort  and  strength  all  the  way  through  life,  will  give  its 
ahoicest  fruits  and  benefits  in  old  age.  As  you  grow  old,  childhood's  companions 
die  around  you  every  year;  but  if  you  have  been  living  a  true  Christian  life, 
although  the  world  may  seem  desolate  for  a  time,  yet  your  thought  is  this :  "  My 
companions,  my  fellow- workers,  have  gone  before  me;  I  am  left  alone  in  the  dreary 
world,  but  am  every  day  being  brought  closer  and  closer  to  that  world  of  aver* 
lasting  blessedness.  One  has  gone  before;  another  has  gone;  the  wife  of  my 
bosom,  my  eldest  child,  one  after  another  of  my  children,  and  of  their  children, 
have  gone;  one  after  another  of  my  neighbours  and  the  friends  of  my  youth  have 
gone,  and  I  am  left  behind;  but  I  am  close  upon  their  steps.  They  are  all  thera 
waiting  for  me.  I  have  but  a  few  days  to  wait,  and  I  shall  be  blessed  again  with 
their  high  and  holy  society."     (H.  W,  Batcher.) 

Yer.  2.  The  eloTids  return  after  the  rain. — Sorrow  unspeakable: — Coming  home 
irom  the  burial  of  his  little  Agnes,  the  late  Nehemiah  Adams,  D.D.,  of  Boston, 
drew  out  of  his  pocket  the  ribbon-tied  key  of  her  casket.  "  I  thought  for  a  few 
minutes  that  I  should  lose  my  reason,"  he  writes.  "  The  clouds  returned  after 
the  rain,"  and  they  were  very  dark  and  distressing.  And  who  has  not  had  similar 
experiences  1  And  sometimes  they  are  exquisitely  painful  as  well  as  sorrowful,  as 
when  conscience  reproaches  us  for  unkindnese,  or  remissness,  or  for  hasty  words 
and  cruel  alienation,  or  neglect  of  duty,  ae  we  hang  over  the  coffin  of  a  husband 
or  wife,  or  parent  or  child,  or  friend,  or  come  back  from  the  new-made  grave. 
The  unnamed,  unspeakable  agony  of  a  reproving  conscience,  when  all  redress  or 
eonfeesion  is  impossible,  is  harder  to  bear  than  the  blow  itself.  The  after-cloud 
hae  no  "  silver  lining  ";  it  is  miirky,  dismal,  and  almost  unbearable,  for  it  abides, 
and  there  is  no  relief  from  it.  Let  us  be  careful  in  life  to  give  no  occasion  for 
euoh  return  of  the  clouds  after  the  rain. 

7er.  8.  Those  that  look  out  of  the  windows  he  darkened.— TTindowt.* — ^In  the 
description  of  the  infirmities  of  old  age,  the  window  doubtless  stands  for  the  eyes, 
with  lashes  like  lattice- work  of  an  Oriental  houee,  and  the  fringe  of  tha  irii 
regulating  the  light  as  a  curtain.  Observe  that  it  is  said,  not  that  the  windows, 
but  "  those  that  look  out  of  them  "  are  darkened :  the  reference,  therefore,  being 
pot  to  the  failing  eyesight,  ae  many  have  suppoeed,  but  rather  to  the  growing 


800  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

dullness  of  the  inner  person,  the  mind,  which  takee  less  and  leM  interest  in  the 
world  as  one  advances  towards  senility.  A  person  may  be  blind  in  years,  yet 
yoimg  in  heart,  if  he  only  keeps  alert  to  the  life  about  him.  Think  of  Bank* 
beginning  his  "  Universal  History  "  at  eighty -three  years  of  age,  and  finishing  his 
■eventh  volume  at  ninety-one  1  The  venerable  Kaiser  Wilhelm  not  long  before  his 
death  was  asked  by  his  daughter  if  he  had  not  better  rest  a  little.  "  No,"  he 
replied,  **  I  will  have  plenty  of  time  to  rest  by  and  by."  In  a  call  upon  George 
Bancroft,  at  eighty-eight  years  of  age,  I  found  him  as  full  of  questions  about  men 
and  things  that  he  thought  I  knew  of  as  if  I  were  the  representative  of  old  times 
and  he  the  interviewer.  The  eyes  of  such  men  may  be  dim,  but  the  spirits  that 
look  out  of  them  are  not  "darkened."  They  are  the  really  senile  people  who 
pull  down  the  curtains  of  selfishness  on  amiable  curiosity,  on  generous  solicitude 
for  the  evils  of  society,  and  on  delight  in  the  good  of  the  world,  though  they  have 
not  yet  come  to  wear  glasses.  Let  us  keep  at  the  windows  until  God  closes  them 
by  dropping  over  them  the  curtain  of  the  last  night.  And  then,  when  the  dusk  of 
life's  eventide  has  fallen  around  us,  when  secular  things  do  turn  dim,  we  may 
look  up  through  the  window  at  the  infinite  sky,  and  see  the  stars  of  •  better 
world  coming  out.     (J.  M.  Ludlow^  D.D.) 

Vet.  4.  The  doors  shall  be  shnt  in  the  streets. — Door* ."—Literally,  "double 
doors."  This  occurs  in  the  description  of  the  decrepitude  of  an  old  man :  "  The 
keepers  of  the  house  (the  arms)  shall  tremble,  and  the  strong  men  (the  legs) 
ehall  bow  themselves,  and  the  grinders  (the  teeth)  cease  because  they  are  few, 
and  those  that  look  out  of  the  windows  (our  natural  interest  in  the  world)  be 
darkened,  and  the  double  doors  shall  be  shut  in  the  street."  By  "  double  doors  " 
is  meant  those  bodily  functions  which  have  double  organs — eyes,  ears,  nostrils, 
lips,  the  openings  of  sense  and  communication  with  the  world.  It  is  a  great  thing 
to  have  the  house  of  the  soul  stored  with  good,  with  true  thoughts,  bright  hopes, 
sweet  loves,  comfortable  conscience,  the  various  food  of  Divine  promises,  and 
best  of  all  is  to  have  God,  the  source  of  all  good,  inside  with  us  when  the  double 
doors  no  longer  open.  I  once  heard  a  man  cursing  with  screeching  rage  his  coming 
blindness,  and  a  paralytic  swearing  at  his  fate  with  half -palsied  tongue,  struggling 
impotently  like  a  convict  resisting  the  shutting  of  the  doors  of  his  cell.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  some  of  the  sweetest-tempered  persons  are  blind  or  deaf. 
Beethoven  was  full  of  music  though  deaf ;  the  music  was  stored  there  in  his  know- 
ledge of  harmony  through  previous  study.  Milton's  mind  was  full  of  light, 
though  he  was  blind;  the  vast  stores  of  knowledge  were  laid  in  before  the  doors 
were  closed.     (/.  M.  Ludlow,  D.D.) 

Ver.   6    The   almond-tree   shall   flourish. — Th$   almoni'tree   in   blo8»otn>— In 

January,  Palestine  is  adorned  with  the  blossoming  of  the  almond-tree.  It  breathes 
its  life  into  that  winter  month  as  a  promise  of  God  sometimes  lightens  up  and 
sweetens  the  coldness  and  desolation  of  a  sorrowing  spirit.  When  the  almond-tree 
was  in  full  bloom,  it  must  have  looked  like  some  tree  before  our  window  on  a 
winter's  morning,  after  a  nightfall  of  snow,  when  its  brightness  is  almost  insuffer- 
able, every  stem  a  white  and  feathery  plume.  Now  you  are  ready  to  see  the 
meaning  of  the  text.  Solomon  was  giving  a  full-length  portrait  of  an  aged  man. 
By  striking  figuies  of  speech,  ho  sets  forth  his  trembling  and  decrepitude,  and 
then  comes  to  describe  the  whiteness  of  his  locks  by  the  blossoming  of  the  almond- 
tree.  It  is  the  master-touch  of  the  picture,  for  I  see  in  that  one  sentence  not 
only  the  appearance  of  the  hair,  but  an  announcement  of  the  beauty  of  old  age. 
The  white  locks  of  a  bad  man  are  but  the  gathered  frosts  of  the  second  death, 
but  "  a  hoary  head  is  a  crown  of  glory  "  if  it  be  found  in  the  way  of  righteous- 
ness. There  may  be  no  colour  in  the  cheek,  no  lustre  in  the  eye,  no  spring  in 
the  step,  no  firmness  in  the  voice,  and  yet  around  the  head  of  every  old  man 
whose  life  has  been  upright  and  Christian  there  hovers  a  glory  brighter  than  ever 
shook  in  the  white  tops  of  the  almond-tree.  If  the  voice  quiver,  it  is  because 
Ood  is  changing  it  into  a  tone  fit  for  the  celestial  choral.  If  the  hand  tremble, 
it  is  because  God  is  unloosing  it  from  worldly  disappointments  to  clasp  it  on 
ringing  harp  and  waving  palm.  If  the  hair  has  turned,  it  is  only  the  grey  light 
dtneaTsn's  dawn  streaming  through  the  scant  locks.  The  falling  of  this  aged 
Christian's  staff  will  be  the  signal  for  the  heavenly  gate  to  swing  open.  The  scat- 
tering of  the  almond  blossoms  will  only  discover  the  sstting  of  the  fruit.  (T.  D« 
Win  Ttlmag0.)    Bsoansenua  goeth  to  Us  long  home.— i/an's  long  koms.*— Man 


CHAP,  m.]  ECCLESIASTES.  801 

ifl  on  his  way  to  a  long  home  :  hia  lot  in  his  long  home  will  be  determined  by  the 
manner  in  which  he  walks  that  homeward  way;  therefore,  in  his  homeward  walk 
he  ought  to  "  remember  hie  Creator  in  the  days  of  his  youth,"  and  to  "  fear  God  " 
all  hie  life  long.  It  might  be  made  to  run  thus :  Live  wisely  that  you  may  die 
happily.  Live  obediently  unto  God  in  this  world  that  you  may  live  joyfully  with 
God  in  the  next  world.  I.  Thi  home-going.  "  Man  goeth  home."  He  does  not 
enter  it  by  a  sudden  leap  or  boxmd,  but  he  is,  as  on  a  journey,  continuously 
progressing  nearer  and  nearer  to  it.  This  is  life — a  constant  home-going.  There 
are  what  we  may  call  years  of  preparation  for  the  conscious  start.  When  the 
infant  first  breathes  these  mortal  airs;  when  the  child  is  growing  in  stature  and 
developing  in  mind  and  soul,  scarcely  thinking,  or  even  knowing  that,  right  on 
before,  there  lies  an  eternal  destiny;  and  when  the  youth  is  just  catching  the  faint 
glimmerings  of  consciousness  as  to  duty  and  responsibility,  and  the  need  for  heroic 
spiritual  efforts — then  is  the  time  of  a  silent  equipment,  physically  and  morally, 
for  entering  on  the  hard,  rough  way  of  the  homeward  journey.  And  only  at  its 
close  is  the  thought  borne  in  on  the  soul  that  life  is  not  to  be  considered  as  an 
automatic,  purposeless  thing,  but  is  a  well-marked  and  controllable  progression 
which  ends  somewhere  in  a  "long  home."  When  that  thought  is  first  clearly 
and  earnestly  realized  by  a  boy  or  girl,  then  the  real  conscious  start  in  the  home- 
going  is  made.  It  usually  happens,  if  not  earlier,  when  the  young  people  are  in 
their  teens.  They  can,  at  the  very  outset,  if  only  they  will,  bound  forward  and 
gain  splendid  spiritual  lengths.  They  have  ardent  affections,  they  have  burning 
enthusiasms,  which  can  go  out  untrammelled  to  what  is  highest  and  best.  They 
have  not  yet  entangled  themselves  with  evil  habits  which  have  to  be  sternly  battled 
with  before  they  can  be  flung  off.  They  have  not  yet  come  under  the  burden  of 
life's  many  cares,  which  sometimes  make  the  feet  heavy  and  slow  in  the  heaven- 
ward way.  Are  yovir  eyes  dimmer,  or  your  ears  duller,  or  your  limbs  feebler,  o« 
your  appetites  blunter,  or  your  hair  whiter  and  scantier,  or  your  soul  less  enthu- 
siastic than  in  other  days?  Then,  these  are  the  Divine  monitors  telling  that  you 
are  not  to  be  always  here — that,  in  your  progressive  home-going,  you  are  fast 
ripening  for  the  final  exit.  II.  The  long  bomb.  "  Man  goeth  to  his  long  home," 
or,  as  the  Hebrew  has  it,  to  "  his  house  of  eternity."  Used  by  other  and  earlier 
Writers,  this  may  have  been  only  a  synonym  for  the  grave;  but  more  than  this 
was  meant  by  the  writer  of  our  text,  for  in  ver.  7  he  speaks  of  "  the  dust  returning 
to  the  dust  as  it  was,  and  the  spirit  returning  to  God  who  gave  it."  So  the  "  long 
borne  "  in  his  mind  was,  for  the  body  the  grave,  and  for  the  spirit  an  existence 
within  the  veil.  May  we  not,  therefore,  think  of  man's  "  long  home  "  as  having 
an  outer  and  an  inner  court?  The  outer  court  is  the  grave.  That  is  the  "  long 
home  "  to  which  our  bodies  are  daily,  hourly,  going — our  poor  bodies,  which  we 
deck  and  pamper,  and  on  which  we  bestow  such  thought  and  care.  The  inner 
court  is  within  the  veil.  And  back  from  it,  when  the  spirit  enters,  there  is  no 
retiirning  to  these  earthly  scenes.  It  is  "  oiu:  house  of  eternity  " — an  eternal 
home.  About  that  unseen  world  we  know  bo  little  that  it  is  not  wise  to  say  much. 
III.  Tbb  iiouBNBBS  LEFT  BEHIND.  When  a  man  enters  the  long  bright  home,  he 
receives  the  "  Welcome  home!"  of  the  Saviour  and  of  all  the  blessed.  But  his 
home-going  throws  a  shadow  on  the  earth :  it  causes  an  aching  void,  a  bitter 
lamentation.  "  The  mourners  go  about  the  etreet."  Bather  since  they  have 
gone  to  join  in  "  the  song  of  them  that  feast,"  ought  we  not  to  strive  to  catch 
the  blessed  infection  of  their  celestial  joy,  and  put  on  festal  robes,  and  sing 
hymns  of  triumph  over  their  departure?  This  is  what  we  would  do  were  the 
Christian  hope  and  faith  sure  and  strong  within  us.  This  is  what  we  are  asked 
to  do.  Listen,  my  moiu-ning  friends,  listen  I  Tour  Saviour  speaks  to  you,  and 
Bays,  Your  loved  ones  have  but  come  to  their  bright  long  home  with  Me.  "  Then 
why  make  ye  this  ado,  and  weep?"  (T.  Young,  B.D.)  "  The  eternal  house  ": — 
By  some  scholars  "  long  home  "  is  translated  "  enduring  house,"  or  "  perpetual 
house."  It  seems  to  them  that  the  writer  looked  upon  earth  as  the  embodiment 
of  the  perishable,  and  that  beyond  the  earth  man  passes  into  the  imchangeable. 
This  world  is  the  place  where  silver  cords  are  loosed,  and  golden  bowls  broken, 
and  where  the  mourners  go  about  the  streets;  beyond  this  all  these  dissolving 
views  cease,  and  the  spirit  dwells  amid  the  eternal.  Its  house  is  for  ever,  its 
love  is  for  ever,  its  life  is  like  that  of  God.  I  shall  ask  you  to  think  upon  this 
idea  of  "  an  eternal  house  "  for  man.  Now  that  science  is  indirectly  assailing 
this  future  house — assailing  it  by  placing  man  among  the  mere  productions  of 
Nature,  among  the  plants  and  the  fishes  and  the  birds — it  becomes  us  all  to  place 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOS.  [ohaf.  xn. 


»8  against  euoh  a  form  of  science  the  longings  of  the  mind,  and  to  find  in  ths 
•oul'fi  yearnings  an  antidote  to  the  coldness  of  materialism.     We  must  array  spirit 
•gainst  dust.    All  that  materialism  rests  upon  is  an  analogy:  the  tree  dies,  the 
insect  dies,  the  bird  and  the  fish  die,  and  therefore  man  dies  and  becomes  nothing. 
But  spiritualism  can  summon  as  good  an  analogy.     It  can  say  God  Urea.     He 
passes  on  from  age  to  age,  and  hence  man  passes  onward  parallel  with  this  Maker. 
This  argument  assumes  only  the  existence  of  a  God.     With  that  datum  all  becomes 
easy,  for  man  sustains  a  closer  resemblance  to  Deity  than  to  the  tree,  the  bird, 
♦he  fish.     He  is  an  image  of  God,  and  hence  analogy  places  man  in  the  Dirine 
elasB  rather  than  in  the  mundane  class,  and  makes  man  a  partaker  of  the  long 
being  of  Deity  rather  than  of  the  short  career  of  the  vegetable  or  brute  world. 
The  analogy  of  man  and  God  is  as  rational  as  the  analogy  of  man  and  dust.     All 
we  need  do  in  order  to  escape  the  annihilation  inferred  from  material  philosophj 
is  to  place  man  in  the  category  of  spirit,  and  then  claim  for  him  a  parallelism 
with  Deity.     We  shall  not,  however,  argue  the  question  of  immortality.     We 
design  only  to  ask  oiu:  hearts  to  ponder  upon  the  idea  of  the  "  eternal  house  "  of 
man,  and  see  how  grand  it  is,  and  what  a  bracing  atmosphere  surrounds  it.     No 
one  carrying  such  a  mind  and  soul  as  man  is  endowed  with  has  any  right  to  move 
along  through  these  formative  years  without  enveloping  himself  in  the  best  possible 
atmosphere  of  truth,  or  of  dream  at  least,  if  positive  truth  refuse  to  come.     Aa 
invalids  flee  from  low,  damp  valleys  to  climb  up  into  mountain  air,  that  their 
blood  may  find  pure  nutriment  and  flow  with  new  life,  so  the  soul  and  intellect 
born  into  the  valley  of  ignorance  should  fly  from  the  miasma,  and  seek  mountain 
heights  of  belief  and  hope.     There  is  no  one  reflection  which  has  so  commended 
the  "  eternal  house  "  to  me  as  the  thought  that  this  house  is  transient — painfully, 
•Imoet  unjustly  transient.     The  children  of  earth  are  so  pitilessly  swept  away 
into  the  tomb,  with  all  their  friendships  and  studies  and  arts  and  happiness  and 
longings,  that  we  are  plunged  into  deep  wonderment  whether  there  is  a  God  d 
love  and  wisdom  all  around  this  earth,  as  close  as  its  atmosphere,  and  warm  as 
the  tropic  sunshine.     To  preserve  to  us  the  idea  of  God  comes  this  idea  of  the 
"  perpetual  house,"  an  idea  born  out  of  the  tears  of  earth,  as  a  rose  out  of  rain. 
Almost  all  that  is  valuable  in  this  world  lies  back  of  its  present  living  souls.     The 
heroes  that  live  are  but  a  handful  to  the  heroes  that  are  gone.     All  the  arte  we 
now  enjoy  are  the  fruits  of  intellects  and  souls  that  have  gone  away.     Our  state 
was  piuchased  for  us  by  hands  that  have  dissolved  into  dust.     All  the  ministers 
of  religion  now  living  are  not  equal  in  power  to  the  one  Christ  who  died  at  Jeru- 
salem eighteen  hundred  years  ago.    What  has  become  of  this  sublime  past — this  past 
whose  temples  of  law  and  art  and  worship  are  crumbling  by  the  Nile,  and  by  the 
great  sea,  and  by  the  Tiber,  and  are  covered  with  old  ivy  in  England?    There  is 
but  one  answer  worthy  of  our  minds  or  our  hearts :  and  that  is,  that  this  impressive 
human  race  has  been  called  not  to  oblivion,  but  to  its  "  Eternal  House."     These 
phenomena  of  earth,  this  great  past  display  of  intellect  and  love  and  learning  and 
wisdom  and  morale,  belong  not  to  the  realm  of  material,  but  to  the  realm  of  the 
Divine;  and  hence,  as  God  reaches  over  ages,  and  is  not  subject  to  decay  and 
annihilation,  so  He  draws  His  children  along  after  Him  to  His  perpetual  mansion. 
This  is  the  only  solution  of  man's  being  that  does  not  make  reason  and  morals 
•nd  education  and  hope  all  unmeaning  terms,  and  docs  not  make  the  human  soul 
a  sounding  brass  full  of  noise  without  music.     The  words  of  the  text,  "  eternal 
house,"  not  only  recall  to  mind  a  lost  past  to  be  provided  for,  but  they  awaken 
in  our  mind  thoughts  about  {he  future.     Our  earth  will  some  time  cease  to  be 
habitable  by  man.    As  its  geologic  forms  show  that  it  did  once  at  least  become 
uninhabitable,  and  by  perhaps  some  sudden  extinguishment  of  the  sun  did  become 
a  globe  of  ice  such  that  the  great  mammals  were  frozen  to  death  as  they  stood; 
•nd  as  at  some  other  epoch  this  same  little  globe  did  all  melt  and  become  liquid 
•s  a  globule  of  molten  iron,  so  again  in  the  coming  centuries  it  will  cease,  suddenly 
or  slowly,  to  be  the  home  of  man,  and  nowhere  upon  its  whole  surface  will  there 
remain  even  a  Selkirk  for  its  deep  solitude.     It  must  be  that  from  a  star  of  such 
vicissitudes,  from  a  star  where  death  comes  in  a  few  years  to  all,  and  where  it 
same  in  thirty -three  years  to  such  a  being  as  Jesus  Christ,  and  from  which  one 
hundred  and  fifty  times  all  the  dear  hearts  upon  it  have  been  swept  away,  the 
Creator  is  transferring  these  ephemeral  myriads  to  a  mors  lasting  home.     There 
must  be,  somewhere,  a  "  perpetual  house,"  into  which  we  shall  all  fall  when  the 
earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  shall  be  dissolved.     (D.  Swing.)     On  death:— 
I.  CoHSiDBB  TEE  DEATH  OF  iNDiFFBEENT  PEBsoNS;  if  sDy  eas  bs  Called  iudifferexil 


'i 


.  xn.]  ECCLE8IASTES.  SOS 

k)  whom  we  are  so  nearly  allied  as  brethren  by  nature,  and  brethren  in  mortality. 
Whan  we  observe  the  funerals  that  pass  along  the  streete,  or  when  we  walk  along 
the  monuments  of  death,  the  first  thing  that  naturally  strikes  us  is  the  undistin* 
guishing  blow  with  which  that  common  enemy  levels  all.  One  day,  we  see  carried 
along  the  coffin  of  the  smiling  infant ;  the  flower  just  nipped  as  it  began  to  bloflsont 
in  the  parante'  view;  and  the  next  day,  we  behold  a  young  man,  or  young  woman, 
•I  blooming  form  and  promising  hopes,  laid  in  an  untimely  grave.  While  the 
fwieral  is  attended  by  a  numerous,  unconcerned  company,  who  are  discoursing  to 
one  another  about  the  news  of  the  day,  or  the  ordinary  afiairs  of  life,  let  our 
thoughts  rather  follow  to  the  house  of  mourning,  and  represent  to  themselves  what 
M  going  on  there.  There,  we  should  see  a  disconsolate  family,  sitting  in  silent 
grief,  thinking  of  the  sad  breach  that  is  made  in  their  little  society;  and,  with 
tears  in  their  eyes,  looking  to  the  chamber  that  is  now  left  vacant,  and  to  every 
memorial  that  presents  itself  of  their  departed  friend.  By  such  attention  to  the  woea 
of  others,  the  selfish  hardness  of  our  hearts  will  be  gradually  softened,  and  melted 
down  into  humanity,  n.  Consideb  thb  death  of  odb  fbiends.  Then,  indeed, 
is  the  time  to  weep.  Let  not  a  false  idea  of  fortitude,  or  mistaken  conceptions  of 
religious  duty,  be  employed  to  restrain  the  bursting  emotion.  Let  the  heart  seek 
its  relief  in  the  free  effusion  of  just  and  natural  sorrow.  It  is  becoming  in  every, 
(Mie  to  show,  on  such  occasions,  that  he  feels  as  a  man  ought  to  feel.  At  th* 
tame  time,  let  moderation  temper  the  grief  of  a  good  man  and  a  Christian.  H« 
most  not  sorrow  like  those  who  have  no  hope.  They  whom  we  have  loved  still 
Mve,  though  not  present  to  us.  They  are  only  removed  into  a  different  mansioa 
ia  the  house  of  the  common  Father.  In  due  time,  wa  hope  to  ba  associated  with 
ibem  in  these  blissful  habitations.  UntU  this  season  of  reunion  arrive,  no  pria« 
•ipla  of  religion  discourages  our  holding  correspondence  of  affection  with  them  by 
means  of  faith  and  hope.  Meanwhile,  let  us  respect  the  virtues  and  cherish  tha 
memory  of  the  deceased.  Let  their  little  failings  be  now  forgotten.  Let  ua 
dwell  on  what  was  amiable  in  their  character,  inaitate  their  worth,  and  trace  their 
•taps.  Moreover,  let  the  remembrance  of  the  friends  whom  we  have  lost 
•kengthen  our  affection  to  those  that  remain.  The  narrower  the  oirole  become* 
•1  those  we  love,  let  us  draw  the  closer  together.  But  they  are  not  only  our 
Mends  who  die.    Our  enemies  also  must  go  to  their  long  home.    III.  Consideb 

mow   WB  OUGHT  TO   Bl  AmOTBO,   WHEN   THBT  FBOU   WHOM   SUSMOIONS   HAVB   ALIBN'* 

aau),  OB  BiVALBT  HAS  DIVIDED  US;  they  with  whom  we  have  long  contended,  or 
by  whom  we  imagine  ourselves  to  have  suffered  wrong,  abb  laid,  ob  about  to  bb 
l>AU>,  III  nu  OBAVB.  How  inconsiderable  then  appear  those  broils  in  which  w* 
kave  been  long  involved,  those  con  teste  and  feuds  which  we  thought  were  to  last 
kr  evarl  The  awful  moment  that  now  terminates  them  makes  us  feel  their 
vanity.  Let  the  anticipation  of  such  sentiments  serve  now  to  correct  tha 
inveteracy  of  prejudice,  to  cool  the  heat  of  anger,  to  allay  the  fierceness  of  resents 
maoi.  When  a  few  suns  more  have  rolled  over  our  heads,  friends  and  foes  shall 
kave  retreated  together;  and  their  lova  and  their  hatred  be  equally  buried.  Let 
mm  few  days,  then,  be  spent  in  peace.  While  we  are  all  journeying  onwards  to 
daatb,  let  us  rather  bear  one  another's  burdens,  than  harass  one  another  by  tba 
way.  Let  us  smooth  and  cheer  the  road  as  much  aa  wa  can,  rather  than  fill  tha 
Tallay  of  our  pilgrimage  with  the  hateful  monumenta  of  our  contention  and  strife. 
(H.  BU,ir,  D.D.)  Our  long  homt: — ^I.  Exauimb  thb  tbbu  applied  here  to 
BSSOBiBB  thb  obavb — "  the  long  home."  We  are  not  to  look  down  into  the  earth, 
bat  up  at  the  skies.    Above  the  grave  wa  may  discern  tha  glory.    II.  What  an 

AOBBD  AMD  INTBN8IFIBD  INTEBBST  BBL0MO8  TO  TH08B  WHOM  WB  HATH  KNOWN  WHEN 
THBT  PASS  AWAT  FBOM  US  INTO  "  THB  I.ONO  HOME,"  THUS  BQUIPPBD.      1.   There  WSB 

Iha  process  of  tha  spirit  disentangling  itself  from  the  body.  2.  There  was  the 
•aw  consciousness  of  the  spirit,  freed  from  the  limitations  of  the  flesh,  and  really 
Mitaring  tha  new  world.  8.  As  we  think  upon  the  long  home  wa  cannot  but 
ramambar  that  wa  too  must  finish  with  this  world  and  die.  4.  We,  too,  must  ba 
Mgad,  •mt  conduct  and  character  will  be  examined  by  the  Infallible  Judge.  S. 
wa,  tae,  must  prepare.  We  may  well  consider  whether  tha  preparation  is  really 
■>ii»  and  whether  it  ia  continually  enlarged  and  perfected.     (Alfred  Norri$.) 

▼»•  "f-  ^n^*A  >1^^  tha  dut  retura  to  the  aarth  ai  it  wm;  and  tha  spirit  shdl 
MtVB  VBte  Oed  who  gara  It. — The  death  of  the  body,  and  eeparaie  state  of 
tmth } — ^I.  Death  bbducbs  oub  bodies  to  thbib  peimitive  dust.  1.  How  doth  this 
•taia  iiit  yride  of  all  flesh,  and  bring  their  glory  into  contempt!   What  are  pedigrea 


^  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xir. 


»nd  noble  blood  that  mortal  man  should  value  himself  upon  them?  2.  "Wty  should 
we  give  way  to  the  slavish  fear  of  man?  He  is  but  dust,  and  must  die  as  well 
•s  we;  and  God  can  easily  sfop  his  breath,  and  cut  ofiE  all  his  designs  against  us, 
by  bringing  him  down  to  the  dust  of  death  before  us.  8.  How  illustriously  doea 
God  display  His  glory  in  our  dust  I  What  a  wonderful  living  machine  has  He 
made  it!  What  strength  and  beauty  has  He  put  into  it  I  How  has  He  fitted 
every  part  for  the  office  He  designed  itl  And  when  it  shall  be  dissolved  into 
flust  again,  He  will  build  it  anew  with  greater  improvements  and  refinements, 
sprightlinesfl  and  glory,  than  ever  before.  4.  How  great  is  the  condescension  of 
the  Son  of  God,  that  He  would  clothe  Himself  with  our  dust,  and  so  become  a 
mortal  man  like  ourselves  I  II.  The  soul  does  not  die  with  the  body.  1. 
Reason  itself  tells  us  that  the  loul  is  immortal.  The  very  heathens  themselves 
had  strong  apprehensions  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul;  their  apotheoses,  and 
worshipping  deceased  men  for  gods,  supposed  their  present  existence  in  an  invisible 
etate;  and  the  soul's  surviving  the  body  was  such  a  common  conjecture,  at  least, 
of  all  ages  and  nations  among  them,  that  Cicero  calls  it  the  voice  of  nature,  and 
6eneoa  thought  the  consent  of  all  mankind  about  it  had  the  force  of  a  considerable 
argument  to  prove  it.  But  we  have  still  a  better  proof  to  insist  on,  and  that  is — 
2.  Divine  revelation.  (1)  The  Scripture  gives  us  such  descriptions  of  death  aa 
Intimate  a  separation  of  th©  soul  from  the  body.  (Job  xxxiv.  14;  Gen.  xxxv.  18; 
2  Tim.  iv.  6;  2  Pet.  i.  18,  14;  Matt.  x.  28.)  (2)  We  have  accounts  in  Scripture 
of  souls  which,  after  death,  have  returned  again  to  their  bodies  (1  Kings  xvii. 
81,  22;  Matt,  xxvii.  52,  53.)  (3)  We  have  an  account  of  souls  which  do  exist 
in  another  world  separate  from  their  bodies.  (Heb.  xii.  23;  Rev.  vi.  9,  10.)  III. 
Ihubdiatblt  after  death  the  soul  appears  befobe  God,  to  be  consigned  to  a 

8BPABATE    8TATB    OF    BLESSEDNESS    OB    MISERY    IN    ANOTHER    WORLD.      1.    The    SOuls    of 

believers,  immediately  after  death,  enter  into  a  state  of  blessedness  with  Christ 
in  glory.  (Rev.  xiv.  13;  Ps.  xlix.  15;  Ixxiii.  24;  Isa.  Ivii.  1,  2;  Luke  xxiii.  43; 
2  Cor  V  1,  8;  Phil.  i.  21-23;  Acts  vii.  69;  Heb.  xii.  23,  24;  Rev.  v.,  yii.)  2.  The 
•ouls  of  the  wicked,  immediately  after  death,  enter  into  a  state  of  misery.  (Acts 
i.  25;  1  Pet.  iii.  19,  20;  Luke  xvi.  19-31.)  (J.  Quyae,  D.D.)  The  two  naturtB 
of  man: — 1.  As  we  lay  our  beloved  in  the  grave,  we  recognize  indeed  their 
mortality;  but  at  the  same  time  we  feel  that  this  is  not  really  they.  The  presence 
of  death  assures  us  afresh  that  our  beloved  is  really  the  spirit  which  has  passed 
out  of  sight.  2.  This  recognition  of  a  spiritual  nature  as  well  as  a  material  nature 
gives  us  a  presumption  of  a  higher  as  well  as  a  lower  destiny.  We  see  how  the 
frail  body  died  inevitably :  year  by  year  it  was  always  coming  nearer  to  death ; 
•nd  we  see  how  the  strong  spirit  did  not  waste  and  decay  in  like  manner,  but 
ought  to  have  survived.  8.  We  ask  where  the  strong,  sweet  spirit  has  gone,  and 
our  hearts  answer,  with  the  Bible,  It  has  gone  to  God;  recalled  to  Him  who  gave 
it.  Augustine  says,  "  Thou  hast  made  us  for  Thyself,  and  we  rest  not  till  we 
rest  in  Thee."  4.  To  one  who  is  not  afraid  to  go  to  God,  death  is  the  triumphant 
conclusion  of  this  life  of  trial  Those  who  pass  the  veil  find  hope  changed  to 
tight,  prayer  to  praise.  (F.  Noble,  D.D.)  The  ttory  of  a  soul: — The  story  of  a 
•oul,  its  relations,  its  prospects,  its  futtu*e,  is  the  one  important  thing  to  be  con- 
•idered;  yet  who  dare  draw  aside  the  veil  and  read  his  coming  history?  The 
■acred  penmen  for  whom  the  veil  of  the  future  was  in  part  drawn  aside  caught 
glimpses  of  the  soul's  history  in  the  futiure  which  they  have  sketched  in  brief  and 
graphic  lines.  The  text  discloses  to  us  the  single  fact  of  the  separation  of  the 
floul  from  the  body  at  death  and  its  continued  existence  in  another  sphere.     I.  It 

BETAINS     A     00N80I0U8NBSS     OF     ITS     INDIVIDUAL     EXISTENCE     AND     OF     ITS     PERSONAL 

IDENTITY.  The  effects  of  death  upon  the  body  we  can  distinctly  trace  from  the 
■uspended  animation  to  the  final  dissolution.  But  who  can  show  any  influence 
of  death  upon  the  soul  beyond  the  simple  cessation  of  any  visible  action  of  the 
mind  through  its  supposed  organ  the  brain?  If  there  were  uniformly  a  decline 
of  mental  manifestations  corresponding  with  the  decline  of  the  body  through 
disease,  if  we  saw  that  the  mind  always  failed  in  perception,  in  memory,  in  reflec- 
tion, and  in  aotion,  just  in  proportion  as  the  body  failed  in  strength  and  in  the 
power  of  locomotion,  then  we  might  infer  that  death  had  an  influence  upon  the 
mind  corresponding  with  its  influence  upon  the  body ;  yet  even  then  we  should  not 
be  warranted  in  saying  that  the  mind  itself  had  ceased  to  be,  or  that  anything 
had  occurred  beyond  the  suppression  of  mental  activity  through  its  ordiaarr 
channels.  You  enter  an  apartment  where  a  thousand  wheels  all  connected  by 
Qogs  and  bands  are  ia  swiftest  motion,  and  the  shuttle  is  flying  incessantly  through 


(DHAP.  xit]  ECCLESIASTES.  90| 

•  Boore  of  looms.  You  do  not,  however,  see  the  propelling  force  by  which  all  this 
machiaery  is  driven.  Far  down  under  the  ground,  in  a  vault  of  the  Btronge«b 
masonry,  the  great  fire  is  fed  that  generates  the  steam  which,  conveyed  through 
concealed  pipes,  imparts  motion  to  the  engine,  and  thence  to  the  thousand  wheels 
of  the  factory.  Of  a  sudden  the  machinery  stops;  the  wheels  are  motionless,  the 
shuttle  is  arrested  in  the  middle  of  the  loom.  Now,  you  are  not  warranted  in 
inferring  that  the  great  fire  in  the  vault  below,  which  you  have  never  seen,  has 
been  suddenly  extinguished,  or  that  the  supply  of  water  in  the  boiler  has  failed, 
or  that  the  boiler  itself  has  burst,  or  that  from  any  cause  the  engine  has  ceased 
to  move.  Only  some  connecting  pipe  has  burst,  or  some  band  or  joint  concealed 
from  you  is  broken.  The  force  exists  there  and  needs  only  a  connecting  medium 
to  manifest  its  presence.  What  more,  then,  are  you  authorized  to  infer  when  the 
machinery  of  life  stands  still  than  that  the  connection  between  the  energizing  will 
and  the  muscular  framework  has  been  severed?  Would  you  be  warranted  in 
inferring  that  intelligence  and  will  were  annihilated,  even  if  simultaneously  with 
the  decay  of  the  body  you  always  witnessed  a  corresponding  cessation  of  mental 
activity?  The  machinery  has  stopped,  but  does  that  prove  that  the  fire  hae  been 
put  out,  that  the  motive  power  is  destroyed?  But  we  do  not  always  witness  a 
decline  of  mental  activity  corresponding  with  the  decay  of  the  body.  How  often 
does  the  mind  continue  the  full  exercise  of  its  every  faculty  up  to  the  very  moment 
of  death;  how  often,  indeed,  does  its  activity  seem  to  increass  as  it  approaches 
that  crisis.  How  evident  is  it  that  the  fire  is  burning,  that  the  engine  is  moving, 
that  the  inner  force  is  there  even  while  the  outer  machinery  drags  heavily,  and 
grates  and  pauses,  from  the  snapping  of  one  and  another  of  its  bands.  You  can 
show  me  nothing  to  prove  that  the  mind  is  injuriously  affected  by  death,  you  can 
bring  no  proof  whatever  that  it  is  annihilated.  And  now,  with  no  evidence  from 
nature  of  the  annihilation  of  the  spirit  at  death,  I  turn  to  revelation  to  learn  what 
then  becomes  of  it.  And  here  I  learn  first  of  all  that  it  continues  to  exist,  a 
conscious  spirit,  retaining  its  personal  identity.  There  is  no  suspension  of  con- 
sciousness; or,  if  any,  it  is  only  as  the  momentary  suspension  of  consciousness  in 
sleep,  from  which  the  mind  awakes  with  new  perceptions  and  with  augmented 
vigour.  Abraham,  Moses,  Elias,  Lazarus  and  Dives  are  the  same  persons  after 
death  that  they  were  before  it,  and  knew  themselves  to  be  the  same.  This  is  the 
first  fact  that  we  gain  knowledge  of  in  the  future  history  of  the  soul.  And  how 
significant  is  such  a  fact  as  this.  What  an  awful  discovery  to  the  man  who  has 
lived  an  atheist,  who  has  flattered  himself  into  the  belief  that  death  was  an 
eternal  sleep.  The  delusion  then  vanishes.  When  death  comes  and  his  connection 
with  this  outward  world  is  severed,  he  wakes  up  to  a  consciousness  of  existenoa 
still ;  the  same  being  and  beyond  the  possibility  of  annihilation,  and  where  death 
has  no  more  power.  What  a  discovery  is  this  for  such  a  mind  to  wake  up  to,  and 
understand  after  death  1  II.  The  soul  after  death  awakes  to  a  lively  and  a 
CONSTANT  SENSE  OF  THE  PRESENCE  OF  GoD.  What  a  fearful  thought  for  the  men 
who  have  tried  to  convince  themselves,  and  others,  that  there  was  no  God,  or  that 
God  was  but  a  blind,  indifferent,  unobservant  force.  Think  of  such  a  mind  waking 
up  into  the  very  presence  of  the  living  God.  That  is  the  soul's  second  experience 
after  death — it  wakes  up  to  know  itself  alive,  and  it  wakes  up  to  a  personal  God. 
Ill  Thb  soul  awakes  TO  THE  MEMORY  OF  THE  PAST.  This  is  clearly  intimated  in 
the  following  context.  The  spirit  will  return  to  God  for  a  judicial  piupose.  God 
shall  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  secret  thing.  And  in  order  to 
this,  the  soul  itself  will  recall  its  secret  and  its  long-forgotten  sins.  Indeed,  there 
is  great  probability  that  at  death  the  faculty  of  memory  will  be  quickened  into 
new  activity  and  power;  and  that  impressions  buried  under  the  dust  and  rubbish 
of  years  will  be  brought  out  as  fresh  as  when  first  made  upon  the  pliant  but 
durable  tablet  of  the  heart.  Now,  the  Scriptiu'es  teach  us,  as  in  the  parable  of 
Dives  and  Lazarus,  that  the  memory  is  in  most  lively  exercise  after  death.  IV. 
The  soul  will  awake  to  the  certainty  and  the  nbab  psospect  op  the  judgment. 
The  spirit  returns  to  God  that  it  may  answer  for  the  deeds  it  has  done  here  in  the 
body.  Retaining  its  identity,  it  retains  its  accountability;  it  retains  its  personal 
relations  to  the  government  of  God,  and  to  God  Himself  as  a  Buler  and  a  Judge. 
V.  The  soul  after  death  will  enter  upon  the  experience  of  an  eternal  retri- 
bution. This  is  the  uniform  representation  of  the  Scriptures.  The  soul  enters  at 
once  upon  a  state  of  happiness  or  of  misery,  and  it  knows  that  that  state  is  to  be 
eternal.  0  the  unutterable  joy  or  the  unspeakable  anguish  of  the  mind  when  it 
first  realizes  the  faot  that  it  will  be  for  ever  blessed  or  for  ever  miserable  I     {J.  P. 

20 


B08    .  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

.f%07)»p«o».)  Our  deitiny  after  d$ath: — I.  The  destint  or  the  bodt.  1.  Death 
b  the  seTAranoe  of  the  two  parts  of  man's  complex  being;  the  dissolution,  not  ol 
tha  being,  but  of  the  union,  between  body  and  soul.  2.  The  text  points  to  the 
origin  of  the  body.  **  Then  shall  the  dust  return  " — ^not  '*  the  body."  It  is 
«tMoribed  by  what  it  was  and  will  be:  "  Dust  thou  art,"  etc.  (Ps.  ciii.  14;  Gen. 
xriii.  27).  The  Church,  in  the  same  way,  commits  the  body  to  the  grave,  as 
"  dust  to  duet,"  in  the  Surial  Office.  This  is  a  humbling  thought,  and  it  is  true, 
whatever  view  may  be  taken  of  the  creation  of  the  body.  8.  It  "  shall  return  to 
13ie  earth."  "  Unto  dust  shalt  thou  retiurn,"  has  in  it  the  accents  of  Divine  dis- 
appointment.  An  act  of  man  has  intervened,  whereby  the  hindrance  to  corruptioo 
has  been  removed,  and  the  corruptible  body  therefore  pursues  its  natural  course. 
"  God  made  not  death  "  (Wisd.  i.  18),  but  man  '*  called  it  to  "  him  by  forfeiting 
tiie  grace  which  kept  it  away.  The  result  is,  "  in  Adam  all  die."  4.  It  is  bodily 
death  to  which  the  text  refers ;  and  the  words  are  true  now,  as  in  the  Old  Covenant 
—though  Christ  redeemed  both  body  and  soul.  "  The  body  is  dead  because  of 
sin"  (Bom.  viii.  10),  though  "the  spirit  is  life  because  of  righteousness."  II. 
The  dbbtint  of  the  spibit.  1.  It  pursues  a  different  route,  for  its  origin  is  dif- 
lerent.  "  God  who  gave  it."  The  words  point  to  the  spirit  as  being  a  special 
•reation  of  God — the  infusio  anima.  God  is  truly  "  the  Father  of  Spirits  "  (Heb. 
zii.  9),  and  it  can  be  said  of  souls  that  they  are  His,  because  He  directly  creates 
tiiem  (Ezek.  xviii.  8).  They  come  from  Him.  2.  The  spirit  returns  to  its 
Source.  The  words,  "  Into  Thine  hands  I  commit  "  [or,  "  commend,"  Prayer- 
book  Version]  "  My  spirit,"  are  used  at  the  departing  of  the  soul,  when  leaving 
the  body.  Thus  death  is  regarded  as  the  withdrawal  of  that  which  had  been 
fivan.  8.  Here  is  the  belief  in  a  future  life,  and  in  a  book,  too,  which  materialists 
•sd  pessimists  have  thought  favoured  their  views.  The  soul  in  its  individuality; 
the  soul  as  a  supra-sensuous  substance — the  spirit;  the  soul  as  the  express  gift 
(rf  God;  the  soul  as  an  immortal  principle  beyond  the  reach  of  that  disintegration 
which  death  produces  in  the  "  houses  of  clay  "  (Job  iv.  19);  the  soul  returning 
to  Him  "  who  only  hath  immortality  "  in  an  absolute  sense,  as  Self -derived ; — all 
Hm  is  in  Ecolesiastes,  before  Christ  had  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through 
tiie  Gospel.  III.  Lessons.  1.  The  remembrance  of  the  end  is  one  which  is  impressed 
upon  us  in  Holy  Scripture  as  most  important  (Deut.  xxxii.  29;  Ps.  xxxix.  4).  2.  This 
is  most  necessary  in  the  time  of  temptation,  in  making  some  important  choice,  or 
when  languid  in  devotion.  It  acts  respectively  as  a  curb,  as  an  adviser,  as  a 
■timulant,  on  those  occasions.  8.  If  death  were  annihilation,  to  view  life  from  the 
standpoint  of  death  would  be  morbid;  but  as  death  is  the  gate  to  higher  life,  such 
m  view  is  not  one  of  immingled  sadness,  but  fills  this  present  life  with  interest, 
•s  its  issues  are  seen  to  be  eternal.  4.  To  seek  more  and  more  to  realize  how 
precious  is  the  immortal  spirit,  God-given;  and  to  learn  how  to  preserve  it  from 
WQ,  knowing  its  destination.  (H.  W.  Hutching$,  M.A.)  The  spirit  shall  retain 
mnto  God  who  gave  it. — The  immortality  of  the  $oul: — ^The  immortality  of  the  soul 
may  be  argued — I.  Fbou  the  soul  itself.  1.  The  soul  is  a  spiritual  substance. 
This  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  it  possesses  all  the  properties  of  spirit,  and  nona 
oi  those  that  belong  to  matter — such  as  intelligence,  reflection,  and  volition. 
9.  The  soul  is  capable  of  endless  improvement.  The  more  knowledge  the  mind 
possesses,  the  better  fitted  it  is  for  fresh  acquisitions  in  knowledge.  The  mind 
possesses  faculties  that  are  but  imperfectly  exercised  in  this  life;  but  as  nothing 
is  made  in  vain,  there  must,  therefore,  be  a  future  state.  8.  All  men  deeira 
immortality,  and  are  averse  to  annihilation.  Can  we  suppose  that  a  Bein^, 
^finite  in  wisdom  and  goodness,  would  plant  such  desires  for  immortality  in  His 
•reatures  if  they  were  never  to  be  gratified?  4.  All  human  beings  are  disposed 
to  be  religious  in  some  way.  This  is  so  natural  to  men,  that  some  have  chosen 
to  define  man  a  religious,  rather  than  a  rational,  animal.  All  nations  have  their 
gods,  to  whom  they  pay  adoration  and  worship;  and  there  is  nothing  too  mean 
and  insignificant  for  man  to  worship,  rather  than  to  have  no  god.  And  all  religions 
are  founded  in  the  belief  of  a  futtire  state.  6.  The  powers  and  faculties  of  the 
mind  are  strong  and  vigorous,  when  the  body  is  weak  and  emaciated.  "  Though 
the  outward  man  perish,  yet  the  inward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day."  How 
often,  when  speech  has  failed,  and  the  body  has  lost  the  power  to  raise  a  single 
Imb,  has  the  soul,  by  some  token,  evinced,  not  only  that  all  its  faculties  remained 
nnimpaired,   but   that  it  was  leaving  the  world   in  the  greatest  peace.     H.  A 

rUTCRB    STATE    OF    EXISTENCE    HAT   BE    CONCLUDED    FBOM   THE   DREQUAL    DISTBIBDTIOM 

•B  KWABDS  AND  PCNI8HHBMT8  III  THIS  UFB.    1.  If  there  b«  A  Ood,  He  is  »  God  oi 


CHAP.xn.]  ECCLESIASTES.  SOf 


justice;  and  if  He  be  a  God  of  juetice,  He  will  fully  reward  the  virtuous,  and 
punish  the  vicious — but  this  He  does  not  do  in  the  present  world;  tind,  therefore, 
there  must  be  a  future  state.  2.  The  natural  tendency  of  virtue  is,  indeed,  to 
produce  happiness,  and  that  of  vice  is  to  produce  misery.  But  though  thesa 
positions  hold  true  in  general,  still  there  are  innumerable  cases  in  which 
the  virtuous  suffer  much,  and  the  vicious  little  or  nothing  in  this  world. 
We  are  therefore  led  to  conclude  that  the  present  state  is  only  a  small 
part  of  the  great  plan  of  God's  moral  government.  3.  That  the  present 
life  is  a  time  of  trial,  or  probation,  is  admitted  on  all  hands,  with  very  few 
exceptions.  And  a  state  of  trial  implies  that  there  will  be  a  time  of  review,  or 
examination,  when  the  probationers  will  be  rewarded,  or  punished,  according  to 
Mieir  works.  But  this  time  cannot  come  till  the  state  of  trial  is  finished.  4.  The 
doctrine  that  there  is  no  future  state  destroys  all  proper  distinction  between 
virtue  and  vice.  And,  indeed,  if  this  be  the  case,  they  have  no  existence  but  in 
name;  for  neither  is  the  one  rewarded,  nor  the  other  punished.  There  would  b« 
no  motives  to  virtue,  nor  any  checks  to  vice.  Do  away  a  future  state,  and  there 
is  nothing  for  the  vicious  to  fear,  nor  for  the  virtuous  to  desire.     III.  The  iu- 

HOBTALITT   OF   THE    SOUL  AND   A   FUTURE    STATE   ABB   MOST   CLEABLT   EEVEALED    IN   THB 

icEiPTURBS  OF  Truth.  1.  There  are  certain  persons  of  whom  it  is  said  that  they 
shall  never  die.  But  none  are  exempt  from  the  death  of  the  body.  It  is,  there* 
fore,  the  soul  that  shall  not  die.  2.  The  immortality  of  the  soul  may  be  inferred 
from  Scripture  instances  of  committing  the  spirit  to  God.  3.  We  learn  from  tha 
Scriptures  that  the  soul,  on  the  death  of  the  body,  goes  immediately  to  happinesi 
ta  misery.  4.  The  Scriptures  speak  particularly  of  the  existence  of  the  soul, 
alter  the  death  of  the  body.  Christ  affirms  that  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob  were 
living  in  His  time,  in  quoting  and  commenting  on  the  words  of  the  Lord  to 
Mosea  at  the  burning  bush.  IV.  Inferences  : — 1.  If  the  soul  be  immortal,  i(f 
Miust  be  exceedingly  valuable.  2.  If  the  soul  be  immortal,  the  loss  of  it  must  ba 
indescribable.  (0.  Scatt.)  The  individuality  of  the  soul: — Nothing  is  more  di£5« 
•ult  than  to  realize  that  every  man  has  a  distinct  soul,  that  every  one  of  all  tha 
■aillions  who  live,  or  have  lived,  is  as  whole  and  independent  a  being  in  himself 
as  if  there  were  no  one  else  in  the  whole  world  but  he.  We  class  men 
in  masses,  ae  we  might  connect  the  stones  of  a  building.  Consider  our 
•ommon  way  of  regarding  history,  politics,  commerce,  and  the  like,  and  you 
wfll  own  that  I  speak  truly.  We  generalize,  and  lay  down  laws,  and  then  contem* 
Tplskie  these  creations  of  our  own  minds,  and  act  upon  and  towards  them,  as  if  they 
•were  the  real  things,  dropping  what  are  more  truly  such.  Take  another  instance : 
wiieo  we  talk  of  national  greatness,  what  does  it  mean?  Why,  it  really  means 
Hhtii  a  certain  distinct  definite  number  of  immortal  individual  beings  happen  for 
•  few  ye«rs  to  be  in  circumstances  to  act  together  and  one  upon  another,  in  such 
a  way  as  to  be  able  to  act  upon  the  world  at  large,  to  gain  an  ascendency  over 
the  world,  to  gain  power  and  wealth,  and  to  look  like  one,  and  to  be  talked  ol 
Mid  to  be  looked  up  to  as  one.  They  seem  for  a  short  time  to  be  some  one  thing : 
and  we,  from  our  habit  of  living  by  sight,  regard  them  as  one,  and  drop  the 
aotioo  of  their  being  anything  else.  And  when  this  one  dies  and  that  one  dies, 
we  forget  that  it  is  the  passage  of  separate  immortal  beings  into  an  unseen  state, 
that  tha  whole  which  appears  is  but  appearance,  and  that  tha  component  parti 
are  tha  realities.  We  still  think  that  this  whole  which  we  call  the  nation  is  one 
and  the  same,  and  that  the  individuals  who  coma  and  go  exist  only  in  it  and  for 
it,  and  are  but  at  the  grains  of  a  heap  or  the  leaves  of  a  tree.  Again  :  when  wa 
read  history,  we  meet  with  accoimts  of  great  slaughters  and  massacres,  great 
pestileneas,  famines,  conflagrations,  and  so  on;  and  here  again  we  are  accustomed 
m  an  especial  way  to  regard  collections  of  people  as  if  individual  units.  We 
cannot  understand  that  a  multitude  is  a  collection  of  immortal  souls.  I  say 
immortal  souls :  each  of  these  multitudes  not  only  had  while  he  was  upon  earth, 
bat  has,  a  soul,  which  did  in  its  own  time  but  return  to  God  who  gave  it,  and 
no*  perish,  and  which  now  lives  unto  Him.  All  those  millions  upon  millions  of 
luman  beings  who  ever  trod  the  earth  and  saw  the  sun  successively  are  at  this 
very  moment  in  existence  all  together.  Moreover,  every  one  of  all  the  souls  which 
have  ever  been  on  earth  is,  in  one  of  two  spiritual  states,  so  distinct  from  ona 
another,  that  the  one  is  the  subject  of  God's  favour,  and  the  other  under  BUa 
wrath;  the  one  on  the  way  to  eternal  happiness,  the  other  to  eternal  misery. 
TIms  is  true  of  the  dead,  and  is  true  of  the  living  also.  All  are  tending  one  way 
or  the  other ;   there  is  no  middle  or  neutral  state  for  any  one ;  though  as  far  as  tbe 


toe  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xrr. 

Bight  of  the  external  world  goes,  all  men  eeem  to  be  in  a  middle  etate  common  to 
one  and  all.  Yet,  much  as  men  look  the  same,  and  impossible  as  it  is  for  us  to 
Bay  where  each  man  stands  in  God's  sight,  there  are  two,  and  but  two  classee  o! 
men,  and  these  have  characters  and  destinies  as  far  apart  in  their  tendencies  aa 
light  and  darkness  :  this  is  the  case  even  of  those  who  are  in  the  body,  and  it 
is  much  more  true  of  those  who  have  passed  into  the  unseen  etate.  What  make* 
this  thought  still  more  solemn,  is  that  we  have  reason  to  suppose  that  souls  on 
the  wrong  side  of  the  line  are  far  more  numerous  than  those  on  the  right.  It  is 
wrong  to  speculate;  but  it  is  safe  to  be  alarmed.  This  much  we  know,  that  Christ 
says  expressly,  "Many  are  called,  few  are  chosen";  "Broad  is  the  way  that 
leadeth  to  destruction,  and  many  there  be  who  go  in  thereat  ";  whereas  "  narrow 
is  the  way  that  leadeth  to  life,  and  few  there  be  who  find  it."  What  a  change  it 
would  produce  in  our  thoughiys,  imless  we  were  utterly  reprobate,  to  understand 
what  and  where  we  are — accountable  beings  on  their  trial,  with  God  for  their 
friend  and  the  devil  for  their  enemy,  and  advanced  a  certain  way  on  their  road 
either  to  heaven  or  to  hell.  Endeavour,  then,  to  realize  that  you  have  souls,  and 
pray  God  to  enable  you  to  do  so.  Endeavour  to  disengage  your  thoughts  and 
opinions  from  the  things  that  are  seen;  look  at  things  as  God  looks  at  them,  and 
judge  of  them  as  He  judges.  Avoid  sin  as  a  serpent ;  it  looks  and  promises  well ; 
it  bites  afterwards.  It  is  dreadful  in  memory,  dreadful  even  on  earth;  but  in  that 
awful  period,  when  the  fever  of  life  is  over,  and  you  are  waiting  in  silence  for  the 
judgment,  with  nothing  to  distract  your  thoughts,  who  can  say  how  dreadful  may 
be  the  memory  of  sins  done  in  the  body?     (J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  Vanity  of  vanities,  saith  the  Preacher,  all  is  vanity. — Two  reviewt  of 
life  (with  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8) : — These  two  preachers  were  both  distinguished  men, 
aged  men,  men  of  wide  experiences.  Thus  far  they  resembled  each  other;  but  the 
results  of  their  experience  are  a  perfect  and  a  startling  contrast.  You  would  expect, 
with  the  experiences  behind  them,  that  their  verdicts  would  be  contradictory.  You 
would  expect  the  man  for  whom  earth  had  plucked  her  choicest  roses  to  present 
life  as  a  gorgeous  garden;  and  you  would  expect  the  man  whose  course  had  been 
a  martyrdom  to  give  a  shaded  view.  Yet  the  contrast  is  the  precise  opposite  of 
what  you  expect.  It  is  from  the  man  who  has  had  the  world's  choicest  gifts 
lavished  upon  him  that  you  hear  as  sad  an  epitaph  as  ever  described  a  human 
life — "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity  "  It  is  the  man  who  has  passed  through 
tribulations,  and  experienced  the  worst  ills  of  life  who  gives  us  the  ring  of  triumph 
in  his  review,  I.  The  first  condemns  life  as  a  failure — "  All  is  vanity,  and 
vexation  of  spirit."  What  was  there  in  his  life  which  could  explain  this 
disappointment?  I  think  if  you  look  at  Solomon's  life  you  will  see  it  had  self  for 
its  centre,  earth  for  its  circumference,  human  energy  for  its  working  power,  and 
failure  for  its  result.  II.  The  second  reviews  life  as  a  triumph.  "  I  have 
fought  a  good  fight,"  etc.  The  whole  is  a  review  of  trial  and  triumph.  1.  The 
trial  consisted  in  the  apostle  having  been  able  to  endure  to  the  end,  to  carry  on  the 
struggle  without  being  turned  aside.  Men  had  called  his  faith  fanaticism,  but  he 
did  not  let  go  his  faith.  Men  called  his  hopes  delusions,  but  he  cherished  them 
fitill.  Men  sneered  at  his  motives,  but  no  slur  or  scorn  cast  upon  him  could  lead 
him  to  renounce  Christ  or  the  work  given  him  to  do.  He  reviews  his  life  as  a 
triumph  simply  because  of  this  patience.  In  all  this  there  is  to  me  a  great  hope 
and  comfort.  Had  the  triumph  lain  in  the  works  which  he  had  wrought,  you  and 
I  might  well  despair  of  reviewing  a  life  such  as  his.  But  this  we  may  review — 
fidelity  to  Christ.  2.  Let  us  look  now  at  the  elements  which  made  the  apostle's 
life  such  a  triumph.  We  will  place  them  in  contrast  with  those  we  were  noticing 
in  the  life  of  Solomon.  (1)  In  the  apostle's  life  Christ  was  the  centre;  everything 
revolved  aroimd  Him.  (2)  The  spiritual  was  the  sphere  of  life  in  which  the 
apostle  lived.  (3)  The  working  power  of  his  life  was  faith.  (4)  Its  result  was 
a  glorious  triumph — a  triumph  which  led  to  a  crown.  All  true  triumphs  end 
in  crowns,  and  this  is  a  crown  of  character,  not  merely  a  reward  for  righteousness. 
Eighteousness  is  the  very  material  of  which  it  is  made.  It  is  the  crown  of  a 
spiritual  sanctified  character,  and  hence  the  crown  fadeth  not  away.  (C.  B. 
Bymet,  B.A.)  The  vanities: — I.  Official  position  will  never  give  solacb  to 
A  man's  soul.  II.  Worldly  wealth  cannot  satisfy  the  soul's  longing.  III. 
Learning  cannot  satisfy  the  soul.  Solomon  was  one  of  the  largest  contributors 
to  the  literature  of  the  day.  IV.  In  the  life  or  the  voluptuary  there  is  no 
•comfort.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)     On  the  proper  eetimate  of  human  life: — I.  Ih 


CHAP,  xn.]  ECCLESIASTES.  809 

WHAT  8BN8B  IT  IS  TBDB  THAT  ALL  HUMAN  PLEASDKE8  ABB  VANITY.      I  shall  studiouslv 

avoid  exaggeration,  and  only  point  out  a  threefold  vanity  in  human  life,  whica 
every  impartial  observer  cannot  but  admit;  disappointment  in  pursuit,  dissatisfao- 
tion  in  enjoyment,  uncertainty  in  possession.  1.  Disappointment  in  pursuit. 
We  may  form  our  plans  with  the  most  profound  sagacity,  and  with  the  most 
vigilant  caution  may  guard  against  danger  on  every  side.  But  some  unforeseen 
ooourrence  comes  across,  which  baffles  our  wisdom,  and  lays  our  labours  in  the 
dust.  Neither  the  moderation  of  our  views,  nor  the  justice  of  our  pretensions, 
can  ensure  success.  But  time  and  chance  happen  to  all.  Against  the  stream  of 
events,  both  the  worthy  and  the  undeserving  are  obliged  to  struggle;  and  both 
are  frequently  overborne  alike  by  the  current.  2.  Dissatisfaction  in  enjoyment 
is  a  further  vanity  to  which  the  human  state  is  subject.  This  is  the  severest  of 
•11  mortifications;  after  having  been  successful  in  the  pursuit,  to  be  baffled  in  the 
enjoyment  itself.  Yet  this  is  found  to  be  an  evil  still  more  general  than  the 
former.  Together  with  every  wish  that  is  gratified,  a  new  demand  arises.  One 
void  opens  in  the  heart,  as  another  is  filled.  On  wishes,  wishes  grow;  and  to  the 
end,  it  is  rather  the  expectation  of  what  they  have  not,  than  the  enjoyment  of 
what  they  have,  which  occupies  and  interests  the  most  successful.  This  dissatis* 
faction,  in  the  midst  of  human  pleasure,  springs  partly  from  the  nature^f  our 
enjoyments  themselves,  and  partly  from  circumstances  which  corrupt  them.  No 
worldly  enjoyments  are  adequate  to  the  high  desires  and  powers  of  an  immortal 
spirit.  Femcy  painte  them  at  a  distance  with  splendid  colours;  but  poesessioa 
unveils  the  fallacy.  Add  to  the  unsatisfying  nature  of  our  pleasures,  the  attending 
circumstances  which  never  fail  to  corrupt  them.  For,  such  as  they  are,  they  are 
at  no  time  possessed  unmixed.  When  external  circumstances  show  fairest  to 
the  world,  the  envied  man  groans  in  private  under  his  own  burden.  Some  vexa- 
tion disquiets,  some  passion  corrodes  him;  some  distress,  either  felt  or  feared, 
gnaws,  like  a  worm,  the  root  of  his  felicity.  For  worldly  happiness  ever  tends  to 
destroy  itself,  by  corrupting  the  heart.  8.  Uncertain  possession  and  short  dura- 
tion. Were  there  in  worldly  things  any  fixed  point  of  security  which  we  could 
gain,  the  mind  would  then  have  some  basis  on  which  to  rest.  But  our  condition 
is  such  that  everything  wavers  and  totters  around  us.  If  your  enjoyments  be 
numerous,  you  lie  more  open  on  different  sides  to  be  woimded.  If  you  have 
possessed  them  long,  you  have  greater  cause  to  dread  an  approaching  change. 
Even  supposing  the  accidents  of  life  to  leave  us  untouched,  human  bliss  must  still 
be  transitory ;  for  man  changes  of  himself.  No  course  of  enjoyment  can  delight  us 
long.  What  amused  our  youth,  loses  its  charm  in  maturer  age.  As  years 
advance,  our  powers  are  blunted,  and  our  pleasurable  feelings  decline.  We  project 
great  designs,  entertain  high  hopes,  and  then  leave  our  plans  unfinished,  and  sink 
into  oblivion.  II.  How  this  vanity  of  the  wobld  can  bb  beconoiled  with  tbb 
PBBFB0TI0N8  OF  ITS  DiviNE  AuTHOB.  If  Ood  be  good,  whence  the  evil  that  fills 
the  earth?  1.  The  present  condition  of  man  was  not  his  original  or  primary 
state.  As  our  nature  carries  plain  marks  of  perversion  and  disorder,  so  the  world 
which  we  inhabit  bears  the  symptoms  of  having  been  convulsed  in  all  its  frame. 
Naturalists  point  out  to  us  everywhere  the  traces  of  some  violent  change  which 
it  hae  suffered.  Islands  torn  from  the  continent,  burning  mountains,  shattered 
precipices,  uninhabitable  wastes,  give  it  all  the  appearance  of  a  mighty  ruin. 
The  physical  and  moral  state  of  man  in  this  world  mutually  sympathize  and  corre- 
spond. They  indicate  not  a  regular  and  orderly  structure,  either  of  matter  or  of 
mind,  but  the  remains  of  somewhat  that  was  once  more  fair  and  magnificent. 
2.  As  this  was  not  the  original,  so  it  is  not  intended  to  be  the  final,  state  of  man. 
Though,  in  consequence  of  the  abuse  of  the  human  powers,  sin  and  vanity  were 
introduced  into  the  region  of  the  universe,  it  was  not  the  purpose  of  the  Creator 
that  they  should  be  permitted  to  reign  for  ever.  He  hath  made  ample  provision 
for  the  recovery  of  the  penitent  and  faithful  part  of  His  subjects,  by  the  merciful 
undertaking  of  the  great  Eestorer  of  the  world,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  8.  A 
future  state  being  made  known,  we  can  account  in  a  satisfying  manner  for  the 
present  distress  of  human  life,  without  the  smallest  impeachment  of  Divine  good- 
ness. The  sufferings  we  here  undergo  are  converted  into  discipline  and  improve- 
ment. Through  the  blessing  of  Heaven,  good  is  extracted  from  apparent  evil; 
and  the  very  misery  which  originated  from  sin  is  rendered  the  means  of  correcting 
sinful  passions,  and  preparing  us  for  felicity.     III.  Whetheb  thebb  bb  not,  in 

THB  PBB8BNT  CONDITION  OF  HUMAN  LIFB,  SOME  BEAL  AND  SOLID  BNJOTMENTS  WHICH 
COUa  MOT  UNDBB  THB  QBNEBAL  CHABOB  OF  VANITY  OF  VANITIXS.      The  doctrinC  of  the 


810  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  xrf. 

text  is  to  be  considered  as  chiefly  addressed  to  worldly  men.  Them  Solomoo 
means  to  teach  that  all  expectations  of  bliss,  which  rest  solely  on  earthly  posees- 
eions  and  pleasuree,  shall  end  in  disappointment.  But  surely  he  did  not  intend 
to  assert  that  there  is  no  material  difierence  in  the  pureuite  of  men,  or  that  no  real 
happiness  of  any  kind  could  now  be  attained  by  the  virtuous.  For,  beeidee  the 
unanswerable  objection  which  this  would  form  against  the  Divine  administration, 
it  would  directly  contradict  what  He  elsewhere  asserts  (Eccles.  ii.  26).  How  vain 
soever  this  life,  considered  in  itself,  may  be,  the  comforts  and  hopes  of  religion  are 
sufficient  to  give  solidity  to  the  enjoyments  of  the  righteous.  In  the  exerciss  of 
good  aflections,  and  the  testimony  of  an  approving  conscience;  in  the  sens*  of 
peace  and  reconciliation  with  Qod  through  the  great  Bedeemer  of  mankind ;  in  the 
firm  confidence  of  being  conducted  through  all  the  trials  of  life  by  infinite  wisdom 
and  goodness;  and  in  the  joyful  prospect  of  arriving  in  the  end  at  immortal 
felicity;  they  possess  a  happiness  which,  descending  from  a  purer  and  more  perfect 
religion  than  this  world,  partakes  not  of  its  vanity.  Besides  the  enjoyments 
peculiar  to  religion,  there  are  other  pleasures  of  our  present  stats  which,  though 
of  an  inferior  order,  must  not  be  overlooked  in  the  estimate  of  himian  life.  Some 
degree  of  importance  must  be  allowed  to  the  comforts  of  health,  to  the  innocent 
gratifications  of  sense,  and  to  the  entertainment  afforded  us  by  all  the  beautiful 
■eenes  of  nature;  some  to  the  pursuits  and  amusements  of  social  life;  and  more 
to  the  internal  enjoyments  of  thought  and  reflection,  and  to  the  pleasures  of  affas- 
tionate  intercourse  with  those  whom  we  love.  Were  the  great  body  of  men  fairlgr 
to  compute  the  hours  which  they  pass  in  ease,  and  even  with  some  degree  <^ 
pleasure,  they  would  be  found  far  to  exceed  the  number  of  those  which  are  spent  ia 
absolute  pain  either  of  body  or  mind.  But  in  order  to  make  a  still  mora  aoeurat* 
estimation  of  the  degree  of  satisfaction  which,  in  the  midst  of  earthly  vanity, 
man  is  permitted  to  enjoy,  the  three  following  observations  claim  our  attention : — 
1.  That  many  of  the  evils  which  occasion  our  complaints  of  the  world  are  wholly 
Imaginary.  It  is  among  the  higher  ranks  of  mankind  that  they  chiefly  abound; 
where  fantastic  refinements,  sickly  delicacy,  and  eager  emulation,  open  a  thousaiui 
sources  of  vexation  peculiar  to  themselves.  2.  That,  of  those  evils  which  may 
be  called  real,  because  they  owe  not  their  existence  to  fancy,  nor  can  be  removed 
by  rectifying  opinion,  a  great  proportion  is  brought  upon  us  by  our  own  misconduot. 
Diseases,  poverty,  disappointment  and  shame  are  far  from  being,  in  every  in- 
stance, the  unavoidable  doom  of  men.  They  are  much  more  frequently  the  c&- 
spring  of  their  own  misguided  choice.  3.  The  third  observation  which  I  make 
respects  thoss  evils  which  are  both  real  and  unavoidable;  from  which  neither 
wisdom  nor  goodness  can  procure  our  exemption.  Under  these  this  comfort 
remains,  that  if  they  cannot  be  prevented,  there  are  means,  however,  by  which 
they  may  be  much  alleviated.  Religion  is  the  great  principle  which  acta  under 
such  circumstances  as  the  corrective  of  human  vanity.  It  inspires  fortitude,  sap- 
ports  patience,  and,  by  its  prospects  and  promises,  darts  a  cheering  ray  into  the 
darkest  shade  of  human  life.  IV.  Pbaotioal  conclusions.  1.  It  highly  eoneertw 
us  not  to  be  unreasonable  in  our  expectations  of  worldly  felicity.  Peace  and  eon- 
tentment,  not  bliss  and  transport,  is  the  full  portion  of  man.  Perfect  joy  is 
reserved  for  heaven.  2.  But  while  we  repress  too  sanguine  hopes  formed  upon 
human  life,  let  us  guard  against  the  other  extreme,  of  repining  and  discontent. 
What  title  hast  thou  to  find  fault  with  the  order  of  the  universe,  whose  lot  is  so 
much  beyond  what  thy  virtue  or  merit  gave  thee  ground  to  claim?  8.  The  visw 
which  we  have  taken  of  human  life  should  naturally  direct  us  to  such  pursuits  M 
may  have  most  influence  for  correcting  its  vanity.     (H.  Blair,  D.D.) 

Vet.  II.  The  words  of  the  wise  are  h  goads. — A  v)i$e  preacher  aim$  io  wtove 
his  hearere: — ^I.  A  wish  fbbachbb  will  aih  to  iupbess  thb  hinds  of  his  hba&ebs. 
1.  Every  wise  preacher  knows  that  unless  he  impresses  the  minds  of  his  hearers, 
he  can  do  them  no  good  by  his  preaching.  Hearers  must  feel  what  they  hear,  or 
what  they  hear  will  be  like  sounding  brass,  or  a  tinkling  cymbal.     2.  Every  wise 

Sreaoher  knows  that  his  hearers  will  not  feel  the  truth  and  importance  of  what 
e  says  tmless  he  makes  them  feel  it.  Hearers  look  upon  it  as  the  part  of  the 
preacher  to  make  them  feel.  They  mean  to  be  passive  in  hearing,  unless  he 
makes  them  active.  II.  How  hb  will  pbbach  in  obdeb  to  attain  this  dbsirablb 
OBJECT.  When  any  person  proposes  a  certain  end,  the  end  which  he  proposes 
naturally  suggests  the  proper  means  to  accomplish  it.  This  holds  with  respect 
to  e  wise  preacher,  who  makes  it  his  object  to  penetrate  and  impress  the  minds 


ciiAP.  xii.]  ECCLESIASTES.  511' 

of  hie  hearere.  1.  This  end  will  naturally  lecul  him  to  use  tba  most  proper  ityla 
in  preaching.  Ha  will  choose  the  best  words,  and  plaoe  them  in  the  beet  order, 
to  enlighten  the  mind  and  affect  the  heart.  2.  His  design  to  penetrate  and  impress 
the  minds  of  his  hearers  will  lead  him  to  exhibit  great  and  interesting  truths. 
He  will  bring  much  of  the  character,  perfections  and  designs  of  God  into  his 
public  discourses.  He  will  preach  Christ  in  the  greatness  of  Hie  nature,  and  in 
the  glory  and  grace  of  Hie  mediatorial  character  and  works.  He  will  exhibit  maa 
in  the  dignity  of  his  nature,  and  in  the  importance  of  bis  destination.  And  ha 
will  unfold  the  scenes  of  a  general  judgment,  and  of  a  boundless  eternity,  in 
their  own  native  awful  solemnity.  8.  For  the  same  purpose  he  will  explain 
Divine  truths  and  describe  Divine  objects.  4.  The  wise  preacher,  who  intends  to 
impress  the  minds  of  his  hearers,  will  arrange  Divine  truths,  and  exhibit  Divine 
objecte,  in  such  an  order  as  to  reach  every  power  and  faculty  of  the  soul,  in  its 
proper  turn.  Instruction  should  always  go  before  declamation.  It  can  answer 
no  valuable  purpose  to  inflame  the  passions  before  light  is  thrown  into  the  under- 
standing  and  conscience;  but  rather  serves,  on  the  other  hand,  to  produce  the 
most  fatal  eSects.  5.  The  wise  preacher,  who  means  to  impress  the  minds  ot 
bis  hearers,  will  always  apply  his  discourse  according  to  their  particular  char- 
acters. What  belongs  to  saints,  he  will  apply  to  saints;  and  what  belongs  to 
fiiimers,  he  will  apply  to  sinners.  III.  Ihpbovbubnt.  1.  We  learn  from  whaii 
has  been  said,  the  importance  of  ministers  being  good  men.  Piety  is  necessary, 
both  to  dispose  and  enable  them  to  penetrate  and  impress  the  minds  of  their 
hearers.  2.  We  learn  from  what  has  been  said,  the  importance  of  ministers  giving 
themselves  wholly  to  their  work.  If  they  mean  to  penetrate  and  impress  the 
minds  of  their  hearers,  they  must  exhibit,  in  the  course  of  their  preaching,  a  rich 
variety  of  Divine  truths.  But  they  will  soon  lose  a  variety,  and  fall  into  a  same- 
ness in  preaching,  unless  they  constantly  improve  their  minds  in  the  knowledge  of 
the  doctrines  and  duties  of  religion  by  reading,  meditation  and  prayer.  8.  We 
learn  from  what  has  been  said,  the  manner  in  which  a  minister  should  appear 
and  speak  in  the  pulpit.  His  voice,  his  looks,  bis  gestures,  and  his  whole 
deportment,  should  be  wholly  governed  by  bis  ultimate  end,  which  is  to  penetrate 
and  impress  the  minds  of  his  hearers.  4.  We  learn  from  what  has  been  said  that 
it  is  not  very  material  whether  a  minister  preaches  with  notes,  or  without.  II 
be  aims  to  impress  the  minds  of  his  hearers,  he  may  attain  his  end  by  either  tA. 
these  modes  of  preaching.  5.  We  learn  from  what  has  been  said,  the  great 
absurdity  of  those  ministers  who  studiously  avoid  penetrating  and  impressing  the 
minds  of  their  hearers.  Solomon  and  Christ,  the  prophets  and  apostles  meant  to 
penetrate  and  impress  the  minds  of  their  hearers;  and,  by  the  manifestation  of  the 
truth,  to  commend  themselves  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God. 
These  are  examples,  which  it  is  wise  in  preachers  to  follow,  though  it  should  give 
pain  and  even  offence  to  their  hearers.  6.  If  it  be  the  wisdom  and  duty  o£ 
ministers  to  penetrate  and  impress  the  minds  of  their  hearers,  then  they  have  no 
reason  to  complain  of  the  most  close  and  pungent  preaching.  They  always  desire 
such  plainness  and  fidelity  in  other  men,  whom  they  employ  to  promote  their 
temporal  good.  They  wish  their  attorney  to  examine  their  cause  with  care,  dis- 
cover every  flaw,  and  tell  them  the  plain,  naked  truth.  And  they  heartily  desire 
their  surgeon  to  probe  their  wounds  to  the  bottom,  and  apply  the  most  effectual 
remedies,  though  ever  so  painful  and  distressing  to  endure.  Why,  then,  should 
they  complain  of  their  minister  for  dealing  plainly  and  faithfully  with  their  souls? 
This  is  an  absurdity  in  its  own  nature,  an  injtiry  to  their  minister,  and  may  be 
eternal  destruction  to  themselves.  7.  If  it  ought  to  be  the  aim  of  the  minister 
to  penetrate  and  impress  the  minde  of  his  hearers,  then  there  is  blame  somewhere 
if  their  minds  are  not  penetrated  and  impressed.  Either  the  minister  does  not 
aim  to  impress  their  minds,  or  they  mean  to  resist  the  impressions  of  Divine  truth. 
{N.  Emmona,  D.D.)  The  words  of  the  wi$e: — I.  They  ark  stimulating,  "as 
goads."  Wise  teaching,  however  attractive  (ver.  10),  is  never  pointless.  It  is 
penetrating,  incisive.  It  stimulates  to — 1.  Hatred  and  opposition.  Ahab  (1  Kings 
xxi.  20;  xxii.  8).  The  Pharisees  (Mark  xii.  12).  2.  Conversion.  Saul  of  Tarsus 
(Acts  ix.  5.  See  also  Pe.  xlv.  2,  5).  3,  Progress  and  effort  (2  Pet.  i.  12;  iii.  1). 
II.  They  are  abiding,  "  as  nails,"  etc.  *'  Masters  of  assemblies,"  either  those 
who  assemble  persons  together  to  hear  them,  or  perhaps  "  masters  of  collections," 
those  who  collect  and  arrange  wise  words.  In  either  case  they  are  teachers,  by 
word  of  mouth  or  in  writing.  A  nail  "  fastened  "  or  "  planted,"  not  only  pene- 
trates, but  abides.    The  impreesion  made  by  wiee  teaching  is  lasting.     It  abides — 


«12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  rn. 

1.  To  be  pondered.  The  Blessed  Virgin  (Luke  il.  19,  51.  See  also  chap.  i.  M, 
and  Gen.  xxxvii.  11).  2.  To  be  acted  upon,  as  fixed  principles,  regulating  the 
conduct.  "  Having  heard  the  word,  keep  it,  and  bring  forth  fruit,"  etc.  (Luke 
riii.  16;  see  Ps.  cxix.  11).  3.  To  be  added  to;  a  nail  (a  "  peg,"  as  we  aay)  oa 
which  to  hang  much  else.  Compare  the  promise  to  Eliakim  (Isa.  xxii.  23-25).  III. 
Tbbt  havb  essential  unity,  *'  given  from  one  shepherd."  1.  The  human  teacher 
making  his  own  (so  giving  harmony  and  unity  to  "  words  of  the  wise  "),  drawn 
from  many  sources.  2.  God,  the  Author  of  all  wisdom  (Prov.  ii.  6),  the  Great 
Prophet  and  Teacher  of  the  Church  (John  xvi.  13;  1  Cor.  ii.  9-18).  Harmony 
and  unity  of  truth,  as  taught  by  inspired  writers,  and  those  whose  teaching  accords 
with  them.  IV.  Conclusion.  In  this  description  we  have  a  rule  by  which — 1. 
The  teacher  should  guide  himself.  2.  The  hearer  should  try  himself.  (Archdeacon 
Perowne.)  The  ChTittian  ministry  of  literary  men: — There  is  a  Christian  ministry 
wider  than  that  to  which  men  are  consecrated  through  ecclesiastical  offices.  They 
also  belong  to  the  "  great  company  of  preachers,"  or  teachers,  who  explore  the 
heavens,  or  who  decipher  the  records  graven  on  rocks,  or  who  analyze  material 
forms,  or  who  trace  the  evolutions  of  life,  with  those  who  delineate  or  embody  the 
beautiful  in  art;  all  these  are  co-workers  with  "  the  apostles  and  prophets  "  in  the 
service  and  worship  of  God  the  Father.  Some  of  God's  servants  stand  nearer 
to  the  altar  than  others,  but  the  sacrifice  and  service  of  those  in  the  outermost 
range  are  ever  and  everywhere  acceptable  to  Him  when  offered  or  done  "in  an 
honest  and  true  heart."  And  among  these  diverse  gifts  of  God's  Spirit,  who 
divides  to  men  "  severally  as  He  will,"  we  may  surely  count  the  gift  of  the 
genius  which  has  enriched  the  world  with  so  many  sweet  and  inspiring  thoughts 
in  the  varied  forme  of  literature.  Charles  Lamb  has  said,  in  his  own  quiet,  quaint 
way,  "  I  am  disposed  to  say  grace  upon  twenty  other  occasions  in  the  course  of 
the  day  besides  my  dinner.  I  want  a  form  for  setting  out  upon  a  pleasant  walk, 
for  a  moonlight  ramble,  for  a  friendly  meeting,  for  a  solved  problem.  Why  have 
we  none  for  books,  those  spiritual  repasts — a  grace  before  Milton,  a  grace  before 
Shakespeare,  a  devotional  exercise  proper  to  be  said  before  reading  the  '  Faery 
Queen  '?"  For  literature,  even  in  its  lowlier  forms,  has  been  a  ministry  of 
oomfort  and  help  to  millions.  It  has  filled  days  in  the  lives  of  multitudes  with 
solace  or  with  sunshine  which  otherwise  had  been  "  dark  and  dreary."  Many 
devout  people  have  a  horror,  I  know,  of  what  they  call  works  of  "  fiction  ";  nor 
am  I  insensible  of  the  demoralizing  influence  of  the  baser  sort  of  such  literature. 
But  let  us  discriminate  here,  as  we  do  in  music  and  in  painting  and  in  poetry, 
nor  condemn  that  which  is  wholesome  with  that  which  is  vicious  in  books  ol 
amusement  or  recreation;  for  the  greatest  writers  of  so-called  fiction  have  done 
good  and  blessed  service  often  in  the  cause  of  morality  and  religion.  There  is 
more  "  pure  gospel,"  in  the  substantial  sense  of  that  cant  phrase,  in  the  writings 
of  Charles  Dickens,  for  instance,  than  in  seven-tenths  of  our  printed  sermons. 
Think  of  the  gentleness,  the  pathos,  the  Divine  charity  which  pervade  his  books  t 
while  even  the  homely,  the  ludicrous  and  the  seemingly  profane  are  always 
friendly  to  virtue.  What  a  power  he  has  been  in  the  regeneration  of  English 
manners  1  Then  think  of  a  similar  service  done  by  his  great  compeer  in  English 
letters;  by  him  who  lashed  the  follies  and  the  vices  of  "  Vanity  Fair,"  doing  a 
work  which  the  pulpit  was  impotent  or  afraid  to  do  in  rebuking  the  fashionable 
extravagance  and  profligacy  of  the  age;  for  literature  could  find  audience  in  circles 
which  were  closed  to  homilies  and  Episcopal  pastorals,  insinuating  truths  which 
had  beeu  resented  cominsr  in  dogmatic  shape.  And  the  results  are  marked  in 
every  sphere  of  English  life,  for  it  is  not  to  an  increase  of  ecclesiastical  activity 
that  the  improved  manners  and  morals  of  the  English  people  are  to  be  solely  or 
chiefly  traced.  The  influence  of  the  press  has  become  supreme;  our  greatest 
prophets  speak  through  books.  No  man  can  estimate  the  debt  which  modern 
civilization  owes  to  the  men  the  weapon  of  whose  warfare  has  been  the  pen.  They 
have  been  ever  forward  to  expose  hypocrisy,  to  resist  the  tyranny  of  power,  to 
plead  the  cause  of  the  oppressed,  and  sometimes  at  a  bitter  cost.  Of  all  powers 
merely  human,  poetry  has  been  the  most  potent  over  the  cultivated  thought  and 
feeling  of  the  world.  It  holds  more  condensed  wisdom,  it  speaks  more  directly 
to  the  primal  affections,  it  incites  the  soul  to  grander  aims,  it  is  more  nearly  akin 
to  the  unction  of  the  Divine  Spirit  than  any  other  instrxmient  or  influence  con- 
trolled by  man.  The  art  of  making  verses  may  be  acquired,  but  the  true  poet  ia 
inspired,  having  deeper  insight  into  men  and  things  with  finer  faculties  of  inter- 
pretation :  the  teacher  at  whose  feet  all  other  men  sit  to  oatob  the  flow  of  har* 


CHAP.  XII.]  ECCLESIASTES,  318 

moniouB  wisdom.  All  gifts  of  genius  are  from  heaven,  but  the  brightest  and  the 
best  is  **  the  vision  and  the  faculty  Divine  "  of  the  poet.  He  is  the  teacher  ol 
teachers.  The  best  thoughts  of  the  cultivated  world  had  birth  in  poetry.  Every 
other  species  of  intellectual  power  has  been  inspired  by  it.  Religion,  morals, 
government  have  all  been  penetrated  and  purified  by  it.  Take  one  name  and  all 
it  represents  out  of  the  literary  annals  of  England,  and  what  a  void  would  be 
visible  wherever  the  English  tongue  has  gone  1  "Take  the  entire  range  of 
English  literature,"  says  the  late  Canon  "Wordsworth;  "put  together  our  best 
authors  who  have  written  upon  subjects  not  professedly  religious  or  theological, 
and  we  shall  not  find,  I  believe,  in  them  all  united  bo  much  evidence  of  the 
Bible  having  been  read  and  used  as  we  have  found  in  Shakespeare  alone."  Who 
can  take  his  thoughts  and  reflections  into  the  study  or  the  closet  without  coming 
forth  with  deeper  and  diviner  feelings  in  him — without  a  more  awful  estimate  of 
life  and  its  great  issues?     (/.  H.  Rylance,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  Of  making  many  books  there  is  no  end. — Book$: — If  true  so  many 

years  before  Christ,  how  much  more  true  so  many  years  a.d.  1  We  so  often  see  books, 
we  have  no  appreciation  of  what  a  book  is.  It  took  all  civilizations,  all  martyr  fires,  alt 
battles,  all  victories,  all  defeats,  all  glooms,  all  brightness,  all  centuries  to  make 
one  book  possible.  A  book;  the  chorus  of  the  ages;  it  is  the  drawing-room  in 
which  kings  and  queens,  and  philosophers  and  poets,  and  orators  and  rhetoricians 
came  forth  to  meet.  If  I  burned  incense  to  any  idol  I  would  build  an  altar  before  a 
book.  Thank  God  for  books — good  books,  healthful  books,  books  of  men,  books 
of  women — above  all,  for  the  Book  of  God.  "  Of  making  many  books  there  is  no 
end."  The  printing  press  is  the  mightiest  agency  for  good  or  evil.  I  have  an  idea 
that  it  is  to  be  the  chief  agency  for  the  rescue  and  evangelization  of  the  world, 
and  that  the  last  great  battle  will  not  be  fought  with  guns  and  swords,  but  with 
types  and  presses,  a  gospelized  printing  press  triumphing  over  and  trampling 
under  foot  and  crushing  out  a  pernicious  literature.  You  must  apply  the  same 
law  to  the  book  and  the  newspaper.  The  newspaper  is  a  book  swifter  and  in  more 
portable  shape.  Under  pernicious  books  and  newspapers  tens  of  thousands  have 
gone  down.  The  plague  is  nothing  to  it.  That  counts  its  victims  by  the  thou- 
sands; this  modern  pest  shovels  its  millions  into  the  charnel-house  of  the  morally 
'  dead.  Is  there  anything  that  I  can  do  to  help  stem  this  mighty  torrent  of  per- 
nicious literature?  Yes.  The  first  thing  for  us  all  to  do  is  to  keep  ourselves  and 
our  families  aloof  from  iniquitous  books  and  newspapers.  If  you  ask  me  to-day  is 
there  anything  we  can  do  to  stem  this  tide,  I  say  yes,  very  much  every  way.  First 
we  will  stand  aloof  from  all  books  that  give  false  pictures  of  human  life.  Life  is 
neither  a  tragedy  nor  a  farce.  Men  are  not  all  either  knaves  or  heroes.  Women 
are  neither  angels  nor  fairies.  Judging,  however,  from  much  of  the  literature  of 
this  day,  we  would  come  to  the  idea  that  life  is  a  fitful,  fantastic  and  extravagant 
thing,  instead  of  a  practical  and  useful  thing.  Those  women  who  are  indiscriminate 
readers  of  novels  are  unfit  for  the  duties  of  wife,  mother,  sister,  daughter,  the 
duties  of  home  life,  the  duties  of  a  Christian  life.  We  will  also  help  to  stem  the 
tide  of  pernicious  literature  by  standing  aloof,  we  and  our  families,  from  books 
which  have  some  good  but  a  large  admixture  of  evil.  I  do  not  care  how  good  you 
are,  you  cannot  afford  to  read  a  bad  book.  You  say,  "  The  influence  is  insig- 
nificant." Ah  I  the  scratch  of  a  pin  may  produce  the  lockjaw.  You  out  of  curi- 
osity plunge  into  a  bad  book,  and  you  have  the  curiosity  of  a  man  who  takes  a 
torch  into  a  gunpowder  mill  to  see  whether  or  not  it  will  blow  up.  If  you  want 
to  help  stem  the  tide  of  pernicious  literature  you  and  your  families  must  also 
stand  back  from  books  which  corrupt  the  imagination.  In  the  name  of  God,  I 
warn  some  of  you  that  your  children  are  threatened  with  moral  and  spiritual 
typhoid,  and  if  the  evil  be  unarrested,  there  will  be  the  funeral  of  the  body,  the 
funeral  of  the  mind,  and  the  funeral  of  the  soul — three  funerals  in  one  day.  If 
you  want  to  help  stem  this  tide  keep  aloof,  you  and  your  families,  from  all  books 
that  are  apologetic  for  crime.  Many  of  the  fascinations  of  book-binding  are  thrown 
around  sin.  Vice  is  horrible  anyhow.  It  is  born  in  shame,  and  it  dies  howling  in 
the  darkness.  Paint  it  as  writhing  in  the  horrors  of  a  city  hospital.  Cursed  are 
the  books  which  make  impurity  decent,  and  crime  honourable,  and  hypocrisy  noble. 
I  must  in  this  connection  call  to  your  mind  the  iniquitous  pictoriais  of  our  time. 
For  good  pictures  I  have  great  admiration.  An  artist  with  one  flash  will  do  that 
which  an  author  can  accomplish  in  four  hundred  pages.  Fine  paintings  are  the 
aristocracy  of  art.     Engravings  are  the  democracy  of  art.     A  good  picture  on  one 


814  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xa. 

•ide  of  a  pictorial  will  sometimes  do  just  as  much  good  as  a  book  of  four  or  five 
hundred  pages.  But  you  know  our  cities  are  to-day  cursed  with  evil  pictorials. 
These  death-warrants  are  on  every  street.  A  young  man  purchases  perhaps  one 
copy,  and  he  purchases  it  with  his  eternal  discomfiture.  That  one  bad  picture 
poisons  one  soul,  that  soul  poisons  fifty  souls,  the  fifty  despoil  a  hundred,  the 
hundred  a  thousand,  the  thousand  a  million,  and  the  millions  other  millions,  until 
it  will  take  the  measuring  line  of  eternity  to  tell  the  height,  and  the  depth,  and 
the  ghastlinesB  of  the  great  misdoing.  Bemember  that  one  column  of  good  reading 
may  save  a  soul,  that  one  column  of  bad  reading  may  destroy  a  soul.  Years  ago, 
s  clergyman  passing  along  through  the  west  stopped  at  an  hotel  and  saw  a  woman 
copying  from  a  book.  He  found  the  book  was  Doddridge's  "  Rise  and  Progress." 
This  woman  had  been  pleased  with  the  book,  which  she  had  borrowed,  and  was 
copying  a  passage  that  impressed  her  very  much.  The  clergyman  happened  to 
have  a  copy  of  Doddridge's  "  Bise  and  Progress  "  in  his  valise,  and  gave  it  to 
her.  Thirty  years  passed  along,  and  that  clergyman  came  to  the  same  hotel  and 
was  inquiring  about  the  family  that  had  lived  there  thirty  years  before,  and  was 
pointed  to  a  house  near  by.  He  went  there  and  said  to  the  woman,  "  Do  you 
remember  seeing  me  before?"  She  said,  "  I  don't  remember  ever  to  have  seen 
you  before."  *'  Don't  you  remember  thirty  years  ago  a  man  giving  you  a  copy 
of  Doddridge's  *  Rise  and  Progress  '?"  **  Oh,  yes,  I  remember  that;  that  saved 
my  soul,  that  book.  I  lent  it  to  my  neighbours  and  they  read  it,  and  they  all 
came  into  the  Church,  and  we  had  a  great  revival.  Do  you  see  the  spire  of  a 
church  out  yonder?  That  church  was  built  as  a  consequence  of  that  book."  Oh„ 
the  power  of  a  good  bookl  Oh,  the  power  of  a  bad  bookl  Crowd  your  minds  with 
good  books,  and  there  will  be  no  room  for  the  bad.  The  bushel  full  of  the  wheat, 
where  can  you  put  in  the  chafE?     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 

Yer.  13.  Let  as  hear  the  concluaion  of  the  whole  matter:  Fear  Ood,  and  keep 
His  commandments. — The  purpose  of  life: — I.  Life  has  a.  pdbposb.  The  archi- 
tect intends  the  building  he  designs  and  erects  to  answer  a  specific  end ;  so  is  it 
with  the  engineer,  the  ship-builder,  the  mechanic,  the  artist,  the  creator  and 
fashioner  of  any  work.  Surely  God  must  have  had  some  end  in  view  in  making 
the  universe,  and  in  making  us  what  we  are,  and  in  placing  us  in  the  midst  of 
Buch  wondrous  realities.  II.  What  is  the  purpose  of  life?  1.  It  is  our  business 
to  see  that  we  get  into  right  relationship  with  God.  By  nature  and  by  practic© 
we  are  in  a  state  of  alienation  from  Him;  there  is  a  breach  of  our  own  making — 
between  Him  and  us.  Our  prime  concern  should  be  to  get  that  breach  healed. 
This  is  possible.  2.  Our  reconciliation  to  God  effected,  we  should  constantly  love 
Him  and  obey  Him,  and  seek  His  glory.  For  this  He  has  given  us  life,  physical 
strength,  mental  endowments,  our  spiritual  nature.  He  has  placed  us  here  that 
wo  may  do  His  will.  This  should  be  our  continual  aim.  To  engage  in  this  employ 
should  be  considered  rather  a  privilege  than  an  obligation.  In  all  pursuits  and 
circumstances  we  should  seek  to  live  for  God.  Indeed,  we  can  only  fulfil  this 
purpose  by  attending  to  details.  It  is  only  by  being  faithful  in  the  least  that  we 
can  be  faithful  in  much.  In  mosaic,  it  is  the  filling  up  with  small  pieces  that  often 
gives  completeness  and  beauty  to  the  design.  The  neglect  of  little  things  some- 
times leads  to  serious  results.  Let  life's  details  be  "  with  God."  If  we  take  heed 
to  this,  all  our  work  will  be  done  well.  8.  The  purpose  of  life  embraces  love  and 
service  to  all  mankind.  In  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  men;  in  their  struggle  with 
poverty — aye,  and  with  riches;  in  their  temptations,  and  need  of  succour  and 
sympathy;  in  all  these  see  your  field  of  toil.  Up  to  your  work.  Perform  it  with 
glad  heart  and  diligent  hands;  and  never  grow  weary — at  all  events,  never  grow 

idle till  you  can  say,  as  your  Master  said — "  It  is  finished."    When  Dr.  Donne 

was  dying,  he  said,  "  I  count  all  that  part  of  my  life  lost  which  I  spent  not  in 
commimion  with  God,  or  in  doing  good."  (W.  Walters.)  The  moral  of  it  all: — 
There  are  times  when  every  one  of  us  is  either  constrained  by  sorrow,  or  invited 
by  the  hope  of  profit,  to  take  stock  of  his  recollections.  We  have  all  desired 
eagerly,  we  have  all  toiled;  not  one  of  us  but  has  had  his  aspirations  and  his 
disappointments.  Life  has  turned  out,  and  will,  we  suppose,  turn  out  differently 
from  what  we  either  hoped  or  found  when  we  sallied  forth  upon  its  ways  untried. 
The  book  is  sympathetic  with  all  who  have  lost  their  illusions;  with  all  who  watch 
the  bright  dreams  die  out  one  by  one  like  the  fairy  lamps  of  some  summer's 
festival.  How  often  have  we  exclaimed  with  the  Preacher,  as  the  hoUowness  of 
each  pretence  of  this  most  pretentious  world  has  been  exposed  by  our  own  trial: 


CHAP.  XII.]  ECCLESIASTES.  315 

"This  also  is  vanity  I"  But  there  i«  another  side  to  the  subject.  Some  things 
are  real.  Never  does  the  author  of  this  book  speak  of  religion  as  if  it  were  an 
illusion ,  or  of  God  as  if  He  were  other  than  true.  The  spiritual  part  by  which  we 
are  related  to  God  and  know  God  is  our  genuine  self.  It  is  because  the  soul  wants 
truth  that  it  discards  so  impatiently  the  counterfeits  of  truth  that  press  upon  its 
notice.  If  there  were  not  a  vital  spark  of  worth  in  the  soul  it  would  never  criticize 
so  severely  the  mass  of  worthlessness  which  surrounds  it.  That,  then,  is  our 
subject — the  vanity  of  the  world  and  the  worth  of  religion,  and  each  of  these 
seen,  and  seen  only,  in  contrast  and  foil  to  the  other.  1.  We  may  name  three 
things  on  which  the  moralist  writes  the  legend  of  vanity — human  labour,  human 
knowledge,  human  pleasure.  (1)  One  of  his  thoughts  about  labour  is  that  it  seems 
a  fruitless  fretting  against  the  fixed  forces  of  nature.  "  The  earth  abideth  for 
ever."  Suns  arise  and  set;  the  wind  shifts  from  quarter  to  quarter;  the  rivers 
flow  to  the  sea,  and  the  brooks  flow  to  the  rivers.  There  are  times  when  we  are 
oppressed  with  this  thought,  and  it  becomes  unbearable.  As  one  of  our  English 
noblemen,  who  had  a  mansion  overlooking  the  beautiful  valley  of  the  Thames, 
said:  "  I  cannot  understand  why  people  delight  in  the  view  of  the  river;  there  ii 
k — flow,  flow,  flow,  always  the  samel"  How  speedily  the  effect  of  man's  toil 
vanishes  from  the  face  of  Nature  1  There  \s  nothing  more  beautiful  than  the 
sight  of  well-ordered  gardens  or  cultivated  held;  yet  how  quickly  does  Nature,  as 
if  in  defiance  of  man's  eSort  at  improvement,  come  rushing  back  with  her  weeds 
and  wildness  I  (2)  Again,  the  contrast  of  human  knowledge  and  wisdom  with 
the  sameness  of  human  nature  leads  to  the  same  reflection  of  disappointment. 
Increase  of  knowledge  means  increase  of  sorrow.  The  study  of  history  brings  to 
light  a  long  series  of  passionate  struggles  after  truth  and  good,  which  have  inces* 
santly  to  be  begun  anew.  (3)  The  Preacher  turned  with  sickness  of  heart  from 
the  toil  of  knowledge,  and  betook  himself  to  refined  pleasures.  The  thought  of 
death,  levelling  all  distinctions,  intruded  itself  upon  him.  The  wise  man  is 
equalled  in  the  earth  at  last  with  the  fool.  Life  became  odious  to  him  becausa 
the  work  wrought  under  the  sim  was  grievous  to  him ;  for  all  was  vanity  and  vexa* 
tion  of  spirit.  2.  And  now  we  come  to  "  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter." 
If  this  legend,  "  Vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit,"  is  to  be  written  upon  the  objects 
of  human  desire  and  delight,  if  the  world  sounds  hollow  wherever  we  touch  it, 
where  is  reality  to  be  found?  The  simple  answer  of  the  Preacher  is,  it  is  to  be 
found  in  religion:  "  Fear  God,  and  keep  His  commandments."  God  is  real  as  the 
soul  is  real.  He  is,  as  Augustine  describes  Him,  the  Life  of  our  life,  the  core  of 
our  hearts.  God  is  that  pure  and  perfect  Being  for  alliance  and  communion  with 
whom  we  long.  And  it  is  the  light  we  have  from  Him  and  in  Him  which  makes 
the  world  look  so  dark,  the  perception  of  His  rightness  which  throws  into  painful 
contrast  the  crookedness  of  men's  ways,  and  of  His  beauty  which  makes  their 
wickedness  so  deformed.  And  our  happiness  must  lie,  for  each  one  of  us,  in  loyalty 
to  Him,  in  the  keeping  of  His  laws,  whether  they  be  known  to  us  through  the 
study  of  Nature  or  of  sacred  Scriptures,  or  by  attentive  study  of  our  own  hearts 
and  the  oracular  spirit  of  holiness,  whose  influence  is  felt  therein.  It  is  in  weari- 
ness of  the  world  that  we  fall  back  upon  the  sweetness  and  truthfulness  of  pure 
religion  for  our  refreshment  and  solace;  it  is  when  we  have  given  up  the  conceit 
of  being  wiser  than  our  forefathers,  and  the  hope  of  setting  crooked  things  straight, 
that  we  see  distinctly  the  cultivation  of  our  souls  to  be  our  main  concern,  and  the 
only  way  to  better  the  world  is  by  reverently  attending  to  our  duty  in  wholeness 
and  simplicity  of  heart.  It  is  an  ill  thing  for  us  if,  when  we  have  found  out  the 
hoUownesa  of  this  bubble-like  world,  the  trickiness  and  imposture  of  human 
nature,  we  say:  "  We  will  live  like  the  rest,  we  will  not  take  things  seriously,  we 
will  pass  on  our  way  with  a  smile  and  a  jest,  trusting  nothing,  hoping  nothing." 
It  is  only  the  presence  of  God  that  is  of  substantial  and  eternal  good,  that  can 
console  us  for  the  vanity  of  earthly  things,  as  the  Preacher  foimd  so  long  ago. 
(B.  Johnson,  M.A.)  Making  the  moat  of  life: — What  is  meant  by  "making  the 
most  of  life  "?  The  answer  may  be  given  in  four  distinct  yet  related  propositions. 
I.  Thb  wish  beokoninq  of  life  in  its  end,  aims,  limitations,  and  possibilities. 
Life  is  a  serious  and  tremendous  reality;  life  is  short  at  best;  life  is  freighted  with 
infinite  possibilities  of  good  and  evil;  life  is  a  responsible  trust  of  infinite  solemnity 
and  importance.  To  enter  upon  such  a  life  and  spend  its  precious  years,  and  part 
with  its  priceless  opportunities,  without  due  consideration,  with  no  serious  thought 
of  the  future — the  end,  the  obligations  and  the  final  issues  of  life — is  to  act  tha 
part  of  a  fool  and  a  wanton  sinner.    II.  The  sioht  ohoiox  or  means  fob  tb> 


81«  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

SEODBiNo  or  LiFB's  OBEAT  END.  Life  IS  a  rational,  fearful  trust,  which  God  has 
put  into  our  hands,  and  He  will  hold  us  strictly  responsible  for  the  use  and 
outcome  of  it.  On  the  right  choice  of  means  and  their  wise  and  faithful  application 
will  depend  mainly  the  tone,  the  character,  the  fruit,  and  the  final  outcome  of 
life  itself.     III.  A  jealous  husbanding  of  all  the  kesources  at  oub  command,  in 

OBDEB  TO  accomplish  LIFE'S  END  AND  MISSION.  IV.  ThE  UTMOST  OUTLAY  OF  WILL 
AND    ENBBGT    AND    EFFORT    TO    GET    THE    BEST    POSSIBLE    BESULTS    OUT    OF    THIS    BRIEF 

PEBiOD  OF  PROBATIONARY  EXISTENCE.  The  present  is  the  seedtime  of  an  eternal 
existence.  Brief  as  this  life  ia  it  affords  the  only  chance  of  heaven.  Our  days 
are  "  numbered  "  from  the  start — enough,  but  not  one  too  many,  for  the  work 
given  us  to  do.  We  must  up  and  haste.  (J.  M.  Shermood,  D.D.)  The  fear  of 
God: — The  fear  of  God  which  he  holds  up  before  us,  as  the  whole  work  and  duty 
and  happiness  of  man,  is  such  a  fear  as  blends  with  love,  and  issues  in  all  holy 
obedience,  in  the  keeping  of  God's  commandments,  heartily,  impartially,  univers- 
ally. I.  The  fbinciple  of  bbligion.  This  ia  the  fear  of  God,  not  such  a  dread 
as  wicked  men  have,  and  which  makes  them  tremble — like  the  devils  in  their 
prison  beneath,  but  a  holy  and  reverential  sense  of  His  majesty — a  belief  in  Hia 
presence,  power,  and  goodness — the  adoration  of  His  love  and  wisdom — the  reliance 
upon  His  providence  and  the  dread  of  His  displeasure.  By  consequence,  the  fear 
of  God  includes  our  belief  in  Him,  as  He  has  revealed  Himself  to  us  in  Hit 
Word.  The  fear  of  God  which  I  now  commend  to  you  is  a  mixed  feeling — ^love, 
faith,  confidence  must  blend  with  it.  This  is  the  inward  principle  of  religion — 
without  it  there  can  be  no  acceptable  worship.  There  are  two  extremes  from 
which  it  is  alike  distant.  The  one  extreme  is  that  dread,  which  engenders  super- 
Btition  and  human  devices  for  its  palliation  and  removal.  II.  This  feab  is  seen 
IN  ITS  besolts — it  necessarily  leads  to  practice ;  it  is  in  'connection  with  duty  and 
obedience.  When  we  see  the  movements  of  a  clock,  or  any  complex  machine,  we 
know  that  there  is  a  power  at  work  within.  If  the  hands  of  a  watch  move,  we 
know  that  there  is  a  cause ;  the  result  follows  of  course.  It  is  so  with  the  outward 
acts  of  religion  when  they  are  right;  they  spring  from  the  inward  principle.  The 
great  virtue  of  this  inward  principle  is,  that  it  actuates  man  in  his  conduct 
imiversally;  it  gives  a  right  aim  and  tendency  both  to  his  desires  and  affections — 
both  to  his  words  and  works.  To  govern  the  tongue,  to  restrain  the  appetites  of  the 
body,  to  correct  the  temper,  to  keep  down  the  swellings  of  pride,  the  suggestions  of 
malice  and  revenge,  to  curb  all  dishonesty  in  desire  and  action,  to  secure  temperance, 
soberness,  and  chastity;  "to  keep  the  hands  from  picking  and  stealing,  and  the 
tongue  from  evil  speaking,  lying,  and  slandering;"  to  establish  truth  and  integrity 
in  the  deep  places  of  the  heart ;  these  are  all  residte  flowing  from  an  inward  principle 
of  the  fear  of  God.  III.  This  is  the  whole  of  man  ;  his  whole  duty,  his  higheet 
achievement,  his  noblest  work.  (H.  J.  Hastings,  M.A.)  What  is  the  whole  duty  of 
man : — The  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  resembles  that  of  Job — its  aim  is  not  disclosed  till  it 
ends.  It  might  be  called  the  Book  of  Awakening  and  Benunciation.  If  we  look 
at  life  from  a  mere  earthly  point  of  view  it  is  not  worth  living.  All  is  vanity; 
what's  the  use?  As  the  book  closes  it  reveals  the  true  philosophy  of  life.  I.  Thb 
FEAB  OF  God.  This  includes  a  variety  of  feelings.  1.  Beverence.  This  may  be 
viewed  as  threefold,  according  to  Goethe's  profound  view  of  education — ^reverence 
for  what  is  above  us,  reverence  for  our  equals,  and  reverence  for  what  is  below  us. 
2.  The  fear  of  offending  God  by  doing  what  is  sinful.  8.  This  fear,  which  springs 
from  reverence,  has  in  it  no  torment,  and  is  closely  allied  to  hope.  II.  The  obedi* 
ENCB  OF  God.  To  keep  His  commandments  includes  the  whole  duty  of  man;  or 
this  is  every  man's  duty.  The  tree  of  duty  supports  many  branches.  1.  Our  duty 
to  God.  2.  Our  duty  to  ourselves.  8.  Our  duty  to  others.  III.  Some  beasons. 
1.  Our  whole  life  shall  be  judged.  2.  Every  secret  thing  in  the  whole  of  life  shall 
be  revealed  in  the  judgment,  whether  it  be  good,  or  whether  it  be  evil.  (L.  0. 
Thompson.)  The  summary  of  manhood: — There  is  no  need  to  caution  men  against 
the  fear  of  God.  The  tendency  to-day  is  not  to  fear  too  much,  but  too  little. 
I.  Feab  God.  Godly  fear  is  salutary.  1.  It  fosters  reverence.  2.  It  guards 
virtue.  8.  It  restrains  from  sin.  4.  It  impels  to  obedience;  to  the — II.  Keeping 
OF  God's  commandments;  of  the  commandment.  1.  To  repent.  2.  To  believe  in 
the  Lord  Jesus.  These  are  preliminary — to  keeping — 8.  The  great  commandment; 
ftnd — i.  That  "  like  unto  it,"  and  the  command — 5.  To  walk  in  "  all  the  statute* 
of  the  Lord."  III.  "This  is  the  whole  duty  op  man;"  rather,  "this  is  the 
whole  " — ^that  is,  this  it  everything — "  so  far  as  man's  life  is  concerned."  This  is 
•▼erything  ai  it  reUtet— 1.  Xo  faith.    2.  To  experience.    8..  To  conduct.    4.  !• 


CHAP,  xn.]  ECCLESIJSTES.  817 

■ervioe.  Thus  you  get  the  complete  man.  (B.  C.  Cowell.)  The  whole  duty  of 
man: — This  suggests  as  a  theme  for  meditation  the  fact  that  the  religion  revealed 
by  God  includes  the  entire  sphere  of  possible  human  activity ;  that  there  is  nothing 
good  that  a  man  can  think,  do,  or  say,  or  feel,  which  cannot  In  its  highest  forms 
be  shown  to  be  rooted  in,  and  a  fruit  of,  the  religion  which  God  has  revealed. 
"Fear  God,  and  keep  His  commandments;  for  this  is  the  whole  duty  of  man." 
I.  The  first  point  to  determine  is  the  meaning  of  the  wobd  feab.  It  is  not 
slavish  fear;  it  is  not  the  feeling  that  a  man  might  have  who  was  writhing  on  tha 
earth  at  the  approach  of  a  despot,  and  expecting  to  be  groimd  into  dust  by  tha 
stamp  of  his  iron  heel.  The  scriptural  meaning  of  fear  is  what  we  suggest  by 
the  word  revere.  "  Eevere  God,  and  keep  His  commandments."  This  is  the  "  few 
of  the  Lord  that  ii  the  beginning  of  wisdom."  Bevering  God  as  our  Creator,  aa 
the  Sovereign  of  the  imiverse,  as  the  one  Lawgiver,  is  the  union  of  the  intellect 
which  approves,  and  the  heart  which  loves,  and  the  will  which  consents.  They 
are  all  in  the  single  word  revere.  When  reverence  for  God  exists  in  a  human  soul, 
the  natural  attitude  of  that  soul  is  the  attitude  which  led  St.  Paul,  while  yet  hia 
name  was  Saul,  to  cry  out :  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do?"  II.  When 
a  child  of  God,  revering  Him,  asks  this  question,  he  finds  that  the  command' 
uents  of  God  incldde  his  devotions.  The  explanation  of  prayer,  of  the  holy 
Sabbath,  and  of  the  Word  of  God  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  they  create, 
maintain,  and  increase  reverence.  III.  Observe,  also,  that  God's  commands  taei 
the  fosu  of  righteousness,  and  these  commands  abb  simplified,  and  then 
DETAILS  ABE  PKESENTED  UNOEB  THEM.  The  first  and  great  commandment  is  that 
"  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  ail  thy  heart,  mind,  and  strength." 
The  only  definition  of  the  love  of  God  which  can  satisfy  the  mind  or  the  heart  ia 
"  to  have  an  intense  desire  to  please  Him."  It  will  apply  equally  to  spirits  in  tha 
body  and  out  of  the  body.  And  the  second  is  like  imto  it :  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself."  This  does  not  mean  more  than  thyself,  as  some  fanatics 
have  supposed,  but  as  thyself;  not  in  the  sense  of  oaring  for  thy  neighbour  as  for 
thyself,  or  of  caring  for  his  house,  his  children,  his  life;  but  in  this  sense:  that 
thou  wilt  do  good  to  thy  neighbour  as  thou  hast  opportimity,  and  that  thou  wilt 
not  do  evil  to  him  even  for  thine  own  transient  advantage.     (J.  M.  Btuskley,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.    For  God  shall  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  secret 
thing,  whether  it  be  good  or  whether  it  be  evil. — The  great  day  of  judgment: — 

I.    PbOVE    THE-  ABSOLCTE    GEBTAINTT    OF    A    DAT    OF    GENERAL    JUDGMENT.      1.    By    th« 

Bible  (Jude  14;  Job  xix.  26;  Ps.  ix.  7,  8;  1.  3-6;  Dan.  vii.  9,  10;  Matt.  xxv. 
81-46;  Acts  xxiv.  16,  25;  2  Pet.  iii.  10-12;  Rev.  xx.  11-18).  2.  Conscience, 
influenced  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  resting  on  the  inspired  volume  for  theological 
information,  points  to  the  Day  of  Judgment  for  rewards  and  punishments  to  ba 
distributed  at  the  end  of  our  probation.  8.  The  equality  and  justice  of  God's 
administration  are  incontestable  proof  of  a  Day  of  Judgment.     II.  The  Judge,  thi 

CIBCOM8TANCE8    ATTENDANT   ON,    AND   THE    IMMEDIATE   CONSEQUENCES    OF,    THE    DaT   Of 

Judgment.  1.  The  Judge.  Jesus  Christ  alone,  as  exhibited  in  the  Bible,  is 
adequate  for  the  great  work  of  judging  the  world  in  righteousness.  As  Son  of 
Ood,  Ha  understands  all  the  rights  of  the  eternal  throne,  the  requirements  of  law, 
and  the  demands  of  justice;  and  as  Son  of  man.  He  knows  the  extent  of  our 
ability,  the  feelings  of  our  hearts,  and  the  state  of  our  nature,  and  can,  therefore, 
be  a  merciful,  gracious,  and  just  Judge  in  things  pertaining  to  God  and  man. 
8.  The  circumstances  attendant  on  the  Day  of  Judgment,  and  the  immediate 
results  of  the  decisions  of  the  Supreme  Judge.  (W,  Barn$.)  Human  responti- 
bility: — In  the  argument  in  which  we  are  about  to  engage,  we  shall  assume  tha 
great  truth  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul;  we  shall  assume,  at  least,  that  man  is 
to  live  after  death;  for  if  this  be  denied,  there  is  little  place  for  reasoning  as  to 
human  accountableness.  I  shall  perhaps  bring  this  grave  question  most  plainly 
before  you  by  imagining  certain  cases,  in  which  a  creature  would  not  be  account* 
able,  or  in  which  his  being  held  accountable  by  a  Supreme  Power  would  con* 
feasedly  be  at  variance  with  justice.  Supposing,  then,  that  I  were  to  tell  you  of 
one  of  the  inferior  animals,  a  horse  or  a  dog,  as  held  accountable  for  its  actions, 
•o  that  the  Creator  of  that  animal  would  call  it  to  a  reckoning,  and  reward  or 
punish  it  according  to  its  works;  there  would  be  an  instant  feeling  in  your  minds 
that  this  could  hardly  be  true.  You  cannot  think  that  the  animal  has  intelligenos 
anough  to  be  placed  under  any  law;  the  distinctions  between  right  and  wrong 
have  naver  baen  apprehended  by  it,  and  becausa  of  its  want  of  intelligenoa  and 


sit  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  to. 

of  its  supposed  utter  inaptitude  for  any  moral  rule,  it  would  eeem  to  you  as  though 
to  bring  the  horse  or  the  dog  were  little  better  than  to  bring  a  machine  into 
judgment.  Now,  take  another  case;  the  case  of  an  infant,  or  a  very  young  child, 
xou  would  declare  it  palpably  unjust  were  this  infant  or  child  alleged  accountabU 
for  its  actions;  you  would  instantly  say,  "  The  child  is  in  no  sense  master  of  its 
actions;  its  reason  is  not  strong  enough,  and  its  conscience  not  formed  enough,  for 
discerning  between  right  and  wrong;  and  certainly,  if  there  be  accountableness  in 
any  case,  there  cannot  be  in  that  in  which  moral  diSerence  has  as  yet  no  exist* 
ence."  You  would  do  precisely  the  same  with  the  idiot.  You  would  say,  "  The 
lamp  has  been  quenched  or  never  kindled  in  this  being,  by  whose  shinings  he 
might  have  been  turned  from  evil  and  directed  to  good  :  how,  then,  can  he  justly 
be  brought  into  judgment  for  his  actions?  how  can  he  be  a  fit  subject  whether  for 
punishment  or  reward?"  Neither  is  it  only  infancy  or  idiotcy  which  would  make 
you  put  a  human  being  beyond  the  range  of  accountableness.  If  it  could  be  shown 
that  a  being  was  under  some  invincible  constraint,  actuated  by  a  superior  power, 
forced  by  irresistible  passions,  or  compelled  by  irreversible  circumstances,  to  a 
certain  course  of  conduct,  you  would  decide,  and  we  think  very  justly,  that  ha 
oould  not  be  accountable  for  his  actions.  A  free  agent  alone  can  be  accountable; 
one  free,  in  such  a  measure,  that  he  can  make  an  election  between  evil  and  good, 
and  is  under  no  necessity  of  acting  in  this  manner  rather  than  in  that.  We  muflt 
admit,  also,  another  exception  from  accountableness.  If  a  being  be  so  placed  that 
he  has  not  sufficient  information  as  to  what  is  his  duty,  or  that  he  is  without 
adequate  motive  to  its  performance  when  discerned,  it  would  seem  unjust  to  make 
him  responsible  for  his  actions;  as  he  must  be  free  in  order  to  be  accountable,  bo 
he  must  have  light  enough  for  his  direction,  and  inducement  enough  for 
his  obedience.  We  are  now  to  see  whether  any  of  these  allowed  pleas 
against  accountableness  can  be  urged  by  men  in  general;  for  if  not,  there 
will  be  an  end  of  all  objection  against  the  doctrine  of  human  responsibility, 
or  that  doctrine  will  stand  out  in  thorough  consistence  with  the  attributes  of 
•uch  a  Being  as  is  God.  Now,  first,  as  to  the  free  agency  of  man.  You  may  all 
have  heard  of  what  is  called  the  doctrine  of  necessity,  or  fatalism.  We  are  told, 
that  inasmuch  as  there  is  a  succession  of  causes  and  effects  in  the  universe,  and 
every  cause  must  produce  its  effect,  there  is  no  possibility  of  things  being  other- 
wise than  as  they  are;  we  have  no  power  over  events,  and  none  over  actions;  we 
cannot  act  but  in  one  way,  we  can  arrive  at  but  one  result;  and  it  is  ridiculous 
to  talk  of  our  being  accountable,  when  we  are  but  machines  which  do  not  regulate 
themselves.  Now,  this  doctrine  of  necessity,  if  true  at  all,  must  be  true  universally. 
But  I  can  see  that  the  doctrine  of  necessity  is  false  in  matters  of  common  life.  It 
is  not  true  that  things  are  beyond  our  control ;  it  is  not  true  that  they  proceed  just 
the  same,  whether  we  interfere  or  whether  we  do  not.  The  fields  do  not  wave 
with  harvest,  whether  we  till  them  or  whether  we  do  not;  and  it  does  make  a 
difference,  whether  we  put  out  a  fire  or  suffer  it  to  burn.  Be,  then,  consistent,  ye 
modern  fatalists!  Carry  out  your  doctrine  of  necessity  in  all  its  extent,  and  do 
not  confine  it  to  religion  and  morals.  But  setting  aside  this  doctrine  of  necessity, 
is  there  any  real  liberty  of  action— are  not  men  the  creatures  of  circumstances? 
are  they  not  under  an  insuperable  bias?  is  it  not  practically  undeniable,  that  they 
will  act  in  one  way  and  not  in  another?  Nay,  not  so;  man  is  no  machine,  when 
the  utmost  has  been  allowed  as  to  the  tendencies  and  circumstances  of  his  nature. 
Man  is  a  being  who  can  be  swayed  by  motives ;  and  a  being  influenced  by  motives 
cannot  be  a  being  impelled  by  necessity.  Judge  for  yourselves;  are  you  not  con- 
scious, when  you  do  many  thingp,  that  you  might  forbear  to  do  them? — ^that  if  a 
greater  inducement  to  the  forbearing  were  presented  than  is  urging  you  on  to  the 
doing,  you  would  forbear?  Then  assuredly  your  actions  are  so  far  free,  that  you 
may  justly  be  held  to  account.  But  a  being  may  be  free,  and  on  that  accoimt 
responsible,  yet  he  may  be  left  in  such  ignorance,  or  possess  so  little  moral  power, 
that  he  can  hardly  discover  the  right,  or  follow  it  if  discovered.  There  is  an  end 
of  moral  government,  unless  a  rigid  proportion  be  maintained  between  the  demands 
of  the  ruler  and  the  powers  and  opportunities  of  the  subject.  When  St.  Paul 
delivered  those  memorable  words,  "  For  as  many  as  have  sinned  without  law 
shall  also  perish  without  law,  and  as  many  as  have  sinned  in  the  law  shall  be 
judged  by  the  law,"  he  quite  settled  the  question,  with  all  believers  in  revelation, 
as  to  accountableness  varying  with  advantages,  so  that  there  shall  be  different 
standards  for  different  circumstances.  But,  withal,  we  do  not  think  you  can  find 
US  the  tribe  of  human  beings  whose  circumstances  can  be  given  as  sufficient  to 


CHAP.  XII.]  ECCLESIASTES.  31» 

excuse  them  from  the  being  accountable  at  all.  Tou  have  never  any  right  to 
look  at  those  in  whom  the  moral  sense  seems  almost  extinct,  without  looking 
also  at  others  in  whom  that  sense  is  in  vigorous  exercise.  We  gather  from  the 
fact  of  a  moral  sense  being  found  where  man  has  not  thoroughly  degraded  and 
sensualized  himself,  that  this  moral  sense  is  actually  an  element  of  our  nature; 
yea,  an  element  not  destroyed,  but  only  overlaid  in  the  most  degraded  and  sensuaU 
ized.  For  no  tribe  has  been  met  with  in  whom  conscience  could  not  be  awakened; 
•wakened,  we  say;  it  was  not  dead,  but  only  slept.  There  is  not  one  of  you 
without  a  conscience.  Let  men  say  what  they  will  as  to  the  strength  of  various 
motives,  the  strongest,  the  moet  uniform,  the  most  permanent  motive  with  you  all 
ia  the  sense  of  duty.  I  do  not  say  that  this  is  the  motive  to  which  you  most 
commonly  yield,  but  I  do  say  that  this  motive  is  always  pressed  on  you  through 
the  instrumentality  of  conscience;  so  that  whilst  every  other  is  transient,  this  is 
•biding.  I  dare  aiSrm,  that  in  every  mind  duty  is  secretly  placed  before  interest 
or  pleasure,  though  it  is  a  hundred  to  one  that  practically  interest  or  pleasure  will 
carry  it  over  duty.  There  is  a  light  vouchsafed  unto  all — ^there  is  a  voice  which  is 
audible  by  all — there  is  power  in  all  to  attempt  the  walking  by  the  light,  and  the 
hearkening  to  the  voice.  And,  therefore,  with  every  admission  that  accountable- 
ness  is  not  a  fixed  thing,  but  must  vary  in  degree  with  the  circumstances  and 
capacities  of  the  individual,  we  may  contend  in  the  general  that  Ood  will  only 
be  acting  with  the  most  thorough  justice  if  He  act  on  the  principle  of  the  text—* 
the  principle  of  bringing  "  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  secret  thing, 
whether  it  be  good,  or  whether  it  be  evil."  Now,  it  has  not  been  our  object 
throughout  our  foregoing  argument  to  show  you  that  Ood  does  or  will  hold  man 
accountable,  but  rather  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  circumstances  or  capacities 
of  man  to  militate  against  the  doctrine  of  his  accountableness ;  on  the  contrary, 
that  those  circumstances  and  capacities  are  such  as  to  prove  it  quite  just  thai 
be  should  be  held  accountable.  And  you  may  tell  me  that  this  leaves  the  question 
of  human  responsibility  unsettled;  for  that  Ood  will  call  men  to  account  is  na 
necessary  consequence  on  a  proof  that  He  might  call  them  to  account  consistently 
with  justice.  Now,  here  again  we  are  at  issue  with  you;  we  think  that  the  one 
is  a  necessary  consequence  on  the  other;  for  if  Ood  would  be  just  in  holding  man 
accountable,  would  He  not  be  unjust  in  not  holding  him  accountable?  The  justice 
results  from  the  capacities  with  which  He  has  endowed  man,  and  the  circum- 
stances in  which  He  has  placed  him;  and  He  would  be  unjust  were  He  not  to 
deal  with  him  according  to  those  capacities  and  circumstances;  imjust  because 
having  proposed  an  end.  His  perfections  demand  of  Him  that  He  inquire  whether 
or  no  it  have  been  effected.  But,  in  truth,  if  men  require  from  us  a  rigid  mathe- 
matical proof  of  their  being  responsible,  we  fairly  own  that  it  is  not  easy  to  give. 
We  can  show  that  the  elements  essential  to  accountableness  are  all  found  in  man, 
and  yet  it  may  not  be  easy  to  draw  out  a  demonstration  that  man  is  accountable. 
But  why  is  this?  Only  because  things  on  which  there  is  the  least  doubt  are  often 
the  hardest  to  prove.  A  man  asks  me  to  prove  to  him  that  he  is  responsible;  I 
ask  him  to  prove  to  me  that  he  exists.  He  will  tell  me  that  he  is  his  own  evidence 
as  to  his  existence;  and  I  tell  him  that  he  is  his  own  evidence  as  to  his  account- 
ableness. That  there  should  be  such  words  in  common  use  with  reference  to 
man,  is  itself  convincing  proof,  that  there  are  facts  which  correspond  to  them  in 
his  nature  and  condition.  The  whole  structure  of  society  is  based  on  the  fact  of 
hiunan  responsibility,  and  it  is  this  responsibility  which  keeps  it  together.  You 
have  only  to  establish  that  men  are  not  accountable  for  their  actions,  and  there 
is  an  end  of  all  confidence,  an  end  of  all  law,  an  end  of  all  decency ;  the  common- 
wealth ia  sick  at  its  core,  and  the  mainspring  is  snapped  which  actuates  all  the 
system.  Neither  are  our  modern  philosophers  prepared  for  this.  They  want  to 
keep  man  responsible  so  far  as  accountableness  may  be  necessary,  as  the  cordage 
of  society ;  and  then  they  wish  to  prove  him  irresponsible,  so  far  as  accountableness 
has  to  do  with  his  relation  unto  God.  Vain  effort  1  futile  distinction  I  There  is 
no  accountableness,  except  accountableness  to  Ood.  If  I  am  responsible  to  man, 
it  ia  only  in  a  subordinate  sense.  I  see  where  men  want  to  draw  the  line  o£ 
•cooimtableness.  They  have  no  idea  of  not  holding  one  another  accountable, 
when  their  present  interests  are  concerned ;  but  they  would  like  to  be  rid  of  the 
restraints  which  God's  moral  government  imposes,  and  they  manage,  therefore, 
to  fix  the  point  of  human  responsibility  just  where,  if  responsible,  they  stand 
exposed  to  eternal  destruction.  This  will  not  do.  We  cannot  admit  that  prin- 
eiples  whieh  are  either  universally  true  or  universally  false,  shall  be  partially 


830  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

applied,  chopped  and  squared,  as  may  suit  man's  passions  or  accord  with  his 
interests.  We  will  have  them  everywhere  or  nowhere.  They  shall  use  their 
principle*  wheresoever  they  are  applicable;  they  shall  carry  them  into  politics, 
they  shall  carry  them  into  science;  they  shall  be  fatalists  everywhere,  they  shall 
be  responsible  nowhere.  And  until  this  be  done  there  shall  be  no  place  for  argu* 
ment  against  human  aocountableness,  and  the  testimony  of  Scripture  shall  remain 
thoroughly  consistent  with  all  the  conclusions  of  reason,  that  "  God  will  bring 
every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good  or  whether 
it  be  evil."  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  reasonablenega  and  credibility  of  this  great 
principle   of  religion,   concerning   a   future   state   of  reward   and   punishment:— 

1.  The  SDITABLENB98  OP  THIS  PBIKOIPLB  TO  THE  MOST  NATURAL  NOTIONS  OF  OCB 

MINDS.  We  see,  by  experience,  that  all  other  things  (so  far  as  we  are  able  to 
judge),  minerals,  plants,  beasts,  etc.,  are  naturally  endowed  with  such  principles 
as  are  most  fit  to  promote  the  perfection  of  their  natures  in  their  several  kinds. 
And  therefore  it  is  by  no  means  credible  that  mankind  only,  the  most  excellent 
of  all  the  other  creatures  in  this  visible  world,  for  the  service  of  whom  so  many 
other  things  seem  to  be  designed,  should  have  such  kind  of  principles  interwoven 
in  his  very  nature  as  do  contain  in  them  mere  cheats  and  delusions.  1.  This 
principle  is  most  suitable  to  the  general  apprehensions  of  mankind  concerning  the 
nature  of  good  and  evil.  And  as  the  one  of  these  doth  in  the  essence  of  it 
imply  comeliness  and  reward,  so  doth  the  other  denote  turpitude  and  punishment, 

2.  This  principle  is  most  suitable  to  those  natural  hopes  and  expectations  which 
the  generality  of  good  men  have  concerning  a  state  of  future  happiness.  The 
better  and  the  wiser  any  man  is,  the  more  earnest  desires  and  hopes  hath  he 
after  such  a  state  of  happiness.  And  if  there  be  no  such  thing,  not  only  nature, 
but  virtue  likewise  must  contribute  to  make  men  miserable;  than  which  nothing 
can  seem  more  unreasonable  to  those  who  believe  a  just  and  a  wise  Providence. 
8.  This  principle  is  most  suitable  to  those  fears  and  expectations  which  the 
generality  of  wicked  men  are  possessed  with,  concerning  a  future  state  of  misery. 
Now,  as  there  is  no  man  whatsoever  that  is  wholly  freed  from  these  fears  of 
future  misery  after  death,  so  there  is  no  other  creature  but  man  that  hath  any 
fears  of  this  kind.  And  if  there  be  no  real  ground  for  this,  then  must  it  follow 
that  He  who  framed  all  His  other  works  with  such  an  excellent  congruity,  did 
yet  80  contrive  the  nature  of  man,  the  most  noble  amongst  them,  as  to  prove  a 
needless  torment  and  burden  to  itself.     II.  The  necessity  of  this  pbinoiplb  to 

TH>    BIOHT    government    OF    UEN'S    LIVES    AND    ACTIONS    IN    THIS    WORLD,    AND    THB 

pbbsebvino  of  SOCIETY  AMONGST  THEM.  Nothing  can  be  more  evident  than  that 
the  human  nature  is  so  framed  as  not  to  be  regulated  and  kept  within  due  bounds 
without  laws;  and  laws  must  be  insignificant  without  the  sanctions  of  rewards 
and  punishments,  whereby  men  may  be  necessitated  to  the  observance  of  them. 
Now,  the  temporal  rewards  and  punishments  of  this  life  cannot  be  sufficient  to 
this  end;  and  therefore  there  is  a  necessity  that  there  should  be  another  future 
state  of  happiness  and  misery.  1.  Not  all  that  may  be  expected  from  the  civil 
magistrate;  because  there  may  be  many  good  and  evil  actions  which  they  cannot 
take  notice  of,  and  they  can  reward  and  punish  only  such  things  as  come  under 
their  cognizance.  2.  Not  all  that  may  be  expected  from  common  providence; 
for  though  it  should  be  granted  that,  according  to  the  most  general  course  of 
things,  both  virtuous  and  vicious  actions  are  rewarded  and  punished  in  this  life; 
yet  there  may  be  many  particular  cases  which  this  motive  would  not  reach  imto, 
namely,  all  such  cases  where  a  man's  reason  shall  inform  him  that  there  is  far 
greater  probability  of  safety  and  advantage  by  committing  a  sin  than  can  be 
reasonably  expected  (according  to  his  experience  of  the  usual  course  of  things  in 
the  world)  by  doing  his  duty.  But  the  thing  I  am  speaking  to  will  more  fully 
appear  by  consideration  of  those  horrid  mischiefs  of  all  kinds  that  would  most 
naturally  follow  from  the  denial  of  this  doctrine.  If  there  be  no  such  thing  to  be 
expected  as  happiness  or  misery  hereafter,  why,  then,  the  only  business  that  men 
are  to  take  care  of  is  their  present  well-being  in  this  world,  there  being  nothing 
to  be  counted  either  good  or  bad  but  in  order  to  this.  Thcee  things  which  we 
conceive  to  be  oonducible  to  it  being  the  only  duties,  and  all  other  things  that  are 
cross  to  it  being  the  only  sins.  And,  therefore,  whatever  a  man's  appetite  shall 
incline  him  to,  he  ought  not  to  deny  himself  in  it  (be  the  thing  what  it  will),  so 
he  can  have  it,  or  do  it  without  probable  danger.  Now,  let  any  man  judge  what 
bears  and  wolves  and  devils  men  would  prove  to  one  another  if  everything  should 
be  not  only  lawful,  but  a  duty,  whereby  they  might  gratify  their  impetuous  lust** 


OUP.  Ml.]  ECCLESIASTES.  821 

if  they  might  either  perjure  themselves,  or  steal,  or  murder,  as  often  as  they  could 
do  it  safely,  and  get  any  advantage  by  it.  But  there  is  one  thing  more,  which 
those  who  profess  to  disbelieve  this  principle  should  do  well  to  consider,  and  that 
is  this :  that  there  is  no  imaginable  reason  why  (amongst  those  that  know  them) 
they  should  pretend  to  any  kind  of  honesty  or  conscience,  because  they  are  wholly 
destitute  of  all  such  motives  as  may  be  sufficient  to  oblige  them  to  anything  of 
this  nature.  But,  according  to  them,  that  which  is  called  virtue  and  religion  must 
be  one  of  the  most  silly  and  useless  things  in  the  world.  As  for  the  principle  of 
honour,  which  some  imagine  may  supply  the  room  of  conscience,  this  relates 
only  to  external  reputation,  and  the  esteem  which  we  have  amongst  others,  and 
therefore  can  be  of  no  influence  to  restrain  men  from  doing  any  secret  mischief. 
III.  The  necessity  of  this  principle  to  the  vindication  of  Divine  pbovidenob. 
It  is  well  said  by  a  late  author.  That  not  to  conduct  the  course  of  natiire  in  a 
due  manner  might  speak  some  defect  of  wisdom  in  Ood;  but  not  to  compensate 
virtue  and  vice,  besides  the  defect  of  wisdom,  in  not  adjusting  things  suitably  to 
their  qualifications,  but  crossly  coupling  prosperity  with  vice,  and  misery  with 
virtue,  would  argue  too  great  a  defect  of  goodness  and  of  justice.  And  perhaps 
it  would  not  be  less  expedient  (saith  he)  with  Epicurus,  to  deny  all  Providence, 
than  to  ascribe  to  it  such  defects.  It  being  less  unworthy  of  the  Divine  nature 
to  neglect  the  universe  altogether,  than  to  administer  human  affairs  with  so  much 
injustice  and  irregularity.  IV.  Application.  If  this  be  so,  it  will  concern  ut 
then  to  inquire — 1.  Whether  we  do  in  good  earnest  believe  this,  that  thera  shall 
be  a  future  state  of  reward  and  punishment,  according  as  men's  lives  and  actions 
have  been  in  this  world.  If  not,  why  do  we  profess  ourselves  to  be  Christians? 
2.  Do  we  at  any  time  seriously  consider  this,  and  revolve  upon  it  in  our  minds? 
S.  What  impression  doth  the  belief  and  consideration  of  this  make  upon  out 
hearts  and  lives?  Doth  it  stir  up  in  us  vehement  desires,  and  carefulness  of  mind 
in  preparing  for  that  time?    (fip.  TFtUctns.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB. 
THE   SONG   OF   SOLOMON. 


THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 

Anecdote*,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustradoiu; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  Hi»» 
torical,  and  Homiletic,  Gathered  &om 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Uteiature,  on  the  Verses  of  the    Bible 


BY 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.il. 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON 


New  York         Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

London    and    Edinburgh 


JNTRODUCTIOir  TO  TEE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 

TfflB  Tttlk  of  thb  Book. — It  ia  generally  believed  that  the  title  **  Song  of 
Songs"  is  a  superlative  expression  (like  "heaven  of  heavens")  to  indicate  the  heat 
of  songs ;  thongh  some  expiain  it  in  the  sense  of  a  song  made  up  of  different  songs, 
or  canticles,  all  having  one  subject — love.  {James  Robertson,  D.D.)  The  opening 
words,  "The  Song  of  Songs  which  is  Solomon's,"  are  of  the  nature  of  a  title  added 
in  later  times — an  author  would  hardly  oaU  his  poem  the  Song  of  Songs — and  there- 
fore are  not  conclusivfl  evidence  as  to  the  writer.    {A.  M.  Machay,  B.A.) 

Thb  Authobship  of  thb  Book. — Solomon  is  expressly  mentioned  in  the 
onpersoription  as  the  author.  Positive  arguments  for  the  genuineness  of  the 
supersoription  are— (a)  Its  enigmatical  and  pregnant  character,  and  that  mingliM 
of  description  of  the  subject  and  of  the  author  which  is  very  probable  and 
appropriate  as  emanating  from  the  sacred  poet  himself,  but  not  as  emanating 
from  a  later  glossarist ;  {b)  The  circumstance,  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  poem 
there  would  oe  no  mention  of  its  subject  if  the  present  superscription  be 
pronounced  inaccurate.  The  evidence  in  relation  to  the  author,  furnished  by  the 
euperscription,  is  confirmed  by  the  marked  connection  of  the  historical  relations  and 
alhisions  of  the  book  with  the  age  of  Solomon.  This  is  most  decided  and  plain  in 
ataoh  passages  as  chap.  iv.  8  ;  viL  6.  The  age  of  Solomon  is  farther  suggested  by  the 
whole  style  and  character  of  the  work.  "The  whole  feeling,  the  whole  tone  of  the 
book,  and  its  manner,  which  is  in  part  splendid,  and  in  part  beautiful  and  natural, 
lead  ns  at  once  to  think  of  the  writer  as  belonging  to  the  most  flourishing  period  of 
the  Hebrew  constitution  and  history."  (Kleuker.)  The  account  given  of  itself  by 
the  Song  of  Songs  receives  further  confirmation  from  the  fact  that  the  mental  and 
other  peculiar  characteristics  of  Solomon  reappear  in  it.  It  breathes  the  high  and 
lofty  spirit  attributed  to  Solomon  in  1  Kings  v.  9  ff ;  and  it  could  only  have  been 
written  by  a  man  whose  experiences  in  connection  with  earthly  love  had  been  such 
as  Solomon's.  History  testifies  to  Solomon's  pleasure  in  gardens  (Eccles.  iL  4-6). 
Here  we  have  the  natural  groundwork  of  the  allegorical  description  of  nature 
contained  in  the  Song.  According  to  1  Kings  iv,  33,  Solomon  "discoursed 
oonceming  trees  .  .  .  cattle  and  birds,"  etc.  Now  there  is  not  a  book  in  the  whole 
of  the  Scriptures  which  contains  in  so  brief  a  space  so  many  allusions  to  natural 
objects.  Again,  Solomon  "buHt  houses"  (Eccles.  ii.  4 ;  cp.  1  Kings  vL,  vii.) ;  and 
his  taste  for  art  shows  itself  in  various  ways  in  the  Song  (chap.  i.  5,  10,  11,  17  ;  iiL 
10,  11 ;  v.  14,  16 ;  viL  2,  5 ;  viiL  9).  The  testimony  of  the  superscription  to 
Solomon  as  the  author  is  also  confirmed  by  the  reference  to  the  Song  found  in  the 
oldest  prophets,  especially  in  Hosea  ;  see  also  Joel  iii.  8  ;  Isa.  v.  1.  A  farther  con< 
firmation  is,  that  Psalm  xlv.,  which  belongs  to  an  early  period,  presupposes  the 
existence  of  the  Song,  and  is  evidently  a  compendium  thereof.  (E.  JV.  Hengstenberg, 
D.D.)  If  Solomon  was  indeed  the  author,  he  must  have  written  in  the  dialect  used 
in  the  northern  part  of  his  country ;  and  not  in  that  with  which  he  was  most 
familiar.  That  he  should  have  written  so  strongly  in  favour  of  an  ideal  of  love  the 
reverse  of  that  which  he  adopted  in  practice  is  certainly  improbable,  but  not,  ae 
Driver  says,  "out  of  the  question."  Did  not  Bums,  in  "The  Cotter's  Saturday 
Night,"  eloquently  denounce  the  cruelty  of  that  licentiousness  which  was  his  own 
besetting  sin,  and  is  not  all  literature  fall  of  such  inconsistencies  ?  (A.  M.  Mackay^ 
B.A.)  The  view  most  generally  accepted  at  present  is  that  the  Song  was  the  work 
of  a  poet  in  the  northern  kingdom,  composed  not  long  after  the  separation  of  the 
two  kingdoms,  probably  about  the  middle  of  the  teaia  century  before^ Christ.  In 
•videnoe  of  its  northern  birthplace,  are  the  frequent  and  almost  exclusive  mention 


yi  INTROLUCTION  TO  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOIf. 

of  localities  in  the  north  ;  the  author's  strongly  expressed  dislike  of  the  luxury  and 
expense  of  Solomon's  court,  which  necessitatea  the  exactions  that  so  contributed  to 
the  schisms  between  the  two  kingdoms  (1  Kings  xii.  4,  seq.  ;  2  Chron.  x.  1,  seq.) ; 
the  entire  absence  of  all  allusions  to  the  temple  and  its  worship  ;  the  exaltation  of 
Tirzah  to  an  equal  place  with  Jerusalem  as  a  type  of  beauty  (vi.  4) ;  dialectical 
peculiarities,  which  can  only  be  accounted  for  on  this  hypothesis,  or  on  the  unten- 
able one  of  an  extremely  late  composition  ;  the  comparison  of  Hosea,  undoubtedly  a 
northern  writer,  which  shows  that  the  two  authors  "lived  in  the  same  circle  of 
images,  and  that  the  same  expressions  were  familiar  to  them."  (Renan.)  This 
fact  of  a  northern  origin  established,  it  follows  almost  inevitably  that  the  date  of 
the  poem  must  be  placed  somewhere  in  the  middle  of  the  tenth  century,  for  it  was 
only  during  the  period  from  975  to  924  B.O.  that  Tirzah  occupied  the  position  of 
northern  capital ;  and  the  whole  tone  and  spirit  of  the  book,  together  with  its 
treatment  of  Solomon,  is  what  we  should  expect  at  a  time  not  far  removed  from  the 
rapture  of  the  two  kingdoms.  As  yet  tradition  had  not  exaggerated  the  splendour 
of  the  Solomonic  era:  in  the  references  to  Solomon's  guard,  his  harem,  and  his 
arsenal,  the  figures  are  not  extravagant,  as  in  the  comparatively  late  accounts  in 
Kings  and  Chronicles.  A  crowd  of  smaller  indications  point  the  same  way,  «.  g. 
the  mention  of  Heshbon,  which  had  ceased  to  be  an  Israelitish  town  by  Isaiah's 
time  (Isa.  xr.  8).  The  mention  of  the  Tower  of  David,  as  still  possessing  a 
garrison  (viL  4,  and  iv.  4),  the  allusion  to  Pharaoh's  equipages  have  a  similar 
tendency ;  while  it  is  almost  inconceivable  that  Solomon  himself  or  any  author, 
while  tnat  monarch  was  alive,  and  his  rule  aU-powerfol,  could  have  represented 
him  and  his  court  in  such  an  unfavourable  light  as  they  appear  in  the  Song.  But 
it  is  exactly  the  representation  we  sQould  look  for  in  a  poet  of  the  northern  kingdom 
in  the  earfy  years  after  it  revolted  against  the  tyranny  of  the  Davidic  dynasty. 
(Archdeaeon  Aglen,  D.D.) 

The  Pubpose  and  Plan  of  the  Book. — ^There  is  no  doubt  that  diflFerent  speakers 
are  introduced,  so  as  to  give  a  dramatic  appearance  to  the  book  ;  but  they  appear  so 
abruptly  that  it  is  exceemngly  difficult  to  say  who  or  how  many  they  are ;  and  hence 
the  determination  of  the  purpose  and  plan  of  the  whole  book  remains  one  of  the  most 
perolexing  problems  of  Old  Testament  study.  1.  In  the  original,  the  distinction  of 
male  and  female  speakers  is  indicated  by  the  genders  of  the  words.  We  can  thus,  so 
to  speak,  discriminate  the  voices,  though  we  cannot  clearly  discern  th.&  features  of  the 
characters.  In  the  R.V.  a  space  between  the  verses  denotes  a  change  of  speaker. 
2.  Of  the  characters  of  the  piece,  one  can  be  traced  throughout,  viz.  the  "Shulam- 
mite,"  so  named  in  vL  13  (R.V.)  and  generally  understood  to  be  a  maiden  of  Shunem 
(compare  2  Brings  iv.  12).  The  "  daughters  of  Jerusalem,"  who  somewhat  resemble 
the  cnorus  in  a  Greek  plav,  though  subsidiary,  are  easily  recognizable.  The  main 
question  is  whether  the  Snulammite  has  two  suitors  or  only  one  ;  for  according  as 
this  question  is  answered,  the  division  of  dialogue  must  be  made  and  the  interpretation 
of  the  whole  carried  out.  (a)  On  the  view  that  there  is  only  one  male  speaker,  it  is 
the  king  who  falls  in  love  with  a  rustic  maiden,  and  at  length  raises  her  to  the 
position  of  his  bride  in  the  palace.  The  most  of  the  dialogue  on  this  view  consists 
of  the  exchange  of  endearments  between  the  lovers.  (6)  The  other  opinion,  which 
many  now  hold,  is  that  the  Shulammite  has  been  betrothed  to  a  shepherd  lover  ;  but 
she  has  been  noticed  by  Solomon  and  his  retinue  on  some  royal  journey  (vi.  10-13), 
brought  to  Jerusalem,  and  there,  surrounded  by  the  women  of  the  palace,  is  plied 
with  entreaties  by  the  king  in  the  hope  of  winning  her  affections.  On  this  view  it 
is  explained  that  those  speeches  of  a  rustic  suitor,  which  do  not  befit  the  character 
of  Solomon  (see  ii.  8-14),  are  the  words  of  her  absent  lover,  recalled  by  the  maiden 
herself  to  confirm  her  in  her  devotion.  Towards  the  close  the  parted  lovers  are 
united  (viii.  6-7),  and  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  seems  to  be  that  tnie  love  is 
unquenchable,  and  cannot  be  bought  by  wealth  and  position.  3.  The  conclusion  to 
be  drawn  as  to  the  purpose  of  the  book  depends  upon  the  opinion  we  form  of  the 
characters  introduced.  On  the  view  that  has  just  been  mentioned  (6  above\  the 
book  would  have  an  ethical  aim — to  exhibit  the  triumph  of  pure,  spontaneous  love, 
over  aU  worldly  and  unworthy  enticements  ;  and,  the  scene  being  laid  in  the  time  of 
Solomon  (though  the  book  could  not  thus  have  come  from  his  hand),  the  protest 
would  be  aU  the  more  striking  against  the  loose  view  of  marriage  which  is  associated 
with  his  reign.  The  lesson  womd  be  one  on  the  sacredness  of  human  love,  which 
our  Lord  Himself  emphasized  (Matt.  xix.  4-8,  etc.).  On  the  other  view  mentioned 
(a  aboTo),  while  some  would  regard  the  book  as  nothing  more  than  a  collection  of 


INTBOLUCTION  TO  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON".  tO 

loTe-songs,  or  a  composite  poem  made  up  of  songs  such  as  are  found  in  other  Eastern 
literature,  others  think  that  the  marriage  of  Solomon  to  Pharaoh's  daughter,  or  to  • 
Galilean  maiden  whom  he  raised  to  the  throne,  is  made  typical  of  a  higher  and 
spiritual  love.  On  chis  ground  they  suppose  the  book  was  taken  into  the  Canon, 
and  has  a  counterpart  in  Psalm  zlv.  This  may  be  called  a  modification  of  the 
earliest  known  mode  of  interpreting  the  book,  which  was  allegorical.  This  view, 
found  among  the  Jews  as  early  as  the  Fourth  Book  of  Esdras  (end  of  the  first  century 
(A.D.)  and  among  Christian  writers  first  in  Origen  (died  A.D.  254),  regarded  the  boot 
88  teaching  symbolically  the  love  of  God  to  the  nation  of  Israel,  or  to  the  Church, 
or  to  the  individual  som  ;  and  the  literature  connected  with  the  Song  on  this  line 
of  interpretation  haa  been  most  extensive  down  to  modem  times.  {James  Robertson^ 
B.D.)  The  mystical  sense  is  false  philosophically,  but  it  is  true  religiously.  It 
corresponds  to  the  great  sanctification  of  love  inaugurated  by  Christianity.   {E.  Eenan, ) 

The  Oanonioitt  of  thb  Book. — This  was  a  subject  of  dispute  down  to  the 
assembly  of  Jewish  doctors  held  at  Jamnia  about  90  A.D.,  when  it  was  settled,  on 
the  authority  of  Rabbi  Akiba,  that  "  no  day  in  the  history  of  the  world  is  worth  the 
day  when  the  Song  of  Solomon  was  given  to  Israel," and  that  "  the  Song  of  Solomon 
is  a  holy  of  the  hoBes," — though,  indeed,  its  sanctity  was  still  sometimes  questioned 
in  the  second  century  after  Christ.  {Chambers's  EncyclopcEdia.)  Oastellio  was  forced 
to  leave  Geneva  in  1544  for  having  demanded  its  exclusion  from  the  Canon  as  a  mere 
amatory  poem.  (Ibid.)  The  story  could  only  seem  out  of  place  in  Holy  Scripture 
to  one  who  assigns  to  religion  a  very  narrow  sphere  indeed,  and  leaves  outside  its 
pale  the  largest  and  most  important  tracts  of  human  life.  Consider  how  large  a 
part  love  plays  in  the  literature  of  every  nation,  how  vividly  it  colours  the  experience 
of  almost  every  life,  how  powerfolly  for  evil  or  for  good  it  influences  character  and 
conduct,  and  few  will  fail  to  appreciate  and  approve  the  words  of  Niebuhr :  "I 
should  think  there  was  something  wanting  in  the  Bible  if  we  could  not  find  in  it 
any  expression  for  the  deepest  and  strongest  sentiment  of  humanity."  To  th& 
ancient  Jew  it  must  have  been  a  witness  for  monogamy  against  polygamy,  for  true 
and  honest  love  as  against  the  or^nized  lust  which  then  prevailed  in  king's  courts. 
And  by  the  modem  Englishman  its  lessons  are  not  less  needed.  How  much  misery 
and  sin  is  occasioned  by  marriages  made  for  money,  for  position,  formere  convenience, 
without  that  strong  affection  which  can  fuse  two  personalities  into  one ;  how  often 
is  a  le^  marriage  made  a  cover  for  prostitution  of  the  soul  I  So  &i  firom  the  poem, 
taken  in  its  primary  sense,  being  unworthy  of  the  Bible,  it  is  to  be  wished  that  the 
Church  would  take  to  heart  the  lessons  it  teaches,  and  inoolcate  them  upon  its 
childrui  with  growing  insistenoe  and  earnestness.    (A,  il,  ifaeiay,  S,A,) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTMTOR. 

THE    SONG    OF   SOLOMON. 

OHAPTEE  L 

TxB.  1.  The  Song  of  Songa,  which  ia  Solomon's. — The  Song  of  Solomon. •^Th9 
Song  of  Songs  is  Solomon's,  as  composed  by  the  wisest  of  men,  under  the  guidance 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  Solomon's  also  as  composed  concerning  the  true  Solomon  the 
PWnce  of  Peace,  of  whom  the  son  of  David  was  an  eminent  type.  It  belongs  to  the 
earthly  Solomon,  as  the  skilful  work  of  his  hands ;  to  the  heavenly  Solomon,  ai 
the  utterance  of  his  heart  to  the  Ohurch,  and  of  the  heart  of  the  Ohuroh  towards 
libm.    (A.  Moody  Stuart.) 

Yer.  2.  let  Him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses  of  His  month :  for  Thy  loye  is  better 
than  wine. — Communion  with  Christ : — 1.  Such  as  have  the  least  taste  of  Ohrist's 
love,  are  impatient  and  restless  in  their  desires  after  the  nearest  fellowship  and  corn* 
munion  with  Him.  The  Ohurch  here  desires  Christ's  manifestation  in  the  flesh, 
that  she  might  enjoy  him  in  a  Gospel-dispensation,  and  have  sweeter  discoveries  of 
His  favour :  so  in  like  manner  the  Church  of  the  New  Testament,  who  did  enjoy  all 
the  privileges  of  the  Gospel ;  yet  she  goes  higher  in  her  affections,  and  desires 
Ohrist's  last  coming,  that  so  she  might  enjoy  Him  in  that  heavenly  and  everlasting 
communion,  which  the  saints  shall  enjoy  hereafter.  2.  Christ  hath  given  more 
sweet  and  comfortable  pledges  of  love  and  reconciliation  to  His  people  under  the 
Gospel,  than  He  did  under  the  Law  (Luke  x.  24  ;  Heb.  xii.  18-20,  22  ;  Eph.  iv,  8). 
8.  'The  doctrine  of  the  Gospel  is  very  sweet  and  desirable  (Heb.  vi.  5  ;  1  Iim.  ir.  6 ; 
2  Cor.  v.  19  ;  Eph.  i.  13  ;  ii.  17).  4.  Those  strong  desires  and  earnest  longing  of 
the  faithful  after  Christ,  flow  from  a  principle  of  love  (2  Cor.  v.  15 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  S ; 
Hosea  xi.  4).  Christ  is  the  ocean  of  spiritual  love,  from  whence  we  derive,  and 
into  which  we  return  our  love :  so  that  our  love  proceeds  from  Christ's  love  ;  His 
love  is  as  a  loadstone,  attractive,  drawing  our  affections  to  Him ;  our  love  ia  as 
the  reflecting  back  to  Him  again  the  beams  of  His  own  love.  5.  The  love  of 
God  in  Christ  is  an  infinite  and  a  manifold  love.  (1)  His  electing  love  (Eph.  L  4- 
6,  11).  (2)  His  redeeming  love,  whereby  He  hath  brought  His  from  the  bondage  of 
sin  into  glorious  liberty  and  freedom  (Gal.  iv.  4 ;  Acts  xx.  28 ;  1  Tim,  ii  6).  (3) 
God's  love  of  calling ;  the  outward  is  a  bare  propounding  of  the  Gospel ;  but  the 
inward  call  is  a  spiritual  enlightening, ' '  to  know  the  hope  of  His  calling  "  (Eph.  i  17). 
And  that  whereby  the  soul  is  made  able  to  apprehend  Him,  of  whom  it  is  appre- 
hended (PhU.  iii.  12).  (4)  God's  justifying  love,  whereby  He  doth  free  ana  dis- 
charge His  people  from  sin  and  death,  and  accounts  them  righteous  in  Christ.  (5) 
His  adopting  love,  whereby  He  accepts  the  faithful,  unto  the  dignity  of  sons  (Jolm 
i.  12 ;  Rom.  viii.  17).  (6)  His  sanctifying  love,  whereby  He  doth  free  believers 
from  the  filthiness  of  sin,  and  restore  in  them  again  the  image  of  God,  which  con- 
sisteth  of  righteousness  and  holiness  (Eph.  iv.  24).  (7)  His  glorifying  love,  whereby 
He  lifts  up  His  people  unto  that  state  of  life  and  glory,  and  gives  them  an  immortal 
inheritance,  where  all  comfort,  peace,  and  joy  shall  abound,  and  where  they  shall 
have  the  communion  of  the  chiefest  good,  the  love  of  God  shining  forth  immediately 
npon  their  hearts.  {John  Eobotham!)  Thy  love  is  better  than  wine. — Better  than 
wine; — I.  Christ's  lote  is  better  than  wine  because  of  what  it  is  not. 
1.  It  may  be  taken  without  question.  Many  delightsome  things,  many  of  the  plea- 
sures of  this  world,  are  very  questionable  enjoyments.  Christians  had  better  keep 
away  from  everything  about  which  their  consciences  are  not  perfectly  clear  ;  but  au 
our  consciences  are  clear  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  our  heart's  love  to  Him ;  so 
that,  in  this  respect.  His  love  is  better  than  wine.  2.  It  is  to  be  had  without  money. 
Many  a  man  has  beggared  himself,  and  squandered  his  estate,  through  his  love  of 
worldly  pleasure,  and  especially  through  his  fondness  for  wine ;  bat  the  love  of 

1 


S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Christ  is  to  bs  had  without  money.  The  love  of  Christ  is  unpurchased  ;  and  I  may 
add  that  it  is  un[iurchasable.  Christ's  love  is  the  freest  thing  in  the  world, — free  a» 
the  sunbeam,  free  as  the  mountain  torrent,  free  as  the  air.  3.  It  is  to  be  enjoyed 
without  cloying.  If  ever  there  was  a  man  on  earth  who  had  Christ's  love  in  him  to 
the  full,  it  was  holy  Samuel  Rutherford  ;  yet  you  can  see  in  his  letters  how  he 
laboured  for  suitable  expressions  while  trying  to  set  forth  his  himgering  and  thirsting 
after  the  love  of  Christ.  He  says  he  floated  upon  Christ's  love  like  a  ship  upon  a 
river,  and  then  he  quaintly  asks  that  his  vessel  may  founder,  and  go  to  the  bottom, 
till  that  blessed  stream  shall  flow  right  over  the  masthead  of  his  ship.  He  wanted 
to  be  baptized  into  the  love  of  Christ,  to  be  flung  into  the  ocean  of  his  Saviour's 
love  ;  and  this  is  what  the  true  Christian  ever  longs  for.  4.  It  is  without  lees. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that  we  could  wish  to  have  taken  away 
from  Him ;  there  is  nothing  in  His  love  that  is  impure,  nothing  that  is  unsatis- 
factory. Our  precious  Lord  is  comparable  to  the  most  fine  gold ;  there  is  no  alloy 
in  Him ;  nay,  there  is  nothing  that  can  be  compared  with  Him,  for  "  He  is  altogether 
lovely, "  all  perfections  melted  into  one  perfection,  and  all  beauties  combined  into 
one  inconceivable  beauty.  5.  It  will  never,  as  wine  will,  turn  sour.  He  is  the  same 
loving  Saviour  now  as  ever  He  was,  and  such  He  always  will  be,  and  He  will  bring 
us  to  the  rest  which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God.  6.  It  produces  no  ill  effects. 
Many  are  the  mighty  men  who  have  fallen  down  slain  by  wine.  But  who  was  ever 
slain  by  the  love  of  Christ  %  Who  was  ever  made  wretched  by  this  love  ?  II.  Christ's 
LOVE  IS  BETTER  THAN  WINE  BECAUSE  OF  WHAT  IT  IS.  Let  me  remind  you  of  some  of 
the  uses  of  wine  in  the  East.  1 .  Often,  it  was  employed  as  a  medicine,  for  it  had  certain 
healing  properties.  The  good  Samaritan,  when  he  found  the  wounded  man,  poured 
into  his  wounds  "oil  and  wine."  But  the  love  of  Christ  is  better  than  wine ;  it 
may  not  heal  the  wounds  of  the  flesh,  but  it  does  heal  the  wounds  of  the  spirit. 
2.  Wine,  again,  was  often  associated  by  men  with  the  giving  of  strength.  Now, 
whatever  strength  wine  may  give  or  may  not  give,  certainly  the  love  of  Jesus  gives 
strength  mightier  than  the  mightiest  earthly  force,  for  when  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ 
is  shed  abroad  in  a  man's  heart,  he  can  bear  a  heavy  burden  of  sorrow.  3.  Wine 
was  also  frequently  used  as  the  symbol  of  joy ;  and  certainly,  in  this  respect,  Christ's 
love  is  better  than  wine.  Whatever  joy  there  may  be  in  the  world  (and  it  would  be 
folly  to  deny  that  there  is  some  sort  of  joy  which  even  the  basest  of  men  know),  yet 
the  love  of  Christ  is  far  superior  to  it.  4.  It  is  better  than  wine,  once  more,  for  the 
saci-ed  exhilaration  which  it  gives.  The  love  of  Christ  is  the  grandest  stimulant  of 
the  renewed  nature  that  can  be  known.  It  enables  the  fainting  man  to  revive  from 
his  swooning  ;  it  causes  the  feeble  man  to  leap  up  from  his  bed  of  languishing ;  and 
it  makes  the  weary  man  strong  again.  III.  The  marginal  reading  of  our  text  is  in 
the  plural :  "Thy  loves  are  better  than  wine,"  and  this  teaches  us  that  Christ's 
IjOVE  mat  be  spoken  of  in  THE  PLURAL,  because  it  manifests  itself  in  so  many 
ways.  1.  Think  of  Christ's  covenant  love,  the  love  He  had  to  us  before  the  world 
was.  2.  Think  next  of  Christ's  forbearing  love.  8.  Aye  I  but  the  sweetness  to  us 
was  when  we  realized  Christ's  personal  love,  when  at  last  we  were  brought  to  the 
foot  of  His  cross,  humbly  confessing  our  sins.  4.  When  you  first  felt  Christ's  for- 
giving love,  I  will  not  insult  you  by  asking  whether  it  was  not  better  than  wine. 
That  was  a  love  that  was  inconceivably  precious  ;  at  the  very  recollection,  our  heart 
leaps  within  us,  and  our  soul  doth  magnify  the  Lord.  6.  Since  that  glad  hour,  we 
have  been  the  subjects  of  Christ's  accepting  love,  for  we  have  been  "  accepted  in  the 
Beloved."  6.  We  have  also  had  Christ's  guiding  love,  and  providing  love,  and 
instructing  love.  His  love  in  all  manner  of  ways  has  come  to  us,  and  benefited  and 
enriched  us.  7.  And  we  have  had  sanctifying  love  ;  we  have  been  helped  to  fight 
this  sin  and  that,  and  to  overcome  them  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  8.  The  Lord 
has  also  given  us  sustaining  love  under  very  sharp  troubles.  Some  of  us  could  tell 
many  a  stoiy  about  the  sweet  upholding  love  of  Christ, — in  poverty,  or  in  bodily 
pain,  or  in  deep  depression  of  spirits,  or  under  cruel  slander,  or  reproach.  His  left 
band  has  been  under  our  head  while  His  right  hand  has  embraced  us.  9.  Then  let 
us  reflect  with  shame  upon  Christ's  enduring  love  to  us.  Why,  even  since  we  have 
been  converted,  we  have  grieved  Him  times  without  number  I  Yet  He  uses  the 
most  kind  and  endearing  terms  towards  us  to  show  that  His  love  will  never  die 
sway.  Glory  be  to  His  holy  name  for  this  I  Is  not  His  love  better  than  wine  t 
10.  There  is  one  word  I  must  not  leave  out,  and  that  is,  Christ's  chastening  love.  I 
know  that  many  of  yon  who  belong  to  Him  have  often  smarted  under  His  chastening 
lumd,  bnt  Christ  never  smote  you  in  anger  yet.  Whenever  He  has  laid  the  cross  on 
yoor  badk,  it  baa  been  because  He  loved  you  so  much  that  He  could  not  keep  it  <^ 


CHAj.  1.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOTT.  8 

11.  There  are  other  forms  of  Christ's  love  yet  to  be  manifested  to  you.  Do  you  not 
sometimes  tremble  at  the  thought  of  dying  ?  Oh,  you  shall  have — and  you  ought  to 
think  of  it  now, — you  shall  have  special  revelations  of  Christ's  love  in  your  dying 
moments.  Then  snail  you  say,  like  the  governor  of  the  marriage  feast  at  Cana, 
"Thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  untUnow."  12.  And  then — but  perhaps  I  had 
better  be  silent  upon  such  a  theme, — when  the  veil  is  drawn,  and  the  spirit  has  left 
the  body,  what  will  be  the  bliss  of  Christ's  love  to  the  spirits  gathered  with  Him  in 
glory  f  13.  Then  think  of  the  love  of  the  day  of  our  resurrection,  for  Christ  loves 
our  bodies  as  well  as  our  souls  ;  and,  arrayed  in  glory,  these  mortal  bodies  shall  rise 
from  the  tomb.  With  a  life  coeval  with  the  life  of  God,  and  an  immortality  divinely 
given,  we  shall  outlast  the  sun  ;  and  when  the  moon  grows  pale,  and  wanes  for  ever, 
and  this  old  earth  and  all  that  is  therein  shall  be  burned  up,  yet  stUl  shall  we  be 
for  ever  with  Him.  Truly,  His  love  is  better  than  wine,  it  is  the  very  essence  of 
Heaven,  it  is  better  than  anything  that  we  can  conceive.  IV.  Christ's  lovb  in 
THE  SINGULAR. — Look  at  the  text  as  it  stands:  "Thy  love  is  better  than  wine." 
1.  Think  first,  of  the  love  of  Christ  in  the  cluster.  That  is  where  the  wine  is  first. 
We  talk  of  the  grapes  of  Eshcol ;  but  these  are  not  worthy  to  be  mentioned  in 
comparison  with  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ  as  it  is  seen,  in  old  eternity,  in  the 
purpose  of  God,  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  afterwards,  in  the  promises  of  the 
Word,  and  in  the  various  revelations  of  Christ  in  the  types  and  symbols  of 
the  ceremonial  law.  There  I  see  the  love  of  Christ  in  the  cluster.  2.  Next,  look  at 
the  love  of  Christ  in  the  basket,  for  th«  grapes  must  be  gathered,  and  cast  into  the 
basket,  before  the  wine  can  be  made.  Oh,  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  manger 
of  Bethlehem,  the  love  of  Jesus  in  the  workshop  of  Nazareth,  the  love  of  Jesus  in 
His  holy  ministry,  the  love  of  Jesus  in  the  temptation  in  the  wilderness,  the  love  of 
Jesus  in  His  miracles,  the  love  of  Jesus  in  His  commimion  with  His  disciples,  the 
love  of  Jesus  in  bearing  shame  and  reproach  for  our  sakes,  the  love  of  Jesus  in  being 
so  poor  that  He  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head,  the  love  of  Jesus  in  enduring  such 
contradiction  of  sinners  against  Himself  1  3.  But  oh  1  if  your  hearts  have  any 
tenderness  towards  Him,  think  of  the  love  of  Christ  in  the  wine-press.  What  a 
crushing  was  that  under  the  foot  of  the  treader  of  grapes  when  Chxist  sweat  as  it 
were  great  drops  of  blood,  and  how  terribly  did  the  great  press  come  down  again  and 
again  when  He  gave  His  back  to  the  smiters,  and  His  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked 
off  the  hair,  and  hid  not  His  face  from  shame  and  spitting  1  But  oh  I  how  the  red 
wine  flowed  from  the  wine-press,  what  fountains  there  were  of  this  precious  sweet- 
ness, when  Jesus  was  nailed  to  the  cross,  sufifering  in  body,  depressed  in  spirit,  and 
forsaken  of  His  God  1  "  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  sabachthani  ? "  These  are  the  soimds  that 
issue  from  the  wine-press,  and  how  terrible  and  yet  how  sweet  they  are  !  4.  Now  I 
want  you  to  think  of  the  love  of  Christ  in  the  flagon,  where  His  precious  love  ia 
stored  up  for  His  people  ; — the  love  of  His  promises,  given  to  you  ;  the  love  of  Hia 
providence,  for  He  rules  for  you  ;  the  love  of  His  intercession,  for  He  pleads  for  you ; 
the  love  of  His  representation,  for  He  stands  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  as  the 
Representative  of  His  pe^le  ;  the  love  of  His  union  with  His  people,  for  you  are 
one  with  Him,  He  is  the  Head,  and  you  are  the  members  of  His  Body  ;  the  love  of 
all  that  He  is,  and  all  that  He  was,  and  all  that  He  ever  shall  be,  for  in  every 
capacity  and  under  all  circumstances  He  loves  you,  and  will  love  you  without  end!. 
6.  And  then  not  only  think  of,  but  enjoy  the  love  of  Christ  in  the  cup,  by  which 
I  mean  His  love  to  you.  For  this  we  have  the  declaration  of  inspiration  ;  nay,  we 
have  more  even  than  that  to  confirm  it  beyond  all  question,  for  we  have  His  own 
death  upon  the  cross.  He  signed  this  document  with  His  own  blood,  in  order  that 
no  believer  might  ever  doubt  its  authentic!^.  "Herein  is  love."  "Behold  what 
manner  of  love  "  there  is  in  the  cross !  What  wondrous  love  is  there  1  {0.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Christ's  love  is  better  than  wine: — I.  Foe  its  antiquity.  Good  old 
wine  is  accounted  the  best  (Luke  v.  39).  Now  no  wine  is  comparable  to  this  of 
Christ's  love,  for  its  antiquity ;  for  it  is  a  love  which  commences  from  everlasting  ; 
it  does  not  bear  date  with  time,  but  was  before  time  was.  II.  For  its  pueity.  It 
is  wine  on  the  lees  well  refined,  free  from  all  dregs  of  deceit,  hypocrisy,  and  dis- 
simulation ;  it  is  a  love  unfeigned,  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life.  III.  Foe  its  febb- 
NEss  AND  CHEAPNESS.  IV.  FoE  THE  PLENTY  OF  IT.  In  the  marriage  at  Cana  of 
Galilee,  there  was  want  of  wine  ;  but  there  is  no  want  thereof  in  this  feast  of  love : 
this  is  a  river,  nay,  an  ocean  of  love,  which  flows  forth  in  plentiful  streams  to  poor 
sinners.  V.  In  the  effects  of  it.  1.  Wine  will  revive  and  cheer  a  man  that  is 
of  a  heavy  heart  (Prov.  xxxi.  6).  2.  Wine  may  remove  a  worldly  heaviness,  or  a 
Borrow  on  the  account  of  worldly  things,  the  things  of  time ;  but  not  a  spiritual 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

heaviness,  or  a  sorrow  on  the  account  of  the  things  of  another  world,  the  things  of 
eternity  ;  but  the  manifestation  of  Christ's  love  to  the  soul,  can  remove  this  sorrow 
and  heaviness,  and  fill  it  with  a  joy  imspeakable  and  full  of  glory,  and  give  him 
that  ease,  and  comfort,  and  satisfaction  of  mind,  he  is  wishing  for.  3.  If  a  man 
drinks  never  such  large  draughts  of  the  wine  of  Christ's  love,  it  will  never  hurt 
him  ;  when  other  wine,  with  excessive  drinking  of  it,  not  only  wastes  the  estates, 
but  consumes  the  bodies,  and  destroys  the  health  of  men ;  but  of  this  a  man  may 
drink  freely  and  plentifully,  without  doing  himself  any  hurt ;  nay,  it  will  be  of 
considerable  advantage  to  him,  and  therefore  says  Christ  (chap.  v.  1).  (JbA» 
OUl,  D.D.) 

Yer.  8.  Because  of  the  savour  of  Thy  good  ointments,  Thy  name  i>  as  ointment 
poured  forth,  therefore  do  the  virgins  love  Thee. — The  preciousness  of  Christ: — In 
Christ  are  contained  all  those  attractive  beauties — those  excellencies,  which  are 
adapted  to  win  souls  to  Himself,  and  to  God  in  Him.     The  rose  and  the  lily,  every 
flower  of  the  garden,  and  every  tree  of  the  forest,  are  brought  together  at  once,  to 
illustrate  to  us  the  rich  and  varied  excellence  of  Him  who  is  "altogether  lovely." 
The  rays  of  the  sun  are  sometimes  collected  together  by  a  burning-glass,  and  made  to 
rest  on  a  certain  point,  and  there  to  b\im  with  great  fervour.     Oh  !  the  rays  of  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness  seem  to  be  gathered  together  here.      I.  The  anointing  of 
THE  LoKD  Jesus  Cheist,  with  the  Holy  Ghost, — "Because  of  the  savour  of 
Thy  good  ointment. "    Now,  this  anointing  of  Christ  implies  two  things,  His  call 
and  qualification, — His  call  to,  and  qualification  for,  all  the  oflBces  entrusted  to  Him 
by  His  Father.     Christ,  being  set  forth  to  us,  as  anointed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  all 
His  offices,  invites  and  claims  all  our  confidence  that  we  should  come  to  God, 
through  Him,  and  repose  unlimited  trust  in  Him  as  our  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King. 
II.  Because  of  this  anointing,   "his  name  is  as  ointment  poxteed  foeth'  ; 
because  of  His  covenant  offices.  His  name  is  sweet  and  fragrant  to  the  perception  of 
all  those  who  believe  in  His  name.     The  name  of  the  Lord  implies  everything  where- 
by God  is  made  known  to  us,  even  all  the  attributes  of  God.     Before  Christ  became 
incarnate,  the  ointment,  as  it  were,  was  shut  up  in  a  box,  it  was  not  poured  forth  ; 
the  only  begotten  Son  was  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  so  that  there  was  not  that 
full  development  of  the  gracious  purposes  of  God  to  sinners  which  afterwards  took 
place  in  His  incarnation.     Even  after  His  incarnation,  and  during  the  days  of  His 
flesh  in  this  world,  the  fragrance  of  His  name  was  little  perceived,  the  ointment  was 
not  fully  discovered,  some  little  perfume  rejoiced  the  hearts  of  the  few  disciples  who 
had  grace  to  wait  upon  Him.     It  was  when  Christ  was  lifted  up  on  the  cross,  when 
the  vial  which  held  the   precious   ointment  was  broken,   that  the   dying  thief 
was  quickened  to  newness  of  life  by  the  fragrance  of  it,  and  acknowledged  hii 
anointed  King  in  his  expiring  agonies.     But  there  was  a  still  further  manifesta- 
tion  after  the  resurrection,   and  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit.      That  was  the 
day  indeed  when  the  name  of  Jesus  was  as  ointment  poured  forth.    The  apostles 
are  now  filled  with  its  sweetness,  and  ravished  with  its  fragrance,  and  now,  their 
own  souls  being  possessed  with  the  unspeakable  preciousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as 
the  Saviour  of  sinners,  they  show  forth  that  knowledge  to  others,  they  proclaim  the 
name  of  Jesus.     III.  "Thekefore  do  the  virgins  love  Thee."     Vfrgin  souls 
are  attracted  to  Christ  by  the  fragrance  of  Christ's  sweet  name,  so  that  they  love 
Christ.     Now  what  is  signified  by  the  expression,  virgins  ?    You  have  the  same 
word  in  Psalm  xlv.  14,  where  the  Church  as  a  bride  is  brought  to  the  bridegroom. 
Individual   believers  are  called  by  that  name  of  virgins  which  indicates  purity, 
holiness,  "Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."    And  how  shall 
their  hearts  be  purified  ?    You  have  it  in  Acts  xv.  that  God  purifies  their  hearts  by 
faith  ;  they  believed  in  the  Son  of  God,  and  their  hearts  were  purified  ;  their  hearts, 
which  before  were  like  "a  sepulchre  full  of  dead  men's  bones,  and  aU  imcleanness," 
are  cleansed.     Now,  where  the  heart  is  purified  by  faith  in  Christ,  that  heart  will 
embrace  Christ  and  love  Him.     {E.  Verschoyle,  M.A.)    As  ointment  poured  forth : — 
1.  First,  it  may  be  taken  to  intimate  the  greater  discoveries  of  the  riches  of  His 
grace  which  have  been  made  to  us  under  the  Gospel.     Adam  had  a  savour  of  the 
ointment  in  the  promise  made  to  him  of  "  the  seed  of  the  woman  "  ;  Abraham  had, 
as  it  were,  drops  of  the  precious  unguent  granted  to  him  when,  rejoicing  in  the  day 
of  Christ,  he  saw  it  and  was  glad.     But  now,  in  these  Gospel  times,  the  box  con- 
taining the  ointment  is  broken.     As  bees  to  a  garden  of  spices,  all  nations  flow  to 
this  Divine  compound  of  myrrh,  aloes,  and  cassia.     2.  Again,  the  expression  seems 
to  intimate  that  a  right  apprehension  of  Christ  in  His  work,  character,  and  offices, 


CBAP.  l]  the  bono  of  SOLOMON.  f 

will  condnoe  to  religions  cheerfolnesa  and  joy.  The  use  of  ointments  in  the  East,  on 
aoconnt  of  their  cooling  and  refreshing  properties,  often  famishes  the  saored  trritera 
with  an  expressive  image  for  all  that  is  bright,  and  beautiful,  and  happy.  To 
know  Ohrist,  then — ^what  He  is,  what  He  says,  what  He  has  done  for  ns,  what  He 
is  doing  now  ;  to  know  Him  as  onr  Shepherd  to  guide,  our  Staff  to  uphold,  our  Book 
to  flee  to,  "  from  storms  a  Shelter,  and  from  heat  a  Shade  "  ; — ^to  know  Ohrist  in  all 
these  beneficent  and  happy  relations,  should  make  the  heart  glad,  and  the  hands 
strong,  and  the  tread  firm.  3.  Another  reflection  arising  out  of  this  passage  is  the 
obligation  which  lies  upon  us  to  make  Ohrist  known  to  outers.  "  The  savour  of  Thy 
name  is  as  ointment ;  "but  then  not  ointment  as  it  is  pent  up,  hoarded,  not  suffered  to 
escape  bom.  its  case  of  alabaster,  but  ointment  as  it  is  "  poured  forth,"  difiPosed  far 
and  wide,  reviving  all  who  come  near  to  it  with  the  odour  of  its  pei^Cames,  and  having 
life  and  healing  on  its  wings.    (D.  Moortf  M.A,) 

Yer.  4.  Draw  me,  we  will  ran  after  Thee. — Dimine  dravfings! — ^I.  Maw  nxeds 
TO  BB  DivimLY  DBAWN  TO  GoD.  1.  He  is  far  away  from  God  in  heart,  life,  and 
purpose.  2.  Has  no  inclination  to  return.  8.  Is  every  moment  wandering  farther. 
4.  His  understanding  needs  to  be  enlightened,  his  affections  to  be  won,  his  will  changed, 
and  his  whole  life  and  being  drawn  God-ward.  II,  God  is  eveb  seeking  to  draw 
MEN  TO  Himself.  1.  By  loving  words.  2.  By  merciful  deeds.  8.  By  gracious  revelations 
of  Himself  and  of  His  purposes,  as  in  Christ  His  Son.  4.  By  the  influences  of  His 
Holy  Spirit.  III.  Man's  peopee  attitttde  in  belation  to  the  Divtnb  draw- 
1X08.  Sere  is — 1.  A  sense  of  need.  2.  Candid  acknowledgment  of  it.  8.  Earnest  prayer 
— "Drawme."  4.  A  spirit  of  obedience — "and  we  will  run  after  Thee."  6.  Eager  desire 
to  come  to  God  with  all  possible  diligence— "  we  wiU  run  after  Thee."  {Thonuu 
ffaynes. )  Divine  dravniiga  : — I.  A  humble  admission.  1.  Of  ourselves  we  cannot 
oome  to  God.  Need  to  be  drawn  (John  vi  44).  Disposition  to  procrastinate  (Acts 
xxiv.  25).  2.  What  holds  us  back  I  (1)  Natural  bias  of  will.  (2)  Strengtli  of 
temptation.  (8)  Spell  of  the  world.  8.  Yet,  over  against  this  reluctance  to  come, 
see  God's  gracious  promise  (John  ziL  82 ;  Jer.  zxzi.  3 ;  Hosea  zL  4).  XL  An 
EARNEST  REQUEST.  Appeal  to  God  to  "draw"  the  souL  1.  Ohrist  draws  by 
silenee — woman  of  Canaan.  2.  By  a  look — Peter.  8.  By  a  word — Mary  of  Mag- 
dalen at  sepulchre.  4.  By  afflictions — the  two  sisters  at  Bethany.  III.  An  eager 
promise.  If  drawn,  "we  will  run  after  Thee."  What  does  tms  promise  imply  f 
1.  We  will  lead  a  new  life.  Instead  of  after  sin,  now  "  after  Thee."  2.  We  wiU 
lead  an  active  life— "run."  3.  We  will  lead  a  useful  life.  Not  "Xj^but  "we," 
will  run,  etc.  Drawn  myself,  I  will  induce  others  to  run  with  me  in  the  way  of  Thy 
commandments.  Conclusion  :  Two  drawing  powers  are  plying  us.  Satan  is  draw- 
ing. Ohrist  is  drawing.  How  different  the  two  drawings  1  Satan's  downward. 
Cnnst's  upward.  Which  of  the  two  prevails  in  your  case  !  (Precudier's  Assistant.) 
The  Church's  prayer  for  nearsr  eommunion  ajid  fellowship  with  Christ : — 1.  Let  us 
note,  first,  what  it  is  the  Church  desires — what  every  pious  soul  must  desire  who 
would  make  a  prayer  to  Christ  at  all :  "  Draw  me,  allure  me,  bring  my  soul  under 
the  power  of  a  holy  and  Divine  captivity."  It  is  a  prayer  of  the  believer  that  he 
xaa.j  feel  all  the  oppositions  of  the  unregenerate  nature  giving  way ;  that,  by  the 
spell  of  some  holy  fascination  resting  upon  him,  he  may  feel  his  will  drawn  into 
absolute  and  entire  concurrence  with  the  Divine  wilL  "  Draw  me,"  says  the 
Church,  "  with  lovingkindness,  and  compassions,  and  mercies.  Allure  me  to  Thee 
by  Thy  Word — its  promises  drawing  me  after  them,  like  the  sweet  strains  of  distant 
music  ;  or  by  Thy  Spirit,  His  holy  and  gentle  compulsions  leading  me  onwards,  by 
an  influence  the  methods  of  which  I  know  not,  save  that  thereby  I  am  brought 
nearer  to  Christ,  by  having  Ohrist  brought  nearer  to  me.  Many  are  the  things  I 
have  need  to  be  drawn  from.  Draw  me  from  the  bondage  of  sin,  which  holds  me ; 
from  the  allurements  of  the  world,  which  entangle  me ;  frt)m  the  infirmities  of  a 
fleshly  nature,  which  still  cleave  to  me.  Draw  me  from  my  enemies,  which  are  too 
many  for  me  ;  from  my  temptations,  which  are  too  strong  for  me  ;  from  my  fears 
of  being  forsaken,  and  overmastered,  and  finally  falling  away."  2.  "And  we  wiU 
run  after  Thee."  "  Eun ;  "  being  so  drawn  we  could  not  be  content  with  a  slower 
pace,  and  the  speed  of  the  running  is  proportioned  to  the  intensity  of  the  draw- 
ing. "  I  made  haste,"  said  the  psalmist,  "  and  delayed  not  to  keep  Thy  com- 
mandments." Hence  the  expression  may  be  taken  to  denote  the  aJacrity  with 
which,  after  an  experimental  acquaintance  with  Christ  and  the  power  of  EQs  grace, 
we  shall  persevere  in  our  Christian  course.  None  run  so  fast  as  those  whom 
Christ  draws.    Thus  the  believer  "follows  on  to  know  the  Lord";  he  becomes 


«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [caoAP.  u 

more  vehemently  and  intensely  earnest  the  nearer  he  gets  to  the  heart  of  Christ. 
Led  and  lured  as  by  some  secret  magnetism — by  "a  sweet  omnipotence,  and 
an  omnipotent  sweetness,"  as  one  of  old  describes  it — ^he  feels  as  if  he  could 
follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth.  "  Draw  me,  and  we  will  run  after 
Thee."  The  change  of  person  should  not  be  passed  over,  for  it  illustrates 
the  germinating  property  of  Divine  influences.  One  convert  makes  many.  He 
who  runs  well  does  much  to  quicken  others'  speed.  Grace  is  communicative,  it  can- 
not but  speak.  " Come,  see  a  Man  that  told  me  all  that  ever  I  did."  3.  But  mark, 
next,  the  grounds  on  which  the  Church  presumes  to  hope  for  these  near  manifesta- 
tions of  Christ's  love  to  her.  "  The  King  hath  brought  me  into  Hie  chambers  " — 
that  is,  He  has  recognized  the  lawfulness  of  my  espousals ;  He  has  initiated  for  me 
this  covenant  relation  of  protection,  and  peace,  and  mercy.  It  is  on  the  authority 
of  the  King  Himself  that  we  and  the  whole  Church  "  have  access  by  faith  into  this 
grace  wherein  we  stand."  We  may  take  the  words  "bringing  into  the  chambers  "  in 
two  senses  ;  that  is,  either  as  implying  an  admission  to  the  ordinances  of  religion, 
or  a  more  privileged  insight  into  the  truth  of  its  doctrines.  Either  interpretation 
would  fall  in  with  the  national  custom  which  is  supposed  to  be  the  source  of  the 
allusion — that  of  a  bride  being  conducted  to  her  lord's  home,  both  to  inspect  all  his 
household  treasures,  and  to  have  her  future  part  and  possession  in  them  formally 
made  over  and  acknowledged.  Thus,  assuming  ordinances  to  be  the  chief  point  of 
the  reference,  how  truly  may  we,  as  Christians,  say,  "  The  King  hath  brought  me 
into  His  chambers."  Or  adopting  the  other  supposition,  that  by  "chambers"  here 
are  meant  the  inner  recesses  of  God's  truth — the  deep  things  of  the  Spirit,  hidden 
mysteries,  kept  secret  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  which  even  "angela 
have  desired  to  look  into " — ^this  privilege  is  ours  also.  Ours,  the  more  we  love 
Christ  and  the  nearer  we  keep  to  Him.  A  knowledge  of  the  things  of  the  kingdom 
is  reserved  for  the  children  of  the  kingdom.  As  the  bridegroom  would  lead  hia 
affianced  bride  from  chamber  to  chamber,  to  show  his  wealth,  to  display  his  treasures, 
to  unlock  his  cabinet  of  choicest  gifts,  so  does  Christ,  by  His  Spirit,  delight  to  lead 
His  people  into  all  truth,  to  conduct  them  from  knowledge  to  knowledge,  and  from 
pronaise  to  promise,  and  from  glory  to  glory.  (2).  Moore,  M.A.)  The  believer' a 
prayer: — L  The  earnest  petition.  "Draw  me."  1.  TMs  is  a  petition  which  the 
very  best  of  us  need  continually  to  oflFer.  We  have  these  three  enemies  ever  plotting, 
ever  drawing  us — drawing  us  from  salvation  towards  destruction — the  world,  the 
flesh,  and  the  devil.  We  need,  therefore,  the  magnet  of  God's  love  to  overcome 
these  adverse  "drawings,"  and  to  guide  us  at  last  to  a  happy  and  holy  heaven. 
2.  To  whom  is  your  petition  addressed  T  The  three  Persons  of  the  ever-blessed 
Trinity  are  employed  m  drawing  you  from  earth  to  heaven.  (1)  God  the  Father 
draws  you  (John  vi.  44).  (2)  God  the  Son  draws  you  (John  xii.  32).  (3)  God  the 
Holy  Ghost  draws  you.  He  takes  of  the  things  of  Jesus,  and  shows  them  to  you, 
making  you  willing  converts  in  the  day  of  Christ's  power.  3.  But  in  the  passage 
before  us,  the  prayer,  I  conceive,  is  rather  addressed  to  God  the  Son.  (1)  We  pray 
Christ  to  draw  us  from  those  things  which  will  do  us  harm.  From  self,  that  we  may 
not  trust  in  our  own  strength.  (2)  We  pray  Christ  to  draw  us  to  those  things  whicn 
will  do  us  good.  We  pray  Him  to  draw  us  "  to  a  throne  of  grace  " — to  His  Word — 
to  His  people — to  His  house — and  to  His  table.  And  oh,  the  blessed  end  of  thia 
"drawing"!  Deborah  the  prophetess  "drew"  Sisera,  with  his  chariots  and  his 
multitude,  to  Mount  Tabor ;  out  she  "drew"  them  thither,  only  to  give  them  into 
the  hands  of  Barak  for  their  destruction.  But,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  drawing 
you,  not  to  Mount  Tabor,  but  to  Mount  Zion,  and  He  is  drawing  you  thither,  not  for 
your  destruction,  but  for  your  salvation ;  that  you  may  stand  there  with  all  the 
redeemed  for  the  endless  ages  of  eternity.  O  blessed  drawing  I  4.  But  the 
Lord  Jesus  uses  means.  (1)  He  draws  you  by  His  Spirit ;  for  without  the  Holy 
Spirit  we  can  do  nothing.  (2)  He  draws  you  by  dark  providences,  and  makes 
yon  say  with  David,  "  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted."  (3)  He  draws 
you  by  the  sunshine  of  prosperity  (Jer.  zxzL  8).  (4)  He  draws  you  by  the 
remonstrances  of  oonscienoe,  as  He  drew  the  woman  of  Samaria  at  Jacob's  well. 
(6)  He  also  draws  you  by  the  preaching  of  His  Gospel,  opening  your  hearts,  as  He 
opened  the  heart  of  Lyma,  and  bringing  the  Word  home  to  your  souls,  as  He  did 
to  the  Thessalonians,  "  in  power,  and  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit,  and  in  much 
assurance."  IL  Ths  deoidbd  promise.  "  We  will  run  after  Thee."  1.  This 
is  not  the  voice  of  nature,  but  of  graoe.  Nature,  unconverted  nature,  says,  "I 
will  run  from  Thee."  "I  will  hide  myself,  as  did  Adam,  in  the  trees  of  the 
garden."    I  will  forsake  the  fountain  of  living  waters,  and  I  will  hew  ms  oat 


OHA».  I.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON".  1 

other  cisterns.  I  will  say  to  the  Lord,  "  Depart  from  me ;  for  I  desire  not  the 
knowledge  of  Thy  ways."  But  jirace,  grace  in  your  heart,  says,  "Lord,  when  wilt 
Thou  come  unto  me  ?  Lord,  I  will  run  after  Thee.  I  will  follow  Thee  whithersoever 
Thou  goest."  It  is  the  large-hearted  obedience  of  one  who  feels  that  all  he  has  belongs 
to  Christ ;  who  confesses  that  he  is  not  his  own,  but  that  he  has  been  bought 
with  a  price.  2.  You  are  not  content  to  "run"  alone.  You  wish  your  fellow- 
men  to  enjoy  what  you  are  looking  for ;  and,  therefore,  you  promise  your  Divine 
Lord,  that  if  He  will  only  draw  you  by  His  grace  and  free  Spirit,  you  will  bring 
others  with  you.  "Draw  me,  and  we  will  run  after  Thee."  {C.  Clayton,  M.A.) 
Predestination: — We  have  to  investigate  what  is  taught  us  herein  of  the  Church 
and  her  Lord.  He  is  to  draw  her  ;  she  is  to  hasten  after  His  steps.  This  is  the 
statement  in  its  simplest  form ;  but  it  will  lead  us  across  deep  mysteries,  and 
doctrines  which  have  ministered  food  for  much  controversy.     L  The  text  brings 

VS  ACROSS  THE  GREAT  MYSTERY   OF  God'S  PREDESTINATION.      The   Cry   of  man   tO 

God  is,  "Draw  me,  and  I  will  follow  Thee."  In  the  New  Testament  we  have  our 
Blessed  Lord  declaring,  "No  man  cometh  unto  Me,  except  the  Father  draw  him." 
It  is  asserted  that  God  must  call,  before  there  can  be  any  access  of  the  creature  to 
Him.  St.  Paul  has  accurately  traced,  the  order  of  Divine  providence  in  this  respect ; 
"those  whom  He  did  predesttuate,  them  He  also  called;  and  whom  He  called, 
them  He  also  justified  ;  and  whom  He  justified,  them  He  also  glorified."  The  act 
by  which  the  Almighty  draws,  or  calls.  His  people,  is  a  consequent  of  His  pre- 
destination. Now,  wherever  predestination  is  spoken  of,  it  is  a  predestination 
which  concerns  not  our  final  salvation  or  condemnation,  but  simply  our  call  to  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus.  "Whom  He  did  foreknow,"  says  St.  Paul,  "He  did 
predestinate" — to  what?  why — "to  be  conformed  to  the  likeness  of  His  Son,  that 
He  might  be  the  first-bom  among  many  brethren."  And  again  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians  we  read,  "God  predestinated  us  unto  the  adoption  of  the  children,  by 
Jesus  Christ."  These  are  the  only  two  places  in  which  the  apostle  speaks  of  pre- 
destination ;  and  it  is,  you  observe,  a  predestination  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Gospel, 
to  incorporation  into  the  Christian  Church,  to  which  he  alludes.  He  to  whom  the 
future  is  as  the  present,  fixed  by  His  high  decree  that  some  kingdoms  should 
immediately  be  instructed  in  the  tmth  as  it  is  in  Jesus ;  that  others  should  only 
after  the  lapse  of  years  be  enlightened ;  that  others  should  not  be  summoned  to 
enter  the  fold  until  the  thunder-clouds  of  the  last  tempest  should  be  seen  gathering 
in  the  sky.  The  whole  history  of  the  propagation  of  the  Gospel,  in  short,  the  rela- 
tion of  the  fulfilment  by  man's  agency  of  the  determinate  counsel  of  God,  which  in 
the  morning  of  creation,  whilst  the  first  dew  was  yet  upon  the  hiUs,  traced  out 
across  them  the  path  of  evangelists  and  teachers,  and  decreed  who  should  be  called 
and  who  passed  by,  while  yet  all  the  generations  of  human  kind  were  in  the  loins  of 
Adam.  And  this  is  the  predestination  of  the  Bible ;  and  it  has,  you  see,  nothing 
whatever  to  do  with  the  salvation  of  individuals.  A  predestination  to  eternal  ruin 
would  be  hopelessly  irreconcileable  to  the  Divine  attributes  of  justice  and  mercy  ; 
but  there  is  nothing  so  hard  in  accepting  the  doctrine  of  a  predestination  to  tne 
knowledge  of  Christ  and  HIb  Gospel  here  upon  the  earth.  We  would  not  have  you 
then  recoil  from  the  doctrine  of  God's  predestination,  as  from  something  too  hard  for 
flesh  and  blood.  It  is  the  alone  doctrine  which  will  explain  why  one  is  taken  and 
another  left ;  one  people  adopted  into  the  Church,  and  another  passed  by.  I  cannot 
teU  what  moves  the  Eternal  King  in  His  dispensation  of  the  Word  of  Life ;  but  I  am 
prepared  to  beUeve  that  He  has  a  reason  for  all  He  does,  and  believing  this,  I  take 
the  doctrine  of  His  absolute  predestination  as  a  most  marvellous  proof  of  His  infinite 
nature.  Who  but  God  could  thus  comprehend  in  His  counsels  thousands  of  years, 
and  myriads  of  living  things  ?  Even  now  there  are  millions  of  our  race  to  whom  the 
nsone  of  Christ  is  an  unknown  thing.  But  not  according  to  man's  eagerness,  but 
His  own  ancient  counsel,  does  the  Lord  reveal  Himself  to  those  that  sit  in  dark- 
ness :  their  day  and  their  hour  was  predestined  long  since.  But  this  predestination 
touches  not  tneir  free-will  to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly ;  and  therefore 
do  I  hear  but  a  tribute  to  His  greatness  and  omniscience  in  the  cry  that  floats 
upward  from  the  dim  waters  to  Him  who  arranges  the  times  and  seasons  for  every 
islet  that  sleeps  upon  the  wave,  "Draw  me,  we  will  ran  after  Thee."  II.  Let  us 
now  consider  the  words  as  the  tjtterance  of  the  bribe  after  her  union  with 
Christ.  Let  us  examine  in  what  way  they  may  be  used  by  us,  who  have  already 
been  grafted  into  the  family  of  Christ.  Now  with  respect  to  ourselves,  the  Divine 
acts  of  predestination,  justification,  and  sanctification,  are  past  and  gone.  We  are 
of  those  who  were  predestined  to  be  early  adopted  into  God's  household.    So  fu^ 

22 


8  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

then,  H«  has  drawn  ns  to  Him,  and  we  have  hastened  after  TTim  ;  we  have  believed 
in  Christ,  we  have  taken  up  the  sign  of  the  Cross  to  be  our  banner ;  we  have,  in  a 
word,  accepted  the  Gospel,  and  are  members  of  the  Church,  the  mystical  bride  of 
tie  Lamb.  Is  there,  then,  no  further  application  of  the  language  of  the  text  ?  no 
farther  drawing  by  the  Lord  God  ?  Indeed  the  entire  life  of  man  is  a  period  during 
which  there  is  perpetually  being  exerted  upon  the  soul  a  gentle  violence,  alluring, 
tempting  it  to  follow  the  footsteps  of  Christ.  The  life  of  every  man  is,  we  believe, 
arranged  by  God  in  such  a  manner  as  will  best  conduce  to  his  salvation.  The  details 
of  our  existence  are  so  planned  as  to  lead  us  unto  heaven.  Do  you  ask  why  any  of 
ns  fall  short  of  the  promised  reward  1  Oh  1  is  it  not  because,  though  God  draws, 
we  hasten  not  after  Him  1  We  thwart  God's  purposes  ;  we  resist  His  impulses  ;  we 
counteract  His  designs.  If  we  would  surrender  ourselves  into  His  hands  unreservedly. 
He  would  bring  us  safe  to  the  eternal  city.  And  there  is  yet  a  farther  truth  involved 
in  the  text.  It  implies,  that  the  course  of  the  servant  of  God  is  one  of  constant 
progress  and  active  advance.  Christ  is  ever,  as  it  were,  moving  onward ;  He  leads 
us  from  one  height  of  moral  excellence  to  another.  There  is  no  rest  in  store  for  us 
on  this  side  the  grave.  We  dare  not  look  for  ease  ;  we  dare  not  fancy  that  the  time 
shall  ever  come  on  earth  when  our  discipline  for  eternity  shall  be  over,  or  the  lessons 
of  our  schoolhouse  be  learnt.  He  that  looketh  back  is  not  fit  for  the  kingdom  of 
God.  Whatever  ye  are,  ye  may  be  better  ;  whatever  ye  have  done,  ye  may  do  more. 
(Bp.  Woodford.)  The  soul's  delight  in  Ood: — When  the  fields  are  clothed  with 
fruitfulness,  and  the  flowers  bloom  in  beauty,  we  know  that  the  rains  and  the  dewe 
have  descended,  and  the  sun  has  sent  forth  ms  rays  of  light  and  heat ;  so,  when  in 
the  soul  of  man  the  fruits  of  holiness  abound,  when  aspirations  of  faith  and  prayer 
bind  him  to  the  throne  of  the  Eternal,  it  is  because  there  has  been  unveiled  to  that 
■onl,  as  existing  in  the  heart  of  God,  a  gentleness  which  makes  as  great ;  the 
gracious  and  omnipotent  love,  which  sought  us  when  we  were  lost,  welcomes  us 
when  we  return,  and  leads  us  into  the  King's  own  banqueting-house,  where,  in  His 
presence,  we  make  merry  and  are  glad.  Of  the  salvation  of  the  Church,  and  of 
every  man  in  it,  Christ  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  first  and  the  last,  the  beginning 
and  the  end.  I.  Tbos  attractions  of  the  DrviNB  love  by  which  we  aeb 
BBonoHT  NIGH  TO  GoD.  "Draw  me,  and  we  will  run  after  Thee."  It  is  the 
language  of  devout  aspiration,  the  expression  of  the  soul's  desire  for  doser,  holier 
fellowship  with  its  Saviour  King ;  and,  by  the  very  fact  that  it  takes  the  form  of 
prayer,  we  are  reminded  of  the  inborn  helplessness  of  the  soul  either  to  enter  upon 
or  to  continue  in  the  life  whereunto  we  are  called.  The  best  of  men  are  open  to 
powerful  temptations  ;  the  strongest  are  often  weary  and  dispirited ;  and  if  any  of 
us  are  to  be  kept  safe  unto  the  heavenly  kingdom,  we  must  indeed  pray,  "  Draw 
me,  draw  me  unto  Thyself."  And  if  the  prayer  be  sincerely  oflFered,  it  will  assuredly 
be  answered.  God  will  draw  you  as  with  the  cords  of  a  man  and  the  bands  of  love. 
By  the  power  of  His  Spirit,  He  will  Uluminate  your  mind,  and  whisper  to  your 
hearts  the  mysteries  of  His  love.  By  sweet  and  gentle  persuasives  will  He  win  for 
Himself  your  deepest  trust.  The  image  of  Christ  wiU  be  so  imprinted  on  your 
memory,  that  no  succeeding  waves  of  worldly  thought  or  sensuous  impression  shall 
be  able  to  erase  it.  The  joy  of  living  unto  Him  shall  be  so  true  and  keen,  that  all 
lower  choice  shall  be  as  poison  to  your  soul.  Duty  and  pleasure,  inclination  and 
ddight,  sacrifice  and  reward,  shall  be  transmuted  into  one ;  and,  unseen  by  others, 
the  Son  of  Man  shall  be  ever  at  your  side  to  counsel,  to  direct,  to  sustain  you. 
II.  The  exalted  privileges  to  which  that  love  introduces  its.  "The  King 
hath  brought  me  into  His  chambers,"  beyond  the  outer  courts  and  entrance  haUs 
of  Bos  palace,  and  the  rooms  in  which  His  servants  abide,  into  the  inner  and  more 
sedaded  apartments  reserved  for  His  own  use ;  where  He  receives  no  casual  visitors, 
but  those  only  who  possess  His  full  confidence,  who  are  entrusted  with  the  most 
responsible  tasks  of  His  government,  and  are  honoured  with  marks  of  His  special 
regard.  We  are  the  Lord's  free  men ;  not  servants  merely,  but  friends,  who  have 
the  continued  right  of  access  to  His  presence,  receive  direct  communications  of  His 
will,  and  are  entrusted  with  tasks  of  highest  moment.  We  are  brought  into  the 
King's  chambers,  and  can  there  tell  out  to  Him  the  sorrows  of  our  heart,  and  seek 
His  nelp  in  every  form  of  need.  The  plea  of  the  penitent  and  aspiring  suppliant, 
the  adoration  of  the  reverent  worshipper,  and  the  song  of  the  victor  are  alike 
welcome  to  His  ear.  It  is  the  King's  chamber  into  which  we  have  been  introduced, 
and  there  we  haveperfect  freedom.  {Jos.  Stuwrt.)  The  King  hath  brought  me  into 
Hit  chambers. — Tm  Kingship  of  Christ : — Clear  as  a  knell  of  pure  silver,  rang  out 
^b»  words  of  t^  Strang*  maa  of  Fethor,  amid  the  goodly  tents  and  tabemaclee  of 


CHAP.  1.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  9 

Israel  (Num.  xxiv.  17).  With  the  most  captivating  frenzy,  Israel's  greatest  bard 
gave  grand,  dramatic  exhibitions  of  the  coming  Saviour — as  the  enthroned  King 
(Ps.  ii.) ;  as  the  conquering  King  (Ps.  xlv.) ;  as  the  righteous  King  (Ps.  Ixxii.) ;  as 
the  Priest  King,  made  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek  (Ps.  cxi.).  The  weeping 
Jeremiah  wiped  away  his  tears,  as  visions  of  a  new  hope  broke  upon  him  (xxiii. 
5,  6).  Gathering  up  the  choice  music  of  the  centmies,  Zechariah  bursts  forth  into 
the  loftiest  of  refrains  (ix.  9).  To  the  Virgin,  the  angel  came  ringing  joy-bells, 
because  of  the  Kingship  of  her  expected  Child  (Luke  i.  33).  The  Magians — those 
etar-guided  strangers — thought  only  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  world's  Redeemer 
(Matt.  ii.  2).  As  soon  as  the  guileless  eyes  of  Nathaniel  rested  upon  Jesus  Christ, 
he  exclaimed :  "Thou  art  the  King  of  Israel"  (John  i.  49).  Coronation  Day  being 
passed  and  the  newly  crowned  potentate  having  entered  into  glory,  how  the  subse- 
quent disclosures  that  Jesus  made  of  Himself,  in  the  visions  of  Patmos,  were  radiant 
•with  His  own  royal  light:  "We  read  that  He  is  "the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the 
earth"  (Rev.  i.  5) ;  "the  King  of  saints"  (xv.  3) ;  "the  King  of  kings  (xvii.  14) ! 

I.  Thb  elements  of  the  Divine  Kingship.  1.  Christ's  Personality.  A  king  is 
a  man  of  high  birth — noble  ancestry — pure,  good  blood.  Royalty  is  the  blossom  on 
the  Tree  of  Humanity — the  ripened  fruit  of  the  race.  The  Kingship  of  Christ  calls 
attention,  first  of  all,  to  His  lofty  personality — that  is,  to  the  exclusiveness  of  Hia 
ancestral  line :  the  nobility  of  His  immediate  parentage,  and  the  dignity  and 
grandeur  of  His  own  inborn  substance.  2.  Christ's  Authority  over  His  people. 
This  is  the  second  idea  involved  in  His  Kingship.  "  Him  hath  God  exalted  with 
His  right  hand  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour ! "  0,  this  is  the  new  and  startling 
lesson  the  Gospel  brings  to  every  man  to  learn:  "Christ  a  Prince  first — then  a 
Saviour  ! "  Submission  of  will,  before  redemption  from  sin  !  Make  a  whole-hearted 
self-surrender  to  Jesus,  as  your  Lord  and  Master.  Then  wiU  your  sins  be  for- 
given and  you  will  be  a  child  of  God.  But  what  is  meant  by  a  surrender  of 
self  to  Jesus  Christ  ?  I  reply,  we  must  make  Him  the  King  of  Life ;  the  King 
of  Truth  ;  and  the  King  of  Monev.  3.  Clirist's  protection  of  His  people.  This 
is  the  third  element  involved  in  fiis  Kingship.  When  things  seem  dark  for  the 
Church,  for  the  ultimate  success  of  the  Gospel  and  the  triumph  of  Christianity, 
bear  in  mind  that  this  glorious  work  is  in  the  hands  of  an  infinite  Potentate. 
Glorious  King!     He  will  conquer  all  our  enemies.      He  will  protect  His  people. 

II.  Behold,  in  view  of  the  facts  stated,  the  high  spiritual  teaching  of  mt 
TEXT.  Just  read  the  second  verse  of  this  wonderful  Song  of  Redeeming  Love. 
There  we  find  the  awakened  soul  praying  for  reconciliation.  In  the  third  verse 
we  find  a  burst  of  praise  to  the  Saviour.  Then  comes  the  text,  with  its  prayer 
of  humility  and  submission:  "Draw  me;  we  wiU  run  after  Thee."  We  are  only 
Baved  when  we  "run"  after  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  His  own  sovereign  command; 
"Follow  thou  Me!"  In  the  next  clause,  behold  this  saved  soul's  protection — 
absolute  safety,  as  to  every  foe:  "The  King  hath  brought  me  into  His  chambers,'* 
t.  e.  into  the  inner,  private  compartment  of  the  palace,  from  which  the  world  is 
excluded  and  where  no  enemy  can  enter.  This  is  the  sacred  place  of  the  Most  High, 
ifhere  all  dwellers  abide  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty  (Ps.  xci.  1).  This  is 
the  pavilion,  where,  in  the  time  of  trouble,  Jesus  Christ  hides  His  people — the  secret 
of  His  tabernacle,  giving  safety  to  all  (Ps.  xxviL  5) ;  "The  strong  tower  into  which 
the  righteous  run  and  are  safe  "  (Prov.  xviii.  10).  But  this  part  of  my  text  is  rich 
beyond  all  we  have  yet  seen.  Truly  we  see  Protection  standing  before  us  in  all  the 
caun  dignity  and  infinite  power  of  Divine  sovereignty.  But  you  know  that  the 
"  chambers  '  of  an  Eastern  monarch  were  those  secluded  and  gorgeously  furnished 
apartments  of  his  palace,  into  which  no  male  friend  ever  entered ;  nor  yet  a  con- 
cubine— only  the  King's  most  cherished  wife.  In  these  "chambers,"  therefore, 
behold  the  dwelling-place  of  Love.  That  is,  Christ  is  King  of  Love  !  Who  would  not 
exclaim :  "  We  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Thee,"  seeing  that  Christ's  work  is  love — 
first,  last  and  evermore  !  Behold  this  truth  and  go  forth,  from  this  hour,  to  make 
your  religion  a  grand  chorus-song — a  sweet  harp  of  a  thousand  chords — an  immortal 
flower,  ever  beautiful,  ever  fragrant — a  life  spent  in  willing,  joyful  service  !  III.  The 
Kingship  of  Christ  must  be  cherished  in  sacred  memory.  "  We  wUl  remember 
Thy  love  more  than  wine;  the  upright  love  Thee."  "Wine,"  here,  means  the 
world's  most  desirable  things :  gold  ;  learning  ;  pleasure  ;  power  ;  fame  ;  ease  ;  human 
affection.  But  what  are  aU  these,  as  compared  with  Him  who  is  the  King  of  all 
wills,  all  hearts,  all  knowledge,  all  possessions,  of  righteousness,  and  of  love — the 
Christ  of  God  who  has  saved  us  with  His  own  precious  blood  !  (A.  H.  Moment,  D.D.) 
"We  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Thee. — Hej'aicing  and  remembering: — It  is  a  very 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

blessed  habit  of  saints  who  have  grown  in  grace  to  enter  into  actual  conversation 
with  the  Well-beloved.     Our  text  is  not  so  much  speaking  of  Him  as  speaking  to 
Him :  "  We  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Thee,  we  wiU  remember  Thy  love  more  than 
wine."    I.  We  have  here  A  double  resolve  :  '*  We  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Thee, 
we  will  remember  Thy  love  more  than  wine." — 1.  It  is,  first,  a  necessary  resolve,  for 
it  is  not  according  to  human  nature  to  rejoice  in  Christ,  it  is  not  according  to  the 
tendency  of  our  poor  fallen  state  to  remember  His  love.     There  must  be  an  act  of  the 
wiU  with  regard  to  this  resolve  ;  let  us  will  it  now.     2.  It  is  also  a  right  and  proper 
resolve.     Should  we  not  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Christ  ?    Why  should  the  children  of 
the  bride-chamber  fast  while  the  Bridegroom  is  with  them  ?    With  such  a  Husband 
as  we  have  in  Christ  should  not  the  spouse  rejoice  in  Him  %    3.  Do  you  not  think 
also  that  this  resolution,  if  we  carry  it  out,  will  be  very  helpful  to  ourselves  ?    There 
is  no  way  of  getting  right  out  of  the  Stygian  bog  of  the  Slough  of  Despond  like 
rejoicing  in  the  Lord.     4.  Certainly,  it  wiU  also  be  for  the  good  of  others.     If  you 
can  get  right  out  of  your  sorrow,  and  can  actually  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  and  if  you  can 
so  remember  Him  as  to  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Him,  you  will  allure  many  to  the  fair 
ways  of  Christ,  which  else  will  be  evil  spoken  of  if  you  go  mourning  all  your  days. 
5.  We  cannot  carry  out  that  resolve  without  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     Therefore, 
let  us  breathe  it  unto  the  Lord  in  prayer  ;  and,  as  we  tell  Him  what  we  mean  to  do, 
let  us  each  one  add,  ' '  Draw  me,  0  Lord  ;  then  I  will  run  after  Thee.     Help  me  to 
come  to  Thee  ;  manifest  Thyself  to  me,  and  then  I  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Thee." 
II.  The  resolve  of  the  text  is  A  suitable  resolve  for  this  occasion:  "We  will 
be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Thee,  we  will  remember  Thy  love  more  than  wine."    1.  We  are 
most  of  us  coming  to  the  communion  table,  to  eat  of  the  bread  and  to  drink  of  the 
cup  in  remembrance  of  our  Master's  dying  love.     Surely,  now  is  the  hour,  if  ever  in 
our  lives,  to  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Him,  and  to  remember  Him,  for  the  object  of  this 
supper  is  to  commemorate  His  dying  love.     It  is  idle,  and  worse  than  idle,  to  come 
to  Christ's  table  if  you  do  not  remember  Him ;  what  good  can  it  do  you  ?    2. 
Recollect,  next,  that  in  coming  to  this  communion  table,  we  also  commemorate  the 
results  of  Christ's  death.    One  res\ilt  of  our  Lord's  death  is  that  He  gives  food  to  His 
people ;  His  body  broken  has  become  bread  for  our  souls,  yea,  it  is  meat  indeed. 
His  blood,  which  was  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins,  has  become  drink 
indeed.     So,  dear  friends,  if  we  come  to  this  table  in  a  right  spirit,  we  must  rejoice 
in  our  Lord,  and  we  must  remember  His  love.     3.  I  think  also  that  there  is  this 
further  reason  why  we  should  rejoice  in  our  Lord,  and  remember  His  love,  because  at 
this  table  the  commemoration  is  made  by  our  Lord  to  be  a  feast.     What !  vrill  ye 
come  to  the  King's  table  with  sorrowful  countenances  ?    Will  ye  come  sadly  to  see 
what  He  has  brought  you  ?    4.  Let  us  also  recollect  that,  when  we  come  to  the  table 
of  our  Lord,  we  commemorate  a  very  happy  union.     5.  It  does  not  become  us  to 
gather  at  this  communion  table  with  a  heavy  heart  when  we  recollect  that  it  is  not 
only  a  commemoration,  but  an  anticipation.     We  are  to  do  this  **  till  He  come."    Let 
us  leap  up  at  the  remembrance  of  this  gladsome  hope.     III.  I  must  dwell  for  a  brief 
space  upon  what  I  meant  to  make  my  third  point  concerning  this  double  resolve, — 
let  us  CARRY  IT  OUT.     "We  will  remember  Thy  love."    Dear  Saviour,  what  we 
have  to  remember  is  Thy  love, — ^Thy  love  in  old  eternity,  or  ever  the  earth  was.  Thy 
prescient  love.     We  remember  the  love  of  Thine  espousals  when  Thou  didst  espouse 
Thy  people  unto  Thyself,  and  didst  resolve  that,  whatever  might  be  the  lot  of  Thine 
elect.  Thou  wouldst  share  it  with  them.     "  We  wUl  remember  Thy  love," — that  love 
which,  having  once  begun,  has  never  wavered,  never  diminished,  never  stopped.     We 
remember  the  love  which  Jesus  bore  in  His  heart  right  up  into  the  glory  at  the  right 
hand  of  the  Father  ;  that  love  which  is  still  as  great  as  when  He  hung  on  Calvary  to 
redeem  us  unto  Hin[iself.     Next,  let  each  one  of  us  say  to  Christ,  "  I  wiU  remember 
Thy  love  to  me. "     Still,  even  that  is  not  all.     The  text  does  not  merely  speak  about 
Christ's  love,  and  Christ's  love  to  me,  but  it  talks  about  Christ  Himself.     "  We  wiU 
be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Thee," — not  only  in  His  love,  but  in  Himself.     Do  try,  dear 
friends,  to  let  your  thoughts  dwell  upon  Christ,  His  complex  person,  God  and  man, 
and  all  the  wonders  which  lie  wrapped  up  in  Immanuel,  God  with  us.     Thy  work, 
Lord,  is  fair ;  but  the  hand  that  wrought  the  work  is  fairer  still.     Come,  then, 
beloved,  and  let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Him,  and  let  us  remember  His  love  more 
than  wine.     (C.  H.  Spurgnon.)    We  will  remember  Thy  love  more  than  wine. — A 
refreshing  canticle : — The  Hebrew  word  for  ' '  love  "  here  is  in  the  plural :  "  We  will 
remember  Thy  loves."    Think  not,  however,  that  the  love  of  Jesus  is  divided,  but 
know  that  it  hath  different  channels  of  manifestation.     All  the  affections  that  Christ 
hath,  He  bestows  upon  His  Church  ;  and  these  are  so  varied  that  they  may  well  bo 


CHAP.  I.]  TSE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOir,  11 

called  "loves  "  rather  than  "  love."  We  will  remember,  0  Jesus,  that  love  of  Thine 
which  was  displayed  in  the  council  chamber  of  eternity,  when  Thou  didst,  on  our 
behalf,  interpose  as  the  Daysman  and  Mediator  ;  when  Thou  didst  strike  hands  with 
Thy  Father,  and  become  our  Surety,  and  take  us  as  Thy  betrothed  I  We  will 
remember  that  love  which  moved  Thee  to  imdertake  a  work  so  burdensome  to 
accomplish,  an  enterprise  which  none  but  Thyself  ever  could  have  achieved.  We  wiU 
remember  the  love  which  suggested  the  sacrifice  of  Thyself ;  the  love  which,  until 
the  fulness  of  time,  mused  over  that  sacrifice,  and  longed  for  the  hour  of  which,  in 
the  volume  of  the  Book  it  was  written  of  Thee,  "  Lo,  I  come."  We  will  remember 
Thy  love,  0  Jesus,  as  it  was  manifested  to  us  in  Thy  holy  life,  from  the  manger  of 
Bethlehem  to  the  garden  of  Gethsemane  1  We  will  track  Thee  from  the  cradle  to 
the  grave,  for  every  word  and  every  deed  of  Thine  was  love.  And  especially,  O 
Jesus,  will  we  remember  Thy  love  to  us  upon  the  cross  1  Nor  is  this  all  the  love  we 
have  to  remember.  Though  we  ought  to  recoUect  what  we  have  heard,  and  what  we 
have  been  taught,  I  think  the  spouse  means  more  than  this.  "  We  will  remember 
Thy  loves, — not  only  what  we  have  been  told,  but  what  we  have  felt.  Let  each  one 
of  you  speak  for  yourselves  ;  or,  rather,  do  you  think  of  this  for  yourselves,  and  let 
me  speak  of  it  for  you.  I.  Here,  then,  we  have  A  resolution  positively  expressed  : 
"  We  vrill  remember  Thy  love. "  Why  does  the  spouse  speak  so  positively  T  Because 
she  is  inspired ;  she  is  not  like  Simon  Peter  when  he  said,  '*  Although  all  shall  be 
oflFended,  yet  will  not  I. "  She  is  speaking  the  truth,  for  she  will  not  forget  the  love 
of  her  Lord.  Why  is  that  ?  For  one  very  good  reason,  because  she  cannot.  The 
▼irtue  was  not  in  her  own  constancy,  but  m  the  tenacity  of  his  afi"ection,  wherefore 
she  could  not  help  remembering  it.  What  is  there,  in  the  love  of  Christ,  that  will 
compel  us  to  remember  it  ?  The  things  that  we  recollect  best  are  of  certain  kinds. 
Some  that  we  remember  best  have  been  sublime  things.  When  we  have  stood,  for 
the  first  time,  where  we  could  see  a  lofty  mountain,  whose  snowy  summit  pierced 
the  thick  ebon  clouds,  we  have  said,  "We  shall  never  forget  this  sight.  The 
sublimity  of  what  we  have  seen  often  causes  us  to  remember  it.  So  is  it  with 
the  love  of  Christ.  How  it  towers  to  heaven  I  And  mark  how  brightness 
succeeds  brightness,  how  flash  follows  after  flash  of  love  unspeakable  and  full  of 

f;lory !  There  is  no  pause,  no  interval  of  darkness  or  blackness,  no  chasm  of 
brgetfolness.  Its  subUmity  compels  us  to  remember  its  manifestation.  Again,  we 
are  pretty  sure  to  recollect  unusual  things.  Many  people  do  not  notice  the  stars 
much,  but  who  forgets  the  comet !  So  it  is  with  the  love  of  Christ.  It  is  such  an 
extraordinary  thing,  such  a  marvellous  thing,  that  the  like  was  never  known.  That 
constellation  of  the  Cross  is  the  most  marvellous  that  is  to  be  seen  in  the  spiritual 
sky ;  the  eye,  once  spellbound  by  its  charms,  must  retain  its  undying  admiration, 
because  it  is  the  greatest  wonder  of  wonders  and  miracle  of  miracles  which  the 
universe  ever  saw.  Sometimes,  too,  things  which  are  not  important  in  themselves 
are  fixed  on  the  memory  because  of  certain  circumstances  which  happen  in  association 
with  them.  If  something  particular  in  politics  should  happen  on  our  birthday,  or 
our  wedding  day,  or  on  some  other  notable  occasion,  we  should  say,  "Oh,  yes!  I 
recollect  that ;  it  happened  the  day  I  was  married,  or  the  day  So-and-So  was  buried." 
Now,  we  can  never  forget  the  love  of  Christ,  because  the  circumstances  were  so 
peculiar  when,  for  the  first  time,  we  knew  anything  at  all  about  it.  We  were 
plunged  in  sin  and  ruin ;  we  were  adrift  on  the  great  sea  of  sin,  we  had  no  hope,  we 
were  ready  to  sink,  and  no  shore  was  near ;  but  Jesus  came  and  saved  us.  I  think  I 
might  give  you  twenty  reasons  why  it  would  be  impossible  for  the  children  of  God 
to  forget  the  love  of  Christ  to  them  ;  but  above  and  beyond  every  other  reason  is 
this  one,  Christ  will  not  let  His  people  forget  His  love.  If,  at  any  time.  He  finds 
them  forgetful,  He  wiU  come  to  them,  and  refresh  their  memories.  If  aU  the  love 
they  have  ever  enjoyed  should  be  forgotten  by  them,  He  will  give  them  some  fresh 
manifestations  of  love.  II.  Now  let  us  look  at  the  comparative  resolution  : 
"We  will  remember  Thy  love  more  than  wine. "  Why  is  " wine  "  mentioned  here ? 
I  take  it  to  be  used  here  as  a  figure.  The  fruit  of  the  vine  represents  the  chiefest  of 
earthly  luxuries.  "I  will  remember  Thy  love  more  than  the  choicest  or  most 
exhilarating  comforts  which  this  world  can  give  me."  The  fact  is,  the  impression 
which  the  love  of  Christ  makes  on  the  true  believer  is  far  greater  and  deeper  than 
the  impression  which  is  made  by  anything  earthly.  Mere  mortal  joys  write  their 
record  on  the  sand,  and  their  memory  is  soon  efi"aced  ;  but  Christ's  love  is  like  an 
inscription  cut  deeply  into  marble,  the  remembrance  of  it  is  deeply  engraven  in  our 
hearts.  _  Earthly  comforts,  too,  like  wine,  leave  but  a  mingled  impression.  In  the 
,  cup  of  J07  there  is  a  dash  of  sorrow.    There  is  nothing  we  have  here  below  which  is 


11  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 


not  somewhat  tainted  with  grief.  But  in  Christ's  lore  there  is  nothing  for  vou  erer 
to  regret ;  when  you  have  enjoyed  it  to  the  full,  you  cannot  say  that  there  has  been 
any  bittemess  in  it.  True,  there  is  the  remembrance  of  your  sin,  but  that  is  so 
sweetly  covered  by  your  Lord's  forgiveness  and  graciousness,  that  His  love  is  indeed 
better  than  wine.  It  has  had  all  the  good  eflfects  of  wine,  and  none  of  its  iU  results. 
Equally  true  is  it  that  the  remembrance  of  earth's  comforts,  of  which  wine  is  the 
type,  must  be  but  transient.  If  the  sinner  could  live  many  days,  and  have  muck 
wealth,  would  he  remember  it  when  he  entered  the  unseen  world }  Ah  !  he  might 
remember  it,  but  it  would  be  with  awful  sighs  and  sobs.  But  we  can  say,  of  the  love 
of  Christ,  that  it  is  better  than  wine,  for  we  shall  rejoice  to  remember  it  in  eternity. 
III.  Thb  practical  effects  of  kembmberino  Christ's  love.  1.  If  we  remember 
the  love  of  Christ  to  us,  the  first  practical  effect  will  be  that  we  shall  love  Him. 
2.  Another  practical  effect  of  rememoering  Christ's  love  will  be,  love  to  the  brethren. 
Christ  has  many  veir  unseemly  children ;  yet  if  we  can  but  see  that  they  are  Christ's, 
if  they  have  only  a  little  likeness  to  Him,  we  love  them  directly  for  His  sake,  and  are 
wiUing  to  do  what  we  can  for  them  out  of  love  to  Him.  3.  'The  next  effect  will  be, 
holy  practice.  When  we  remember  the  love  of  Christ  to  us,  we  shall  hate  sin. 
4.  Another  effect  of  remembering  the  love  of  Christ  will  be,  repose  of  heart  in  time 
of  trouble.  A  constant  remembrance  of  Christ's  love  to  us  will  make  us  always 
cheerful,  dutiful,  holy.  Dear  Lord,  grant  us  this  boon ;  for  if  Thou  wilt  enable  us 
to  remember  Thy  love  more  than  wine,  Thou  wilt  give  us  all  good  things  in  one. 
Let  Thy  good  ^irit  but  keep  us  up  to  this  good  resolution,  and  we  shall  be  both 
holy  and  happy,  honouring  Thee  and  rejoicing  in  Thee.    lY.  A  few  practical 

SUGOISnONS  AS  TO  PRESERVING  A  DEEPER  AND  MORE  SINCERE  REMEMBRANCE  Or 

Ovist's  love  than  you  have  hitherto  done.     1.  One  of  the  first  things  I  would 
recommend  to  you  is,  frequent  meditation.     See  if  you  cannot  more  often  get  a 

anuter  of  an  hour  all  alone,  that  you  may  sit  down,  and  turn  over  and  over  again 
lie  love  of  Christ  to  you.  Our  old  proverb  says,  "  Prayer  and  provender  hinder  no 
man's  journey "  ;  and  I  believe  that  prayer  and  meditation  hinder  no  man's  work. 
Do  try  to  get  a  little  time  to  think  about  your  soul.  2.  Take  care  that  you  are  not 
content  with  what  you  knew  of  Christ's  love  yesterday.  You  want  to  know  a  little 
more  about  it  to-day,  and  you  ought  to  know  still  more  about  it  to-morrow.  If  you 
learn  a  little  more  about  Christ  every  day,  you  will  not  be  likely  to  forget  what  you 
already  know  of  Him,  3.  Then,  agam,  as  another  way  of  keeping  in  your  heart  what 
yon  do  know, — take  care,  when  you  have  a  sense  of  Christ  s  love,  that  you  let  it 
go  down  deeply.  If  there  were  a  nail  so  placed  that  it  would  slacken  its  hold  a 
Uttle  every  day  for  six  days,  if  I  had  the  opportunity  of  driving  it  in  the  first  day,  I 
would  try  to  drive  it  in  nght  up  to  the  head,  and  to  clinch  it.  So,  if  you  have  not 
much  time  for  fellowship  and  communion  with  Christ,  if  you  have  only  a  short  season 
for  meditation,  trr  to  drive  the  nail  weU  home.  Do  not  be  content  with  merely 
thinking  about  CJhrist,  seek  to  see  Him  before  your  eyes  as  manifestly  crucified!. 
Bealize  your  fellowship  with  Him  as  He  rises  from  the  tomb,  for  this  will  help  very 
much  to  keep  you  right.  4.  When  any  of  you  meet  together,  it  is  always  a  good 
thing  to  make  Christ  the  theme  of  your  conversation.  Whenever  you  have  the 
opportunity,  tell  out  the  marvellous  story  of  His  great  love  to  you ;  so  will  your 
own  memoir  be  refreshed,  and  others,  listening  to  your  testimony,  will  also  get  a 
large,  and,  it  may  be,  an  everlasting  blessing.  {C.  S.  Spurgeon.)  Bemembrance  of 
Vi4  lovt  of  Cfhrist: — I.  Inquire  into  the  natttre  of  the  Saviour's  special 
lotx.  1.  This  love  is  everlasting ;  that  is  to  say,  it  did  not  commence  in  time,  but 
existed  from  eternity ;  and  it  will  not  terminate  while  eternity  endures :  like  its 
Divine  source,  it  has  neither  "beginning  of  days  nor  end  of  years."  2.  The  love  of 
Christ  is  most  generous ;  since  it  was  undeserved,  unsolicited,  and  disinterested. 

3.  This  is  an  efficient  and  powerful  love.  If  conscience  condemn  us.  His  peace- 
speaking  blood  can  assure  us,  and  enable  us  to  shout  with  the  apostle,  "  Who  shall 
lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect ! "  If  our  corruptions  rage  and  struggle,  His 
Spirit  can  subdue  them,  and  render  us  more  than  conquerors  over  them.  If  the 
curses  of  the  broken  covenant  hang  over  us,  and  hell  gape  to  receive  us,  yet  sheltered 
in  His  wounds,  no  curse  can  smite  us,  no  flames  kindle  around  ns.  If  we  be  called  to 
pass  through  the  gloomy  vale  of  death,  this  Sun  of  Righteousness  can  enlighten  it, 
and  cause  us  sven  there  to  "  lift  up  our  heads,  knowing  that  our  redemption  draweth 
nigh."  If  we  go  into  a  strange  and  unknown  world,  He  can  there  fill  our  souls  with 
joys  far  above  aU  our  thought  or  desires.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  shall  we  be  abls 
to  see  the  power  of  that  love,  which  stormed  and  vanquished  our  obstinate  hearts. 

4.  To  crown  all  these  properties,  this  love  was  painful  and  suffering.     II.  It  is  ihs 


CHAP.  1.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOHT.  IS 

DXnr   OF  BELIEVERS   TO    REMEMBER   THE   LOVE    OF  ChEIST.      1.   All   those  CirCUm- 

Btances  which  tend  to  produce  permanent  and  finn  impressions  upon  the  memory,  are 
to  be  found  in  this  love.     (1)  We  carefully  observe  and  faithfully  remember  those 
things  that  are  wonderful  and  beyond  the  ordinary  course  of  nature.     "Common 
events  pass  through  the  mind  as  common  persons  through  the  streets,  without 
attracting  particular  notice  ; "  whilst  those  events  that  are  rare  and  astonishing, 
fasten  upon  the  mind,  and  leave  a  durable  impression.    Now  where  can  a  greater 
complication  of  wonders  be  discerned,  than  in  the  love  of  your  Redeemer  ?    (2)  We 
easily  retain  and  frequently  meditate  on  all  those  things  which  excite  our  love.     Do 
we  love  any  object  ?    Memory  constantly  presents  it  to  Q8 ;  in  our  more  retired 
moments,  and  even  amidst  the  bustle  of  the  world,  the  object  of  our  attachment  is 
the  theme  of  our  meditation.     Now,  what  is  more  calculated  to  excite  our  love  than 
the  love  of  Christ  ?    (3)  We  easily  remember  those  things  that  are  hervefidal  to  us, 
and  necessary  for  us.     And  what  is  there  so  beneficial,  so  necessary,  as  the  Iofc  of 
Christ  ?    2.  We  are  bound  to  remember  the  love  of  Christ,  because  the  remembrance 
and  sense  of  this  love  is  the  foimtain  whence  all  holy  actions  and  good  desires 
proceed.     It  is  this  love  which  animates  the  Christian  to  obedience  ;  it  is  this  love 
which,  in  the  strong  language  of  the  apostle,  " constraineth  him"  to  labour  for  his 
Master.    III.  Our  remembrance  must  be  accompanied  with  gratitude  in  the 
BEART.     This  duty  is  not  painful ;  this  duty  is  the  source  of  the  highest  joy  ;  dost 
thou  fly  from  pleasure,  my  soul  ?    Then  let  thy  transports  and  thy  rapture  testify- 
that  thou  feelest  the  value  of  a  Saviour's  love.     1.  If  this  remembrance  be  thus 
accompanied  by  gratitude  in  the  heart,  it  will  manifest  itself  by  the  praises  of  the 
lips ;  it  will  shine  in  our  discourse.     2.  To  these  emotions  of  the  heart,  to  these 
words  of  the  mouth,  must  be  added  the  actions  of  the  life,  if  we  would  manifest  a 
true  remembrance  of  the  love  of  the  Saviour.     {3.  Kollock,  D.D.)     The  memory  of 
Christ's  love : — This  is  a  night  for  remembering  Christ's  love.    The  communion  table 
spread  before  us,  the  sacred  feast  to  which  we  are  about  to  come,  is  meant  to  recall 
to  our  minds  our  Saviour's  words,  '  *  This  do  in  remembrance  of  Me.  .  .  .  This  do  ye, 
as  oft  as  ye  drink  it,  in  remembrance  of  Me."    I.  First,  I  would  remind  you  of  thi 
PREPARATIONS  FOR  THIS  HOLY  MEMORY.     Here  they  are.     1.  The  first  word  is, 
"  Draw  me."    Lord,  I  would  fain  come  at  Thee  ;  but,  like  Mephibosheth,  I  am  lame 
in  both  my  feet.     I  would  fain  fly  to  Thee  ;  but  my  wings  are  broken  ;  if,  indeed,  I 
ever  had  any.     I  cannot  come  to  Thee.     I  lie  inert,  and  dead,  and  powerless.     So 
the  first  preparation  is,  "Draw  me."    It  is  a  sweet,  gracious,  efficacious  exercise  of 
Divine  power  that  I  need  and  entreat.     I  pray  this  for  myself,  and  I  trust  that  you 
win  pray  with  me,  "  Come,  Sacred  Spirit,  and  draw  us  nearer  to  Christ ;  enliven  our 
hopes ;  incline  our  hearts  ;  arouse  our  desires  ;  and  then  help  ua  to  yield  our  whole 
bemg  to  Thy  gracious  influences!"    2.  Notice,  next,  that  this  verse  says,  "Draw 
me,  we  will  run  after  Thee."    I  like  the  change  in  the  pronouns,  as  though  I  should 
pray  to-night,  "Lord,  draw  me ;  I  am  the  most  weighted,  the  heaviest  of  all  Thy 
children  in  this  congregation  ;  but  draw  me,  we  will  run  after  Thee.     If  Thou  dost 
draw  the  most  burdened  one  towards  Thyself,  all  the  rest  wiU  come  to  Thee  at  a 
rapid  rate."    Oh,  that  we  might  every  one  attain  the  running  pace  to-night  I    Oh, 
that  we  might  speed  along  towards  our  Lord  with  that  strong,  impetuous  desire 
which  will  not  let  us  rest  till  we  are  close  to  Him :  "  Draw  me,  we  will  run  after 
Thee."    3.  Now,  in  the  further  preparation,  if  you  read  the  verse  through,  you  will 
find  that  an  answer  comes  to  the  prayer  directly  it  is  uttered:  "The  King  hath 
brought  me  into  His  chambers."    I  know,  and  some  of  you  know,  unhappily,  what 
it  is  to  feel  very  cold  and  lifeless  ;  but  I  also  know,  and  some  of  you  know,  what  it 
is  to  become  full  of  life,  full  of  love,  foil  of  joy,  fiiU  of  heavenly  rapture,  in  a  single 
moment.     4.  There  is  only  one  more  preparation  for  remembering  Christ,  and  that 
is  to  feel  gladness  and  joy  in  Him :  "we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Thee."    Come, 
take  those  ashes  from  thy  head,  thou  that  art  sighmg  by  reason  of  affliction !    Come, 
unbind  that  sackcloth,  and  throw  it  aside,  thou  that  hast  lost  fellowship  with  God, 
and  art  consequently  in  the  dark  I    Christ  ifl  yours  if  you  believe  in  Him.     He  has 
given  Himself  to  you,  and  He  loves  you.    Rejoice  in  that  blessed  fact.     II.  I  would 
like  to  speak  about  the  Divine  subject  of  this  holy  memory:  "We  will 
remember  Thy  love."    1.  First,  we  wiU  remember  the  fact  of  Christ's  love.     What 
it  is  for  God  to  love,  God  only  knows.    We  faintly  guess,  by  the  love  that  bums  in 
our  bosom  towards  the  objects  of  our  affection,  what  the  love  of  God  must  be.     The 
love  of  God  must  be  a  mighty  passion.    I  use  the  word  because  I  know  no  better ;  I 
am  conscious  that  it  is  not  the  right  one,  for  human  language  is  too  feeble  to  describe 
Divine  love.    2.  But  we  will  remember,  also,  the  character  of  Christ's  love.     What 


14  ,      THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chjlp.  u 

»  love  it  was  I  He  loved  us  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  With  the  telescope 
of  His  prescience,  He  foresaw  our  existence,  and  He  loved  us  when  we  had  no  being. 
It  was  unmerited  love,  which  had  no  reason  in  us  for  it  to  light  upon.  He  loved  ua 
because  He  would  love  us.  It  was  the  sovereignty  of  His  love  that  made  Him  love 
those  whom  He  chose  to  love.  He  loved  them  freely,  without  anything  in  them,  or 
that  would  ever  be  done  by  them,  to  deserve  His  love.  But  He  loved  fully  as  well 
aa  freely  ;  He  loved  intensely,  divinely,  immeasurably.  8.  "We  will  also  remember 
the  deeds  of  Christ's  love.  4.  I  would  like  you,  to-night,  to  remember  the  proofs  of 
Christ's  love.  You  were  far  oflF,  but  He  sought  you,  and  brought  you  back.  You 
were  deaf,  but  He  called  you,  and  opened  your  ear  to  His  loving  call.  III.  Trb 
Divine  pkodxtct  of  this  holt  memory:  "The  upright  love  Thee."  1.  So  it 
seems,  then,  that  if  we  remember  Christ,  we  shall  have  a  respect  for  His  people. 
His  people  are  the  upright ;  and  she,  who  speaks  in  the  sacred  Canticle,  here  looks 
round  upon  them,  and  says,  "The  upright  love  Thee."  "That  commends  Thee  to 
me ;  for  if  they  who  are  of  a  chaste  spirit  love  Thee,  much  more  should  I. "  2.  In 
remembering  Christ's  love  as  the  upright  do,  we  shall  grow  upright.  I  believe  that 
God  blesses  trouble  to  our  sanctification,  and  that  He  can  bless  joy  to  the  same  end  ; 
but  I  am  sure  of  this,  that  the  greatest  instrument  of  sanctification  is  the  love  of 
Jesus.  If  you  will  remember  Christ's  love,  you  wiU  be  lifted  up  from  your  crooked- 
ness, and  made  straight,  and  put  among  the  upright,  who  love  the  Lord.  {C.  H. 
Spwrgeon.)  Love  of  Jesvs: — The  spouse  has  been  smging  the  praise  of  her  Beloved. 
^e  Church  has  been  chanting  to  the  honour  of  the  Church's  Head.  There  is  nothing 
gives  tiie  spouse  so  much  delight  as  to  be  able  to  set  forth  the  glory  of  her  Husband 
and  her  Mng.  She  cannot  find  words  sweet  enough  to  express  her  admiration  of 
Him.  She  loves  Him  better  than  all  else,  and  her  love  is  better  than  a  banquet  of 
■wine.  She  is  happy  in  the  song,  but  just  while  she  is  at  her  happiest,  there  seems 
to  float  across  her  sky  clouds,  dark  and  heavy  clouds.  She  remembers,  for  a  moment 
at  all  events,  that  dl  do  not  love  Him  as  she  does.  "Oh,"  she  seems  to  say,  "I 
love  Thee,  yet  all  do  not  share  in  my  affection. "  But  the  cloud  does  not  tarry  long ; 
it  is  gone  when  she  remembers  that  the  upright  love  Him,  that  all  whose  love  is 
worth  having  love  Him,  so  she  cheers  her  heart  again  with  this  ^d  thought  that 
there  are  some  who  hold  Him  at  His  true  worth,  some  who  count  Him  fairest  of  the 
fair,  and  dearest  of  the  dear.  Then  is  it  that  she  speaks,  not  always  in  the  first 
person,  but  sometimes  in  the  third,  for  she  loves  to  get  them  to  join  the  strain  and 
all  rejoice  to  sing  the  self-same  song.  All  ye  who  love  Jesus,  have  you  not  all  felt 
the  same  ?  I  learn  from  this  text,  first,  that  Jesus  well  deserves  His  people's  highest 
love.  Take  the  revised  version  or  the  text,  "  Rightly  do  they  love  Thee."  He  well 
deserves  His  people's  love,  first,  because  of  His  great  affection  for  His  people.  "  We 
love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  This  is  the  charm  of  Christ's  love,  that  it  is 
ever  the  same,  that  it  never  changes,  that  it  stands  the  strain  of  our  unfaithfulness 
and  lack  of  love,  and  He  has  proved  it  over  and  over  again.  Did  He  not  leave  His 
glorious  throne  to  tabernacle  with  men  1  Did  not  He  live  ?  Did  not  He  die  ?  Did 
not  He  rise  again,  all  for  your  sake  and  for  mine  ?  Lord  Jesus,  rightly  do  we  love 
Thee !  Lord,  we  love  Thee,  because  Thou  art  so  lovelj  and  so  lovable.  "Thy  very 
name  is  as  ointment  poured  forth,  therefore  do  the  virgins  love  Thee,"  The  purer 
we  are  the  more  we  shall  love  all  that  is  pure.  I  love  to  think  of  this,  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  delights  to  have  His  people  happy  in  His  love,  to  see  them  trusting  Him  and 
familiar  with  Him.  Who  can  chide  us  for  loving  our  dearest  friends  ?  Lastly,  there 
is  that  other  version  in  the  margin  of  the  Authorized  Version  which  tells  us  that 
"they  love  Thee  uprightly."  I  understand  from  this  that  those  who  love  Jesus 
must  love  Him  in  the  best  possible  style  and  greatest  possible  degree,  love  with 
utmost  love.  You  love  Christ,  you  are  conscious  of  that ;  but  that  love  of  yours 
must  coimt  best.  You  must  love  uprightly.  Now,  I  want  you  to  search  your 
hearts  to  see  if  you  love  Him  as  He  deserves.  Do  you  long  for  fresh  tokens  of  His 
affection!  Your  love  is  not  of  the  right  sort  unless  you  are  constantly  pressing 
forward  to  closer  proximity  to  the  Master.  Here  is  another  test.  Have  you  great 
joy  in  His  sacred  Person  I  We  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Thee.  I  do  believe  that 
true  love  to  Jesus  means  much  joy  to  every  one  of  us.  My  heart  does  leap  at  the 
sound  of  His  name.  There  is  something  wrong  in  the  heai-t  if  it  does  not  thus 
respond  to  His  affection.  I  would  that  you  were  happy  Christians.  The  clouds 
that  darken  the  sky  are  gilded  with  this  love.  I  pray  you  revel  in  His  love.  It  is 
better  than  wine.     Be  as  those  who  feast.     {T.  Spurgeon.) 

Ten.  6,  6.  I  am  blaok|  but  comely,  0  ye  daughters  of  Jenualem. — The  Church's 


CHAy.i.l  THE  SONO  OF  SOLOMOy.  15 

llacknesa: — I.  The  Chuech  op  God  and  Oheistians,  whilst  they  are  heee, 
ABE  IN  AN  impeefect  STATE.  There  is  a  mixture  of  some  light  and  darkness 
together,  and  so  it  will  be  till  we  come  to  heaven,  both  for  sin  and  sorrow,  for  sins 
and  defects  in  soul.  The  causes  why  God  wiU  have  it  so  are :  1.  In  regard  of  out- 
ward infirmities,  that  we  might  be  made  conformable  to  His  Son  (Rom.  viii.  17),  and 
80  reign  with  Him,  being  first  made  suitable  to  the  body.  2.  In  respect  of  outward 
and  inward  infirmities,  both  because  God's  glory  is  seen  in  our  infirmities  (2  Oor. 
xii.  7),  His  grace  being  sufficient  to  uphold  us,  and  also  in  regard  our  weakness  com- 
mends His  strength,  and  our  foUy  His  wisdom.  3.  Because  He  would  draw  us  out 
of  the  earth,  and  have  xis  hasten  to  accomplish  the  marriage  and  come  away,  there- 
fore He  sends  us  so  many  crosses,  and  so  little  rest  in  the  flesh.  4.  Because  God  would 
have  us  humble,  patient  and  pitiftd  people,  neither  of  which  would  be  unless  our 
state  were  imperfect ;  we  would  never  know  ourselves,  our  brethren  and  God,  imless 
it  were  so,  that  on  both  sides  we  saw  the  prints  of  our  imperfections.     II.  Though 

CUE  ESTATE  BE  HEEE  IMPEEFECT,   YET  WE   MUST    NOT  BE   DISCOURAGED.       1.   We 

have  a  great  and  mighty  deliverer.  He  loves  His  children  in  the  midst  of  all  their 
deformities.  2.  He  is  able  to  help  them  in  all  estates  ;  His  grace  is  still  sufficient, 
He  hath  present  help.  What  needs  the  child  be  dismayed  for  pain  when  the  Father 
can  remove  it  at  His  pleasure  ?  3.  The  saints  of  God  in  all  ages  have  gone  through 
imperfections  ;  they  have  been  sick,  poor,  doubtful,  passionate,  as  well  as  we.  God 
hath  brought  them  to  heaven,  to  happiness,  through  all  storms.  4.  Uprightness 
may  stand  with  imperfection,  some  goM  maybe  amongst  earth ;  as  the  Church  shows 
here,  beauty  and  deformity  may  stand  together,  some  light,  some  darkness.  Now 
God  bids  the  upright  hope,  rejoice,  says  he  is  blessed  (Ps.  xxiii.  6).  5.  Because  the 
eflfects  of  discouragement  are  too  bad,  as  fretting  (Ps.  xliL  11) ;  yea,  this  doth  not 
only  keep  out  praises,  but  causes  neglect  of  all  ordinances,  drives  from  God,  makes 
one  fierce,  envious,  uncomfortable,  impotent,  etc.      III.  Theee  is  a  gloey  and 

EXCELLENCE  IN  THE  SAINTS  OF   GOD    IN    THE    MIDST   OF  ALL  THEIE  DEFOEMITIES 

AND  DEBASEMENTS.  Indeed  their  glory  is  like  Solomon's  curtains,  not  obvious  to 
every  eye  ;  like  Kedar's  tents,  or  a  heap  of  wheat  in  the  chaflF,  and  outwardly  base, 
but  mwardly  excellent.  1.  Needs  it  must  be  so,  for  being  converted,  they  obtain  a 
new  name  (Rev.  ii.  17) ;  yea,  they  have  this  peculiar  favour  granted,  as  1  John  iiL  1, 
to  be  called  the  "sons  of  God."  2.  They  have  a  new  nature,  being  made  par- 
takers of  the  image  of  God,  and  so  of  the  Divine  nature  ;  as  it  is  (2  Pet.  i.  4).  3. 
They  have  a  new  estate  ;  Christ  Jesus  makes  them  free,  as  John  viii.  35,  and  He 
makes  them  also  rich,  supplying  all  their  wants  with  the  riches  of  His  glory 
(Ps.  iv.  3).  4.  They  have  a  new  kindred  and  guide.  God  is  their  Father,  they  are 
members  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  xii.  13),  they  are  "led  by  the  Spirit  of  God."  God 
dwelleth  in  them,  and  the  Spirit  of  glory  rests  upon  them  even  in  affliction  (1  Pet. 
iv.  14),  and  fiUeth  them  with  glorious  faith  and  precious  graces.  (1)  This  first  dis- 
covers a  wonderful  blindness  in  us,  who  can  see  no  such  matter  in  the  saints  of  God. 
(2)  This  is  comfort  to  saints  now  and  hereafter.  Now  they  be  glorious,  but  yet 
they  are  but  in  the  way  going  to  glory  (Pro v.  iv.  18).  If  thus  in  their  pUgrimage, 
what  at  home  in  their  country  ?  If  thus,  imperfect,  what  in  perfection !  If  thus, 
in  corruption,  what  when  this  corruption  shall  put  on  incorruption  1  And  if  thus, 
in  mortality,  what  when  mortality  shall  be  swallowed  up  of  life  ?    IV.  Ws  must 

NOT  STILL  BE  POEING  INTO  THE  DEFOEMITIES  OF  God'S  OHUKCH  AND  PEOPLE,  like 

flies  on  galled  places,  or  dogs  upon  garbage  and  raw  flesh.  For — 1.  This  is  a  practice 
which  utterly  crosseth  God  in  His  commandments,  who  chargeth  us  "not  to  despise 
the  day  of  small  things  "  (Zech.  iv.  10).  2.  This  is  quite  against  justice  ;  for  Chris- 
tians have  beauty  as  well  as  blackness,  graces  as  well  as  corruptions.  3.  This 
neither  cometh  from  any  good,  nor  worketh  good.  It  ariseth  from  pride,  ignorance, 
etc. ,  and  showeth  that  a  man  neither  knows  his  own  estate,  nor  God's  proceedings 
with  His  people,  who  brings  them  to  honour  through  baseness,  and  confounds  the 
glory  of  the  world  with  base  things.     V.  Then  God's  childeen  pay  foe  it,  when 

THEY  DO  not  THEIE  OWN  WOEK,  NOT  KEEPING  THEIE  OWN  STANDING.       It  is  with 

them  as  soldiers  and  scholars,  when  they  keep  not  their  own  places,  and  learn  not 
their  own  lessons :  they  are  met  with  on  every  side.  1.  Because  no  man  speeds 
well  out  of  his  own  place,  but  Christians  worst  of  all ;  as  Prov.  xxvii.  8,  a  thousand 
inconveniences  befall  to  oneself,  to  his  charge,  when  absent.  God  will  be  upon 
him,  and  leave  him  to  himself,  till  he  hath  wound  himself  into  woeful  brakes.  2. 
Men  will  be  upon  his  back,  as  Paul  on  Peter's,  or  else  grow  strange  till  he  be 
humbled  ;  but  bad  men  they  will  curse  him,  all  the  hypocrites  in  the  town  will  be 
At  his  heels.     3.  The  devU  will  be  npon  them,  and  having  drawn  them  out  of  the 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. " 

way,  will  either  still  mislead  them,  or  else  out  their  throats  and  steal  all,  or  hold 
them,  if  possible  he  may,  from  returning  unto  God ;  as  in  the  prodigal  son. 
4.  Their  own  consciences  wUl  be  upon  them,  and  it  is  with  them  as  with  a  chUd  that 
plays  truant,  lus  heart  throbs,  he  nath  no  peace :  so  a  Christian,  whether  he  prosper 
or  not  prospers,  he  hath  no  peace,  he  eats  not,  he  sleeps  not  in  peace.  (iJ.  Sibhea.) 
The  Churches  confession  of  infirmity: — By  the  "daughters  of  Jerusalem,"  Jewish 
expositors  understand  the  Gentiles,  Jerusalem  being  the  spiritual  metropoUs  and 
mother  of  us  alL  And,  in  substance,  most  Christian  expositors  agree  with  them — 
that  is,  they  suppose  the  persons  addressed  to  be  some  who  are  not  yet  openly  joined 
to  Ohnst ;  who  are  halting  and  undecided ;  seeing  much  of  power  and  grace  in 
Christ,  but  discouraged  and  driven  back,  either  by  the  remaining  infirmities  of  His 
followers,  or  by  the  persecutions  to  which  they  see  them  to  be  exposed.  Hence  the 
Church  proceeds  to  vindicate  herself  against  any  suspicions  arising  out  of  these 
adverse  appearances.  "True,  in  one  sense  lam  'black  ;  judged  of  externally,  and 
Been  only  as  man  seeth,  I  am  as  dark  and  swarthy  as  the  skins  with  which  the  wild 
Arab  roofs  his  tent.  But,  in  another  sense,  I  am  *  comely '  ;  my  '  clothing  is  of 
wrought  gold,'  my  raiment  '  is  of  finest  needlework ' ;  my  soul,  embroidered  and 
enriched  with  the  graces  of  the  Eternal  Spirit,  makes  me  beautiful  as  the  hangings 
in  king's  palaces,  gorgeous  'as  the  curtains  of  Solomon.'  "  "Black,  but  comely." 
The  words  may  be  taken,  and  by  the  Jews  are  taken,  as  anticipative  of  the  gloiy  of 
the  Church  in  the  latter  days.  In  her  present  state  she  may  be  considered  as  dark 
as  the  Ethiop's  skin.  Her  heresies,  her  divisions,  her  heart-burnings,  the  spots  in 
her  feasts  of  charity,  the  scandals  among  men  professing  godliness,  make  the  saying 
to  be  true  of  her  which  Jeremiah  witnesses,  that  her  "visage  is  blacker  than  a  coaL' 
But  how  does  Ezekiel  speak  of  what  her  glory  shall  be  (Ezek.  xvi.  9-14)  ?  Again, 
the  expression,  "  I  am  black,"  may  be  taken  to  refer  to  the  many  sins  of  the  believer. 
In  the  eyes  of  no  one  is  he  so  black  as  he  is  in  his  own.  He  is  covered  over  with 
blemishes,  and  spots,  and  soils.  There  are  stains  upon  his  duties,  stains  upon  his 
repentances,  stains  upon  his  prayers.  But  look  we  again.  "We  have  seen  the  picture 
but  from  one  side.  On  looking  at  it  from  the  other,  jthis  stained  and  darkened  thing 
is  beautifril  as  Tirzah,  comely  as  Jerusalem,  "terrible  as  an  army  with  banners." 
Thus,  while  the  believer  is  both  "black  and  comely,"  he  is  neither  all  the  one,  nor  all 
the  other.  There  is  a  strife  for  mastery  always  gomg  on  between  the  elements  of  his 
iimer  life — the  grace  reigning,  but  the  sin  not  expelled — the  flesh  disputing  inch  by 
inch  the  claims  of  the  Spirit,  and  iniquity  forcing  its  presence  into  the  shrme  of  his 
holiest  things.  Still,  comely  he  is,  and  that  through  Christ's  comeliness.  The 
world  sees  only  the  "tents  of  Eedar,"  but  cannot  discern  the/'  curtains  of  Solomon." 
{D,  Moore^  M.A.) 

Yet.  6.  look  not  upon  me,  because  I  am  black. — Self-humbling  and  $e^- 
$earching: — L  The  fairest  Christians  are  the  most  shamefaced  with  beoaed 
TO  THEMSELVES.  The  persou  who  says,  "  Look  not  upon  me,  because  I  am  black," 
is  described  by  some  one  else  in  the  eighth  verse  as  the  "  fairest  among  women." 
Others,  who  thought  her  the  fairest  of  the  fair,  spoke  no  less  than  the  truth  when 
they  afi&rmed  it ;  but  in  her  own  esteem  she  felt  herself  to  be  so  little  fair,  and  so 
much  uncomely,  that  she  besought  them  not  even  to  look  upon  her.  Why  is  it  that 
the  best  Christians  depreciate  themselves  the  most  t  Is  it  not  because  they  are  most 
accustomed  to  look  within !  They  keep  their  books  in  a  better  condition  than  those 
unsafe  tradesmen,  the  counterpart  of  mere  professors,  who  think  themselves  "rich 
and  increased  in  goods,"  when  they  are  on  the  very  verge  of  bankruptcy.  In  his 
anxiety  to  be  pure  from  evil,  the  godly  man  wiU  be  eager  to  notice  and  quick  to 
detect  the  least  particle  of  defilement ;  and  for  this  reason  he  discovers  more  of  his 
blackness  than  any  other  man  is  likely  to  see.  He  is  no  blacker,  but  he  looks  more 
nan-owly,  and  therefore  he  sees  more  distinctly  the  spots  on  his  own  character. 
The  genuine  Christian  also  tries  himself  by  a  higher  standard.  He  knows  the 
law  to  be  spiritual,  and  therefore  he  judges  many  things  to  be  sinful  which  others 
wink  at ;  and  he  coimts  some  things  to  be  important  duties  which  others  regard  as 
trifles.  The  genuine  Christian  sets  up  no  lower  standard  than  perfection.  He  does 
not  judge  himself  by  others,  but  by  the  exact  measure  of  the  Divine  requirements,  by 
the  law  of  God,  and  especially  by  the  example  of  his  Lord  and  Master  ;  and  when  he 
thus  sets  the  brightness  of  the  Saviour's  character  side  by  side  with  his  own,  then  it 
is  tiiat  he  cries  out,  "Look  not  upon  me,  for  I  am  black."  Another  reason  why  the 
fairest  Christians  are  generally  those  that  think  themselves  the  blackest,  is  that  they 
Itave  more  light.   When  the  light  of  God  comes  into  the  soul,  and  we  see  what  purity 


CHAP.  1.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON".  17 

really  is,  what  holiness  really  is,  then  it  is  the  contrast  strikes  ns.  Though  w« 
might  have  thought  we  were  somewhat  clean  before,  when  we  see  God  in  His  light 
we  see  light,  and  we  abhor  ourselves  in  dust  and  ashes.  Our  defects  so  appal  our  own 
heart,  that  we  marvel  they-do  not  exhaust  His  patience.  The  better  Christian  a  mau 
is,  the  more  abashed  he  always  feels ;  because  to  him  sin  is  so  exceedingly  hateful, 
that  what  sin  he  sees  in  himself  he  loathes  himself  for  far  more  than  others  do. 
A  very  little  sin,  as  the  world  calls  it,  is  a  very  great  sin  to  a  truly  awakened 
Christian.  Now,  I  think  our  text  seems  to  say  just  this :  there  were  some  that 
admired  the  Church.  They  said  she  was  fair.  She  seemed  to  say,  "  Don't  say  it ; 
you  don't  know  what  I  am,  or  you  would  not  praise  me."  Every  Christian,  in  pro- 
portion as  he  lives  near  to  God,  will  feel  this  self-abasement,  this  lowliness  of  heart ; 
and  if  others  talk  of  admiring  or  of  imitating  him,  he  will  say,  "  Look  not  upon  me, 
for  I  am  black."  And  as  he  thus,  in  deep  humility,  begs  that  he  be  not  exalted,  he 
will  often  desire  others  that  they  would  not  despise  him.  It  will  come  into  hia 
mind,  "  Such  and  such  a  man  of  God  is  a  Christian  indeed  ;  as  he  sees  my  weakness, 
he  will  contemn  me.  Such-and  such  a  disciple  of  Christ  is  strong  ;  he  will  never  ba 
able  to  bear  with  my  weakness.  Such  and  such  a  Christian  woman  does,  indeed, 
adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  her  Saviour  ;  but  as  for  me,  alas  1  I  am  not  what  I  ought 
to  be,  nor  what  I  would  be.  Children  of  God,  do  not  look  upon  me  with  scorn.  I 
will  not  say  that  you  have  motes  in  your  own  eyes.  I  have  a  beam  in  mine.  Look 
not  upon  me  too  severely.  Judge  me  not  harshly.  If  you  do  look  at  me,  look  to 
Christ  for  me,  and  pray  that  I  may  be  helped  ;  '  for  I  am  black,  because  the  sun  hath 
looked  upon  me."  II.  The  most  diligent  Christian  will  be  the  man  mosx 
AFRAID  OF  the  EVILS  CONNECTED  WITH  HIS  WORK.  "  Evils  Connected  with  his 
work !  "  says  one.  * '  Does  work  for  God  have  evils  contingent  upon  it  ?  "  Yes  ;  but 
for  every  evil  connected  with  the  work  of  God,  there  are  ten  evils  connected  with 
idleness.  I  speak  now  only  to  the  workers.  I  have  known  some  whom  the  sim  has 
looked  upon  in  this  respect ;  their  zeal  has  grown  cold  through  non-success. 
You  went  out,  first  of  all,  as  a  Christian,  full  of  fire  and  life.  You  in- 
tended to  push  the  Church  before  you,  and  drag  the  world  after  you.  But  yon 
have  been  mixed  up  with  Christians  for  some  years  of  a  very  cool  sort.  Use  th* 
thermometer  to-night.  Has  not  the  spiritual  temperature  gone  down  in  your  own 
soul  ?  Perhaps  you  have  not  seen  many  conversions  under  your  ministry  1  or  in  the 
class  which  you  conduct  you  have  not  seen  many  children  brought  to  Jesus  T  Do 
you  feel  you  are  getting  cool  ?  Then  wrap  your  face  in  your  mantle  to-night,  and 
flay :  "  Look  not  upon  me,  for  in  losing  my  zeal  I  am  black,  for  the  sun  hath  looked 
upon  me. "  Perhaps  it  has  affected  you  in  another  way,  for  the  sun  does  not  bring 
freckles  out  on  all  faces  in  the  same  place.  Perhaps  it  is  your  temper  that  ia 
grown  sour  ?  Sometimes  this  evU  of  sim-buming  will  come  in  the  shape  of  joy  taken 
away  from  the  heart  by  weariness.  I  do  not  think  any  of  us  are  weary  of  God's 
■work.  If  80,  we  never  were  called  to  it.  But  we  may  get  weary  in  it.  The  toil 
is  more  irksome  when  the  spirits  are  less  buoyant.  Well,  I  would  advise  you  to 
confess  this  before  God,  and  ask  for  a  medicine  to  heal  you.  You  had  need  get  youp 
joy  back,  but  first  you  must  acknowledge  that  you  have  lost  it.  Say,  "  I  am  black, 
because  the  sun  hath  looked  upon  me."  III.  The  most  watchful  Christian  is 
coNSCioiTS  OF  THE  DANGER  OF  SELF-NEGLECT.  "They  made  me  the  keeper  of  the 
vineyards ;  but  mine  own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept."  Solemnly,  let  me  speak  again 
to  my  brethren  who  are  seeking  to  glorify  Christ  by  their  lives.  I  met  some  time 
a,go  with  a  sermon  by  that  famous  divine,  Mr.  Henry  Melvill,  which  consists  all 
through  of  one  solitary  thought,  and  one  only  image  well  worked  out.  He  supposes 
a  man  to  be  a  guide  in  Switzerland.  It  is  his  duty  to  conduct  travellers  in  that 
country  through  the  sublime  passes,  and  to  point  out  to  them  the  glories  of  the 
scenery,  and  the  beauties  of  the  lakes,  and  streams,  and  glaciers,  and  hUls.  This 
man,  as  he  continues  in  his  office,  almost  inevitably  gets  to  repeat  his  descriptions 
as  a  matter  of  course ;  and  everybody  knows  how  a  guide  at  last  comes  to  '  *  talk 
book,"  and  just  iterate  words  which  do  not  awaken  any  corresponding  feeling  in  hia 
own  mind.  Yet  when  he  began,  perhaps  it  was  a  sincere  love  of  the  sublime  and  the 
beautiful  that  led  him  to  take  up  the  avocation  of  a  guide  ;  and  at  first  it  really  was 
to  him  a  luxury  to  impart  to  others  what  he  had  felt  amidst  the  glories  of  nature  ; 
but  as,  year  after  year,  to  hundreds  of  different  parties,  he  had  to  repeat  much  the 
flame  descriptions,  call  attention  to  the  same  sublimities,  and  indicate  the  same 
beauties,  it  is  almost  impossible  but  that  he  should  get  to  be  at  last  a  mere  machine. 
Through  the  hardening  tendency  of  custom,  and  the  debasing  influence  of  gain,  his 
»pti3st  descriptions  and  most  exquisite  eulogies  oome  to  be  of  no  greater  account  than 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

the  mere  language  of  a  hireling.  Every  worker  for  Christ  is  deeply  concerned  in  the 
application  of  this  parable  ;  because  the  peril  of  self-complacency  increases  in  pre- 
cisely the  same  ratio  as  the  zeal  of  proselytizing.  When  counselling  others,  you 
think  yourself  wise.  When  warning  others,  you  feel  yourself  safe.  When  judging 
others,  you  suppose  yourself  above  suspicion.  You  began  the  work  with  a  flush  of 
ardour  ;  it  may  be  with  a  fever  of  enthusiasm  ;  a  sacred  instinct  prompted,  a  glowing 

Sassion  moved  you.  How  will  you  continue  it  ?  Here  is  the  danger — the  fearful 
anger — lest  you  do  it  mechanically,  fall  into  a  monotony,  continue  in  the  same 
train,  and  use  holy  words  to  others  with  no  corresponding  feeling  in  your  own  soul. 
.IV.  The  most  conscientious  Christian  will  be  the  first  to  inquire  for  thb 
ANTIDOTE,  AND  TO  USE  THE  CURE.  What  is  the  cure  ?  The  cure  is  found  in  the 
verse  next  to  my  text.  See,  then,  you  workers,  if  you  want  to  keep  up  your  fresh- 
ness, and  not  to  get  blackened  by  the  sun  under  which  you  labour,  go  to  your  Lord 
again — go  and  talk  to  Him.  Aadress  Him  again  by  that  dear  name,  "  Thou  whom 
my  soul  loveth."  Ask  to  have  your  first  love  rekindled  ;  strive  after  the  love  of  your 
espousals.  Oh,  to  be  always  full  of  love  to  Him  !  You  will  never  get  any  hurt  by 
working  for  Him  then  ;  your  work  will  do  you  good.  The  sweat  of  labour  will  even 
make  your  face  the  fairer.  The  more  you  do  for  souls,  the  purer,  and  the  holier,  and 
the  more  Christlike  wiU  you  be,  if  you  do  it  with  Him.  Keep  up  the  habit  of  sitting 
at  His  feet,  like  Mary,  as  well  as  serving  Him  with  Martha.  You  can  keep  the  two 
together ;  they  will  balance  each  other,  and  you  shall  not  be  barren  or  unfruitful, 
neither  shall  you  fall  into  the  blackness  which  the  sun  is  apt  to  breed.  (C.  ff. 
Spurgeon.)  My  mother's  children  were  angry  with  me. — The  Church' s  enemies : — 
1.  The  greatest  enemies  of  the  Church  are  such  as  are  the  nearest  in  relation  unto 
her.  Where  there  is  the  greatest  sympathy,  when  divided,  turns  to  the  greatest 
antipathy.  Hereof  David  complaineth  (Ps.  IxLx.  9).  Such  was  the  enmity  of  Cain 
towards  Abel,  of  Esau  towards  Jacob,  of  Absalom  towards  David.  2.  The  greatest 
pretenders  to  religion  and  holiness,  prove  many  times  the  greatest  enemies  to  the 
same  (PhU.  iii.  5,  6).  Paul  had  a  zeal,  but  not  according  to  knowledge  ;  and  there- 
fore none  more  forward  to  persecute  the  saints  than  Paul ;  none  more  greater 
enemies  to  Christ  than  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  ;  none  more  opposite  to  the 
apostles  than  the  devout  Jew,  one  that  was  zealous  for  legal  observances.  3.  Those 
that  are  nearest  in  relation  to  the  saints,  and  those  that  pretend  most  holiness,  if 
such  prove  false  brethren,  they  afflict  and  hurt  the  saints  most  of  all.  (1)  Such  are 
most  apt  to  seduce  them,  and  draw  them  from  the  truth  (Acts  xx.  30).  Josephus, 
in  his  "  Book  of  Antiquities,"  reporteth  that  when  Jerusalem  was  besieged  by  the 
Komans,  the  Jews  received  more  damage  by  their  several  divisions  within  their  city 
than  from  the  Romans  without,  who  were  their  besiegers  :  so  a  false  brother  doth 
more  endanger  the  welfare  of  the  saints  than  an  open  enemy.  (2)  Such  as  are  false 
brethren  do  not  only  seduce  the  saints  but  grievously  afflict  them  ;  they  know  how 
to  strike  where  it  will  most  smart ;  they  know  the  conscience  to  be  the  most  tender 
place,  and  therefore  aim  to  oppress  that  most.  Julian  the  Apostate  did  the  saints 
more  hurt  than  any  persecutor  beside :  so  none  was  more  fit  to  betray  Christ  than 
Judas.  (3)  False  brethren  persecute  with  the  greatest  heat  and  indignation. 
Of  this  the  Church  complaineth  here:  "  My  mother's  sons  were  angiy  with  me," 
they  were  incensed  with  indignation,  and  with  burning  heat  and  choler ;  with 
wrath  and  envy  they  were  set  against  her.  {John  Rohotham. )  They  made  me  keeper 
of  the  vineyards;  but  my  own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept. — The  vineyard-keeper 
at  fault : — If  you  consider  the  bride  in  the  nuptial  song  to  be  the  Jewish  nation, 
then  the  text  is  a  confession,  that  while  witnessing  for  God  against  other  nations — 
idolatrous  nations — the  children  of  Abraham  had  not  considered  their  own  ways.  If 
you  take  the  bride  to  be  the  Church  of  Christ,  then  the  text  is  a  confession  that  while 
she  has  attended  to  her  mission  in  the  world,  she  has  forgotten  her  duty  to  herself. 
If  the  bride  be  the  individual  subject  of  Messiah's  kingdom,  then  the  text  is  an 
acknowledgment  that  benevolent  work  has  supplanted  personal  spiritual  cultivation. 
The  heart  of  a  Christian  is  redeemed  by  the  Saviour  for  God,  and  redeemed  v/nto 
God ;  and  that  heart  is  taken  possession  of  by  the  Holy  Ghost  that  it  may  bring 
forth  fruit  unto  God.  Now,  the  keeping  of  that  heart  by  God  Himself  is  essential 
to  prosperity  and  well-being  ;  but  there  is  a  something  also  which  God  requires  us 
to  do,  and  that  something  is  to  co-operate  with  His  ministrations  and  with  His  care 
of  us.  The  husbandman  breaks  up  the  clods  of  the  field  ;  he  casts  in  the  seed  ;  he 
treats  the  soil  as  the  soil  demands  ;  but  when  he  has  done  his  best  and  his  utmost, 
Providence  has  to  do  very  much.  Unless  rain  faU  and  the  sim  shine,  unless  the 
Source  of  life  give  life,  and  sustain  life,  the  husbandman  will  be  a  sower,  but  he  will 


CHAP.  1.]  TEE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON,  19 

never  be  a  reaper.  Just  so  ia  it  with  the  heart  of  a  Christian.  There  are  certain 
things  which  God  does  for  us,  and  then  God  saith  to  us,  *'  Now  work  out  your  own 
salvation  with  fear  and  trembling. "  You  see,  therefore,  the  point  to  which  I  want 
your  attention.  I.  What  is  this  complaint?  " Mine  own  vineyard  have  I  not 
kept."  The  spiritual  nature  of  a  godly  man  is  here  supposed  to  be  likened  to  a  vine- 
yard ;  and  it  is  like  to  a  vineyard  in  several  respects.  In  the  first  place  it  is 
a  soil  in  which  things  are  planted  and  sown ;  in  which  things  spring  up  and 
wither ;  in  which  things  grow  and  are  cut  down ;  in  which  things  bear 
fruit  and  are  barren  ;  in  which  things  live  and  die.  In  the  next  place  it 
is  a  sphere  affording  full  scope  for  exertion,  vigilance  and  skill.  In  the 
third  place  judicious  labour  secures  profit  and  reward.  And  in  the  last  place 
neglect  makes  evil  fertile,  and  brings  miserable  barrenness  of  good.  In  a  self- 
neglected  spirit  you  will  find  such  things  as  these — first  there  is  culpable  and 
mischievous  ignorance ;  also,  undigested  information  ;  words  about  things,  without 
the  ideas  of  things  ;  or  the  ideas  of  things  not  connected  or  classified.  You  wUl  also 
find  injurious  prejudices,  false  judgments,  vain  imaginations,  irregular  emotions,  an 
evil  conscience,  corrupt  motives  supposed  to  be  right  motives,  restlessness,  self- 
deception,  falsity  of  profession,  and  a  constant  going  back  from  good  and  from  true 
positions  which  the  individual  has  gained.  Such  an  one  will  not  be  like  the  man  who 
said,  "  I  keep  under  my  body,  and  bring  it  into  subjection."  He  will  have  no  idea 
of  self-crucifixion,  or  of  self-mortification.  You  will  not  discover  in  such  an  one 
power  in  prayer.  You  will  not  observe  in  such  a  case  judicious  and  successful  work. 
You  may  find  such  an  one  busy  ;  but  you  will  not  witness  in  this  case  judicious  and 
successful  labour.  Neither  will  you  find  profit  from  Divine  ordinances — rest  of  soul 
or  peace  of  mind.  The  witness  of  the  Spirit  with  such  a  man  will  not  be  distinct 
and  clear  ;  nor  will  you  behold  in  this  case  the  choicest  fruits  of  righteousness. 
' '  Mine  own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept. "  II.  The  cause  and  the  occasion  of  the 
EVIL  complained  OF.  You  know  the  distinction  between  the  cause  and  the  occa- 
sion. It  is  possible  to  keep  others'  vineyards,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  take  care 
of  our  own.  The  two  things  are  compatible.  We  are  quite  sure  they  may  be  done 
together,  because  God  requires  us  to  do  them  both.  The  cause  of  self-neglect,  there- 
fore, is  not  in  the  vineyard-keeping  for  others  ;  it  must  be  in  the  character  of  the 
individual  concerned.  But  where  in  the  individual  concerned  ?  It  may  be  in  false  ,  ^ 
views  of  a  state  of  salvation,  and  of  om:  personal  obligations.  Many  persons  who 
are  exceedingly  particular  about  doctrine,  and  who  tithe  their  mint,  and  anise,  and 
cummin,  as  respects  doctrinal  statements,  are  often  horridly  careless  with  reference 
to  practice  :  and  yet  if  there  be  not  religious  practice  in  those  who  embrace  religious 
truths,  tell  me  in  what  is  the  advantage  of  holding  true  doctrine  ?  The  cause  of  ,a 
neglecting  our  own  vineyards  is  to  be  found  also  in  excess  of  zeal  for  the  welfare  of  '  "^ 
others.  It  ia  to  be  found  in  false  amiability  and  accessibility  to  others.  It  is  to  be  , 
foimd  in  a  strong  taste  for  the  excitement  of  caring  for  others  ;  and  in  the  vanity 
which  prefers  the  position  of  keeper  of  the  vineyard  to  the  quiet  condition  of  attend- 
ing to  one's  own  vineyard.  These  few  remarks  will  show  the  cause — now  for  the 
occasion.  "  They  made  me."  "They."  A  great  deal  of  regions  and  benevolent  ,-ci 
work  is  done  evidently  as  unto  man,  and  not  as  unto  God.  You  ask  me  for  proof  of 
this — I  give  it  you  instantly.  The  proof  is  here.  If  the  leader  or  associate  of  some 
benevolent  religious  workers  offend  them,  they  wiU  throw  the  work  up  directly. 
What  does  this  prove  ?  It  proves  that  they  have  been  working  for  man,  and  not  for 
God.  If  men  work  simply  for  gratitude,  if  they  are  kind  to  each  other  simply 
expecting  thankfulness,  they  will  be  invariably  disappointed.  And  it  is  not  the 
prospect  of  thankfulness  from  others  that  should  ever  bind  you  to  doing  good  to 
men.  Never  look  even  for  gratitude,  but  do  good  to  another  for  the  sake  of  the 
blessed  God.  And  then  it  matters  very  little  what  the  man  you  serve  may  be,  how 
he  may  change,  either  towards  you  or  towards  othera,  you  will  be  able  to  cleave  to 
him,  not  for  his  own  sake,  but  for  his  God's  sake.  We  neglect  our  own  vineyards  i^' 
because  others  caU  us  away,  and  we  obey.  We  become  engrossed.  We  become  too 
ardent.  We  are  keeping  the  vineyards  of  others,  just,  perhaps,  that  it  may  be  said 
that  we  are  keeping  their  vineyards,  and  that  we  may  have  the  praise  of  the  fruit  of 
the  vineyard,  or  that  we  may  please  those  who  are  connected  with  the  vineyard.  The 
occasion  of  self-neglect  may  be  suggested  in  these  words:  "They  made  me  keeper 
of  the  vineyards."  (^S".  Martin,  M.A.)  The  unkept  vineyard;  or,  personal  work 
neglected : — We  are  all  pretty  ready  at  complaining,  especially  of  other  people.  Not 
much  good  comes  of  picking  holes  in  other  men's  characters ;  and  jet  many  ' 
spend  hours  in  that  unprofitable  occupation.     It  will  be  well  for  as,  at  this  time,  to 


be 


<i ' 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ctttf.  t 

let  our  complaint,  like  that  of  the  text,  deal  with  oorselTes.  I.  Firet,  then,  let  me 
begin  with  the  Christian  man  who  has  fokgotten  his  high  and  heavenly 
CALLING.  In  the  day  when  you  and  I  were  bom  again,  we  were  bom  for  God.  In 
the  day  when  we  were  quickened  by  the  Holy  Ghost  into  newness  of  life,  that  life 
was  bound  to  be  a  consecrated  one.  This  you  will  not  deny.  Christian,  you  admit 
that  you  have  a  high,  holy  and  heavenly  calling !  Now  let  us  look  back.  "We 
have  not  spent  our  fife  idly :  we  have  been  forced  to  be  keepers  of  the  vineyards. 
Even  in  Paradise  man  was  bidden  to  dress  the  garden.  There  is  something  to  be 
done  by  each  man,  and  specially  by  each  Christian  man.  Ask  yourself,  "  Am  I  an 
earnest  labourer  together  with  God,  or  am  I,  after  all,  only  a  laborious  trifler,  an 
industrious  doer  of  nothing,  working  hard  to  accomplish  no  purpose  of  the  sort  for 
which  I  ought  to  work,  since  I  ought  to  live  unto  my  Lord  alone  ?  "  To  a  very 
large  degree  we  have  not  been  true  to  our  own  professions :  our  highest  work  has 
been  neglected,  we;  have  not  kept  our  own  vineyards.  In  looking  back,  how  little 
time  has  been  spent  by  us  in  communion  with  God  I  How  little  a  part  of  our 
thoughts  has  been  occupied  with  meditation,  contemplation,  adoration,  and  other 
acts  of  devotion  !  How  little  have  we  surveyed  the  beauties  of  Christ,  His  person. 
His  work,  His  sufferings,  His  glory  1  Think  of  our  neglect  of  our  God,  and  see 
whether  it  is  not  true  that  we  nave  treated  Him  very  ill.  We  have  been  in  the 
shop,  we  have  been  on  the  exchange,  we  have  been  at  the  markets,  we  have  been  in 
the  fields,  we  have  been  in  the  public  libraries,  we  have  been  in  the  lecture-room,  we 
have  been  in  the  forum  of  debate  ;  but  our  own  closets  and  studies,  our  walk  with 
Grod,  and  our  fellowship  with  Jesus,  we  have  far  too  much  neglected.  Moreover,  the 
vineyard  of  holy  service  for  God  we  have  too  much  left  to  go  to  ruin.  I  would 
ask  you — How  about  the  work  your  God  has  called  you  to  do !  Men  are  dying ;  are 
^ou  saving  them  1  Might  not  manv  a  man  among  yon  say  to  himself,  "  I  have 
Deen  a  tauor,"  or  "I  have  been  a  snopkeeper,"  or  "I  have  been  a  mechanic,"  or 
"  I  have  been  a  merchant,"  or  "I  have  been  a  physician,  and  I  have  attended  to 

,.  these  callings  ;  but  mine  own  vineyard,  which  was  my  Master's,  which  I  was  bound 
to  look  to  &st  of  all,  I  have  not  kept "  I  Well,  now,  what  is  the  remedy  for  this  ? 
It  is  that  you  follow  up  the  next  verse  to  my  text.  Get  to  your  Lord,  and  in  Him 
you  win  find  recovery  from  your  neglects.  Ask  Him  where  He  feeds  His  flock,  and 
go  with  Him.  They  have  warm  hearts  who  commune  with  Christ.  They  are 
prompt  in  duty  who  enjoy  His  fellowship.     Hasten  to  your  Lord,  and  you  will  soon 

"^  begin  to  keep  your  vineyard  ;  for  in  the  Song  you  will  see  a  ha^py  change  effected. 
The  spouse  began  to  keep  her  vineyard  directly,  and  to  do  it  in  the  best  fashion. 
Within  a  very  short  time  you  find  her  saying,  "  Take  us  the  foxes,  the  little  foxes, 

'  that  spoil  the  vines."  See,  she  is  hunting  out  her  sins  and  her  follies.  Farther  on 
you  find  her  with  her  Lord  in  the  vineyard,  crying,  "  Awake,  0  north  wind ;  and 
come,  thou  south  ;  blow  upon  my  garden,  that  the  spices  thereof  may  flow  out ! " 
She  is  evidently  keeping  her  ^rden,  and  asking  for  heavenly  influences  to  make  the 
spices  and  flowers  yield  their  perfume.  She  went  down  to  see  whether  the  vines 
flourished,  and  the  pomegranates  budded.  Anon,  with  her  Beloved,  she  rises  early 
to  go  to  the  vineyard,  and  watch  the  growth  of  the  plants.  Farther  on  you  find  her 
talking  about  all  manner  of  fruits  that  she  has  laid  up  for  her  Beloved.  Thus  you 
see  that  to  walk  with  Christ  is  the  way  to  keep  your  vineyard,  and  serve  your  Lord. 
II.  Now  I  turn  to  the  man  who  in  any  place  has  taken  other  work  and 
NEGLECTED  HIS  OWN.  He  Can  use  the  words  of  the  text — "  They  made  me  the 
keeper  of  the  vineyards  ;  but  mine  own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept."  There  is  a  vine- 
yard that  a  great  many  neglect,  and  that  is  their  own  heart.  It  is  well  to  have 
talent ;  it  is  well  to  have  influence ;  but  it  is  better  to  be  right  within  yourself. 
What  is  your  character,  and  do  you  seek  to  cultivate  it  ?  Do  you  ever  use  the  hoe 
upon  those  weeds  which  are  so  plentiful  in  us  aU  f  Do  you  water  those  tiny  plants 
of  goodness  which  have  begun  to  grow  ?  Do  you  watch  them  to  keep  away  the  little 
foxes  which  would  destroy  them  ?     Now  think  of  another  vineyard.      Are  not  some 

^  people  neglecting  their  families  ?  Next  to  our  hearts,  our  households  are  the  vine- 
yards which  we  are  most  bound  to  cultivate.  It  is  shocking  to  find  men  and  women 
speaking  fluently  about  religion,  and  yet  their  houses  are  a  disgrace  to  Christianity. 
Besides  that,  every  man  who  knows  the  Lord  should  feel  that  his  vineyard  lies  also 
around  about  his  own  house.  If  God  has  saved  your  children,  then  try  to  do  some- 
thing for  your  neighbours,  for  your  workpeople,  for  those  with  whom  you  associate 
in  daily  labour.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vera.  7«  8.  Tell  me,  0  Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth,  where  Thou  feedest. — Th«  Good 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  SI 

Shepherdess : — The  bride  was  most  tmhappy  and  ashamed  because  her  personal  beanty 
had  been  sorely  marred  by  the  heat  of  the  snn.     The  fairest  among  women  had 
become  swarthy  as  a  siinbumt  slave.     Spiritually  it  ia  so  full  often  with  a  chosen 
soul.     The  Lord's  grace  has  made  her  fair  to  look  upon,  even  as  the  lUy ;  but  she 
has  been  so  busy  about  eartihly  things  that  the  sun  of  woridliness  has  injured  her 
beauty.    The  bride  with  holy  shamefacedness  exclaims,  "  Look  not  upon  me,  for  I 
am  black,  because  the  sun  hath  looked  upon  me."    This  is  one  index  of  a  gracious 
soul — that  whereas  the  ungodly  rush  to  and  fro,  and  know  not  where  to  look  for 
consolation,  the  believing  heart  naturally  flies  to  its  well-beloved  Saviour,  knowing 
that  in  Him  is  its  only  rest.     It  would  appear  from  the  preceding  verse  that  the 
bride  was  also  in  trouble  about  a  certain  charge  which  had  been  given  to  her,  which 
burdened  her,  and  in  the  discharge  of  which  she  had  become  negligent  of  herself. 
"Mine  own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept."    Under  this  sense  of  double  un worthiness 
and  failure,  feeling  her  omissions  and  her  commissions  to  be  weighing  her  down,  she 
turned  roimd  to  her  Beloved  suid  asked  instruction  at  His  hands.     This  was  welL 
Had  she  not  loved  her  Lord  she  would  have  shunned  Him  when  her  comeliness  was 
faded,  but  the  instincts  of  her  affectionate  heart  suggested  to  her  that  He  would  not 
discard  her  because  of  her  imperfections.    She  was,  moreover,  wise  thus  to  appeal  to 
her  Lord  against  herself.   Never  let  sin  part  you  from  Jesus.   Under  a  sense  of  sin  do 
not  fly  from  Him  ;  that  were  foolishness.   Sin  may  drive  you  from  Sinai ;  it  ought  to 
draw  you  to  Calvary.     I.  Here  is  A  question  asked.     Every  word  of  the  inquiry 
is  worthy  of  our  careful  meditation.     You  wiU  observe,  first,  concerning  it,  that  it 
is  asked  in  love.     She  caUa  Him  to  whom  she  speaks  by  the  endearing  title,  "O 
Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth."    Whatever  she  may  feel  herself  to  be,  she  knows  that 
she  loves  Him.    The  life  of  her  existence  is  bound  up  with  Him :  if  there  be  any 
force  and  power  and  vitality  in  her,  it  is  but  as  fuel  to  the  great  flame  of  her  love, 
which  bums  alone  for  Him.     Mark  well  that  it  is  not  "  0  Thou  whom  my  soul 
believes  in."    That  would  be  true,  but  she  has  passed  further.     It  is  not  "  0  Thou 
whom  my  soul  honours."    That  is  true  too,  but  she  has  passed  beyond  that  stage. 
Nor  is  it  merely  "  O  Thou  whom  my  soul  trusts  and  obeys."    She  is  doing  that,  but 
she  has  reached  something  warmer,  more  tender,  more  full  of  fire  and  enthusiasm, 
and  it  is  "  O  Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth."    The  question  therefore  becomes  instruc- 
tive to  U8,  because  it  is  addressed  to  Christ  under  a  most  endearing  title  ;  and  I  ask 
every  worker  here  to  take  care  that  he  always  does  his  work  in  a  spirit  of  love,  and 
always  regards  the  Lord  Jesus  not  as  a  taskmaster,  not  as  one  who  has  given  us  work 
to  do  from  which  we  would  fain  escape,  but  as  our  dear  Lord,  whom  to  serve  is  bliss, 
and  for  whom  to  die  is  gain.     "  0  Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth,"  is  the  right  name 
by  which  a  worker  for  Jesus  should  address  his  Lord.     Now  note  that  the  question, 
as  it  is  asked  in  love,  is  also  asked  of  Him.    "  Tell  me,  0  Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth, 
where  Thou  feedest."    She  asked  Him  to  tell  her,  as  if  she  feared  that  none  but 
Himself  would  give  her  the  correct  answer;  others  might  be  mistaken,  but  He 
could  not  be.     She  asked  of  Him  because  she  was  quite  sure  that  He  would  give 
her  the  kindest  answer.     Perhaps  she  felt  that  nobody  else  could  tell  her  as  He 
could,  for  others  speak  to  the  ear,  but  He  speaks  to  the  heart :  others  speak  with 
lower  degrees  of  influence,  we  hear  their  speech  but  are  not  moved  thereby ;  but 
Jesus  speaks,  and  the  Spirit  goes  with  every  word  He  utters,  and  therefore  we  hear 
to  profit  when  He  converses  with  us.     Now,  observe  what  the  question  is.    She 
wishes  to  know  how  Jesus  does  His  work,  and  where  He  does  it.     The  question 
seems  to  be  just  this  :  "  Lord,  tell  me  what  are  the  truths  with  which  Thou  dost 
feed  Thy  people's  souls ;  tell  me  what  are  the  doctrines  which  make  the  strong  ones 
weak  and  the  sad  ones  glad :  teU  me  what  is  that  precious  meat  which  Thou  art 
wont  to  give  to  himgry  and  fainting  spirits,  to  revive  them  and  keep  them  alive  ;  for 
if  Thou  teU  me,  then  I  will  give  my  flock  the  same  food :  teU  me  where  the  pasture 
is  wherein  Thou  dost  feed  Thy  sheep,  and  straightway  I  will  lead  mine  to  the  self- 
same happy  fields.     Then  tell  me  how  Thou  makest  Thy  people  to  rest.     What  are 
those  promises  which  Thou  dost  apply  to  the  consolation  of  their  spirit,  so  that 
their  cares  and  doubts  and  fears  and  agitations  aU  subside?     Thou  hast  sweet 
meadows  where  Thou  makest  Thy  beloved  flock  to  lie  calmly  down  and  slumber,  tell 
me  where  those  meadows  are  that  I  may  go  and  fetch  the  flock  committed  to  my 
charge,  the  mourners  whom  I  ought  to  comfort,  the  distressed  ones  whom  I  am 
bound  to  relieve,  the  desponding  whom  I  have  endeavoured  to  encourage  ;  tell  me. 
Lord,  where  Thou  makest  Thy  flock  to  lie  down,  for  then,  under  Thy  help,  I  will 
go  and  make  my  flock  to  lie  down  too.    It  is  for  myself,  but  yet  far  more  for  others, 
that  I  ask  the  question,  '  Tell  me  where  Thou  feedest,  where  Thou  makest  them  to 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. ' 

rest  at  noon.' "  We  would  know  the  groves  of  promise  and  the  cool  streams  of  peace, 
that  we  may  lead  others  into  rest.  If  we  can  follow  Jesus  we  can  guide  others,  and 
so  both  we  and  they  will  find  comfort  and  peace.  That  is  the  meaning  of  the  request 
before  us.  II.  Here  is  AN  argument  used.  The  bride  says,  "  Why  should  I  be 
as  one  that  tumeth  aside  by  the  flocks  of  Thy  companions  ? "  If  she  should  lead 
her  flock  into  distant  meadows,  far  away  from  the  place  where  Jesus  is  feeding  Hia 
flock,  it  would  not  be  well.  She  speaks  of  it  as  a  thing  most  abhorrent  to  her 
mind,  and  well  might  it  be.  For,  first,  would  it  not  look  very  unseemly  that  the 
bride  should  be  associating  with  others  than  the  Bridegroom  ?  They  have  each  a 
flock :  there  is  He  with  Hia  great  flock,  and  here  is  she  with  her  little  one.  Shall 
they  seek  pastures  far  ofi"  from  one  another  ?  Will  there  not  be  talk  about  this  ? 
Will  not  onlookers  say,  "  This  is  not  seemly  :  there  must  be  some  lack  of  love  here, 
or  else  these  two  would  not  be  so  divided  "  ?  Stress  may  be  put,  if  you  like,  upon 
that  little  word  "I."  Why  should  /,  Thy  blood-bought  spouse  ;  I,  betrothed  unto 
Thee,  or  ever  the  earth  was,  I,  whom  Thou  hast  loved, — why  should  I  turn  after 
others  and  forget  Thee  %  Our  hearts  may  grow  unchaste  to  Christ  even  while  they 
are  zealous  in  Christian  work.  I  dread  very  much  the  tendency  to  do  Christ's  work 
in  a  cold,  mechanical  spirit  ;  but  above  even  that  I  tremble  lest  I  should  be  able  to 
have  warmth  for  Christ's  work  and  yet  should  be  cold  towards  the  Lord  Himself. 
Beware  of  that  1  Love  your  work,  but  love  your  Master  better  ;  love  your  flock, 
but  love  the  great  Shepherd  better  still,  and  ever  keep  close  to  Him,  for  it  will  be  a 
token  of  unfaithfulness  if  you  do  not.  And  mark  again,  "  Why  should  I  be  as  one 
that  tumeth  aside  by  the  flocks  of  Thy  companions  ?  "  We  may  read  this  as  mean- 
ing, "  Why  should  I  be  so  imhappy  as  to  have  to  work  for  Thee,  and  yet  be  out  of 
communion  with  Thee  1 "  It  is  a  very  unhappy  thing  to  lose  fellowship  with  Jesus, 
and  yet  to  have  to  go  on  with  religious  exercises.  If  the  wheels  are  taken  off'  your 
chariot  it  is  no  great  matter  if  nobody  wants  to  ride,  but  how  if  you  are  called  upon 
to  drive  on  I  When  a  man's  foot  is  lamed  he  may  not  so  much  regret  it  if  he  can 
sit  still,  but  if  he  be  bound  to  run  a  race  he  is  greatly  to  be  pitied.  It  made  the 
spouse  doubly  unhappy  even  to  suppose  that  she,  with  her  flock  to  feed  and  herself 
needing  feeding  too,  should  have  to  tiim  aside  by  the  flocks  of  others  and  miss  the 
presence  of  her  Lord.  Above  all,  should  we  not  try  to  live  as  a  church,  and  indi- 
vidually, also,  in  abiding  fellowship  with  Jesus  ;  for  if  we  turn  aside  from  Him  we 
shall  rob  the  truth  of  its  aroma,  yea,  of  its  essential  fragrance.  If  we  lose  fellow- 
ship with  Jesus  we  shall  have  the  standard,  but  where  will  be  the  standard-bearer  % 
We  may  retain  the  candlestick,  but  where  shall  be  the  light  ?  We  shall  be  shorn  of 
our  strength,  of  our  joy,  our  comfort,  our  all,  if  we  miss  fellowship  with  Him.  God 
grant,  therefore,  that  we  may  never  be  as  those  who  turn  aside.  III.  We  have  here 
AN  ANSWER  GIVEN  by  the  Bridegroom  to  His  beloved.  She  asked  Him  where  He 
fed,  where  He  made  His  flock  to  rest,  and  He  answered  her.  Observe  carefully  that 
this  answer  is  given  in  tenderness  to  her  infirmity  ;  not  ignoring  her  ignorance,  but 
dealing  very  gently  with  it.  "  If  thou  know  not" — a  hint  that  she  ought  to  have 
known,  but  such  a  hint  as  kind  lovers  give  when  they  would  fain  forbear  to  chide. 
The  Lord  forgives  our  ignorance,  and  condescends  to  instruct  it.  Note  next  that 
the  answer  is  given  in  great  love.  He  says,  "0  thou  fairest  among  women."  That 
is  a  blessed  cordial  for  her  distress.  She  said,  "I  am  black"  ;  but  He  says,  "  0 
thou  fairest  among  women."  I  would  rather  trust  Christ's  eyes  than  mine.  If  my 
eyes  tell  me  I  am  black  I  wiU  weep,  but  if  He  assures  me  I  am  fair  I  will  believe 
Him  and  rejoice.  As  the  artist,  looking  on  the  block  of  marble,  sees  in  the  stone 
the  statue  which  he  means  to  fetch  out  of  it  with  matchless  skill,  so  the  Lord  Jesus 
sees  the  perfect  image  of  Himself  in  us,  from  which  He  means  to  chip  away  the 
imperfections  and  the  sins  until  it  stands  out  in  all  its  splendour.  But  still  it  is 
gracious  condescension  which  makes  Him  say,  "  Thou  art  fairest  among  women,"  to 
one  who  mourned  her  own  sunburnt  countenance.  The  answer  contains  much  sacred 
wisdom.  The  bride  is  directed  where  to  go  that  she  may  find  her  Beloved  and  lead 
her  flock  to  Him.  "  Go  thy  way  forth  by  the  footprints  of  the  flock."  If  thou 
wilt  find  Jesus,  thon  wilt  find  Him  in  the  way  the  holy  prophets  went,  in  the  way 
of  the  patriarchs  and  the  way  of  the  apostles.  And  if  thou  dost  desire  to  find  thy 
flock,  and  to  make  them  lie  down,  very  well,  go  thou  and  feed  them  as  other  shep- 
herds have  done — Christ's  own  shepherds  whom  He  has  sent  in  other  days  to  feed 
ffis  chosen.  Make  the  Lord  Jesus  your  model  and  example  ;  and  by  treadling  where 
the  footprints  of  the  flock  are  to  be  seen,  you  wiU  both  save  yourself  and  them  that 
hear  you ;  you  shall  find  Jesus,  and  they  shall  find  Jesus  too.  Then  the  spouse 
addet^  "Feed  thy  kids  beside  the  shepherds'  tents."    Now,  who  are  these  shep-  i 


CHAP.  1.]  TEE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON".  23 

herds  ?  Let  me  take  you  to  the  twelve  principal  shepherds  who  came  after  the 
great  Shepherd  of  aU.  You  want  to  bless  your  children,  to  save  their  souls,  and 
have  fellowship  with  Christ  in  the  doing  of  it ;  then  teach  them  the  truths  which 
the  apostles  taught.  And  what  were  they  ?  Take  Paul  as  an  example.  "  I  deter- 
mined not  to  know  anything  among  you  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified." 
That  is  feeding  the  kids  beside  the  shepherds'  tents,  when  you  teach  your  children 
Christ,  much  of  Christ,  all  of  Christ,  and  nothing  else  but  Christ.  Mind  you  stick 
to  that  blessed  subject.  And  when  you  are  teaching  them  Christ,  teach  them  all 
about  His  life,  His  death.  Bis  resurrection  ;  teach  them  His  Godhead  and  Hia 
manhood.  Preach  regeneration.  Let  it  be  seen  how  thorough  the  change  is,  that 
we  may  glorify  God's  work.  Preach  the  final  perseverance  of  the  saints.  Teach 
that  the  Lord  is  not  changeable — casting  away  His  people,  loving  them  to-day  and 
hating  them  to-morrow.  Preach  in  fact,  the  doctrines  of  grace  as  you  find  them  in 
the  Book.  Feed  them  beside  the  shepherds'  tents.  Aye,  and  feed  the  kids  there — 
the  little  children.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  dialogue: — It  is  the  Church  addressing 
her  Lord  :  it  is  the  condescending  Saviour  giving  in  reply  the  instruction  required. 

1.  The  Church  addresses  heb  Lord.  1.  A  conscious  love  to  her  best  friend. 
(1)  The  Church  loves  Him  for  His  personal  excellence.  (2)  The  Church  loves  Him 
for  His  condescending  gifts.     (3)  The  Church  loves  Him  for  His  precious  promises, 

2.  A  dread  of  swerving  from  her  loyalty  to  Him.  "Why  should  I  be  as  one  that 
tnmeth  aside,"  etc.  Christ  has  many  rivals  :  and  that,  not  only  in  hearts  which 
"the  god  of  this  world  hath  blinded,  '  but  even  in  those  of  His  faithful  followers. 
The  spiritual  Christian  is  aware  that  there  are  such  rivals.  He  knows  how  ensnaring 
they  are — how  feeble  and  treacherous  his  own  heart  is.  3.  An  anxious  petition  for 
His  pastoral  care.  "  Tell  me  where  Thou  feedest,"  etc.  A  true  believer  needs  food 
for  his  soul ;  something  to  nourish  and  strengthen  him  in  the  exercise  of  that 
spiritual  life.  And  it  is  to  Christ  that  He  looks  for  it — "Tell  me  where  Thou 
feedest,"  that  I  may  "go in  and  out,  and  find  pasture."  He  needs  rest  to  his  soul 
— peace  from  the  war  in  his  members — victory  over  the  world,  whether  it  allure  or 
terrify  him.  And  because  Jesus  has  invited  "aU  them  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden,"  he  "comes";  "Tell  me  where  Thou  makest  Thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon. 
II.  The  condescending  Saviour  replies.  1.  A  gentle  reproof :  "If  thou  know 
not."  They  who  know  so  much  of  Christ,  as  the  petition  implies,  already  possess 
the  means  of  knowing  more.  But  they  are  apt  to  forget  their  past  experience  of 
His  care,  and  of  the  way  in  which  they  sought  and  found  it,  and  impatiently  desire 
some  new  and  unusual  means  to  be  employed  for  their  consolation.  Then  He  will 
gently  reprove — "  How  I  knowest  thou  not  ?  if  I  be  not  a  Saviour  to  others,  yet 
doubtless  I  am  to  thee  1 "  2.  An  expression  of  endearment :  "0  thou  fairest  among 
women  I  "  Has  He,  then,  forgotten  that  we  are  "  conceived  in  sin  "  and  "  shapen  in 
iniquity  "  ?  He  sees,  moreover,  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  which  He  Himself  bestows 
upon  His  children  ;  imperfect,  indeed,  but  genuine — variable,  but  progressive — 
resisted  by  the  flesh,  but  gradually  victorious  over  it.  3.  A  significant  reference. 
Certain  questions  had  been  asked :  the  Saviour  will  not  give  a  direct  answer,  but 
refers  the  questioner  to  those  who  could  satisfy  the  inquiry.  ' '  Go  thy  way  forth  by 
the  footsteps  of  the  flock,"  etc.  (1)  Christ  will  have  His  people  to  be  helpers  of 
each  other's  faith,  hope,  and  love.  (2)  Christ  puts  especial  honour  upon  His  own 
ordinance,  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel ;  and  upon  His  ministers  in  that  excellent 
work.  He  is  Hmaself  "the  Chief  Shepherd  "  ;  yet  the  tents  of  His  under-shepherds 
must  also  be  frequented,  {J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  Church's  love  to  her  loving  Lord : — 
I.  We  commence  with  THE  title  :  "  0  Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth."  It  is  well  to  be 
able  to  call  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  this  name  without  an  "if,"  or  a  "but." 
Learn  to  get  that  positive  knowledge  of  your  love  to  Jesus,  and  be  not  satisfied  till 
you  can  talk  about  your  interest  in  Him  as  a  reality,  which  you  have  made  infalUbly 
sure  by  having  received  the  witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  His  seal  upon  your  soul 
by  faith,  that  you  are  bom  of  God,  and  belong  to  Chmt.  Speaking,  then,  of  this 
title  which  rings  the  great  beU  of  love  to  Jesus,  let  us  notice  fia-st  the  cause,  and 
secondly  the  efiect  of  that  love.  1.  If  we  can  look  into  the  face  of  Him  who  once 
sweat  great  drops  of  blood,  and  call  Him,  "0  Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth,"  it  is 
interesting  to  consider  what  is  the  cause  of  our  love.  And  here  our  reply  is  very 
quick.  The  efiBcient  cause  of  our  love  is  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  Why  do  we  love 
Jesus  1  We  have  the  best  of  answers — because  He  first  loved  us.  Moreover,  we 
have  another  reason.  I  trust  many  here  can  say  that  they  love  the  Saviour  because 
of  His  present  dealings  towards  them.  What  has  He  not  done  for  us  this  veiy  day  ? 
He  has  made  us  glad ;  our  spirits  have  leaped  for  very  joy,  for  He  hath  turned  again 

23 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  captivity  of  our  soul.  Nor  is  this  all.  "We  love  the  Saviour  because  of  the 
excellency  oi  His  person.  We  are  not  blind  to  excellence  anywhere,  but  still  we 
can  see  no  excellence  like  His.  2.  I  shall  now  for  a  short  time  speak  on  the  effecta 
of  this  love,  as  we  have  dwelt  on  the  cause  of  it.  When  a  man  has  true  love  to 
Christ,  it  is  sure  to  lead  him  to  dedication.  There  is  a  natural  desire  to  give  some- 
thing to  theperson  whom  we  love,  and  true  love  to  Jesus  compels  us  to  give  ourselves 
to  Him.  Wnen  the  pupils  of  Socrates  had  nearly  all  of  them  given  him  a  present, 
there  was  one  of  the  best  scholars  who  was  extremely  poor,  and  he  said  to  Socratee, 
' '  I  have  none  of  these  things  which  the  others  have  presented  to  thee ;  but,  O 
Socrates,  I  give  thee  myself"  ;  whereupon  Socrates  said  it  was  the  best  present  he 
had  had  that  day.  "My  son,  give  Me  thy  heart " — this  is  what  Jesus  asks  for. 
True  love  next  snows  itself  in  obedience.  If  I  love  Jesus,  I  shall  do  as  He  bids 
me.  He  is  my  Husband,  my  Lord — I  call  Him  "Master."  "  If  ye  love  Me,"  saith 
He,  "keep  My  commandments."  True  love,  again,  is  always  considerate  and 
afraid  lest  it  should  give  offence.  It  walks  very  daintily.  If  I  love  Jesus,  I 
ehaU  watch  my  eye,  my  heart,  my  tongue,  my  hand,  being  so  fearful  lest  I  should 
■wake  my  beloved,  or  make  Him  stir  until  He  please  ;  and  I  shall  be  sure  not  to  take 
in  those  bad  guests,  those  ill-favoured  guests  of  pride  and  sloth,  and  love  of  the 
world.  Again,  true  love  to  Christ  will  make  us  very  jealous  of  His  honour.  As 
Queen  Eleanor  went  down  upon  her  knees  to  suck  the  poison  from  her  husband's 
wound,  so  we  shall  put  our  hps  to  the  wound  of  Christ  when  He  has  been  stabbed 
with  the  dagger  of  calumny,  or  inconsistency,  being  willing  sooner  to  take  the 
poison  ourselves,  and  to  be  ourselves  diseased  and  despised  than  that  His  name, 
His  cross,  should  suffer  ilL  Oh,  what  matters  it  what  oecomes  of  us,  if  the  King 
reigneth  I  If  we  love  Christ,  again,  we  shall  be  desiring  to  promote  His  cause,  and 
we  shall  be  desiring  to  promote  it  ourselves.  We  shall  wish  to  see  the  strength  of 
the  mighty  turned  at  the  gate,  that  King  Jesus  may  rehim  triumphant ;  we  shall 
not  wish  to  sit  still  while  our  brethren  go  to  war,  but  we  shall  want  to  take  our 
portion  in  the  fray,  that  like  soldiers  that  love  their  monarch,  we  may  prove  by  our 
woimds  and  by  our  sufferings  that  our  love  is  real.  The  apostle  says,  ' '  Let  us  not 
love  in  word  only  but  in  deed  and  in  truth."  Actions  speaks  louder  than  words, 
and  we  shall  always  be  anxious  to  tell  our  love  in  deeds  as  well  as  by  our  lips.  And 
once  again,  if  we  love  Jesus  we  shall  be  willing  to  suffer  for  Him.  Darkness  is  light 
about  us  if  we  can  serve  Him  there.  II.  The  second  point  of  consideration  is  thb 
DESiBS  OF  THB  Chxtrch  aftbe  Chkist  Jesus  ottk  Lokd  :  having  called  Him  by 
His  title,  she  now  expresses  her  longing  to  be  with  Him.  "  Tell  me,  0  Thou  whom 
my  soul  loveth,  where  Thou  feedest."  The  desire  of  a  renewed  soul  is  to  find  out 
Christ  and  to  be  with  Him.  Stale  meats  left  over  from  yesterday  are  very  well  when 
there  is  nothing  else,  but  who  does  not  like  hot  food  fresh  from  the  fire !  And  past 
communion  with  Christ  is  very  well.  "  I  remember  Thee  from  the  land  of  the 
Hermonites  and  the  hill  Mizar ; "  but  these  are  only  stale  meats,  and  a  loving  soul 
wants  fresh  food  every  day  from  the  table  of  Christ,  and  you  that  have  once  had  the 
kisses  of  His  mouth,  though  you  remember  the  past  kisses  with  delight,  yet  want 
daily  fresh  tokens  of  His  love.  A  true  loving  soul,  then,  wants  present  communion 
with  Christ ;  so  the  question  is,  •'  Tell  me  where  Thou  feedest  ?  Where  dost  Thou 
get  Thy  comfort  from,  0  Jesu  ?  I  will  go  there.  Where  do  Thy  thoughts  go  ?  To 
Thy  cross  ?  Dost  Thou  look  back  to  that  ?  Then  I  vnll  go  there.  Where  Thou 
feedest,  there  will  I  feed."  Or  does  this  mean  actively,  instead  of  being  in  the 
passive  or  the  neuter  ?  Where  dost  Thou  feed  Thy  flock  ?  In  Thy  house  ?  I  will 
go  there,  if  I  may  find  Thee  there.  In  private  prayer  ?  Then  I  will  not  be  slack  in 
that.  In  the  Word  ?  Tell  me  where  Thou  feedest,  for  wherever  Thou  standest  as  the 
Shepherd,  there  will  I  be,  for  I  want  Thee.  I  cannot  be  satisfied  to  be  apart  from 
Thee.  My  soul  hungers  and  thirsts  to  be  with  Thee.  She  puts  it  again,  "  Where 
dost  Thou  make  Thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon,"  for  there  is  only  rest  in  one  place,  where 
Thou  causest  Thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon.  She  wants  to  get  away  to  hold  quiet  com- 
munion with  her  Lord,  for  He  is  the  brook  where  the  weary  may  lave  their  wearied 
limbs  ;  He  is  that  sheltered  nook,  that  shadow  of  the  great  rock  in  the  weary  land 
where  His  people  may  lie  down  and  be  at  peace.  III.  The  argument  used  by 
THE  Chttrch.  She  says,  "  Why  should  I  be  as  one  that  turneth  aside  by  the  flocks 
of  Thy  companions  ? "  Thou  hast  plenty  of  companions — why  should  1  be  turned 
aside  ?  Why  should  I  not  be  one  ?  Let  us  talk  it  over.  Why  should  I  lose  my 
Lord's  presence  ?  But  the  devil  tells  me  I  am  a  great  sinner.  Ah !  but  it  is  all 
washed  away,  and  gone  for  ever.  That  cannot  separate  me,  for  it  does  not  exist. 
My  sin  is  buried.    The  devil  tells  me  I  am  unworthy,  and  that  is  a  reason.     But  I 


CHAP.  1.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


always  was  tmworthy,  and  yet  it  was  no  reason  why  He  should  not  love  me  at  first, 
and  therefore  cannot  be  a  reason  why  I  should  not  have  fellowship  with  Him  now. 
"Why  should  /  be  left  out  ?  Why  should  I  be  tamed  aside  ?  I  am  equally  bought 
with  a  price.  I  cost  Him,  in  order  to  save  me,  as  much  as  the  noblest  of  the  saints ; 
He  bought  them  with  blood ;  He  could  not  buy  me  with  less.  {C.  E.  Sptirgeon.) 
The  love  of  the  Redeemer  and  the  redeemed: — I.  The  relation  which   Christ 

SUSTAINS  TO     US  AS  THE    SHEPHERD  OF    OUR  SOULS.      II.  ThE    WARM    AFFECTIOK 

WHICH  Christ's  relation  to  us  inspires.  "Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth." 
III.  The  special  manifestation  of  His  favour  for  which  our  affection 
PLEADS.  "Tell  me  where  Thou  feedest,  where  Thou  makest  Thy  flock  to  rest  at 
noon."  It  is  a  perfectly  legitimate  thing  to  desire  a  close,  personal  intimacy  with 
our  Saviour.  There  is  no  virtue  in  spiritual  timidity.  We  ought  not  to  be  contented 
with  a  dwarfed  and  maimed  Christianity,  with  an  imperfect  righteousness  or  a  dis- 
turbed peace.  In  everything  we  should  seek  to  attain  the  highest  and  do  the  best. 
And  if  Christ  be  a  Saviour  at  all,  we  ought  to  desire  His  best  and  choicest  blessings. 
If  He  welcomes  us  in  our  sin  and  sorrow.  He  will  not  spurn  our  endeavours  to  be 
always  near  Him.  If,  however,  we  are  to  reach  this  height,  we  must  take  the  course 
indicated  in  our  text.  We  rise  by  earnest  and  fervent  prayer.  "Tell  me  where 
Thou  feedest."  To  receive  we  must  ask  ;  to  find  we  must  seek  ;  to  have  the  door 
opened  to  us  we  must  knock.  The  receiving  of  this  blessing  must  be  made  a  direct 
and  specific  aim.  IV.  The  satisfaction  and  delight  such  a  manifestation 
OF  our  Lord's  favour  will  bring.  "Why  should  I  be  as  one  that  tumeth 
•side  by  the  flocks  of  Thy  companions  ? "    I  need  scarcely  remind  you  how  in  actual 

life  other  lords  than  Christ  claim  to  rule  over  us.     {J.  Sttiart.)    Love  to  Jesus : 

I.  First,  then,  the  loving  title  of  our  text  is  to  be  considered  as  expressing  rhetoric 
OF  the  lip.    The  text  calleth  Christ,  "  Thou  whom  my  soul  lovetii."    Let  us  take 
this  title  and  dissect  it  a  little.     One  of  the  first  things  which  wiU  strike  us 
when  we  come  to  look  upon  it,  is  the  reality  of  the  love  which  is  here  expressed. 
Eeality,  I  say  ;  understanding  the  term  "  real,   not  in  contradistinction  to  that  which 
is  lying  and  fictitious,  but  in  contrast  to  that  which  is  shadowy  and  indistinct. 
Suppose  an  infant  taken  away  from  its  mother,  and  you  should  seek  to  foster  in  it  a 
love  to  the  parent  by  constantly  picturing  before  it  the  idea  of  a  mother, — and 
attempting  to  give  it  the  thought  of  a  mother's  relation  to  the  child.     Indeed,  I 
think  you  would  have  a  difficult  task  to  fix  in  that  child  the  true  and  real  love 
which  it  ought  to  bear  towards  her  who  bore  it.     But  give  that  child  a  mother  ;  let 
it  hang  upon  that  mother's  real  breast ;  let  it  derive  its  nourishment  from  her  very 
heart :  let  it  see  that  mother ;  feel  that  mother ;  put  its  little  arms  about  that 
mother's  real  n«jk  andyou  have  no  hard  task  to  make  it  love  its  mother.    So  is  it 
with  the  Christian.     We  want  Christ — not  an  abstract,  doctrinal,  pictured  Christ — 
but  a  real  Christ.    It  is  not  the  idea  of  disinterestedness ;  it  is  not  the  idea  of 
devotion ;   it  is  not  the  idea  of  self-consecration  that  will  ever  make  the  Ohuioh 
mighty:  it  must  be  that  idea  incarnate,  consolidated,  personified  in  the  actual 
existence  of  a  realized  Christ  in  the  camp  of  the  Lord's  host.     I  do  pray  for  you,  and 
pray  yon  for  me,  that  we  may  each  one  of  us  have  a  love  which  realizes  Christ,  and 
which  can  address  Him  as  "  Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth."    But,  again,  look  at  the 
text  and  you  will  perceive  another  thing  very  clearly.    The  Church,  m  the  expression 
which  she  uses  concerning  Christ,  speaks  not  only  with  a  realization  of  His  presence, 
but  with  a  firm  assurance  of  her  own  love.     Many  of  you,  who  do  really  love  Christ, 
can  seldom  get  further  than  to  say,  "  0  Thou  whom  my  soul  desires  to  love  !    0  Thou 
whom  I  hope  I  love  I "    But  this  sentence  saith  not  so  at  all.     This  title  hath  not 
the  shadow  of  a  doubt  or  a  fear  upon  it :  "0  Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth  !  "    Is  it 
not  a  happy  thing  for  a  child  of  God  when  he  knows  that  he  loves  Christ  ?  when  he 
can  speak  of  it  as  a  matter  of  consciousness  ? — a  thing  out  of  which  he  is  not  to  be 
argued  by  all  the  reasonings  of  Satan  ? — a  thing  concerning  which  he  can  put  his  hand 
npon  his  heart,  and  appeal  to  Jesus  and  say,  "  Lord,  Thou  knowest  all  things.  Thou 
knowest  that  I  love  thee  "  ?    Now,  notice  something  else  equally  worthy  of  our 
attention.    The  Church,  the  spouse,  in  thus  speaking  of  her  Lord,  thus  directs  our 
thoughts  not  merely  to  her  confidence  of  lo\ . .  but  to  the  unity  of  her  aifections  with 
regard  to  Christ.     She  hath  not  two  lovers,  she  hath  but  one.     She  doth  not  say, 
"  0  ye  on  whom  my  heart  is  set  !  "  but  "  0  Thou  !  "    She  hath  but  one  after  whom 
her  heart  is  panting.     She  has  gathered  her  affections  into  one  bundle,  she  hath 
made  them  but  one  affection,  and  then  she  hath  cast  that  bundle  of  myrrh  and  spices 
npon  the  breast  of  Christ.     He  is  to  her  the  "Altogether  Lovely,"  the  gathering  up 
of  all  the  loves  which  once  strayed  abroad.     She  has  put  before  the  sun  of  her  heart 


2«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.i. 

a  burning-glass,  whicli  has  brought  all  her  love  to  a  focus,  and  it  is  all  concentrated 
with  all  its  heat  and  vehemence  upon  Christ  Jesus  Himself.  Come,  do  we  love 
Christ  after  this  fashion  ?  Do  we  love  Him  so  that  we  can  say,  "Compared  with  our 
love  to  Jesus,  all  other  loves  are  but  as  nothing  "  ?  If  you  will  look  at  the  title  before 
us,  you  will  have  to  leam  not  only  its  reality,  its  assurance,  its  unity ;  but  you  will 
have  to  notice  its  constancy,  "0  Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth."    Not,  "did  love 

f'esterday;"  or,  "may  begin  to  love  to-morrow;"  but,  "Thou  whom  my  soul 
oveth," — "Thou  whom  I  have  loved  ever  since  I  knew  Thee,  and  to  love  whom  has 
become  as  necessary  to  me  as  my  vital  breath  or  my  native  air. "  The  true  Christian 
is  one  who  loves  Christ  for  evermore.  In  our  text  you  will  clearly  perceive  a 
vehemence  of  affection.  The  spouse  saith  of  Christ,  "  0  Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth." 
She  means  not  that  she  loves  Him  a  little,  that  she  loves  Him  with  an  ordinary 
passion,  but  that  she  loves  Him  in  all  the  deep  sense  of  that  word.  Oh  !  you  should 
see  Love  when  she  hath  her  heart  full  of  her  Saviour's  presence,  when  she  cometh  out 
of  her  chamber  1  Indeed,  she  is  like  a  giant  refreshed  with  new  wine.  I  have  seen 
her  dash  down  difficulties,  tread  upon  hot  irons  of  affliction  and  her  feet  have  not 
been  scorched  ;  I  have  seen  her  lift  up  her  spear  against  ten  thousand,  and  she  has 
slain  them  at  one  time.  I  have  known  her  give  up  all  she  had,  even  to  the  stripping 
of  herself,  for  Christ ;  and  yet  she  seemed  to  grow  richer,  and  to  be  decked  with 
ornaments  as  she  unarrayed  herself,  that  she  might  cast  her  all  upon  her  Lord,  and 
give  up  all  to  Him.  Do  you  know  this  love,  Christian  brethren  and  sisters  ?  II.  Now 
let  me  come  to  the  liOGic  of  thb  heart,  which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  text.  My 
heart,  why  shouldest  thou  love  Christ  ?  With  what  argument  wilt  thou  justify 
thyself?  Our  hearts  give  for  their  reason  why  they  love  Him,  first,  this:  We  love 
Him  for  His  infinite  loveliness.  When  you  see  Christ  you  look  up,  but  you  do  more, 
you  feel  drawn  up ;  you  do  not  admire  so  much  as  love  ;  you  do  not  adore  so  much 
as  embrace  ;  His  character  enchants,  subdues,  o'erwhelms,  and  with  the  irresistible 
impulse  of  its  own  sacred  attraction — it  draws  your  spirit  right  up  to  Him.  But 
still,  love  hath  another  argument  why  she  loveth  Christ,  namely,  Christ's 
love  to  her.  One  more  reason  does  love  give  us  yet  more  powerful  still.  Love 
feels  that  she  must  give  herself  to  Christ,  because  of  Christ's  suffering  for  her. 
This  is  love's  logic.  I  may  well  stand  here  and  defend  the  believer's  love  to  his 
Lord.  I  wish  I  had  more  to  defend  than  I  have.  I  dare  stand  here  and  defend 
the  utmost  extravagancies  of  speech,  and  the  wildest  fanaticisms  of  action,  when 
they  have  been  done  for  love  to  Christ.  I  say  again,  I  only  wish  I  had  more  to 
defend  in  these  degenerate  times.  Has  a  man  given  up  all  for  Christ  1  I  will 
prove  him  wise  if  he  has  given  up  for  such  an  one  as  Christ  is.  Has  a  man  died 
for  Christ  ?  I  write  over  his  epitaph  that  he  surely  was  no  fool  who  had  but  the 
wisdom  to  give  up  his  heart  for  one  who  had  His  heart  pierced  for  him.  III.  Rhetoric 
is  good,  logic  is  better,  but  a  positive  demonstration  is  the  best.  Let  the  world 
see  that  this  is  not  a  mere  label  to  you — a  label  for  something  that  does  not  exist, 
but  that  Christ  really  is  to  you  "  Him  whom  your  soul  loves."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Heavenly  Food : — First  of  all,  we  find  in  the  words  of  the  text  the  cry  of  the  living, 
longing  soul,  "Tell  me,  0  Thou  whom  I  love,  where  Thou  feedest,  where  Thou 
makest  Thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon."  The  soul  that  here  speaks  is  the  soul  of  the 
child  of  God  speaking  to  Jesus.  It  is  a  test  by  which  to  try  the  true  spiritual  life 
of  a  soul.  The  heart  can  always  speak  to  Jesus  in  words  of  love,  for  we  are  not 
God's  true  children,  we  are  not  true  disciples  of  Jesus,  unless  each  of  us  can  speak  to 
Him  in  words  like  these,  "  0  Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth."  It  is  not,  remember, 
the  warm  excited  feelings  of  affection  of  which  God's  Word  here  speaks,  but  of  the 
deliberate  choice,  of  the  deliberate  surrender  of  the  will.  But,  again,  the  text  is 
also  the  cry  of  a  hungering  soul,  "Tell  me,  0  Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth, 
where  Thou  feedest,  where  Thou  makest  Thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon."  It  is,  you 
see,  the  soul  hungering  from  a  sense  of  weakness,  conscious  of  the  need  of  heavenly 
food.  So  we  may  hear  one  saying,  "I  see  others  around  me  strong  in  the  life 
and  power  of  His  might,  though  I  suflFer  naught  but  defeat."  It  is  the  cry  of  a 
soul  which  has  been  stumbling  on  in  weakness,  fighting  and  backsliding,  yet  long- 
ing to  get  more  near  to  Jesus,  to  cleave  to  Him,  to  foUow  after  Him,  yet  deeply 
conscious  of  its  utter  helplessness  and  weakness  and  need  of  spiritual  food.  God 
Himself  hath  given  us  the  answer.  He  feeds  us  with  the  Word  of  Life — ogives  us 
strength  with  which  to  fight  on  through  the  struggle  afber  Jesus.  Is  this  the 
spiritual  food  with  which  our  souls  are  strengthened  and  refreshed  from  day  to  day  t 
.if  gain,  God  feeds  us  in  the  blessed  sacrament  of  His  body  and  blood.  But,  again, 
tM  soul  aski,  "  Where  makest  Thou  Thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon  I "    The  phrase  "  a& 


CHAP.  I.]  TEE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  27 

noon  "  carries  us  to  another  suggestion  of  our  text.  It  may  have  been  in  the 
Bcorching  sun  of  prosperity  that  we  suH'ered  our  great  trial — none  so  sharp  as  that, 
none  under  which  one  who  had  been  really  seeking  God  found  it  more  difficult  to 
follow  Jesus,  none  under  which  he  had  more  need  to  cry,  "  Tell  me,  0  Thou  whom 
I  love,  where  Thou  feedest,  where  Thou  makest  Thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon. "  But, 
blessed  be  God,  there  are  those  on  whom  the  sun  of  prosperity  has  shined  in  all  its 
brightness,  yet  have  never  been  moved  from  rest  in  their  Holy  Saviour.  We  long 
to  know  and  enjoy  that  rest  for  ourselves.  And  where  is  our  hope  ?  Not  in  any- 
thing of  man,  but  in  God's  Word.  The  Lord  hath  said,  "  Believe,"  and  I  take  Him 
at  His  word  and  rest  in  that  word.  He  tells  me  of  One  who  loved  me  and  gave 
Himself  for  me,  and  then  I  ask  my  soul,  "  Do  I  feel  peace  ?  Do  I  sufficiently  care 
about  this  matter  ?  Do  I  sufficiently  love  my  Saviour  ? "  There  is  no  sweeter 
resting-place  for  weary  souls  than  in  God's  own  soul.  But,  once  more,  God  gives 
vs  rest  in  His  Church.  Is  this  not  the  meaning  of  what  we  call  the  "  Day  of  Rest  " 
— our  Lord's  Day,  the  day  given  by  our  Lord  to  be  a  resting-place  unto  our  souls  in 
the  midst  of  a  weary  world  ?  Surely,  above  all  things  that  we  desire  in  this  busy, 
toiling  age,  is  that  we  may  find  rest.  Yet  one  other  question  arises  in  our  hearts  as 
we  speak  to  Him  whom  our  soul  loveth.  Christ  has  two  flocks — a  travelling  flock 
and  a  gathered  flock.     He  tells  us  where  the  travelling  flock  finds  rest — in  the 

{)astures  of  His  Word,  in  the  quiet  of  His  Church,  above  all  in  His  own  heart  of 
ove.  But  that  gathered  flock — where  does  that  rest  ?  We  shall  know  when  we, 
like  it,  are  gathered.  God's  Word  tells  us  but  little  of  that  heavenly  rest,  but 
enough  surely  to  spur  us  on  to  seek  it  earnestly  each  for  ourselves.  '*  There  re- 
maineth  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God. "  Oh  !  let  us  then  press  on  more  earnestly 
after  Jesus  lest  any  of  us  fail  to  enter  into  the  rest.  But  now  let  us  turn  to  the 
answer  to  our  text— "  If  thou  know  not,  0  thou  fairest  among  women,  go  thy  way 
forth  by  the  footsteps  of  the  flock,  and  feed  thy  kids  beside  the  shepherds'  tents." 
*'  Why  should  I  be  as  one  that  turneth  aside  by  the  flocks  of  Thy  companions  ?  "  is 
the  question  of  the  anxious  soul.  Let  it  be  our  question  this  morning,  each  one 
for  himself,  "  Why  should  I  be  as  one  that  turneth  aside  ?  "  God  calls  me  to  read 
His  Word,  why  should  I  reject  the  Heavenly  knowledge  ?  God  calls  me  to  rest  on 
His  Church,  why  should  I  turn  my  back  upon  that  rest  and  seize  after  the  things  of 
the  world  ?  God  calls  me  to  His  Holy  Sacrament,  "  Why  should  I  be  as  one  that 
turneth  aside  from  the  flocks  ? "  Yes,  why  indeed  ?  Can  we  do  without  Christ ! 
Can  we  risk  disobedience  to  His  Holy  Word  ?  Are  we  strong  enough  without  His 
strength  ?    Can  we  be  satisfied  without  He  shall  feed  us  ?    {Archbishop  Maclagan.) 

"Ver.  8.  If  thoa  know  not,  0  thon  fairest  among  women,  go  thy  way  forth  by  the 
footsteps  of  the  flock. — Christ's  answer  unto  His  spouse : — I.  His  supposition.  1. 
The  faithful  servants  and  saints  of  Christ  walk  in  much  blindness  and  ignorance. 
2.  Christ  takes  not  advantage  from  the  sins  or  from  the  ignorance  of  His  people  to 
upbraid  them,  but  doth  rather  help  them  against  their  infirmities  (Heb.  ii.  17,  18). 
II.  His  compellation.  1.  Christ  doth  win  the  aff"ections  of  His  saints  by  sweet 
insinuations.  (1)  To  assume  them  of  His  goodwill,  love,  delight,  and  acceptation. 
(2)  To  cause  them  to  take  notice  of  His  grace  and  love.  2.  The  Church  is 
exceeding  fair  and  beautiful  in  Christ's  eyes  (Eph.  v.  25-27).  (1)  This  beauty  is 
not  natural,  nor  do  we  receive  it  from  nature  (Ezek.  xvi.  3-6).  (2)  It  is  super- 
natural (Ezek.  xvi.  7-10,  13  ;  Eph.  iv.  24).  3.  The  saints  are  most  fair  in  Christ's 
eyes,  when  they  are  most  deformed  in  their  own  (2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10).  III.  His 
DIEECTIONS  TO  HER.  1.  Where  she  should  go.  (1)  Out  of  former  evUs  of  blackness 
and  ignorance  unto  purity  and  saving  knowledge.  (2)  From  one  degree  of  grace  to 
another.  (3)  From  all  kind  of  superstition  and  idolatry  to  pure  worship  and 
sanctity.  2.  Where  she  should  feed.  (1)  He  doth  tend  and  take  care  for  young 
Christians.  (2)  Those  that  are  strong  should  strengthen  and  feed  those  that  are 
weak.  (3)  Young  and  tender  Christians  must  be  fed  with  wholesome  food.  {John 
Eobotham.) 

Vers.  9-11.  I  have  compared  thee,  0  Uylove,  to  a  company  of  horses  in  Pharaoh's 
chariots. — Christ's  commendation  of  His  Church : — I.  The  sweet  epithet  Cheist 
oiVETH  unto  His  Chuech.  "  0  My  love."  1.  The  greatest  outgoings  of  love  and 
friendship  from  Christ,  are  toward  His  Church.  His  love  to  His  people  is— (1) 
Infinite  and  immeasurable,  beyond  all  imagination  or  comparison  (John  xv.  9).  (2) 
Gracious  (Hosea  xiv.  8).  (8)  Liberal  and  bountifiil  (John  xv.  13  ;  Eph.  y.  25).  (4) 
Eternal  (jer.  xxxi.  8).    II.  The  oompabison  by  which  He  sets  bee  foeth.    1. 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


"  I  have  compared  thee."  Christ  esteems  His  servants  and  people,  not  as  they  are 
in  themselves,  but  as  they  are  in  Himself.  2.  "  A  company  of  horses,"  etc.  Now 
by  this  comparison  Christ  setteth  forth  the  glory  and  renown  of  His  Church  in  respect 
of  her  victories  and  achievements  ;  for  He  having  directed  His  Church  to  follow  the 
footsteps  of  the  Flock,  and  to  feed  above  the  tents  of  false  Shepherds,  no  question 
now  but  these  false  Shepherds,  who  before  were  called  Christ's  companions,  will 
persecute  and  afflict  her  :  now  for  the  comforting  and  supportiag  of  her,  Christ  tells 
ner  she  shall  be  strong  and  victorious,  she  shall  be  like  the  horses  of  Egypt,  ready 
for  the  battle.  3.  Christ  having  set  forth  the  Church's  strength  and  valour,  now 
continueth  His  speech,  showing  also,  how  His  Church  is  decked  with  His  ordinances 
and  graces  (ver.  10).  4.  Then  He  declareth  what  should  be  her  future  happiness  ; 
viz.  a  further  increase  of  her  graces,  and  some  addition  of  rich  ornaments  (ver.  11). 
(JbAn  Mobotham.) 

Ver.  10.  Thy  cheeks  are  comely  with  rows  of  jewels,  thy  neck  with  chains  of 
gold. — The  Iride  adorned  with  jewels : — I.  The  geacbs  of  the  Holt  Spirit  ark 

THAT  ADOIINING  OF  THE  CHURCH  WHICH  IS  VISIBLE  TO  ALL  SPIRITUAL  DI8CERNMEKT. 

Faith  itself  is  a  very  choice  jewel,  but  we  are  to  have  rows  of  jewels — faith  in 
exercise  ;  faith,  as  a  principle,  honouring  Christ ;  as  a  hand,  laying  hold  of  Christ ; 
as  an  eye,  beholding  His  beauty  ;  as  a  warrior,  conquering  aU  that  opposes  Christ — 
faith  victorious  over  the  world — the  grace  of  faith.  The  next  jewel  the  apostle 
mentions  is  hope.  We  must  take  care  we  do  not  get  it  exchanged  for  a  pebble,  or 
some  portion  of  mud,  as  formalists,  and  hypocrites,  and  profane  persons  do,  hoping 
that  they  will  be  saved,  hoping  that  God  mil  forgive  them,  and  that  they  will  get 
to  heaven  and  the  like.  Pass  on  to  mark  another  brilliant  jewel — love.  Not  only 
the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  the  heart,  though  that  is  very  blessed,  but  love  as  a 
grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Then  we  go  on  to  another  jewel,  a  very  lovely  one,  though 
frequently  out  of  sight — humility.  "God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  to 
the  himible  ; "  He  giveth  it  first,  and  giveth  grace  to  supply  it.  Another  jewel  in 
close  connection  with  humility  is  meekness.  "  Let  this  mind  be  in  you  which  was 
also  in  Christ  Jesus."  He  was  meek  and  lowly  of  heart,  and  enjoins  His  disciples  to 
imitate  Him,  that  they  may  find  rest  to  their  souls.  Another  very  brilliant  jewel  is 
zeal.  I  do  not  want  the  meekness  and  humility  of  the  Christian  to  dwindle  down 
into  Laodicean  carelessness — that  would  tarnish  his  jewels  ;  but  I  want  the  zeal  of 
the  Lord  of  Hosts,  which  is  said  to  have  eaten  up  my  glorious  Master,  to  eat  me  up 
also.  I  want,  as  He  was,  to  be  clothed  with  zeal,  as  with  a  cloak.  I  will  mention 
another  jewel,  making  seven  on  this  side  of  the  face.  It  is  a  quiet  jewel,  but  a  very 
important  one.  I  mean  patience.  "In  patience  possess  ye  your  souls."  "Let 
patience  have  her  perfect  work."  I  might  lengthen  this  row  of  jewels,  but  I  leave 
you  to  do  it  in  your  retirement,  for  I  want  to  turn  to  the  other  cheek,  and  notice 
those  jewels  which  are  visible  to  the  world.  And  when  I  have  exhibited  both  cheeks 
to  you,  you  may  foUow  the  advice  of  our  Lord,  "  If  thine  enemy  smite  thee  on  the 
one  cheek,  turn  to  bim  the  other  also. "  If  they  smite  you  on  the  cheek  I  have  been 
naming,  they  will  not  hurt  one  of  the  jewels.  Now  let  us  look  at  the  other.  The 
first  jewel  I  mention  is  decision.  A  very  important  one,  for  you  must  know  that  if 
you  are  like  the  Israelites,  halting  between  two  opinions,  the  world  will  laugh  at 
you  ;  if  they  find  you  one  hour  very  devout  in  the  house  of  God,  or  perhaps  reading 
the  Bible  or  some  good  book,  or  even  holding  conversation  scripturally  and  profitably 
on  spiritual  things,  and  another  at  some  silly  amusement,  some  careless  kill-time 
pursuit  of  the  world,  they  will  say  your  religion  is  all  hypocrisy,  and  I  should  not 
wonder  if  they  are  very  near  the  mark.  Oh,  for  more  decision  1  Then  there  is 
another  jewel  that  the  world  wiU  look  at  and  admire — integrity.  Oh,  the  disgrace- 
fulness  of  everything  Uke  duplicity  among  those  who  profess  to  belong  to  Christ ! 
Oh,  the  dignity  of  a  Christian  being  blessed  with  that  mtegrity  which  says  what  it 
means,  and  means  what  it  says — that  wUl  not,  cannot,  say  and  imsay,  but  is  ever  in 
the  same  mind  as  to  the  things  which  relate  to  God's  ^lory,  and  to  his  own  persever- 
ance in  the  divine  life  1  Mark,  another  prominent  jewel  before  the  world  is  self- 
denial,  just  the  contrast  of  selfishness.  Again,  another  of  these  visible  jewels  is 
fortitude,  which  bears  up  the  soul  with  a  holy  confidence,  and  shows  a  firm  front  to 
every  enemy,  and  causes  the  soul  to  put  on  the  armour  of  God,  and  make  its  stand 
in  the  evil  day,  and  having  done  all,  to  stand.  Circumspection  must  be  reckoned 
among  the  jewels  that  are  visible  to  the  world.  Hence  it  is  written,  "See,  then, 
that  ye  walk  circumspectly,  not  as  fools,  but  as  wise."  And  again,  "Walk  in 
wisdom  toward  them  that  are  without."   But  there  are  two  more  I  must  just  mention. 


V 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOy.  29 

Devotion.  The  spirit  of  devotion  is  invisible  to  the  world,  bnt  its  manifestation  will 
be  seen.  Just  the  contrast  of  that  levity,  and  carelessness,  and  trifling  that  charac- 
terize 80  many  professors.  Then  there  is  one  jewel  more  I  must  name — joy.  "The 
Ood  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing."  This,  of  course,  will 
include  gratitude,  which,  also,  is  a  grace  ;  but  I  put  them  together,  and  just  remark 
that  we  are  exhorted  to  "rejoice  in  the  Lord  always."  II.  The  bride's  neck  akd 
ITS  ORNAMENTS.  The  first  question  that  arises  is,  What  are  we  to  understand  by 
the  neck  of  the  Church  ?  The  neck  is  the  part  that  unites  the  body  and  the  head. 
Then  it  must  be  the  covenant  of  grace  that  is  the  neck  ;  the  living  union  between 
Christ  and  His  Church.  It  is  the  strength,  the  support,  and  the  medium  of  com- 
munication. Now  let  us  come  to  the  ornaments.  You  are  to  recollect  they  are  in 
the  plural — chains.  ' '  Thy  neck  with  chains  of  gold. "  The  golden  chain  of  doctrines. 
Observe,  they  are  not  detached  links  or  rings,  but  they  are  closely  linked  together, 
and  we  cannot  part  with  one  link  without  breaking  the  chain.  What  shall  I  say 
about  the  chain  of  promises  ?  If  I  take  a  short  summary  of  it  I  would  just  say,  that 
they  are  distinct,  that  they  are  not  to  be  separated,  ana,  as  we  before  said,  tney  are 
linked  together.  And  hence  we  read  that  all  the  promises  of  God  in  Him  (Christ) 
are  yea,  and  in  Him  amen.  Are  they  not  well  riveted  ?  One  more  chain  I  must 
mention — the  chain  of  privileges.  The  privilege  of  separation  and  distinction  from 
the  world — the  privilege  of  high  education,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  being  the  preceptor 
— the  privilege  of  adoption,  being  at  home  at  the  Father's  house — the  privilege  ot 
feasting  on  a  feast  of  fat  things,  provided  and  prepared  by  the  Master  of  the  feast, 
who  is  the  Bridegroom — the  privilege  of  attendants,  servants  such  as  you  cannot  find 
on  earth.  Moreover,  the  privilege  of  advocacy  within  the  veil.  "If  any  man  sin, 
we  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous."  Here  are  chains 
of  gold,  beloved,  chains  to  hang  about  the  neck.  I  tell  you  of  these,  as  of  the  jewels, 
that  Jesus  has  put  them  on,  and  they  are  invaluable  ;  though  I  know  the  carnal 
mind  will  prefer  the  tinsel,  the  toys,  the  gUded  ornaments,  the  empty,  light,  worth- 
Jess  things,  that  look  a  little  gaudy  in  external  religion,  rather  than  these  gold 
chains.  {J.  Irons. )  Chains  of  gold : — By  those  chaitis  of  gold,  with  which  the  Church's 
neck  is  beautified  and  adorned,  may  be  meant,  1.  The  laws  and  ordinances  of  God ; 
which  the  ministers  of  the  Gospel  and  members  of  Churches,  should  be  careful  to 
observe  (Prov.  i.  9).  Or,  2.  Those  diversities  of  gifts  which  are  bestowed  on  the 
ministers  of  Christ,  by  which  they  are  made  "  able  ministers  of  the  New  Testament"  ; 
and  so  become  usefiil  to  many,  and  appear  comely  and  beautiful,  both  in  the  eyes  of 
Christ,  and  of  such  souls  to  whom  they  minister.  Or,  3.  The  various  graces  of  the 
Spirit,  with  which,  not  only  ministers,  but  all  believers  are  adorned  ;  for  sins  and 
vices  are  so  chained  and  linked  together,  that  where  there  is  one,  there  is  all ;  so  the 
graces  of  the  Spirit  are  like  chains  of  gold,  which  are  so  closely  linked  together,  that 
they  cannot  be  separated,  but  where  there  is  one  grace  there  is  every  grace,  which 
very  much  beautify  and  aidorn  the  believer.  This  chain  consists  of  ten  links :  (1) 
Faith.  (2)  Hope.  (3)  Love.  (4)  Humility.  (5)  Patience.  (6)  Self-denial,  (7)  Content- 
ment. (8)  A  saving  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ.  (9)  Longsuflfering  and  forbearance. 
(10)  Sincerity.  Or,  4.  Those  blessings  of  grace  which  are  laid  up  in  an  everlasting 
covenant,  come  through  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  are  communicated  to  all  His  people, 
may  be  meant  by  these  chains ;  they  go  inseparably  together  ;  where  a  person  is 
blessed  with  one,  he  is  blessed  with  all :  for  though  our  interest  in  them  may  be 
gradually  discovered  to  us,  yet  are  we  blessed  at  once,  "  with  all  spiritual  blessings 
in  heavenly  places  in  Christ."  Not  one  of  these  links  can  be  broken  ;  this  golden 
chain  of  grace  and  salvation  is  described  (Rom.  viii.  30).     {John  GKll,  D.D.) 

Yer.  12.  While  the  King  sitteth  at  His  table,  my  spikenard  sendeth  forth  the 
smell  thereof. — Hie  Church's  testimony  to  Christ: — These  words  are  the  Church's 
testimony  from  experience  of  the  blessed  effects  which  Christ's  presence  in  His 
ordinances  hath  upon  pious  souls  which  wait  upon  Him  uuder  them.  1.  The  title 
THE  Church  gives  Christ,  "The  King":  as  showing  thereby  the  sense  she  had  of 
His  dignityand  dominion,  and  also  of  her  subjection  to  Him,  and  dependence  upon 
Him.  2.  What  she  says  of  Him  from  her  own  experience,  as  a  witness  to  His  con- 
descension and  grace,  "  the  King  sitteth  at  his  table  "  :  which  may  refer  to  all  the 
ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  in  which,  as  at  a  feast.  He  meets  and  entertains  His  people, 
supping  with  them,  and  they  with  Him,  as  His  own  expression  is  (Rev.  iii.  20). 
8.  "The  happy  fruit  or  efiFect  of  Christ's  sitting  at  His  table  upon  the  believer  who  is 
admitted  to  sit  with  Him.  "  My  spikenard  sendeth  forth  the  smell  thereof"  Grace 
is  compared  to  spikenard  for  its  preciousness  and  value  ;  and  the  sending  forth  of  its 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Binell  denotes  that  grace  a8  discovering  itself  in  a  lively,  fresh  and  vigorous  manner. 
It  is  as  ointment  poured  forth,  most  pleasing  to  Christ,  and  to  all  that  love  Him, 
too  ;  they  rejoicing  in  the  honour  paid  Him  by  themselves  and  others  through  a 
lively  exercise  of  grace.  4.  The  connection  of  this  effect  with  its  cause,  or  the 
presence  of  Christ,  and  the  dependence  of  this  upon  it.  I.  Gkace  in  the  friends 
OF  Christ  is  highly  valuable  and  precious.  1.  Grace  in  Scripture  most 
usually  denotes  these  two  things,  namely,  God's  goodwill  to  us,  and  His  good  work 
in  us.  (1)  His  goodwill  to  us  lost  sinners  in  and  through  His  Son,  and  this  as 
revealed  and  tendered  to  us  hi  the  Gospel  (Tit.  ii.  11 ;  Eph.  ii.  8).  (2)  God's  good 
work  in  us,  in  all  His  people,  which  is  the  fruit  or  effect  of  that  goodwill  which  He 
had  in  His  heart  concerning  them  (Eph.  iv,  7  ;  John  i.  16).  2.  From  whence  its 
•worth  and  excellency  may  be  collected.  (1)  Grace  in  the  friends  of  Christ  may  be 
said  to  be  valuable  and  precious,  as  having  so  much  of  heaven  in  it.  (a)  It  comes 
from  heaven  ;  (6)  It  marks  out  for  it ;  (c)  It  leads  to  it ;  {d)  \t  will  issue  in  it.  (2) 
The  necessity  of  grace  is  a  further  evidence  of  its  value.  Without  grace  we  cannot 
please  God  upon  earth,  nor  be  admitted  to  the  enjoyment  of  Him  in  heaven.  It  is 
grace  that  crowns  all  outward  mercies,  and  speaks  and  makes  them  mercies  indeed  ; 
and  nothing  but  this  can  sweeten  afflictions,  and  make  our  heaviest  crosses  light. 

(3)  The  excellency  of  grace  may  be  argued  from  the  happy  distinction  it  makes  in 
them,  from  fallen  angels,  from  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  from  their  former  selves. 

(4)  The  value  of  grace  may  be  gathered  from  the  price  that  went  to  purchase  it,  which 
was  no  less  than  the  blood  of  Christ.  (5)  It  is  precious  in  regard  of  its  Author,  the 
Spirit  of  God  :  hence  He  is  called  "  the  Spirit  of  Grace."  Under  this  character  He 
is  promised  where  a  saving  change  is  designed  (Zech.  xii.  10).  And  it  is  wrought  by 
His  agency  wherever  it  is  wrought.  The  instrument  He  ordinarily  makes  use  of  is  the 
"Word  ;  but  all  the  influence  it  hath,  and  the  saving  impression  it  makes,  is  from  Him. 
(6)  It  is  precious  in  its  nature.  No  two  things  can  more  widely  differ  than  the  old 
and  the  new  ;  the  corruption  propagated  vrith  the  common  nature  by  the  first  birth, 
and  the  grace  infused  in  regeneration.  (7)  The  excellency  of  grace  is  proved  by  its 
effects :   particularly  as  it  ennobles,  enriches,  secures  and  comforts.     Application  : 

1.  Is  grace  so  valuable  ?  How  blind  are  they  that  see  not  its  worth  !  What  enemies 
to  their  souls  are  they  who  labour  not  after  it  I  2.  How  much  hath  God  done  for 
them  on  whom  He  hath  bestowed  His  grace,  so  excellent  in  itself,  and  leading  to 
glory  !  3.  How  greatly  are  the  partakers  of  grace  obliged  to  Christ,  by  whose  blood 
it  is  purchased,  and  for  whose  sake  it  is  bestowed  !  4.  How  glad  should  they  be  of 
all  the  opportunities  to  meet  Him,  by  His  presence  and  influence,  to  have  grace  drawn 
into  act !  5.  How  thankful  should  they  be  who  can  say  with  the  Church,  "  WhUe 
the  King  sat  at  His  table,  my  spikenard  sent  forth  the  smell  thereof  1 "  6.  How  willing 
should  they  be  whose  grace  hath  been  drawn  forth  by  the  presence  of  Christ  here,  to 
behold  Him  in  His  glory,  and  dwell  with  Him  for  ever.  {D.  Wilcox.)  A  Sacrament 
sermon : — In  acts  of  special  communion  with  Christ,  grace  cannot  lie  hid,  but  will 
breathe  out  with  great  fragrancy  ;  or,  at  the  table  of  the  Lord  our  graces  should  be 
Bpecially  and  in  a  most  lively  manner  exercised.  1.  There  is  a  reverence  common  to 
au  worship,  for  "  God  will  be  sanctified  in  all  that  draw  nigh  unto  Him  "  (Lev.  x.  3). 

2.  There  is  a  special  delight  and  affection  which  should  accompany  every  act  of 
communion  with  God  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  28  ;  Isa.  Ivi.  7).  3.  Besides,  in  all  acts  of  communion 
with  God  there  is  an  interchange  of  donatives  and  duties.  Where  we  expect  to  receive 
much  grace,  there  it  must  be  much  exercised  and  acted  (Mark  iv.  24).  4.  Christ  may 
more  sensibly  manifest  Himself  in  one  duty  than  another,  for  He  is  not  tied  to  means,  or 
to  time  and  season  ;  and  it  is  His  presence  that  maketh  an  ordinance  comfortable,  and 
doth  revive  the  exercise  of  grace.  5.  One  duty  must  not  be  set  against  another.  They 
are  all  instituted  by  God,  and  accompanied  with  His  blessing,  and  are  means  of  our 
communion  with  Him,  yet  they  all  have  their  special  use  and  tendency,  and  one  is  to 
be  preferred  in  this  respect,  another  in  that,  as  the  ends  are  for  which  they  are 
appointed  ;  as  in  the  Word  we  come  to  Christ  as  our  teacher,  in  prayer  as  our 
advocate,  in  baptism  as  our  head  and  lord,  into  whose  mystical  body  we  are  planted  ; 
in  the  Lord's  Supper  as  the  master  of  the  feast,  or  our  royal  entertainer.  6.  Though  the 
Lord's  Supper  be  a  special  means,  yet  it  is  the  spirit  of  grace  which  doth  stir  up  faith, 
hope  and  love  in  us.  (1)  The  duty  is  a  means  accommodated  and  fitted  to  this  end, 
or  God  would  never  have  instituted  it.  (2)  The  Spirit  is  the  author  both  of  grace  and 
the  exercise  of  grace  ;  He  first  infuseth  and  then  quickeneth  and  stirreth  up  grace  in 
us  by  this  means  :  "  It  is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth,  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing  " 
(John  vi.  63).  (3)  You  must  stir  up  your  own  hearts  (Isa.  Ixiv.  7  ;  2  Tim.  L  6). 
7.  Allowing  all  this,  yet  it  is  a  truth  that  at  the  Lord's  table  graces  should  be  exercisea 


CHAP.  1.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON,  31 

in  a  special  lively  manner,  which  will  appear  if  we  consider — I.  What  a  Sackament 
HATH  BEYOND  OTHER  DUTIES.  It  is  the  most  mvsterious  instrument  of  our  sanctifi- 
cation  and  preservation  in  a  state  of  grace,  and  tnerefore  requireth  a  special  exercise 
of  grace.  1.  In  a  Sacrament  there  is  a  more  sensible  assurance.  In  other  duties  we 
see  God's  goodness,  or  readiness  to  do  us  good,  in  this  His  solicitous  and  anxious  care 
for  our  good  (Heb.  vi.  17,  18).  2.  A  closer  application.  A  general  invitation  is  not 
80  much  as  an  express  injunction.  "We  have  the  universal  proposal  in  the  Word,  the 
particular  application  in  the  Sacraments  (Acts  ii.  38).  3.  A  solemn  investiture,  or 
taking  possession  by  certain  instituted  rites.  As  we  are  put  in  possession  by  certain 
formalities  of  law,  as  of  a  house  by  the  delivery  of  a  key,  or  of  a  field  by  the  delivery 
of  a  turf,  so  we  take  possessicai  of  Christ  and  all  His  benefits,  "This  is  my  body." 
4.  A  visible  representation  of  the  mysteries  of  godliness  ;  and  so  it  doth  excite  us  to 
the  more  serious  consideration  of  them  when  they  are  transmitted  to  the  soul  not  by 
the  ears  only,  but  by  the  eyes  (Gal.  iii.  1).  5.  An  express  means  of  union  and  com- 
munion with  Christ.  We  draw  nigh  to  God  in  prayer,  and  God  draweth  nigh  to  ua 
in  the  Word  ;  but  here  is  not  only  an  approximation,  but  a  communion  (1  Cor.  x.  16). 
6.  It  is  God's  feast,  where  we  come  to  eat  and  drink  at  His  table  aa  those  that  are  in 
friendship  with  Him.  7.  This  is  the  sum  of  aU  other  duties  and  privileges,  the 
abridgment  of  Christian  religion,  the  land  of  promise  in  a  map  (Luke  xxii.  20). 
II.  What  is  the  special  use  and  intent  of  this  duty  !  It  was  instituted  for 
the  remembrance  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  xi.  24,  25),  and  (ver.  26)  it  is  an  annunciating  or 
showing  forth  the  Lord's  death  till  He  come.  1.  The  occasion  and  necessity  of  it, 
why  Christ  should  be  given  for  us,  our  guilt,  and  misery,  which  could  only  be  expiated 
by  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God  ;  so  that  one  great  work  of  the  Sacrament  is  the  repre- 
sentation of  the  evil  of  sLa  ;  for  we  are  to  remember  the  Son  of  God,  "  Who  was  made 
sin  for  us  that  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him  " 
(2  Cor.  V.  21),  and  who  was  "  made  a  curse  for  us  "  (Gal.  iii.  13).  2.  The  cause  of  it ; 
the  great  love  of  God,  or  His  mercy  to  poor  sinners  (John  iiL  16).  3.  The  act  of 
redemption  itself;  His  "obedience  to  the  death  of  the  cross"  (Phil.  ii.  7) ;  or  His 
"  makmg  His  soul  an  ofiering  for  sin  "  (Isa.  liii.  10).  Therefore  He  is  represented  as 
"  crucified  before  your  eyes '  (Gal.  iii  1).  4.  The  consequent  benefits  which  thence 
result  to  us.  You  come  not  to  receive  the  mercy  of  an  hour,  but  here  is  pardon  of 
sin  given  us  without  any  infringing  the  honour  of  God's  justice  (Eom.  iii.  25.  26)  ; 
the  favour  of  God  (2  Cor.  v.  19)  ;  the  spirit  of  grace  (Titus  iii.  5,  6  ;  Gal.  iii.  14  ; 
and  1  Oor.  x.  4,  compared  with  John  iv.  14,  and  vii.  37).  So  also  eternal  life,  or 
hopes  of  glory  (Titus  iii.  7  ;  Rom.  v.  1,  2,  and  1  John  iv.  9).  And  indeed  this  whole 
duty  is  a  figure  of  the  eternal  banquet.     III.  What  graces  are  to  be  exercised, 

WHICH  is,   as  it  were,   THE  POURING  OUT  OF  OUR  BOX   OF  PRECIOUS  SPIKENARD 

ON  Christ's  head  or  feet  t  1.  With  respect  to  the  necessity  of  our  redemption, 
s  humble  sense  of  the  odiousness  of  sin,  represented  to  us  in  the  bruises  and  sufferings 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  when  He  came  to  be  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  that  we  may  loath  it, 
condenm  it,  resolve  no  more  to  have  to  do  with  it  (Rom.  viii.  3).  2.  The  love  of  God 
in  Christ,  which  was  the  cause,  must  beget  a  fervent  love  to  Him  again,  that  we  may 
love  Him  who  hath  loved  us  at  so  dear  a  rate  (2  Cor.  v.  14,  15).  3.  The  act  of 
redemption,  or  the  death  of  Christ,  must  breed  in  us  a  lively  faith  in  Christ,  that  we 
may  accept  Him  as  our  Redeemer  and  Saviour  upon  His  own  terms,  and  Irust  our- 
selves into  His  hands,  and  devote  ourselves  to  His  service,  crying  out,  as  Thomas, 
"  My  Lord  and  my  God  "  (John  xx.  28),  welcoming  Him  into  our  souls  with  the 
dearest  embraces  of  thankfulness  and  hearty  affection.  4.  With  respect  to  the  con- 
sequent benefits,  there  must  be  (1)  Earnest  desire  after  communion  with  God  in 
Christ,  that  you  may  be  pai-takers  both  of  His  renewing  and  reconciling  grace,  and 
that  you  may  get  more  sensible  proof  of  His  love  to  your  souls  ;  (2)  Joy  in  the  sense 
of  the  greatness,  suitableness  and  firmness  of  the  mercy  represented,  offered  and 
applied  to  you  (Cant.  i.  4) ;  (3)  Hope,  which  is  a  desirous  expectation  of  the  promised 
glory,  looking  and  longing  for  it  with  more  earnestness  and  confidence.  This  ante- 
past  in  the  house  of  our  pilgrimage  is  sweet,  but  what  will  be  our  communion  with 
Him  in  heaven  I  5.  That  love  which  is  here  commemorated  must  be  imitated,  and 
leave  a  suitable  impression  upon  you.  If  Christ  gave  His  life  for  those  who  are 
sometimes  called  His  enemies,  sometimes  His  people,  such  an  impartial  charity  must 
you  have  to  all  men ;  to  brethren  and  neighbours  (1  John  iv.  11),  and  to  enemies 
(Eph.  iv.  82).    (r.  MatOon,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  A  btindle  of  myrrh  is  my  Well-beloved  unto  me. — A  btmdle  of  myrrh: — 
I.  Ohrist  Jesus  is  unutterably  precious  to  believebs.     Observe  first,   that 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

nothing  gives  the  believer  so  much  joy  as  fellowship  with  Christ.  In  our  esteem, 
the  joys  of  earth  are  little  better  than  husks  for  swine  compared  with  Jesus  the 
heavenly  manna.  I  would  rather  have  one  mouthful  of  Christ's  love,  and  a  sip  of 
His  fellowship,  than  a  whole  world  full  of  carnal  delights.  What  is  the  chaff  to  the 
■wheat  ?  "What  is  the  sparkling  paste  to  the  true  diamond  ?  What  is  a  dream  to  the 
glorious  reality  ?  What  is  time's  mirth  in  its  best  trim  compared  to  otir  Lord  Jesus 
m  His  most  despised  estate  ?  We  may  plainly  see  that  Christ  is  very  precious  to  the 
believer,  because  to  him  there  is  nothing  good  without  Christ.  Oh,  what  a  howling 
wilderness  is  this  world  without  my  Lord  !  If  once  He  groweth  angry,  and  doth, 
though  it  be  for  a  moment,  hide  Himself  from  me,  withered  are  the  flowers  of  my 
garden  ;  my  pleasant  fruits  decay  ;  the  birds  suspend  their  songs,  and  black  night 
lowers  over  all  my  hopes.  On  the  other  hand,  when  aU  earthly  comforts  have  failed 
you,  have  you  not  found  quite  enough  in  your  Lord  ?  Do  you  remember  when  you 
were  poor  ?  Oh  !  how  near  Christ  was  to  you,  and  how  rich  He  made  you  I  You 
were  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  and  no  man  gave  you  a  good  word !  Ah !  sweet 
was  His  fellowship  then,  and  how  delightful  to  hear  Him  say,  *'  Fear  thou  not ;  for 
I  am  with  thee :  be  not  dismayed  ;  for  I  am  thy  God !  "  As  aflBictions  abound,  even 
80  do  consolations  abound  by  Christ  Jesus,  Nor  should  I  be  straining  the  truth  if 
I  say  that  the  Christian  woijld  sooner  give  up  anything  than  forsake  his  Master.  If 
it  came  to  this,  that  you  must  deny  Christ,  or  give  up  the  dearest  thing  you  have, 
would  you  deliberate  ?  I  think  we  could  go  further,  dear  friends,  and  say,  not  only 
could  we  give  up  everything,  but  I  think,  when  love  is  fervent,  and  the  flesh  is  kept 
under,  we  could  suffer  anything  with  Christ.  I  met,  in  one  of  Samuel  Rutherford's 
letters,  an  extraordinary  expression,  where  he  speaks  of  the  coals  of  Divine  wrath  all 
falling  upon  the  head  of  Christ,  so  that  not  one  might  fall  upon  His  people.  "  And 
yet,"  saith  he,  "  if  one  of  those  coals  should  drop  from  His  head  upon  mine  and  did 
utterly  consume  me,  yet  if  I  felt  it  was  a  part  of  the  coals  that  fell  on  Him,  and  I  was 
bearing  it  for  His  sake,  and  in  communion  with  Him,  I  would  choose  it  for  my 
heaven. "  One  thing  I  know  proveth,  beloved,  that  you  esteem  Christ  to  be  very 
precious,  namely,  that  you  want  others  to  know  Him  too.  The  more  your  love 
grows,  beloved,  the  more  insatiable  will  be  your  desire  that  others  should  love  Him, 
tUl  it  will  come  to  this  that  you  will  be,  like  Paul,  "in  labours  more  abundant," 
spending  and  being  spent  that  you  may  bring  the  rest  of  Christ's  elect  body  into 
imion  with  their  glorious  head.  II.  The  soul  clingeth  to  Cheist,  akd  she  hath 
GOOD  REASON  FOR  SO  DOING,  for  her  own  words  are,  ^'A  bundle  of  myrrh  is  my  Well- 
beloved  unto  me."  1.  Jesus  Christ  is  like  myrrh.  (1)  Myrrh  may  be  well  tne  type 
of  Christ  for  itspredousness.  It  was  an  exceedingly  expensive  drug.  We  know  that 
Jacob  sent  some  of  it  down  into  Egypt  as  being  one  of  the  choice  products  of  the 
land.  It  is  always  spoken  of  in  Scripture  as  being  a  rich,  rare  and  costly  substance. 
But  no  myrrh  could  ever  compare  with  Him,  for  Jesus  Christ  is  so  precious,  that  if 
heaven  and  earth  were  put  together  they  could  not  buy  another  Saviour.  (2)  Myrrh, 
again,  was  pleasant.  It  was  a  pleasant  thing  to  be  in  a  chamber  perfumed  with 
myrrh.  Through  the  nostrils  myrrh  conveys  delight  to  the  human  mind ;  but 
Christ  gives  delight  to  His  people,  not  through  one  channel,  but  through  every 
avenue.  (3)  Moreover,  myrrh  is  perfuming.  It  is  used  to  give  a  sweet  smell  to 
other  things.  And  surely,  beloved,  Jesus  Christ  is  very  perfuming  to  His  people. 
Does  not  He  perfume  their  prayers,  so  that  the  Lord  smelleth  a  sweet  savour  ?  Doth 
He  not  perfume  their  songs,  so  that  they  become  like  vials  fuU  of  odour  sweet  ? 
(4)  Myrrh  has  preserving  qualities.  It  was  used  to  prevent  corruption.  What  is 
there  which  can  preserve  the  soul  but  Christ  Jesus  ?  What  is  the  myiTh  which  keeps 
our  works,  which  in  themselves  are  dead,  and  corrupt,  and  rotten — what,  I  say, 
keeps  them  from  becoming  a  foul  stench  in  the  nostrils  of  God,  but  that  Christ  is  in 
them  !  (5)  Myrrh,  again,  was  used  as  a  disinfectant.  And  there  doubtless  is  some 
power  in  myrrh  to  preserve  from  infectious  disease.  Well,  brethren,  certain  I  am  it 
18  80  with  Christ.  You  have  to  go  into  the  world,  which  is  like  a  great  lazar-house  ; 
but  if  you  carry  Christ  with  you,  you  will  never  catch  the  world's  disease.  (6)  But 
myrrh  was  believed  by  the  ancient  physicians  to  do  more  than  this — it  was  a  cure — 
it  did  not  merely  prevent,  but  it  healed.  Certain  it  is  that  your  Christ  is  the  best 
medicine  for  the  soul.  His  name  is  Jehovah  Rophi — "  I  am  the  Lord  that  healeth 
them."  (7)  Myrrh  was  used  in  the  East  as  a  beautifier.  The  belief  of  Oriental 
women  was,  that  it  removed  wrinkles  and  stains  from  the  face,  and  they  used  it 
constantly  for  the  perfecting  of  their  charms.  I  do  not  know  how  that  may  be,  but 
I  know  tnat  nothing  makes  the  believer  so  beautiful  as  being  with  Christ.  He  is 
beautiful  in  the  eyes  of  God,  of  holy  angels,  and  of  his  fellow-men.     (8)  Myrrh  might 


CHAP.  1.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  SS^ 

•well  be  Tised  as  an  emblem  of  onr  Lord  from  its  connection  -with  sacrifice.  It  was  one 
of  the  precious  drugs  used  in  making  the  holy  oil  with  which  the  priests  were 
anointed  and  the  frankincense  which  burned  perpetually  before  God.  It  is  this,  the 
sacrificial  character  of  Christ,  which  is  at  the  root  and  bottom  of  all  that  Christ  is 
most  precious  to  His  people.  0  Lamb  of  God  our  sacrifice,  we  must  remember  Thee. 
2.  Christ  is  called  a  bundle  of  myrrh,  or,  as  some  translate  it,  a  bag  of  myrrh,  or  s 
box  of  myrrh.  There  were  three  sorts  of  myrrh :  there  was  the  myrrh  in  sprigs, 
which  being  burnt  made  a  sweet  smell ;  then  there  was  myrrh,  a  dried  spice  ;  and 
then,  thirdly,  there  was  myrrh  a  flowing  oil.  We  do  not  know  to  which  there  Is 
reference  here.  But  why  is  it  said  "  a  bundle  of  myrrh  "  ?  (1)  First,  for  the  plenty 
of  it.  He  is  not  a  drop  of  it,  He  is  a  casketful.  He  is  not  a  sprig  or  flower  of  it, 
but  a  whole  bundlefitl.  There  is  enough  in  Christ  for  my  necessities.  (2)  A  bundle 
again,  for  variety  ;  for  there  is  in  Christ  not  only  the  one  thing  needful,  but  "  ye  are 
complete  in  Him  "  ;  there  is  everything  needful,  (3)  He  is  a  bundle  of  mvrrh  again, 
for  preservation — ^not  loose  myrrh  to  be  dropped  on  the  floor  or  trodden  on,  but 
myrrh  tied  up,  as  though  God  bound  up  aU  virtues  and  excellences  in  His  Son  :  not 
myrrh  spilt  on  the  ground,  but  myrrh  in  a  box — myrrh  kept  in  a  casket.  Such  is 
Christ  **  Able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God  through  Him," 
is  He  still  unto  this  hour.  (4)  A  bundle  of  myrrh  again,  to  show  how  diligently  we 
should  take  care  of  it.  We  must  treasure  up  His  words,  prize  His  ordinances,  obey 
His  precepts,  tie  Him  up  and  keep  Him  ever  with  us  as  aprecious  bundle  of  myrrh. 
(5)  And  yet  again,  a  bimdle  of  myrrh  for  speciality,  as  if  He  were  not  common  myrrh 
for  everybody.  No,  no,  no  ;  there  is  distinguishing,  discriminating  grace — a  bundle 
tied  up  for  His  people  and  labelled  with  their  names  from  before  the  foimdation  of 
the  world.  Oh  !  blessed  people  whom  the  Lord  hath  admitted  into  His  secrets  I 
Oh  !  choice  and  happy  people  who  are  thus  made  to  say,  "  A  bottle  of  myrrh  is  my 
WeU-beloved  unto  me.  III.  With  a  sense  of  Christ  s  preciousness  is  combined  A 
CONSCIOTJSNESS  OF  POSSESSION.  It  is  "  my  WeU-beloved.  My  dear  hearer,  is  Christ 
your  well-beloved  ?  A  Saviour — that  is  well ;  but  my  Saviour — that  is  the  best  of 
the  best.  What  is  the  use  of  bread  if  it  is  not  mine  ?  I  may  die  of  hunger.  Of 
what  value  is  gold,  if  it  be  not  mine  ?  I  may  yet  die  in  a  workhouse.  I  want  this 
preciousness  to  be  mine.  "  My  WeU-beloved.  Have  you  ever  laid  hold  on  Ohrist 
by  the  hand  of  faith  ?  But  that  is  not  the  only  word.  "  A  bundle  of  myrrh  is  my 
"WeU-beloved  unto  me."  He  is  not  so  to  many.  Ah  !  my  Lord  is  a  root  out  of  a  dry 
ground  to  multitudes.  They  would  sooner  go  to  a  play  or  a  dance  than  they  would 
have  any  feUowship  with  Him,  They  can  see  the  beauties  upon  the  cheeks  of  this 
Jezebel  world,  but  they  cannot  see  the  perfections  of  my  Lord  and  Master,  WeU  ! 
weU  !  weU  1  Let  them  say  what  they  wiU,  and  let  them  think  as  they  please,  every 
creature  hath  its  own  joy,  but  "  a  bundle  of  myrrh  is  my  WeU-beloved  unto  me  " — 
nntome — unto  me,  and  if  there  is  not  another  who  finds  Him  so,  yet  "a  bundle  of 
myrrh  is  my  WeU-beloved  unto  me,"    IV.  A  sense  of  possession  and  a  sense  of 

ENJOYMENT  WILL  ALWAYS  LEAD  THE  CHRISTIAN  TO  DESIEE  CONSTANT  FELLOWSHIP. 

The  Church  does  not  say,  "  I  will  put  this  bundle  of  myrrh  on  my  shoulders" — 
Ohrist  is  no  burden  to  a  Christian.  She  does  not  say,  "  I  wiU  put  this  bundle  of 
myrrh  on  my  back  " — the  Church  does  not  want  to  have  Christ  concealed  from  her 
face.  She  desires  to  have  Him  where  she  can  see  Him,  and  near  to  her  heart,  1.  It 
is  an  expression  of  desire — her  desire  that  she  may  have  the  consciousness  of  Christ's 
love  continually.  Do  not  you  feel  the  same  desire  ?  2.  But  then,  it  is  not  only  hep 
desire,  but  it  is  also  her  confidence.  She  seems  to  say,  "  He  will  be  with  me  thus." 
You  may  have  a  suspension  of  visible  fellowship  with  Ohrist,  but  Christ  never  will 
go  away  from  His  people  really.  He  may  close  His  eyes  and  hide  His  face  from  you, 
but  His  heart  never  can  depart  from  you.  3.  This  is  also  a  resolve.  She  desires,  she 
believes,  and  she  resolves  it.  Lord,  Thou  shalt  be  with  me.  Thou  shalt  be  with  me 
always,  I  appeal  to  you,  brethren,  wiU  you  not  make  this  resolve  in  God's  strength 
this  morning  to  cUng  close  to  Christ  ?    ((7.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yer,  14,  My  Beloved  is  unto  me  as  a  cluster  of  camphire  in  the  vineyards  of  En* 
gedi. — A  beautiful  symbol : — Terraced  on  the  side  of  the  mountains  were  the  vine- 
yards of  En-gedi.  Oh,  they  were  sweet  places  !  From  a  shelving  of  the  mountain 
four  hundred  feet  high  waters  came  down  in  beautiful  baptism  on  the  faces  of  the 
leaves  ;  the  grapes  intoxicate  with  their  own  wine  ;  pomegranates  with  juices  burst- 
ing from  the  rind  ;  all  fruits,  and  flowers,  and  aromatic  woods — among  the  sweetest  of  ' 
these  the  camphire  plant  of  the  text.  Its  flowers  are  in  clusters  like  our  Ulao— 
graceful,  fragrant,  symbolical  of  Jesus.     I.  I  wiU  first  show  you  that  this  camphir* 


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  I. 

plant  of  the  text  was  a  symbol  of  Christ,  because  of  its  fragrance.  If  I  had  a  branch 
of  it,  and  should  wave  it  in  your  midst,  it  would  fill  all  the  house  with  the  redolence. 
The  camphor,  as  we  have  it,  is  offensive  to  some  ;  but  the  camphire  plant  of  the  text 
had  a  fragrance  gracious  to  all.  The  name  of  Caesar  means  power ;  the  name 
of  Herod  means  cruelty ;  the  name  of  Alexander  means  conquest ;  the  name  of 
Demosthenes  means  eloquence ;  the  name  of  Milton  means  poetry  ;  the  name  of 
Benjamin  West  means  painting  ;  the  name  of  Phidias  means  sculpture  ;  the  name  of 
Beethoven  means  music  ;  the  name  of  Howard  means  reform  ;  but  the  name  of  Christ 
means  love  I  It  is  the  sweetest  name  that  ever  melted  from  Up  to  heart.  Oh,  rich 
and  rare,  exquisite  and  everlasting  perfume  !  Set  it  in  every  poor  man's  window  ; 
plant  it  on  every  grave  ;  put  its  leaves  under  every  dying  head  ;  wreath  its  blossoms 
for  every  garland ;  wave  its  branches  in  every  home  ;  and  when  I  am  about  to  die, 
and  my  hand  Ues  cold  and  stifiF  and  white  upon  the  pillow,  let  no  superstitious  priest 
come  with  mumbling  fooleries  to  put  a  crucifix  of  wood  or  stone  in  my  hand,  but 
rather  some  plain  and  humble  soul — let  him  come  and  put  in  my  dying  grasp  this 
living  branch,  with  "  clusters  of  camphire  from  the  vineyards  of  En-gedi."  II.  This 
camphire  plant  of  the  text  was  a  symbol  of  Christ  in  the  fact  that  it  gives  colouring. 
From  the  Mediterranean  to  the  (Ganges,  the  people  of  the  East  gathered  it,  dried  the 
leaves,  pulverized  them,  and  then  used  them  as  a  dye  for  beautifying  garments  or 
their  own  persons.  It  was  that  fact  that  gave  the  camphire  plant  of  the  text  its 
commercial  value  in  the  time  of  King  Solomon  ;  a  type  of  my  Lord  Jesus,  who 
beautifies  and  adorns,  and  colours  everything  He  touches.  I  have  no  faith  in  that 
man's  conversion  whose  religion  does  not  colour  his  entire  life.  It  was  intended  so 
to  do.  If  a  man  has  the  grace  of  God  in  his  heart,  it  ought  to  show  itself  in  the  life. 
There  ought  to  be  this  "cluster  of  camphire  "  in  the  ledger,  in  the  roll  of  govern- 
ment securities,  in  the  medical  prescription,  in  the  law-book.  I  tell  you,  unless 
your  religion  goes  with  you  everywhere,  it  goes  nowhere.  That  religion  was 
intended  to  colour  aU  the  heart  and  the  life.  But,  mark  you,  it  was  a  bright  colour. 
For  the  most  part,  it  was  an  orange  dye  made  of  this  camphire  plant,  one  of  the  most 
brilliant  of  all  colours  ;  and  so  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  casts  no  blackness  or 
gloom  upon  the  soul.  It  brightens  up  life,  it  brightens  up  everything.  III.  The 
camphire  plant  of  the  text  was  a  symbol  of  Jesus  Christ  because  it  is  a  mighty 
KESTORATIVE.  You  know  that  there  is  nothing  that  starts  respiration  so  soon  in  one 
who  has  fainted  as  camphor,  as  we  have  it.  Put  upon  a  sponge  or  handkerchief,  the 
effects  are  almost  immediate.  Well,  tlus  camphire  plant  of  the  text,  though  some- 
what different  from  that  which  we  have,  was  a  pungent  aromatic,  and  in  that  respect 
it  becomes  a  type  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  mightiest  of  all  restoratives. 
I  have  carried  this  camphire  plant  into  the  sick-room,  after  the  doctors  had  held 
their  consultation  and  said  there  was  no  hope  and  nothing  more  could  be  done,  and 
the  soul  brightened  up  under  the  spiritual  restorative.  There  is  no  fever,  no 
marasmus,  no  neuralgia,  no  consumption,  no  disease  of  the  body,  that  the  grace  of 
God  will  not  help.  I  wish  that  over  every  bed  of  pain  and  through  every  hospital  of 
distress  we  mi^ht  swing  this  "  cluster  of  camphire  from  the  vineyards  of  En-gedi." 
Christ's  hand  is  the  softest  pillow,  Christ's  pardon  is  the  strongest  stimulus,  Christ's 
comfort  is  the  mightiest  anodyne,  Christ^  salvation  is  the  grandest  restorative. 
This  grace  is  also  a  restorative  for  the  backslider.  For  great  sin,  great  pardon.  For 
deep  wounds,  omnipotent  surgery.  For  deaf  ears,  a  Divine  aurist.  For  blind  eyes, 
•  heavenly  oculist.  For  the  dead  in  sin,  the  upheaval  of  a  great  resurrection.  But 
why  should  I  particularize  that  class  in  tms  audience  when  we  aU  need  this 
lestoratiTe,  for  we  have  aU  wandered  and  gone  away  1    {T.  De  WHt  TeUmage.) 


CHAPTER  II 


Ym. 


Tib.  1.  I  am  fhe  rose  of  Sharon,  and  the  lily  of  tbB  vdXleyM.^-Tke  best  qf  tht 
tat  .'—It  is  a  marveUous  stoop  for  Christ,  who  is  "  God  over  aU,  blessed  for  ever," 
•ad  the  Lteht  of  the  nniverse,  to  say,  "  I  am  a  rose  ;  I  am  a  Uly."  0  my  blessed 
Lord,  this  is  a  sort  of  incarnation,  as  when  the  Eternal  God  did  take  upon  Himself 
Jin  infant's  form  i  So  here,  the  JEverlasting  God  says,  "I  am" — and  what  comes 
SQKt  h^**  a  xgM  and  » lily."    It  is  on  amaziiig  stoop,  I  know  not  liow  to  set  it  forth 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  35 


to  you  by  human  language  ;  it  is  a  sort  of  verbal  rehearsal  of  what  He  did  afterwards 
■when,  though  He  counted  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  ' '  He  took  upon 
Himself  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and 
became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross."  **  I  am  God,  yet,"  saith 
He,  "I  am  the  rose  of  Sharon,  and  the  Uly  of  the  valleys."  I,  The  exceeding 
DKLiGHTFULNESS  OF  OUR  LoED.  He  Compares  Himself  here,  not  as  in  other  places 
to  needful  bread  and  refreshing  water,  but  to  lovely  flowers,  to  roses  and  lilies.  What 
is  the  use  of  roses  and  lUies  ?  They  are  of  no  use  at  aU  except  for  joy  and  delight. 
With  their  sweet  form,  their  charming  colour,  and  their  delicious  fragrance,  we  are 
comforted  and  pleased  and  delighted  ;  but  they  are  not  necessaries  of  Hfe.  You  are 
to  find  in  Christ  roses  and  lilies,  as  well  as  bread  and  water  ;  you  have  not  yet  seen  all 
His  beauties,  and  you  do  not  yet  know  all  His  excellence.  1.  And  first.  He  is  in  Him- 
self the  delight  of  men.  He  speaks  not  of  ofiices,  gifts,  works,  possessions  ;  but  of 
Himself:  "lam."  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  the  best  of  all  beings  ;  the  dearest,  sweetest, 
fairest  and  most  charming  of  all  beings  that  we  can  think  of  is  the  Son  of  God,  our 
Saviour.  Eyes  need  to  be  trained  to  see  beauty.  No  man  seeth  half  or  a  thousandth 
part  of  the  beauty  even  of  this  poor,  natural  world  ;  but  the  painter's  eye — the  eye 
of  Turner,  for  instance — can  see  much  more  than  you  or  I  ever  saw.  "  Oh  !  "  said 
one,  when  he  looked  on  one  of  Turner's  landscapes,  "I  have  seen  that  view  every 
day,  but  I  never  saw  as  much  as  that  in  it."  "  No,"  replied  Turner,  "  don't  you 
wish  you  could  ? "  And,  when  the  Spirit  of  God  trains  and  tutors  the  eye,  it  sees  in 
Christ  what  it  never  saw  before.  But,  even  then,  as  Turner's  eye  was  not  able  to 
see  all  the  mystery  of  God's  beauty  ia  nature,  so  neither  is  the  most  trained  and 
educated  Christian  able  to  perceive  all  the  matchless  beauty  that  there  is  in  Christ. 
2.  But  next,  our  Lord  is  exceedingly  delightful  to  the  eye  of  faith.  He  not  only 
tells  us  of  what  delight  is  in  Himself — '*  I  am  the  rose,  and  I  am  the  lily  " — but  lie 
thereby  tells  us  that  there  is  something  to  see  in  Him,  for  the  rose  is  very  pleasing  to 
look  upon.  Is  there  a  more  beautiful  sight  than  a  rose  that  is  in  bud,  or  even  one 
that  is  full-blown  ?  And  the  lily — what  a  charming  thing  it  is  !  It  seems  to  be 
more  a  flower  of  heaven  than  of  earth.  Well  now,  Christ  is  delightful  to  the  eye  of 
faith.  To  you  who  look  at  Christ  by  faith,  a  sight  of  Him  brings  such  peace,  such 
rest,  such  hope,  as  no  other  sight  can  ever  afl'ord ;  it  so  sweetens  everything,  so 
entirely  takes  away  the  bitterness  of  life,  and  brings  us  to  anticipate  the  glory  of  the 
life  that  is  to  come,  that  I  am  sure  you  say,  "  Yes,  yes  ;  the  figure  in  the  text  ia 
quite  correct ;  there  is  a  beauty  in  Jesus  to  the  eye  of  faith.  He  is  indeed  red  as  the 
rose  and  white  as  the  lUy."  3.  And  next,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  delightful  in 
the  savour  which  comes  from  Him  to  us.  There  is  a  spiritual  way  of  perceiving  the 
savour  of  Christ ;  I  cannot  explain  it  to  you,  but  there  is  an  inefiable  mysterious 
sweetness  that  proceeds  from  Him  which  touches  the  spiritual  senses,  and  afibrds 
supreme  delight ;  and  as  the  body  has  its  nose,  and  its  tender  nerves  that  can 
appreciate  sweet  odours,  so  the  soul  has  its  spiritual  nostril  by  which,  though  Christ 
be  at  a  distance,  it  yet  can  perceive  the  fragrant  emanations  that  come  from  Him, 
and  is  delighted  therewith.  4.  Once  more,  in  all  that  He  is,  Christ  is  the  choicest 
of  the  choice.  You  notice  the  Bridegroom  says,  "  I  am  the  rose."  Yes,  but  there 
were  some  particularly  beautiful  roses  that  grew  in  the  valley  of  Sharon ; 
"I  am  that  rose,"  said  He.  And  there  were  some  delightful  lilies  in  Palestine  ; 
it  is  a  land  of  lilies,  there  are  so  many  of  them  that  nobody  knows 
which  lUy  Christ  meant,  and  it  does  not  at  all  signify,  for  almost  aU  lilies  are 
wondrously  beautiful.  "  But,"  said  He,  "  I  am  the  lUy  of  the  valleys,"  the  choicest 
kind  of  lily  that  grew  where  the  soU  was  fat  and  damp  with  the  overflow  of  mountain 
streams.  "  I  am  the  Hly  of  the  valleys : "  that  is  to  say,  Christ  is  not  only  good, 
but  He  is  the  best ;  and  He  is  not  only  the  best,  but  He  is  the  best  of  the  best.  II. 
The  sweet  variety  of  Christ's  delightfulness.  He  is  not  only  full  of  joy, 
and  pleasure,  and  delight  to  our  hearts,  but  He  is  fuU  of  all  sorts  of  joy,  and  all  sorts 
of  pleasure,  and  aU  sorts  of  delights  to  us.  The  rose  is  not  enough,  you  must  have 
the  lily  also,  and  the  two  together  fall  far  short  of  the  glories  of  Christ,  the  true 
"  Plant  of  renown."  "  I  am  the  rose."  That  is  the  emblem  of  majesty.  The  rose  ia 
the  very  queen  of  flowers  ;  in  the  judgment  of  all  who  know  what  to  admire  it  ia 
enthroned  above  all  the  rest  of  the  beauties  of  the  garden.  But  the  lily — what  is 
that  ?  That  is  the  emblem  of  love.  The  psalmist  hints  at  this  in  the  title  of  the 
forty-fifth  psalm.  "  Upon  Shoshannim,  a  Song  of  love."  Shoshannim  signifies  lilies, 
80  the  lily -psalm  is  the  love-song,  for  the  lilies,  with  their  beauty,  their  purity,  their 
delicacy,  are  a  very  choice  emblem  of  love.  Are  you  not  delighted  when  you  put 
these  two  things  together,  majesty  and  love!    A  King  upon  a  throne  oi  love,  * 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

Prince,  whose  very  eyes  beam  with  lore  to  those  who  put  their  trust  in  Him,  a  real 
Head,  united  by  uving  bonds  of  love  to  all  His  members — such  is  our  dear  Lord  and 
Saviour.  The  combination  of  these  aweet  flowers  also  suggests  our  Lord's  suffering 
and  purity.  Jesus,  when  on  earth,  could  say,  "The  prince  of  this  world  cometh, 
and  hath  nothing  in  Me. "  The  devil  himself  could  not  see  a  spot  or  speck  in  that 
lovely  lily.  Jesus  Christ  is  perfection  itself.  He  is  aU  purity  ;  so  you  must  put  the 
two  together,  the  rose  and  the  lily,  to  show  Christ's  suffering  and  perfection,  the 
infinitely  pure  and  infinitely  suffering.  In  which  of  the  two  do  you  take  the  greater 
delight  ?  Surely,  in  neither,  but  in  the  combination  of  both  ;  what  would  be  the 
value  of  Christ's  sufferings  if  He  were  not  perfect  ?  And  of  what  avail  would  His 
perfections  be  if  He  had  not  died,  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God  ?  But 
the  two  together,  the  rose  and  the  lily,  suffering  and  purity,  fill  us  with  delight. 
Of  both  of  these  there  is  a  great  variety.  Jesus  possesses  every  kind  of  beauty  and 
fragrance.  "  He  is  all  my  salvation,  andaU  my  desire."  All  good  things  meet  in 
Christ ;  in  Him  all  the  lines  of  beauty  are  focussed.  Blessed  are  they  who  truly 
know  Him.  Further,  Christ  is  the  very  essence  of  the  sweetness  both  of  the  rose  and 
of  the  lily.  When  He  says,  "  I  am  the  rose,"  He  means,  not  only  that  He  is  like  the 
rose,  but  that  He  made  all  the  sweetness  there  is  in  the  rose,  and  it  is  still  in  Him  ; 
and  aU  the  sweetness  there  is  in  any  creature  comes  to  us  from  Christ,  or  else  it  is 
not  sweetness  such  as  we  ought  to  love.  All  good  for  our  soul  comes  from  Him, 
whether  it  be  pardon  of  sin,  or  justification,  or  the  sanctification  that  makes  ua  fit 
for  glory  hereafter,  Christ  is  the  source  of  it  all ;  and  in  the  infinite  variety  of 
delights  that  we  get  from  Him,  He  is  Himself  the  essence  of  it  all.  III.  The  exceedino 
yEEENESS  OF  OUR  Lobd's  delightfulness.  I  have  been  talking  about  my  Master, 
and  I  want  to  show  you  that  He  is  accessible.  He  is  meant  to  be  plucked  and  enjoyed 
as  roses  and  lilies  are.  He  says  in  the  text,  "  I  am  the  rose  of  Sharon."  What 
was  Sharon  ?  It  was  an  open  plain  where  anybody  might  wander,  and  where  even 
cattle  roamed  at  their  own  sweet  will.  Jesus  is  not  like  a  rose  in  Solomon's  garden, 
•hut  up  within  high  walls,  with  broken  glass  all  along  the  top.  Oh,  no  !  He  says, 
"I  am  the  rose  of  Sharon,"  everybody's  rose,  the  flower  for  the  common  people  to 
come  and  gather.  "  I  am  the  lily."  What  lily?  The  lily  of  the  palace  of  Shushan, 
enclosed  and  guarded  from  all  approach  1  No  ;  but,  "  I  am  the  lily  of  the  valleys," 
found  in  this  glen,  or  the  other  ravine,  growing  here,  there  and  everywhere :  "  I  am 
the  lily  of  the  valleys. "  Then  Christ  is  as  abundant  as  a  common  flower.  Whatever 
kind  of  rose  it  was,  it  was  a  common  rose  ;  whatever  kind  of  lily  it  was,  it  was  a 
well-known  lily  that  grew  freely  in  the  valleys  of  that  land.  Oh,  blessed  be  my 
Master's  name.  He  has  brought  us  a  common  salvation,  and  He  is  the  common 
people's  Christ  1  And  now,  poor  soul,  if  you  would  like  an  apronful  of  roses,  come 
and  have  them.  If  you  would  like  to  carry  away  a  big  handful  of  the  lilies  of  the 
valleys,  come  and  take  them,  as  many  as  you  will.  May  the  Lord  give  you  the  will ! 
Even  to  those  who  do  not  pluck  any,  there  is  one  strange  thing  that  must  not  be 
forgotten.  A  man  passes  by  a  rose-bush,  and  says,  "  I  cannot  stop  to  think  about 
roses,"  but  as  he  goes  along  he  exclaims,  "  Dear,  dear,  what  a  delicious  perfume  !  '* 
A  man  journeying  in  the  East  goes  through  a  field  that  is  full  of  lilies  ;  he  is  in  a 
great  hurry,  but,  for  all  that,  he  cannot  help  seeing  and  smelling  the  lilies  as  he 
rashes  through  the  field.  And,  do  you  know,  the  perfume  of  Christ  has  life  in  it ! 
He  is  "  a  savour  of  life  unto  life."  What  does  that  mean  but  that  the  smell  of  Him 
will  save?  (C.  E.  Sjmrgeon.)  The  lest  Jlower: — We  find  flowers  of  some  kind  or 
other  growing  everywhere.  They  spring  up  in  the  sandy  desert.  On  the  tops  of 
bleak  and  snow-capped  mountains,  where  even  trees  will  not  grow,  the  little  flowers 
may  be  seen.  Travellers  who  have  gone  near  the  North  Pole,  where  ice  and  snow 
last  aU  the  year,  have  been  surprised  to  find  in  some  places  red  snow.  And  when 
they  came  to  examine  it  with  a  microscope,  they  were  still  more  surprised  to  find 
that  the  colour  of  it  was  owing  to  an  exceedingly  smaU  kind  of  plant,  bearing  a 
flower  too  little  for  the  naked  eye  to  see.  But  among  all  the  multitude  of  flowers 
which  grow  on  the  earth,  there  is  none  like  this  which  Solomon  speaks  of  in  the 
verse  before  us.  "  I  am  the  Rose  of  Sharon."  This,  we  suppose,  refers  to  Jesus.  He 
is  the  "  Rose  of  Sharon."  Sharon  was  the  name  of  a  large  plain,  or  level  tract  of 
country  in  Palestine,  famous  for  the  number  of  flowers  which  grew  there.  And  if 
we  consider  this  "  Rose  of  Sharon  "  as  referring  to  our  blessed  Saviour,  then  we  may 
well  say  that  this  Rose  is  the  best  flower.  I.  Because  it  will  grow  everywhere. 
This  flower  does  not  grow  in  the  ground  like  other  flowers.  You  must  not  look  for 
it  in  the  beds  of  the  garden  ;  nor  in  the  fields,  the  valleys  or  the  mountains.  The 
foil  in  which  it  grows  is  the  human  heart.    And  when  any  person  learns  to  love  and 


CHAP,  u.]  THE  SOIf^G  OF  SOLOMON.  37 

serve  Jesus,  and  is  made  happy  by  Him,  then  we  may  say  that  the  "  Rose  of  Sharon  " 
is  growing  in  that  person's  heart.  This  flower  is  sometimes  found  growing  in  the 
hearts  of  very  young  people.  And  the  old  as  well  as  the  young — the  poor  as  well 
as  the  rich,  may  have  it  if  they  wiU.  It  is  growing  now  in  the  hearts  of  people  in 
all  the  dififerent  nations  of  the  earth.  John  WUliams,  the  martyr-missionary  of 
Erromanga,  planted  it  in  the  sunny  islands  of  the  South  Seas.  Robert  Moffat  planted 
it  far  up  into  the  southern  part  of  Africa  ;  and  other  missionaries  are  planting  it  all 
along  the  western  coast.  Dr.  Livingstone  carried  it  into  the  very  centre  of  Africa, 
from  the  East.  The  great  wall  of  separation,  which  kept  the  missionaries  so  long 
out  of  China,  has  been  thrown  down,  and  now  all  that  vast  country  is  waiting  to 
receive  the  Gospel.  The  servants  of  Jesus  are  going  about  over  the  burning  plains  of 
India,  and  planting  this  best  flower  there.  The  heat  is  dreadful  there  sometimes, 
but  still  it  is  not  too  hot  a  climate  for  the  "  Rose  of  Sharon  "  to  grow  and  flourish  in. 
The  Moravian  missionaries  have  carried  it  to  Greenland's  ice-bound  shores  ;  and  that 
climate,  even,  is  not  too  cold  for  it.  For  above  a  hundred  years  it  has  been  blooming 
sweetly  there.  And  now,  this  veir  day,  it  is  growing  and  flourishing  equally  well 
in  all  these  different  countries.  Oh,  what  a  wonderful  flower  this  is  !  There  is  no 
other  like  it  in  all  the  earth.  II.  Because  of  its  many  uses.  1.  It  is  beautiful 
to  look  at.  When  Jesus  was  on  earth,  most  people  saw  no  beauty  in  Him,  that  they 
should  desire  Him.  But  those  who  learn  to  know  and  love  Him,  find  Him  to  Iw 
"  the  chief  among  ten  thousand,  and  altogether  lovely."  The  greatest  happiness  of 
heaven  wiU  be  to  "see  His  face."  There  is  nothing  in  all  the  world  half  so  beautiful 
as  the  sight  of  Jesus  will  be  in  heaven.  2.  It  is  useful  for  its  fragrance,  as  well  aa 
for  its  beauty.  Every  one  knows  how  sweet  it  is  to  smell  a  beautiful  rose.  And  we 
read  in  the  Bible,  that  the  name  of  Jesus  is  "as  ointment  poured  forth."  This 
means,  that  it  is  just  as  pleasant  to  the  souls  of  those  who  love  Jesus  to  think  about 
Him,  as  it  is  to  their  bodily  senses  to  smeU  the  sweetest  flower,  or  the  most  fragrant 
ointment.  3.  Tlie  "  Rose  of  Sharon  "  bears  fruit  as  well  as  flowers,  and  its  fruit  is 
wholesome  and  pleasant.  It  is  made  to  be  eaten,  as  well  as  looked  at,  and  its  "  fruit 
is  sweet  to  the  taste  "  of  those  who  partake  of  it.  4.  The  "  Rose  of  Sharon  "  yields 
pure  water  to  diink,  as  well  as  food  to  eat.  There  is  a  singular  plant  in  the  East 
Indies  called  "the  pitcher-plant."  It  has  leaves,  or  flowers,  in  the  form  of  small 
pitchers.  Each  pitcher  has  a  lid  to  it,  and  at  certain  seasons  these  pitchers  are  filled 
with  a  sweet,  pleasant  liquid,  which  is  very  good  to  drink.  The  "  Rose  of  Sharon  " 
is  a  pitcher-plant.  It  is  fuU  of  pitchers.  These  are  not  only  always  full,  but  they 
never  can  be  emptied.  The  water  of  salvation  flows  into  them  as  fast  as  it  is  taken 
out.  And  oh,  it  is  delightful  water  1  It  is  cool,  clear  and  refreshing.  6.  The 
"Rose  of  Sharon  "  is  good  for  medicine,  as  well  as  for  food  and  drink.  When  Jesus, 
who  is  tMs  "  Rose  of  Sharon,"  was  on  earth.  He  opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind  ;  He 
unstopped  the  ears  of  the  deaf ;  He  made  the  lame  to  walk,  and  went  about ' '  healing 
aU  manner  of  sickness  and  disease  among  the  people."  Then,  He  cured  all  kinds  of 
bodily  diseases.  Now,  He  cures  all  kinds  of  spirituaZ  diseases.  6.  The  "Rose  of 
Sharon  "  is  good  for  clothing.  This  is  a  very  singular  use  to  make  of  a  flower.  We 
often  hear  of  people  making  wreaths  of  flowers  to  ornament  or  dress  the  head  with. 
But  no  one  ever  heard  of  an  earthly  flower  that  was  good  to  make  clothing  of.  The 
"Rose  of  Sharon,"  however,  is  good  for  clothing.  We  read  in  the  Bible  about 
"  garments  of  salvation  " — about  "  robes  washed  and  made  white  in  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb  " — about  "clothing  of  wrought  gold — all-glorious  within."  These  aU  refer  to 
that  righteousness  of  Jesus,  which  He  puts  upon  all  His  people  as  the  dress  they  are 
to  wear  in  heaven.  Oh,  the  clothing  which  is  made  out  of  the  "  Rose  of  Sharon  "  is 
very  beautiful  I  It  is  so  in  God's  sight.  There  never  was  any  like  it.  7.  And  then 
the  "  Rose  of  Sharon  "  is  good  to  make  people  rich.  Nobody  ever  thinks  of  feeling 
rich  because  he  has  a  rose.  Why,  you  may  have  a  bunch  of  roses  ;  yes,  a  whole 
garden  of  roses,  and  yet  not  be  veiy  rich.  Sometimes  we  hear  of  a  king  making  a 
present  of  a  golden  rose  to  one  of  nis  friends.  Yet  that  would  not  make  him  rich. 
But  every  one  who  has  the  "  Rose  of  Sharon  "  is  rich.  Nobody  can  tell  how  rich 
Christ  makes  His  people.  "They  shall  inherit  all  things."  What  more  could  they 
have  ?  III.  Because  it  makes  people  happy  vthen  nothing  else  can.  What  a 
dreadful  thing  it  must  be  on  board  a  burning  ship,  far  off  on  the  ocean  !  We  all  heard 
about  that  dreadful  calamity — the  burning  of  the  steamer  "Austria."  She  was  full 
of  passengers.  The  fire  spread  almost  like  lightning.  Could  anything  make  persons 
calm  and  happy  on  board  that  burning  vessel  ?  Yes,  there  were  some  there  who 
loved  Jesus,  who  had  the  "Rose  of  Sharon"  with  them  and  that  made  tbem  happy. 
lY.  BscAUS£  II NSYSB  FADES.    Its  beauty  never  decays.    Its  leaves  never  fall  off. 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

Winter  never  comes  in  heaven.  The  flowers  are  blooming  all  the  time  there.  And 
chief  among  them  is  this  beautiful  "Rose  of  Sharon."  Ah  !  my  dear  children,  if 
you  want  to  love  one  who  never  dies  and  never  changes,  then  love  Jesus.  He  is  the 
"  Rose  of  Sharon,"  and  this  is  the  best  flower,  because  it  never  fades.  V.  Becausb 
irs  BEAUTY  IS  ALWAYS  INCREASING.  There  never  was  another  flower  known  of 
which  this  could  be  said.  You  take  a  small  rose-bud  and  look  at  it.  How  beautiful 
it  is  1  As  it  grows  larger  its  beauty  increases.  Every  day  it  swells  to  a  greater  size. 
You  see  more  and  more  of  its  lovely  crimson  colour.  Presently  the  bud  begins  to 
open.  You  can  almost  see  its  leaves  expanding  as  you  stand  and  gaze  upon  it.  How 
interesting  it  is  to  watch  it !  Gradually  it  imfolds  itself,  tiU  all  its  many  leaves 
have  opened  themselves,  and  now  it  stands  before  you  a  fragrant,  blushing,  beautiful, 
full-blown  rose.  How  sweetly  it  looks  1  Can  anything  in  the  world  be  mora 
delightful  ?  But  now  it's  all  over  I  You  have  seen  all  there  is  about  the  rose  worth 
seeing.  Very  soon  it  will  wither  away,  and  you  won't  care  to  look  at  it  any  more. 
But  it  is  very  different  with  the  "Rose  of  Sharon."  This  will  be  always  growing 
and  always  blooming.  And  its  flowers  will  be  always  increasing  in  beauty.  I  do 
not  mean  that  some  of  its  flowers  will  die,  and  others,  more  beautiful,  come  out  upon 
it.  Not  one  of  its  flowers  wUl  ever  die.  But  they  wiU  all  go  on  increasing  in  beauty 
continually.  Oh,  wonderful  plant!  How  glorious  it  will  be,  if  we  get  to  heaven 
to  look  on  and  to  watch  its  increasing  beauty  to  all  eternity  !  {H.  Newton,  D.D.) 
The  rose  and  the  lily : — It  is  our  Lord  who  speaks  :  "  I  am  the  Rose  of  Sharon." 
How  is  it  that  He  utters  Hia  own  commendation,  for  it  is  an  old  and  true  adage,  that 
" self-praise  is  no  recommendation"?  None  but  vain  creatures  ever  praise  them- 
selves, and  yet  Jesus  often  praises  Himself.  How,  then,  shall  we  solve  the  riddle  ?  Is 
not  this  the  answer,  that  He  is  no  creature  at  all,  and  therefore  comes  not  beneath 
the  rule  ?  For  the  creature  to  praise  itself  is  vanity,  but  for  the  Creator  to  praise 
Himself,  for  the  Lord  God  to  manifest  and  show  forth  His  own  glory  is  becoming  and 
proper.  Our  Lord,  when  He  thus  praises  Himself  doubtless  does  so  for  an  exceUent 
reason,  namely,  that  no  one  can  possibly  reveal  Him  to  the  sons  of  men  but  Himself. 
No  lips  can  tell  the  love  of  Christ  to  the  heart  till  Jesus  Himself  shall  speak  within. 
Christ  must  be  His  own  mirror  ;  as  the  diamond  alone  can  cut  the  diamond,  so  He 
alone  can  display  Himself.  L  First,  I  shall  speak  upon  the  motives  of  our  Lord 
IN  THUS  COMMENDING  HiMSELF.  I  take  it  that  He  has  designs  of  love  in  this  speech. 
He  would  have  all  His  people  rich  in  high  and  happy  thoughts  concerning  Hia 
blessed  person.  1.  Doubtless,  He  commends  Himself  because  high  thoughts  of  Christ 
wUl  enable  us  to  act  consistently  with  our  relations  towards  Him.  The  saved  soul 
is  espoused  to  Christ.  Now,  in  the  marriage  estate,  it  is  a  great  assistance  to  happiness 
if  the  wife  has  high  ideas  of  her  husband.  In  the  marriage  imion  between  the  soul 
and  Christ,  this  is  exceedingly  necessary.  2.  Moreover,  our  Master  knows  that  high 
thoughts  of  Him  increase  our  love.  If  we  are  to  love  Him  at  aU,  it  must  be  with  the 
love  of  admiration  ;  and  the  higher  that  admiration  shall  rise,  the  more  vehemently 
wiU  our  love  flame  forth.  3.  A  high  esteem  of  Christ,  moreover,  as  He  well  knoweth, 
is  very  necessary  to  our  comfort.  Beloved,  when  you  esteem  Christ  very  highly,  the 
things  of  this  world  become  of  small  account  with  you,  and  their  loss  is  not  so 
heavily  felt.  Get  but  delightful  thoughts  of  Him,  and  you  will  feel  like  a  man  who 
has  lost  a  pebble  but  has  preserved  his  diamond  ;  like  the  man  who  has  seen  a  few 
cast  clouts  and  rotten  rags  consumed  in  the  flames,  but  has  saved  his  children  from 
the  conflagration.  You  will  rejoice  in  your  deepest  distress  because  Christ  is  yours 
if  you  have  a  high  sense  of  the  preciousness  of  your  Master.  4.  Our  Lord  would 
have  us  entertain  great  thoughts  of  Himself,  because  this  wUl  quicken  all  the  powers 
of  onr  soul.  I  spoke  to  you  just  now  of  love  receiving  force  from  an  esteem  of  Jesus, 
I  might  say  the  like  of  faith,  or  patience,  or  humility.  5.  High  thoughts  of  Jesus 
wUl  set  us  upon  high  attempts  for  His  honour.  When  the  grand  thought  of  love  to 
God  has  gained  full  possession  of  the  soul,  men  have  been  able  to  actually  accomplish 
what  other  men  have  not  even  thought  of  doing.  Love  has  laughed  at  impossibilities, 
and  proved  that  she  is  not  to  be  quenched  hj  many  waters,  nor  drowned  by  floods. 
II.  Whatever  may  be  the  commendable  motive  for  any  statement,  yet  it  must  not 
be  made  if  it  be  not  accurate,  and  therefore,  in  the  second  place,  I  come  to  observe 
oim  Lord's  justification  foe  this  commendation,  which  is  abundantly 
satisfactory  to  all  who  know  Him.  What  our  Lord  sajrs  of  Himself  is  strictly  true. 
It  faUs  short  of  the  mark,  it  is  no  exaggeration.  Observe  each  one  of  the  words. 
He  begins,  "I  am."  Those  two  little  words  I  would  not  insist  upon,  but  it  is  no 
straining  of  language  to  say  that  even  here  we  have  a  great  deep.  "  I  am"  hath 
revealed  Himself  onto  thee  in  a  more  glorious  manner  tbm  He  did  unto  Moses  at  th« 


CBkt.  u.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON  39 

burning  bush,  the  great  "  I  AM  "  in  human  flesh  has  become  thy  Saviour  and  thy 
Lord.  "I  am  the  rose."  We  understand  from  this,  that  Christ  is  lovely.  He 
selects  one  of  the  most  charming  of  flowers  to  set  forth  Himself.  All  the  beauties  of 
all  the  creatures  are  to  be  foimd  in  Christ  in  greater  perfection  than  in  the  creatures 
themselves.  He  is  infinitely  more  beautiful  in  the  garden  of  the  sold  and  in  the 
paradise  of  God  than  the  rose  can  be  in  the  gardens  of  earth,  though  it  be  the 
universally  acknowledged  queen  of  flowers.  But  the  spouse  adds,  "  I  am  the  rose  of 
Sharon. "  This  was  the  best  and  rarest  of  roses.  Jesus  is  not  "  the  rose  "  alone,  but 
"  the  rose  of  Sharon,"  just  as  He  calls  His  righteousness  "  gold,"  and  then  adds, 
"  the  gold  of  Ophir  "—the  best  of  the  best.  Our  Lord  adds,  _'*  I  am  the  lily,"  thus 
giving  Himself  a  double  commendation.  Indeed,  Jesus  Christ  deserves  not  to  be 
praised  doubly,  but  sevenfold,  aye,  and  unto  seven  times  seven.  Earth's  choicest 
charms  commingled,  feebly  picture  His  abounding  preciousness.  He  is  the  "lily  of 
the  valleys. "  Does  He  intend  by  that  to  hint  to  us  that  He  is  a  lily  in  His  lowliest 
estate,  a  lily  of  the  valley  ?  The  carpenter's  son,  living  in  poverty,  weanng  the 
common  garb  of  the  poor,  is  He  the  lily  of  the  valleys  1  Yes  ;  He  is  a  lily  to  you  and 
to  me,  poor  dwellers  in  the  lowlands.  Up  yonder  He  is  a  lily  on  the  hilltops,  where 
all  celestial  eyes  admire  Him  ;  down  here,  in  these  valleys  of  fears  and  cares.  He  is  a 
lily  still  as  fair  as  in  heaven.  The  words,  having  been  opened  up  one  bv  one,  teach 
us  that  Christ  is  lovely  to  all  our  spiritual  senses.  The  rose  is  delightful  to  the  eye, 
but  it  is  also  refreshing  to  the  nostril,  and  the  lily  the  same.  So  is  Jesus.  Go 
anywhere  where  Jesus  is,  and  though  you  do  not  actually  hear  His  name,  yet  the 
sweet  influence  which  flows  from  His  love  will  be  plainly  enough  discernible.  Our 
Lord  is  so  lovely,  that  even  the  recollection  of  His  love  is  sweet.  Take  the  rose  of 
Sharon,  and  piill  it  leaf  from  leaf,  and  lay  by  the  leaves  in  the  jar  of  memory,  and 
you  shall  find  each  leaf  most  fragrant  long  afterwards,  filling  the  house  with  perfume  ; 
and  this  very  day  we  remember  times  of  refreshing  enjoyed  at  the  Lord's  table  still 
delightful  as  we  reflect  upon  them.  Jesus  is  lovely  in  the  bud  as  well  as  when  full 
blown.  You  admire  the  rose  quite  as  much  when  it  is  but  a  bud  as  when  it  bursts 
forth  into  perfect  development :  and  methinks,  Christ  to  you,  my  beloved,  in  the 
first  blush  of  your  piety,  was  not  one  whit  less  sweet  than  He  is  now.  Jesus  fuU 
blown,  in  our  riper  experience,  has  lost  none  of  His  excellence.  When  we  shall  see 
Him  fully  blown  in  the  garden  of  paradise,  shall  we  not  count  it  to  be  our  highest 
heaven  to  gaze  upon  Him  for  ever  ?  Christ  is  so  lovely  that  He  needs  no  beautifying. 
Let  the  roughest  tongue  speak  sincerely  of  Him  in  the  most  broken  but  honest  accents, 
and  Jesus  Himself  is  such  a  radiant  jewel  that  the  setting  will  beof  small  consequence, 
He  is  80  glorious  that  He  is  "  Most  adorned  when  unadorned  the  most."  He  is  so 
lovely,  again,  that  He  satisfies  the  highest  taste  of  the  most  educated  spirit  to  the 
very  full.  The  greatest  amateur  in  perfumes  is  quite  satisfied  with  the  rose,  and  I 
should  think  that  no  man  of  taste  wUl  ever  be  able  to  criticize  the  lily,  and  cavil  at 
its  form.  Now,  when  the  soul  has  arrived  at  her  highest  pitch  of  true  taste,  she 
shall  still  be  content  with  Christ,  nay,  she  shall  be  the  better  able  to  appreciate  Him. 
Dwelling  for  another  minute  on  this  subject,  let  me  remark  that  our  Lord  Jesua 
Christ  deserves  all  that  He  has  said  of  Himself.  First,  in  His  Divine  glory.  The  glory 
of  Christ  as  God,  who  shall  write  upon  it  ?  Nothing  is  great,  nothing  is  excellent 
but  God,  and  Christ  is  God.  0  roses  and  lilies,  where  are  ye  now  ?  Our  Lord 
deserves  these  praises,  again,  in  His  perfection  of  manhood.  He  is  like  ourselves, 
but  in  Him  was  no  sin.  •'  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh,  but  hath  nothing  iu 
Me. "  Throughout  the  whole  of  His  biography,  there  is  not  a  faulty  line.  He 
deserves  this  commendation,  too,  in  His  mediatorial  quaKfications.  Since  His  blood 
has  washed  us  from  all  our  sins,  we  talk  no  more  of  the  red  roses,  for  what  can  they 
do  to  purify  the  soul  ?  Since  His  righteousness  has  made  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved, 
we  will  speak  no  more  of  spotless  lilies,  for  what  are  these  ?  He  deserves  aU  this 
praise,  too,  in  His  reigning  glory.  He  has  a  glory  which  His  Father  has  given  Him  aa 
a  reward,  in  the  power  of  which  He  sits  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God  for  ever  and 
ever,  and  shall  soon  come  to  judge  the  world  in  righteousness,  and  the  people  with 
equity.  View  the  Lord  Jesus  in  any  way  you  please,  all  that  He  Himself  can  say 
concerning  Himself  He  richly  deserves,  and  therefore  glory  be  unto  His  name  forever 
and  ever,  and  let  the  whole  earth  say.  Amen.  III.  I  shall  now  conduct  you  to  a 
third  consideration,  namely,  the  influence  of  this  commendation  trPON  us. 
Think  of  the  ruin  of  this  world  till  Christ  came  into  it !  Methinks  I  see  in  vision 
a  howling  wilderness,  a  great  and  terrible  desert,  like  to  the  Sahara.  Christ  is  the 
rose  which  has  changed  the  scene.  If  you  would  have  great  thoughts  of  Christ  think 
of  your  own  ruin.     Yonder  I  behold  you  cast  out  an  infant,  unswathed,  unwashed, 

24 


40  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.u. 


defiled  with  your  own  blood,  too  foul  to  be  looked  upon  except  by  beasts  of  prey. 
And  what  is  this  that  has  been  cast  into  your  bosom,  and  which  lying  there  has 
suddenly  made  you  fair  and  lovely  ?    A  rose  has  been  thrown  into  your  bosom  by  a 
Divine  hand,  and  for  its  sake  you  have  been  pitied  and  cared  for  by  Divine  Providence, 
you  are  washed  and  cleaned  from  your  defilement,  you  are  adopted  into  Heaven's 
family,  the  fair  seal  of  love  is  upon  your  forehead,  and  the  ring  of  faithfulness  is  on 
your  hand — a  prince  unto  God — though  just  now  you  were  an  orphan,  cast  away.     O 
prize  the  rose,  the  putting  of  which  into  your  bosom  has  made  you  what  yoti 
are !    Consider  your  daily  need  of  this  rose.     You  live  in  the  pestilential  air  of  this 
earth :  take  Christ  away,  you  die.     Christ  is  the  daily  food  of  your  spirit.     Think 
of  the  estimation  that  Omist  is  had  in  beyond  the  skies,  in  the  land  where  things 
are  measured  by  the  right  standard,  where  men  are  no  longer  deceived  by  the 
delusions  of  earth.    Think  how  Grod  esteems  the  Only  Begotten,  His  unspeakable  gift 
to  us.   Consider  what  the  angels  think  of  Him,  as  they  count  it  their  highest  honour 
to  veil  their  faces  at  His  feet.  Consider  what  the  blood-washed  think  of  Him,  as  day 
•without  night  they  sing  His  well-deserved  praises  with  gladdest  voices.     Remember 
how  you  yourself  have  sometimes  esteemed  Him.     Have  there  not  been  momenta 
when  the  chariots  of  Amminadib  seemed  but  poor  dragging  things,  compared  with 
the  wheels  of  your  soul  when  Jesus  ravished  your  heart  with  His  celestial  embrace  t 
Estimate  Him  to-day  as  you  did  then,  for  He  is  the  same,  though  you  are  not.    IV.  I 
shall  close  by  asking  you  to  make  confessions  suggested  bt  my  text.    I  am  sura 
you  have  all  hadfaSs,  and  slips,  and  shortcomings,  with  regard  to  Him.  Well,  then, 
come  humbly  to  Jesus  at  once.     He  will  forgive  you  readily,  for  He  does  not  soon 
take  ofifence  at  His  spouse.   He  may  sometimes  speak  sharp  words  to  her,  because  He 
loves  her,  but  His  heart  is  always  true,  and  faithful,  and  tender.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  Base  of  Sharon,  and  the  Lily  of  the  Valleys: — Jesus  calls  Himself  first,  '*  the 
Eose  of  Sharon,"  and  then,  "  the  Lily  of  the  Valleys."    Let  us  consider  what  He 
means.    I.  The  Rose  of  Shaeon.    Of  all  the  flowers  that  God  has  made,  the 
rose,  take  it  all  in  all,  is  the  loveliest  and  the  sweetest.     It  has^  three  things  in 
perfection — shape,  colour,  and  fragrance.     Indeed,  we  may  call  it  the  queen  of 
flowers.     Now,  it  is  in  its  sweetness  especially  that  the  rose  reminds  me  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.     His  character  was  marked  not  only  by  manliness,  but  also  with  what 
we  may  call  "  sweetness,"  for  he  had  all  the  firmness  of  a  man  and  all  the  tenderness 
of  a  woman.     I  will  give  you  another  reason  for  the  comparison  of  Christ  to  a  rose. 
The  rose  is  the  most  common  as  well  as  the  most  beautiful  of  all  the  flowers.  ^  You 
find  it  wherever  you  go, — in  all  countries  and  in  all  places.     In  fact,  it  is  the 
iiniversal  flower :  it  belongs  to  everybody.    And  in  this  respect  it  resembles  Christ, 
for  Christ  is  the  common  property  of  aU — of  the  peasant  as  well  as  of  the  prince  ; 
of  poor  as  well  as  of  rich ;  of  the  child  as  well  as  of  the  full-grown  man.    He  belongs 
to  all  nations,  too — to  the  dwellers  in  north  and  south  and  east  and  west ;  and 
there  is  no  one,  whatever  he  may  be,  or  wherever  he  lives,  who  cannot  say,  "The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  my  Saviour,  and  I  claim  Him  as  my  own."    IL  But  the  Saviour 
calls  Himself  in  the  text  the  Lilt  of  the  Valleys,  and  we  have  now  to  consider 
what  this  second  title  is  intended  to  teach  us.     Supposing  that  "the  Lily  of  the 
Valleys  "  is  the  flower  which  we  know  by  that  name— you  all  remember  how  graceful 
it  is,  with  pretty  little  white  bells  ranged  in  a  row  on  a  tapering  stalk,  and  how  it 
appears  to  hide  itself  modestly  under  the  shade  of  its  broad  green  leaves.     Now, 
^y  is  it  thus  chosen  \    Partly  because  the  lily  is  of  a  beautiful  white  colour,  and 
represents  purity.     And  you  know  how  pure  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was.     Never  at 
any  time  <ud  He  think,  or  say,  or  do  anything  that  wa,?  wrong.     As  a  child,  as  a 
boy,  as  a  man,  He  was  absolutely  free  from  fault.     But  the  lily  of  the  valley — 
because  it  has  a  (k'oopuig  head,  and  retires  behind  the  shade  of  its  broad  green 
leaves,  instead  of  thrusting  itself  forward — ^may  be  taken  as  an  emblem  of  lowliness 
or  humility,  and  so  will  serve  to  remind  us  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     III.  We  will 
try,  in  conclusion,  to  apply  the  subject  to  ourselves,  so  that  we  may  be  the 
better,  by  God's  blessing,  for  having  talked  about  it  and  thought  about  it.     We 
have  the  example  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  proposed  to  us.    He  is  perfect,  and  we 
ean  never  hope  to  be  perfect.     But  we  may  become,  by  the  kind  help  of  His  Holy 
Spirit,  more  and  more  like  Him  every  day.     {0.  Calthrcyp,  M.A.).     The  rose  and  tM 
Ifly: — I  have  taken  a  text,  chiefly  because  it  is  generally  supposed  that  a  sermon 
oaimot  be  preached  without  a  Bible  text.     But  I  only  want  those  two  words — Rose, 
JJlj ;  and  I  take  those  two  because  they  may  be  regarded  as  the  chief  and  the 
representative  of  the  midsummer  flowers.    But  how  can  we  learn  from  the  rose  and 
1  the  lilj  oozioeimng  God  1    In  this  way.    Everything  a  man  does  or  makes  embodies 


CHAP,  u.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  41 

and  expresses  himself.  The  Bible  tells  us  that  is  true  even  of  children.  "  Even  a 
child  is  known  by  his  doings. "  Somehow  children  and  men  always  stamp  them- 
Belves  on  everything  they  make  and  everything  they  do.  And  this  is  one  of  the 
chief  ways  by  which  we  come  to  know  God.  We  look  at  the  things  He  makes,  and 
when  we  find  out  what  character  they  bear  we  may  say,  God  is  like  this,  only 
infinitely  better.  If  He  made  this,  the  possibility  of  making  more  and  better  than 
this  must  be  in  Him.  If  God  made  the  rose  and  the  lUy,  what  must  He  be  t  1.  Now 
the  first  thing  that  comes  to  our  thought,  when  we  notice  the  exquisite  form  of 
the  rose  and  the  stately  grace  of  the  lily,  is — How  beautiful  God  must  be.  What 
beautiful  thought  He  must  have  to  have  designed  such  forms,  and  what  a  beautiful 
touch  to  mould  such  forms,  and  so  how  beautiful  He  Himself  must  be.  2.  Looking 
again  at  the  rose  and  the  lily  we  are  reminded  of  their  fragrance,  we  feel  their 
fragrance — that  sweet  scent  of  the  rose,  that  rich  and  almost  overpowering  odour 
of  the  lUy.  Then  it  strikes  us  that  they  are  not  merely  beautiful  to  look  at,  they 
«re  scattering  blessings  continually — pouring  forth  their  treasures  to  enrich  the 
air,  and  to  give  us  pleasure  and  health,  filling  the  summer  sky  with  balmy  breath, 
spending  themselves  to  do  others  good,  to  make  others  glad.  And  so  they  teU  us 
■what  God  is.  For  in  God's  thought  they  were  filled  with  that  fragrance,  and  in 
breathing  it  out  they  fain  would  tell  us  of  Him  of  whose  eternal  sweetness  they 
partake.  What  must  the  fragrance  of  God  be  who  put  such  fragrance  into  His 
flowers !  And  this  we  can  feel  to  be  true  of  God  manifested  in  Christ.  The 
fragrance  of  Christ's  life  on  earth  is  its  greatest  charm.  It  was  a  life  of  self-denials, 
generosities  and  charities ;  crowded  with  thoughtfulnesses  and  helpfulnesses, 
exemplifying  His  own  words,  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  receive."  3.  Then, 
again,  we  are  struck  with  the  colour  of  the  rose  and  the  lily — that  creamy  white- 
ness of  the  lily,  that  tinted  whiteness  of  the  rose.  We  feel  purity  in  colour,  more 
especially  in  white  flowers,  but  it  is  the  characteristic  of  them  all.  God  made 
these  pure  white  flowers,  then  what  must  His  purity  be  ?  We  are  often  touched 
with  God's  wonderful  and  exhaustless  power  of  making  pure  things — clear  waters, 
white  snows,  woolly  clouds,  new  leaves,  blue  sky,  and  the  exquisite  pale  tinting 
all  about  the  summer  sunset.  Moses  had  a  vision  of  the  surroundings  of  God,  and 
under  His  feet  was  a  paved  work  of  a  sapphire  stone,  and,  as  it  were,  the  body  of 
heaven  in  His  clearness.  This  purity  is  characteristic  of  God  "manifest  in  the 
flesh."  Jesus  was  clothed  in  white  all  through  His  life,  and  on  His  beautiful 
garments  one  stain  never  came.  4.  So  the  leaves  and  petals  of  rose  and  lily 
become  leaves  of  a  Bible  to  us,  from  which  we  may  learn  of  God.  The  flowers  say, 
' '  We  come  to  tell  you  that  God  lives,  that  God  loves,  and  that  God  wants  your  love. " 
The  roses  say,  "  Love  and  serve  the  good  and  beautiful  God,  who  may  be  served  by 
everything  that  is  kind  and  lovely."  The  lilies  say,  "Love  and  serve  the  pure 
and  righteous  God,  who  may  be  served  b^  everything  that  is  holy  and  true. "  And 
all  the  other  midsummer  flowers,  gathering  roimd  their  king  and  queen,  seem  to 
join  in  one  great  chorus,  and  to  say,  "  We  love  and  serve  the  One,  the  living  God — 
the  Wonderful,  the  Beautiful,  the  Pure,  the  Grood — and  jou  should  love  Him  too." 
(B.  Tuck.) 

Yer.  2.  As  the  lily  among  thorns,  so  is  My  love  among  the  danghters. — The  lilr/ 
among  Vuyms : — I.  First,  I  think  my  text  very  beautifully  sets  forth  the  relation 
OF  THE  Chttboh  AND  OF  EVEKT  INDIVIDUAL  TO  Christ.  He  stvlcs  her,  "  My  love." 
An  exquisitely  sweet  name  ;  as  if  His  love  had  all  gone  forth  of  Him,  and  had  become 
embodied  in  her.  1.  The  first  point,  then,  of  her  relation  to  Christ  is  that  she  has  His 
love.  Think  of  it,  and  let  the  blessed  truth  dwell  long  and  sweetly  in  your  meditations. 
Each  one  of  us  may  rejoice  in  the  title  under  which  our  Lord  addresses  us — My  love. " 
This  love  is  distinguishing  love,  for  in  its  light  one  special  object  shines  as  a  Uly, 
and  the  rest,  "  the  daughters  "  are  as  thorns.  Observe  that  this  is  a  love  which  He 
openly  avows.  The  Bridegroomjspeaks  and  says  before  all  men,  "As  a  lily  among 
thorns,  so  is  My  love  among  the  daughters."  He  puts  it  upon  record  in  that  Book 
which  is  more  widely  scattered  than  any  other,  for  He  is  not  ashamed  to  have  it 
published  on  the  housetops.  He  declares  it  that  His  adversaries  may  know  it,  that 
He  hath  a  people  in  whom  His  heart  delights,  and  these  He  will  have  and  hold  as  His 
own  when  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away.  This  love,  wherever  it  has  been 
revealed  to  its  object,  is  reciprocated.  If  the  Lord  has  really  spoken  home  to  your 
soul  and  said,  "I  have  loved  thee,"  your  soul  has  gladly  answered,  "This  is  my 
Beloved,  and  this  is  my  Friend  ;  yea,  He  is  altogether  lovely. "  2.  Next,  she  bears 
His  likeness.    Notice  the  first  verse  of  the  chapter,  wherein  the  Bridegroom  speaks— 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  il. 

"I  am  the  rose  of  Sharon,  and  the  lily  of  the  valleys."  He  ia  the  lily,  but  His 
beloved  is  like  Him  ;  for  He  applies  His  own  chosen  emblem  to  her — "As  the  lily 
among  thorns,  so  ia  My  love  among  the  daughters. "  Notice  that  He  is  the  lily,  she 
is  as  the  lUy,  that  is  to  say.  He  has  the  beauty  and  she  reflects  it ;  she  is  comely  in 
His  comeliness,  which  He  puts  upon  her.  Note,  too,  that  He  who  gave  the  beauty  is 
the  first  to  see  it.  While  they  are  unknown  to  the  world  Jesus  knows  His  own. 
Love's  eyes  are  quick,  and  her  ears  are  open.  Love  covers  a  multitude  of  favdts,  but 
it  discovers  a  multitude  of  beauties.  Let  His  condescending  discernment  have  all 
honour  for  this  generous  appreciation  of  us.  Let  us  bless  and  love  Him  because  He 
deigns  to  think  so  highly  of  us  who  owe  everything  to  Him.  '*  Thou  art,"  saith  He, 
*'  My  love,  as  the  Uly."  It  is  evident  that  the  Lord  Jesus  takes  delight  in  thia 
beauty,  which  He  has  put  upon  His  people.  He  values  it  at  so  great  a  rate  that  He 
counts  all  rival  beauties  to  be  but  as  thorns.  3.  Bringing  out  still  further  the 
relationship  between  Christ  and  His  Church,  I  want  you  to  notice  that  her  position 
has  drawn  out  His  love.  "  As  the  lUy,"  saith  He,  "  among  thorns,  so  is  My  love." 
He  spied  her  out  among  the  thorns.  She  was  at  the  first  no  better  than  a  thorn  her- 
self ;  His  grace  alone  made  her  to  differ  from  the  briars  about  her  ;  but  as  soon  as 
ever  He  had  put  His  life  and  His  grace  into  her,  though  she  dwelt  among  the  ungodly, 
she  became  as  a  lily,  and  He  spied  her  out.  The  thorn-brake  could  not  hide  His 
beloved.  "  As  the  lily  among  thorns  "  wears  also  another  meaning.  Dr.  Thompson 
writes  of  a  certain  lily,  "It  grows  among  thorns,  and  I  have  sadly  lacerated  my 
hand  in  extricating  it  from  them.  Nothing  can  be  in  higher  contrast  than  the 
luxuriant,  velvety  softness  of  tMs  lily  and  the  withered,  tangled  hedge  of  thorns 
about  it. "  Ah,  beloved,  you  know  who  it  was  that  in  gathering  your  soul  and  mine, 
lacerated  not  His  hand  only,  but  His  feet,  and  His  head,  and  His  side,  and  His  heart, 
yea,  and  His  inmost  soul.  4.  Yet  once  more,  I  think  many  a  child  of  God  may 
regard  himself  as  still  being  a  lily  among  thorns,  because  of  his  afflictions.  Certainly 
the  Church  is  so,  and  she  is  thereby  kept  for  Christ's  own.  If  thorns  made  it  hard 
for  Him  to  reach  us  for  our  salvation,  there  is  another  kind  of  thorn  which  makes  it 
hard  for  any  enemy  to  come  at  us  for  our  hurt.  Our  trials  and  tribulations,  which  we 
would  fain  escape  from,  often  act  as  a  spiritual  protection  :  they  hedge  ua  about  and 
ward  ofif  many  a  devouring  foe.  Sharp  as  they  are,  they  serve  as  a  fence  and  a 
defence.  II.  Our  text  is  full  of  instruction  as  to  the  relationship  of  the  Ohuech 
AND  EACH  INDIVIDUAL  BELIEVEB  TO  THE  WORLD — "The  Hly  among  thoms."  1. 
First,  then,  she  has  incomparable  beauty.  As  compared  and  contrasted  with  all  else 
she  is  as  the  lily  to  the  thorn-brake.  The  thorns  are  worthless,  they  flourish,  and 
spread,  and  cumber  the  ground,  but  they  yield  no  fruit,  and  only  grow  to  be  cut 
down  for  the  oven.  Alas,  such  is  man  by  nature,  at  his  best.  As  for  the  lily,  it  is 
a  thing  of  beauty  and  a  joy  for  ever  ;  it  lives  shedding  sweet  perfume,  and  when  it 
is  gathered  its  loveliness  adorns  the  chamber  to  which  it  is  taken.  So  does  the  saint 
bless  his  generation  while  here,  and  when  he  is  taken  away  he  is  regarded  with 
pleasure  even  in  heaven  above  as  one  of  the  flowers  of  God.  He  will  ere  long  be 
transplanted  from  among  the  thoms  to  the  garden  enclosed  beyond  the  river,  where 
the  King  delights  to  dwell,  for  such  a  flower  is  far  too  fair  to  be  left  for  ever  amid 
tangled  briars.  2.  In  the  comparison  of  the  saint  to  the  lily  we  remark  that  he  has, 
like  the  lily,  a  surpassing  excellence.  The  thorn  is  a  fruit  of  the  curse :  it  springs  up 
because  of  sin.  Not  so  the  lily :  it  is  a  fair  type  of  the  blessing  which  maketh  rich 
without  the  sorrow  of  carking  care.  The  thorn  is  the  mark  of  wrath  and  the  Uly  is 
the  symbol  of  Divine  Providence.  A  true  believer  is  a  blessing,  a  tree  whose  leaves 
heal  and  whose  fruit  feeds.  A  genuine  Christian  is  a  living  gospel,  and  embodiment 
of  goodwill  towards  men.  3.  The  last  point  with  regard  to  our  relationship  to  the 
world  is  that  the  Church  and  many  individual  Christians  are  called  to  endure  singular 
trials,  which  make  them  feel  ' '  as  the  lily  among  thorns. "  That  lovely  flower  seems 
out  of  place  in  such  company,  does  it  not?  Christ  said,  "Behold,  I  send  you  forth 
as  sheep  among  sheep" — no,  no,  that  is  my  mistake,  "  as  sheep  among  wolves."  It 
is  a  very  blessed  thing  to  be  as  sheep  among  sheep  :  to  lie  down  with  them  under 
the  shadow  of  the  great  rock,  and  feed  with  them  in  green  pastures  under  the 
Shepherd's  eye.  This  is  our  privilege,  and  we  ought  to  value  it  greatly,  and  unite 
with  the  Church  and  frequent  its  ordinances  ;  but  even  then  we  shall,  some  of  us, 
have  to  go  home  to  an  ungodly  family,  or  to  go  out  into  the  world  to  win  our  bread, 
and  then  we  shall  be  as  sheep  among  wolves.  Grace  struggling  in  loneliness  is  very 
choice  in  God's  esteem.  If  man  sees  thee  not,  0  lonely  believer,  thou  mayest  never- 
theless sing.  "Thou  God  seest  me."  The  flower  which  blooms  for  God  alone  has  » 
special  honour  put  upon  it,  and  so  hath  the  saint  whose  c[uiet  life  is  all  for  Jesuiw 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  49 

If  you  are  unappreciated  by  those  around  you,  do  not  therefore  be  distressed,  for  you 
are  honourable  in  the  sight  of  God.  But  why  doth  the  Lord  put  his  lilies  among 
thorns  1  It  ia  because  He  works  transformations,  singular  transformations,  by  their 
means.  He  can  make  a  lily  grow  among  thorns  till  the  thorns  grow  into  lilies. 
He  can  set  a  Christian  in  a  gomess  family  till  first  one  and  then  another  shall  feel 
the  Divine'  power,  and  shall  say,  "  We  will  go  with  you,  for  we  perceive  that  God  ia 
with  you."  Be  lilies,  preach  by  your  actions,  preach  by  your  kindness,  and  by  your 
love  ;  and  I  feel  quite  sure  that  your  influence  will  be  a  power  for  good.  If  the  Holy 
Spirit  helps  all  of  you  to  stand  among  your  associates  as  lilies  among  the  thorns,  the 
day  will  come  when  thorns  will  die  out,  and  lilies  will  spring  up  on  every  side  :  sin  wiU 
be  banished  and  grace  wiU  abo\md.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ  and  the  believer : — I. 
Inquire  what  Cheist  thinks  of  the  believer. — "  As  the  lily  among  the  thorns, 
80  is  My  love  among  the  daughters."  1.  See  what  Christ  thinks  of  the  unconverted 
world.     It  is  like  a  field  fuU  of  briars  and  thorns  in  His  eyes.     (1)  Because  fruitless. 

(2)  Because,  when  the  Word  is  preached  among  them,  it  is  like  sowing  among  thorns. 

(3)  Because  their  end  will  be  like  that  of  thorns — they  are  dry  and  fit  only  for  the 
burning.  2.  See  what  Christ  thinks  of  the  believer.  "  As  the  lily  among  thorns,  so 
is  My  love  among  the  daughters."  The  believer  is  like  a  lovely  flower  in  the  eyes  of 
Christ.  (1)  Because  justified  in  the  eyes  of  Christ ;  washed  in  His  blood,  he  is  pure 
and  white  as  a  lily.  (2)  A  believer's  nature  is  changed.  Once  he  was  like  the  barren, 
prickly  thorn,  fit  only  for  burning — now  Christ  has  put  a  new  spirit  in  him — the 
dew  has  been  given  to  him,  and  he  grows  up  like  the  lily.  (3)  Because  so  lonely  in 
the  world.  Observe,  there  is  but  one  lily,  but  many  thorns.  There  is  a  great 
wilderness  all  full  of  thorns,  and  only  one  lonely  flower.  So  there  is  a  world  lying 
in  wickedness,  and  a  little  flock  that  believe  in  Jesus.  11.  Inquire  what  the 
BELIEVER  thinks  OF  CHRIST — "  As  the  apple  tree  among  the  trees  of  the  wood." 
1.  Christ  is  more  precious  than  all  other  saviours  in  the  eye  of  the  believer.  As  a 
traveller  prefers  an  apple  tree  to  every  other  tree  of  the  wood,  because  he  finds  both 
shelter  and  nourishing  food  under  it,  so  the  believer  prefers  Christ  to  all  other 
saviours.  Oh  I  there  is  no  rest  for  the  soul  except  under  that  branch  which  God  has 
made  strong.  My  heart's  desire  and  prayer  for  you  is,  that  you  may  all  find  rest 
there.  2.  Why  has  the  believer  so  high  an  esteem  of  Christ!  (1)  Because  he 
has  made  trial  of  Christ.  (2)  Because  he  sat  down  with  great  delight,  (ii.  M, 
M'Cheynt.) 

Yet.  8.  As  the  apple  tree  among  the  trees  of  the  wood,  so  is  my  Beloved  among 
the  sons. — The  apple  tree  in  the  wood : — The  point  of  the  metaphor  is  this.    There  are 
many  trees  of  the  forest,  and  they  all  have  their  uses,  but  when  one  is  hungry,  and 
faint,  and  thirsty,  the  forest  trees  yield  no  succour,  and  we  must  look  elsewhere : 
they  yield  shelter,  but  not  refreshing  nutriment.     If,  however,  in  the  midst  of  the 
wood  one  discovers  an  apple  tree,  he  there  finds  the  refreshment  which  he  needs  ; 
his  thirst  is  alleviated,  and  his  hunger  removed.     Even  so  the  Church  here  means 
to  say  that  there  are  many  things  in  the  world  which  yield  us  a  kind  of  satisfaction 
— many  men,  many  truths,  many  institutions,  many  earthly  comforts,  but  there 
I  are  none  which  yield  us  the  full  solace  which  the  soul  requires ;  none  which  can 
I  give  to  the  heart  the  spiritual  food  for  which  it  hungers ;  Jesus  Christ  alone 
supplies  the  needs  of  the  sons  of  men.     I.  First,  then,  our  text  speaks  of  the  tree 
WHICH  THE  FAINTING  80UL  MOST  DESIRES.     Suppose  you  appeal  to  yonder  stately 
tree  which  is  the  greatest  of  them  all,  the  king  of  the  forest,  unequalled  in  greatness 
or  girth ;  admire  its  stupendous  limbs,  its  gnarled  roots,  its  bossy  bark,  the  vast 
!  area  beneath  its  boughs.    You  look  up  at  it  and  think  what  a  puny  creature  you 
j  are,  and  how  brief  has  been  your  lift  compared  with  its  duration.     You  try  to 
contemplate  the  storms  which  nave  swept  over  it,  and  the  suns  which  have  shone 
,  upon  it.     Great,  however,  as  it  is,  it  cannot  help  you :  if  it  were  a  thousand  times 
higher,  and  its  topmost  boughs  swept  the  stars,  yet  it  could  minister  no  aid  to  you. 
This  is  a  fit  picture  of  the  attempt  to  find  consolation  in  systems  of  religion  which 
are  recommended  to  you  because  they  are  greatly  followed.     Suppose  that  in  your 
wanderings  to  and  fro  you  come  upon  another  tree  which  is  said  to  be  the  oldest  in 
the  forest.     We  all  of  us  have  a  veneration  for  age.     Antiquity  has  many  charms. 
I  scarcely  know,  if  antiquity  and  novelty  should  run  a  race  for  popular  favour, 
which  might  win.     There  are  some  things  which  are  so  old  as  to  be  rotten,  worm- 
eaten,  and  fit  only  to  be  put  away.     Many  things  called  ancient  are  but  clever 
counterfeits,  or  wherein  they  are  true  they  are  but  the  bones  and  the  carcases  of 
I  that  which  once  was  good  when  life  filled  it  with  energy  and  power.     It  may  be 


i4  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR:  [chap.  n. 

that  in  the  midst  of  the  forest,  while  you  are  hungry  and  thirsty,  you  come  upon 
a  strangely  beautiful  tree :  its  proportions  are  exact,  and  as  you  gaze  upon  it  from  » 
distance  you  exclaim,  "  How  wonderful  are  the  works  of  God  !  "  and  you  begin  to 
think  of  those  trees  of  the  Lord  which  are  full  of  sap,  the  cedars  of  Lebanon  which 
H«  hath  planted.  But  beauty  can  never  satisfy  hunger,  and  when  a  man  is  dying 
of  thirst  it  is  vain  to  talk  to  mm  of  symmetry  and  taste.  He  wants  food.  "We  will 
pursue  our  investigations  in  the  forest,  and  while  we  are  doing  so  we  shall  come 
upon  some  very  wonderful  trees.  I  have  seen  just  lately  instances  in  which 
branches  are  curiously  interlaced  with  one  another ;  the  beech  sends  forth  a  long 
drooping  bough,  and  lest  it  should  not  be  able  to  support  itself,  another  bough 
strikes  up  from  below  to  buttress  it,  or  descends  from  above  and  clasps  it,  and  tne 
boughs  actually  grow  into  one  another.  Strange  things  may  be  observed  in  the 
imdisturbed  woo(£,  which  are  not  to  be  seen  in  our  hedgerow  trees,  or  discerned  in 
our  gardens  ;  trees  have  odd  habits  of  their  own,  and  grow  marvellously  if  left  to 
their  own  sweet  wills.  I  have  stood  under  them  and  said,  "How  can  this  be? 
This  is  singular  indeed  !  How  could  they  grow  like  this  ?  What  wondrous  inter- 
lacings,  and  intertwinings,  and  gnarlings,  and  knottings  I "  Yes,  but  if  a  man 
were  hungry  and  thirsty,  he  would  not  be  satisfied  with  curiosities.  You  remember 
when  you  first  came  to  that  precious  tree  whereon  the  Saviour  died,  and  found  that 
your  sm  was  blotted  out,  ana  that  you  were  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  and  were  made 
to  be  henceforth  an  heir  of  heaven.  Oh,  the  lusciousness  of  the  fruit  which  you 
gathered  then  1  Oh,  the  delightful  quiet  of  the  shadow  under  which  you  sat  that 
day ;  blessed  be  His  name !  You  had  searched  among  the  other  trees,  but  you 
found  no  fruit  there :  you  tried  to  rest  in  the  shadow  of  other  boughs,  but  you 
never  rested  till  on  that  blood-stained  tree  of  the  cross  you  saw  your  sin  put  away 
and  your  salvation  secured,  and  then  you  rested  and  were  satisfied.  But  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  has  not  only  satisfied  us  as  to  the  past,  see  what  He  has  done  for  us  as 
to  the  present !  Why,  1  know  sick  people  who  are  far  more  happy  in  their  sickness 
than  worldlings  are  in  their  health  ;  and  I  know  poor  men  who  are  Infinitely  more 
at  peace,  and  more  contented,  than  rich  men  who  have  not  the  Saviour.  Jesus 
Christ  alone  satisfies  us  for  the  past  and  delights  us  for  the  present.  And  then  as 
to  the  future.  The  man  who  has  found  Christ  looks  forward  to  it  not  merely  with 
complacency,  not  simply  without  a  dread,  but  with  a  joyous  expectancy  and  hope. 
Those  things  which  make  others  tremble  make  us  glad.  II.  The  spouse  spoke  of 
the  tree  which  she  most  desired  ;  the  wondee  was  that  she  found  it.  It  was 
an  apple  tree,  but  it  was  not  in  a  garden  ;  a  firait  tree,  but  not  in  a  vineyard ;  it  was 
"among  the  trees  of  the  wood."  Who  would  know  of  so  great  a  rarity  as  an  apple 
tree  in  a  wood  if  he  were  not  first  told  of  it  ?  So  Jesus  Christ  at  this  present  day 
is  not  known  to  all  mankind.  Even  in  our  own  country  you  will  not  find  it  a  difficult 
thing  to  meet  with  persons  who  are  totally  ignorant  of  Christ.  Where  the  greatest 
light  is,  there  the  shadows  are  deepest.  Men  nearest  to  the  church  are  often 
furthest  from  God.  You  cannot  easily  find  an  apple  tree  in  a  great  forest.  If  you 
were  put  down  in  the  middle  of  a  forest  and  told  there  was  an  apple  tree  there,  you 
might  wander  for  many  a  day  before  you  discovered  it,  and  often  go  over  your  own 
footsteps,  lost  in  endless  mazes,  but  you  would  not  find  the  object  of  your  search  ; 
and  80,  though  there  be  a  Saviour,  men  have  not  found  the  Saviour,  and  there  may 
even  be  souls  here  present  who  long  for  that  which  Jesus  is  able  to  give,  and  yet 
have  not  discovered  Him.  You  know  all  about  Him  in  the  letter  of  His  Word,  but 
you  cannot  find  Him  spiritually,  and  I  hear  you  cry,  "Oh,  that  I  knew  where  I 
might  find  Him."  Now,  is  it  not  a  strange  place  for  an  apple  tree  to  be  fotmd  in — 
in  a  wood  ?  We  seldom  hear  of  such  a  thing ;  an  apple  tree  should  grow  in  a 
garden.  How  should  it  be  found  in  a  forest  ?  And  is  it  not  a  strange  thing  that  a 
Saviour  should  be  found  for  us  among  men — not  among  angels  ?  Ye  shall  search  for 
a  Saviour  amongst  "the  helmed  cherubim  and  sworded  seraphim"  as  long  as  you 
will,  but  there  is  none  there.  The  Saviour  is  found  in  a  manger  at  Bethlehem,  in 
a  carpenter's  shop  at  Nazareth  ;  amongst  the  poor  and  needy  is  He  seen  while  He 
sojourns  amongst  the  sons  of  men.  Not  among  you,  0  ye  cedars,  not  among  you, 
O  mighty  oaks,  but  amongst  the  bushes  of  the  desert,  amongst  the  trees  accursed 
was  Jesus  found.  "He  made  His  grave  with  the  wicked."  Now,  there  is  some- 
thing very  sweet  about  this,  because  a  wood  is  the  very  place  where  we  most  love 
to  find  Cnrist  growing.  If  I  had  come  the  other  day  upon  an  apple  tree  in  the 
forest,  and  it  had  happened  to  be  the  time  of  ripe  fruit,  I  shomd  have  felt  no 
compunction  of  conscience  in  taking  whatsoever  I  was  able  to  reach,  for  a  tree 
growing  in  the  forest  is  &«e  to  all  comers.     Should  there  be  a  hungry  one  beneath 


CHAP.  11.3  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOK  4S 

its  bough,  he  need  not  say,  "  May  I  ? "  when  his  mouth  waters  at  the  golden  fruit : 
he  need  not  say,  "  It  would  be  stealing  ;  I  am  unfit  to  take  it ;  I  am  unworthy  of 
it. "  Man,  if  there  be  an  apple  tree  in  the  forest,  no  man  can  keep  it  for  himself  or 
deny  your  right  to  it,  for  each  wanderer  has  a  right  to  what  fruit  he  can  gather. 
Christ  has  no  barriers  around  Him  to  keep  you  from  Him.  If  there  be  any  they 
are  of  your  own  making.  Whoever  shall  come  shall  be  welcome  to  this  priceless 
apple  tree.  There  is  some  comfort,  therefore,  in  thinking  that  He  grows  among  the 
trees  of  the  wood.  III.  It  was  little  wonder  that  when  the  spouse,  all  hungry 
and  faint,  did  come  upon  this  apple  tree  in  the  forest  she  acted  as  she  did. 
Straightway  she  sat  down  under  its  shadow,  with  great  delight,  and  its  fhiit  was 
sweet  unto  her  taste.  She  looked  up  at  it ;  that  was  the  first  thing  she  did,  and 
■he  perceived  that  it  met  her  double  want.  The  sun  was  hot,  there  was  the 
shadow :  she  was  faint,  there  was  the  fruit.  Now,  see  how  Jesus  meets  aU  the 
wants  of  aU  who  come  to  Him.  Is  it  not  delightful  to  sit  down  beneath  the  scarlet 
canopy  of  the  Saviour's  blood,  and  feel,  "God  cannot  smite  me:  He  has  smitten 
His  Son  ;  payment  He  cannot  demand  the  second  time :  if  Jesus  suffered  in  my 
stead,  how  can  God  make  me  suffer  again  for  sin  ?  Where  were  the  justice  of  the 
Most  High  to  punish  an  immaculate  Substitute,  and  then  pimish  men  for  whom 
that  Substitute  endured  His  wrath  ? "  This  is  the  cool,  calm,  holy  shadow  under 
which  we  abide.  But  then,  the  spouse  also  found  that  she  herself  was  thirsty,  and 
that  the  fruit  of  the  tree  exactly  met  her  case.  Our  inner  life  wants  sustenance  and 
food  ;  now,  in  the  Lord  Jesus  is  life,  and  the  bread  of  life.  One  thing  more  is  to 
be  noted :  the  spouse,  when  she  had  begun  to  enjoy  the  provision  and  the  shade, 
and  had  sat  down  under  it  as  if  she  intended  to  say,  "I  never  mean  to  leave  this 
place  ;  in  this  delicious  shadow  I  mean  to  repose  for  ever,"  then  she  also  began  to 
tell  of  it  to  others.  In  the  text  she  describes  Christ  as  the  apple  tree,  and  gives  her 
reason  for  so  calling  Him — "  I  sat  down  under  His  shadow  with  great  delight,  and 
His  fruit  was  sweet  to  my  taste."  Experience  must  be  the  ground  upon  which  we 
found  our  descriptions.  Now,  I  beseech  you  who  have  found  the  Saviour  to  be 
telling  others  what  you  know  about  Him,  and  try  to  lead  others  to  look  at  Him. 
You  cannot  make  them  feed  upon  Him,  but  God  can,  and  if  you  can  lead  them  to 
the  tree,  who  knows  but  God  will  give  them  spiritual  hunger,  and  will  lead  them 
to  feed  as  you  have  fed.     (C.  R.  Spurgeon.)    I  sat  down  under  His  shadow  with 

Peat  delight,  and  His  fruit  was  sweet  to  my  taste. — The  Church's  experience: — 
What  it  is  to  sit  down  undek  the  shadow  of  Christ  with  great  delight. 
1.  A  shadow  is  not  prized  by  men,  till  some  heat  scorch  them.  The  Church  is  here 
represented  as  faint  and  parched  with  heat.  Our  addresses  to  Christ  always  begin 
with  a  sense  of  our  own  want  and  misery.  Ease  is  sweet  to  the  burdened  soul,  and 
none  seek  rest  in  Christ  to  any  purpose,  but  those  that  feel  the  load  of  their  own 
sins  (Matt.  xi.  28).  2.  That  which  scorcheth  poor  distressed  souls,  is  a  sense  of 
God's  wrath :  observe  how  fitly  God's  vn-ath  is  set  forth  by  the  scorching  of  the 
sun.  God's  goodness  is  exceeding  great  and  large ;  yet  this  good  God  hath  His 
wrath,  which  is  set  forth  to  us  by  the  notions  of  a  consuming  fire  (Heb.  xii.  29),  and 
a  burning  oven  (Mai.  iv.  1).  The  wrath  of  the  living  God  is  a  dreadful  thing,  which 
consnmeth  and  drieth  up  all,  without  recovery,  unless  we  get  a  shelter  from  it. 

3.  Scorched  souls  can  find  no  shelter  nor  refreshing  shadow  among  the  creatures  ; 
but  only  by  coming  to  the  spiritual  apple  tree,  who  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

4.  Christ  is  a  complete  and  comfortable  shadow,  the  only  screen  between  us  and 
wrath.  In  Him  alone  we  find  refreshing,  ease,  and  comfort.  5.  Faith  is  necessaiy, 
that  we  may  have  the  comfort  of  our  shadow  ;  for  we  make  use  of  Christ  by  faith. 
There  are  three  acts  of  faith :  (1)  They  choose,  consent,  and  own  Christ  as  the  only 
shadow.  (2)  They  earnestly  run  to  it.  And  (3)  compose  and  quiet  their  hearts 
under  it.  6.  They  meet  not  only  with  coolness,  but  fruit ;  as  an  apple  under  an 
apple  tree  to  one  that  sits  under  its  shadow  in  a  great  heat.  II.  What  these 
PRUITS  ARE.  They  are  the  benefits  and  privileges  which  we  have  by  Christ. 
1.  Here  is  fruit.  Christ  received  of  the  Father  the  fulness  of  power  and  of  the 
Spirit,  for  the  benefit  of  the  redeemed,  that  He  might  shower  down  the  streams  of 
grace  on  all  that  repair  to  Him  for  relief  and  succour.  Now,  what  these  finiits  are  ;  in 
the  general,  we  may  tell  you,  all  that  is  worth  the  having,  we  have  from  Jesus  Christ : 
all  the  blessings  of  this  present  life,  and  of  the  world  to  come.  More  particularly. 
There  are  many  choice  and  excellent  fruits  which  believers  receive  from  Him.  (1) 
The  pardon  of  all  our  sins  (Eph.  i.  7).  (2)  Peace  with  God  (Rom.  v.  1).  (3)  Adop- 
tion into  God's  family  (John  i.  12  ;  1  John  iii.  1).  (4)  The  heirs  of  glory  (Rom.  viii. 
17).     (5)  The  Holy  Ghost  is  given,  not  only  to  sanctify  us  at  first,  but  to  dwell  in 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

our  hearts,  as  a  constant  inhabitant,  as  in  His  own  Temple  (1  Oor.  vi.  19).  (6) 
Peace  of  conscience,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost :  for  this  is  a  great  privilege  of 
Christ's  kingdom  (Eom.  xii.  17).  (7)  Access  to  God,  with  assurance  of  welcome 
and  audience  (Ps.  1.  15  ;  Heb.  iv.  15,  16  ;  1  John  v.  14).  2.  His  fruits  :  for  a  three- 
fold reason :  Because  purchased  by  Him :  all  these  privileges  were  procured  for  us 
by  His  blood,  death,  and  sufferings.  3.  These  are  sweet  unto  a  believer's  taste. 
Believers  have  a  taste  of  the  goodness  of  Christ.  They  do  experimentally  find  a 
great  deal  of  comfort  and  sweetness  in  Him  (1  Pet.  ii.  2,  3).  Christ's  fruits  ar« 
very  sweet  to  their  taste,  because  of  the  suitableness  of  the  fruit  to  the  prepared 
appetite :  they  have  a  hungry  conscience,  and  so  can  sooner  taste  that  sweetness. 
A  Christian  hath  another  spirit  than  the  spirit  of  this  world.  A  sanctified  soul  can 
taste  the  sweetness  of  spiritual  things,  word,  sacraments,  graces,  hopes.  Yea,  the 
way  of  obedience  is  sweet  to  them  (Prov.  iii.  17).  It  is  wonderful,  comfortable,  and 
filleth  their  hearts  in  a  satisfying  manner,  when  they  can  have  any  experience  of  God's 
love  in  Christ,  in  the  Word,  or  meditation,  or  prayer,  or  sacraments  (Ps.  Ixiii.  6). 
Besides  the  attractive  goodness  of  the  object,  there  is  inclination  in  their  own  souls 
to  it.  I.  Here  is  an  invitation  to  draw  ua  to  Christ.  1.  As  He  ia  a  shadow. 
T!lufl  notion  is  like  to  prevail  with  none  but  those  who  are  scorched  with  God's 
^rrath,  or  loaden  with  the  burden  of  sin  ;  with  them  that  are  either  of  a  troubled, 
or  of  a  tender  conscience.  They  long  to  sit  down  under  His  shadow  indeed,  and  to 
get  a  taste  of  His  pleasant  fruits.  Yet  I  must  speak  to  all  to  begii^  here.  The 
miits  are  neither  eaten,  nor  the  sweetness  of  them  felt,  till  we  come  under  His 
shadow,  and  delightfoUy  sit  under  His  righteousness.  2.  With  respect  to  pleasant 
firuit  (Ps.  xxxiv.  8).  We  entertain  black  thoughts  of  the  ways  of  God,  as  if 
religion  were  a  sour  thing,  and  there  were  no  pleasure  and  delight  for  those  that 
submit  to  it.  O  taste  and  see  1  You  will  find  enough  in  Christ  to  spoil  the  gust 
and  relish  of  all  other  pleasures.  II.  Do  we  ever  sit  down  under  His  shadow,  so  as 
to  find  Hia  fruit  sweet  unto  our  taste !  You  may  try  your  state,  and  discern  it  by 
your  relish  of  spiritual  things.  III.  Direction  to  us  in  our  s{>ecial  addresses  to 
God.  The  practice  of  the  spouse  is  then  in  season.  Come  and  sit  down  under  His 
shadow,  and  eat  of  His  fitiits.  {T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Suitable  improvement  of  Christ 
the  Apple  Tree: — I.  The  wat  of  belief  foe  poor  sinners,  under  all scorchings 
TO  which  they  are  exposed,  is  to  sit  down  in,  and  by  faith  to  repose 
THEMSELVES  UNDER  Christ's  SHADOW.  1.  Show  what  need  sinners  have  of  a 
shadow  to  cover  them.  The  world  is  turned  a  hot  cotmtry  aU  over  to  the  sons  of 
fallen  Adam,  witness  the  spiritual  blackness  upon  all  faces  (Amos  ix.  7).  Adam's 
(all  has  changed  the  temperature  of  the  air  which  we  breathe.  God  Himself,  the 
son  of  the  world,  whose  influences  were  enlighteniag,  cheering,  comforting  and 
warming  to  innocent  men,  is  become  a  consuming  fire  to  the  workers  of  iniquity. 
2.  Show  how  Christ  became  a  shadow  for  poor  sinners  in  this  case.  (1)  He  was 
fitted  to  afford  a  shadow  from  that  heat,  by  His  assuming  our  nature,  in  that  He 
being  God  was  incarnate  and  became  man.  Good  news  to  poor  sinners  in  this  weary 
land.  There  is  a  root  sprung  out  of  the  dry  ground,  and  it  is  become  a  tree  of  life ; 
the  name  of  it  is  the  tree  of  life ;  and  it  casts  a  shadow,  a  defence,  for  guilty 
creatures  under  it,  from  the  heat  of  wrath  from  Heaven.  (2)  He  actually  affords  a 
shadow  for  needy  sinners  by  virtue  of  His  complete  satisfaction  to  law  and  justice, 
(a)  He  received  all  the  scorching  beams  of  wrath  on  Himself,  that  so  He  might 
keep  them  from  His  people.  (6)  He  exhausted  them.  He  drank  the  cup  of  wrath 
from  the  brim  to  the  bottom,  (c)  And  now  through  Him,  the  comfortable  influences 
of  Heaven  are  bestowed  and  conveyed  to  those  under  His  shadow,  through  Him  ai 
the  channel  of  conveyance.  (3)  He  is  by  Divine  appointment  made  a  public  shadow 
for  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  weary  land  ;  so  that  it  is  lawful  for  them  and  every 
one  of  them  to  come  in  by  faith  and  take  shelter  under  it,  whatever  they  are  or 
have  been.  8.  Show  what  it  is  to  sit  down  under  Christ's  shadow.  It  is  the  soul 
fleeing  to  Jesus  Christ  for  a  refuge,  coming  unto  Him  on  the  call  of  the  Gospel,  and 
receiving  Him  and  uniting  with  Him  by  believing  on  His  name.  And  this  notion 
.  of  faith  bears,  (1)  The  soul  being  sensibly  scorched  and  uneasy  in  itself.  Though 
all  may,  yet  none  will  come  imder  Christ's  shadow  but  sensible  sinners.  (2)  That 
the  soul  mids  no  shadow  anywhere  else.  (3)  A  discovery  of  Christ's  shadow  to  the 
poor  outcast  that  can  get  lodging  nowhere  else.  (4)  It  imports  that  the  soul  goes 
under  Christ's  shadow  for  shelter  and  rest.  This  is  the  renouncing  of  all  other 
refuges,  and  betaking  oneself  to  the  covert  of  blood  alone.  (5)  It  imports  the 
■ool  abiding  nnder  Ohrist's  shadow.  II.  Christ's  fruit  beusheth  well  with 
TEon  WBO,  BT  VAITB,  tiT  DOWN  UNDER  His  SHADOW.    1.  Show  some  things 


'^  CHAP.  II.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOIT.  47 

imported  in  this  doctrine.  (1)  It  imports  that  there  is  in  Christ  Jesus  a  suitable 
fulness  for  the  soul.  (2)  They  miist  put  themselves  under  the  covert  of  His  blood 
and  righteousness,  who  would  partake  of  His  fruits.  (3)  Those  to  whom  Christ  is 
ft  shadow  and  defence  from  the  wrath  of  God  and  curse  of  the  law  He  also  feeds. 
There  is  no  separating  of  the  justifying  blood  and  sanctifying  Spirit.  (4)  When  we 
ait  down  under  Christ's  shadow  by  faith,  it  corrects  the  vitiated  taste,  cools  the 
distempered  heat  of  the  soul,  and  brings  it  to  a  holy  temperature  ;  so  as  spiritual 
things  which  before  were  tasteless  as  the  white  of  an  egg,  become  sweet  to  their 
taste.  (5)  Faith,  trust,  and  confidence,  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  produce  sweet 
experiences  at  length  of  the  Lord's  goodness  to  the  souL  This  is  the  way  the  soul 
sucks  the  sweet  and  nourishment  out  of  the  precious  promisea,  while  unbelief  as  it 
expects  nothing  from  Him,  gets  as  little.  2.  Show  what  are  Christ's  fruits  which 
are  so  sweet  to  the  taste  of  those  that  sit  under  His  shadow.  These  are  all  the 
benefits,  privileges,  graces,  comforts,  and  fulness  of  the  covenant,  making  Hia 
people  happy  here  and  hereafter.  (1)  There  is  an  inexhaustible  fulness  of  them 
that  will  serve  to  feed  all  the  saints,  in  time  and  through  all  the  ages  of  eternity. 
Therefore  they  are  called  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ  (Eph.  iii.  8).  (2)  There 
is  a  variety  of  them,  suited  to  all  the  possible  cases  of  those  that  are  under  Christ's 
shadow.  3.  Show  why  Christ's  fruit  reHsheth  so  well  with  those  who  by  faith  do 
partake  of  it.  (1)  Because  it  is  suitable  to  their  case,  which  drove  them  under 
Chnst's  shadow.  (2)  Because  this  fruit  is  proper  food  for  their  new  nature. 
(3)  Because  the  real  experience  of  Christ's  fruits  communicated  to  the  soul,  always 
leaves  a  sweet  relish  of  them  behind  it.  ( T.  Boston,  D.I).)  His  fruit  was  aweet  to 
my  taste. — The  fruUfulnesa  of  Christ: — The  fruit  borne  by  Christ,  the  Tree  of  life, 
the  Living  Vine,  "the  Apple  Tree  among  the  trees  of  the  wood,"  may  be  regarded 
nnder  three  aspects,  relating  to  His  character,  work,  influence.  I.  Chakacter. 
The  Lord  Jesus  possesses  excellence  in  Himself,  apart  from  the  relation  in  which 
He  stands  to  us.  His  own  personal  nature  preceded  and  qualified  Him  for  His 
entire  mediatorial  work.  The  manifestation  of  this  excellence  shone  forth  in  His 
earthly  life.  Words,  acts,  miracles  were  but  the  outward  exhibitions  of  what  He 
wae  within.  He  was  hidden,  concealed  from  earthly  gaze,  visible  only  to  His 
Father.  As  seen  thus,  however,  He  was  spotless,  and  Divine  Omniscience  declared 
itself  "  well  pleased  "  with  Him.  The  soul  of  Christ,  that  human  spirit,  which,  in 
its  powers  and  faculties,  was  like  ours,  and  which  became  "  an  offering  for  sin,"  was 
most  holy.  And  His  life  I  this  was  the  embodiment  of  His  pure  spirit,  its  outward 
working,  the  channel  through  which  its  sympathies  flowed  oat  upon  the  world 
around.  How  perfect  this ;  recollect  it  was  life  like  ours ;  in  the  same  world, 
subject  to  the  same  laws,  physical  and  mental,  as  our  own.  It  was  far  less  favour- 
ably  circumstanced  than  ours.  It  was  the  first  of  its  kind  ;  there  was  no  previous 
example  for  Christ  to  imitate,  no  perfect  model  to  copy.  It  was  also  surrounded 
by  sin-  It  was  without  sympathy  too.  The  " loneliness  of  Christ"  in  these 
respects  was  most  painful,  and  itself  a  test  of  virtue.  That  virtue  had  no  external 
support  from  custom,  habit,  friendly  countenance.  Not  only  Scribes  and  Pharisees 
sought  to  ensnare,  entangle,  and  catch  Him  in  His  talk,  the  prince  of  the  world 
came.  And  how  He  did  resist !  What  conflict  in  doing  this  He  had  to  pass 
through,  how  sorely  He  was  tried,  what  strong  "  crying  and  tears "  were  wrung 
from  His  mighty  spirit, — is  what  none  of  us  can  know ;  but  He  did  resist  all ;  and 
spite  of  all  there  shone  forth  a  character  the  most  radiant  earth  has  ever  exhibited, 
and  one  which  now  fills  heaven  with  light  and  lustre  superior  to  all  else  which  it 
contains.  II.  Wokk.  One  of  the  names  by  which  prophecy  foretold  the  Messiah 
was  "Emmanuel,  God  with  us."  One  of  the  expressions  by  which  the  apostle 
declares  the  purport  of  His  work,  is  in  the  corresponding  sentiment,  "  He  was  made 
sin  for  us."  What  tongue  can  express,  what  imagination  conceive,  the  grandeur  of 
this  work  I  It  spans  eternity,  past  and  to  come.  It  rescues  humanitv,  and  makes 
it  Godlike.  Nothing  nobler,  grander,  purer,  has  been  devised,  even  by  God  Him- 
self. It  is  IBs  chief  work.  His  masterpiece,  His  last  and  greatest  conception ;  and 
of  it  all,  Christ  is  "the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning,  the  ending,  the  first  and 
the  last."  It  is  His  operation,  His  frnit,  that  which  here  we  may  find  most  delect- 
ftble,  which  through  eternity  we  shall  feast  upon  and  find  sweet  to  our  taste.  III. 
Inplxtencb.  By  this  I  mean  not  so  much  what  the  Saviour  is  in  Himself,  nor  what 
He  is  for  us,  though  there  is  influence  from  both,  as  the  power  which  He  exerts 
upon  US.  How  vast  the  inflnence  the  Saviour  has  been  ever  exerting  in  our  world  ! 
Kings,  emperors,  dynasties,  mighty  forms  of  government,  have  risen  and  decayed, 
apparently  subject  only  to  natural  laws  of  progress  and  dissolution.     The  Saviour 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, ' 

has  been  guiding  all.  They  hare  been  His  servants ;  and  although  they  thought 
not  so,  nor  did  their  hearts  mean  so,  He  has  by  them  been  working  out  His  purposes, 
and  using  them  as  His  agents.  "While  His  general  influence  has  thus  been  exerted 
on  the  world,  its  choicest  modes  of  operation  have  been  reserved  for  the  Church. 
What  streams  of  Divine  influence,  like  waters  from  a  fountain,  or  beams  from  the 
sun,  have  ever  been  flowing  from  Christ.  As  there  is  no  diminution  in  the  sun's 
power  though  it  has  been  pouring  forth  its  radiance  for  six  thousand  years  ;  as  the 
ocean  is  to-day  as  mighty  as  ever,  though  it  has  been  ever  difiusing  freshness  and 
health,  so,  and  far  more  certainly,  is  there  no  diminution  in  Christ.  {/.  Viiiey, 
D.D.) 

Yer.  4.  He  bronght  me  t«  the  ban^aeting  house,  and  His  banner  over  me 
was  love. — TJie  ChrisliarHs  position  of  privilege : — It  is  a  great  thing  to  be  a 
Christian.  It  is  a  great  thing  in  view  of  the  personal  change  wrought  in  him  who 
sustains  this  character.  He  was  once  lost,  he  now  is  found.  It  is  a  great  thing,  too, 
in  view  of  the  change  which  it  brings  over  a  man's  relations  to  others,  as  well  as 
that  which  it  produces  in  his  personal  character.  Once  he  lived  for  time,  now  he 
lives  for  eternity.  Once  he  served  Satan,  now  he  serves  God.  Once,  if  his  earthly 
possessions  had  been  wrested  from  him  he  would  have  exclaimed,  "Ye  have  taken 
away  my  gods,  and  what  is  there  more  ? " — now,  with  St.  Paul,  he  can  endure  the 
loss  of  all  things,  and  account  it  a  gain,  that  he  may  win  Christ  and  be  found  in 
Him.  Once  the  grave  bounded  all  his  prospects,  and  death  was  dreaded  as  the  ex- 
tinguisher of  all  his  hopes  ;  now  he  can  look  death  calmly  in  the  face,  and  go  down 
to  the  grave  with  a  hope  full  of  immortality.  I.  The  action,  on  vs^hich  all  the 
Christian's  experience  of  his  privilege  is  based.  "He  brought  me."  The 
agent  referred  to  is  God  our  Saviom:.  Salvation,  in  all  its  efifectual  influences,  be- 
longs to  Him.  Each  truly  converted  soul,  when  telling  how  it  was  led  to  Christ, 
will  feel  constrained  to  look  up  to  God  with  adoring  gratitude  and  say,  "  He  brought 
me."  "  He  brought  me,"  by  Divine  foreknowledge  and  sovereign  choice,  before  the 
foundations  of  the  world  were  laid.  "He  brought  me"  through  His  Spirit,  work- 
ing with  me  in  due  season,  to  make  His  own  call  efifectual.  "  He  brought  me  "  by 
ordering  and  controlling  all  the  outward  circumstances  [of  my  condition  so  as  to 
favour  this  blessed  result  of  His  purpose.  "He  brought  me"  by  His  preventing 
grace  so  working  in  my  soul,  that  I  should  have  a  desire  to  know  and  love  Him, 
and  then,  co-operating  with  that  desire,  in  such  a  way  as  to  bring  it  to  good  eflfeot. 
"He  brought  me"  by  sweetly  subduing  my  stubborn  wiU, — taking  away  all  the 
natural  enmity  of  my  heart  to  Him,  and  sending  the  spirit  of  adoption  into  my 
soul  whereby  I  cry  Abba  Father.  II.  The  position  in  which  this  experience 
IS  realized.  "He  brought  me  into  the  banqueting  house."  There  are  two  ideas 
which  we  seem  naturally  to  associate  with  the  thought  of  a  monarch's  banqueting 
house.  1.  It  is  a  place  where  choice  delicacies  may  be  expected.  It  is  not  common  fare, 
which  the  ^guests  admitted  to  such  a  place  look  for.  The  richest  and  the  rarest 
things  that  wealth  can  purchase,  or  skill  prepare,  are  provided  for  such  a  banqueting 
hall.  The  products  of  every  clime,  the  luxuries  of  every  land  are  put  in  requisition 
there.  And  these  are  but  faint  figures  of  those  spiritual  good  things  with  which 
Jesus  regales  the  souls  of  His  people  in  the  banquet  house  of  salvation.  2.  It  is  a 
place  where  special  favours  are  dispensed,  and  confidential  communications  made  ; 
and,  on  this  account  too,  the  language  of  the  text  applies  to  the  believer's  condition 
of  privilege  in  Christ.  The  treasury  of  heaven  is  put  at  the  disposal  of  the  believer 
in  Jesus.  He  is  fiiUy  assured  that  ' '  God  will  supply  all  his  need  from  the  riches  of 
His  grace  in  Christ."  III.  The  circitmstances  of  the  believer  in  occrrPYiNG 
THIS  position.  "  His  banner  over  me  was  love."  1.  When  a  prince,  a  governor,  or 
monarch  unfurls  his  banner  over  a  fortress  or  citadel,  he  means  thereby  to  declare 
his  determination  to  protect  that  place.  As  that  flag  waves  in  the  breeze,  it  pro- 
claims significantly,  that  aU  the  power  and  resources  of  him  whom  it  represents  are 
pledged  for  the  defence  and  safeguard  of  that  fortress.  And  this  is  what  Jesus 
means  when  He  unfurls  His  banner  of  love  over  the  believing  sord.  AU  the 
resources  of  omnipotence — all  the  perfections  of  an  infinite  God  are  enlisted  for 
the  safety  of  that  soul.  2.  The  material  of  a  banner,  and  the  mottoes,  or  emblems 
upon  it,  are  expressive  of  the  thoughts  and  intentions  of  Him  whom  the  banner 
represents.  A  white  banner  bespeaks  a  desire  for  peace.  A  red  flag  shows  a  deter- 
mination to  shed  blood  ;  a  black  flag  is  the  signal  that  no  quarter  is  to  be  expected. 
And  then  the  military  nations  of  the  earth,  whose  lust  has  been  for  war  and  con- 
quest, have  generally  adopted  emblems  expressive   of  their  character.     Thus  tba 


6HAP.  u.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  40 

eagle  was  the  emblem  Imperial  Rome  bore  on  her  conquering  standards.  But 
the  Captain  of  our  salvation  has  a  banner  woven  out  of  the  precious  fabric  of 
love,  and  the  dove  is  the  symbol  which  that  banner  bears.  His  thoughts  to- 
wards His  people  are  thoughts  of  peace  ;  and  love,  unspeakable,  everlasting,  and 
past  finding  out,  runs  through  all  His  purposes  concerning  them.  3.  The  banner 
of  his  country  is  to  the  true  patriot  an  object  of  honourable  regard,  and  of 
intense  afiection.  And  so,  while  the  wise  man  glories  in  his  wisdom,  the  rich 
man  in  his  riches,  and  the  mighty  man  in  his  might,  the  language  of  the 
Christian  is:  "God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  Cross  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."      {R.   Newton,   D.D.)     Christ's  banqueting  house  for  His  spouse: — 

1.  Jesus  Christ  hath  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  entertained  His  Church  with 
various  dispensations  of  providence,  and  doth  so  entertain  every  true  believing  soul. 

2.  Though  all  these  dispensations  be  proper  means  in  relation  to  the  great  end  of 
the  soul's  salvation,  and  profitable  to  the  Church  and  the  soul  in  reference  to  that 
end  ;  yet  some  are  more  sweet  and  pleasant  than  others,  and  so  more  fitly  compared 
to  Christ's  banquet.  3.  The  dispensation  of  the  Gospel  to  the  Church  in  general, 
and  the  enlightening,  quickening,  strengthening,  consolatory  influences  of  the 
Spirit  of  grace  to  patient  souls,  may  be  fitly  compared  to  a  banqueting  house  or  to  a 
house  of  wine.  4.  As  Christ  did  of  old  entertain  some  of  His  people's  souls,  under 
the  darker  dispensations  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  with  these  refreshing  dispensa- 
tions, which  were  like  a  banquet  of  wine  to  them  ;  so  under  the  latter  and  more 
full  dispensation  of  the  Gospel,  He  doth  still  entertain  some  of  His  people's  souls 
■with  these  gladdening  dispensations.  5.  It  is  Christ,  and  Christ  alone,  that  can 
bring  the  soul  into  the  house  of  wine.  {John  Collinges,  D.D. )  His  banner  over 
me  was  love. — How  Christ's  baiwier  over  a  believing  soul  is  love: — 1.  The  love  of 
Christ  is  that  which  distinguishes  the  soul  of  a  believer  from  another  soul,  and  the 
Church  of  God  from  other  companies.  (1)  Let  this  be  rooted  in  your  hearts,  that 
you  may  not  glory  in  any  other  difierences  and  distinctions.  (2)  Let  Christ  have 
all  the  praise,  and  let  it  be  our  business  to  labour  to  be  thus  distinguished  from 
others.  2.  The  exalting  of  Christ's  love  directs  and  invites  every  soul  whither  to 
go  (John  iii.  14,  15  ;  xii.  32).  3.  The  Church  of  God  and  the  believing  soul  should 
move  as  the  love  of  God  doth  guide  them.  All  our  actions  are  of  no  worth  that 
flow  not  from  this  principle.  4.  The  love  of  Christ  is  that  which  unites  the 
Churches  of  God  and  particular  believers  both  unto  Christ  and  unto  one  another. 
6.  The  love  of  Christ  is  a  sign  of  His  protection  to  His  people.  6.  The  love  of 
Christ  displayed  to  the  world  signifies  His  victory  over  His  enemies,  yea  and  the 
Church's,  and  every  true  believing  soul's  victory.  7.  The  love  of  Christ  to  His 
people  is  that  which  should  make  His  Church  and  true  believers  terrible  to  aU  His 
and  their  enemies.  {John  Collinges,  D.D.)  Christ's  banner  over  His  Church : — 1. 
The  use  of  banners,  standards,  or  ensigns,  is  to  gather  and  keep  persons  together  : 
thus  Christ  Himself  was  lifted  up  on  the  cross,  and  is  now  lifted  up  in  the  Gospel, 
as  an  ensign  to  gather  souls  unto  Him :  and  so  His  love,  being  displayed  in  the 
preaching  of  the  Gospel,  has  a  power  and  eflBcacy  in  it  to  draw  souls  after  Him  ;  for 
as  a  fruit  and  effect  of  everlasting  love,  "with  loving  kindness  "  He  draws  them  : 
and  in  the  same  way  and  manner  Christ  here  drew  the  Church  unto  Himself,  and 
held  her  fast ;  and  constrained  her  to  keep  close  to  Him,  and  follow  hard  after  Him  ; 
see  2  Cor.  v.  14.  2.  A  banner  displayed,  or  a  standard  set  up,  is  an  indication  of 
war  ;  it  is  to  prepare  for  it  and  to  animate  to  it  (Jer.  li.  12,  27),  the  Church  of 
Christ  here  on  earth  is  militant,  and  therefore  in  chap.  vi.  4,  is  represented  as  for- 
midable and  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners :  she  has  many  enemies  to  engage 
with,  as  sin,  Satan,  and  the  world,  and  yet  has  the  greatest  encouragement  to  fight, 
for  she  is  bannered  imder  the  Lord  of  hosts.  3.  A  banner  displayed  is  also  a  sign 
of  victory  ;  sometimes  when  a  town,  city,  or  castle  is  taken,  the  flag  is  hung  out  as 
an  indication  of  it ;  see  Jer.  I.  2.  Christ  has  gotten  the  victory  over  all  His  and  our 
enemies.  4.  A  banner  is  for  protection  and  defence  ;  hence  Moses  built  an  altar, 
and  called  it  Jehovah  nissi,  that  is,  The  Lord  is  my  banner  ;  because  the  Lord  had 
been  on  the  side  of  him  and  the  people  of  Israel,  and  defended  them  from  the 
Amalekites.  5.  It  is  to  direct  soldiers  where  to  stand,  when  to  march,  and 
whom  to  follow  ;  see  Numb.  i.  52,  ii.  2,  which  may  teach  us,  who  are  enlisted  in 
Christ's  service,  not  to  fly  from  our  colours,  but  adhere  closely  to  Christ  and 
His  Gospel,  Hia  cause  and  interest,  His  Church  and  people,  and  to  foUow  Him, 
the  Standard-bearer,  wherever  He  goes ;  and  nothing  can  more  strongly  engage 
us  to  do  so  than  love,  which  is  the  motto  of  His  banner ;  this  first  drew  us  to 
Eim,  this  animates  us  in  His  service,  and   keeps  us  close  to  His  person  and 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


interest.  6.  It  is  to  distinguish  one  band  from  another  (Numb.  ii.  2).  As  one  band 
has  one  motto  upon  its  banner  or  ensign,  by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  another, 
so  the  motto  on  Christ's  banner  is  "Zcwe,"  by  which  His  band  or  company  is  dis- 
tinguished from  all  others.  The  allusion  may  be  to  the  names  of  generalfl  being 
inscribed  on  the  banners  of  their  armies  ;  so  Vespasian's  name  was  inscribed  on  the 
banners  throughout  his  armies.     {John  Oill,  D.D.) 

Ver.  5.  Comfort  me  with  apples. — An  apple : — The  term  "apple"  is  a  conven- 
tional one.  By  the  ancients  it  was  applied  indiscriminately  to  every  round  fleshy 
fruit.  We  require  to  take  into  account  this  extended  application  of  the  term,  in 
order  to  understand  the  metaphorical  allusions  to  the  apple  in  ancient  poetry, 
classical  and  oriental.  The  "apple"  occurs  several  times  in  the  Bible,  but  there  is 
abundant  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  in  almost  every  case  a  mistranslation  of  a  word 
which  should  have  been  rendered  citron,  orange,  or  quince.  The  East  is  not  th» 
true  home  of  the  apple.  It  is  essentially  a  Western  fruit,  the  product  of  the  cooler 
air  and  moister  skies  of  the  north  temperate  zone.  The  wild  crab-apple,  from  which 
all  the  cultivated  varieties  have  sprung,  is  a  native  of  most  of  the  countries  of  Europe  ; 
and  the  development  of  the  fruit  has  engaged  the  attention  of  their  inhabitants  as  far 
back  as  we  can  trace.  The  tree  does  not  grow  wild  in  the  East  as  it  does  in  our 
hedges  and  woodlands,  and  the  ancient  Jews  were  altogether  ignorant  of  apples  such 
as  we  know  them.  The  apple  is  appropriately  associated  by  popular  tradition  with 
the  paradisiacal  condition  of  man,  for  it  belongs  to  an  order  of  plants  that  was  intro- 
duced into  the  world  about  the  human  period.  Nature  in  former  epochs  had  run 
into  rank,  luxuriant  foliage,  but  she  blossomed  and  fruited  when  man  came  upon  the 
scene.  There  is  a  profound  relation  between  the  efflorescence  of  the  earth  and  that  of 
the  human  soul.  The  fullest  significance  of  flowers  and  fruits  can  only  be  seen  in 
the  life  of  man,  for  the  illustration  of  which  they  furnish  innumerable  expressive 
images  and  analogies.  The  apple  belongs  not  only  to  the  latest,  but  also  to  the 
highest  order  of  plants.  This  order  is  the  Rosaceoe,  which  for  beauty  of  colour,  grace 
of  form,  perfection  of  structure,  and  great  and  manifold  utility,  takes  precedence  of 
all  others.  Looking  at  an  apple  from  a  morphological  point  of  view,  we  find  that  it 
is  an  arrested  branch.  Instead  of  going  on  to  develop  more  wood  and  foliage,  a 
branch  tenninates  in  an  apple  ;  and  in  this  apple  the  sap  and  substance  that  would 
have  prolonged  the  branch  are  concentrated,  and  hence  its  enlarged  size  and  capa- 
bility of  expansion.  Looking  upon  an  apple  thus  as  an  arrested  branch,  the  branch 
giving  up  its  own  indi^ddual  life  in  order  that  the  species  may  be  perpetuated  by 
means  of  blossom,  and  fruit,  and  seed,  we  behold  in  it,  as  in  a  glass,  a  very  striking 
natural  example  of  the  law  of  self-sacrifice  ;  that  law  which  pervades  all  nature,  and 
upon  which  the  welfare  and  stability  of  nature  depend.  And  it  is  a  most  interesting 
circumstance,  that  it  is  in  this  self-sacrifice  of  the  plant  that  all  its  beauty  comes  out 
and  culminates.  The  blossom  and  fruit  in  which  it  gives  its  own  life  for  another  life 
that  is  to  spring  from  it  are  the  loveliest  of  aU  its  parts.  God  crowns  this  self-denial 
and  blessing  of  others  with  all  the  glory  of  colour,  and  grace  of  form,  and  sweetness 
of  perfume,  and  richness  of  flavour.  The  flesh  of  the  apple,  it  may  be  remarked,  has 
no  purpose  to  serve  in  the  economy  of  the  plant  itself.  It  is  merely  an  excretion  of 
the  plant,  produced  in  large  measure  by  cmtivation.  And  surely  this  capability  of 
developing  flesh  which  certain  fruits  possess  in  relation  to  the  wants  of  man  is  one 
of  the  most  interesting  subjects  of  thought.  In  this  respect  man  is  a  fellow- worker 
with  God,  in  dressing  and  keeping  the  great  garden  of  nature  so  that  there  shall  be 
trees  in  it  good  for  food  and  pleasant  to  the  taste.  The  nature  bound  fast  in  fate 
has  been  made  fluent  by  the  freedom  of  the  human  wiU  ;  and  all  the  hints  and  out- 
lines suggested  b^  her  roots,  and  finiits,  and  flowers  are  worked  out  and  filled  in  by 
man  in  the  exercise  of  this  wondrous  Divine  gift.  Passing  strange  is  it  that  through 
this  same  freedom  of  will,  he  should,  in  the  higher  moral  region,  instead  of  being  a 
fellow-worker  with  (Jod,  be  less  true  to  his  proper  end  and  destiny  than  the  beasts 
that  perish  to  their  several  instincts.  Why  is  an  apple  round  ?  The  circular  shape 
is  that  in  which  forces  and  substances  are  most  perfectly  balanced — in  which  there  is 
the  greatest  economy  of  material,  and  the  greatest  resistance  to  external  circum- 
stances. It  is  the  most  stable  of  all  forms,  and  therefore,  characteristic  of  bodies  in 
repose.  The  whole  heavens  and  the  whole  earth  are  continually  aiming  at  the 
vpnerical  form  ;  and  they  fail  to  reach  or  retain  it  because  of  their  want  of  repose, 
insisting  upon  a  shortcoming  or  departure  from  the  spherical.  Thus  the  apple 
becomes  to  us  a  very  significant  object,  when  we  see  in  its  round  form  a  striking 
jQlustration  of  the  same  law  that  is  shaping  the  earth  around  us,  and  the  heavens 


CHAP,  n."]  THE  SOJ\rG  OF  SOLOMOIT,  51 

above  us,  and  the  heart  within  us.  The  akin  or  rind  which  hems  in  the  apple,  and 
by  limiting  completes  and  individualizes  it,  is  also  a  most  si^ificant  feature.  It 
varies  in  thickness,  smoothness,  quality  of  texture,  and  colour  in  different  varieties 
of  apple  ;  but  in  all  it  may  be  said  to  pass  through  the  different  stages  of  leaf  and 
flower  like  the  plant  that  bears  it.  Wonderful  is  the  ministry  of  the  green  skin  of 
plants.  It  changes  inorganic  into  organic  matter,  and  thus  famishes  the  starting- 
point  of  all  life.  Nowhere  else  on  the  face  of  the  earth  does  this  most  important 
process  take  place.  Everything  else  consumes  and  destroys  ;  the  green  skin  of  plants 
alone  creates  and  conserves.  It  is  the  mediator  between  the  world  of  death  and  the 
world  of  life.  Hence  the  significance  of  the  green  colour  which  appears  so  vividly  in 
aU  young  growing  plants.  We  thus  see  that  the  little  globe  of  the  apple  is  a 
microcosm,  representing  within  its  miniature  sphere  the  changes  and  processes  which 
go  on  in  the  great  world.  Life  and  death,  growth  and  decay,  fight  their  battle  on 
its  humble  stage.  Fermentation  and  putrefaction,  the  two  great  processes  under 
whose  familiarity  are  hid  some  of  the  greatest  wonders  of  the  physical  world,  take 
place  within  it.  It  exhibits  the  characteristics  of  the  vegetable,  animal,  and 
mineral  kingdoms  ;  it  creates  organic  matter,  and  it  consumes  it ;  and  in  its  motion 
■within  its  little  orbit,  from  its  formation  on  the  bough  in  summer  to  its  fall  to  the 
ground  in  autumn,  it  illustrates  the  action  of  the  mighty  laws  which  bind  the 
universe  together.  Our  greatest  philosopher,  by  his  sublime  theory  of  gravitation, 
connected  it  with  the  stars  of  heaven  ;  and  to  every  thoughtful  mind  it  suggests  far- 
reaching  ideas  which  shed  light  upon  the  mysteries  of  our  own  world,  {fl.  Macmillwn, 
D,D.) 

Ver.  7.  By  the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of  the  field. — The  roes  and  the  hinds: — 
The  spouse  was  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  fellowship  with  her  Beloved.  Her  joy  was 
80  great  as  almost  to  overpower  her,  and  yet,  so  nearly  does  fear  tread  npon  the 
heels  of  joy,  she  was  filled  with  dread  lest  her  bliss  should  come  to  an  end.  She 
feared  lest  others  should  disturb  her  Lord,  for  if  He  were  grieved  she  would  be 
grieved  also,  and  if  He  departed  the  banquet  of  her  delight  would  be  over.  She  was 
afraid  even  of  her  friends,  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem ;  she  knew  that  the  best  can 
interrupt  fellowship  as  weU  as  the  worst,  and  therefore  she  adjured  even  Zion's 
daughters  not  to  sin  against  Zion's  King.  The  adjuration  which  she  used  is  a  choice 
specimen  of  oriental  poetry :  she  charges  them,  not  as  we  should  prosaically  do,  by 
everything  that  is  sacred  and  true,  but  "by  the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of  the  field.  * 

I.  "The  roes  and  the  hinds  of  the  field"  are  creatures  of  great  beauty.    Who  can 

faze  upon  them  as  they  wander  among  the  bracken  without  an  inward  admiration  I 
Tow,  since  nothing  can  be  more  lovely  than  communion  with  Jesus,  the  spouse 
exhorts  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  by  all  the  loveliest  objects  in  nature  to  refrain 
from  disturbing  it.  A  soul  in  converse  with  its  God  is  the  admiration  of  angels. 
Was  ever  a  lovelier  sight  seen  than  Jesus  at  the  table  with  the  beloved  disciple 
leaning  on  His  bosom  %  Is  not  Mary  sitting  at  the  Master's  feet  a  picture  worthy  of 
the  choicest  art  ?  Do  nothing,  then,  0  ye  who  joy  in  things  of  beauty,  to  mar  the 
fellowship  in  which  the  rarest  beauty  dwells.  Neither  by  worldly  care,  nor  sin, 
nor  trifling  make  even  the  slighest  stir  which  might  break  the  Beloved's  repose. 

II.  The  next  thought  suggested  "  by  the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of  the  field  "  is  that 
of  TENDER  INNOCENCE.  These  gentle  creatures  are  so  harmless,  so  defenceless,  so 
timid,  that  he  must  have  a  soulless  soul  who  would  do  them  harm  or  cause  them 
fright.  By  all,  then,  that  is  tender  the  spouse  beseeches  her  friends  not  to  disturb 
her  Beloved.  He  is  so  good,  so  kind,  so  holy,  harmless,  and  undefiled,  that  the 
most  indifferent  ought  to  be  ashamed  to  molest  His  rest.  In  fellowship  with  Jesus 
there  is  a  tenderness  which  ought  to  disarm  all  opposition,  and  even  command 
respectful  deference.  A  soul  communing  with  the  Son  of  God  challenges  no  enmity. 
The  world  may  rise  against  proselyting  zeal,  or  defiant  controversy,  or  ostentatious 
ceremonialism,  for  these  have  prominence  and  power,  and  are  fair  game  for  martial 
spirits  :  but  fellowship  is  quiet,  retiring,  unobtrusive,  harmless.  The  saints  who 
most  abound  in  it  are  of  a  tender  spirit,  fearful  to  offend,  non-resistant,  and  patient 
— surely  it  would  be  a  superfluity  of  craelty  to  vdsh  to  deprive  them  of  their  unsel- 
fish happiness,  which  deprives  no  heart  of  a  drop  of  pleasure,  and  costs  no  eye  a  tear. 

III.  A  third  thought  most  certainly  had  place  in  the  mind  of  the  anxious  spouse  ; 
she  meant  to  adjure  and  persuade  her  friends  to  silence  by  everything  which  sets 
forth  LOVE.  The  lilies  and  the  roes  have  always  been  sacred  to  love.  If  you  love, 
or  are  loved,  or  wish  to  be  loved,  have  a  reverent  regard  for  those  who  commune 
with  Jesus,  for  their  souls  take  their  fill  of  love,  and  to  drive  them  from  their 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  il. 

"bliss  would  be  inexcusable  barbarity.  0  ye  who  have  any  hearts  to  feel  for  others^ 
do  not  cause  the  bitterest  of  sorrow  by  depriving  a  sanctified  soul  of  the  sweetest  of 
delights.  Draw  not  nigh  hither  with  idle  tale,  or  wanton  speech,  or  empty  mirth  : 
the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy  ground,  for  surely  God  is  in  that  place  where 
a  heart  enamoured  of  the  altogether  Lovely  One  delights  itself  in  the  Lord. 
IV.  Once  more,  upon  the  very  surface  of  the  figure  lies  the  idea  of  delicate  sensi- 
tiveness. The  roes  and  the  hinds  of  the  field  are  soon  away  if  anything  occurs  to 
disturb  them.  In  this  respect  they  set  forth  to  the  life  the  speediness  with  which 
the  Beloved  departs  when  He  is  annoyed  by  sin.  The  Lord  our  God  is  a  jealous  God. 
In  proportion  to  the  fire  of  love  is  the  heat  of  jealousy,  and  therefore  our  Lord  Jesus 
will  not  brook  a  wandering  aflfection  in  those  greatly  beloved  ones  to  whom  He 
manifests  Himself.  It  needs  constant  watchfulness  to  maintain  constant  fellowship. 
If  we  would  be  favoured  above  others  we  must  be  more  on  our  guard  than  others  are. 
He  who  becomes  "  a  man  greatly  beloved  "  must  needs  keep  his  heart  with  sevenfold 
diligence,  for  to  whom  much  is  given  of  him  much  will  be  required.  (C.  H. 
Sjpurgeon.) 

Vers.  8-17.  The  voice  of  my  BeloTed. — The  voice  of  the  Beloved : — I.  When  Ohrist 

18  AWAY  FROM  THB  SOXTL  OF  THE  BELIEVER,  Hb  SITS  ALONE.  Whatever  be  th© 
movmtains  of  Bether  that  have  come  between  his  soul  and  Christ — whether  he  hath 
been  seduced  into  his  old  sins,  so  that  "his  iniquities  have  separated  again  between, 
him  and  his  God,  and  his  sins  have  hid  his  face  from  Him,  that  He  will  not  hear  " — 
or  whether  the  Saviour  hath  withdrawn  for  a  season  the  comfortable  light  of  His 
presence  for  the  mere  trial  of  His  servant's  faith,  to  see  if,  when  he  "walketh  in 
darkness  and  hath  no  light,  he  will  still  trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  stay  himself 
upon  his  God  " — whatever  the  mountains  of  separation  be,  it  is  the  sure  mark  of  the 
believer  that  he  sits  desolate  and  alone.  He  cannot  laugh  away  his  heavy  care,  as 
worldly  men  can  do.  He  cannot  drown  it  in  the  bowl  of  intemperance,  as  poor 
"blinded  men  can  do.  Even  the  innocent  intercourse  of  human  friendship  brings  no 
balm  to  his  wound — nay,  even  fellowship  with  the  children  of  God  is  now  distasteful 
to  his  soul.  II.  Christ's  coming  to  the  desolate  belieater  is  often  sudden 
AND  wonderful.  Some  text  of  the  Word,  or  some  word  from  a  Chiistian  friend,  or 
some  part  of  a  sermon,  again  reveals  Jesus  in  all  His  fulness — the  Saviour  of  sinners, 
even  the  chief.  Or  it  may  be  that  He  makes  Himself  known  to  the  disconsolate  soul 
in  the  breaking  of  bread,  and  when  He  speaks  the  gentle  words — * '  This  is  My  body 
broken  for  you  ;  this  cup  is  the  New  Testament  in  My  blood  shed  for  the  remission 
of  the  sins  of  many  ;  drink  ye  all  of  it" — then  he  carmot  but  cry  out,  "  The  voice  of 
my  Beloved !  behold,  He  cometh  leaping  upon  the  mountains,  skipping  upon  the 
hills."  III.  Christ's  coming  changes  all  things  to  the  believer,  and  His 
LOVE  IS  more  tender  THAN  EVER.  The  world  of  nature  is  aU  changed.  Instead  of 
the  thorn  comes  up  the  fir  tree,  and  instead  of  the  brier  comes  up  the  myrtle  tree. 
Every  tree  and  field  possesses  a  new  beauty  to  the  happy  soul.  The  world  of  grace 
is  all  changed.  The  Bible  was  all  dry  and  meaningless  before  ;  now,  what  a  flood  of 
light  is  poured  over  its  pages  1  how  full,  how  fresh,  how  rich  in  meaning,  how  its 
simplest  phrases  touch  the  heart  I  The  house  of  prayer  was  all  sad  and  dreary 
before — its  services  were  dry  and  imsatisfactory ;  but  now,  when  the  believer  sees 
the  Saviour,  as  he  hath  seen  Him  heretofore  within  His  holy  place,  his  cry  is, — 
' '  How  amiable  are  Thy  tabernacles,  0  Lord  of  Hosts,  etc. "  The  garden  of  the  Lord 
•was  all  sad  and  cheerless  before  ;  now  tenderness  towards  the  unconverted  springs  up 
afresh,  and  love  to  the  people  of  God  bums  in  the  bosom — then  they  that  fear  the 
Lord  speak  often  one  to  another.  The  time  of  singing  the  praises  of  Jesus  is  come,  and 
the  turtle  voice  of  love  to  Jesus  is  once  more  heard  in  the  land  ;  the  Lord's  vine  flourishes, 
and  the  pomegranate  buds,  and  Christ's  voice  to  the  soul  is,  "  Arise,  My  love.  My 
fair  one,  and  come  away."  IV.  Observe  the  threefold  disposition  of  fear, 
liOVE,  and  hope,  which  this  visit  of  the  Saviour  stirs  up  in  the  believer's  bosom. 
These  three  form,  as  it  were,  a  cord  in  the  restored  believer's  bosom,  and  a  threefold 
cord  is  not  easily  broken.  {R.  M.  McCheyne.)  Behold,  He  cometh,  leaping  upon  the 
mountains,  skipping  upon  the  hills. —  The  mountains  of  Judah  : — One  of  the  most 
striking  featirres  of  this  book  of  Solomon's  Song  is  that  of  liveliness.  We  find  the 
Church  here  represented  in  the  liveliness  of  her  affections  to  Christ,  to  God  ;  we  here 
see  the  Saviour  in  the  liveliness  of  His  love,  and  of  His  activities  towards  the  Church  ; 
and  so  He  is  represented  as  a  roe,  or  as  a  young  hart,  expressive  of  freedom  and 
activity.  I.  The  mountains,  the  hills  of  impediment  which  the  Saviour 
©TBRCOMBS.     I  will  here  take  the  Saviour  leaping  upon  the  mountains,  skipping 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  53 

upon  the  hills,  to  denote  with  what  triumph  and  with  what  certainty  He  enables  all 
His  people  to  overcome  all  their  troubles.  II.  Take  the  mountains  and  the  hills  to 
denote  the  eternal  truths  of  the  Gospel,  as  spoken  of  in  this  book, — the  moun* 
tains  of  eternity.  "The  voice  of  my  Beloved  !  behold,  He  cometh  leaping  upon  the 
mountains,  skipping  upon  the  hills,"  of  division.  There  is  God's  everlasting  love  to 
Jacob  in  contradistinction  to  Esau  ;  God's  everlasting  love  to  His  own,  in  contra- 
distinction to  the  others  ;  and  Christ  glorified  in  that  mountain  of  division.  There 
iB  God's  eternal  election,  and  Christ  gloried  in  the  same,  and  commands  His  disciples 
to  rejoice  that  their  names  are  written  in  heaven.  There  is  His  eternal  achievement 
by  which  He  hath  redeemed  His  people,  and  distinguished  them  from  all  others  by 
that  eternal  redemption,  for  none  but  the  redeemed  can  learn  that  song  that  the 
redeemed  sing.  "The  mountains  of  division."  Then  comes  regeneration ;  that 
brings  His  people  up  to  Mount  Zion — mountain  of  division.  Then  comes  resurrection 
to  life  ;  then  comes  glorification.  Here  is  a  range  of  mountains  ranging  from  eternity 
to  eternity.  {J.  Wells.)  An  absent  Christ  yet  beloved: — 1.  An  absent  Christ  is  yet 
a  beloved  Christ  to  His  true  Church,  and  to  the  truly  believing  soul.  2.  The  spouse 
of  Christ  wiU  know  her  Beloved's  voice,  though  He  hath  a  while  been  absent. 
3.  The  spouse  of  Christ  will  greatly  rejoice  to  hear  her  Beloved's  voice,  especially 
afber  a  time  of  absenting  Himself.  4.  Though  Christ  may  withdraw,  and  absent 
Himself  from  His  Church,  and  from  the  souls  of  His  people,  yet  He  will  come. 
6.  When  He  comes.  He  will  come  skipping  upon  the  mountains  and  leaping  upon 
the  hiUs,  openly  and  hastily,  and  trampling  aU  diflBculties  and  impediments  under 
His  feet.  6.  The  Church,  and  the  true  members  of  it,  will  by  the  eye  of  faith 
discern  Christ  coming,  skipping  upon  the  mountains.  {John  Collinges,  D.D.) 
Christ's  coming  to  His  spouse  to  be  beheld : — Believing  souls  in  the  time  of  His  with- 
drawing from  them  may  and  ought  to   behold   Him  again   returning  to  them. 

I.  Christ's  return  to  His  spouse  after  an  absence  maybe  beheld  by  a  believer.  (1)  He 
came  by  His  Incarnation.  (2)  He  cometh  to  His  people  in  the  influences  of  His 
grace,  to  comfort,  quicken,  strengthen  them.  (3)  He  cometh  in  the  influences  of 
His  providence,  to  protect,  save,  rescue  and  deliver  His  people.  (4)  He  cometh  to 
judgment,  and  His  reward  is  with  Him  to  render  to  every  one  according  to  his  work. 

II.  A  believer  may  behold  Christ's  coming,  in  many  sure  and  faithful  promises. 

III.  The  believer  sees  Him  coming  in  the  sure  words  of  prophecy.  IV,  His  coming 
may  be  beheld  in  the  steps  of  His  providence.  (1)  To  a  particular  soul  in  the 
influences  of  His  grace.  (2)  To  the  public  assemblies  of  His  people  in  the  influences 
of  His  common  providences.  (3)  To  the  universal  judgment.  Signs  of  this  are : — 
(a)  Plenty  of  seducers  (Matt.  xxiv.  4),  {b)  Great  commotions  in  the  world,  and 
other  judgments  of  God.  (c)  Abounding  of  iniquity  and  decay  of  religion,  {d)  Great 
security  of  sinners,  (e)  Alterations  in  the  course  of  nature.  {Ibid.)  Lessons  of  the 
Spring : — Whatever  these  words  may  or  may  not  mean  in  any  deep,  spiritual  sense, 
they  may  at  least  be  applied  to  the  Spring-time  and  the  Summer.     I.  As  we  feel 

THE  INFLTJENCES  OF  THE  GROWING  SPRING,  THEY  SUGGEST  TO  US  THE  IDEA  OF  ORDER. 

By  the  end  of  the  Winter  we  are  apt  to  feel  as  if  we  had  the  end  of  all  inanimate 
nature.  But  the  first  buds  of  Spring  bring  to  mind  the  order  of  nature  more  vividly 
than  such  frequent  changes  as  the  succession  of  day  and  night,  which  become  so 
familiar  that  we  fail  to  mark  their  lessons.  II.  Spring  impresses  tjs  with  the 
MANIFESTATION  OF  POWER.  It  retums  with  a  great  manifestation  of  force.  Who 
can  compute  the  aggregate  weight  now  lifting  in  the  vegetable  creation  all  over  this 
land,  in  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  billions  and  billions  of  plants,  from  the 
tiny  grass-blade  to  the  giant  oak  ?  There  is  a  moral  aspect  here  also.  "The  power 
which  wields  this  force  is  on  the  side  of  righteousness.  It  is  the  same  as  that  which 
rules  the  hearts  of  men,  and  makes  their  lives  and  actions  to  praise  God,  and  bring 
about  His  will  on  earth.  III.  The  incoming  Spring  delights  us  with  its 
EXHIBITION  of  progressiveness.  I  watch  a  tree  opposite  my  dwelling  with  ever- 
increasing  interest.  This  tree  in  Winter  seemed  dead,  until  as  Spring  approached  a 
single  bud  peeped  forth.  After  neglecting  to  look  for  a  few  days  I  was  yesterday 
surprised  to  see  it  clothed  in  every  branch  with  leaves.  Ah,  what  progressiveness  I 
The  kingdom  of  Spring  "  cometh  not  by  observation."  So  with  the  "kingdom  of 
God  " — the  kingdom  of  goodness  in  the  earth.  Has  Christianity  made  no  advance  % 
Compare  to-day  with  yesterday,  and,  as  in  a  tree,  we  see  but  little  change.  But 
think  of  the  treatment  of  the  insane,  or  of  prisoners,  now,  and  even  so  lately  as  only 
fifty  years  ago  I  Is  there  no  advance  there  ?  Compare  the  pictures  drawn  by  writers 
of  the  former  day  with  what  we  now  take  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  we  seem  to  be 
living  in  almost  a  new  world.     The  function  of  Christianity  in  the  world  is  the 


€4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  h. 

bettering  of  men  in  physical,  moral,  and  spiritual  progress  ;  and  the  work,  though 
gradual,  is  sure.  Therefore  learn  this  lesson  :  Be  patient  I  You  cannot  take  the 
beUows  of  the  sky  and  blow  the  heat  of  heaven  into  greater  intensity,  to  hasten 
Crod's  work  in  nature  or  in  grace.  Be  patient,  as  God  is  patient.  His  policy  is 
broadly  progressive.  In  means  of  Gospel  privilege  God's  kingdom  grows  as  under 
glass  ;  but  in  heathen  lands  the  progi-ess  is  more  slow — yet  none  the  less  sure.  God's 
will  shall  triumph  in  the  end.  He  can  afford  to  wait,  and  we  should  follow  His 
example.  IV.  We  leaen  from  the  Spring  the  hope  of  recovery.  The  Spring- 
time IS  a  recovering.  So  with  grace.  Salvation  is  a  recovering — not  only  a  setting 
np  of  something  new.  There  was  once  a  golden  age  for  the  race,  but  we  have 
descended  to  an  iron  age  ;  nay,  even  to  an  age  of  clay,  and  broken  clay  at  that. 
But  there  is  a  good  day  coming,  when  the  earth  shaU  be  filled  with  more  than  its 
original  blessedness.  This  blessedness  is  through  Christ,  in  whom  alone  trusting 
you  may  sorely  find  atemal  life.     {L.  D.  Bevan,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10-13.  Sise  up,  my  loy»,  my  fair  one,  and  come  away.  For,  lo,  the  winter 
is  past,  the  rain  is  over  and  gone. — A  Sermon  for  Spring: — The  works  of  creation 
are  pictures  to  the  children  of  God  of  the  secret  mysteries  of  grace.  The  very  seasons 
of  the  year  find  their  parallel  in  the  little  world  of  man  within.  Each  particular 
season  has  its  duty.  The  husbandman  finds  that  there  is  a  time  to  plougn,  a  time 
to  sow,  a  time  to  reap ;  there  is  a  season  for  vintage,  and  a  period  for  the  pruning 
of  the  vine ;  there  is  a  month  for  the  planting  of  herbs,  and  for  the  ingathering  of 
seeds.  To  everything  there  is  a  time  and  a  purpose,  and  every  season  has  its  special 
labour.  It  seems  from,  the  text,  that  whenever  it  is  springtime  in  our  hearts,  then 
Christ's  voice  may  be  heard  saying,  "Arise,  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come  away." 
Whenever  we  have  been  delivered  from  a  dreary  winter  of  temptation  or  affliction, 
or  tribulation, — ^whenever  the  fair  spring  of  hope  cometh  upon  us,  and  our  joys  begin 
to  multiply,  then  we  should  hear  the  Master  bidding  us  seek  after  something  higher 
and  better,  and  we  should  go  forth  in  His  strength  to  love  Him  more,  and  serve  Him 
more  diligently  than  aforetime.  I.  First,  with  regard  to  the  ttniversal  Church 
OF  Christ.  The  history  of  Christ's  Church  is  a  varied  year  of  many  seasons.  She 
has  had  her  high  and  noble  processions  of  victory ;  she  has  had  her  sorrowftil 
congregations  of  mourners  during  times  of  disaster  and  apparent  defeat.  Commencing 
with  the  life  of  Christ,  what  a  smiling  spring  it  was  for  the  world  when  the  Holy 
Spirit  was  poured  out  in  Pentecost.  The  bride  arose,  charmed  by  the  heavenly  voice 
of  her  spouse,  she  girt  on  her  beautiful  garments  and  for  some  hundred  years  or 
more,  she  did  come  away ;  she  came  away  from  her  narrowness  of  spirit,  and  she 
preached  to  the  Gentiles  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ :  she  came  away  from  her 
attachment  to  the  State,  and  she  dared  to  confess  that  Christ's  kingdom  was  not  of 
this  world  :  she  came  away  from  her  earthly  hopes  and  comforts,  for  "  they  counted 
not  their  Uvea  dear  unto  tnem  that  they  might  win  Christ  and  be  found  in  Him  :  " 
she  came  away  from  all  ease  and  rest  of  body,  for  they  laboured  more  and  more 
abundantly,  making  themselves  sacrifices  for  Christ.  Alas,  alas,  that  season  passed 
away,  the  Church  grew  dull  and  sleepy ;  she  left  her  Lord,  she  turned  aside,  she 
leaned  upon  an  arm  of  flesh,  courting  the  endowments  of  earthly  kingdoms,  then 
there  came  a  long  and  dreary  winter,  the  dark  ages  of  the  world,  the  darker  ages  of 
the  Church.  At  last  the  time  of  love  returned,  when  God  again  visited  His  people 
and  raised  up  for  them  new  apostles,  new  martyrs,  new  confessors.  The  time  of 
Luther  and  Calvin,  and  Melanchthon,  and  of  Knox  was  come — heaven's  sunny  days 
when  once  again  the  frost  should  give  way  to  approaching  summer.  Then  it  was 
that  men  could  say  once  again,  "  The  winter  is  passed,"  priestcraft  has  lost  its 
power,  the  rain  is  over  and  gone  ;  false  doctrines  shall  no  more  be  as  tempests  to 
the  Church  ;  the  flowers  appear  on  the  earth — little  Churches  ;  plants  of  God's  right 
hand  planting,  are  springing  up  everywhere.  Oh  1  would  to  God  that  the  Church 
could  then  have  heard  her  Master's  voice,  "Rise  up  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  coma 
away."  And  now,  brethren,  in  these  days  we  have  had  another  season  of  refreshing. 
God  has  been  pleased  to  pour  out  Hia  Spirit  upon  men  again.  He  speaks  to  each 
denomination  according  to  its  need,  but  to  the  same  import,  "  Rise  up  and  come 
away  ;  leave  deadness  and  coldness  and  wrong-doing  and  hardness  and  harshness, 
and  bitterness  of  spirit ;  leave  idleness  and  slothfulness  and  lukewammess  ;  rise  up 
and  come  away.  Come  away  to  preach  the  Gospel  amongst  the  heathen  ;  come  away 
to  reform  the  masses  of  this  wicked  city ;  come  away  from  your  little  heartedness  ; 
from  your  coldness  of  spirit,  come  away :  the  land  is  before  you ;  go  up  and  possess 
it."    II.  Methinks  Uxe  text  has  a  very  spbcial  toicx  to  vs  as  a  Ohttsch.  We  musfc 


CHAF.  n.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOy.  55 


use  the  Scripture  widely,  but  yet  personally.  While  we  know  its  reference  to  the 
uniYersal  Church,  we  must  not  forget  its  special  application  to  ourselves.  We,  too, 
have  had  a  season  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  A  glad  period  of 
abundant  increase  in  which  there  has  been  as  many  converts  as  we  could  receive, 
till  every  officer  of  the  Church  has  had  his  hands  full  in  seeing  enquirers,  and  we 
have  oiily  had  time  to  stop  now  and  then  and  take  breath,  and  say,  '*  What  hath 
God  wrought  ? "  Well,  what  ought  we  to  do  1  I  hear  the  Master  saying,  *'  Rise  up, 
my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come  away."  I  hear  Jesus  speaking  to  this  Church,  and 
•eying,  "Where  much  is  given,  there  much  shall  be  required."  Serve  not  the  Lord 
as  other  Churches,  but  yet  more  abundantly.    III.  When  the  time  of  the  bridal 

OF  THE  80UL  HAS  ARRIVED  TO  EACH  CONVINCED  SINNER,  THEN  ALSO  THERE  ARK 

SPECIAL  DUTIES.  Young  convert,  yoimg  believer,  in  the  dawn  of  thy  piety,  Jesus 
says,  "Rise  up,  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come  away."  He  asks  thee  to  come  out 
from  the  world  and  make  a  profession  of  thy  faith  in  Him  now  :  put  it  not  off ;  it  ia 
the  best  time  to  profess  thy  faith  whilst  thou  art  young,  while  aa  yet  to  thee  the 
days  come  not,  nor  the  years  draw  nigh,  when  thou  shalt  say,  "  I  have  no  pleasure 
in  them. "  Make  haste  and  delay  not  to  keep  His  commandments.  Arise,  and  b* 
baptized.  Oome  ye  out  from  among  the  world,  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the 
unclean  thing  ;  follow  Christ  in  this  perverse  generation,  that  you  may  hear  Him 
say  at  the  last,  "  Of  you  I  am  not  ashamed,  for  you  were  not  ashamed  of  Me  in  the 
day  when  I  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men."  In  this  your  early  time,  dedicate 
yourselves  to  God.  IV.  It  may  be  that  you  and  I  have  had  winters  of  dark  trouble, 
succeeded  by  soft  springs  of  deliverance.  Now  have  we  our  assurance  back 
again  ;  and  Christ  is  near  to  us,  and  we  have  fellowship  with  the  Father,  and  with 
His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  WeU,  then,  what  are  we  to  do  1  Why,  the  Master  says  to  us, 
"Rise  up,  and  come  away."  Now  is  the  time  when  we  should  mount  up  to  be 
nearer  to  Himself.  Now  that  the  day  dawns  and  the  shadows  flee  away,  let  us  seek 
our  beloved  amid  the  bed  of  spices,  and  by  the  LQies  where  he  feeds.  (C  ff.  Spurgeon. ) 
Spring  should  remind  us  of— I.  The  introduction  of  the  Gospel  dispensation. 
1.  The  Jewish  dispensation  may  fitly  be  compared  to  winter.  2.  The  opening  of  the 
Gospel  dispensation  resembled  the  advent  of  spring.  It  was  caused  by  the  rising  of 
the  Sim  of  Righteousness.  II.  Times  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  th« 
Lord.  1.  Seasons  of  awakening  in  the  experience  of  individuals.  2.  Seasons  of 
reformation  in  the  history  of  the  Church.  III.  The  glorious  resurrection  of 
the  saints,  and  the  full  realization  of  the  kingdom  of  God  and 
Christ.  {EvangelicaZ  Preacher.)  A  Spring  Sermon: — I.  Some  of  the  natural 
characteristics  of  spring.  1.  Life  will  be  felt  to  be  a  predominant  feature.  The 
sap  is  rising,  with  its  quickening  energies,  through  every  plant  and  tree.  The  buds 
are  opening  with  the  elasticity  and  glow  of  life.  From  the  nests  of  birds  are  issuing 
the  first  quivering  strains  of  the  yoimg  feathered  host  whose  liquid  music  shall  soon 
be  heard  rippling  through  all  the  woo(& :  "  the  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  is  come." 
But  amongst  men  death  is  stiU  to  be  seen  in  dark  contrast.  There  is  bodily  death ; 
the  passing  bell  is  toUing  through  all  these  spring  days.  There  is  mental  death, 
where  ignorance,  blind  prejudice,  and  superstition  prevail.  And,  worst  of  all,  there 
is  spiritual  death.  Men  are  "dead  in  trespasses  aud  sins."  To  such  the  cry  comes, 
"Awake,  thou  that  sleepest."  2.  Beauty  shines  forth  in  spring.  We  see  it  in 
unfaUen  blossoms  and  opening  flowers,  in  the  many  hues  of  early  foliage  that  soften 
and  relieve  each  other,  in  the  cloud-dappled  sky  and  its  moving  shadows  on  the 
earth,  and  in  the  fresh  clear  landscape  that  looks  as  though  the  rain  of  winter  and  the 
sun  of  siunmer  had  combined  to  clothe  it  with  rainbow  radiance.  3.  Beauty  consists 
in  due  proportions  being  maintained  between  each  part  and  the  perfect  harmonizing 
of  them  as  a  whole.  Does  your  soul  present  this  picture  of  spiritual  beauty,  or  is  it 
deformed  and  distorted  by  smenation  from  God  1  Spring  profiFers  health  and  strength. 
The  sick  yearn  for  its  balmy  breath.  It  ministers  additional  vigour  to  the  robust. 
But  how  does  it  find  you — weakly  yielding  to  besetting  sins,  victims  of  vices  that 
will  hurry  you  to  the  gates  of  hell,  poor,  hapless  slaves  of  Satan,  crying  out,  "Who 
win  deliver  me  from  this  body  of  death  ? "  Oh  1  to  you  thus  groaning  in  impotence 
and  sin  comes  a  reviving  strength  in  the  beams  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  4.  Joy 
and  gladness  distinguish  the  spring-time.  The  winds  laugh  as  they  play  through 
the  bowing  trees.  The  leaves  rustle  as  though  the  feet  of  fairy  dancers  were 
pattering  on  them.  A  chorus  of  joy  rolls  up  to  the  clouds  from  "  a  thousand  voices 
full  and  sweet."  Is  your  heart  glad  too  !  Accept  the  offer  of  mercy  that  is  made 
BOW  by  Christ,  who  cries,  "  Oome  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden, 
and  I  will  give  you  rest."    5.  We  are  impressed  at  this  season  with  the  proofs  of 

25 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

riches  and  wealth  that  are  manifest  around.  "Thou  crownest  the  year  with  Thy 
goodness,  and  Thy  paths  drop  fatness."  But  yet  with  all  this  external  plenty  there 
may  be  leanness  in  the  soul.  The  spirit  may  be  poverty-stricken,  starving,  oecauae 
it  refuses  to  be  fed  by  the  hand  of  God,  preferrmg  the  husks  of  this  world  to  the 
com  that  may  be  eaten  in  the  Father's  house.  6.  Lastly,  we  notice  youth  and 
promise  as  characteristics  of  spring.  We  look  forward  to  a  further  development  of 
what  we  see.  The  green  blades  of  wheat  shall  become  golden  stalks  of  com.  The 
blushing  blossoms  shall  give  place  to  ripe  mellow  fruit.  Nature  is  but  young.  It 
has  yet  to  glow  with  maturity  and  to  droop  with  age.  The  dew  must  glisten 
through  many  mornings  and  the  sun  must  shine  through  many  moons  ere  the 
moaning  winds  of  autumn  sweep  the  leaves  to  their  graves.  Some  of  you  are  in  the 
spring  of  life.  You  are  hopeful,  and  afford  promise  of  great  things.  But  are  yoa 
beginning  life  "  looking  imto  Jesus,"  as  your  Saviour  and  example — seeking  to  grow 
up  into  the  perfect  stature  of  man  in  Ohjist  Jesus !  If  you  are  not  yours  will  be  an 
aimless,  fruitless  life.  II.  The  revelation  concerning  the  Divine  nattjrk 
WHICH  spring  affords.  1.  Spring  testifies  to  the  faithfulness  of  God.  Never  da 
the  seasons  cease  to  recur  at  the  appointed  times.  The  snows  of  winter  do  not  forget 
to  melt.  The  ice-bound  rivers  do  not  remain  for  ever  held  in  silent  rest.  He  that 
never  slumbers  nor  sleeps  rolls  the  earth  on,  without  any  exercise  of  care  or  thought 
on  our  part,  irntU  the  sim's  rays  can  warm  and  revive  the  forms  that  winter's  cold 
has  benumbed.  Surely  the  frequent  manifestations  of  His  faithfulness  in  nature 
should  inspire  us  with  a  nobler  confidence,  and  cause  us  to  cry  with  Job,  "Though 
He  slay  me  yet  will  I  trust  Him."  2.  But  not  less  plainly  revealed  is  the  goodness 
of  God.  With  how  many  hands  do  we  see  God,  in  the  spring  time,  promising  to 
supply  our  coming  wants !  The  lowliest  fruit  of  the  earth  proclaims  that  God  is 
love.  And  this  regard  is  manifested  to  all  alike.  The  sun  shines  on  the  evil  and 
on  the  good.  But  how  do  you  regard  this  goodness  when  it  is  revealed  in  the  form 
of  mercy  towards  you  who  have  sinned  so  greatly  against  God  ?  What  think  you  of 
the  statement — "  God  so  loved  the  world  "  ?  3.  How  many  evidences  of  the  wisdom 
of  God  we  may  gather  up  at  this  spring  time  !  Take  that  leaf,  and  mark  the  wonderful 
system  of  veins  by  which  nutriment  is  supplied  to  the  remotest  part ;  or  that  flower, 
and  see  what  wonderful  provision  is  made  for  the  propagation  of  the  species ;  or  that 
bird's  feather  that  lies  on  the  ground,  and  see  how  its  cylindrical  pen  gives  it 
lightness  and  strength  designing  it  for  flight.  In  these  minute  objects  tnat  are 
scattered  all  around  now  we  may  trace  Divine  wisdom.  But  in  general  results  we 
may  see  it  equally.  It  is  wisdom  that  arranges  the  gradual  transition  from  winter 
to  summer,  thus  adapting  the  change  to  the  human  constitution.  It  is  wisdom  that 
provides  that  man  shall  be  tasked  with  ploughing  and  sowing  before  the  reaping 
season  comes,  for  were  there  not  these  healthfiil  labours,  idleness  and  sin  would  soon 
enervate  and  destroy  the  race.  And  this  wisdom  is  that  in  which  we  invite  you  to 
confide  rather  than  in  your  own  erring  judgments.  May  you  leam  to  discern  the 
wisdom  of  God  in  redemption,  and  be  able  with  adoring  faith  to  adopt  the  language 
of  the  apostle,  and  cry,  "0  the  depth  of  th«  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and 
knowledge  of  God  I "  4.  Lastly,  we  will  advert  to  the  resources  of  God  that  are 
made  known  to  us  in  the  spring.  We  see  them  in  the  provision  made  for  the  support 
of  the  myriad  living  creatures  that  awaken  to  life  as  the  spring  opens.  We  find 
them  also  in  the  arrangements  made  for  maintaining  the  fertility  of  the  soil.  The 
leaves  of  last  autumn  as  they  decay  render  the  earth  more  rich  this  year.  Let  us 
learn  then  to  trust  in  Hun  who  invites  us  by  His  love,  and  encourages  us  by  His 
wisdom  and  infinite  power,  to  rely  upon  Him.  III.  The  relation  of  spring  to 
THE  doctrine  OF  RESURRECTION.  Spring  presents  the  most  appropriate  figures 
whereby  to  represent  resurrection.  The  forms  of  animal  and  vegetable  life  that  lived 
through  the  fast  summer,  and  which  either  died  or  passed  into  a  torpid  condition 
at  the  approach  of  winter,  now  arise  again  in  all  their  wonted  beauty  and  vigour. 
The  insect  breaks  forth  from  its  chrysalis  state,  and  spreads  its  bright  gauzy  wings 
in  the  sunshine.  The  seed  decays,  and  from  it  arises  a  stately  stem  to  wave  with 
joyous  life  in  the  breeze.  It  is  not  without  interest  that  the  period  of  the  resui-rection 
of  our  Lord  is  coincident,  at  least  in  our  country,  with  the  spring-time.  Let  us 
rejoice  as  we  read  the  record  of  that  wondrous  event,  which  confirms  our  faith  in  the 
Divine  character  of  the  Saviour,  which  proclaims  His  sacrifice  to  have  been  accepted, 
and  which  celebrates  His  victory  over  death  and  heU.  This  spring-time  points  us 
also  to  a  more  general  resurrection  of  which  our  Lord's  was  the  first-fruit,  when 
through  earth's  valleys,  and  in  the  caverns  of  the  deep,  the  trumpet-call  of  the 
angel  shaU  be  heard  winding,  summoning  bmied  millions  to  the  judgment-seat  of 


CHIP,  n.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  57 

Christ.  In  that  rcBuireetion  we  must  take  part.  To  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ 
"we  must  come.  If  you  should  now  begin  to  live  a  life  of  faith  in  the  Son  of  God, 
it  will  be  the  brightest  spring  that  has  ever  blossomed  around  you.  It  will  be  spring 
in  your  soul.  All  the  latent  powers  you  possess  of  knowing,  of  loving,  and  of  having 
fellowship  with  God  shall  awake  to  life.  The  lost  likeness  of  God  shall  be  restored. 
Your  soul  shall  feel  the  harmony  with  extended  nature  renewed.  The  thrill  of  holy 
joy,  and  the  glow  of  Divine  life,  shall  be  felt,  with  new  and  spiritual  meaning  you 
shall  sing,  "The  winter  is  past."  {R.  S.  Harington.)  Spring: — I.  Spring  an 
EMBLEM  OF  TOUTH.  Winter,  of  age.  1.  Spring  is  the  season  of  hope,  the  dawn  of 
the  year.  Looking  forward.  So  youth  is  the  season  of  bright  anticipations.  2.  The 
Beason  of  preparation.  Ploughing,  sowing,  etc.  So  youth.  Laying  foundations  of 
character  and  success.  3.  The  season  of  activity.  So  youth.  4.  Fleeting.  Youth 
Boon  merges  into  manhood,  care  and  trouble  comes.  II.  Spring  ak  emblzm  of 
CONVBRSION.  Winter,  of  the  unconverted  state.  Cold,  dark,  dreary.  1.  The 
season  of  renewal.  "Thou  renewest  the  face  of  the  earth."  Conversion  is  the 
renewal  of  the  heart.  "  Renew  a  right  spirit  within  me."  2.  The  season  of  joy  and 
gladness.  "  Time  of  the  singing  of  birds  is  come. "  Conversion  produces  joy.  Eunuch 
"went  on  his  way  rejoicing."  III.  Spring  an  emblem  of  revival.  Winter,  of 
declension.  Spiritual  barrenness.  A  revival  needed  both  in  churches  and  individuals. 
"  O  Lord,  revive  Thy  work."  IV.  Spring  an  emblem  op  Kesurrection.  Winter, 
of  death.  1.  Kesurrection  of  Christ.  Then  the  Winter  of  the  world  indeed.  The 
race  was  filled  with  hope,  joy,  gladness.  2.  Our  resurrection  at  the  last  day. 
V.  Spring  suggests  Heaven.  ' '  There  everlasting  Spring  abides. "  May  the  Winter  of 
our  spiritual  apathy  be  past  and  the  Springtide  of  a  new  life  be  ours.  {E.  AsMon  Jones. ) 
Spring  and  Summer : — We  shall  be  following  the  example  of  Christ,  and  shall  do 
well,  when  we  take  the  words  of  the  royal  lover  and  apply  them  as  the  words  of 
Divine  invitation  to  human  souls  ;  making  spring  and  summer,  with  their  flowers 
and  grass,  trees  and  fioiits,  and  the  birds  and  beasts,  speak  on  behalf  of  God  and 
Christ,  of  Divine  love  and  mercy,  of  perfect  righteousness  and  justice,  and  of 
human  activity  and  life.  I.  Returned  Spring  and  coming  Summer  reproyb 
AND  condemn  our  SINFUL  soxTLS.  Jesus  Christ  was  sent  into  the  world  to  live, 
and  suflFer,  and  die  for  human  salvation  ;  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given  to  quicken 
our  spiritually  dead  souls  into  newness  of  life  ;  the  Church  was  established  by  Christ 
to  preserve,  and  perpetuate,  and  extend  the  Gospel  of  salvation  ;  the  Sabbath-day 
and  the  ministry^  of  the  Word,  and  the  public  services  of  religion,  are  divinely 
appointed  to  bring  the  truth,  and  the  power,  and  the  love  of  God,  with  livinff 
energy  from  living  hearts  to  cold  and  dead  souls.  This  is  the  spiritual  order  of  God 
for  the  regeneration  of  men.  And  this  order  is  as  powerful  and  effective  on  willing 
minds  and  obedient  hearts,  as  returned  spring  and  coming  summer  make  the  flowers 
to  appear  on  the  earth,  the  trees  to  enrobe  themselves  with  foliage,  the  grain  hid  in 
the  soil  to  grow,  the  birds  of  the  air  to  sing,  and  all  animate  nature  to  join  in  the 
universal  enjoyment  of  the  world.  II,  Returned  spring  and  coming  summer,  with 
their  silent  processes  continually  and  unchangeable  at  work,  prove  the  Divink 
P0V7ER  AND  WisDOM  OF  GoD.  Divine  power  and  wisdom  were  no  more  visible 
in  Christ  creating  and  multiplying  food  for  the  hungry  thousands  from  a  few  loaves, 
than  in  those  slow,  silent  processes  by  which  the  seed  springs  up  and  bears  the  full 
com  in  the  ear  during  the  course  of  spring  and  summer  and  autumn,  and  is  multi- 
plied some  thirty,  some  sixty,  and  some  an  hundredfold.  The  power  and  wisdom  of 
God  would  no  more  be  seen  in  a  bare,  leafless,  flowerless  deU  or  grove  instantly 
clothed  with  foliage  and  blossom  of  every  variety  of  form  and  colour,  than  in 
the  same  results  gradually  achieved  by  silent,  hidden,  but  interesting  processes 
extending  over  weeks  or  months.  The  processes  are  the  same  in  the  first  case, 
though  accelerated  or  made  to  act  in  a  moment  of  time,  instead  of  being  spread  over 
weeks.  No  power  other  than  the  infinite  power  and  wisdom  of  the  Divine  Creator 
could  combine  the  influences  and  forces  and  agencies  necessary  to  produce  in  either 
case  such  a  scene  of  beauty  and  sublimity.  III.  Returned  spring  and  coming  sum- 
mer  DIFFUSE   A   SWEET,    SOOTHING,  AND   SACRED    INFLUENCE.      The  fields  and  dclls 

and  hUls,  the  air  perfumed  with  the  breath  of  flowers,  the  bursting  of  buds,  the 
spreading  of  luxuriant  foliage  bearing  every  shade  of  green,  the  light  of  heaven 
shining  down, — all  speak  of  the  perfect  goodness  and  the  sweet  loveliness  of  God. 
Even  the  names  by  which  flowers  are  commonly  known  have  a  language  of  their 
own,  by  which  they  give  utterance  to  pure  thoughts,  kindly  feelings,  and  generous 
words,  and  speak  of  sympathy  and  affection,  truth  and  goodness,  peace  and  love. 
How  beautifully,  yet  how  marvellously,  has  God  revealed  Himself  in  nature ;  how 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

srweet,  how  clear,  and  how  lovingly  does  He  stamp  His  presence  and  the  attributea 
of  His  character  upon  all  things,  for  He  has  made  all  things  for  beneficent  ends. 
Even  through  Nature,  the  door  of  the  future  world  is  opened  to  our  view.  The 
forms  and  colours  and  substances  of  things  are  perfectly  adapted  to  preserve  and  pro- 
mote our  earthly  comfort  and  life  ;  and  may  we  not  assume  there  will  be  in  glory 
the  same  natural,  pleasing,  and  perfect  fitness  of  all  things  to  preserve  and  promote 
our  glorious  life  in  the  likeness  of  Jesus  Christ !  The  same  God  who  rules  and  reigns 
on  earth  also  rules  and  reigns  in  heaven.     IV.  Returned  spring  and  coming  summer, 

IN  AWAKENING  THB  KNEEGIE8  AND  ACTIVITIES   OF   NATURE  FROM  THEIE  WINTER'S 

SLEEP,  CALL  TJS  TO  ARISE  TO  ACTIVE  WORK.  It  is  God  that  worketh  in  us  both  to 
will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure  ;  and  yet  we  must  both  will  and^do  as  He  works 
in  us  by  His  Word  and  Spirit.  The  energies  of  our  sjiritual  nature  must  have 
opportunities  of  exercise  imtil  they  form  gradually  in  us  habits  of  grace  and  goodness. 
"We  must  carefully  form  and  actively  maintain  habits  of  piety,  such  as  prayer,  faith, 
love,  self-restraint,  reverence,  and  decision.  We  must  sustain  a  conscience  void  of 
offence,  and  sensitive  of  evil.  We  must  abhor  selfishness,  pride,  and  immorality. 
We  must  cultivate  close  attsMshment  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  love  Him  as  our  Saviour 
for  His  love  to  us.  We  must  live  in  sympathy  with  every  good  work,  and  with  all 
good  men  ;  and  we  must  rive  full  play  to  our  living  activities  in  doing  good. 
{W.  Simpson.)    The  Risen  Christ  the  Church's  spring: — I.  A  Syrian  spring-timb. 

1.  Winter  past,  and  rain  over.  In  Syria,  winter  rains  descend  in  torrents  unknown 
to  us,  but  at  a  certain  time  spring  at  once  succeeds,  and  for  months  clouds  are  never 
seen  (1  Sam.  xii.  16-19 ;  Prov.  xxvi.  1).  2.  Change  marvellous.  Tender  grass 
springs  out  of  earth  (2  Sam.  xxziiL  4).  Groimd  enamelled  with  lovely  flowers. 
Fig-tree  puts  forth  her  green  fruit,  and  vines  their  fragrant  smell.  3.  Singing  and 
voice  of  the  turtle  heard.  Its  presence  a  sure  sign  of  the  return  of  spring  (Jer.  viii.  7). 
II.  Chuist's  Resurrection  a  spiritual  spring-time.  1.  History  of  early  Church, 
Contrast  apostles  as  seen  in  the  Gospels  and  in  the  Acts — winter  and  spring. 

2.  History  of  religious  revivals.  Churches  for  a  season  in  wintry  state,  Scnpture 
pastures  snow-covered,  spiritual  streams  ice-bound.  When,  however,  Christ  is 
preached,  not  only  as  a  pattern  of  life,  not  only  as  propitiation  for  sin,  but  as  the 
risen  Saviour  pleading  at  God's  right  hand,  then  the  Spirit  works  a  wondrous  change. 
Barren  winter  and  dirk  days  no  more,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  shines,  spring 
returns,  pastures  are  green,  waters  flow  softly,  fruits  of  righteousness  abound. 
Converts  grow  in  grace,  as  willows  by  watercourses,  3.  History  of  individual 
believer.  May  have  felt  dark  and  dead  ;  but  when  the  Spirit  quickens  this  truth  in 
him  then  day  breaks,  shadows  flee  away.  Realizing  in  Christ's  Resurrection 
God's  acceptance  of  the  finished  work  on  his  behalf,  he  henceforth  walks  in  holy 
peace  and  liberty,— each  day  a  Sabbath,  a  sacrament  in  every  meal ;  he  loves 
to  break  the  costly  spikenard  in  the  ardour  of  spiritual  love  and  joy.  III. 
Ohkist's  retxjkn  will  be  a  never-ending  spring.  At  His  coming  all  things 
will  be  made  new.  The  winter  of  sin  and  sorrow  will  be  past,  and  there  will  be 
no  more  sin  and  no  more  tears.  Then  the  dew  of  herbs  (Isa.  xxvi.  19).  When, 
•t  the  voice  of  the  Beloved,  the  Bride  comes  forth  from  her  wintry  grave,  and 
enters  with  Him  the  garden  of  God,  then  creation  itself  wUl  be  de- 
livered from  the  bondage  of  corruption  (Rom.  viii.  21) ;  then  mountains  and 
hills  will  rejoice,  and  trees  will  clap  their  hands,  whilst  the  Church  serves  its  Lord 
with  gladness,  and  comes  into  His  presence  with  a  song.  {Bp.  Bardsley.) 
Spring : — ^The  most  obvious  analogy  which  the  spring  suggests  is — I.  The  resur- 

BECTION    of    many    forms    and    kinds   of   life,  which  foe  a  PERIOD  OF  TIMB 

WEEE  DEAD.  1.  Spring  represents  us  with  a  marvellous  example  of  the  suflBciency 
of  means  to  produce,  in  a  short  time,  a  great  change  in  the  appearance  of  the  earth. 
The  existence  of  this  power  is  calculated  to  remove  all  doubt  from  the  mind 
regarding  those  agencies  which  shall  be  employed  to  awaken  the  buried  inhabitants 
of  Time  from  tineir  wide-spread  places  of  rest.  2.  As  spring  brings  back  to  us 
familiar  objects,  so  the  resurrection  will  re-unite  us  to  those  we  loved  and  from 
whom  we  had  parted  on  earth,  with  sorrow.  As  then,  we  visit  the  resting-places  of 
tiiose  dear  to  us  on  "  God's  acre,"  as  the  Germans  term  the  graveyard,  and  see  the 
violets  blooming  above  their  tombs,  and  the  buds  appearing  on  the  trees,  the  heart 
is  oomforted  by  those  emblems  of  hope,  and  feels  that  those  from  whom  it  has 
parted  are  not  lost,  but  gone  before,  and  that  they  shall  meet  them  on  the  resur- 
rection mom.  II.  Thb  eenewino  of  the  face  of  the  baeth  is  a  type  of  a 
ebnewinq  of  the  soul.  As  the  day  comes  out  of  night,  or  as  the  spring  emerges 
from  winter,  to  the  sonl  passes  from  death  into  the  fresh  light  of  a  new  life  by  th« 


CHAP,  n.]  TEE  SOXG  OF  SOLOMON.  59 

power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "Old  things  pass  awav  and  all  things  become  new." 
And  as  spring  gives  a  tone  to  the  sky,  the  cloud,  the  air  and  the  fields,  so  the  new 
life  of  the  soul,  being  diffusive,  gives  a  tone  and  colouring  to  the  thoughts,  the 
feelings,  and  the  actions  of  the  Christian.  1.  This  progress  of  the  soul  in  the 
Divine  life  is,  like  the  progress  of  the  spring,  gradual.  Sin  does  not  easilv  relax 
its  grasp  ;  old  habits  are  not  thrown  off  at  will ;  so  that  the  virgin  joys  of  the  new 
life  of  tne  soul  are  often  chilled  by  the  cold  influences  of  sin,  striving  to  renew  their 
reign  like  the  winter.  2.  This  progress  of  the  soul  in  the  Divine  life  is,  like  the 
progress  of  spring,  irresistible.  Winter  must  give  place  to  spring.  So  faith,  like 
a  grain  of  mustard  seed  in  the  soul,  wUl  germinate  and  expand,  and  progress,  and 
esSiblish  itself  in  holy  desires,  fervent  affections,  and  correct  thoughts,  under  the 
life-giving  influence  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  3.  This  progress  of  the  soul  in 
the  Divine  life  is,  like  the  progress  of  spring,  pleasing.  As  spring  introduces  ua  to 
new  pleasures  ;  the  renewing  of  the  soul  leads  us  to  fresh  delights.  III.  Spring  is 
ILLUSTRATIVE  OF  YOUTHFUL  LIFE.  Spring  18  a  period  of  importance  to  the  hus- 
bandman ;  80  is  youth.  {Homilist.)  "  I  will  arise — I  who  have  resisted  so  long — 
and  go  to  my  Father."  It  may  be  so  with  them  there ;  but  here  there  is  but 
little  chance  for  them.  "  The  moth  shall  eat  them  up  like  a  garment,  and  the 
worm  shall  devour  them  like  wool."  {Slopford  Brooke,  Mi  A.)  Spring : — No  wonder 
is  80  wonderful  as  the  birth  of  spring.  Music,  painting,  and  poetry,  all  art  and 
every  artist  has  felt  its  power  to  quicken  life  and  warm  emotion,  and  has  striven 
to  express  its  charm  and  thrill  of  joy.  Every  year  we  are  moved  by  its  coming, 
morally  and  physically.  No  one  who  heard  the  warm  west  wind  of  this  April 
flowing  through  the  trees  and  felt  the  secret  stirring  that  was  made  in  blood  and 
brain,  but  knew  the  influence  of  spring  upon  the  body.  As  the  sap  ran  upwards 
through  the  flowers,  so  the  blood  went  swifter  through  the  veins,  and  the  physical 
emotion  sent  its  message  to  that  immaterial  life  of  thought  and  feeling  which 
•we  call  the  spirit.  And  the  spirit  receiving  the  impressions,  took  and  moulded 
them  into  ideas  by  the  imagination  and  sent  the  ideas  forth  to  give  motives  to 
the  will.  The  first  thought  that  occurs  is  the  abounding  life  of  spring.  Through 
all,  there  ran,  as  the  first  mark  of  life,  the  sense  and  power  of  love.  AU  things 
that  lived  seemed  to  sacrifice  their  best  in  colour,  beauty,  and  life  for  one  another  ; 
I  could  not  think  of  any  one  leaf  or  plant  without  thinking  of  the  rest,  so  deep  was 
the  impression  of  the  brotherhood  of  all,  so  strong  was  the  feeling  of  ceaseless 
intercommunion  that  came  to  me  from  the  universe  of  spring,  and  told  me  that  love 
was  its  spirit.  And  not  only  love  lived  there,  but  joy  that  was  intense.  The  face 
of  every  flower  was  like  that  of  a  radiant  child.  The  air  shook  with  the  joyfiil 
thoughts  of  the  birds,  the  dance  of  insect  life  had  begun,  and  the  airy  ravishment 
of  the  butterfly  bom  too  soon,  was  the  expression  of  the  life  that  trembled  with 
delight  through  every  animal.  Life,  love,  joy,  what  are  these  in  their  tale  to 
the  spirit,  as  spring  sends  them  flowing  into  our  hearts  ?  They  are  a  revelation 
of  the  Being  of  God.  Its  first  attribute  is  infinite  Ufe.  Decay,  death,  sorrow, 
dulness,  the  wearing  out  of  feeling,  they  are  only  the  accidents  of  our  trial  time, 
and  in  themselves  part  of  life  and  not  of  death.  Let  them  touch  us  as  they  will, 
they  cannot  last  for  ever  ;  for  they  are  weaker  than  life,  when  Ufe  is  God.  Again, 
this  life  is  Love — love  in  God,  the  same  as  goodness.  What  else  can  it  be  but  love, 
for  it  is  creative  t  That  there  is  such  a  thing  as  creation  ;  that  life  and  joy  come 
out  of  death  and  pain  ;  that  the  wonder  of  the  spring  is  bom  out  of  the  travail 
of  the  winter,  is  proof  enough  to  those  who  feel  how  impossible  creation  is  to  evil, 
that  it  is  goodness — goodness  that  stream  forth  as  love,  love  that  is  life  in  all 
things,  that  is  the  spirit  of  the  universe.  And,  again,  if  life  and  love  be  one  in  the 
being  of  God,  that  being  must  also  be  joy,  infinite,  self-exultant,  varying  through 
every  phase  of  quiet  and  of  rapture.  Words  would  fail  to  paint  one  moment  of 
its  triumphant  fulness  ;  joy  is  the  glory  of  God.  True,  it  is  dear  to  us  who  need 
sympathy  in  pain,  who  know  so  much  of  pain,  to  feel,  through  Christ,  that  God  can 
be  touched  with  sorrow  for  as,  that  it  pitieth  Him  to  see  us  in  the  dust,  but  that  is 
not  of  the  absolute  in  His  Being.  The  essence  of  His  Being  is,  on  the  contrary,  joy, 
intense,  overflowing,  streaming  in  rapturous  life  through  universes  of  Ufe,  material 
and  inmaaterial.  These,  then,  are  the  three  thoughts  of  God's  Being  that  we  bind 
up  with  the  woods  and  fields  and  streams  of  spring.  We  take  the  same  thoughts 
now  and  bring  them  to  touch  on  our  own  Ufe.  Spring  is  the  image  of  our  youth, 
and  the  lesson  we  learn  from  it  is — that  our  youth  should  be  Life,  and  Love,  and 
Joy,  and  that  these  are  its  natural  companions.  Life  Uves  with  youth,  and  its  first 
xosh  is  wonderful.    Thoughts  break  out  into  leaf,  feelings  into  blossoms  ;  a  single 


eo  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

day  in  that  time  of  sun  and  rain  may  make  the  whole  heart  like  a  woodland  ;  when 
the  foliage  of  sweet  thoughts  first  appears  the  grass  is  not  seen  for  flowers.     The 
first  touch  of  love,  the  touch  of  a  new  aspiration,  the  winning  of  one  new  knowledge, 
may  loosen  the  bonds  of  a  thousand  seeds  of  thought,  and  set  them  shooting 
upwards  into  growth  and  life.     We  are  often  born  in  a  day  ;  life  then  begins,  and  I 
hold  it  our  duty  in  youth  to  put  our  whole  force  into  living.      There  is  yet  another 
lesson.     Along  with  the  leaves  is  bom  the  cup  of  the  flower,  and  with  the  flowers 
are  involved  the  seeds.     In  aU  true  life  future  life  is  hidden  ;  provision  is  made 
for  that  production  which  is  the  first  mark  of  life,  for  continuance  of  life  and  for  its 
flower.     Think  of  that  truth  as  the  spring  moves  your  blood.     Is  there  the  element 
of  continuance  in  anything  you  do  ?    In  your  life  are  there  seeds  which,  when  decay 
comes,  will  iusure  a  new  outburst  of  life  ?    Have  you  some  certainty  that  you  have 
life  enough  to  flower  ?     Is  the  true  flower  of  a  beautiful  or  useful  life  already  fonned 
in  you  ?    Are  you  showing  forth  already  the  beauty  and  sweetness  and  charm  which 
tell  that  the  flower  is  coming  ?    If  these  things  be  so,  then  you  are  living  the  fullest 
and  the  quickest  life,  the  Ufe  of  which  spring  is  the  image,  of  which  God  is  the 
reality.     But  you  cannot  have  in  youth  the  life  of  spring  without  also  having 
its  love.     Make  the  brotherhood  of  the  flowers,  their  intercommunion  of  good,  their 
joyous  sacrifice  of  aU  they  have  in  order  to  give  joy,  the  example  and  impulse 
of  your  youth ;  make  your  springtide  the  reflection  of  the  spring  in  love.     Pour 
forth  all  the  odour,  colour,  charm  and  happiness  you  have  to  all  your  friends,  to 
your  home,  to  your  daily  society,  to  the  poor  and  sorrowful,  the  joyous  and  pros- 
perous.    Charm  the  world  by  love.     Brighten  darkened  lives,  soften  the  rude,  make 
a  sunshine  of  peace  in  stormy  places,  cover  the  faults  and  follies  of  men  with  the 
flowers  of  love.     And,  finally,  this  will  be  joy.     Not  the  wild,  self-exhausting  joy 
of  wild  persons  wildly  wrought,  but  something  which,  though  quieter,  is  even  more 
intense,  only  it  is  not  over  tense.     The  strings  of  life  are  in  tune,  not  stretched 
almost  to  breaking  ;  and  music  comes,  not  discord  ;  music  in  which  others  rejoice, 
in  which  we  ourselves  rejoice.      Life  led  by  love  has  as  its  child  the  radiancy  of  joy. 
It  is  a  joy  none  can  take  away,  because  it  has  its  roots  in  the  joy  which  we  make  in 
others,  because  it  has  its  deepest  root  in  the  joy  which  life  and  love  make  in  the 
being  of  God.     (Ibid.)    Spring-time  in  nature  and  in  experience: — Nature  teaches 
that  to  every  season  of  trouble  and  overthrow  there  comes  resurrection.     In  the 
deepest  January  of  the  year  there  is  a  nerve  that  rims  forward  to  June.     Life  is 
never  extinguished.     That  which  seems  to  be  death  reaches  forward  and  touches 
that  which  is  vital.     I.  Nations  seem  to  have  their  periods  like  the  tear. 
Neither  in  civilization  nor  in  Christian  elements  do  they  seem  to  mount  up  with 
steady  growth.     They  move,  rather,  as  it  were  in  spirals.     They  often  return  as 
if  falling  back,  and  yet  their  progress,  on  the  whole,  is  onward.     II.  Deep  convul- 
sions and  embarrassments  of  all  industrial  pursuits  are  wont  to  go 
ALONG  "WITH  NATIONAL  TRIALS.     So  it  has  been  with  us.     To  all  those  whose 
wheels  of  enterprise  are  blocked  ;  to  all  those  whose  past  growths  are  withering ; 
to  all  whose  roots  are  locked  in  the  icy  soil ;  to  all  whose  leaves  are  touched 
by  the  frost  of  dkappointment — to  them  I  say,  the  winter  is  past ;  the  time  of  the 
smging  of  birds  has  come.     Wait  a  little  ;  some  more  snows  may  fall,  and  there  may 
be  some  more  frosts  ;  but  the  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  has  come,  and  the  voice 
of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  affairs.     III.  There  are  the  same  experiences  in 
FAMILIES  AS  IN  NATIONS  AND  INDUSTRIAL  COMMUNITIES.    There  are  some  families 
that  seem  compelled  to  go  to  the  promised  land,  as  the  Israelites  did,  through 
a  desert.     There  are  many  that,  having  experienced  long  years  of  toil  and  sufi'ering, 
come  out  only  at  last.     But  there  are  many  that,  having  been  prospered  and  happy, 
lapse  into  a  state  of  want  and  trouble.     The  streams  that  swelled  with  prosperity, 
•well  no  more  ;  the  birds  that  sang  of  prosperity  sing  no  more.     They  come  from 
wealth  and  comfort  into  distress  and  poverty.     But  are  there  no  spring-like  days 
that  come  upon  the  winter  of  troubles  in  the  household  ?    Is  it  aU  blast,  all  blight, 
all  burying  ?    Is  there  nothing  but  pale,  white,  enwrapping  snow  ?    Are  there  no 
birds  that  ever  fly  athwart  the  sky  of  the  bereaved  family  1    Is  there  an  utter 
absence  of  everything  like  comfort  and  cheer  ?    Blessed  be  God,  even  though  trouble 
may  abide,  joy  comes  too.     IV.  The  same  is  eminently  true  op  individuals. 
They  know  not  why  things  have  gone  against  them.     If  you  were  to  hear  some 
men's  experience,  you  would  think  that  they  grow  as  the  white  pine  grows,  witli 
straight  grain,  and  easily  split — for  I  notice  that  all  that  grow  easy  split  easy.     But 
there  are  some  that  grow  as  the  mahogany  grows,  with  veneering  knots,  and  all 
quirls  and  contortions  of  grain.    That  is  the  best  timber  of  the  forest  which  has  tiia 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON".  61 

most  knots.  Everybody  seeks  it,  because,  being  hard  to  grow,  it  is  hard  to  wear  out. 
And  when  knots  have  been  sawn  and  polished,  how  beautiful  they  are  !  There  are 
those  who  have  fought  the  fight  of  great  trouble  in  sickness.  Not  all  the  soldiers  of 
God  are  in  the  battle-field.  There  are  those  there  who  are  strong-backed,  whose 
muscles  are  like  brawn,  whose  bones  are  like  flint,  and  whose  faces,  for  zeal,  are 
like  the  face  of  January,  and  for  enthusiasm  are  like  the  face  of  July.  But  these 
are  not  God's  only  soldiers,  nor  his  strongest  soldiers.  Some  of  God's  most  heroic 
soldiers  are  the  bedridden.  If  sickness  be  God's  will,  even  so.  His  will  be  done, 
not  mine.  The  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  has  come  to  such  a  heart.  To  such  a 
heart  spring  has  come,  and  summer  is  not  far  ofiF.  V.  There  are  applications 
INNUMERABLE  TO  SPIRITUAL  CONDITIONS.  Many  of  you  have  cast  your  leaves. 
You  have  seen  November,  and  gone  wading  through  the  cold  winter  of  backsliding. 
But  March  has  come  round  to  you.  A  little  bird  began  to  sing  right  in  your  family. 
Before  you  thought  of  such  a  thing,  you  heard  the  singing  of  birds.  It  was  your 
daughter  that  sung  ;  or,  it  was  the  little  child  of  your  next-door  neighbour.  There 
is  beginning  to  be  a  warmth  in  your  heart.  You  are  beginning  to  think  of  your 
declining  days.  You  are  beginning  to  yearn  for  the  old  love.  You  are  beginning 
to  say,  "Is  it  not  time  for  the  winter  to  be  gone,  and  for  the  spring  to  have  come 
in  my  heart  ? "  The  time,  oh  !  backsliding  Christians  ;  oh,  wandering  professor  of 
religion  ;  oh !  child  of  God,  beloved  of  Him,  and  yet  forgetful  of  your  Father  and 
your  Saviour — the  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  has  come  to  you.  Rise  up  and 
rejoice !  VI.  We  are  all  of  us  going  through  life  as  a  kind  of  winter. 
We  are  as  we  go  towards  age,  dropping  our  hair,  and  losing,  one  by  one,  our 
aenses.  We  are  drifting  towards  autumn.  Then  come  the  vacuous  days  of  the 
winter  of  seeming  uselessness — declines  which  men  dread.  How  many  hate  age  ! 
This  is  the  winter  of  human  life,  to  be  sure :  but  just  beyond  is  the  rising  of  that 
bright  immortal  spring  where  the  birds  of  heaven  sing,  and  which,  when  it  has  once 
begun,  shall  never  be  followed  by  winter,  and  shall  never  be  visited  by  storms.  We 
are  all  of  us  drawing  near  to  the  sweet  spring  of  resurrection.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
The  joy  of  spring : — Spring  is  the  season  of  resurrection,  the  period  of  renewed  hope 
and  quickened  sensibilities,  when  the  gloom  of  winter  is  forgotten  in  the  anticipation 
of  growing  brightness  and  life.  The  spring  is  a  season  that  awakens  hope,  that 
revives  deadened  sensibilities,  that  gives  a  man  a  new  sense  of  Ufe,  and  makes  him 
feel  young  again.  Milton  tells  us  that  the  muses  always  came  back  to  him  in 
spring.  He  could  not  sing  very  much  as  a  rule,  in  winter,  but  when  spring  came 
back  the  muses  came.  He  caught  the  youthfulness  and  hopefulness  of  spring  :  he 
looked  round,  and  saw  life  springing  triimiphantly  out  of  the  grave  of  winter : 
he  saw  the  feeblest  growths  rejoice  in  a  new  life  and  beauty.  Then,  too,  his  own 
intellect,  under  the  blessing  and  inspiration  of  his  God,  just  as  the  flower  under  the 
blessing  and  inspiration  of  a  spring  sky,  began  to  blossom  anew.  Spring,  therefore, 
is  a  season  that  comes  to  all  sensitive  men  with  special  freshness  and  inspiration. 
It  is  something  to  feel  that  after  all  death  is  not  the  mightiest  thing  even  in  this 
physical  world.  When  the  spring  comes,  life  in  its  tenderest,  loveliest,  and  most 
delicate  forms  springs  out  of  the  cold  and  lately  frozen  earth.  Look  at  the  little 
bud  as  it  opens.  What  so  delicate  as  the  flower  ?  Take  it  up  and  carry  it  in  your 
hand  ;  you  have  to  guard  against  withering  it  by  the  warmth  of  your  hand.  And 
yet  there  it  is — it  has  sprung  up,  almost  before  you  knew  it,  out  of  the  cold  and 
bare  earth.  The  sun  came  in  the  brightness  of  his  rising,  and,  under  the  genial 
effects  of  his  warmth  that  little  flower  sprang  up  out  of  the  clammy  soil.  Is  not 
that  a  message  for  us  ?  Can  a  life  so  exquisitely  tender  and  so  beautiful  spring  out 
of  the  desolate  earth  ?  Then  I  have  leamt  once  more  that  all  along  the  line,  even  in 
the  physical  world,  life  is  triumphant.  That  even  in  the  revolving  year  death  only 
reigns  for  a  brief  season,  and  even  then  to  answer  the  higher  purposes  of  life  in  its 
rich  and  varied  developments  and  outgrowths ;  so  that  when  the  proper  season 
comes,  life  asserts  itself  anew,  in  new  forms  of  beauty,  that  surprise  the  eye,  and 
delight  the  heart.  1.  The  spring  delights  the  eye — "The  flowers  appear  on  the 
«artb."  What  are  the  uses  of  flowers?  Surely  one  is  the  joy  they  give  to  life. 
It  is  as  if  God  said  to  Nature,  "  I  am  about  to  give  thee  reviving  power:  see  to  it 
that  the  first  things  thou  bringest  forth  shall  be  things  of  beauty,  a  joy  to  the 
child's  eye,  a  solace  to  the  heart  of  the  invalid  in  the  sick  room,  and  a  delight  to 
the  bedimmed  vision  of  the  aged  ere  the  realities  of  another  world  dawn  upon  them. 
See  to  it  that  thou  puttest  on  thy  loveliest  garb — not  the  useful  for  the  moment 
80  much  as  the  delightful,  which,  however,  shall  be  the  promise  of  the  useful  by 
and  by."    Nature  responds  and  sends  forth  its  lovely  flowers — "flowers  appear  on 


68  TSE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

the  earth."  But  God  has  also  higher  motives  than  that.  It  is  His  will  that  the 
flowers  shoTild  take  their  humble  and  doubtless  secondary  part,  but  a  very  important 
one,  in  our  and  in  our  children's  education.  He  has  not  merely  intended  that  we 
should  be  hard  at  work  from  morning  to  night,  and  see  the  buildings  which  our 
hands  and  other  hands  have  erected,  without  seeing  a  field  or  becoming  rapturous 
over  an  opening  flower.  No,  He  bids  us  go  forth  to  the  fields,  as  opportunity  offers, 
and  see  how  happy  God  would  have  His  children  be,  "  for  the  flowers  appear  in  the 
earth."  2.  But  not  only  is  the  eye  appealed  to  by  the  beauty  of  Nature,  but  also 
the  ear  by  its  music — "The  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  is  come."  Out  of  the 
fulness  of  the  heart  the  bird  po\irs  out  its  harmonies.  This  is  the  safety  valve,  or 
the  bird  would  die  of  compression.  It  sends  out  the  music  because  it  cannot  keep 
it  in.  This  is  the  instinct  that  God  has  put  in  the  heart  of  the  bird,  bidding  him 
"  tell  out  the  joy  that  is  in  him."  This  is  s  blessed  privilege.  And  as  it  is  true  of 
the  bird,  it  ought  to  be  true  of  the  Christian.  The  Christian  must  sing  out  his  joy 
like  the  bird,  not  for  the  sake  of  effect,  but  for  the  joy  and  relief  that  the  very  act 
gives.  Wendell  Holmes  tells  us  that  there  are  some  men  and  women  who  "die  with 
all  their  music  in  them."  This  is  spoken  of  as  one  of  the  saddest  possibilities  of  life. 
There  are  circumstances  in  life  which  have  so  oppressed  them  that  they  grow  sullen, 
hopeless,  and  despairing.  There  is  nothing  more  sad  than  such  a  sight.  The 
Christian  surely  should  be  beyond  that.  O  man,  touch  the  strings  of  thy  lyre,  and 
out  of  those  finger  tips  shall  go  forth  harmonies  into  every  string  thou  touchest. 
Do  not  sit  down  in  the  dust ;  lift  up  thy  voice  withal,  to  and  for  God.  Speak  for 
Christ,  and  sing  of  His  love ;  and  out  of  thy  soul,  even  in  trial  and  in  afiUction, 
shall  inspiring  harmonies  go  forth.  3.  Not  only  does  the  spring  gratify  the  eye  and 
the  ear,  but  also  the  smeU.  This  is  the  third  gate  of  which  Bunyan  speaks.  Here 
we  have  a  perfect  picture  of  a  peaceful  home  in  the  East.  We  have  already  read 
of  the  eye  being  gratified,  and  the  ear  charmed,  and  now  we  read  of  the  tender  grape 
giving  a  sweet  smell.    And  so  God  speaks  to  us  through  the  avenues  of  even  our 

Physical  senses.     It  is  His  wish  that  we  should  aU  be  happy  on  this  bright  spring 
ay,  and  that,  like  the  flowers  and  the  birds,  and  sweet  smelling  blossoms,  we  should 
be  ftill  of  praise  to  His  name.     {D.  Davies.)     The  spring  and  its  voice : — Spring  has 
8  great  deal  to  say  to  us  that  may  be  worthy  of  our  attention.     She  speaks  to 
various  characters.     1.  We  will,  in  the  first  place,  listen  to  what  spring  has  to  say 
to  the  aged  Christian.     It  is  pregnant  with  hope,  joy,  and  immortauty,  because  God 
has  put  these  precious  things  into  his  heart.     2.  The  spring  has  also  something  to 
say  to  the  young  Christian.     The  spring  to  you  is  pregnant  with  promise,  full  of 
hope.    And  when  you  look  around  on  this  wide-spread  picture  of  Divine  benevolence, 
and  remember  that  all  these  things  have  come  into  existence  at  the  voice  of  God, 
and  reflect  upon  the  fact  that  the  God,  who  has  again  covered  Nature  with  beauty 
and  glory,  is  the  God  you  serve  and  the  Saviour  that  redeemed  your  spirit,  spring 
may  well  teach  you  the  importance  of  a  strong  and  vigorous  hope.    What  cannot  Ho 
do  for  your  spirit  who  can  thus  adorn  Nature  ?    But  spring  also  teaches  you  that  in 
connection  with  your  religion  there  should  be  toil.    How  concerned  the  husbandman 
is  to  get  in  the  seed  on  which  their  hopes  of  a  crop  depend.    So  it  must  be  with  you. 
Now  is  the  time  to  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  your  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 
These  bright  and  fair  opportunities  may  never  return.     Eemember,  moreover,  that 
you  are  bound,  as  Christians,  to  "contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to 
the  saints  "  ;  but,  in  order  that  you  may  do  so,  you  must  understand  what  that 
faith  is.     You  must  love  the  Word  of  God,  and  ponder  often  and  deeply  over  the 
precious  Gospels,  and  study,  also,  the  writings  of  good  men.     Get  into  your  minds 
a  goodly  store  of  precious  truth — a  kind  of  bread-house  to  which  you  shall  repair  in 
other  days,  and  get  that  spiritual  nutriment  which  you  will  need.     3.  The  spring 
also  speaks  to  the  afflicted  Christian.     There  may  be  some  one  here  greatly  tempted 
in  soul.    It  may  be  there  is  winter  within.    Thou  art  ready  to  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  God  hath  forsaken  thee ;  that  there  is  death  and  destruction  in  this  winter. 
But  it  is  not  so.    Winter  precedes  the  harvest-home  ;  and  so  this  spiritual  winter  i» 
not  intended  to  destroy,  but  to  do  a  necessary  work,  as  in  Nature.    God  frequently 
brings  winter  into  the  hearts  of  His  people  that  He  may  teach  them  His  wiU.    This 
winter  may  have  come  upon  thee  in  love.    It  may  be  that  roots  of  spiritual  pride 
and  presumption  require  to  be  rooted  np,  which  have  stifled  the  meekness  and 
tenderness  of  thy  love  towards  Christ.     It  may  be  that  He  has  brought  this  winter 
upon  thee  to  tesMsh  thee  the  vanity  of  the  creature,  and  that  without  Christ  there  is 
no  enjoyment,  but  that  with  the  presence  of  Christ,  even  winter  can  be  a  joy  to 
thee  i  while  gammer  itself  without  Him,  without  Christ,  would  be  a  miserable 


CHAP,  n.]  TSE  S02VG  OF  SOLOMOX.  63 

desert — a  winter  of  desolation.  4.  Spring  also  speaks  to  the  slothfal  Christiaui. 
And  what  is  the  voice  of  spring  to  him  ?  Awake,  thou  sluggard.  Every  green  leaf 
which  surrounds  thee,  all  the  various  forms  of  life  which  encompass  thy  path,  the 
very  birds  of  the  air  reprove  thee ;  all  Nature  speaks,  and  calls  upon  thee  to  arise 
from  the  dust,  and  shake  thyself.  Has  not  thy  soil  been  waste  long  enough? 
5.  Spring  also  speaks  to  the  backslider.  All  Nature  is  coming  back  to  her  ongmal 
beauty  and  glory — coming  out  of  the  womb  of  winter.  Does  it  not  speak  to  thee, 
backslider  ?  Thou  hast  wandered  from  the  Lord,  and  it  is  now  winter  with  thee. 
Thy  soul  is  miserable.  The  smile  of  God  is  not  upon  thy  spirit.  But  does  not 
spring  speak  to  thee,  and  say,  come  back  again  t  By  the  remembrance  of  the  past, 
by  the  patience  of  thy  Lord  whom  thou  hast  pierced  and  wovmded,  return  again. 
He  says  to  thee,  "Return,  oh,  backsliding  children  !  "  6.  Spring  also  speaks  to  the 
sinner — to  the  man  who  has  been  altogether  unconcerned  about  the  state  of  his  soul. 
.  Dream  not  of  heaven  you  who  treat  the  Gospel  as  a  fable  and  bring  forth  no  fruits 
of  contrition,  of  faith,  hope,  love,  and  meekness.  Unless  men  have  their  Springtide 
here,  they  will  not  have  it  in  the  paradise  above.  ( W.  P.  Balfern.)  The  Spring- 
time call : — Each  succeeding  season  comes  to  the  world  with  a  new  and  peculiar 
influence.  Spring  has  a  different  language  from  winter.  She  stirs  different  forces 
within  the  human  frame.  She  evokes  different  feelings  within  the  human  heart. 
She  hath  a  gladsome  voice,  and  her  step  is  altogether  light  and  joyous.  And  men 
change  under  her  influence ;  then  they  will  come  to  bear  the  impress  of  siimmer's 
hand,  and  then  again  grow  sad  and  contemplative  with  autumn.  And  the  Christian 
lives  in  this  world  and  under  these  varying  influences  ;  and  they,  like  all  the 
multiform  forces  which  he  feels,  should  prove  religious, — favouring  breezes  to  swell 
the  sails  of  his  Christian  life  ;  drawing  powers  to  draw  towtirds  happiness  and  peace, 
and  purity  and  God.  Hence  Christ's  exhortation  to  His  Church  in  the  text,  I.  Ho 
calls  unto  her  through  the  BEAtrxY  of  the  speing-time.  His  exhortation  hath  for 
its  emphasis,  or  one  of  its  most  beautiful  settings,  the  blossoming  flowers.  "  Arise, 
come  away,  for  the  flowers  appear  on  the  earth."  Scattered  throughout  the  earth  ; 
blooming  now  upon  mountain  top,  and  now  in  deepest  gorge ;  now  lifting  up  its 
tiny  form  from  out  the  crevasses  of  the  ice-fields,  and  now  painting  itself  in  gorgeous 
hues  beneath  a  tropical  sun ;  now  blooming  in  lonely  desert,  where  no  eye  save  that 
of  God  may  note  its  beauty,  and  now  upon  the  beaten  thoroughfare  lifting  up  its 
spiritual  face  beneath  the  rude  gaze  of  the  passers-by;  now,  in  rich  profusion, 
heaped  upon  the  casket  of  death  until  its  ghastliness  is  well-nigh  abolished,  and, 
now,  in  wreaths  of  orange  and  snow,  lending  the  last  charm  and  grace  to  animated 
beauty, — the  flower,  wherever  it  blooms,  is  a  smile  of  God  lingering  upon  the  earth  ; 
the  most  delicate  earthly  blossoming  of  that  spirit  of  beauty  which  God  has  breathed 
into  all  the  works  of  His  hand.  And  spring  is  full  of  flowers.  She  stretches  forth 
her  wand  over  the  earth,  and  forthwith  they  start  up  in  innumerable  ranks  of 
loveliness.  She  calls  with  her  voice,  and  they  come  trooping  in  beautiful  array 
to  her  side.  She  cries  out  that  the  winter  is  gone,  and  assured  of  safety,  as  an 
angel  ambuscade,  they  lift  up  their  smiling  faces  over  all  the  earth.  She  breathes 
with  the  breath  of  the  south  wind  over  field  and  garden,  and  at  once  they  rise  up 
from  their  wintry  graves,  their  spirits  of  life  laden  with  ten  thousand  odours.  And 
so  God  calls  unto  men  through  the  voice  of  the  spring;  for  this  is  the  voice  of 
flowers  and  of  beauty.  With  the  beauty  which  is  external  He  would  call  unto  that 
which  belongs  to  the  soul,  and  which  is  the  beauty  of  holiness.  As,  then,  during 
the  coming  days,  and  amid  the  opening  glories  of  the  spring-time,  your  Nature  shall 
feel  the  softening  influence,  and  flow  out  in  warmer  and  swifter  currents  towards  the 
lovely,  the  beautiful,  and  the  good,  know  that  all  this  is  the  voice  of  your  Saviour 
speaking  unto  you,  and  saying,  "  Arise,  come  away."  Open  your  heart  to  the  gentle 
and  puriiying  influences  which,  at  this  season  of  the  year,  fill  the  air  ;  for  they  will 
do  you  good  and  not  evU.  They  will  have  for  you  a  voice  from  God  speaking  of  the 
beauty  which  is  imfading, — the  beauty  of  holiness,  which  blossoms  perennially  in 
the  world  above.  IL  The  call  of  the  Saviour  is  through  the  jot  of  the  spring- 
time. There  is  joy  in  the  vernal  season  as  well  as  beauty  ;  and  this  joy  is  made 
the  organ  of  the  Saviour's  call :  "  The  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  is  come.  Arise, 
my  love,  and  come  away. "  As  the  Creator  of  all  things,  He  is  the  Author  of  all  the 
joy  which  fills  the  world,  and  which  meets  in  a  royal  crown  upon  the  head  of  spring. 
Birds  sing  because  He,  the  Good  One,  has  created  them  so  full  of  joy  that  they 
cannot  help  but  sing.  The  waters  laugh  in  the  sunshine,  and  join  in  merry  musio 
as  they  flow,  because  He  has  made  the  sun  so  bright  and  water  so  clear.  Children 
disport  themselves  in  the  streets,  and  fill  the  air  with  their  meny  voices,  becausa 


01  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

children  are  fresh  from  God, — freshly  filled  with  joy  at  an  infinite  fountain.    God 
is  the  joy  of  this  world.     Forget  not  the  joy-fountain,  while  you  bathe  yourself 
in  the  joy-streams  !     While  gladness  streams  into  your  heart,  let  grateful  love  flow 
out  from  it  and  upward.     And,  oh  !  if  perchance  you  are  a  dissonant,  jarring  being 
within  this  world  of  joy  and  gladness  ;  if  the  waves  of  the  spring-time  joy,  as  they 
roll  over  this  world,  reach  not  your  dry  and  thirsty  and  unhappy  heart, — still  is  the 
voice  of  the  Saviour  unto  you  through  all  this  unshared  flood,  which,  Tantalus  like, 
yon  reach  after,  but  may  not  drink.    Listen  to  His  words,  "Arise,  come  away." 
Crod  has  the  joy  which  you  need  also, — enough  for  all  your  cravings,  and  to  fill  you 
too.     Pray  Him  that  by  His  renewing  Spirit  He  would  create  spring-time  within 
your  soul,  and  fill  you  with  this  joy  of  His  which  rolls  and  flows  throughout  His 
Being  and  throughout  His  realm.    III.  The  call  of  the  text  is  unto  men  through 
THB  FRUITFUL  LIFE  OF  THE  SPRING.    The  winter  has  been  the  night  of  Nature, 
and  with  spring  comes  the  morning,  in  which,  as  in  a  gradually  awakening  city, 
begins  the  hum  of  life,  swelling  louder  and  louder  into  the  fuU  activity  of  mid- 
day.   Spring  is  life  from  the  dead  ;  resurrection,  reanimation,  restoration.    And  Grod 
speaks  through  it  as  such,  proclaiming  Himself  as  the  Life-giver,  and  through  it 
He  also  calls  for  life  within  His  followers.     Some  of  you,  it  may  be,  have  been 
hibernating  in  the  Church :  you  have  not  been  dead,  but  torpid ;  hoping  little, 
feeling  little,  doing  little.     Come  away ;  leave  your  winter-quarters ;  throw  off  their 
imprisonment,  their  constraint,  their  dull  routine.    Forth  into  the  field  where  your 
Saviour  calls ;  go,  to  ramble  with  Him  through  the  flowery  fields  and  beside  the 
still  waters.     Drink  of  the  fulness  of  a  spiritual  spring-time.     Dare  to  hope  more, 
to  attempt  more,  to  enjoy  more.     Let  all  the  fulness  of  your  being  flow  out  towards 
the  Saviour,  who  loves  you  with  an  everlasting  love.     (S.   S.   Mitchell,  D.D.) 
The  flowers  appear  on  the  earth. — Flowers: — What  object  do  flowers  serve  in  the 
economy  of  Nature  and  in  the  purposes  of  God  ?    Every  one  admits  that  the 
flowers  are  beautiful — strikingly  and  prominently  beautiftd,  even  among  the  choicest 
beauties  of  God's  most  perfect  works.     Now,  philosophers  tell  us  that  the  useful  is 
the  beautifol — that  things  are  beautiful  in  proportion  to  their  usefiilness  in  supplying 
the  material  wants  of  men.    According  to  this  theory,  an  ear  of  com  ought  to  be 
more  beautiful  than  a  rose  or  a  lily,  and  yet  there  is  probably  not  a  sound-minded 
man  in  the  whole  world  who  would  not  consider  the  useless  rose  more  beautiful  than 
the  useM  ear  of  com.     In  fact,  the  flowers  that  men  have  always  agreed  to  regard 
as  the  most  beautiful  are  in  most  cases  absolutely  useless  for  man,  from  a  utilitarian 
point  of  view.    This  proves,  then,  that  beauty  is  something  very  different  from  mere 
usefulness.     In  reality  the  great  characteristic  of  beauty  is  to  lift  up  our  minds  from 
mere  worldly  usefulness  to  the  contemplation  of  the  perfect  and  the  Divine  :  to  lift 
our  hearts  and  minds  to  God.     For  example,  we  might  speak  of  beautiful  conduct, 
and  what  is  it  that  constitutes  beauty  of  conduct  I    Conduct  is  beautiful  in  proportion 
•s  it  approaches  the  conduct  of  Christ.     Again,  what  is  it  that  constitutes  beauty  in 
literature  ?    Literature  is  beautiful  in  proportion  as  it  reveals  by  means  of  suitable 
language  the  soul  of  man  in  its  Godward  aspirations.     In  everything,  then,  which 
we  call  beautiful,  we  find  that  this  principle  holds  good,  and  the  more  powerful  to 
lift  up  our  hearts  unto  God,  the  more  beautiful.     Beauty  is  the  manifestation  of 
God  in  His  works.    Why,  then,  do  we  regard  the  flowers  as  beautiful  ?    We  regard 
the  flowers  as  beautiful  because  they  direct  our  thoughts  to  God.     God  is  the  natural 
destiny  of  man.     God  is  the  one  thing  that  every  man  either  consciously  or  uncon- 
sciously longs  for.    Whatever  helps  to  satisfy  your  longing  is  pleasurable,  and  wheu 
the  longing  is  of  an  elevating  nature — when  it  is  Godward — the  pleasurable  is  also 
the  beautiful.     Art  is  elevating  and  ennobling  only  when  its  votary  has  learned 
to  cultivate  the  beautiful  as  a  means  of  approach  to  God.    This  was  the  spirit  in 
which  the  greatest  architects,  the  greatest  sculptors,  the  greatest  painters  and  the 
greatest  poets  did  their  work,  and  so  no  atheist,  however  great  his  natm-al  talent, 
has  ever  yet  produced  a  master  work,  either  in  art  or  in  literature.      The  first 
condition  of  true  art  is  to  recognize  the  beautiful  as  an  expression  of  the  Divine. 
To  the  sound  and  healthy  and  pure  mind  everything  beautiful  in  man  or  in  the 
world  around  him  points  towards  God.     And  so  the  flowers  are  beautiful,  not 
because  they  are  useful,  but  because  they  lift  up  our  hearts  to  God.     There  are 
many  ways  in  which  they  do  this,  many  lessons  which  they  teach  us  in  their  silent 
eloquence  vrith  more  force  and  more  clearness  than  the  words  of  our  greatest  and 
our  wisest  teachers.    Our  Lord  Himself  taught  some  of  His  most  important  lessons 
from  such  ordinary  things  as  the  lilies  of  the  field,  and  the  grass,  and  each  one  of 
^ose  lessons  had  for  its  aim  the  lifting  up  of  our  hearts  to  God.    Christ  made  use  of 


CHAP.  11.]  THE  SONQ  OF  SOLOMON.  65 

the  humble  beauty  of  the  flowers  to  attain  that  end.  One  of  the  first  conditions  of 
realiziug  the  presence  of  God  is  to  learn  the  lesson  of  humility.  This  is  taught  by 
the  flowers.  Most  men  are  vain  of  something — appearance,  attainments,  position,  and 
so  on — but  Jesus  rebukes  such  vanity  by  telling  us  to  * '  consider  the  Ulies  of  the  field. " 
"  I  say  unto  you  that  even  Solomon,  in  aU  his  glory,  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of 
these.  Christ  makes  use  of  the  flowers  to  teach  us  the  lesson  of  faith — also  one  of  the 
conditions  of  any  real  knowledge  of  God  or  communion  with  Him.  The  flowers  prove 
that  God  is  just  as  careful  of  small  things  as  He  is  of  large  things.  Again,  the 
flowers  teach  us  the  shortness  and  the  uncertainty  of  human  life.  Out  of  the  dull- 
looking  stem  springs  forth  mysteriously  and  silently,  the  fragrant  blossom  of  loveliest 
hue.  It  spreads  itself  out  in  smiling  gladness,  to  the  light  and  warmth  of  the  sun. 
It  gladdens  the  eye  of  the  beholder  with  its  beauteous  presence,  but  no  sooner  does 
it  attain  its  highest  perfection  than  it  fades  away  in  a  breath  of  wind  and  vanishes 
quite  as  mysteriously  as  it  came.  And  so  the  earthly  life  of  man  passeth  away  as 
mysteriously  as  it  came,  and  the  place  that  knew  him  shall  know  him  no  more. 
And  once  more,  do  not  the  flowers  teach  the  great  and  comforting  lesson  of  the 
resurrection  from  the  dead  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul  ?  Complete  indeed  is  the 
■withering  of  a  flower.  The  beauty,  the  colour,  the  fragrance,  the  delight  of  it 
vanish  away,  leaving  no  trace  or  vestige  behind,  even  as  the  life  of  man  does.  But, 
in  spite  of  the  cold  and  frost  of  winter,  the  dead  stump  will  awake  to  life  after  many 
days.  The  summer  sun  will  shine  upon  it.  The  bud  will  appear,  the  flower  will  bloom 
once  more  in  its  pristine  beauty,  a  perfect  and  a  never-failing  emblem  of  the  resur- 
rection and  the  life.  {^A.  Macrae,  B.A.)  The  teaching  of  the  flowers : — ' '  The  flowers 
appear  on  the  earth  "  not  accidentally,  but  for  gracious  ends  and  purposes.  I.  To 
TESTIFY  OF  THEIR  Makeb's  WISDOM  AND  SKILL.  Take  the  best  human  imitation, 
and  how  far  short  it  faUs  of  the  Divine  original  1  Difiisrent  shades,  and  delicate 
blendings  of  colour,  the  perfect  structure  and  reviving  scent  defy  reproduction  by 
man.  No  two  blades  of  grass  are  exactly  alike,  nor  two  flowers,  even  of  the  same 
species.  Why !  A  profound  mystery,  enough  to  awe  and  humble  us.  II.  To  pro- 
claim THE  GOODNESS  OF  GoD.  We  may  see  His  compassion  for  His  children  in 
every  flower  that  bends  to  the  breeze.  A  believer  on  the  verge  of  starvation,  or  in 
temptation,  or  oppressed  by  spiritual  chill  and  lethargy  might  argue  a  fortiori :  "  If 
God  so  clothe  the  grass  of  the  field  .  .  . ! "  "If  God  provides  even  flowers  with 
means  of  protection  and  recovery  .  .  . ! "  "  If  the  flowers  praise  the  Lord,  shall  I 
be  sUent  ? "  III.  As  A  protest  against  human  discontent.  Flowers  are 
content  to  bloom  where  they  are  planted.  "  Godliness  with  contentment  is  great 
gain."  Still,  we  must  not  be  the  slaves  of  our  environment.  Submission  may  be 
servile  and  ruinous  to  our  manhood  ;  e.  9.  to  continue  in  a  business  that  compels 
dishonesty  or  injury  to  others.  But  where  we  are  earning  an  honest  livelihood,  and 
Providence  does  not  point  the  way  to  some  other  sphere,  it  is  our  duty,  and  certainly 
our  interest,  to  be  quiet,  cheerful,  and  contented.  IV.  As  a  symbol  of  ottr  mor- 
tality. Mazzini  preferred  the  pale  blossoms  of  the  syringa  to  the  rose  because  their 
acrid  perfume  suggested  hidden  stings  in  aU  pleasures,  and  so  were  a  better  type  of 
life.  And  it  is  not  a  morbid  religiousness  that  sees  in  every  frail  flower  an  emblem 
of  our  fragile  and  fleeting  life.  Let  us  face  the  fact  bravely.  As  we  see  the  flower 
of  our  existence  fading  let  us  dispense  fragrance  while  we  may.  And  let  those  whose 
earthly  leafis  withered  anticipate  the  completer  life  beyond.  {John  Wright.)  1.  Note 
the  infinite  variety  of  flowers,  and  how  they  thrive  in  all  sorts  of  places.  High  up 
on  the  mountains,  at  the  very  edge  of  the  snow,  is  found  the  purple  soldaneUa,  the 
white  crocus,  and  the  blue  hepatica.  Down  in  the  sultry  plain  blooms  the  red  poppy, 
the  white  dog-daisy,  and  the  blue  corn-flower ;  in  the  cold,  raw  winds  of  March, 
the  dearly -loved  snowdrop  shakes  its  pure  bell.  Everywhere,  in  all  sorts  of  situa- 
tions, in  all  sorts  of  climates,  out  of  all  sorts  of  soils,  spring  up  the  flowers  God  has 
made.  Everywhere,  in  all  sorts  of  situations,  in  all  ranks  of  life,  in  all  conditions  of 
life,  out  of  every  social  deposit,  the  saints  of  God  arise.  Everywhere  the  grace  of 
God  shines  and  matures  the  seed  of  eternal  life,  and  causes  the  flowers  of  a 
Christian  life  to  unfold.  And  as  each  flower  is  specially  suited  to  the  soil  in 
which  it  grows,  and  to  the  climate  which  surrounds  it,  so  it  is  with  the  Christian 
graces.  There  are  special  graces,  special  virtues,  according  to  class,  and  place, 
and  circumstances.  2.  At  certain  times  you  may  be  discouraged,  and  think  that 
you  cannot  serve  God  in  the  place  where  you  are,  you  have  so  many  difficulties  to 
contend  against,  those  around  you  are  so  wicked.  But  do  not  fear.  God's  flowers 
wiU  CTOw  everywhere.  What  can  be  fouler  than  the  filth  in  which  the  water-lily 
has  her  root^  the  slime  in  which  the  newt  and  the  worm  wriggle,  and  yet» 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».u» 

what  more  stainless  or  sunlike  than  the  flower  1    I  have  known  lads  in  mechaoioal 
workshops,  surrounded  by  men  blaspheming,  cursing,  doing  all  in  their  power  ta 
degrade  and  brutalize  the  boys  associated  with  them.     And  yet  some  of  these  lads 
have  maintained  a  really  heroic  Ohristian  faith  and  walk  before  God.     3.  The  first 
growth  of  the  seed  or  root  is  hidden.     The  process  is  unseen.     I   dare   say  you 
know  the  rule  to  be  observed  with  hyacinth  bulbs  grown  in  glasses.     They  have  to 
be  put  away  in  the  dark  till  they  are  rooted.    So  must  it  be  with  the  spiritual  growth 
of  the  soul,  its  first  processes  must  be  hidden.     There  must  be  no  display  of  religion, 
no  talking  about  it,  no  demonstrative  piety ;  all  that  sort  of  show  leads  to  poor 
flowering.     The  rooting  and  germinating  must  be  hidden  deep  down  in  the  soft 
soil  of  the  inner  heart.     It  is  afterwards  that  the  flower  of  a  Christian  life  expands. 
Now  for  another  lesson.     Have  you  ever  observed  a  flower  in  its  growth  from  a  seed  t 
The  seed  leaves  unfurl, — two  little  leaves,  quite  unlike  those  the  plant  will  eventually 
bear.    These  open,  and  are  extended  like  little  hands  towards  heaven.     They  are 
very  sensitive.     On  them  depends  the  life  of  the  plant.     If  those  little  appealing 
Lands  be  destroyed,  the  plant  wiU  cast  up  no  more.     It  will  rot  away  underground, 
and  die.     Like  the  seed  leaves  of  the  plant  are  children's  prayers.     These  are  the 
first  manifestations  of  the  soul's  life.     The  little  hands  are  lifted  up    to  God 
appealingly,  often  ignorantly,  but  trustfully  and  lovingly.     Most  essential  to  the 
spiritual  life  are  children's  spiritual  beginnings.     They  must  be  carefully  guarded^ 
Beware,  children,  how  you  suffer  your  early  prayers  to  cease,  to  die.     On  them 
depends  the  life  and  health  of  your  soul  in  after  life.    (S.  Baring  Oould,  M.A.) 
For  a  flower  service : — Nothing  that  we  can  conceive  of  is  prettier  than  flowers. 
People  who  teach  or  learn  drawing  speak  sometimes  of  "  the  line  of  beauty,"  and 
they  bestow  vast  pains  in  order  to  be  able  to  draw  it.    Did  you  ever  observe  » 
flower  which  was  without  a  line  of  beauty !    No  ; — flowers  are  always,  when  their 
growth  is  not  interfered  with,  as  perfect  in  form  as  can  be,  and  all  the  Unes  of  beauty 
which  ever  were  drawn  or  designed  by  man  must,  I  think,  have  been  copied,  in  the 
first  instance,  from  leaves  and  flowers.     Of  this  you  may  have  plenty  of  proofs  by 
noticing  beautiful  pillars  in  buildings,  beautiful  patterns  on  vases,  beautiful  pictures, 
beautiful  forms  of  man's  devising  anywhere  ;  in  most,  or  many,  of  them  you  will 
find  that  the  beauty  consists  in  curves  copied  from  flowers  and  leaves.     Ah !  ther* 
is  a  lesson  for  you  here,  to  be  learned  from  the  beauty  and  perfect  form  of  flowers  ; 
it  is  this : — If  you  wish  your  lives  to  be  as  beautiful  and  perfect  as  they  can  be,  you 
must  fashion  them  after  a  God-given  example.     Nobody  can  make  a  plant  or  flower. 
It  must  grow  in  God's  appointed  way  and  no  other.     Having  grown,  it  lends  itself 
to  the  architect,  the  painter,  the  poet,  the  potter,  to  anybody  having  need  thereof, 
to  make  the  copy  he  desires.     So  also  there  is  one  perfect  life,  one  perfect  character, 
of  God's  appointment,  given  to  mankind,  from  which  to  copy.     In  so  far  as  you 
make  Christ's  life  your  pattern  and  example,  your  life  and  character  shall  be  full 
of  grace,  beauty,  and  sweetness.     Linnaeus,  the  great  Swedish  botanist,  used  to 
observe  the  beautiful  order  which  reigns  among  certain  flowers,  and  so  was  led  t» 
suggest  the  telling  of  time  by  what  he  called  "a  floral  clock."    It  was  to  be  com- 
posed of  plants  which  open  and  close  their  blossoms  at  particular  hours ;  as,  for 
instance,  the  dandelion,  which  opens  its  petals  at  six  in  the  morning,  the  hawkweed 
at  seven,  the  succory  at  eight,  the  celandine  at  nine,  and  so  on  ;  the  closing  of  the 
flowers  being  marked  with  equal  regularity,  so  as  to  indicate  the  progress  of  after- 
noon and  evening.     What  a  lovely  thing  it  would  be  thus  to  bedeck  every  passing 
hour  of  life  with  grace  and  obedience,  as  the  flowers  do.     Shall  they  be  punctual  in 
all  that  concerns  the  purpose  for  which  they  are  made,  and  boys  and  girls,  who 
have  reason  and  intelligence  to  guide  them,  be  unpunctual  ?    Nay, — but  let  the 
flowers  which  open  early  in  the  morning  remind  you  of  the  caU  to  prayer ;  those 
which  open  later,  of  the  call  to  work  and  duty  ;  those  that  close  in  afternoon  or 
evening  may  lead  you  to  reflect  on  the  way  in  which  you  have  spent  your  day,  and 
teach  you  to  commit  yourselves  to  God's  care  and  keeping  during  the  darkness  of 
the  coming  night.     In  this  way  you  will,  with  undeviating  regularity,  learn  to 
obey  the  influence  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  and  give  each  following  hour  its 
proper  due,  just  as  the  flowers  accommodate  themselves  to  the  influence  of  the  natural 
sun.     Has  it  ever  occurred  to  you  that  the  common  names  of  flowers  often  tell  us  of 
the  way  in  which  they  were  regarded  hj  the  people  who  first  named  them  ?    Pansy 
was  originally  a  French  word,  meaning   thought.     The   pansy,  then,   was  the 
thought-flower.     It  is  very  fitting,  therefore,  that  it  should  be  found  everywhere. 
The  whole  world  is  governed  by  tiiought.     But,  we  must  remember  that  thought 
xoAy  be  either  evil  or  good*    Now  the  pansy  ought  never  to  suggest  evil  thought. 


tjHAJ".  n.]  THE  S01<rG  OF  SOLOJfOX.  «T 

How  should  it  t  It  is,  in  itself,  so  beautiful  and  perfect  that  only  an  ill-disposed 
and  perverted  mind  could  be  persuaded  to  evil  by  it.  People  bent  on  evil  deeds  do 
not  seek  for  inspiration  how  to  accomplish  them  by  thinking  of  pretty  flowers. 
They  are  not  led  by  the  beauty  of  pansies  or  other  blossoms  to  be  ill-tempered,  or 
spiteful,  or  disobedient,  or  untruthful,  or  to  commit  thefts,  or  fall  into  other  crimes. 
The  thought  suggested  by  the  pansy,  then,  is  good  thought,  thought  beautifol  like 
its  emblem.  "  The  best  thoughts  are  those  which  a  man  conceives  when  on  his 
kneee  before  his  God."  Thus  we  should  think  what  God  is :  a  loving,  merciful 
Father  ;  what  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  :  a  tender,  atoning  Saviour ;  what  God  tha 
Holy  Spirit  is :  a  Sanctifier  who  wiU  dwell  in  us  and  make  us  holy.  Again,  we 
should  think  what  we  ourselves  are :  weak  and  sinful  by  nature,  who  need  God'a 
help  to  make  us  better.  Thirdly,  we  should  think  of  others,  and  of  what  we  can 
do  to  benefit  them.  Thus  our  thoughts  should  really  be  concerned  with  what  is  set 
before  us  in  the  Church  Catechism  as,  "  Our  duty  to  God  and  our  duty  to  our 
neighbour,"  I  may  tell  you  that  the  pansy,  the  thought-flower,  has  another 
common  name  which  bears  strangely  on  this  subject :  It  is  heart's-ease.  A  good 
deal  of  our  duty  to  our  neighbour  consists  in  giving,  where  we  can,  heart's-ease, 
peace  of  mind.  An  old  ordamed  minister  of  the  Church,  who  lived  many  years  ago, 
Tised  t&say  :  "  I  see  in  this  world  two  heaps,  one  of  human  misery,  and  the  other 
of  human  happiness.  Now  if  I  take  but  the  smallest  bit  from  one  heap  and  add  it 
to  the  other,  I  carry  a  point ;  I  feel  I  have  done  something."  And  is  this  all  I  am 
to  say  ?  Oh  I  no.  By  and  by,  when  you  are  blessed  with  means  such  as  are  not 
expected  in  the  case  of  children,  you  will  dedicate  something  more  than  flowers  to 
Cod's  service.  In  former  days  there  lived  a  princess  Eugenie,  sister  of  the  king  of 
Sweden.  She  set  her  mind  on  finishing  a  hospital  which  had  been  begun,  and,  to 
do  80,  sold  her  diamonds.  When  visiting  this  hospital,  after  its  completion,  a 
suflering  inmate  wept  tears  of  gratitude  as  she  stood  by  his  side  :  "  Ah  !  "  exclaimed 
the  princess,  "now  I  see  my  diamonds  again."  Do  you  understand  her  meaning? 
She  meant  that  in  those  grateful  tears  she  beheld  what  was  to  her  more  beautiful 
and  valuable  than  the  diamonds  with  which  they  had  been  purchased.  One  thing 
more  :  you  will  dedicate  something  else  to  God  besides  your  means,  namely,  your- 
selves, your  lives,  your  thoughts,  your  words,  your  acts.  {George  LittiTig,  M.A.) 
The  vx/rld's  need  of  flowers : — We  are  not  told  why  God  causes  the  flowers  to 
appear  on  the  earth.  Nothing  is  said  of  His  purpose  in  calling  this  hidden  world  of 
beauty  into  the  light.  The  silence  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  end  is  obvioua 
and  patent  to  every  observer.  The  soil  needs  the  work  of  their  roots,  and  the 
chemicals  of  their  tiny  structures.  The  atmosphere  needs  the  fragrance  and  the 
gases  they  exude.  The  world  of  mixed  life  which  hums  all  day  in  their  petals  needs 
tbe  food  they  provide.  The  man  needs  the  sight  of  them  to  train  his  eye  and 
culture  the  love  of  the  beautiful.  And  dimpled  childhood  needs  them,  and  many  a 
sick  home.  God's  end  in  their  creation  is  not  only  adornment,  but  ministry,  the 
serving  and  the  satisfying  of  the  needs  of  other  created  things.  That  is  why  Grod 
seeks  to  call  the  beauties  out  of  man,  because  they  are  needed.  Man  wants  the 
sight  of  a  splendid  faith  to  make  it  possible  for  him  to  believe.  Man  wants  self- 
sacrifice,  for  he  will  die  of  his  woimds  if  there  is  no  self- forgetful  soul  to  help  him. 
Han  wants  love,  for  his  lot  is  hard,  and  he  will  perish  of  heartbreak  and  loneliness 
•without  its  gentle  ministry.  Man  wants  purity,  that,  amid  the  sensuality  and 
immoralities  of  the  age,  he  may  see  it  is  possible  to  master  the  flesh.  Man  wants 
hope,  for  his  sky  is  often  starless,  and  he  needs  the  beacon  of  another's  hope  to 
guide  him  through  the  storm.  The  world  needs  these  flowers  of  the  soul ;  needs 
their  fragrance,  their  colours,  their  help,  their  hints,  their  inspiration.  (C.  E. 
Stone.)  The  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  is  come. —  The  vernal  concert : — I.  Learn 
first  JHB  GOODNESS  OF  GoD.  Do  you  realize  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  the  dominant 
colour  of  the  spring-time — the  green  in  which  is  so  kindly  and  lovingly  mingled  the 
mercy  and  the  goodness  of  God  1  Is  our  voice  silent  1  II.  This  season  suggests  thb 
■WISDOM  OF  God.  Oh,  the  wisdom  of  God  in  the  structure  of  a  bird's  wing  and 
voice  !  Where  is  the  harp  that  gave  the  warble  to  the  lark,  the  sweet  call  to  the 
robin,  the  carol  to  the  canary,  the  chirp  to  the  grasshopper  ?  He  who  pairs  the 
birds  in  the  spring-time  gave  us  our  companions.  He  who  shows  the  chafl&nch  how 
to  take  care  of  her  brood  will  protect  our  children.  He  who  gathers  the  down  for 
the  pheasant's  breast  will  give  us  apparel.  III.  The  season  of  the  year  suggests 
THi  WISDOM  OF  RIGHT  BUILDING  OF  THB  HOMS  NESTS.  Birds  build  alwavs  In 
reference  to  safety.  Sometimes  the  nest  is  buUt  in  rocks,  eaves,  trees,  but  always 
in  reference  to  safety.    The  only  safe  place  for  man  to  build  a  nest  is  ths  tree  of 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.ii,  ' 

the  cross,  and  the  only  safe  rock  is  the  Rock  of  Ages.  IV.  This  season  of  the  year 
suggests  THE  INFINITE  GLORIES  OF  HEAVEN.  If  this  world,  blasted  with  sin  and 
Bwept  with  storms,  is  still  so  beautiful,  what  must  be  the  attraction  of  the  sinless 
world  toward  which  we  travel !  V.  This  season  of  the  bird-anthem  suggests  to  me 
THE  IMPORTANCE  OF  LEARNING  HOW  TO  SING.  In  a  little  while  there  will  be  no 
pause  in  the  melody  of  the  song.  Whether  it  be  a  warble,  or  a  chant,  or  a  carol, 
or  a  chirp,  or  a  croak,  God  will  be  praised  by  it.  Shall  not  we,  more  intelligent 
appreciators,  sing  ?  Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly  in  all  wisdom, 
teaching  and  admonishing  one  another  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs, 
singing  with  grace  in  your  heart  unto  the  Lord.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 

Yet.  13.  The  vines  with  the  tender  grape  give  a  good  smell. — The  tender 
grapes : — The  vine  is  of  all  trees  the  most  useless  unless  it  bears  fruit.  You  cannot 
make  hardly  anything  of  it ;  you  would  scarcely  be  able  to  cut  enough  wood  out  of  a 
vine  to  hang  a  pot  upon ;  you  cannot  turn  it  into  furniture,  and  barely  could  you 
use  it  in  the  least  degree  for  building  purposes.  It  must  either  bear  fruit,  or  else  it 
must  be  consumed  in  the  fire.  You  all  know  that  there  is  no  possibility  of  bringing 
forth  any  fruit  except  we  are  in  Christ,  and  except  we  abide  in  Christ.  We  must 
bear  fruit,  or  we  shall  certainly  perish  ;  and  we  cannot  have  fruit  unless  we  be  knit 
to  Christ,  vitally  one  with  him,  just  as  a  branch  is  really,  after  a  living  fashion,  one 
•with  the  stem.  It  would  be  no  use  to  tie  a  branch  to  the  stem  of  the  vine  ;  that 
■would  not  cause  it  to  bring  forth  fruit.  It  must  be  joined  to  it  in  a  living  union,  so 
must  you  and  I  be  livingly  joined  to  Christ.  I  think  I  hear  some  one  say,  "I  hope 
I  have  begun  to  bring  forth  some  fruit,  but  it  is  very  little  in  quantity,  and  it  is  of 
very  poor  quaUtv  ;  and  I  do  not  suppose  that  the  Lord  Jesus  wiU  hardly  stoop  to 
notice  it."  Well,  now,  listen  to  what  the  text  says ;  it  is  the  heavenly  Bride- 
groom, it  is  Christ  Himself,  who,  in  this  Song,  speaks  to  His  spouse,  and  bids  her 
eome  into  the  vineyard,  and  look  about  her.  For,  saith  He,  "  The  vines  with  the 
tender  grape  give  a  good  smell."  So,  you  see,  there  was  some  finit,  though  it  could 
only  be  spoken  of  as  "the  tender  grape."  Some  read  the  passage,  "The  vines  in 
blossom  gave  forth  fragrance  "  ;  others  think  it  refers  to  the  grape  just  as  it  begins 
to  form.  It  was  a  poor  little  thing,  but  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard  was  the  first  to 
spy  it  out ;  and  if  there  is  any  little  fruit  imto  God  upon  any  one,  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  can  see  it.  Though  the  berry  be  scarcely  formed,  though  it  be  only  like  a 
flower  which  has  just  begun  to  knit.  He  can  see  the  fruit,  and  He  delights  in  that 
fruit.  I.  First,  then,  what  are  these  tender  grapes?  What  are  these  first- 
fruits  of  the  Spirit  of  God  ?  1.  One  of  the  first  tender  grapes  that  we  spy  out  on 
living  branches  of  the  true  Vine  is,  a  secret  mourning  for  sin,  and  very  often,  an 
open  mourning,  too.  The  man  is  no  longer  the  jovial,  light-headed,  dare-devil  sort 
of  fellow  that  he  was.  He  has  found  out  that  his  life  has  not  been  right  in  the  sight 
of  God  ;  he  has  become  conscious  that  he  has  done  much  that  is  altogether  wrong,  and 
that  he  has  left  undone  a  thousand  thin^  which  he  ought  to  have  done,  and  he 
feels  heavy  of  heart,  and  sad  in  spirit.  Whenever  he  sees  his  sin,  it  grieves  him  ; 
and  he  is  grieved  because  he  does  not  grieve  more  than  he  does.  This  is  a  crop  that 
will  ripen  and  sweeten  before  long.  Surely,  never  was  there  a  truly  gracious  soul 
who  did  not  put  forth  this  as  one  of  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit,  a  secret  moximing 
for  sin.  2.  Another  tender  grape  is,  a  humble  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  That  little 
trembling  faith  is  one  of  the  tender  grapes.  It  will  grow,  it  wiH  come  to  perfection 
in  due  time,  for  the  least  true  faith  has  everlasting  life  in  it.  3.  Then  there  comes 
another  tender  grape,  and  that  is,  a  genuine  change  of  life.  The  man  has  evidently 
turned  right  about ;  he  is  not  looking  the  way  he  used  to  look,  and  he  is  not  living 
as  he  used  to  live.  At  first  he  fails,  and  perhaps  fails  a  good  many  times,  like  a 
child  who  is  learning  to  walk,  and  has  many  a  tumble  ;  but  it  wUl  never  walk  if  it 
does  not  tumble  a  bit.  So,  when  men  begin  to  live  the  new  life,  they  have  many 
slips.  They  thought  that  ugly  temper  of  theirs  would  never  rise  again,  but  it  does, 
and  it  grieves  them  very  much  ;  and  some  old  habit,  from  which  they  thought  they 
had  clean  escaped,  entangles  them  unawares,  and  they  say,  "Surely  I  cannot  be 
a  child  of  God  if  I  do  these  things  again  "  ;  and  there  is  great  brokenness  of  spiiit, 
and  soul-humbling.  Well,  that  very  soul-humbling  is  a  tender  grape.  That  eflFort 
to  do  better — not  in  your  own  strength,  because  you  have  none,  and  you  are  sure  to 
fail  utterly  if  you  attempt  such  a  task  alone  ;  but  the  eflfort  to  do  better  in  the 
strength  of  God,  yet  with  the  full  consciousness  of  your  own  weakness, — all  that 
indicates  a  real  change.  4.  Another  very  blessed  fruit  of  spiritual  life  in  the  soul 
is,  secret  devotion.    The  man  never  prayed  before ;  he  went  sometimes  to  a  place  of 


CHAP,  u.]  THE  S02>rO  OF  SOLOMON.  69 

TTorsMp,  but  he  did  not  care  much  about  it.  Now,  you  see  that  he  tries  to  get  alone 
for  private  prayer  as  often  as  he  can.  "  Behold,  he  prayeth,"  is  an  indication  that 
God  has  renewed  his  heart.  5.  Another  of  these  tender  grapes  is  an  eager  desire 
for  more  grace,  a  louging  for  more  of  the  good  things  of  the  covenant.  6. 
There  is  also,  in  such  persons,  another  very  precious  sign  of  grace,  and  that  is,  a 
simple  love  to  Jesus.  The  heart  knows  little,  but  it  loves  much  ;  the  understanding 
is  not  yet  fully  enlightened,  but  the  affections  are  all  on  fire.  II.  "What  is  the 
Lord's  estimate  of  these  tender  grapes  1  1.  WeE,  first.  He  thinks  so  much 
of  it  that  He  calls  His  Church  to  come  and  look  at  it  (vers.  10-13).  We  do 
not  usually  call  our  friends  to  look  at  things  which  we  do  not  ourselves 
admire  ;  so  here  the  Bridegroom  calls  His  spouse  to  share  in  His  joy  in  these 
tokens  of  the  heavenly  life  of  the  Church  of  God.  Be  always  on  the  look-out 
for  the  tender  grapes.  "Ah  1  "  says  one,  "  that  young  man  does  not  know  much." 
Does  he  know  that  one  thing,  whereas  he  was  blind,  now  he  can  see  ?  Then,  be 
thankful  that  he  knows  as  much  as  that.  "  Oh  !  "  you  exclaim,  "  but  he  has  not 
much  prudence. "  No  ;  do  you  suppose  that  this  young  man  is  to  have  as  much 
prudence  as  you  have  at  your  age,  and  you  are  perhaps  sixty  or  seventy  ?  I  might 
possibly  say  with  truth  that  you  have  not  quite  so  much  zeal  as  you  might  have 
to  go  with  your  prudence.  **  Oh,  but ! "  you  say,  "  we  want  the  young  man  to 
be  more  mature."  Give  him  time,  and  he  will  get  as  mature  as  you  are  ;  but  while 
the  grapes  are  still  tender,  your  Master  and  ms  calls  you  to  look  at  them,  and  to 
thaii  Him  for  them,  for  there  is  something  very  cheering  in  the  sight  of  the  first 
weak,  faint  tokens  of  the  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  soul  of  a  young  believer. 
2.  What  is  Christ's  estimate  of  these  tender  grapes  %  Why,  next.  He  calls  them 
tender.  He  might  have  called  them  sour,  but  He  does  not ;  He  calls  them  "  tender. " 
He  likes  to  use  a  sweet  word,  you  see,  the  softest  and  best  word  that  He  can  use  ;  so 
when  you  describe  a  young  convert,  my  dear  brother,  do  not  at  once  point  out  his 
immaturity,  but  caU  him  "tender."  3.  Then  He  says  something  more:  "The 
vines  with  the  tender  grape  give  a  good  smell."  Of  what  do  they  smeU  ?  (1)  Well, 
first,  they  smell  of  sincerity.  (2)  Next,  there  is  about  these  young  believers  a  sweet 
smell  of  heartiness.  (3)  There  is  sure  to  be  also  about  these  young  Christians  the 
sweet  smell  of  zeal ;  and,  whatever  may  be  said  against  zeal,  I  will  take  up  the 
cudgels  for  it  as  long  as  I  live.  In  the  work  of  God,  we  cannot  do  without  fire.  (4) 
These  young  believers  have  another  sweet  smell :  they  are  teachable,  ready  to  learn, 
willing  to  be  taught  from  the  Scriptures  and  from  those  whose  instructions  God 
blesses  to  their  souls.  (5)  There  is  also  another  delicious  smell  about  them,  and 
that  is,  they  are  generally  very  joyfuL  I  wish  that  we  could  catch  the  sweet 
contagion  of  the  early  joy  of  tnose  who  have  just  found  the  Saviour.  There  is 
something  delightful  in  all  joy  when  it  is  joy  in  the  Lord,  but  there  is  a  special 
brightness  about  the  delight  of  those  who  are  newly  converted.  III.  What  is  the 
DANGER  TO  THESE  TENDER  GRAPES  ?  (see  ver.  15).  In  the  spiritual  vine- 
yard there  are  "foxes"  of  many  kinds.  1.  There  is,  first,  the  hard  censurer. 
He  will  spoil  the  vines,  if  he  can,  and  especially  the  vines  that  have  the 
tender  grapes.  He  finds  fault  with  everything  that  he  can  see  in  you  who 
are  but  young  believers.  May  God  deliver  you  from  these  cruel  foxes !  He 
will  often  do  so  by  enabling  you  not  to  mind  them.  After  all,  this  is  only  the 
way  in  which  all  Christians  have  been  tried,  there  is  nothing  strange  in  your 
experience  from  these  censurers  ;  and  they  are  not  your  judges,  you  will  not  be 
condemned  because  they  condemn  you.  Go  and  do  your  best  in  the  service  of  your 
Lord  ;  trust  in  Christ,  and  do  not  mind  what  they  say ;  and  you  will  be  delivered 
from  that  kind  of  fox.  2.  A  worse  fox  even  than  that  one,  however,  is  the  flatterer. 
He  comes  to  you  smiling  and  smirking,  and  he  begins  to  express  his  approval  of 
your  religion,  and  very  likely  tells  you  what  a  fine  fellow  you  are.  Indeed, 
you  are  so  good  that  he  thinks  you  are  rather  too  precise,  you  have  gone  a 
little  over  the  line  1  Get  away  from  that  fox  at  once.  The  man  who  tells 
you  that  you  are  too  precise  ought  to  be  precisely  told  that  you  do  not  want 
his  company.  There  never  lived  a  man  yet  who  was  too  holy,  and  there  never 
will  live  a  man  who  will  imitate  Christ  too  closely,  or  avoid  sin  too  rigidly. 
S.  Then  there  comes  another  foul  fox,  Mr.  Worldly -wiseman.  He  says,  "  You  are 
a  Christian,  but  do  not  be  a  fool.  Carry  your  religion  as  far  as  you  can  make  it 
pay  ;  but  if  it  comes  to  losing  anything  by  it,  well  then,  don't  you  do  it.  You  see, 
this  practice  is  the  custom  of  tne  trade  ;  it  is  not  right,  I  know,  but  still,  other 

Eeople  do  it,  and  you  ought  to  do  it.     If  you  do  not,  you  will  never  get  on  in 
usiness."    I  know  that  there  are  many  young  people  who,  unless  they  are  watchful 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

and  careful  at  the  very  beginning  of  their  spiritual  life,  will  get  lamed,  and  never 
walk  as  they  ought  to  do,  because  this  fox  nas  bitten  them.  4.  There  is  another 
ngly  fox  about,  and  that  is,  a  doubting  fox.  He  comes  and  says,  ' '  You  seem  very 
happy,  and  very  joyful ;  but  is  it  true  ?  You  appear  to  have  become  qmte  a  different 
person  from  what  you  used  to  be  ;  but  is  there,  after  aU,  such  a  thing  as  conversion  ? " 
6.  There  are  some  foxes  of  evil  doctrine,  and  they  generally  try  to  spoil  our  young 
people.  Do  not  any  of  you  young  people  be  carried  away  with  the  notion  that  all 
the  learned  men  are  heretics ;  it  is  very  largely  the  reverse,  and  it  is  your  sham, 
shallow  philosopher  who  goes  running  after  heresy.  Get  out  of  the  way  of  that  fox, 
or  else  he  wiU  do  much  mischief  to  the  tender  grapes.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yer.  14.  0  my  dove,  that  art  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock,  in  the  secret  places  of 
the  stairs,  let  me  see  thy  countenance,  let  me  hear  thy  voice. — A  sermon  for 
Lent : — My  text  contains  a  parable.  The  parable  is  one  easy  for  us  to  realize. 
There  rises  somewhere  in  the  Jewish  land   a   mountain    of  rock,   and   it   rises 

Precipitously.  Looked  at  from  beneath  it  would  seem  as  if  its  peak  were  inaccessible, 
'et  to  the  cragsmen  of  the  district  it  is  an  oft-trodden  path.  They  rise  from  ledge 
to  ledge  of  the  rock  as  by  a  natural  staircase,  and  they  pause  and  rest  in  its  grottoea 
and  caverns,  and  find  refreshment  in  the  ascent.  To  one  at  least  this  is  a  weU- 
known  spot.  Again  and  again  he  climbs  its  height,  and  he  has  entered  into  familiar 
intercourse  with  one  of  those  making  their  homes  in  the  cleft  of  the  rock.  There 
dwells  a  dove  that  he  has  tamed,  one  who  knows  his  voice,  one  who  in  his  sight  ia 
unequalled  in  comeliness,  one  the  sound  of  whose  note  is  as  the  sweetest  music  to 
his  ear.  And  as  he  climbs  the  mountain  ascending  to  where  the  dove  dwells,  he 
cries,  "0  my  dove,  that  art  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock,  in  the  secret  places  of  the 
stairs,  let  me  see  thy  countenance,  let  me  hear  thy  voice :  for  sweet  is  thy  voice, 
and  thy  countenance  is  comely."  Such  is  the  parable.  What  is  its  interpreta- 
tion ? — at  least  to  Christian  men  %  To  us  the  Song  of  Solomon  comes  as  a  beautiful 
goem,  revealing  to  us  the  conditions  of  Christian  life  as  lived  in  the  love  of  Jesua 
hrist  our  Lord.  He  is  the  cragsman  typified  of  old  !  He  draws  nigh  to  His  Church, 
as  at  this  Lenten  season  ;  He  speaks  to  His  dove,  His  undefiled  one,  in  the  words  we 
are  considering  now.  And  this  is  His  cry — God  grant  that  it  may  be  answered  by 
you,  my  brothers,  at  this  Lenten  season,  "  Let  me  see  thy  countenance,  let  me  hear 
thy  voice  :  for  sweet  is  thy  voice,  and  thy  countenance  is  comely. "  A  dove  is  a 
type  of  innocence,  I  know,  but  not  a  type  of  sinless  innocence.  It  is  a  type  of 
innocency  recovered  by  contrition.  Ezekiel  is  our  teacher  here.  He  sees  Israel 
escaped  from  bondage  and  restored  to  her  fatherland,  and  thus  describes  her  dwell- 
ing there.  He  shall  be  like  the  dove  on  the  mountains,  all  of  them  mourning,  every 
one  for  his  iniquity.  There  is  no  sound  so  peaceful  and  so  plaintive  as  the  note  of 
the  dove.  Peaceful,  for  contrition  is  a  state  of  peace.  Yet,  after  all,  mournful  is  his 
plaintive  note,  because  in  the  contrite,  true  sorrow  co-exists  with  peace  and  joy. 
And  this  is  the  call  of  Jesus  Christ  at  this  time — that  we  will  lift  to  Him  the 
countenance  that  is  marked  with  tears  of  penitence  ;  that  we  will  lay  at  His  feet  in 
the  consecrated  songs  of  the  Church  our  misereres  for  forgiven  sin.  Always  in  the 
Church's  worship,  in  the  worship  of  the  individual  creature,  blended  with  the  voice 
of  loud  thanksgiving  must  be  the  wailing  note  of  the  dove.  It  is  this  truth,  I  am 
sure,  that  we  need  to  recognize — that  contrition  is  of  necessity  a  feature  of  Christian 
life,  because  that  Christian  life  is  lived  by  those  who  are  not  wholly  free  from  sin. 
As  we  go  on  our  way  day  by  day  we  are  conscious  of  shortcomings.  Nay,  nay, 
happy  is  he  who  is  not  conscious  from  time  to  time  of  deliberate  deviation  from  the 
law  of  righteousness.  And  even  beyond  that,  whatever  is  wrought  out  in  us  by  the 
great  crisis  of  conversion,  it  does  not  break  that  link  of  personality  which  links 
us  to  our  sin-stained  past.  We  who  live  in  the  Divine  peace  and  love  and  obedience 
now  are  they  who  sinned  in  the  sin-stained  past.  We  cannot,  if  we  are  wise  or  true, 
act  as  though  there  were  no  link  linking  us  to  that  past.  Our  life,  therefore,  of 
necessity,  must  be  a  life  of  contrition  for  sin,  and  all  the  more  intense  just  because 
that  sin  is  forgiven.  How,  then,  is  this  contrition  to  be  ours  ?  God  gives  the 
answer  in  this  season  of  Lent.  Lent  is  one  of  the  seasons  of  our  Divine  education. 
Christ  has  created  by  His  Spirit  this  season  of  Lent  in  the  Catholic  Church,  in  order 
that  He  may  teach  us  how  to  live  a  contrite  Hfe.  Well,  how  ?  In  varied  ways. 
Sometimes  this  contrition  is  awakened  or  deepened  within  us  by  a  revelation  of  the 
reality  of  God,  as  it  was  to  Isaiah.  Sometimes  by  strange  Divine  interpositions  in 
the  ordinary  course  of  life,  as  it  was  to  Simon  Peter  by  the  lake.  Sometimes  in  the 
course  of  deep,  engrossing  study,  as  it  was  with  the  Magi     Sometimes  by  a  Divine 


CHAP.  II.]    -  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOy.  71 


eall  meeting  us  in  the  path  of  our  duty,  as  it  was  when  Matthew  was  called  from  the 
receipt  of  custom.  Yet,  mainly,  Jesus  educates  us  into  contrition  by  the  revelation 
of  Himself  as  the  crucified  Lord.  It  was  thus  when  the  3,000  were  brought  to  contri- 
tion. And  so  it  has  been  all  down  through  the  ages,  as  the  testimony  of  the  history 
of  the  Church  bears  witness.  And  so  it  is  to-day,  as  every  evangelist  will  bear  testi- 
mony. Generally  men  are  brought  to  contrition,  generally  men  are  maintained  in 
contrition,  generally  men  advance  in  contrition  through  the  revelation  of  Jesus  to 
the  sinner  as  the  crucified,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to 
see  why  this  is.  Contrition  depends  upon  conviction  of  sin.  It  begins  in  our 
conviction  of  sin  ;  it  grows  with  the  deepening  of  conviction  of  sin  ;  and  this  convic- 
tion of  sin  is  ours  through  the  revelation  of  the  Cross  of  Christ.  As  we  recognize 
the  connection  between  man's  sins  and  the  Redeemer's  sorrows,  and-  see  what  sin  ia 
in  its  exceeding  sinfulness  ;  our  eyes  are  opened  to  judge  of  sin  aright,  and  our  judg- 
ment expresses  itself  in  self-condemnation.  Again,  contrition  implies  not  only 
conviction  of  sin,  but  the  knowledge  of  God's  love.  A  knowledge  of  sin's  exceeding 
sinfulness,  unless  it  is  followed  by  a  revelation  of  Divine  love,  would  result  in 
despair  and  death.  But  God,  who  sees  our  position  of  danger  when  we  are  convicted 
of  sin,  reveals  imto  us  Jesus  Christ  crucified,  as  being  the  unveiling  of  Himself  as 
the  God  of  Love.  He  bids  us  see  in  the  eyes  of  love  which  look  down  upon  the 
■world  from  the  cross,  eyes  that  are  lit  up  with  the  very  love  of  God  Himself.  And 
yet  once  more.     If  in  the  vision  of  the  cross  there  is  given  to  us  a  revelation  of  the 

freatness  of  sin,  and  then  of  the  greatness  of  the  love  of  God  speaking  to  the  sinner  in 
is  sorrow,  and  giving  to  him  the  kiss  of  reconciliation,  there  comes  to  us  a  revela- 
tion of  what  a  sinner's  life  should  be  aa  lived  under  this  conviction  of  sin  and  in  this 
vision  of  the  love  of  God.  It  is  to  be  a  life  of  humility  as  the  sinner  kneels  at  the 
loving  Father's  feet  and  breathes  out  in  acts  of  devotion  his  own  sorrow  for  sin.  It 
is  to  be  a  life  of  zeal,  as  he  rises  to  show  this  sorrow  for  a  wasted  past  by  devotion  to 
the  service  of  God  in  the  living  present.  It  is  to  be  a  life  of  patient  conformity  to 
the  Divine  discipline,  as  he  recognizes  in  the  sorrows  of  life  God's  blessed  living 
purgatory  in  which  His  own  children  are  purified  and  educated  according  to  His  wUl. 
So,  then,  if  you  would  go  forth  and  really  live  with  God  during  this  season  of  Lent ; 
if  you  would  have  your  Lent  life  a  reality  and  not  a  mere  ecclesiastical  sham,  let  it 
be  a  Lent  spent  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  Christ,  your  crucified,  your  enthroned  Redeemer ; 
give  yourselves  up  to  Him  in  whole  abandonment,  and  in  the  spirit  of  prayer.  Call 
upon  Him  in  the  power  of  His  Spirit,  to  give  you  deeper  conviction  of  sin,  a  grasp  of 
Kvine  love,  a  stronger  purpose  to  live  a  life  of  firmer  humility,  of  zeal,  and  patience. 
Above  »U,  remember  this — there  is  no  living  the  life  of  contrition  unless  it  is  lived  in 
the  Divine  peace.  How  wisely  we  learn  this  from  the  order  of  the  Church's  seasons. 
Shiove  Tuesday  is  not  in  Holy  Week,  nor  is  its  teaching  assigned  to  Easter  Eve.  It 
is  not  first  Lent,  and  then  forgiveness  ;  it  is  first  forgiveness  and  then  Lent. 
Through  Shrove  "Tuesday  we  pass  by  the  door  of  Ash  Wednesday  into  the  Lent  of 
contrition.  And  so  it  is,  believe  me,  in  our  Christian  life.  If  we  would  really 
mourn  before  God  for  sin  with  a  generous  and  unselfish  mourning  ;  if  we  would  sing 
the  song  that  he  longs  to  hear,  we  must  sing  it  in  the  clefts  of  rock.  It  is  only  as 
we  surrender  ourselves  to  Christ  for  forgiveness  of  the  past ;  only  as  we  cling  to  Hitt^ 
in  love  and  faith  and  hope  for  acceptance  in  the  living  present ;  only  as  we  entnist 
ourselves  to  Him  for  the  future  that  awaits  us ;  in  a  word,  it  is  only  as  we  live  in 
realized  imion  with  Him  as  our  Redeemer,  that  we  can  ever  offer  Him  the  contrition 
that  He  craves.     {Canon  Body.) 

Ter.  15.  Take  na  the  foxes,  the  little  foxes,  that  spoil  the  vines  :  for  our  vines 
have  tender  grapes. — The  little  foxes: — The  fox  in  the  vineyard  is  exceedingly 
destructive.  The  food  of  that  animal  ia  not  merely  flesh,  but  honey  and  fruits, 
particularly  grapes  ;  and  the  young  foxes  not  merely  devour  the  fruit,  but  by  their 
sportiveness,  and  by  the  action  of  their  teeth  on  the  bark  of  the  vine,  destroy  as 
much  as  they  devour.  The  habits  of  the  fox  increase  the  mischief.  Insteaa  of 
toaming,  as  some  animals,  without  any  certain  place  of  rest,  he  fixes  the  bounds  of 
his  liabitation,  choosing  a  cave  or  den  at  a  convenient  distance  from  those  places 
which  will  furnish  most  substance  for  pliinder ;  and  from  this  hiding-place  and 
watch-tower  united,  he  exercises  his  acuteness,  ingenuity,  prudence,  ana  circum- 
•peotdon,  in  the  capture  of  whatever  is  fitted  to  be  his  prey.  The  well-known 
voraciousness  of  the  fox  gives  breadth  to  the  mischief,  and  his  cunning  renders  the 
application  of  means  of  defence  almost  impossible.  So  that  the  husbandman  of  the 
vmcyard  regards  the  fox  as  one  of  his  greatest  enemies.    We  will  consider  the  text~- 

26 


7a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

I.  As  ADDKES8ED  TO  THE  INDIVIDUAL.  1.  The  evilfl,  the  Capture  of  which  is 
here  nrged,  are  such  as  the  following : — Ostentation — the  spirit  that  leads  men  to 
give  alms  that  may  be  seen  of  men;  to  pray,  that  it  may  be  said,  "Behold,  he 
prays ; "  and  to  be  very  particular  that  their  circumspection  may  become  the  talk  of 
a  street  or  of  a  town.  Concealment — the  temper  that  prompts  men  to  try  to 
prevent  their  light  shining  by  placing  it  under  a  bushel.  The  easily-oflFended  and 
unforgiving  spirit — by  which  allied  hearts  are  moved  to  a  distance  from  each  other, 
and  kept  separate.  Fear  of  man  and  men-pleasing — by  which  the  soul  is  snared 
into  neglect  of  duty,  and  into  the  occupation  of  wrong  positions.  Anxiety — by 
•which  the  mind  is  mstracted  and  the  heart  robbed  of  peace.  A  longing  for  treasure 
upon  earth — by  which  the  religious  sight  is  confused  and  the  spirit  darkened. 
Tnat  judging  of  others — ^by  which  our  beams  are  made  motes  and  others'  motes 
made  beams.  That  finding  our  life  and  burying  our  dead,  and  bidding  them  fare- 
well who  are  at  our  house — which  involves  a  looking  back  and  an  unfitness  for  the 
kingdom  of  God.  All  such  plausible  errors  in  doctrine  and  specious  deviations 
from  truth  as  afiect  principle  and  conduct ;  injustice  in  the  things  that  are  least ; 
trifling  omissions  of  duty ;  all  pleasures  and  indulgences  producing  moral  uneasiness, 
and  especially  aU  doubtful  actions  and  courses,  those  deeds  and  paths  about  which 
the  conscience  is  uneasy  and  the  spirit  timid,  about  which  the  mind  is  not  made 
up,  and  in  the  performance  or  pursuit  of  which  there  is,  at  least,  a  suspicion  of  the 
divine  displeasure  and  frown.  2.  The  good  which  may  be  marred  is  of  this  kind : — 
The  subjects  of  Christ's  kingdom  are  bom  from  above :  we  may  expect  in  them 
heavenly-mindedness.  They  are  bom  of  God :  and  we  may  look  to  them  for  godli- 
ness. They  are  created  anew  by  Christ  Jesus :  and  we  may  expect  to  see  Christ- 
likeness.  3.  This  good  may  be  thus  marred : — The  pursuit  of  religious  information 
jnay  be  checked.  The  attainment  of  divine  knowledge  by  experience  may  be 
hindered.  The  judgment  may  be  perverted  or  corrupted.  The  memory  may  be 
burdened  with  remembrance  of  sin.  The  conscience  may  be  blimted  or  defiled. 
The  affections  may  be  corrapted  or  divided.  Godly  action  may  be  impeded.  The 
energy  of  holy  prmciple  may  be  impaired.  The  bloom  of  spiritual  peace  and  rest 
may  be  removed.  The  enamel  of  character  may  be  broken.  The  lustre  of  reputa- 
tion may  be  dimmed.  4.  Such  mischief  ought  to  be  prevented  or  cured.  Take 
the  foxes.  Pray  in  secret,  and  give  in  secret.  Let  vour  light  shine.  Forgive  a 
brother  his  trespasses.  Fear  not  them  that  kill  the  body.  Cast  aU  your  care  on 
•prim  who  careth  for  you.  Lay  not  up  for  vourselves  treasure  upon  earth.  Ju(^ 
not.  Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead.  Hold  the  faith  and  a  good  conscience.  Do 
nothing  by  which  others  are  offended  and  made  weak.  Defy  the  persecutor.  With- 
draw from  the  backslider.  Take  the  foxes.  Make  impenoing  evil  captive,  and,  if 
possible,  destroy  it.  IL  As  addressed  to  the  chueches  of  Christ.  1.  The 
foxes  in  any  congregation  of  believing  men  are  such  evils  as  these  : — Ill-humour, 
whether  arising  from  the  body,  or  from  circumstances,  or  from  any  dominant  evil 
passion — ^that  mood  which  makes  a  jaundiced  eye  and  an  itching  ear,  and  which 
will  not  see  good,  but  is  determined  to  discover  evil.  Suspicion — the  opposite 
temper  to  the  charity  that  thinketh  no  evil,  the  spirit  that  sees  nothing  but 
whited  sepulchres,  and  platters  clean  but  on  the  outsid^.  Distrust— the  spirit  that 
has  no  friend  or  counsellor,  but  saith  deliberately,  "All  men  are  liars. "_  Self- 
importance— the  thinking  too  highly  of  oneself,  and  too  meanly  of  others,  instead 
of  estimating  others  and  oneself  soberly.  Carelessness  and  disorder — by  which  the 
sweetest  ointment  is  spoiled,  dead  flies  being  allowed  to  abide  in  it,  and  by  which 
the  most  magnificent  music  is  marred,  through  the  performance  being  slovenly  in 
the  execution.  2.  So  far  as  these  evils  have  influence,  they  check  the  life  of  God 
in  the  soul  of  the  man,  and  thereby  damage  the  fellowship.  As  a  congregation 
consists  of  individuals,  so  the  character  of  a  church  is  created  by  the  moral  and 
■niritual  attributes  of  persons.     Whatever  injures  the  individual,  mars  the  com- 


10 ;  1  Oor.  y.  11.)  Paul's  directions  and  John's  are  in  harmony  with  the  text. 
We  remark,  (1)  That  individual  life  and  church  life  are  not  maintainable  apart  from 
euefulness  and  exertion.  Real  religion  has  nothing  mechanical  in  it.  It  is  all 
life.  It  does  not  proceed  on  a  principle  of  perpetual  motion.  It  meets  resistance 
and  must  resist  in  turn,  or  it  will  stop.  It  is  in  incessant  friction,  and  must  be 
nroteoted  or  it  will  wear  out.  (2)  To  such  carefulness  and  effect  we  have  the 
■trongest  inducement.     Tour  labour  is  not  in  vain ;  God  cares  for  you.    If  you 


CHAP.  11.3  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  73 


look  to  Him,  He  will  satisfy  thy  soul  in  drought  and  make  thee  as  a  watered  garden. 
Abide  in  Christ,  and  you  will  bring  forth  much  fruit.     {S.  Martin,  M.A.)    Little 
Foxes : — The  St.  Gothard  Alp  is  a  great  mountaiu  pass  dividing  Switzerland  from 
Italy.     On  the  Swiss  side  the  nountry  is  bleak  and  sombre,  with  great  mountains 
like  white-coated  sentinels  keeping  watch  over  the  valleys.     On  the  Italian  side  the 
sky  is  bluer  and  nature  is  clad  in  gentler  hues.     The  sloping  hillsides  are  covered 
with  lovely  vineyards.     The  sun  is  so  warm  that  grapes  will  grow  in  the  open  air, 
and  the  green  vines  are  trained  over  frames  and  posts,  making  the  uplands  look 
like  a  vast  garden.     The  vine-dressers  have  to  use  great  care  in  order  to  preserve  the 
Iruit-bearing  branches.     The  grapes  have  many  enemies.     Tiny  parasites  abound 
which  are  very  destructive.     When  the  grapes  are  young  and  tender  the  little 
foxes  steal  into  the  vineyards,  and  snatching  the  bunches  pull  the  branches  down 
and  spoil  the  grapes.     Hence  arose  this  vineyard-keepers'  song.     There  are  little 
foxes  that  spoil  the  character  of  boys  and  girls.     I.  Selfishness.     Jesus  teaches 
us  to  think  more  of  others  than  we  do  of  ourselves.     He  pleased  not  Himself.     His 
life  was  one  long  act  of  service.     Unselfishness  is  one  of  the  tender  fruits  of  a  Ohrist- 
like  character.     A  little  fox  steals  in  and  prowls  around  trying  to  spoU  the  grapes. 
His  name  is  Self.     He  tries  to  make  a  boy  think  of  none  but  himself.     II.  Temper. 
This  fox  is  nearly  always  found  in  company  with  Self.     When  Self  finds  his  way 
into  the  vineyard,  Temper  generally  follows,  and  eats  what  few  grapes  are  lefb. 
This  little  fox  of  Temper  has  a  variable  face.     1.  Sometimes  it  is  passionate.     In 
the  last  summer  months  you  have  seen  the  sun  sailing  in  a  clear  blue  sky  and 
flooding  the  earth  with  life  and  beauty.     Suddenly  thick  black  clouds  gather  and 
blot  out  the  sun  and  smiling  sky  tUl  the  earth  is  covered  with  a  dark  canopy. 
Great  drops  of  rain  splash  on  the  pavement,  the  lightning  flashes  and  the  thunder 
roars.     The  stonn  comes  near,  passes  over  our  head,  dies  away  as  quickly  as  it  came. 
Then  the  sun  shines  out  till  the  raindrops  glisten  like  diamonds,  and  the  birds  sing 
sweetly,  and  the  perfume  of  the  flowers  fills  the  air.     So  suddenly  came  these  bursts 
of  dark,  passionate  temper.     2.    Soiuotimes  this  fox  is  not  passionate,  but  sulky. 
Then  his  victims  are  like  a  duU,  depressing  day,  when  the  mists  are  unrelieved  by 
a  solitary  ray  of  sunlight.     The  boy  pouts  and  sulks.     His  anger  is  sullen,  and  If 
he  is  not  very  watchful  that  fox  wUl  eat  every  bit  of  fruit  clustering  on  the  vine. 
III.  Deceit.     None  of  you,  I  hope,  would  ever  stoop  to  wilful  falsehoods.     Eather 
die  than  be  false  to  truth.     Deceit  is  an  acted  He.     When  a  girl  breaks  a  jug  and 
hides  the  pieces  in  the  cellar  without  saying  anything  to  mother,  that  is  deceit. 
I  knew  a  boy  who  was  not  very  quick  at  sums,  but  was  good  at  grammar.     So  he 
helped  a  boy  at  grammar,  and  that  boy  did  his  sums  in  return.     The  boy  took  his 
sums  on  the  slate  to  school  next  day,  and  they  were  all  correct.    The  master 
thought  he  was  improving,  and  expressed  his  pleasure  to  the  boy.     Tom  knew 
he  did  not  deserve  the  praise,  and  felt  very  guilty.     He  thought  he  would  tell  the 
master ;  but  just  then  this  little  fox  called  Deceit  came  along  and  said  :  "  You  are 
a  siUy  boy  if  you  do.     The  master  wiU  never  know  unless  you  tell  him."    But 
Tom  was  straightforward,  and  told  the  truth,  and  kept  out  the  little  fox.     We 
must  be  like  the  vine-dressers,  ever  upon  the  watch.     Little  foxes  grow  big,  and 
bad  habits  grow  strong.     Passion  grows  in  force  and  intensity.     The  boy  who 
deceives  at  school  will  do  so  at  his  work.     Deceiving  others  ends  in  deceiving  self. 
Keep  out  the  little  foxes,  and  when  the  Master  of  the  vineyard  comes  at  the  time 
of  vintage.  He  will  find  the  rich  and  perfect  finut  of  the  Spirit  growing  in  our  lives 
to  the  glory  of  God.   {E.  Clowes  Chorley.)  Little  foxes: — I.  What  the  LiTTiiE  foxes 
AKB — what  we  are  to  understand  as  represented  by  them.     1.  A  little  lie.     Not  a 
great,  black,  ugly  lie,  enough  to  make  conscience  cry  out,  and  lo^ltartle  yourself 
and  everybody  that  knows  of  it,  but  a  little  untruth  that  does  not  hurt  and  need 
not  frighten  anybody.     2.  A  Uttie  theft.     It  was  only  a  penny  or  halfpenny  or 
farthing — only  a  bit  of  penciTor  aTbliof  ribbon — only  a  sweetmeat  or  a  pin.     It 
was  only  some  little  unfairness  in  the  class  or  in  the  game,  that  got  you  a  place  or 
credit  that  did  not  belong  to  you.     3.  A  little  outburst  of  temper.     You  were 
provoked,  and  flew  into  a  passion,  and  you  looked  or  spoke  or  acted  your  anger. 
4.  A  little  act  of  disobedience,  refusing  to  do,  or  putting  oflF  doing,  or  not  doing 
pleasantly  and  cheerfully,  what  a  parent  asked  you  to  do.     You  say  you  must  do 
something  else  first.     5.  A  little  oath,  or  slang  expression,  or  low  bad  word.     6.  A 
little  act  of  selfishness.     7". "A  little  yielding  to  indolence,  laziness.     8.  A  little 
breaking  of  the  Sabbath.     9.  A  little  omission  of  prayer.     10.  A  little  yielding  to 
envy  or  jealousy.     II.  The  harm  the  little  foxes  do.     1.  Little  sins  are  real 
sins.     A  little  fox  is  a  real  fox.     A  little  tiger  is  a  real  tiger.    A  little  serpent  m 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

a  real  serpent.  'Pbe  smallness  of  it  does  not  alter  its  nature.  2.  Little  sins  are 
apt  to  be  little  thought  of.  That  is  one  great  part  of  their  danger.  You  say  "it 
is  only  a  little  fault.  Who  would  think  anything  of  that  ?  It  is  only  a  little  fox, 
•what  harm  can  it  do  ? "  The  little  sin  does  not  ruffle  your  conscience,  or  make 
you  unhappy,  or  make  other  people  think  much  the  worse  of  you  for  it.  That  is 
the  worst  of  the  whole  case.  That  is  one  of  the  strongest  reasons  why  you  should 
be  afraid  of  it.  3.  Little  sins  prepare  the  way  for  big  ones,  and  form  habits  of 
sin.  I  never  heard  of  a  boy  becoming  a  drunkard,  or  a  thief,  or  a  swearer,  or  a 
liar,  or  a  profligate,  or  a  criminal,  aU  at  once.  It  was  gradually — by  little  and 
little,  that  he  became  such.  III.  How  to  catch  them  and  kill  them.  "  Take 
us  the  foxes,  the  little  foxes. "  Have  you  ever  seen  a  party  setting  out  for  a  day's 
fox-hunting?  How  eager  all  are — men,  horses,  and  dogs.  They  are  prepared  to 
run  any  distance,  to  cross  rivers,  to  leap  over  walls  and  hedges,  each  more  in 
earnest  than  the  other  to  catch  the  fox.  Their  first  concern  is  to  discover  where  he 
is,  and  then  they  set  out  after  him  with  a  will.  And  so  your  first  concern  should 
be  to  discover  what  and  where  the  little  foxes  are,  that  are  spoiling  your  vines. 
And  having  learned  that,  your  next  business  is  to  catch  them  and  kill  them. 
There  are  two  hands  with  which  you  must  seek  to  catch  them.  Neither  will  do 
alone.  Both  must  go  together.  These  hands  are  prayer  and  pains.  The  most 
important  is  prayer,  for  that  calls  in  Divine  help.  But  then  it  is  said,  "God 
helps  them  that  help  themselves,"  and  it  is  in  helping  yourselves — watching, 
striving,  resisting — that  He  helps  you.  You  must  keep  your  eye  ever  open.  You 
must  never  be  off  your  guard.  {J.  H.  Wilson,  D.D.)  Words  to  the  little  ones: — 
We  read  in  the  New  Testament  of  Christ  being  the  Vine,  and  so  our  hearts  joined 
to  him  are  the  vines,  or,  as  they  are  called,  branches.  Now,  we  know  that 
grapes  grow  upon  vines,  so  the  tender  grapes  that  grow  upon  our  vines  are 
all  the  good  thoughts,  and  words,  and  deeds  that  come  forth  from  your 
young  hearts.  We  are  told  that  little  foxes  spoil  the  vines  which  have  tender 
grapes.  Why  do  you  suppose  that  it  is  the  little  foxes  against  which  we 
are  warned  ?  Because  the  Uttle  foxes  are  often  far  more  dangerous  than  the  big 
ones.  I  remember  one  day  passing  through  one  of  our  London  squares.  I  saw 
two  cruel  dogs  chasing  a  cat — indeed,  it  was  only  a  kitten.  The  poor  little  thing 
ran  for  its  life,  and  the  two  dogs  after  it,  a  big  fellow  foremost,  and  a  smaller  one 
coming  on  as  fast  as  it  could  behind.  The  kitten  got  safe  to  the  railings  of  the 
square,  and  it  jumped  in  through  them  ;  and  when  the  big  dog,  almost  touching 
it  as  it  went  through,  tried  to  follow,  he  couldn't  get  in  after  it — the  railings  were 
too  close  together,  and  so  the  little  kitten  thought  itself  safe.  But  up  came  the 
little  dog,  and  he  was  able  to  get  through  when  the  big  fellow  couldn't ;  but  I'm 
glad  to  say  a  gardener,  who  was  working  inside,  drove  it  back  again,  and  so  the 
little  kitten  was  rescued.  Do  you  see  what  I  mean  by  that  story  ?  It  shows  us 
how  small  things  are  often  more  dangerous  than  big  things,  for  they  can  get  in 
through  small  openings.  Now  that  is  just  the  way  it  is  with  your  young  hearts. 
There  are  tender  grapes  growing  in  them,  and  while  you  couldn't  let  a  big  fox  in, 
perhaps  many  a  little  one  creeps  in  and  destroys  them,  and  takes  all  the  sweetnesa 
out  of  them.  You  often  could  not  let  a  great  big  sin  come  into  your  heart,  but 
a  little  one  creeps  in  almost  without  your  knowing  it.  And  the  worst  of  it  is  thesa 
little  fellows  come  into  the  vineyard  of  your  heart,  and  stay  there,  and  grow  big 
there.  A  little  untruth,  so  innocent-looking  that  we  don't  think  it  can  do  harm, 
gets  in  first,  and  it  grows  and  grows  so  gradually  that  we  don't  notice  it,  and  at 
last  it  is  a  big  lie  !  Ah  !  be  on  your  guard  against  the  small  things — the  small 
unkindness,  the  first  bad  word,  the  first  untruth,  the  first  disobedience.  Take  care 
of  the  little  foxes,  or  they'll  get  in  and  destroy  the  tender  grapes.  Don't  be  taken 
in  by  their  looks.  One  time,  when  our  soldiers  were  fighting  against  Indians  in 
America,  a  sentry  at  a  very  important  point  was  found  one  morning  dead  at  hia 
post.  The  guard  had  heard  no  sound,  and  they  could  not  imagine  how  any  one 
could  have  come  so  close  to  the  sentry  as  to  kill  him.  They  thought  he  must  have 
fallen  asleep  at  his  post.  Another  man  was  put  in  his  place,  and  next  morning  he, 
too,  was  found  dead  there.  They  were  greatly  surprised,  for  he  was  a  very  steady 
man,  and  had  been  warned  to  be  on  the  look-out.  So  the  oflicer  selected  another 
soldier,  and  said  to  him,  "Now,  let  nothing  escape  you ;  if  it's  only  a  dog  tries 
to  get  near  you,  shoot  him."  The  man  promised  his  officer  to  obey  him.  Well, 
an  hour  passed,  and  not  a  sound  reached  the  sentry.  He  thought  then  that  he 
heard  a  very  little  noise,  as  of  something  walking  on  the  dead  leaves.  He  called 
out,  "  Who  goes  there )"  and  there  was  no  answer.    So  he  looked,  and  listened; 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  SONO  OF  SOLOMOy.  T5 

and  he  saw  a  slight  movement  of  a  branch  some  few  yards  off.  "  If  you  don't 
answer,  I'll  fire,"  said  he,  and  raised  his  rifle  to  his  shoulder.  He  was  juat  going 
to  pull  the  trigger,  when  he  saw  a  small  bear  passing  away  from  him  beside  a  bush. 
So  ne  lowered  his  gun,  saying  to  himself,  "What  a  fool  I  should  have  looked  to 
have  startled  all  the  camp  by  shooting  that  poor  animal !  "  Still,  he  remembered 
hifl  promise  to  his  officer  that  he'd  shoot  even  a  dog  ;  so  saying  to  himself,  "I 
know  they'll  all  laugh  at  me,  but  I'll  keep  my  word  like  a  good  soldier,"  he  fired. 
The  bear  fell,  and  out  rushed  the  guard  at  the  sound  of  the  shot.  They  ran  over 
to  where  the  bear  lay  dead,  and  they  foimd  it  was  only  a  bear's  skin  and  an  Indian 
dead  inside  it !  The  Indian  had  night  after  night  approached  the  sentry,  walking 
on  hands  and  feet,  and  concealed  in  the  skin  of  a  bear,  and  when  he  got  close  to 
the  soldier  he  had  killed  htm.  So,  boys  and  girls,  be  on  your  guard.  No  matter 
how  innocent,  no  matter  how  small  the  untruth,  the  unkindness,  the  deceit,  the 
dishonesty  may  look,  don't  let  them  pass  in  that  way.  They  are  enemies,  after  all : 
they'll  kill  you,  if  you  don't  kiU  them.  Beware  of  the  foxes  that  spoil  the  tender 
grapes.  (T.  T.  Shore,  M.A.)  Little  sins: — A  famous  ruby  was  once  oflFered  for 
sale  in  England,  and  the  crown  jeweller  reported  that  it  was  the  finest  he  had  ever 
seen,  with  a  single  slight  defect  in  one  of  the  cuttings  of  the  face.  This  almost 
invisible  flaw  reduced  its  value  by  thousands  of  pounds,  and  the  ruby  was  not 
purchased  for  the  regalia  of  the  kingdom.  It  is  only  man's  littleness  which 
discovers  no  importance  in  trifles.  Trifles  make  perfection,  and  perfection  is  no 
trifle.  The  most  deplorable  failures  in  Christian  consistency  and  uprightness  may, 
generally,  be  traced  back  to  a  very  small  departure  from  duty.  Give  the  *'  little 
foxes  "  an  opportunity  to  break  through  the  enclosure  which  surrounds  the  vineyard, 
and  the  prospect  of  grapes  will  be  small.  What,  then,  are  some  of  these  little  sins, 
which  mar  our  happiness  or  hinder  our  usefulness?  I.  At  the  head  of  the  list 
may  be  placed  ▲  souB  and  cbabbed  temper.  II.  Another  little  sin  to  be 
watched  against  is  the  giving  way  to  base  and  self-indulgence.  There  is  too 
much  of  what  may  be  called  "  summer  religion  "  ;  a  readiness  to  enjoy  the  agreeable 
parts  of  it,  without  its  restraints  and  sacrifices.  III.  Dishonesty  in  ottb 
OBDINABY  DBAXINGS  may  be  named  as  another  example  of  little  sins.  lY. 
Another  little  sin,  as  the  world  looks  at  it,  is  jealousy.    (/.  N.  Norton,  D.D.) 

Yet.  16.  My  Beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  His. — The  interest  of  Christ  and  Hi$ 
people  in  each  other: — The  Church  says  concerning  her  Lord,  "My  beloved  is  mine 
and  I  am  His."  No  "ifs,"  no  "  buts."  The  two  sentences  are  solemn  assertions. 
Not  "  I  hope,  I  trust,  I  think  ; "  but,  my  Beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  His."  "  Yes," 
but  you  will  say,  "the  Church  must  then  have  been  gazing  upon  her  Husband's 
face  ;  it  must  have  been  a  season  of  peculiar  enjoyment  with  Him,  when  she  could 
speak  thus."  Nay,  nay  ;  the  Church,  when  she  thus  spake,  was  in  darkness  ;  for  in 
the  very  next  verse  she  cries — "  Until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away, 
turn,  my  beloved,  and  be  thou  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart  upon  the  mountains  of 
Bether."  I.  I  am  my  Beloved's,  and  my  Beloved  is  therefore  mine.  1.  "I 
am  my  Beloved's."  Glorious  assertion  !  I  am  His  by  the  Father's  gift.  But  I  am 
my  Beloved's,  if  I  be  a  believer,  because  of  Jesus  Christ's  purchase  of  me.  But  more 
than  this,  "  I  am  my  Beloved's,"  for  I  am  His  by  conquest.  He  fought  for  me,  and 
He  won  me,  let  Him  possess  me.  Besides  this,  every  true  believer  can  add,  "  I  am 
my  Beloved's  "  by  a  gracious  surrender.  "  With  full  consent  I  give  myself  to  Thee." 
We  have  seen  how  we  came  to  be  our  Beloved's,  let  us  inquire  in  what  sense  we  are 
so  now.  We  are  his,  first  of  all,  by  a  near  affinity  that  never  can  be  sundered. 
Christ  is  the  head ;  we  are  His  members.  Further  than  this  ;  we  are  our  Beloved's 
by  a  most  affectionate  relationship.  He  is  the  husband,  believers  are  the  spouse. 
"  I  am  my  Beloved's"  by  an  indissoluble  connection,  just  as  a  child  is  the  property 
of  his  father.  2.  The  second  sentence  in  order  of  time  is,  "  My  Beloved  is  mine." 
Ah  !  you  very  poor  men  and  women,  you  who  could  not  call  one  foot  of  land  your 
own  I  If  you  can  say,  "  My  Beloved  is  mine,"  you  have  greater  wealth  than  Croesus 
ever  knew,  or  than  a  miser  ever  dreamed.  But  how  is  my  Beloved  mine  ?  He  is 
mine,  because  He  gave  Himself  to  me  of  old.  But  besides  that,  our  Beloved  is  not 
only  ours  by  EKs  own  gift,  which  is  the  bottom  of  all,  but  He  is  ours  by  a  graciously 
completed  union.  "I  in  them,  and  Thou  in  Me;"  for  thus  the  union  stands. 
Again :  Christ  is  ours  personally.  We  sometimes  speak  of  severally  and  jointly. 
Well,  then,  Christ  is  ours  jointly  ;  but  He  is  ours  severally  too.  Chnst  is  as  much 
yours,  however  mean  you  may  be,  as  though  He  did  not  belong  to  another  man 
,  living.     He  is  all  mine,  all  yours  ;  personally  mine,  personally  yours.     Oh  that  w» 


7fl  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAJ.  n, 

could  realize  this  fact !  And,  then  again,  Clirist  is  always  ours.  He  is  never  more 
ours  at  one  time,  and  less  ours  at  another.  The  moment  we  believe  in  Him  we  may 
know  our  perfect  and  invariable  right  to  Christ — a  right  which  depends  not  upon 
the  changes  of  the  hour,  or  upon  the  temperature  of  our  frames  aud  feeling,  but 
upon  those  two  immutable  things  wherein  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie.  II.  I  shall 
now  take  the  text  in  the  oedbr  in  which  it  is  given  to  us,  which  is  thk 
ORDER  OF  OUB  EXPERIENCE.  Do  you  not  See,  that  to  a  man's  experience  God'3 
order  is  reversed  ?  We  begin  thus :  "  My  Beloved  is  mine."  I  go  to  Him,  take  Him 
up  in  the  arms  of  my  faith,  as  Simeon  took  up  the  Kttle  Child  in  the  temple,  and 

fressing  Him  to  my  heart,  I  say :  "Jesus,  Thou  art  mine.  All  unholy  and  unclean, 
nevertheless  obej^  Thy  command ;  I  believe  Thee  ;  I  take  Thee  at  Thy  word  ;  I  trust 
my  soul  wholly  with  Thee ;  Thou  art  mine,  and  my  soul  can  never  part  with  Thee." 
What  next ?  Why,  then  the  soul  aftei-wards  savs :  "Now  I  am  Thme,  tell  me  what 
Thou  wotddst  have  me  do.  Jesus,  let  me  abide  with  Thee.  Lord,  I  would  foUow 
Thee  whithersoever  Thou  goest ;  put  me  on  any  service ;  dictate  to  me  any  command- 
ment ;  tell  me  what  Thou  wouldst  have  me  to  do  to  glori^  Thee  1 "  Christ  is  mine 
— this  is  faith.  I  am  His — this  is  good  works.  Christ  is  mine :  that  is  the 
simple  way  in  which  the  soul  is  saved.  I  am  Christ's  :  that  is  the  equally  simple 
method  by  which  salvation  displays  itself  in  its  practical  fruits.  God's  commands 
require  obedience,  and  it  is  essential  that  eveir  servant  be  found  faithftd.  Whatever 
Jesus  bids  us  do,  if  it  save  us  not  from  anything  else,  at  any  rate  the  fulfilment  of 
it  will  save  us  from  the  sin  of  being  disobedient  to  Him.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Th« 
reciprocal  interest  of  Christ  and  His  people : — I.  Every  real  Christian  mat  bat, 
"Christ  is  mine."  1.  There  are  five  different  ways  in  which  anything  may 
become  ours.  (1)  By  formation,  or  production.  In  this  way  the  articles  wMch  w« 
construct,  and  the  fruits  of  the  earth  which  our  labour  produces,  become  ours.  (2)  By 
purchase,  or  exchange.  In  this  way  we  obtain  many  things  which  were  previously 
the  property  of  others,  (3)  By  inheritance.  In  this  manner  we  become  possessed 
of  the  property  of  deceased  relatives.  (4)  By  conquest.  In  this  manner  many  things 
are  acquiied,  especially  by  sovereign  princes.  (5)  By  gift.  In  this  manner  whatever 
is  bestowed  on  us  by  the  generosity  of  others,  becomes  our  property.  2,  Among  all 
these  ways,  there  is  only  one  in  which  Christ  can  become  ours.  (1)  He  is  given  to 
them  by  His  Father.     (2)  Christ  gives  Himself  to  His  people.     II.  Christ  is  the 

PROPERTY  OF  ALL  TRUE  CHRISTIANS,  SO,  ALL  CHRISTIANS  ARE  HiS.      1.   Th^  are 

His  by  creation ;  for  by  Him  and  for  Him  they  were  created.  2.  They  are  His  by 
inheritance  ;  for  we  are  told  that  the  Father  hath  appointed  Him  heir  of  all  things. 
3.  They  are  His  by  purchase ;  for  He  has  bought  them,  bought  them  with  Hia  own 
blood.  4.  Christians  are  the  property  of  Christ  by  right  of  conquest.  5.  They 
become  His  by  gift.  (1)  They  are  ^ven  to  Him  by  His  Father  (John  xvii.  6). 
(2)  All  true  Christians  have  voluntarily  given  themselves  to  Christ.  Conclusion : 
1.  From  this  subject  you  may  learn  something  of  the  worth  and  interest  of  th« 
Christian's  portion.  2.  We  may  learn  from  our  subject  to  whom  this  incomparable 
gift  belongs;  who  it  is  that  without  presumption  may  say,  "Christ  is  mine." 
Every  man  may  say  this  who  can  with  truth  repeat  the  other  part  of  our  text, 
who  can  truly  say,  "  Christ  is  my  beloved,  and  I  am  His  property."  3.  From  thia 
subject  you  may  learn  the  extent  of  your  duty.  "  I  am  Chnst's  "  are  words  easily 
said,  but  the  engagements  which  they  imply  are  not  so  easily  fulfilled.  If  we  are 
His,  we  are  no  longer  our  own.  If  we  are  His,  then  everything  that  we  possess  is  His 
— our  time,  our  possessions,  our  strength,  our  influence,  our  powers  of  body  and 
faculties  of  mind,  all  are  His,  and  must  be  consecrated  to  His  service  and  glory ; 
and  if  we  love  Him  supremely,  they  will  be  so,  for  the  whole  man  ever  follows 
the  heart.  4.  How  great  are  the  privileges  which  result  from  an  ability  to  say, 
"Christ  is  mine."  If  Christ  is  yours,  then  all  that  He  possesses  is  yours.  Hia 
power  is  yours  to  defend  you.  His  wisdom  and  knowledge  are  yours  to  guide 
you,  His  righteousness  is  yours  to  justify  you.  His  Spirit  and  grace  are  yours 
to  sanctify  you,  His  heaven  is  yours  to  receive  you.  5.  From  this  subject 
you  may  learn  what  is  the  nature  of  the  ordinance  which  you  are  about  to 
celebrate,  and  what  you  are  about  to  do  at  the  Lord's  table.  In  this  ordinance 
we  give  ourselves  to  Christ,  and  He  gives  Himself  to  us.  {E.  Payson,  D.D.) 
My  Beloved  is  mine : — What  I  have  to  do  is  to  mention  a  few  things  which  may 
help  some  timid  one  to  say,  "  My  Beloved  ia  mine,"  and  then  to  do  the  same  with 
regard  to  the  second  sentence  in  the  text,  "  I  am  his."  Thou  askest,  perhaps,  "  May 
I  say,  '  My  Beloved  is  mine '  I "  You  know  who  that  Beloved  is  ;  I  have  no  need  to 
tell  yon  that>     He  is  the  chief  among  ten  thousand,  and  the  altogether  lovely. 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  77 

First,  hast  thou  taken  hold  of  Christ  by  faith  t  Faith  is  the  hand  with  which  we 
grasp  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Hast  thou  believed  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  and  that 
God  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead  ?  Dost  thou  trust  thyself  whoUy  to  Him  ?  Let 
me  ask  thee  another  helpful  question.  Is  He  truly  thy  Beloved,  the  Beloved  of  thy 
80ul  t  I  remember  well  a  dear  Christian  woman,  who  frequently  said  to  me,  "  I  do 
love  Jesus,  I  know  I  do  ;  but  does  He  love  me  ? "  Her  question  used  to  make  me 
smile.  "  Well,"  I  said,  "  that  is  a  question  that  I  never  did  put  to  myself, — '  If  I 
love  Him,  does  He  love  me  ? '  No,  the  question  that  used  to  puzzle  me  was,  *  Do  I 
love  Him } '    When  I  could  once  settle  that  point,  I  was  never  again  the  victim  of 

Jrour  form  of  doubt."  If  thou  lovest  Christ,  Christ  loves  thee  for  certain,  for  thy 
ove  to  Christ  is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  a  beam  out  of  the  great  sun  of  His  love  ; 
and  the  grace  that  has  created  that  love  in  thy  heart  towards  Him,  if  thou  dost 
indeed  love  Him,  proves  that  He  loves  thee.  Next,  I  would  help  thee  with  a  thkd 
question.  Is  Jesus  dear  to  thee  above  all  thy  possessions  ?  I  hope  that  many  cf  you 
can  say,  "  0  sir,  we  would  give  all  that  we  have,  we  would  sufiFer  all  that  might  be 
suffered,  we  would  part  with  the  very  light  and  our  eyes,  too,  if  we  could  but  be  sure 
that  we  might  each  one  truly  say,  'My  Beloved  is  mine.'"  Well,  if  thou  lovest 
Christ  beyond  aU  earthly  things,  rest  assured  that  He  is  thine.  Further,  dost  thou 
love  Him  beyond  all  earthly  companions?  Couldst  thou  part  with  your  dearest 
ones  for  His  sake  ?  Say,  art  thou  sure  of  this  ?  Oh,  then.  He  is  assuredly  thine  ! 
Dost  thou  love  Him  beyond  all  earthly  objects  ?  Aye,  beyond  the  desire  of  learning, 
or  honour,  or  position,  or  comfort, — wouldst  thou  let  all  go  for  His  dear  sake! 
Canst  thou  go  that  length  ?  If  thou  canst,  then  surely  He  is  thine.  Let  me  further 
help  thee  by  another  question.  Is  Jesus  so  faUy  thy  nope  and  thy  trust  that  thou 
hast  no  other  ?  0  poor  heart,  if  thou  art  clean  divorced  from  every  confidence  but 
Christ,  then  I  believe  that  thou  art  married  unto  Christ,  notwithstanding  that  thou 
tremblest  sometimes,  and  askest  whether  it  be  so  or  not.  Let  that  thought  also 
help  thee.    I  would  further  help  you  in  this  way.    If  Christ  is  yours,  your  thoughts 

fo  after  Him.  You  cannot  say  that  you  love  a  person  if  you  never  think  of  him. 
[e  to  whom  Christ  belongs  often  thinks  of  Him.  Again,  do  you  do  more  than 
this?  Do  you  long  for  Christ's  company?  If  "my  Beloved"  is  indeed  mine,  I 
shall  want  to  see  Him  ;  I  shall  want  to  speak  with  Him  ;  I  shall  want  Him  to  abide 
with  me.  How  is  it  with  you  ?  And,  once  more,  if  thy  Beloved  is  thine,  thou 
wilt  own  it  to  be  so.  Holy  Bernard  was  wont  to  say,  and  I  believe  that  he  could 
say  it  truly,  "  0  my  Jesus,  I  never  went  from  Thee  without  Thee  ! "  He  meant 
that  he  never  left  his  knees,  and  left  Christ  behind  him ;  he  never  went  out  of 
the  house  of  God,  and  left  Christ  behind  him  ;  but  he  went  through  the  outward 
act  of  devotion  with  a  consciousness  of  the  presence  of  Christ.  Now,  if  this  be  your 
habit  to  keep  up  or  to  labour  to  keep  up  continued  communion  with  Christ,  and  if 
you  are  longing  for  more  and  more  of  that  communion,  then,  dear  friends,  you  are 
His,  and  He  is  yours.  Further,  let  me  help  you  with  a  stiU  closer  question.  Have 
you  ever  enjoyed  that  communion  with  Christ  ?  Didst  thou  ever  speak  with  Him ! 
Hast  thou  ever  heard  His  voice  ?  If  thou  knowest  anything  experimentally  about 
this  matter,  then  thou  mayest  conclude  that  thy  Beloved  is  indeed  thine.  But 
supposing  that  thou  art  not  enjoying  Christ's  presence,  I  am  going  to  put  another 
question  to  thee.  Art  thou  cast  down  when  He  is  away  ?  If  thou  hast  grieved  His 
Spirit,  art  thou  grieved  1  If  Christ  be  gone,  dost  thou  feel  as  if  the  sun  itself  had 
ceased  to  shine,  and  the  candle  of  thy  existence  had  been  snuffed  out  in  utter  dark- 
ness ?  Oh,  then.  He  is  thine  I  If  thou  canst  not  bear  His  absence,  He  is  thine. 
Stretch  out  the  hand  of  faith,  and  take  Him,  and  then  say  without  hesitation,  "  My 
Beloved  is  mine."  "  Yes,  weighing  everything  the  preacher  has  said,  and  judging 
myself  as  severely  as  I  can,  yet  I  dare  take  Christ  to  be  mine,  and  to  say,  '  My 
Beloved  is  mine.' "  If  that  is  your  case,  dear  friend,  then  you  shall  get  confirmatory 
evidence  of  this  fact  by  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  within  your  soul,  which  will  very 
likely  come  to  you  in  the  form  of  perfect  contentment  of  spirit,  perfect  rest  of  heart. 
(C  £[,  Spurgeon.)  He  feedeth  among  the  lilies. — A  song  among  the  lilies: — This 
passage  describes  a  high  state  of  grace,  and  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  description 
is  full  of  Christ.  This  is  instructive,  for  this  is  not  an  exceptional  case,  it  is  only 
one  fulfilment  of  a  general  rule.  Our  estimate  of  Christ  is  the  best  gauge  of  our 
spiritual  condition  ;  as  the  thermometer  rises  in  proportion  to  the  increased  warmth 
of  the  air,  so  does  our  estimate  of  Jesus  rise  as  our  spiritual  life  increases  in  vigour 
and  fervency.  Tell  me  what  you  think  of  Jesus  and  I  will  teU  you  what  to  thi^  of 
yourself.  Christ  is  all  to  us,  yea,  more  than  all  when  we  are  thoroughly  sanctified 
and  filled  wit&  tb»  Holy  Ghost.     I.  First,  here  is  A  DELiOHTiNa  to  havs  Christ. 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

"My  Beloved  is  mine."  The  spouse  makes  this  the  first  of  her  joy  notes,  the 
comer-stone  of  her  peace,  the  fountain  of  her  bliss,  the  crown  of  her  glory.  Observe 
here  that  where  such  an  expression  is  truthfully  used  the  existence  of  the  Beloved  ia 
matter  of  fact.  Scepticism  and  questioning  have  no  place  with  those  who  thus  sing. 
Love  cannot,  will  not  doubt ;  it  casts  away  the  crutches  of  argument  and  flies  on  the 
wings  of  conscious  enjoyment,  singing  her  nuptial  hymn,  "  My  Beloved  is  mine,  and 
I  am  His."  In  the  case  before  us  the  love  of  the  heavenly-minded  one  is  perceived 
and  acknowledged  by  herself.  ** My  Beloved,"  saith  she  ;  it  is  no  latent  affection, 
she  knows  that  she  loves  Him,  and  solemnly  avows  it.  She  does  not  whisper,  "  I 
hope  I  love  the  peerless  One,"  but  she  sings,  "My  Beloved."  There  is  no  doubt  in 
her  soul  about  her  passion  for  the  altogether  lovely  One.  But  the  pith  of  the  text 
lies  here,  our  possession  of  Him  is  proven,  we  know  it,  and  we  loiow  it  on  good 
•vidence — "  My  Beloved  is  mine."  Jesus  is  ours  by  the  promise,  the  covenant,  and 
oath  of  God  ;  a  thousand  assurances  and  pledges,  bonds  and  seals,  secure  Him  to  us 
as  our  portion  and  everlasting  heritage.  This  precious  possession  becomes  to  the 
believer  his  sole  treasure.  "  My  Beloved  is  mine,"  saith  he,  and  in  that  sentence  he 
has  summed  up  all  his  wealth.  Oh,  what  woiild  all  the  treasures  of  the  covenant  be 
to  us  if  it  were  possible  to  have  them  without  Christ  ?  Their  very  sap  and  sweetness 
would  be  gone.  Having  our  Beloved  to  be  ours,  we  have  all  things  in  Him,  and 
therefor*  our  main  treasure,  yea,  our  sole  treasure,  is  our  Beloved.  O  ye  saints  of 
God,  was  there  ever  possession  like  this  t  II.  The  second  portion  of  the  text  deals 
with  DELIGHTIKO  TO  BBLONG  TO  Ohbist.  "lam  His."  This  is  as  sweet  as  the 
former  sentence.  Christ  is  mine,  but  if  I  were  not  His  it  would  be  a  sorryoase,  and 
if  I  were  His  and  He  were  not  mine  it  would  be  a  wretched  business.  These  two 
things  are  joined  together  with  diamond  rivets — "  My  Beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am 
His.  Put  the  two  together,  and  you  have  reached  the  summit  of  delight.  That 
we  are  His  is  a  fact  that  may  be  proven — ^yea,  it  should  need  no  proving,  but  be 
manifest  to  all  that "  I  am  His. "  Certainly  we  are  His  by  creation :  He  who  made  us 
should  have  us.  We  are  His  because  His  Father  gave  us  to  Him,  and  we  are  His 
because  He  chose  us.  Creation,  donation,  election  are  His  triple  hold  upon  us.  Now 
this  puts  very  great  honour  upon  us.  I  have  known  the  time  when  I  could  say 
"  My  Beloved  is  mine  "  in  a  very  humble  trembling  manner,  but  I  did  not  dare  to 
add  "  I  am  His  "  because  I  did  not  think  I  was  worth  His  having.  I  dared  not  hope 
that  "  I  am  His"  would  ever  be  written  in  the  same  book  side  by  side  with  "  My 
Beloved  is  mine."  Poor  sinner,  first  lay  hold  on  Jesus,  and  then  you  will  discover 
that  Jesus  values  you.  This  second  part  of  the  text  is  true  as  absolutely  as  the  first. 
"  I  am  His  " — not  my  goods  only,  nor  my  time,  nor  my  talents,  nor  what  I  can 
spare,  but  "  I  am  His."  The  believer  feels  that  he  belongs  to  Jesus  absolutely ;  let 
the  Lord  employ  him  as  he  may,  or  try  him  as  he  pleases  ;  let  him  take  away  all 
earthly  friends  from  him  or  surround  him  with  comforts.  Blessed  be  God,  this  ia 
txue  evermore — "I  am  His  " ;  His  to-day,  in  the  house  of  worship,  and  His  to-morrow 
in  the  house  of  business.  This  belonging  to  the  Well-beloved  is  a  matter  of  fact  and 
practice,  not  a  thing  to  be  talked  about  only,  but  really  to  be  acted  on.  If  you  are 
His  He  Yidll  provide  for  you.  A  good  husband  careth  for  his  spouse,  and  even  thus 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  cares  for  those  who  are  betrothed  unto  Him.  You  will  be 
perfected  too,  for  whatever  Christ  has  He  will  make  worthy  of  Himself  and  bring  it 
to  glory.  III.  To  conclude:  the  saint  feels  delight  in  the  vert  thought  of 
Christ.  "He  feedeth  among  the  lUies."  When  we  love  any  persons,  and  we  are 
away  from  home,  we  delight  to  think  of  them,  and  to  remember  what  they  are  doing. 
Now,  where  is  Jesus  1  What  are  these  lilies  ?  Do  not  these  lilies  represent  the  pure 
in  heart,  with  whom  Jesus  dwells  T  Where,  then,  is  my  Lord  to-day  ?  He  is  up  and 
sway,  among  the  lilies  of  Paradise.  In  imagination  I  see  those  stately  rows  of  milk- 
white  lilies  growing  no  longer  among  thorns  :  lilies  which  are  never  soiled  with  the 
dust  of  earth,  which  for  ever  glisten  with  the  eternal  dews  of  fellowship,  while  their 
roots  drink  in  unfading  life  from  the  river  of  the  water  of  life  which  waters  the 
garden  of  the  Lord.  There  is  Jesus  I  But  what  is  He  doing  among  the  lUies  ?  It  is 
said,  "  He  feedeth  among  the  lilies."  He  is  feeding  Himself,  not  on  the  lilies,  but 
among  them.  Our  Lord  finds  solace  among  His  people.  His  delights  are  with  the 
sons  of  men ;  He  joys  to  see  the  graces  of  His  people,  to  receive  their  love,  and  to 
discern  His  own  miage  in  thefr  faces.  Then  wnat  shall  I  do  ?  Well,  I  will  abide 
among  the  lilies.  His  saints  shall  be  my  companions.  Where  they  flourish  I  will 
try  to  grow.  I  will  be  often  in  their  assemblies.  Aye,  and  I  will  be  a  lily  too.  By 
fiath  I  will  neither  toil  nor  spin  in  a  legal  fashion,  but  I  will  live  by  faith  upon  the 
fion  of  God,  rooted  in  Him.    (C.  H.  Sjpurgeon.) 


-tmAx.  n.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOy.  79 

Ver.  17.  Until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away. — Darkness  hefore  the 
dawn: — The  spouse  sings,  "Until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away,"  so 
that  tJie  beloved  of  the  Lord  may  be  in  the  dark.  A  child  of  God,  who  is  a  child  of 
light,  may  be  for  a  while  in  darkness ;  first,  darkness  comparatively,  as  compared 
with  the  light  he  has  sometimes  enjoyed,  for  days  are  not  always  equally  bright. 
Yes,  and  he  may  be  in  positive  darkness.  It  may  be  very  black  with  him,  and  he 
may  be  obliged  to  cry,  "  I  see  no  signs  of  returning  day.  Sometimes,  neither  sun 
nor  moon  appears  for  a  long  season  to  cheer  the  believer  in  the  dark.  This  may  arise 
partly  through  sickness  of  body.  But  yet  it  can  be  only  temporary  darkness.  The 
same  text  which  suggests  night  promises  dawn:    "Until  the  day  break,"  etc. 

I.  First  of  all,  let  us  consider  our  prospect.  Our  prospect  is,  that  the  day  will 
break,  and  that  the  shadows  will  flee  away.  We  may  read  this  passage  in  many 
ways,  and  apply  it  to  different  cases.  ThiiJc,  first,  of  the  child  of  God  who  is  full  of 
doubt.  He  is  afraid  that,  after  aU,  his  supposed  conversion  was  not  a  true  one,  and 
that  he  has  proved  it  to  be  false  by  his  own  misbehaviour.  He  is  afraid,  I  scarcely 
know  of  what,  for  so  many  fears  crowd  in  upon  him.  His  eyes  are  looking  toward 
the  cross,  and  somehow  he  has  a  hope,  if  not  quite  a  persuasion,  that  he  will  find 
light  in  Ohrist,  where  so  many  others  have  foimd  it.  I  would  encourage  that  hope 
till  it  becomes  a  firm  conviction  and  a  fuU  expectation.  The  day  will  break  for  you, 
dear  mourner,  the  shadows  will  yet  flee  away.  This  expression  is  equally  applicable 
when  we  come  into  some  personal  sorrow  not  exactly  of  a  spiritual  kind.  I  know 
that  God's  children  are  not  long  without  tribulation.  As  long  as  the  wheat  is  on  the 
threshing-floor,  it  must  expect  to  feel  the  flaiL  Perhaps  you  have  had  a  bereave- 
ment, or  you  may  have  had  losses  in  business,  or  crosses  in  your  family,  or  you  have 
been  sorely  afiBicted  in  your  own  body,  and  now  you  are  crying  to  God  for  deliverance 
out  of  your  temporal  trouble.  That  deliverance  will  surelv  come.  Yes,  in  the 
darkest  of  all  human  sorrows  there  is  the  glad  prospect  that  the  day  wUl  break,  and 
the  shadows  will  flee  away.  This  is  the  case  agam,  I  believe,  on  a  grander  scale, 
with  reference  to  the  depression  of  religion  at  the  present  time.  We  want — I  cannot 
say  how  much  we  want — a  revival  of  pure  and  undefiled  religion  in  this  our  day. 
Will  it  come  ?  Why  should  it  not  come  ?  If  we  long  for  it,  if  we  pray  for  it,  if  we 
believe  for  it,  if  we  work  for  it,  and  prepare  for  it,  it  will  certainly  come.  The  day 
will  break,  and  the  shadows  will  flee  away.  I  believe  that  this  is  to  be  the  case  also  in 
this  whole  world.  It  is  still  the  time  of  darkness,  it  is  still  the  hour  of  shadows.  I 
am  no  prophet,  nor  the  son  of  a  prophet,  and  I  cannot  foretell  what  is  yet  to  happen 
in  the  earth ;  it  may  be  that  the  darkness  will  deepen  still  more,  and  that  the 
shadows  will  multiply  and  increase  ;  but  the  Lord  will  come.  That  glorious  advent 
shall  end  our  weary  waiting  days,  it  shall  end  our  conflicts  with  infidelity  and 
priestcraft,  it  shall  put  an  end  to  aU  our  fatile  endeavours ;  and  when  the  great 
Shepherd  shall  appear  in  His  glory,  then  shall  every  faithful  under-shepherd  and  all 
his  flock  appear  with  him,  and  then  shall  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away. 

II.  Now  consider  oitr  postcrb,  "until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away." 
We  are  here,  like  soldiers  on  guard,  waiting  for  the  dawn.  It  is  night,  and  the 
night  is  deepening ;  how  shall  we  occupy  ourselves  until  the  day  break,  and  the 
shadows  flee  away  ?  Well,  first,  we  will  wait  in  the  darkness  with  patient  endurance 
as  long  as  God  appoints  it.  Whatever  of  shadow  is  yet  to  come,  whatever  of  cold 
damp  air  and  dews  of  the  night  is  yet  to  fall  upon  ns,  we  will  bear  it.  What  next 
are  we  to  do  until  the  day  break  1  Why,  let  there  be  hopeful  watching.  Keep  your 
eyes  towards  the  East,  and  look  for  the  first  grey  sign  of  the  coming  morning. 
Then,  further,  while  we  maintain  patient  endurance  and  hopeful  watching,  let  ua 
give  each  other  mutual  encouragement.  What  further  should  we  do  in  the  dark  ? 
Well,  one  of  the  best  things  to  do  in  the  dark  is  to  stand  still  and  keep  our  place. 
We  are  not  ^oing  to  plunge  on  in  a  reckless  manner,  we  mean  to  look  before  we 
leap ;  and  as  it  is  too  dark  to  look,  we  will  not  leap,  but  will  just  abide  here  hard 
by  the  cross,  battling  with  every  adversary  of  the  truth  as  long  as  we  have  a  right 
hand  to  move  in  the  name  of  the  Almighty  God,  "until  the  daybreak,  and  the 
shadows  flee  away."  What  else  ought  we  to  do?  Keep  up  a  careful  separatenesa 
from  the  works  of  darkness  that  are  going  on  all  around  ns.     If  it  seems  dark  to 

1  you,  gather  up  your  skirts,  and  gird  up  your  loins.    The  more  sin  abounds  in  the 
world,  the  more  ought  the  Church  of^  God  to  seek  after  the  strictest  holiness. 

III.  Now  notice  our  petition  :  "  Until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away, 
tnm,  my  Beloved,"  etc.  I  am  not  going  to  preach  about  that  part  of  our  text,  but 
only  just  to  urge  you  to  turn  it  into  prayer.  "  Turn  to  me,  O  mv  Beloved,  for  Thou 
hast  turned  away  from  me,  op  from  Thy  Church,    Turn  agam,  I  beseech  Thee. 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. ' 

Pardon  my  lukewarmness,  forgive  my  indifference.  Tom  to  me  again,  my  Beloved. 
O  Thou  Husband  of  my  soul,  if  I  have  grieved  Thee,  and  Thou  hast  hidden  Thy  face 
from  me,  turn  again  unto  me  !  Smile  Thou,  for  then  shall  the  day  break,  and  the 
shadows  flee  away.  Come  to  me,  my  Lord,  visit  me  once  again."  Put  up  that 
prayer,  beloved.  The  prayer  of  the  spouse  is  in  this  poetic  form :  "  Come  over  the 
mountains  of  division."  As  we  look  out  into  the  darkness,  what  little  light  there  is 
appears  to  reveal  to  us  Alp  upon  Alp,  mountain  upon  mountain,  and  our  Beloved 
seems  divided  from  us  by  all  these  hills.  Now  our  prayer  is,  that  He  would  come 
over  the  top  of  them  ;  we  cannot  go  over  the  top  of  them  to  Him,  but  He  can  come 
over  the  top  of  them  to  us,  if  He  think  fit  to  do  so.  Like  the  hinds'  feet,  this 
blessed  Hind  of  the  morning  can  come  skipping  over  the  hills  with  utmost  speed  to 
visit  and  to  deliver  us.  (C  ff.  Spurgeon.)  Things  to  he  awaited: — We  can  speak 
confidently  of  such  things  only  as  we  now  know  in  part,  beginnings  that  here  have 
no  completion,  germs  that  come  to  leaf  and  bud,  but  not  to  fruit,  in  the  soil  of  this 
world ;  processes  that  have  promise  of  great  results  but  are  cut  short  of  them, 
desires  and  aspirations  that  now  have  no  full  satisfaction.  I.  We  wait  for  best. 
If  the  question  were  raised :  Is  man  made  for  toil  or  for  rest '  the  answer  would  be  a 
mixed  and  qualified  one.  He  is  appointed  to  toil,  he  is  destined  to  rest ;  one  is  his 
condition,  the  other  is  his  end.  If  man  is  made  in  God's  image,  he  is  made  to  share 
in  God's  condition  ;  and  both  Christian  revelation  and  heathen  conjecture  unite  in 
conceiving  of  Deity  as  in  repose,  eternally  acting  yet  in  eternal  rest.  If  it  be  said 
that  man  can  never  attain  this  repose  because  he  can  never  reach  the  eternal  per- 
fection and  power,  it  may  be  answered  that  it  does  not  depend  upon  the  proportions 
of  the  being,  but  upon  the  harmony  of  his  powers  and  upon  his  adjustment  to  his 
external  condition.  One  whose  nature  has  been  reduced  to  perfect  harmony  may 
have  perfect  peace  within,  and  also  without,  if  also  he  is  in  a  world  entirely  adapted 
to  him.  But  we  have  not  this  rest  at  present  except  in  some  foretaste  of  it  in  our 
spirit.  Unceasing  toil  is  the  largest  feature  of  human  life.  It  is  divimely  appointed, 
but  it  is  painful ;  it  is  a  blessing,  but  also  a  suffering  ;  an  evil  thing,  but  with  a  soul 
of  goodness  in  it.  It  is  wise,  for,  if  remitted,  vice  creeps  in,  but  it  is  no  less  a  bond 
that  chafes,  a  burden  that  weighs  down,  a  trial  that  wearies  the  spii'it.  Some 
morning,  this  shadow  will  flee  away.  In  the  church  of  St.  Nazaro  in  Florence  is  an 
epitaph  upon  the  tomb  of  a  soldier,  as  fit  for  the  whole  toiling  race  as  for  his  own 
restless  life:  "Johannes  Divultius,  who  never  rested,  rests, — hush ! "  We  say  of 
our  dead,  "  they  rest  from  their  labours."  Whatever  the  future  world  may  be  to  us 
or  require  of  us,  it  is  not  clothed  in  the  guise  of  toil,  but  offers  seats  of  eternal  rest ; 
it  is  the  contrast  of  earth,  the  other  side  of  mortal  existence  as  spirit  is  the  other 
side  of  matter.  II.  We  wait  for  the  renewal  of  lost  povoirs.  However  we 
answer  the  question,  if  life  is  a  process  of  loss  or  gain,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  real 
or  apparent  loss  is  one  of  its  largest  features,  even  when  life  is  at  its  best.  Is  this 
loss  absolute,  or  do  we  regain  that  which  seems  to  pass  ?  Shall  I  never, — so  we  are 
forced  to  ask  ourselves, — shall  I  never  have  again  the  buoyancy  of  youth,  the  zest, 
the  innocence,  the  unquestioning  faith,  the  ardent  desire  and  imconquerable  will,  the 
bounding  vigour  of  body  and  mind,  with  which  I  began  life  ?  We  do  not  get  half- 
way through  our  allotted  years  before  these  riches  are  gone  from  us.  If  they  are 
gone  for  ever,  one  half  of  life,  at  least,  is  spent  under  an  ever-deepening  shadow.  It 
IS  difficult  to  believe  that  existence  is  so  ordered ;  that  God's  increated  gifts  are 
annihilated ;  that  the  impress  of  His  hands,  the  similitudes  of  Himself,  are  blotted 
out  for  ever.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  the  redemption  of  the  body  as  something  that  is 
waited  for.  He  means  no  narrow  doctrine  of  a  physical  resurrection,  but  a  renewal 
of  existence, — a  restoration  of  lost  powers.  It  changes  the  whole  colour  of  life,  and 
its  character  also,  if  we  take  the  one  view  or  the  other, — if  we  regard  existence  as  a 
dying-out  process,  or  as  passing  into  temporary  eclipse,  to  emerge  with  all  its  past 
glories  when  the  shadows  of  death  flee  away.  III.  We  wait  fob  the  full 
PERFECTING  OF  CHARACTER.  I  do  not  mean,  of  course,  that  we  are  to  wait  in  the 
sense  of  relaxing  effort  after  perfection — such  waiting  may  end  in  an  eternal  failure 
of  character,  but  rather  that  the  effort  that  now  only  partially  succeeds  will  finally 
reach  success.  There  is  nothing  that  weighs  more  heavily  upon  a  right-minded  man 
than  the  slow  progress  he  makes  in  overcoming  his  faults.  'There  is  nothing  a  right- 
minded  man  desires  so  much  as  entire  right-mindedness.  Will  it  never  come  ?  Yes — 
but  it  must  be  awaited.  Entireness  is  nowhere  a  feature  of  present  existence,  else  it 
could  not  be  a  world  of  hope  and  promise.  On  no  thing  can  we  lay  our  hand  and 
say,  Here  is  finality  and  perfection.  The  adamant  is  crumbling  to  dust ;  the  orderly 
heavens  oscillate  towards  final  dissolution,  and  foretell  ' '  new  heavens  " ;  in  every 


CHAT.  11.]  TEE  SOJVG  OF  SOLOMOX  81 

soul  is  weakness  and  fault.  We  are  keyed  not  to  attainment,  but  to  the  hope  of  it 
by  struggle  towards  it.  And  it  is  this  struggle,  and  not  the  attainment,  that 
measures  character  and  foreshadows  destiny.  Character  is  not  determined  by  faults 
and  weaknesses,  and  periodic  phases  of  life,  nor  by  the  limitations  and  accidents  of 
present  existence,  but  by  the  central  purpose,  the  inmost  desire  of  the  heart.  If 
that  be  turned  towards  God  and  His  righteousness,  it  must  at  last  bring  us  thither. 
IV.  We  await  the  renewal  of  sundered  love.  When  love  loses  its  object 
its  chann  is  iuterrupted,  for  love  is  oneness  and  cannot  brook  separation.  It  is 
impossible  to  believe  that  God  has  organized  into  life  an  incurable  sorrow  ;  that  He 
has  made  love,  which  is  the  best  conceivable  thing — being  the  substance  of  Himself, 
— the  necessary  condition  of  the  greatest  misery.  Love  may  suifer  an  eclipse,  but  it 
is  not  sent  wailing  into  eternal  shadows.  It  is  as  sure  as  God  Himself  that  human 
love  shall  again  claim  its  own.  But  this  eternal  union  must  be  awaited.  It  begins 
here,  springing  out  of  mysterious  oneness  ;  it  grows  up  amidst  unspeakable  tender- 
ness, rising  from  an  instinctive  thing  to  an  intellectual  and  moral  union,  losing 
nothing,  and  weaving  into  itself  every  strand  of  human  sympathy  till  it  stands  for 
the  whole  substance  of  life,  and  so  vanishes  from  the  scene.  If  this  prime  reality  is 
an  illusion,  then  all  else  is.  If  it  does  not  outlast  death,  then  all  may  go.  But 
love  is  not  a  vain  thing,  and  God  does  not  mock  Himself  and  us  when  He  makes  us 
pMiakers  of  His  nature.  V.  We  wait  for  the  mystery  to  be  taken  off  from 
LIFE.  The  crucial  test  of  a  thoughtful  mind  is  a  sense  of  the  mystery  of  life  in  thia 
•world.  This  highest  order  of  mind  is  not  antagonistic  to  faith  ;  it  is  simply  conscious 
of  the  incomprehensible  range  of  truth.  None  but  an  inferior  mind  has  a  plan  of 
the  universe  ;  it  is  to  the  thoughtless  that  all  things  are  plain.  What  is  life  ?  What 
is  matter!  What  is  the  relation  between  them?  What  is  creation?  Granting 
evolution,  what  started  the  evolving  process  ?  Assuming  God,  what  is  the  relation 
of  creation  to  Him  ?  What  the  relation  of  man  ?  What  is  this  that  thinks  and  wills 
and  loves — this  /  ?  And  then,  what  is  it  aU  for  ?  Is  there  a  final  purpose  and  an  order 
tending  to  it,  or  is  it  but  the  whirl  of  molecules,  the  dust  of  the  universe  circling 
for  a  moment  in  space,  of  which  we  are  but  some  atoms  ?  Is  there  a  bridge  between 
consciousness  and  the  external  world,  or  a  gulf  that  cannot  be  spanned  or  fathomed  ? 
Is  life  a  reality,  or  is  it  a  dream  from  which  we  may  awake  in  some  world  of  reality 
to  find  that  this  world  was  but  the  vision  of  a  night  ?  It  is  useless  to  deny  that  thia 
mystery  carries  with  it  a  sense  of  pain.  It  is  alien  to  mind,  a  condition  foreign  to 
our  nature.  And  the  more  thoroughly  mind  is  true  to  itself,  the  more  painfully 
does  it  feel  the  darkness.  When  Goethe,  dying,  said,  "Let  the  light  enter,"  he 
tittered,  not  the  highest  and  best  hope  of  the  heart,  but  the  dearest  satisfaction  of 
the  intellect.  He  felt  that  he  was  going  where  the  shadows  that  hang  over  this 
world  would  flee  away,  and  he  could  find  some  answer  to  the  questions  that  had 
vexed  him  here.  So,  too,  those  commoner  questions,  Why  does  evil  exist  ?  Why 
<lo  the  innocent  suffer  1  Why  does  one  suffer  on  account  of  another  ?  Why  does 
life  end  untimely  ?  Why  is  man  so  subject  to  nature  ?  Why  is  the  experience  of 
life  so  long  in  ripening  the  fi:uit  of  wisdom  ?  Why  are  the  chances  so  against  man 
that  he  spends  his  days  in  sorrow  and  evil  ?  Why  is  there  not  more  help  from  God  ? 
Why  does  life  gradually  assume  the  appearance  of  a  doom,  spent  in  vanity  and 
ending  in  death  ?  We  get  no  full  answer  to  these  questions  in  this  Ufe.  Shall  these 
questions  never  be  answered  ?  It  is  not  easy  to  believe  that  mind  will  for  ever  be 
harassed  by  an  alien  element ;  it  may  always  require  something  other  than  itself  to 
stand  upon,  or  as  a  foil  like  that  which  the  jewel-merchant  puts  under  precious 
stones  to  reflect  their  colour,  but  it  wUl  not  for  ever  wear  this  other  as  a  clog  and 
burden.  The  mystery  of  the  present  life  is  due  to  the  fact  that  it  is  so  heavHy 
conditioned  by  its  material  environment ;  matter  contends  against  spirit.  But  aa 
existence  goes  on,  if  it  is  normal,  it  throws  off  these  conditions  and  presses  towards 
absolute  action  and  full  freedom.  This  is  the  eternal  state,  and  this  action  is  eternal 
life,  and  the  world  where  it  is  achieved  is  the  eternal  world.  VI.  We  wait  Foa 
FULL  restoration  TO  THE  PRESENCE  OF  GoD.  There  are  hours  when  the  whole 
world,  and  all  it  contains,  shrivels  to  nothingness,  and  God  alone  fills  the  mind ; 
hours  of  human  desolation,  seasons  of  strange,  mysterious  exaltation,  times  of  earthly 
despair,  or  of  joy ;  the  height  and  excess  of  any  emotion  bears  us  away  into  a  region 
where  God  Himself  dwells.  But  even  if  we  have  taught  ourselves  to  make  the 
impression  of  these  hours  constant,  there  is  still  an  unsatisfied  element  in  the  know- 
ledge. We  long  for  more,  for  nearness,  for  sight  or  something  that  stands  for  sight, 
for  the  Father  at  hand,  and  the  home  of  the  soul.  I  know  that  in  many  and  many 
of  God's  children  there  ia  a  longing  for  God  that  is  not  satisfied,  because  they  ara 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  O. 

children  and  are  away  from  the  Father's  house.  And  I  know  still  better  that  the 
unrest  of  this  weary  world  is  its  unvoiced  cry  after  God.  This  fall,  satisfying  presence 
of  God,  must  be  awaited.  It  is  contended  against  by  sense,  by  the  world  of  things,  by 
the  limits  that  shut  out  the  infinite,  and  by  our  own  slow  and  hesitating  departure 
from  the  evil  and  the  sensual — a  muddy  vesture  of  decay  doth  grossly  close  U3  in  ; 
but  when  this  falls  off,  and  these  earthly  shadows  flee  away,  we  shall  see  face  to  face, 
and  know  as  we  are  known.     {T,  T.  Hunger,  D.D.)     The  saint's  night  and  day : — 

I.  A  BOXJL  ONCE  TRULY  MARRIED  TO  CHRIST,  WILL  FROM  THENCEFORTH  LOOK  ON 
THE  LIFETIME  IN  THIS  WORLB  AS  A  NIGHT-TIME,  A  SHADOWY  ONE,  AS  INDEED  IT 
IS.  11.  To  THOSE  THAT  ARE  TRULY  MARRIED  TO  ChRIST,  THE  DAY  WILL  BREAK 
IN  THE  OTHER  WORLD,  AND  THE  SHADOWS  FLEE  AWAY  ;  AND  THEY  SHOULD    LIVB 

IN  THE  COMFORTABLE  EXPECTATION  OF  IT.  Consider  the  day's  breaking,  and  the 
shadows  fleeing  away  thereupon.  I  am  to  speak  of  the  day's  breaking  in  the  other 
world  to  those  that  are  married  to  Christ.  And  here  I  shall  show  what  a  day  will 
break  to  them  there.  A  clear  and  bright  day  (Isa.  Ix.  1,  2).  A  fair  day  and  calm. 
There  are  no  storms  nor  tempests,  no  blustering  winds  nor  rains  in  Immanuel's  land 
(Rev.  xxi.  4).  A  glad  and  joyful  day  (Ps.  cxxvi.  5).  An  eternal  day.  Let  ua  nezi 
see  how  this  day  wiU  break  there  to  those  who  are  married  to  Christ.  As  coming 
near  their  night-journey's  end,  they  enter  the  passage  betwixt  the  two  worlds,  the 
darkness  and  shadowiness  of  the  night  will  come  to  a  pitch.  For  as  the  darkest 
hour  ordinarily  goes  before  daybreak,  so  is  it  here,  the  hour  of  death  is  so  in  a  signal 
manner,  "the  vaUey  of  the  shadow  of  death"  (Ps.  xxiii.  4).  As  soon  as  they  are 
got  over  to  the  other  side,  immediately  the  day  breaks,  and  it  is  fair  daylight  to 
them.  I  proceed  to  consider  the  shadows,  upon  this  breaking  of  the  day,  fleeing 
away.  What  is  that  fleeing  away  of  the  shadows  ?  The  utter  removal  of  everything 
interposing  betwixt  God  and  them,  and  intercepting  the  light  of  His  countenance 
(Rev.  xxi.  3).  The  removal  of  all  dark,  gloomy,  and  melancholy  things  out  of  their 
condition  (Matt.  xxv.  23).  The  removal  of  all  imperfection  of  light,  and  whatsoever 
gives  but  a  faint  and  shadowy  representation  of  Christ  and  the  glories  of  the  other 
world  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12 ;  Rev.  xxii.  4).  What  are  the  shadows  that  will  flee  away 
when  that  day  breaks  ?  The  shadow  of  this  world  will  then  flee  away  (1  Cor.  vii. 
31).  The  shadow  of  sin  (Heb.  xii.  23).  The  shadow  of  temptations  (Rom.  xvi.  20). 
The  shadow  of  outward  troubles  will  flee  away,  of  troubles  on  your  bodies,  relations, 
names,  aff"airs,  etc.  (Job  iii.  17).  The  shadow  of  inward  spiritual  troubles,  through 
desertions,  and  hidings  of  the  Lord's  face.  The  shadow  of  ordinances  wiU  flee  away 
(Rev.  xxi.  23).  The  shadow  of  all  manner  of  imperfections  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  I  shall 
now  confirm  this  point,  That  the  day  will  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away,  as  to 
those  who  are  married  to  Christ.  It  was  so  with  their  Head  and  Husband,  and  the 
procedure  with  them  must  be  conformable  to  that  with  Him  (Heb.  xii.  2).  The 
nature  of  God's  work  of  grace  in  them  ;  it  cannot  be  left  imperfected  (Ps.  cxxxviii). 
The  bounty  and  goodness  of  God  to  His  people.  God  is  essentially  good,  and  He  is 
good  to  them  in  Christ  His  Son.  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  goodness  of  His  nature 
to  keep  them  always  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,  and  horror  of  shadows.  The 
nature  of  the  covenant,  which  is  everlasting,  and  cannot  be  broken.  Consider 
believers  living  in  the  comfortable  expectation  of  the  day's  breaking  to  them  in  the 
other  world  and  the  shadows  fleeing  away.  It  implies  these  following  things  :  (1) 
Their  looking  on  themselves  as  travellers  only  through  this  world,  who  are  not  to 
stay  in  it  (Heb.  xL  13).  (2)  Their  laying  their  account  with  the  continuance  of  the 
night  and  gloomy  shades,  while  they  are  here.  (3)  A  contentedness  to  leave  this 
world,  and  go  to  the  other  (Luke  ii.  29).  (4)  A  faith  of  the  day,  the  clear  and 
bright  day  that  is  in  the  other  world  (Heb.  ix.  13).  (5)  A  desire  to  be  there  in  the 
other  world,  where  the  day  breaks  and  the  shadows  flee  away  (Phil.  i.  23).  (6)  A 
hope  and  expectation  of  tne  day's  breaking  to  them  there,  and  the  shadows  fleeing 
away  (Rom.  viii.  23,  24).  (7)  A  comforting  themselves  in  this  world  with  the 
prospect  of  the  other  world  (2  Cor.  iv.  17, 18).    III.  It  will  be  the  great  concern 

OF  THOSE  married  TO  CHRIST  DUEINO  THEIR  NIGHT-JOURNEY  IN  THIS  WORLD, 
THAT  HB  mat  TUEN  AND  COMB  TO  THEM,  TILL  THE  DAY  BREAKING  AND  THE 
SHADOWS  FLEEING  AWAY,   THEY  GET  TO  HiM  IN  THE  OTHBE  WORLD.      1.   I  am  to 

show  what  is  Christ's  turning  and  coming  to  those  married  to  Him,  that  wiU  be 
their  great  concern  to  have.  (1)  His  affording  them  His  presence.  That  will  bo 
their  great  concern  to  enjoy  during  their  night-journey ;  that  if  they  must  have  a 
dark  and  shadowy  night-journey  of  it  through  the  world.  He  would  not  leave  them, 
but  be  with  them  in  it  (Exod.  xxxiii.  15).  (a)  His  seen  or  sensible  presence  with 
them,  of  the  want  of  which  Job  complama  (Job  xxiii.  8,  9),  and  in  the  enjoyment 


CHAT.  III.]  TEE  soya  OF  SOLOMOK  83 

of  which  the  Psalmist  triumphs  (Pa.  xxiii.  4).  (&)  Hia  operative  or  eflBcacious 
presence  in  them  (Phil.  iii.  8,  10).  (2)  His  affording  them  His  countenance,  the 
shining  of  His  face,  and  the  manifestation  of  His  favour  (Ps.  vi.  6).  2.  The  import  of 
this  concern  of  those  married  to  Christ,  that  He  may  turn  and  come  to  them,  till 
the  day's  breaking  and  the  shadows'  fleeing  away,  they  get  to  Him  in  the  other 
world.  (1)  That  during  the  night-journey  in  this  world,  Christ  sometimes  turns 
away  and  withdraws  from  His  people  ;  so  that  seeking  Him  they  cannot  find  Him 
(Cant  iii.  1).  (2)  The  travellers  to  Zion,  when  Christ  is  away,  though  it  be  night, 
they  readily  miss  Him  (Cant.  iii.  3).  (3)  A  holy  dissatisfaction  with  all  things 
while  He  is  away.  (4)  A  holy  resolution  to  give  Him  a  welcome  reception,  if  He 
will  turn  and  come  again  ;  then  the  doors  should  be  cast  wide  open  to  receive  Him 
(Cant.  viii.  1,  2).  (5)  Earnest  outgoings  of  the  heart  after  Him  in  desires  for  Hia 
return  (Isa.  Ixix.  1).  (6)  A  holy  restlessness  in  the  soul,  till  He  turn  and  come 
again  (Cant.  iii.  1).  8.  The  reasons  of  this  concern  in  those  married  to  Christ,  that 
He  may  turn  and  come  to  them.  (1)  Their  superlative  love  to  Christ  (Cant.  i.  3,  4). 
(2)  Their  comfort  in  their  night-journey  depends  on  it ;  without  it  they  must  go 
drooping,  for  nothing  wUl  make  up  the  want  thereof.  (3)  Their  experience  of  the 
desirableness  of  His  presence  and  countenance  in  their  night-journey  (Ps.  Ixiii.  1-3). 
(4)  Their  felt  need  of  it ;  they  know  not  how  they  will  ever  make  out  the  night- 
journey  without  it  (Ex.  xxxiii.  15).  (a)  The  sense  of  their  Hableness  to  mistak* 
their  way,  that  they  need  Him  for  their  direction  and  guidance  (Jer.  x.  23).  (6)  Th« 
«ense  of  their  weakness  for  the  journey,  that  they  need  to  go  leaning  on  Him,  as  a 
weak  woman  on  her  husband  (Cant.  viii.  5).  (c)  The  sense  of  the  great  opposition 
and  difficulty  to  be  met  with  in  the  way  (Eph.  vi.  12,  13).  4.  We  shall  now 
confirm  this  point.  That  it  will  be  the  great  concern  of  those  married  to  Christ, 
during  their  night-journey  in  this  world,  that  He  may  turn  and  come  to  them 
tUl  the  day  breaking  and  the  shadows  fleeing  away,  they  get  to  Him  in  the  other 
world.  (1)  Christ  their  Lord  and  Husband  has  got  their  heart  above  all  other, 
and  it  rests  in  Him.  (2)  They  are  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  (2  Pet.  i.  4), 
partakers  of  Christ,  of  His  Spirit,  His  grace,  His  image ;  and  like  draws  to  like ; 
the  carnal  worldling  to  the  world,  and  the  Christian  to  Christ.  (3)  All  believers 
may  be  observed  to  be  great  miscounters  of  time,  when  Christ  is  turned  away  from 
them  in  their  night-journey  (Isa.  liv.  7).  (4)  When  they  are  themselves,  they 
are  resolute  for  His  presence  and  countenance  (Eph.  vi.  15.)  {T.  Boston,  D.D.) 
In  the  shadow : — To  all  the  light  is  very  dear,  and  more  so  perhaps  because  this  Ufa 
is  a  tioilight  season  to  all  of  us,  we  are  all  in  the  shadow.  It  is  not  all  dark,  neither 
is  it  all  light,  but  it  is  full  of  shadows,  shadows  of  sin,  shadows  of  sorrow,  shadows 
of  sickness,  of  want,  of  disappointment,  of  death.  The  brightest  life  cannot  be  all 
sunshine,  over  rich  and  poor  alike  the  shadows  fall.  The  brightest  eyes  must  be  dim 
with  tesurs  sometimes,  the  gayest  voices  must  turn  to  mourning  sometimes,  the 
merriest  Church  bell  must  toll  sometimes.  1.  The  Church  on  earth  has  ever  beeu 
in  the  shadow  of  trouble,  its  holiest  members  have  had  to  suffer  many  things.  In 
the  Jewish  Church  there  was  the  shadow  of  idolatry  and  unbeKef,  the  shadow 
of  self-will  and  bad  government,  ending  in  the  darker  shadow  of  captivity  and  exile. 
In  the  Christian  Church  there  have  been  shadows  of  persecution,  of  division,  of  false 
doctrine,  of  lukewarmness,  of  tyranny.  2.  So  with  ourselves,  the  individual  members 
of  the  Church,  we  are  all  more  or  less  in  the  shadow.  (1)  Some  of  us  perhaps  are 
under  the  shadow  of  a  great  sin,  repented  of,  and  so  pardoned,  but  not  forgotten. 
(2)  Some  of  us  perhaps  are  under  the  shadow  of  worldly  loss.  (3)  It  may  be  the 
shadow  of  a  great  bereavement  which  has  fallen  upon  us.  (4)  Over  some  of  us  again 
the  shadow  of  a  great  illness  may  have  fallen.  3.  We  cannot  make  the  darkness 
light,  or  scatter  the  shadows,  or  hasten  the  daybreak,  Jesus  alone  can  do  that. 
He  who  once  said  "  Let  there  be  light,"  will  say  so  again  in  answer  to  our  prayers. 
(S.  J.  WUmot-BuzUyn^  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  IIL 


Vkrs.  1-8.  I  songht  Him,  but  I  found  Him  not. — Hidings  of  God : — ^Prophetically 
these  verses  may  be  taken  as  delineating  the  sorrow  of  the  first  disciples  at  the 
departure  of  Christ  from  the  earth.  Between  Easter  Day  and  Pentecost  the  infant 
Church  was  very  much  as  here  described.    We  would  not,  however,  limit  thf 


84  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cH4P.  lib 


application  of  this  passage  to  the  apostolic  age.     It  has  its  fulfilment,  we  beliere, 
again  and  again.     The  leading  idea  is  that  of  a  temporary  estrangement,  real  or 
imaginary,  between  Christ  and  His  people,  during  whicn  they  seek  Him  but  cannot 
find  Him.     I.  There  would  be  nothing  remarkable  in  the  Redeemer  denying  the 
consolations  of  His  Presence  to  those  who  were  careless  about  Him.     The  remarkable 
point  suggested  by  the  text  is  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  desiring  God  and  being 
disappointed.     Now  it  would  seem  to  be  an  ordinary  featxire  in  God's  providence  to 
■withm-aw  occasionally  from  the  saints,  in  order  to  increase  that  very  craving  after 
Him  which  He  declines  to  gratify.     He  suspends  His  operations  in  their  behalf 
vmtil  what  we  call  the  last  moment  (John  ii.  4,  vi.  5,  6).     Again  and  again  have 
dangers  and  distresses  thickened  round  about  the  Church.    The  heathen  have 
furiously  raged  together.    The  kings  of  the  earth  have  stood  up,  and  the  rulers 
taken  counsel  together.    The  tyranny  of  despotic  monarchs  has  well-nigh  crushed 
the  Church  at  some  periods  :  at  others,  heresies  have  prevailed  so  widely  that  the 
whole  community  has  appeared  tainted.     This  was  the  case  with  Arianism  in  the 
fourth  century.    They  who  maintained  sound  doctrine  cried  imto  the  Lord,  and 
apparently  in  vain.     They  sought  Him,  but  they  found  Him  not.     And  this  is  no 
solitary  instance.     How  often  has  it  happened  with  those  who  have  gone  to  bear 
the  cross  into  heathen  lands !     They  have  laboured  and  toiled,  and  caught  nothing. 
For  months  and  years  they  have  preached,  and  made  no  converts.     Nor  is  it 
difficult  to  perceive  that  all  this  is  a  discipline  to  the  souls  of  the  faithful ;  nay,  not 
only  a  discipline,  but  a  test  of  the  reality  of  their  faith.     How  could  the  fervour  of 
a  man's  heart  be  proved,  if  he  was  heard  at  the  first  petition?    How  could  the 
depth  of  the  soul's  yearning  after  the  Divine  Being  be  manifested,  if  He  was  to  be 
found  as  soon  as  sought  for  ?    Again,  it  is  not  unusual  to  find  persons  complaining 
that  they  are  at  times  quite  unable  to  experience  pleasure  or  consolation  in  religious 
exercises.     They  go  through  the  service  of  the  Church  without  once  being  able  to 
realize  the  presence  of  God,  or  the  solemnity  of  what  they  are  about.    Their  hearts 
respond  not  to  the  words  of  thanksgiving  or  of  prayer.     Everything  seems  heavy, 
wearisome,  and  cold.     People  are  frequently  discouraged  when  they  find  their  souls 
thus  chilled  and  lifeless — utterly  unable  to  rise  to  the  level  of  their  work ;  but 
if  you  get  possessed  of  the  principle  which  we  are  illustrating,  there  will  be  no 
need  for  this  discouragement.     We  are  not  always  to  blame  when  we  are  listless 
and  cold  in  Church.     If  we  do  not  try  or  desire  to  be  otherwise,  of  course  the  fault 
is  our  own ;  but  if  we  try  to  be  devout  and  cannot,  it  may  be  only  that  God  is 
dealing  with  us — that  He  is  subjecting  us  to  a  discipline  wmch  He  sees  necessary. 
For  example.  He  may  be  teaching  us  not  to  rely  upon  warm  emotions — not  to  build 
overmuch  upon  feelings,  however  good.     II.  Now  from  the  foregoing  considerations 
there  flows  a  very  solemn  thought.     We  have  said  that,  as  well  to  individuals  as  to 
the  Christian  Church  at  large,  the  Eedeemer  applies  a  sort  of  discipline  in  modify- 
ing at  times  or  altogether  withholding  the  consolations  of  His  Presence.     What 
foflows  ?    Why,  that  He  must  personally  engage  HimseK  about  every  soul.    The 
spirit  of  each  man  and  woman  is  a  separate  planet  in  the  spiritual  system  whose 
summer  and  winter,  whose  storms  and  sunshine  are  regulated  by  Deity  alone. 
Hence  the  full  meaning  of  that  passage  in  which  Christ  Jesus  is  called  the  Shepherd 
and  Bishop  of  our  souls.     It  intimates  that  the  human  soul  is  so  fine  and  subtle  a 
thing  that  none  but  He  can  supervise  and  tend  it.     From  the  moment  of  our  new 
birth  He  takes  us  in  hand.     Every  trial  and  temptation  has  been  appointed  by 
TTim  ;  every  annoyance  and  disaster  has  been  weighed  out  by  Him.     His  seat  is  in 
heaven,  yet  is  His  hand  upon  each  one  of  us.     He  shrouds  Himself  from  the  gaze  of 
the  seraphim,  but  He  is  about  the  path  and  bed  of  every  child  in  this  assembly. 
And  this  is  what  we  would  have  you  learn  secondarily  from  the  text,  "  I  sought 
Him,  but  I  found  Him  not."    His  withdrawing  Himself  is  a  proof  of  His  individual 
care.     When  anything  happens  out  of  the  common  course,  it  speaks  to  us  of  God. 
When  with  all  our  exertions  we  fail  to  find  Christ,  it  is  evidence  that  He  is  working 
in  and  about  us.    We  recur  to  the  main  lesson  involved  in  what  has  been  said, 
which  we  desire  especially  to  enforce.     It  is  this.     We  are  not  to  expect  to  find 
always  great  delight  in  the  path  of  duty ;  we  are  not  to  be  anxious  about  our 
feelings,  if  our  actions  are  right.     Daily  service  and  weekly  communion  will  often 
be  attended  coldly,  and  as  we  fear  without  heart.     It  must  be  so.     It  is  the 
tendency  of  repetition  to  diminish  ecstatic  emotions  ;  still  we  are  to  go  on  stead- 
fastly on  our  road.     The  spiritual  life  is  very  like  the  natural,  it  has  its  bright  days 
and  its  gloomy,  its  calm  and  its  storm,  its  hours  of  exultation  and  depression.     Let 
us  take  each  as  it  comes,  doing  our  work  in  each  with  care  and  sobriety  and  per- 


CHAP.  111.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  86 

Beverance.  Yet  a  little  while  and  these  variations  shall  be  no  more.  We  are 
trayelling  onward  to  a  land  where  the  sun  never  goes  down,  and  the  noise  of  the 
waterfloods  is  never  heard.     {Bp.  Woodford.) 

Yet.  3.  The  Watchmen  that  go  about  the  city. — Gospel  Watchmen :  The  ministera 
of  the  Grospel  are  called  watchmen,  either  in  allusion  to  shepherds,  who  watch  over 
their  flock  by  night  (Luke  ii.  8) ;  or  else,  to  watchmen  in  cities  as  here  ;  and  their 
work  may  be  considered :  1.  With  regard  to  themselves ;  they  are  to  watch  over 
themselves  as  well  as  others  ;  they  are  to  watch  over  their  conversations,  that  they 
be  as  become  the  Gospel  they  preach,  and  so  that  they  may  give  no  ill  examples  to 
others,  nor  cause  the  ways  and  doctrines  of  Christ  to  be  evil  spoken  of,  and  render 
their  ministry  useless  ;  they  are  to  watch  over  their  doctrines,  and  take  heed  that 
they  be  agreeable  to  the  oracles  of  God ;  and  they  deliver  nothing  but  the 
'  *  wholesome  words  of  Christ  Jesus, "  and  such  as  may  be  for  the  edifying  of  their 
hearers,  and  suitable  to  the  cases  of  souls  ;  they  are  to  watch  all  opportunities  to 
preach  this  gospel,  as  the  apostle  says  (2  Tim.  iv.  2),  to  "  be  instant  in  season  and 
out  of  season  ; "  and  then  they  are  to  watch  and  observe  the  success  of  it,  and  how 
it  is  blessed  and  made  useful  to  souls :  moreover  they  ought  to  have  a  very  great 
guard  upon  themselves  ;  for  if  the  enemy  can  but  surprise,  decoy,  or  corrupt  them, 
it  turns  much  to  his  advantage.  2.  With  regard  to  others,  their  work  is,  (1)  To 
give  the  time  of  night,  as  in  (Isa.  xxi.  11,  12).  (2)  To  give  notice  of  approaching 
dangers.  They  are  to  give  notice  of  the  danger  that  sinners  are  in,  who  are  walking 
in  the  broad  road  to  destruction ;  and  also  the  dangers  that  chui'ches  may  be  in 
through  errors  and  heresies  springing  up  among  them,  as  well  as  by  indulging  them- 
selves in  any  vicious  practices,  which  they  are  severely  to  check  and  reprehend. 
Now,  this  work  requires  vigilance,  prudence,  courage,  and  faithfulness ;  and  also 
shows  the  necessity  and  usefulness  of  the  public  ministry,  which  can  no  more  be 
dispensed  with  than  watchmen  in  a  city  ;  and  likewise  what  care  the  Lord  has  of 
His  churches,  in  placing  such  officers  in  them,  as  well  as  the  awfulness  of  the  work 
they  are  concerned  in  ;  for  if  the  watchman  does  not  discharge  his  duty,  the  blood 
of  those  he  has  to  do  with  will  be  required  of  him.  {John  Gill,  D.I).)  Saw  ye  Him 
whom  my  sool  loveth! — Objects  of  a  Christian's  love: — I.  The  object  of  a  Chkis- 
tian's  love  may  easily  be  identified.  Who  should  be  the  object  of  a  Christian's 
love  but  Christ?  We  wear  His  name,  profess  His  religion,  believe  His  Bible. 
IL  The  existence  of  a  Chbistian's  love  should  be  peesonally  known  to 
oiTESELVES.  It  must  not  be  a  theory,  but  a  realization.  Do  we  love  Him  more 
than  the  world  or  the  creature  1  IIL  The  object  of  a  Christian's  love  shoxtld 
BE  OPENLY  AND  PUBLICLY  AVOWED.  It  is  not  to  be  a  Secret  thing,  for  he  who  is 
ashamed  of  his  Master's  livery  is  unworthy  of  Him.  IV.  The  flame  of  a  Chris- 
tian's LOVE  to  Christ  should  be  strong  and  vigorous.  "  My  soul  loveth  Him." 
"Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,"  etc.  It  will  prompt  to 
inquiry  and  earnestness.  V.  The  Christian's  love  to  Christ  is  not  axways 
satisfied.  The  Master  sometimes  hides  His  face.  There  may  be  some  cause  of 
the  Saviour's  withdrawing — wandering  in  sinful  paths,  sinful  company,  etc. 
VI.  The  Christian's  unsatisfied  love  will  produce  in  his  soul  greater 

ACTIVITY  AND  ZEAL.      {Eomilist.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  It  was  but  a  little  that  I  passed  from  them,  but  I  foimd  Him  whom 
my  soul  loveth :  I  held  Him  and  would  not  let  Him  go. — The  real  presence,  the  great 
want  of  the  Church : — As  God,  Jesus  is  everywhere  ;  as  man.  He  is  only  in  heaven  ; 
as  God  and  man  in  one  person,  Mediator  and  Head  of  the  Church,  He  is  present  with 
us  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Comforter,  whom  the  Father  has  sent  in  His  Name.  This 
presence,  not  a  bodily  but  a  spiritual  presence,  is  the  glory  of  the  Church  of  God. 
When  she  is  without  it  she  is  shorn  of  her  strength  ;  when  she  possesses  it  all  good 
things  ensue.  I.  Before  ever  we  can  bring  the  Well-Beloved  into  our  mother's  house, 
the  Church,  we  must  find  Him  personally  for  ourselves.  "It  was  but  a 
little  that  I  passed  from  them,  but  I  found  Him  whom  my  soul  loveth."  How  tan 
we  bring  into  the  chamber  of  the  Church  Him  whom  we  have  not  yet  met  with  our- 
selves ?  How  can  we  communicate  grace  to  others  instrumentaUy  unless,  first  of  all, 
we  have  received  it  into  our  own  hearts  ?  If  thou  wouldst  bring  Chnst  into  the 
Church  -which  thou  lovest,  then,  first  of  all,  thine  inmost  soul  must  so  love  Christ 
that  thou  canst  not  live  without  His  company.  This  must  be  thy  cry :  ' '  Saw  ye  TTim 
vliom  niy  soul  loveth  ? "  and  this  must  De  the  goal  of  thine  aspirations :  I  have 
found  Him  whom  my  soul  loveth."    It  must  not  be  talk,  it  must  be  soul-love;  it 


86  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

mnst  not  be  a  profession  of  affection  for  Jesus,  but  the  inmost  bowels  of  our  being 
must  be  moved  by  His  Name.  These  ardent  lovers  of  Jesus  must  diligently  seek 
Him.  The  spouse  sought  Him,  sought  Him  on  her  bed,  sought  Him  in  the  streets, 
sought  Him  in  the  broadways,  sought  Him  at  last  at  the  lips  of  the  watchmen,  sought 
Him  everywhere  where  He  was  likely  to  be  found.  In  seeking  our  Lord  we  must  use 
all  ministries.  The  spouse  inquired  of  the  watchmen.  We  are  not  to  despise  God 'a 
servants,  for  He  is  usually  pleased  to  bless  us  through  them,  and  it  would  be  ungratefal 
both  to  Him  and  to  them  to  pass  them  by  as  useless.  But,  whUe  we  use  the  ministriea, 
we  must  go  beyond  them.  Do  not  imagine  that  hearing  the  truth  preached  simply 
and  earnestly  will  of  itself  be  a  blessing  to  your  souls.  Far,  far  beyond  the  servant, 
pass  to  the  Master.  Be  this  the  longing  of  each  heart,  each  Sabbath  day,  "  Lord, 
give  me  fellowship  with  Thyself. "  Note  that  we  must  search  to  the  very  utmost  tUl 
we  find  our  Beloved.  The  Christian  must  leave  no  stone  unturned  till  he  gets  back 
his  fellowship  with  Christ.  If  any  sin  obstructs  the  way,  it  must  be  rigorously  given 
up  ;  if  there  be  any  neglected  duty,  it  must  be  earnestly  discharged  ;  if  there  be  any 
higher  walk  of  grace,  which  is  necessary  to  continuous  fellowship,  we  must  ascend  it, 
fearing  no  hiU  of  difficulty.  Oh,  for  more  Enochs,  men  who  walk  with  God,  whose 
habitual  spirit  is  that  of  close  communion  with  Jesus,  meditating  upon  Him,  yea, 
more  than  that,  sympathizing  with  Him,  drinking  in  His  spirit,  changed  into  His 
likeness,  living  over  again  His  life,  because  He  is  in  them,  the  monarch  of  their  souls. 
II.  If  we  would  be  a  blessing  to  the  Church,  and  have  already  found  Christ,  we  must 
TAKE  OARB  TO  RETAIN  HiM.  "I  have  found  Him  whom  my  soul  loveth  ;  I  held 
Him,  and  I  would  not  let  Him  go. "  How  comparatively  easy  it  is  to  climb  to  the  top 
of  Pisgah !  It  needs  but  a  little  eflfort ;  many  bold  and  gracious  spirits  are  fuUy  equal 
to  it.  But  to  keep  there,  to  abide  in  that  mountain,  this  is  the  difficulty.  Mark 
that,  according  to  the  text,  it  is  very  apparent  that  Jesus  will  go  away  if  He  be  not 
held.  "  I  held  Him  and  I  would  not  let  Him  go  "  ;  as  if  He  would  have  gone  if  Ha 
had  not  been  firmly  retaiued.  When  He  met  with  Jacob  that  night  at  the  Jabbok, 
He  said, ' '  Let  me  go. "  He  would  not  go  without  Jacob's  letting  Him,  but  He  would 
have  gone  if  Jacob  nad  loosed  his  hold.  He  wiU  go  unless  you  hold  Him.  But  note, 
next,  He  is  very  willing  to  be  held.  Who  could  hold  Him  if  He  were  not  ?  He  is 
the  Omnipotent  Saviour,  and  if  He  willed  to  withdraw  He  could  do  so :  let  us  hold 
Him  as  we  might.  But  mark  His  condescension.  Jesus  is  willing  enough  to  be 
retained  by  hearts  which  are  full  of  His  love.  And  whenever  you  have  Christ 
remember  that  you  are  able  to  hold  Him.  She  who  held  Him  in  the  Song  was  no 
stronger  than  you  are ;  she  was  but  a  feeble  woman,  poorly  fed  under  the  Old  Testa- 
ment dispensation  ;  you  have  drunk  the  new  wine  of  the  new  covenant,  and  you  are 
stronger  than  she.  You  can  hold  Him,  and  He  will  not  be  able  to  go  from  you. 
Embrace  Him  with  the  arms  of  mighty  affection,  enchain  Him  with  ardent  admira- 
tion. Lay  hold  upon  Him  by  faith,  and  clasp  Him  with  love.  Be  also  much  in 
prayer.  Prayer  casts  a  chain  about  Him.  He  never  leaves  the  heart  that  prays. 
Hold  Him,  too,  by  your  obedience  to  Him.  Never  quarrel  with  Him.  Let  Him 
have  His  way.  Watch  His  words  ;  be  careful  to  obey  them  all.  Be  very  tender  in 
yonr  conduct,  so  that  nothing  grieves  Him.  Show  to  Him  that  you  are  ready  to 
suffer  for  His  sake.  III.  It  appears  from  the  text  that,  after  the  spouse  had  thus 
found  Christ  for  herself  and  held  Him,  she  brought  Him  into  the  Church — "  I 
brought  Him  to  my  mother's  house."  We  ought  lovingly  to  remember  the  Church 
of  God.  By  the  Holy  Spirit  we  were  begotten  unto  newness  of  life,  but  it  was  in  the 
Church,  and  through  the  preaching  of  the  Word  there,  that  we  were  brought  into 
the  light  of  nfe.  Did  I  hear  a  harsh  but  honest  voice  exclaim,  "But  I  find  much 
fault  with  the  Church " !  If  thou  lovest  her,  thou  wilt  go  backward  and  cast  a 
mantle  over  all.  But  suppose  thy  candour  is  compelled  to  see  faults  in  her  ;  then 
there  is  so  much  the  more  need  of  her  Lord's  presence  in  her  to  cure  those  faults. 
The  more  sickly  she  is,  the  more  she  wants  Him  to  be  her  strength  and  her  physician. 
I  say,  therefore,  to  thee,  dear  friend,  above  all  things,  seek  to  bring  Christ  into  an 
imperfect  Church,  and  a  weak  Church,  and  an  erring  Church,  that  she  may  become 
strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  His  might.  The  saints  can  bring  Him  in  by 
their  testimony.  I  hope  that  often  Christ  is  here  when  I  have  borne  testimony  to 
you  of  His  power  to  save,  of  His  atoning  blood,  of  His  exaltation  in  Heaven,  of  the 
perfection  of  His  character,  and  of  His  willingness  to  save.  But  others  can  do  it  by 
their  prayers.  There  is  a  mysterious  efficacy  in  the  prayers  of  men  who  dwell  near 
to  God.  Even  if  they  were  compelled  to  keep  their  beds,  and  do  notliing  but  pray, 
the^  would  pour  benedictions  upon  the  Church.  Wrestling  prayers  bring  Christ  into 
the  innermost  chambers  of  the  Churoh  of  God.    And  there  is  no  doubt  that  Christ  ia 


CHAF.  ni.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOy.  87 


often  brought  into  the  Church  by  the  example  of  those  eminent  saints  who  abide  in 
Christ.     You  know  what  I  mean.      There  is  a  very  manner  and  air  about  some 
Christian  men  which  honours  Christ,  and  benefits  His  people.     They  may  not  be 
gifted  in  speech,  but  their  very  spirit  speaks,  they  are  so  gentle,  loving,  tender, 
earnest,  truthful,  upright,  gracious.     Their  paths,  like  the  paths  of  God  Himself, 
drop  fatness.     IV.  This  leads  me  to  the  last  point,  which  is  this,  to  charge  the 
Church  that  she  bb  careful  not  to  disturb  the  Lord's  repose,  if  we  have 
been  enabled  by  Divine  Grace  to  bring  the  Lord  into  the  chambers  of  our  mother's 
house  (ver.  5).     Observe,  then,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  in  His  Church  is  not  indiflferent 
to  the  conduct  of  His  people.    The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  looking  around  His  Church,  if 
He  sees  anything  evil  in  it,  will  do  one  of  two  things  ;  either  He  will  go  right  away 
from  His  Church  because  the  evil  is  tolerated  there,  and  He  will  leave  that  Church 
to  be  like  Laodicea,  to  go  on  from  bad  to  worse,  tOl  it  becomes  no  Church  at  all ;  or 
else  He  will  come  and  He  will  trim  the  lamp,  or,  to  use  the  figure  of  the  fifteenth  of 
John,  He  will  prune  the  vine-branch,  and  with  His  knife  will  cut  off  this  member, 
and  the  other,  and  cast  them  into  the  fire  ;  while,  as  for  the  rest.  He  will  cut  them 
till  they  bleed  again,  because  they  are  fruit-bearing  members,  but  they  have  too  much 
•wood,  and  He  wants  them  to  bring  forth  more  fruit.     It  is  not  a  trifling  matter  to  be 
in  the  Church  of  God.     God's  fire  is  in  Zion  and  His  furnace  in  Jerusalem.     (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)    Love's  vigilance  rewarded: — I.  Before  we  actually  come  to  our  text,  we 
may  notice  three  preliminary  steps  in  the  spouse's  progress.     1.   The  first 
one  is  implied  in  the  words,  "  I  love  Him."  She  refers  to  her  Beloved  under  the  title 
of  ' '  Him  whom  my  soul  loveth. "    Can  you  give  the  Lord  Jesus  that  title  ?    2.  Then, 
in  the  spouse's  progress,  there  came  another  step,  "  I  sought  Him."    Can  you  put 
vonr  finger  on  that  sentence  and  say,  '*  That  is  true,  too  "  1    Have  you  been  seeking 
Him  this  Sabbath  day  ?  Are  you  coming  to  His  table  to-night  seeking  Him  ?    3.  Then 
comes  in  a  little  minor  or  mournful  music,  for  the  next  clause  is,  "  I  sought  Him,  but 
I  found  Him  not."    The  spouse  is  so  sad  about  it  that  ^he  tells  out  her  woe  twice, 
"I  sought  Him,  but  I  found  Him  not."    Do  you  know  that  experience ?    I  hope  you 
are  not  realizing  it  at  this  time  ;  but  many  of  us  have  known  what  it  is.     Our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  would  not  have  us  think  little  of  His  company  ;  and,  sometimes,  it  is 
only  as  we  miss  it  that  we  begin  to  appreciate  the  sweetness  of  it.     If  we  always  had 
high  days  and  holidays,  we  might  not  be  so  thankful  when  our  gala  days  come  round. 
II.  Inside  the  text,  there  are  three  further  steps:  "I  found  Him,"  "I  held 
Him,"  "  I  brought  Him  into  my  mother's  house,  and  into  the  chamber  of  her  that 
conceived  me."     1.  This  is  the  first  of  the  second  series  of  steps,  "  I  found  Him."    I 
do  not  wish  to  stand  here  and  speak  for  myself  alone  ;  but  I  want,  beloved,  that  you 
should  each  one  of  you  also  say,  "  I  love  Him,"  "  I  sought  Him,"  and  now,  "  I  have 
found  Him."    What  is  meant  by  the  words,  "  I  found  Him  "  ?   "Well,  I  think  a  soul 
may  say,  "  I  found  Him,"  in  the  sense  employed  in  the  text,  when  first  of  all  it  has 
a  clear  view  of  His  Person.     My  Beloved  is  Divine  and  human,  the  Son  of  God,  and 
yet  the  Son  of  man.     Let  your  soul  picture  Him  so  plainly  that  you  can  seem  to  see 
Him,  for  this  will  be  a  part  of  your  finding  Him.     But  that  will  not  be  enough  ;  you 
must  then  get  to  know  that  He  is  present  with  you.     We  cannot  see  Him,  but  yet 
He  that  walketh  amidst  the  golden  candlesticks  is,  in  spirit,  in  this  house  of  prayer 
at  this  moment.     If  you  can  get  that  thought  fully  into  your  minds,  that  Christ  is 
really  here  in  our  midst,  you  can  then  each  one  begin  to  say,  '*  I  have  found  Him." 
But  you  want  more  than  that,  namely,  to  feel  that  He  loves  vou,  loves  you  as  if  there 
were  nobody  else  for  Him  to  love,  loves  you  even  as  the  Father  loves  Him.     That  is 
a  daring  thing  to  say,  and  I  should  never  have  said  it  if  He  had  not  first  uttered  it ; 
but  He  says,  "  As  the  Father  hath  loved  Me,  so  have  I  loved  you."    2.  Now  we  come 
to  the  second  step.     The  spoiise  says,  "I  held  Him."    This  is  a  deeper  experience 
than  the  former  one  ;  "  I  held  Him  "  means  more  than  "  I  found  Him."    How  are 
•we  to  hold  Christ  ?    Well,  first,  let  us  hold  Him  by  our  heart's  resolve.    Get  you  to 
Jacob's  boldness  when  he  said  to  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant,  "I  will  not  let  thee  go 
«xcept  thou  bless  me  " ;  but  go  even  beyond  that,  do  not  put  in  any  "except "  at  all, 
but  say,  "  I  will  not  let  Thee  go,  for  I  cannot  be  blessed  if  Thou  art  gone  from  me." 
Further,  brethren,  hold  Him  by  making  Him  your  all  in  alL    Yield  up  everything 
to  Him,  be  obedient  to  Him,  be  willing  to  suffer  for  Him,  grieve  not  His  Holy  Spirit, 
cro'wn  Htm,  extol  Him,  magnify  Him,  keep  on  singing  His  praises,  for  so  will  you 
hold  Him.     Hold  Him,  too,  by  a  simple  faith.     That  is  a  wonderful  hold-fast.    One 
word  more  before  we  leave  this  point.     The  only  way  to  hold  Christ  is  to  hold  Him 
by  His  own  power.    Think  of  poor  Jacob,  who,  when  the  angel  did  but  touch  him, 
felt  his  sinews  shrink  directly,  yet  he  said,  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go."    And  I,  a  poor 

27 


gg  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  m. 


trembling  creature,  may  hold  the  Omnipotent  Himself,  and  say  to  Him,  "  I  will  not 
let  Thee  go."  How  is  that  wonder  to  be  accomplished  ?  I  will  teU  you.  If  Omni- 
potence helps  you  to  hold  Omnipotence,  why,  then,  the  deed  is  done  !  If  Christ,  and 
not  you  alone,  holds  Christ,  then  Christ  \a  held  indeed,  for  shall  He  vanquish  His 
own  Self?  3.  The  next  step  is  described  in  the  words,  "I  brought  Him."  With  this 
we  finish :  "  I  brought  Him  into  my  mother's  house,  and  into  the  chamber  of  her  that 
conceived  me."    And  where,  I  pray  you,  is  our  roother's  house  ?    I  do  not  believe  in 

"il  1 


your  spirit.  If  you  have  really  found  Christ,  and  bring  Him  with  you  into  the 
assembly,  you  will  not  be  the  man  who  will  criticize,  and  find  fault,  and  quarrel  with 
your  neighbour  because  he  does  not  give  you  enough  room  in  the  pew.  You  will  not 
be  the  person  to  pick  holes  in  other  people's  coats  ;  but  you  will  be  venr  considerate 
of  others.  As  for  yourself,  anything  will  do  for  you,  and  anywhere  will  do  for  you, 
for  you  have  seen  the  Beloved.  You  want  other  people  to  get  as  much  good  as  they 
can  ;  you  are  no  longer  selfish  ;  how  can  vou  be,  when  you  have  found  Him  whom 
your  soul  loveth  ?  And  now  your  poor  brother  need  not  be  very  choice  in  the  selection 
of  his  words  ;  if  he  will  only  talk  about  Jesus,  you  will  be  quite  satisfied  ;  if  his  accents 
should  be  a  little  broken,  you  will  not  mind  that.  So  long  as  you  feel  that  he  wishes 
to  extol  your  Lord,  that  will  be  enough  for  you.  So,  in  this  manner,  you  wiU  in 
spirit  bring  the  Beloved  to  your  mother's  house,  to  the  chamber  of  her  that  conceived 
you.  But,  dear  friend,  it  will  also  be  a  happy  thing  if  you  are  able  to  talk  about  your 
Lord  for  then  you  can  bring  Him  to  the  Church  with  your  words.  But  if,  alas  !  yoa 
feel  that  you  cannot  speak  for  Christ,  then,  beloved,  bring  Him  by  your  prayers. 
(C.  E.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  6-11.  Who  is  this  that  cometh  out  of  the  wilderneu  \—The  royal  pair  in 
their  glorious  chariot: — Great  princes  in  the  East  are  in  the  habit  of  travelling  in 
splendid  palanquins,  which  are  at  the  same  time  chariots  and  beds.     The  person 
reclines  within,  screened  by  curtains  from  public  view  ;   a  bodyguard  protects  the 
equipage  from  robbers,  and  blazing  torches  light  up  the  path  along  which  the 
travellers  proceed.    King  Solomon,  in  this  Song,  describes  the  Church  of  Christ,  and 
Christ  Himself,  as  travelling  through  the  world  in  such  a  palanquin.    The  day  is 
coming  when  both  our  Divine  Lord  and  His  chosen  bride  shall  be  revealed  in  glory 
before  the  eyes  of  all  men.     I.  The  magnificent  progress,  the  glorious  on-goino 
OF  THE  Church  and  her  Lord  through  the  world  (ver.  6).   The  equipage  excites 
the  attention  of  the  onlooker ;    his  curiosity  is  raised,  and  he  asks,  "  Who  is  this  ? " 
The  true  Church  of  Grod  is  a  stranger  and  pilgrim  still ;  an  alien  and  a  foreigner  iu 
every  land  ;  a  speckled  bird ;  a  dove  in  the  midst  of  ravens  ;  a  lily  among  thorns. 
Ilie  ignorance  of  men  concerning  spiritual  things  is  not,  however,  caused  by  the 
darkness  of  the  things  themselves,  for  Christ  and  His  Church  are  the  great  l^hts  of 
the  world.     When  great  personages  travelled   in   their   palanquins,    and  more 
especially  in  marriage  processions,  they  were  attended  by  a  number  of  persons  who, 
at  night,  carried  high  up  in  the  air  burning  cressets  which  gave  forth  a  blaze  of 
light.     Sometimes  these  lights  were  simply  torches  carried  in  the  hands  of  nmning 
footmen  ;  at  other  times  they  were  a  sort  of  iron  basket  lifted  high  into  the  air, 
upon  poles,  from  which  went  up  a  pillar  of  smoke  and  flame.     Our  text  says,  "  Who 
is  this  that  cometh  out  of  the  wilderness  like  pillars  of  smoke  ? "  a  beautiful  illustra- 
tion of  the  fact  that  wherever  Christ  and  His  cause  are  carried,  light  is  a  sure 
accompaniment.     High  lift  your  lamps,  ye  servants  of  our  Lord.     High  lift  up  the 
Cross  of  the  Redeemer  ;  for  m  Him  is  light,  and  the  light  is  the  life  of  men.     But 
you  will  tell  me  that  our  text  rather  speaks  of  "pillars  of  smoke  "  than  of  sparkling 
lamps.     The  smoke  is  but  the  effect  of  the  flame,  and  even  the  pillar  of  smoke  is 
luminous.     What  is  the  smoke  that  has  attended  the  Church  ?    What  but  the 
deaths  of  her  martyrs,  the  sufferings  of  her  confessors,  the  patient  endurance  of  her 
valiant  sons  ?    Wherever  she  goes,  the  thick  smoke  of  her  suffering  goeth  up  to 
Heaven.     It  often  happens  that  Oriental  monarchs  of  immense  possessions  are  not 
content  with  bumiiig  common  coals  in  these  cressets,  but  frequently  consume  sandal- 
wood and  other  woods  which  give  forth  a  delightful  smell ;   or  else,  if  they  use 
ordinary  coals,  they  sprinkle  upon  them  frankincense  and  mjirh,  so  that  a  delicious 
perfume  is  spread  on  all  sides.     In  the  olden  times,  they  also  went  to  great  expense 
in  obtaining  drugs,  which  the  merchants  collected  from  all  parts  of  the  earth,  and 
these  were  carefully  compounded  into  the  renowned  "powders  of  the  merchants," 


CHAP.  IU.3  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOJfOy,  89 

which  yielded  a  delicious  variety  of  delicate  perfumes,  not  to  be  produced  by  any 
one  aromatic  essence.  Our  inspired  poet  describes  the  travelling  procession  of  the 
royal  pair,  and  faUs  not  to  dwell  upon  the  delightful  perfume  of  myrrh  and  frank- 
incense, with  all  the  powders  of  the  merchant,  "  which  make  the  wilderness  smell  aa 
ft  garden  of  roses. "  Wherever  the  Church  of  Christ  proceeds,  though  her  pathway 
ifl  a  desert,  though  she  marches  through  a  howling  wilderness,  she  scatters  the 
richest  perfume.  Among  the  ten  wonders  which  Jewish  tradition  ascribes  to  th« 
temple,  we  £nd  that  the  rain  never  extinguished  the  hre  of  the  wood  which  was 
laid  in  order  upon  the  altar,  nor  did  the  wind  ever  conquer  the  pillar  of  smoke  so  as 
to  disperse  or  bend  it.  Venly  it  is  so  with  the  Church  of  God,  as  she  cometh  out  of 
the  wilderness :  who  shall  quench  her  flaming  lamp,  or  stay  the  incense  of  her 
golden  censers !  Bide  on.  Great  Prince,  and  bear  Thy  spouse  with  Thee  in  Thy 
majestic  chariot,  till  Thou  hast  lit  the  world  with  Thy  Divine  Ught,  and  hast  made 
it  a  temple  filled  with  a  cloud  of  incense  of  sweet  smell  to  the  nostarils  of  Jehovah ! 
II.  Thb  security  of  Christ's  Church  at  all  times.  Of  course  when  travelling 
through  a  wilderness,  a  royal  procession  was  always  in  danger  of  attack.  Arafa« 
prowled  around ;  wandering  Bedouins  were  always  prepared  to  fall  upon  the 
caravan  ;  and  more  especially  was  this  the  case  with  a  marriage  procession,  because 
then  the  robbers  might  expect  to  obtain  many  jewels,  or,  if  not,  a  heavy  ransom  for 
the  redemption  of  the  bride  or  bridegroom  by  their  friends.  "V\1iat  shall  I  say  of 
the  attacks  which  have  been  made  upon  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  upon  Christ 
Himself  ?  They  have  been  incessant.  We  know  that  Christ's  cause  in  the  world  ia 
always  safe  because  of  Divine  protection,  and  because  the  legions  of  God's  angels 
keep  watch  and  ward  over  the  saints.  But  we  have  something  more  tangible  than 
this.  Our  gracious  God  has  been  pleased  to  commit  unto  men  the  ministry  of 
Christ.  "Unto  the  angels  hath  He  not  put  in  subjection  the  world  to  come, 
whereof  we  speak."  The  Lord  ordaineth  that  chosen  men  should  be  the  protectors 
of  His  Church  ;  not  that  they  have  any  power  as  of  themselves  to  do  anything,  but 
He  girdeth  the  weak  with  strength  and  maketh  the  feeble  mighty  ;  so  then,  men, 
even  the  sons  of  men  stand  in  array  around  the  travelling  palanquin  of  Christ,  to 
guard  both  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride.  Read  the  Tib  and  8th  verses  carefully, 
and  you  will  notice  that  there  are  enough  swordsmen.  "  Threescore  valiant  men  are 
about  it."  There  are  always  enough  men  chosen  of  God  to  guard  the  Church. 
Observe  that  these  warriors  are  men  of  the  right  mettle.  "Yes,"  says  poor 
trembling  Little-Faith,  "we  have  hosts  of  men,  but  they  are  not  like  the  great- 
hearts  of  old  ;  they  have  not  the  qualifications  which  the  age  requires."  Ah  !  but 
remember,  about  the  bed  of  Solomon  there  are  "  threescore  valiant  men  "  ;  and  glory 
be  unto  my  Master,  while  I  may  not  flatter  the  ministry,  I  must  not  dishonour  Him 
by  believing  that  He  has  left  His  Church  without  valiant  defenders.  "Ah!"  I 
think  I  hear  you  say,  "  but  though  there  may  be  so  many  men,  and  men  of  the 
right  sort,  I  am  afraid  they  are  not  in  the  right  place."  Look  again  at  the  text. 
It  is  written,  "  Threescore  valiant  men  are  about  it  "  ;  that  is,  there  are  some  on 
that  side,  and  some  on  this,  some  before,  and  some  behind  ;  they  are  all  round  the 
travelling  chariot  of  Christ.  "  I  wish  there  might  be  one  in  our  parish,"  says  one. 
Pray  for  Him,  and  He  who  has  promised  to  send  you  aU  good  thmgs  may  yet  send 
him  to  you.  Notice  that  these  men  are  all  well  armed.  "They  all  hold  swords." 
What  swords  are  these  ?  Every  valiant  man  in  Christ's  Israel  holds  the  sword  of 
the  Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God.  Besides  this,  and  here  is  an  opportunity  for 
you  all  to  carry  swords — every  valiant  man  in  God's  Israel  carries  the  sword  of 
prayer,  which  is  comparable  to  those  huge  two-handed  swords  of  the  olden  time, 
which  the  soldier  lifted  up  and  brought  down  with  such  tremendous  force  as  to 
cleave  a  man  in  halves :  prayer  is  a  weapon  which  no  man  can  effectually  resist. 
Further,  these  men  are  not  only  well  armed,  but  they  are  weU  trained.  They  are  all 
expert  in  war  ;  men  who  have  endured  temptations  themselves  ;  men  whose  souls 
have  been  exercised  ;  men  who  have  slain  both  the  lion  and  the  bear,  and  are  men 
of  war  from  their  youth.  Further,  these  men  were  not  only  well  trained,  but  you 
will  see  that  they  were  always  ready.  Each  man  has  his  sword  upon  his  thigh, 
ready  to  be  drawn  forth.  Observe  also  that  these  men  were  watchful,  for  ' '  they 
had  their  sword  on  thefr  thigh  because  of  fear  in  the  night. "  They  never  sleep, 
but  watch  always  for  the  Church's  interest.  Pray  ye  that  the  Lord  may  raise  up 
many  such,  who  night  and  day  with  tears  shall  watch  for  the  souls  of  men,  and 
against  the  enemies  of  our  Israel.  III.  The  excellency  of  this  chariot  in 
WHICH  Jesus  rides.  It  is  not  difficult  to  convey  to  persons  the  most  unacquainted 
with  Eastern  maimers  and  customs,  au  idea  of  what  this  palanquin  is.     It  is  a  sort 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

of  large  sedan  in  which  one  or  two  persoM  may  recline  with  ease.  Of  course,  this 
palanquin  could  not  be  made  of  gold  or  sflyer,  because  then  it  would  be  too  heavy 
for  carriage  ;  it  must  be  made  of  wood  ;  hence  King  Solomon  made  a  bed,  or  chariot, 
or  palanquin,  of  the  wood  of  Lebanon.  Then  there  needs  to  be  four  pillars  support- 
ing the  covering  and  the  curtains  ;  the  pUlars  thereof  are  of  sUver.  The  bottom  of 
it  should  be  something  massive,  in  order  to  sustain  the  weight  of  the  person  ;  the 
bottom  thereof  is  of  gold.  The  canopy  on  the  top  is  a  covering  of  purple.  Since 
to  lie  on  gold  would  be  very  unpleasant,  it  is  covered  with  delicate,  daintily  wrought 
carpets  ;  and  so  we  have  the  bottom  thereof  paved,  or  rather  carpeted  with  love  for 
the  daughters  of  Jerusalem.  Some  delicate  devices  of  needlework  adorn  the  bottom 
of  this  bed-chariot  in  which  the  king  and  his  spouse  recline  during  their  journey. 
The  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  are  comparable,  for  their  antiquity,  for  their  sweet 
fragrance,  for  their  incorruptibility,  to  the  wood  of  Lebanon.  The  Gospel  of  Christ 
never  decays ;  Jesus  Christ  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  Not  one 
eiugle  truth  bears  any  sign  of  rot.  And  to  those  souls  that  are  enlightened  from 
above,  the  Gospel  gives  forth  a  fragrance  far  richer  than  the  wood  of  Lebanon.  As 
for  the  silver  pillars  which  bear  up  the  canopy,  to  what  should  I  liken  them  but  to 
the  attributes  of  God  which  support  and  guarantee  the  efficiency  of  the  great 
atonement  of  Christ  beneath  which  we  are  sheltered.  There  is  the  silver  pillar  of 
God's  justice.  He  cannot,  He  will  not  smite  the  soul  that  hides  beneath  tne  Cross 
of  Chnst.  Then  stands  the  next,  the  solid  pillar  of  His  power.  "  They  shall  never 
perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  My  hand  ;  My  Father  which  gave  them 
Me  is  greater  than  all,  and  none  is  able  to  pluck  them  out  of  My  Father's  hand." 
Then  on  the  other  side  is  the  pillar  of  His  love,  a  silver  pillar,  indeed,  bright  and 
sparkling  to  the  eye  ;  love  unchanging  and  eternal,  strong  as  the  power  and  fast  as 
the  justice  which  bear  up  the  canopy  on  the  other  side.  And  here  on  this  side 
stands  immutability,  another  column  upon  which  the  atonement  rests.  If  God 
could  change,  then  might  He  cast  away  His  blood-bought ;  but  "because  I  am  God 
and  change  not,  therefore,  ye  sons  of  Jacob,  rejoice."  As  for  the  covering  of  the 
chariot,  it  is  of  purple.  I  need  not  tell  you  where  it  was  dyed.  No  Tyrian  hues 
are  mingled  here.  As  for  the  bottom  of  this  palanquin,  which  is  of  gold— may  not 
this  represent  the  eternal  purpose  and  counsel  of  God,  that  purpose  which  Ha 
formed  in  Himself  or  ever  the  earth  was  ?  Then,  to  make  this  all  soft  and  pleasant 
to  recline  upon,  here  is  pavement  of  needlework.  Soft  cushions  of  love  on  which  to 
rest.  There  is  a  double  meaning  here,  for  both  the  bride  and  bridegroom  find  rest 
in  love.  Our  Lord  finds  rest  in  the  love  of  His  people.  ' '  Here  will  I  dwell  for 
ever."  They  do,  as  it  were,  make  these  carpets  of  needlework  in  their  love  and 
affection  for  Him,  and  in  their  trust  and  confidence  in  Him  ;  and  here  He  rests.  On 
the  other  hand,  our  Beloved  spent  His  life  to  work  for  us  our  bed  of  rest,  so  that  we 
must  translate  it  "  love  of,"  as  well  as  love  for  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem."  Wa 
rest  in  Christ's  love ;  He  rests  in  our  love.  IV.  The  duty  of  every  BELiEviNa 
HEART  in  connection  with  the  subject.  Let  every  believer,  while  he  recognizes 
himself  as  part  of  the  Church  inside  the  palanquin,  yet  look  upon  himself  personally 
as  one  of  the  daughters  of  Zion,  and  let  us  each  go  forth  this  morning  to  meet  King 
Solomon.  He  is  the  Wonderful,  the  Counsellor,  the  Mighty  God,  the  Evei  lasting 
Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  and  therefore  is  He  King  Solomon  going  forth.  Get  up 
from  your  beds  of  sloth  ;  rise  from  your  chambers  of  ease  ;  go  forth,  go  forth  to  pray, 
to  labour,  to  suffer ;  go  forth  to  live  in  purity,  leaving  Babylon  behind  ;  go  forth  to 
walk  with  Him  alone,  leaving  even  your  kinsfolk  and  acquaintance  if  they  will  not 
follow  with  you.  Wherefore  tarriest  thou  at  home  when  the  King  is  abroad? 
"  Behold  the  Bridegroom  cometh,  come  ye  forth  to  meet  Him,"  and  behold  King 
Solomon.  To-day  let  your  eye  rest  upon  Him.  Let  your  eye  behold  the  head  that 
to-day  is  crowned  with  glory,  wearing  many  crowns.  {0.  H.  Spwrgeon.)  Christ'* 
ascension: — ^The  simile  is  a  most  striking  one.  When  Christ  was  on  earth.  He 
came,  as  it  were,  to  a  wilderness.  He  lived  in  the  wilderness  whUe  here,  in  the 
desert,  on  the  mountain-top.  It  was  at  His  ascension  that  He  appeared  as  pillars  of 
smoke  rising  out  of  the  earthly  wilderness.  "When  He  had  spoken  these  things,  | 
while  they  beheld.  He  was  taken  up,  and  a  cloud  received  Him  out  of  their  sight."  ' 
And  when  we  consider  who  it  was  that  ascended — the  well-beloved  Son  of  God,  in 
whom  the  Father  was  well  pleased,  in  whom  His  soul  delighted,  who  finished  His 
work  on  earth — ^we  see  still  further  the  propriety  of  the  figure.  The  smoke  was  not  i 
the  smoke  of  offensiveness,  but  the  fragrance  of  perfume,  the  smoke  of  the  sweet-  ' 
smelling  incense,  filling  both  earth  and  heaven  with  fragrance.  I.  Christ's  j 
▲BOSNSiOK  18  ZHS  CONSUHUAIION  QW  His  wo&x.     1.  It  WM  not  Complete  ontil  | 


CHAP,  m.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOIT.  Ot 

this  had  taken  place.  Before  His  crucifixion  He  was  working  out  our  salvation  and 
accomplishing  the  purposes  of  His  Father.  When  in  the  grave  He  was  under  the 
dominion  of  death.  After  His  resurrection  He  was  still  in  this  world  of  sin  and 
sorrow.  But  when  He  ascended  into  heaven  the  whole  work  He  had  undertaken 
to  perform  was  carried  to  a  fitting  conclusion.  2.  We  must  bear  in  mind  that  when 
Christ  ascended  into  heaven  it  was  not  merely  a  return  to  the  place  He  cam«  from. 
He  came  from  heaven  a  spiiit,  an  essence.  Ho  returned,  the  same  spirit  indeed,  but 
bearing  with  Hira  a  human  body.  His  ascension,  then,  was  rather  the  entrance  of 
renewed  manhood  into  the  presence  of  God,  the  admission  of  justified  humanity  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  II.  Christ's  ascension  was  the  earnest  of  cue 
PEBfiONAL  BLESSINGS.  Two  important  objects  were  to  be  especially  assured  to  us. 
1.  The  preparing  a  place — "I  go  that  I  may  prepare  a  place  for  you."  What  thia 
preparation  involved  we  cannot  exactly  say.  2.  The  giving  His  Spirit — in  other 
words,  preparing  us  for  the  place.  3.  The  officiating  as  High-Priest.  III.  Christ's 
ASCENSION  WAS  A  SUITABLE  REWARD  TO  His  WORK.  (Homilist.)  Like  pillars 
of  smoke. — Pillars  of  smoke : — The  architecture  of  the  smoke  is  wondrous,  whether 
God  with  His  finger  curls  it  into  a  cloud  or  rounds  it  into  a  dome,  or  point*  it 
in  a  spire,  or  spreads  it  in  a  wing,  or,  as  in  the  text,  hoists  it  in  a  pillar.  In  the 
first  place,  these  pillars  of  smoke  indicate  the  suffering  the  Church  of  God  has 
endured.  The  smoke  of  martyrs'  homes  and  martyrs'  bodies  if  rolling  up  all  at  once 
would  have  eclipsed  the  noonday  sun,  and  turned  the  brightest  day  the  world  ever 
saw  into  a  midnight.  Has  persecution  ceased  ?  Ask  that  young  man  who  is  trying 
to  be  a  Christian  in  a  store  or  factory,  where  from  morning  to  night  he  is  the  butt 
of  all  the  mean  witticisms  of  unbelieving  employes.  Ask  that  mfe  whose  husband 
makes  her  fondness  for  the  house  of  God,  and  even  her  kneeling  prayer  by  the 
bedside,  a  derision,  and  is  no  more  fit  for  her  holy  companionship  than  a  filthy  crow 
would  be  fit  companion  for  a  robin  or  a  golden  oriole.  For  the  body,  thanks  to 
God,  there  are  now  no  swords  or  fiery  stakes,  but  for  the  souls  of  thousands  of  the 
good,  in  a  figurative  sense,  rack  and  gibbet  and  Torquemada.  The  symbol  of  the 
domestic  and  social  and  private  and  public  suffering  of  a  great  multitude  of  God's 
dear  children,  pillars  of  smoke.  But  nothing  can  be  more  beautiful  than  the  figures 
of  smoke  on  a  clear  sky.  You  can  see  what  you  will  in  the  contour  of  this  volatile 
vapour,  now  enchanted  castles,  now  troops  of  horsemen,  now  bannered  procession, 
now  winged  couriers,  now  a  black  angel  of  wrath  under  a  spear  of  the  sunshine 
turned  to  an  angel  of  light,  and  now  from  horizon  to  horizon  the  air  is  a  picture- 
gallery  filled  with  masterpieces  of  which  God  is  the  artist,  morning  clouds  of  smoke 
bom  in  the  sunrise,  and  evening  clouds  of  smoke  laid  in  the  burnished  sepulchres  of 
the  sunset.  The  beauty  of  the  transfigured  smoke  is  a  Divine  symbol  of  the  beauty 
of  the  Church.  The  fairest  of  all  the  fair  is  she.  Her  mission  is  to  cover  the  earth 
with  a  supernatural  gladness,  to  open  all  the  prison-doors,  to  balsam  all  the  wounds, 
to  moss  all  the  graves,  to  burn  up  the  night  in  the  fireplace  of  a  great  morning,  to 
change  handcuffs  into  diamonded  wristlets,  to  turn  the  whole  race  around,  and 
whereas  it  faced  death,  commanding  it,  "  Bight  about  face  for  heaven  1 "  According 
to  the  number  of  the  spires  of  the  churches  in  all  our  cities,  towns  and  neighbour- 
hoods, are  the  good  homes,  the  worldly  prosperities,  and  the  pme  morals,  and  the 
happy  souls.  According  as  the  churches  are  numerous  are  the  crimes  few.  Accord- 
ing as  the  churches  are  few  the  crimes  are  numerous.  The  most  beautiful  organiza- 
tion the  world  ever  saw  or  ever  will  see  is  the  much-maligned  Church,  the  friend  of 
all  good,  the  foe  of  all  evil,  "  fair  as  the  moon  and  clear  as  the  sun."  Beautiful  iu 
her  Author,  beautiful  in  her  mission,  the  heroine  of  the  centuries,  the  bride  of  Christ, 
the  queen  of  the  nations  I  Through  her  gates  will  march  aU  the  influences  for  good 
that  shall  ever  reach  our  world.  Take  its  membership  as  a  mass,  not  speaking  of 
the  acknowledged  exceptions,  they  are  the  noblest,  grandest,  kindest,  best  men  and 
women  of  the  ages.  But  for  them  the  earth  would  long  ago  have  been  a  burned-out 
volcano.  They  have  been  the  salt  that  has  kept  the  human  race  from  putrefaction 
insufferable  either  to  human  or  angelic  olfactories.     {T.  De  Witt  Tdlmage.) 

Yers.  9,  10.  King  Solomon  made  himself  a  chariot  of  the  wood  of  Lebanon. — 

Solomon's  chariot : — I.  Solomon  was  a  type  of  Jesus  Christ.  1.  In  his  offices  he 
represented  Jesus.  (1)  He  was,  as  you  know  full  well,  a  king,  and  a  very  notable 
king,  richer  and  wiser  and  more  glorious  than  any  of  the  kings  of  the  earth.  And 
what  shall  we  say  of  Jesus,  who,  even  when  He  was  here  in  flesh  and  humiliation, 
was  still  a  King  f  Now  that  He  is  exalted  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  He  seems  to  be 
jet  more  kingly ;  but  He  is  destined  to  sit  upon  a  still  nobler  throne,  and  to  wield 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

a  still  wider  influence.     (2)  But  Solomon,  in  this  passage,  and,  indeed,  throughout 
this  wonderful  book,  is  seen  as  a  bridegroom.      Herein  also  he  represents  Jesus 
Christ.     Christ,  as  the  Head  of  the  Church,  calls  us  His  precious  and  beloved  bride. 
All  He  has  we  have.     "  AU  that  is  Mine  is  thine,"  says  Jesus,  and  the  bonds  that 
bind  us  to  Him  neither  life,  nor  death,  nor  earth,  nor  hell,  can  ever  break,  or  even 
stretch.     Blessed  be  the  name  of  Him  who,  while  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  us 
brethren,  admits  His  people  into  still  closer  relationship,  and  calls  them  collectively, 
' '  My  sister.  My  spouse  " !     (3)  Moreover,  Solomon  was  distinguished  as  a  great 
temple  builder.    Jesus  Christ  is  the  architect  and  builder  of  the  Temple  that  shall 
never  fade  away.     Solomon's  temple  has  long  ago  crumbled  into  dust,  and  its  suc- 
cessors have  passed  away,  but  Jesus  Christ  has  been  engaged  from  aU  eternity  erect- 
ing a  Temple  which  abides,  which  will  outlive  the  wreck  of  matter  and  the  crash  of 
worlds,  which  will  shine  in  greater  splendour  as  the  everlasting  ages  come  and  go. 
He  is  at  once  the  architect  and  the  builder  of  it ;  He  is  also  the  foundation-stone, 
and  the  chief  corner-stone  of  it.    2,  But  there  are  certain  qualities  that  distinguished 
the  king  that  shine  resplendent  in  the  King  of  kings.     (1)  Solomon  was  the  wisest 
of  men  ;  he  was  wise  enough  originally  to  ask  for  wisdom.     Then  God  gave  him  not 
only  wisdom,  but  riches  and  honour  and  power.     But  oh,  how  wise  is  Jesus  !     In 
Him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  of  knowledge,  and  He  is  made  unto  ua 
wisdom.     (2)  If  Solomon  was  wealthy,  what  shall  we  say  of  the  Christ  of  God  ?    The 
treasures  of  Solomon's  house,  and  the  abundance  of  his  table  amazed  all  who  visited 
his  court,  but  think  of  the  abundance  of  the  wealth  and  fulness  of  Jesus  Christ.    He 
is  the  possessor  of  all  things,  He  is  God's  own  Son  and  Heir.     (3)  How  glorious 
Solomon  was,  though  indeed  Christ  said  of  the  lilies  that  Solomon,  in  aU  his  glory, 
was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  these.     Yet  it  must  be  admitted  that  Solomon's  court 
was  magnificent.     Oriental  splendour  was  at  its  grandest  in  his  case,  but  oh,  how 
Jesus  outshines  him,  not  with  the  same  sort  of  glory,  but  with  the  glory  that 
excelleth,  the  glory  of  His  grace,  the  beauty  of  His  holiness,  the  grandeur  of  His 
goodness  !     If  the  lilies  outvied  and  excelled  Solomon  in  all  his  glory,  what  shall  be 
said  of  Jesus,  who  is  at  once  the  rose  of  Sharon  and  the  lily  of  the  valleys,  the 
chiefest  among  ten  thousand  and  the  altogether  lovely  ?     II.  The  king's  ghabiot 
IS  A  TYPE  OF  Christ's  covenant,  and  of  the  Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God. 
It  was  not  a  chariot  really,  but  rather  a  travelling  couch  or  palanquin,  in  which  the 
king  himself  and  his  spouse  were  seated.     It  was  the  place  of  rest,  in  which  these 
twain  reclined  at  ease,  while  they  came  up  from  the  wilderness  towards  the  great 
and  glorious  city.     Now  such  is  the  covenant  to  us.     1.  Now  notice  concerning  this 
so-called  chariot  that  Solomon  himself  made  it.     "  King  Solomon  made  himself  a 
chariot."     I  do  not  mean  that  the  royal  hands  were  actually  engaged  in  its  con- 
struction— we  can  hardly  suppose  that — but  he  gave  instnictions  for  its  construction, 
perhaps  personally  superintended  the  making  of  it.     I  do  say,  however,  of  the 
covenant  of  the  Lord  our  God,  that  He  Himself  prepared  it.     As  Noah  built  the 
ark,  so  God  Himself  has  arranged  the  terms  of  the  covenant.     He  Himself  has 
signed  it ;  Jesus  Himself  has  sealed  it  with  His  own  precious  blood.     Christ  has 
built  this  chariot  for  Himself  to  ride  in.     You  may  be  sure  it  is  well  and  truly  built, 
then  ;  I  have  not  the  slightest  fear  in  trusting  myself  on  board  that  travelling  couch, 
for  I  shall  share  it  with  Jesus.     2.  Notice  the  materials  of  its  construction.     This 
royal  litter  is  said  to  have  been  of  cedar — "the  wood  of  Lebanon."    That  is  the 
finest  of  all  the  woods,  the  most  lasting  and  the  most  fragrant.     It  is  as  if  to  say 
that  the  covenant  which  God  has  made  with  Jesus  Christ  on  behalf  of  all  who  love 
Him  and  trust  Him,  is  a  covenant  that  lasts,  and  which,  while  it  lasts,  is  full  of  joy 
and   fragrance.     "He  made  pillars  thereof  of  silver."    This  represented   Divine 
holiness  and  infinite  purity.     I  notice  that  the  floor  or  basis  was  of  gold.     It  was 
constructed  of  this  imperishable  and  unchangeable  metal,  because  it  was  intended  to 
set  forth  the  immutable  purpose  and  the  imchanging  decree  of  the  infallible  God. 
Over  all  was  a  purple  canopy,  with  equally  royal  curtains  hanging  by  the  sides, 
screening  from  the  too-hot  sun.     Ah,  here  is  sovereign  grace,  here  is  atoning  blood, 
here  is  the  doctrine  of  the  substitution,  for  we  can  look  through  these  purple  curtains, 
even  towards  the  sun  of  God's  holiness,  and  find  the  exceeding  brightness  bearable 
because  Jesus  Christ,  the  Day's-Man,  has  come  between  us  and  Him.     It  was  paved 
with  love  for  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  or,  as  some  think,  the  chariot  was  lined 
and  upholstered  with  embroidered  work,  so  that  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  should 
be  glad  at  sight  of  it,  and  the  bride  herself  be  filled  with  joy,     3.  What  is  the 
purpose  of  this  covenant,  and  of  this  Gospel  of  His  grace  ?    A  parallel  purpose  to- 
that  of  Solomon's  chariot.    "  Whereby  believers  are  carried  to  heaven,"  says  Crudeu. 


CHAP.  ra.l  TEE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  93 

The  spouse  shares  the  triumph  to  Zion  as  well  as  in  it,  while  the  daughters  of 
Jerusalem  go  out  to  meet  the  cavalcade,  and  to  share  the  joy.  {T.  Spurgcon.)  The 
saiiW s  palanquin : — It  seems  no  part  of  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  that  we  should  take 
this  description  to  pieces,  and  try  to  allegorize  the  several  parts.  The  intention  \a 
to  represent  to  us  the  fact  that  the  believer  is  carried  onward  to  heaven  in  a  convey- 
ance as  costly  and  glorious  as  that  here  described  ;  that  the  materials  are  of  the  richest, 
choicest,  most  durable  character ;  that  the  midst  is  paved  or  tessellated  with  love. 
The  provision  made,  the  means  provided  for  bringing  us  to  glory,  are  of  a  rare  and 
splendid  nature.  After  exhausting  the  things  most  valuable  among  men,  making  the 
pillars  silver,  the  railing  gold,  the  seat  or  couch  purple,  he  adopts  a  feature  in  the 
description  entirely  new,  and  says  the  midst  is  curiously  wrought  with  something 
more  precious  than  silver  or  gold,  even  with  love  itself — showing  that  the  saint,  while 
thus  passing  through  the  wilderness  between  this  world  and  heaven,  between  our  state 
of  guilt  and  our  state  of  glory,  is  in  a  palanquin  of  the  most  costly  make,  borne  up 
in  the  hands  of  angels,  surrounded  by  an  armed  angelic  guard,  and  reclining  on  a  soft 
couch  beautiful  as  purple,  the  most  costly  colour,  with  the  midst  of  the  litter  formed 
of  love — the  many  acts  of  Divine  love  from  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Spirit,  there  com- 
bining underneath  us  like  the  different  pieces  in  a  iDeautiful  mosaic,  tessellated  pave- 
ment. In  the  spirit  of  this  passage,  those  who  wait  on  the  Lord  are  said  to  renew 
their  strength  ;  and  He  will  give  His  angels  charge  concerning  such,  to  bear  them 
up  in  their  hands,  lest  at  any  time  they  dash  their  foot  against  a  stone  (Isa.  zl.  31 ; 
Ps.  xci.  12).     ((?.  Burrowes.) 

Yer.  10.  The  midst  thereof  being  paved  with  love,  for  the  danghters  of  Jerusalem. — 

Paved  with  love : — This  palanquin  or  travelling  chariot  in  which  the  king  is  carried, 
represents  the  covenant  of  grace,  the  plan  of  salvation,  and,  in  fact,  the  whole  system 
by  which  the  Lord  Jesus  comes  down  in  mercy  among  men,  and  by  which  He  bears 
His  people  along  with  Himself  through  the  wilderness  of  this  world,  onward  to  the 
rest  which  He  hath  prepared  for  them.  It  is,  in  a  word,  the  mediatorial  work  of 
Jesns.  I.  Notice  the  growth  w^hich  is  indicated  here  as  to  oitr  views  of 
THE  covenant  OF  GRACE.  The  description  advances  step  by  step,  each  sentence 
mentioning  an  additional  and  far-enhanced  preciousness.  At  the  first  glance  the 
sweet  singer  who  speaks  in  this  Song  perceived  that  the  chariot  was  made  of  cedar, 
a  costly  wood  ;  a  closer  view  revealed  ' '  the  silver  pillars,  beauteous  to  behold  " :  i 
farther  observation  showed  "  the  basis  all  of  burnished  gold."  From  cedar  to  silver, 
and  from  silver  to  gold,  we  have  a  clear  advance  as  to  precious  material.  On  looking 
again,  the  observer  remarks  "  the  top  of  princely  purple,"  which  is  yet  more  precious 
as  the  type  of  imperial  dignity,  and  the  token  of  that  effectual  atonement  wMch  was 
wrought  out  by  the  ensanguined  stream  of  Calvary.  The  blood  which  dyed  that 
purple  canopy  is  much  more  precious  than  gold  that  perisheth,  though  it  be  tried 
with  fire.  And  then,  though  one  would  think  there  could  be  no  advance  beyond 
the  precious  blood,  the  Song  proceeds  yet  one  step  further,  for  we  find  that  ' '  the 
midst  thereof  was  paved  with  love,  for  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem."  The  covenant 
is  love  in  its  secret  places,  all  love,  unalloyed  love,  invisible  love,  nothing  else  but 
love.  When  one  comes  to  know  most  of  the  covenant,  and  admires  the  wisdom,  the 
power,  the  purity,  the  eternity  of  all  that  God  has  done,  yet  the  most  striking 
characteristic  of  it  to  the  advanced  Christian  is  the  love,  the  mighty  love  of  God,  by 
which  he  is  brought  by  Jesus  Christ  into  eternal  salvation.  Thou  hast  crowned  ma 
with  lovingkindness  ;  Thou  hast  loved  my  soul  out  of  the  pit ;  Thou  hast  loved  me, 
and  given  Thyself  for  me.  Thy  love  has  redeemed  me  witn  a  price  most  precious  ; 
Thy  love  has  made  me  what  I  am  ;  Thy  love  carries  on  the  work,  and  Thy  love  will 
complete  it,  and  present  me  to  Thee  in  its  own  perfect  image  ;  for  "the  midst  of  it 
is  paved  with  love,  for  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem."  II.  Note  the  position  from 
■WHICH  the  love  mentioned  IN  OITR  TEXT  IS  BEST  SEEN.  "The  midst  thereof  is 
paved  with  love."  It  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  seen  from  the  outside.  The  mere 
outsider  understands  nothing  of  the  love  of  God  to  His  people  as  displayed  in  the 
covenant  of  grace.  "The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him,  and  He 
will  show  them  His  covenant."  And  so  note  next,  when  the  Christian  himself 
stands  apart  from  his  Lord,  and  judges  by  outward  appearances,  he  cannot  perceive, 
as  once  he  did,  the  lovingkindness  of  the  Lord.  Providence  grows  dark  as  a  winter's 
day.  The  tried  believer  cries,  '*  My  wife  has  been  taken  from  me  ;  my  property  is 
melting  away,  my  business  fades  ;  I  am  sick  in  body  and  weary  in  soul ;  I  cannot 
see  a  trace  of  the  love  of  God  to  me  in  all  this. "  Brother,  the  description  in  the 
6ong  dees  not  say  ^at  the  chariot  is  plated  with  love  on  the  outside,  but  it  is  paved. 


fi  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

•with  love  vrithin,  "in  the  midst  of  it."  Oh,  that  you  had  faith  to  believe  that  the 
heart  and  real  core  of  every  providence  is  love.  The  exterior  of  it  may  be  as  a  thorn 
hedge,  but  sweet  fruit  ripens  within.  Look  at  the  tessellated  pavement  of  love 
beneath  your  feet  for  a  moment.  See  you  not  the  Father's  love — that  golden  mass 
of  uncreated  love,  for  the  Father  Himself  loveth  you :  look  at  Jesus'  love,  another 
diamond  pavement  beneath  your  foot :  Jesus  loved  you  to  the  death  with  a  love  that 
many  waters  could  not  quench,  nor  floods  drown  :  look  at  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  too : 

gually  precious  is  the  tender  afiFection  of  the  loving  Comforter.  Think  how  the 
oly  Ghost  has  borne  with  you,  has  striven  with  you,  and  endured  your  ill  manners 
in  the  wilderness,  and  blessed  you  still.  Look  at  those  delightful  embroideries  from 
the  Divine  needle — the  precious  promises.  A  thousand  promises  there  are,  but  they 
are  all  love.  Look  down  and  see  how  all  the  attributes  of  God  are  engaged  for  you, 
but  they  are  all  in  league  with  love.  Look,  then,  at  aU  the  providences  of  God 
towards  you,  at  all  the  exercises  of  His  grace  in  your  heart,  and  you  will  see  many 
and  strange  colours  of  varied  beauty,  all  blending  in  one  wondrous  pattern  of  deep, 
unsearchable  love.  III.  Notice  the  peculiar  position  of  the  pavement  of 
LOVE  DESCRIBED  IN  THE  TEXT.  It  is  "in  the  midst  "  of  the  chariot,  and  only  frt)m 
the  midst  is  it  to  be  seen.  It  is  in  the  midst  of  it ;  and  therefore  Jesus  rides  upon 
it,  and  His  espoused  ones  ride  upon  it.  It  is  a  very  simple  thought,  but  it  richly 
deserves  to  be  beaten  out  a  little.  Jesus  is  represented  here  as  the  King  in  the 
chariot,  and  as  the  chariot  is  lined  with  love,  we  are  taught  that  Jesus  dwells  in 
love.  Where  is  He  nowl  Among  the  thrones  and  principalities  above,  but  He 
abides  still  in  love.  Love  brought  Him  down  from  heaven  to  earth,  love  conducted 
Him  in  aU  His  weary  journeys  over  the  acres  of  Palestine :  love  led  Him  to  the 
garden,  the  death-sweat,  and  the  cross ;  and  equally  at  this  hour  does  love  attend 
Him :  He  loves  in  heaven  as  He  loved  below.  Whatever  He  is  doing,  whatever  He 
I  is  feeling,  whatever  He  is  saying,  we  know  this  one  thing  about  Him,  He  dwells 
f  in  love  to  us.  He  is  in  His  chariot,  and  all  around  Him  in  that  chariot  is  love. 
IV.  Dwell  on  that  love  itself  for  a  moment.  Remember  it  is  special  love.  There 
is  an  electing,  discriminating,  distinguishing  love,  which  is  settled  upon  a  chosen 
people — a  love  which  goes  forth  to  none  beside,  but  only  to  them ;  and  it  is  this 
love  which  is  the  true  resting-place  of  the  saint.  It  is  love  imdeserved,  for  what 
daughter  of  Jerusalem  ever  deserved  that  our  glorious  King  should  fall  in  love  with 
her  ?  It  is  a  love,  therefore,  which  is  a  theme  for  eternal  wonder.  Why  didst  Thou 
I  love  me.  Redeemer  ?  Why  didst  Thou  make  a  covenant  of  grace  with  me,  and  line 
that  covenant  with  immuteble  love  ?  This  love  is  everlasting  and  eternal.  It  never 
had  a  beginning,  it  never  will  have  an  end.  Simply  as  I  have  stated  the  truth,  it 
is  a  nut  with  heaven  for  its  kernel.  Thou  wast  always  loved,  0  believer,  and  thoa 
always  shalt  be,  come  what  may.  It  is  love  unrivalled,  for  never  was  there  such 
affection  as  that  which  Christ  has  for  His  chosen  ;  love  unexampled,  to  which  none 
of  us  shall  ever  reach.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon. ) 

Yer.  11.  Gh>  forth,  0  ye  daughters  of  Zion,  and  behold  King  Solomon  with  the 
•town  wherewith  his  mother  crowned  him,  in  the  day  of  his  esponsala. — Th« 
em'OTudion  of  Jesus : — Here  we  have,  by  the  voice  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  account 
of  the  coronation  of  human  nature  in  the  person  of  the  Incarnate  Word.  As  *'  the 
day  of  our  Lord's  Resurrection  is  the  day  wherein  the  dignity  of  the  everlasting 
priesthood  was  actually  collated  upon  Him,"  so  "the  day  of  His  ascension,  or 

E lacing  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  is  the  day  of  His  solemn  enthronization,  when  the 
lOrd  'sent  forth  the  rod  of  His  strength  out  of  Zion.' "  But  the  coronation  of  our 
Lord  is  not  the  quiet  accession  of  the  heir  of  a  desired  and  long-descended  line  to 
the  peaceftd  seat  of  his  fathers  :  it  is  rather  the  final  triumph  of  a  mighty  warrior 
who  through  blood  hath  waded  to  the  throne.  It  is  rather  the  eventual  vindication 
of  the  true  heir,  who,  as  in  many  an  Oriental  land,  has  been  debarred  from  His  suc- 
flession  by  the  intrigues  of  His  enemies,  and  has  to  obtain  His  own  by  the  might  of 
His  holy  arm.  And  who  are  they  whom  the  triumphant  Lord  hath  thus  routed  ? 
I  will  not  speak  of  those  temporal  enemies  who  now,  or  in  times  past,  oppose  and 
resist  His  will.  Rather  wiU  I  speak  of  the  spiritual  enemies  of  this  Monarch,  whom 
He  hath  overthrown — Satan,  sin  and  death :  each  a  mighty  potentate — Satan,  "  the 
vrince  of  this  world"  ;  sin,  that  "reigned  imto  death  "  "in  our  mortal  bodies  "  ; 
death,  that  by  one  offence  reigned  "from  Adam  till  Moses."  Now  the  royal  work 
of  our  ascended  Lord  is  to  subdue  and  to  destroy  these ;  and  because,  though 
•ootohed  and  crippled,  they  still  exist,  so  the  royalty  of  our  Lord  is  a  present  and 
Potential  act  of  conquering  dominion.    The  ' '  demonstration  of  the  eternal  justice  ot 


CHAP.  IT.]  THE  SONQ  OF  SOLOMOK  95 

God,"  and  the  probatioD  of  holy  souls,  require  that  still  the  powers  of  evil  should 
be  allowed  ;  and  therefore  is  the  Eternal  Son  "set  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God, 
from  henceforth  expecting  till  His  enemies  be  made  His  footstool. "  And  yet  the 
conquest  is  complete,  so  far  as  our  condition  of  trial  will  allow.  Satan  subdued  is 
now  the  unwilling  servant  of  Divine  justice  in  the  case  of  the  reprobate,  while  he 
has  no  power  to  hurt  the  elect  of  God.  Sin  still  remains,  in  all  its  hideous  mystery, 
as  the  measure  of  the  love  of  the  Cross,  but  has  no  power  over  the  children  of  the 
kingdom  ;  and  even  death  itself,  though  still  allowed  to  fill  its  place  in  the  physical 
world,  has  now  changed  its  conditions,  and  altered  its  position  in  the  kingdom  of 
grace,  its  realm  being  the  ante-chamber  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  and  itself  the 
harbinger  of  a  joyous  resurrection.  But  we  must  not  confine  our  ideas  of  the  royalty 
of  Christ  to  a  mighty  warrior  going  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer.  Our  Heavenly 
Monarch  is  to  His  own  no  ' '  minister  of  God,  a  revenger  to  execute  wrath  upon  him 
that  doeth  evil " ;  but  yielding  to  the  deep  necessities  of  the  benevolence  of  His 
attributes,  ' '  He  doeth  according  to  His  will  in  the  army  of  heaven,  and  among  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth  :  and  none  can  stay  His  hand,  or  say  unto  Him,  What  doest 
Thou  ? "  First,  His  reign  is  established  in  the  kingdom  of  the  physical  world.  This 
bursting  springtime,  when  nature  is  at  its  freshest  and  loveliest,  when  the  hidden 
powers  of  vegetable  life,  so  lately  dead  and  inert,  have  again  put  forth  their  might 
to  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  green  carpet  of  the  earth,  and  the  rich  foliage  of  the 
trees  and  the  flowers  reflecting  every  hue  of  paradise  on  the  earth  below,  all  speak  to 
the  eye  of  faith,  as  the  sweet  bird's  song  speaks  to  the  ear,  tells  us  not  merely  of  a 
King,  but  of  a  King  whose  law  shall  not  be  broken,  and  who  shows  us,  by  the 
beauty  of  that  inviolate  law,  how  bright  would  be  His  other  kingdoms,  did  not  the 
free  will  of  man  mar  what  He  had  made  good,  and  defile  what  He  had  pronounced 
pure.  And  next.  His  reign  is  established  in  the  kingdom  of  grace.  Our  blessed 
Saviour  is  King  and  Lord  of  His  Mystical  Body.  That  mighty  organization  is  no 
mere  fortuitous  congeries  of  holy  souls,  unknown  to  men,  known  only  to  God,  with- 
out discipline  or  order  ;  but  it  is  a  well-grounded  polity,  of  which  by  far  the  greater 
part  is  in  heaven,  obeying,  loving,  serving,  adoring,  and  where  here  on  earth  the 
heart  of  man  finds  its  truest  hap[)iness  in  perfect  and  unreserved  submission.  How 
it  comforts  one  in  the  midst  of  the  mysterious  providences  and  spiritual  trials,  and 
strange  dispensations  which  mark  the  coxirse  of  the  fortunes  of  the  Church  here 
below,  to  dwell  upon  that  unswerving  obedience  which  is  paid  Him  by  the  glorious 
hierarchies  above.  The  Lord  is  king,  be  the  people  never  so  impatient.  He  sitteth 
between  the  cherubim,  be  the  nations  never  so  unquiet.  And  more  than  this.  He 
is  the  very  King  and  Lord  of  holy  souls.  When  we  say,  "Thy  kingdom  come," 
what  mighty  thoughts  are  stirred  up  within  us !  May  Thy  reign  be  established 
within  our  hearts! — Thy  kingdom  which  Thou  hast  said  is  "within"  us.  May 
every  power  and  faculty  be  subdued  to  Thy  gracious  commandments  I  Be  Thou  the 
Master  of  our  intellects,  the  Lord  of  our  affections.  Rule  Thou,  and  so  constrain 
our  wills  already  subject  to  Thee,  that  even  in  this  world  we  may  anticipate  the 
perfect  conformity  of  heaven.  Is  the  thought  of  our  Lord's  ascension  as  connected 
with  His  royalty  exhausted  ?  I  trow  not.  The  ascension  of  our  Lord  hath  not 
terminated  in  Himself.  It  is  our  ascension  also.  The  coronation  of  our  Lord  is 
not  merely  the  assumption  of  royal  state  by  our  ascended  Head,  it  is  also  the 
coronation  of  His  body  mystical.  The  nature  of  man  in  the  Person  of  the  Divine 
Word  hath  been  seated  upon  the  throne  of  God.  Who  shall  now  use  unworthy 
words  of  the  worthlessness  of  that  which  is  thus  united  to  God  ?  Who  shall  now 
undervalue  the  exalted  position  of  the  true  Christian  ?  Who  shall  now  dare  to 
profane,  either  in  body,  soul  or  spirit,  that  which  has  attained  to  so  high  a  destiny  t 
{BisJwp  A.  F.  Forbes.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Yeb.  8.  Come  with  Me  from  Lebanon,  My  spouse,  with  Me  from  Lebanon. — The 

invitations  of  Christ : — The  whole  idea  is  that  the  Shulamite Virgin  who  is  sought  as 
a  bride  lives  in  high,  craggy,  cavernous  regions — amid  inhospitable  scenes — and  close 
to  the  mountain  haunts  of  beasts  of  prey.  Such  words  as  Amana,  Shenir,  Hermon, 
and  Lebanon  are  used  to  typify  a  region  of  mountain,  rock,  fastness,  forest,  and 
jungle.     There  the  fair  Shulamite  has  her  native  home.     That  is  one  side  of  tho 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

picture.  On  the  other  side  is  the  King,  who  lives  in  Jerusalem,  the  royal  city,  the 
city  of  peace,  far  away  from  the  haunts  of  leopards  ;  and  He  goes  forth  to  invite  the 
bride  to  leave  the  crag  and  the  den,  the  forest  and  the  danger,  saying,  "  Come  to 
Jerusalem,  to  the  centre  of  civilization,  to  the  home  of  beauty,  to  the  King's  palace, 
to  the  splendid  and  inviolable  home, — no  lion  shall  be  there,  nor  any  ravenous  beast 
go  up  thereon, — come,  0  My  dove,  that  art  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock,  whose  lips  drop 
as  the  honeycomb,  and  the  smell  of  whose  garments  is  as  the  smell  of  Lebanon, — 
come  !  "  How  is  aU  this  sustained  by  collateral  Scripture,  and  made  to  apply  to  the 
Son  of  God  ?  Christ  calls  men  away  from  what  may  be  regarded  as  the  nativities  of 
the  present  scene.  There  must  be  no  division,  no  holding  on  with  both  hands :  the 
attitude  must  not  be  that  of  one  who  has  the  right  foot  in  the  caverns  and  the  left 
foot  in  the  metropolis  :  there  must  be  a  complete  detachment  from  all  that  is  native 
and  original,  and  a  clear  coming  away  with  all  trust  and  love  and  hope  to  the  new 
abode.  Christ  is  calling  us  away  from  our  animalism — the  first  condition  of  our 
birth.  He  will  not  have  it  that  the  body  is  the  man,  that  the  ilesh  is  the  immortal 
part  of  humanity.  So  Christ  calls  the  Church,  which  is  His  Bride,  the  Lamb's  Wife, 
— He  calls  her  away  from  stony  places,  and  from  low  associations,  and  from  connec- 
tions with  lions'  dens  and  mountain  haunts  of  leopards, — calls  humanity  away  from 
flesh,  and  earth,  and  time,  and  sense,  and  prison,  into  all  the  upper  spaces,  where 
the  blue  sky  is  unclouded,  and  where  the  infinite  liberty  never  degenerates  into 
licence.  What  does  Christ  call  us  from  ?  Precisely  what  the  Shulamite  was  called 
from — from  stony  places  and  desert  lands  and  mountain  fastnesses — from  "desola- 
tion desolate. "  When  does  Christ  ever  call  men  from  knowledge  to  ignorance  ?  from 
abundance  of  spiritual  realization  to  poverty  and  leanness  of  souL?  When  does  Jesua 
Christ  ever  offer  men  an  inhospitable  welcome  ?  The  great  offers  of  the  Gospel  are  in 
such  terms  as  these :  Eat  and  diink  abundantly,  0  beloved  !  Ho,  eveiy  one  that 
thirsteth,  come  1  We  are  called  not  only  from  desolateness,  but  from  danger.  If 
we  have  not  entered  into  the  spirit-life,  the  faith-Ufe,  that  higher  life  which  sees  the 
invisible  and  realizes  the  eternal,  then  we  are  simply  walking  through  perils  without 
number,  and  as  for  seductiveness  or  subtlety  or  power  of  involving  us  in  mischief  and 
in  suffering,  no  language  can  express  the  reality  of  the  situation.  We  are  called  not 
only  from  desolateness  and  from  danger,  but  from  incongruity.  What  a  background 
was  the  mountain  region  to  the  fair  and  lovely  Shulamite  !  Surely  that  fair  dove 
was  made  for  Jemsalem,  and  not  for  some  region  of  caverns  or  mountain  haunts  of 
leopards.  Save  her  !  This  sense  of  incongruity  afflicts  men  who  profess  to  be  under 
the  spell  of  refined  and  elevating  taste.  What  shocks  do  men  receive  who  profess  to 
be  refined  and  large  in  their  culture !  A  musician  feels  as  if  he  were  staggering 
under  a  blow  of  insult  when  he  hears  a  false  note.  Is  there  no  law  of  incongruity  in 
morals,  in  spiritual  relation?  "What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah?" — why  wanderest 
thou  in  these  desert  places,  0  thou  child  of  the  king,  meant  to  adorn  a  palace  ?  Why 
estranged  and  ragged  and  humiliated  and  debased,  thou  child  of  fortune  ?  Explain 
the  ghastly  incongruity  !  Christ  ever  calls  men  to  home,  to  security,  to  honour. 
Herein  he  is  like  the  man  who  seeks  the  Shulamite  for  Ms  bride  :  he  calls  her  to  the 
palace,  to  Jerusalem,  to  all  beauty  and  comfort  and  security.  Jesus  Christ  says,  "  I 
go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you."  When  Jesus  Christ  prepares  a  place,  who  can  describe 
its  largeness,  its  beauty,  its  completeness !  ' '  Where  I  am,  there  ye  shall  be  also  ; " 
and  where  He  is,  heaven  is.  But,  there  is  on  the  road  a  cross  ?  We  cannot  enter  into 
the  city  unless  we  understand  the  cross,  and  die  upon  it.  The  cross  is  not  an 
intellectual  puzzle  ;  it  is  a  cross  on  which  every  man  must  be  himself  crucified  with 
the  Son  of  God.  After  the  cross  the  crown — the  pure  river  of  the  water  of  life,  clear 
as  crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb.  After  the  cross, 
the  city  in  the  midst  of  whose  street,  and  on  either  side  of  the  river,  is  the  Tree  of 
life.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Christ's  invitation  to  His  bride: — This  world  was  never 
designed  to  be  the  fixed  abode  of  the  children  of  men,  and  therefore  there  was  a 
restraint  laid  upon  our  first  parents  in  paradise,  as  to  the  forbidden  tree,  showing 
that  they  behoved  to  look  to  another  world  for  their  happiness.  Man  was  once  set 
fair  on  the  way  to  the  land  where  glory  dwells,  but  he  lost  his  way,  and  now  poor 
sinners  are  found  wandering  on  the  mountains  of  vanity.  The  first  Adam  managed 
ill,  and  brought  us  into  this  condition.     But  behold,  the  second  Adam  came  to 

father  the  dispersed  of  Israel,  and  to  lead  them  on  their  way  to  the  better  country, 
[ear  His  voice  in  the  text,  calling  His  people  to  leave  the  weary  world  and  go  home- 
ward with  Himself.  I.  Take  notice  of  some  things  supposed  in  this  kind  call 
AND  invitation.  1.  It  supposeth  that  Christ's  bride  is  yet  in  the  world.  Though 
brought  out  of  Egypt,  yet  not  come  to  Canaan,  but  still  in  the  wilderness.     2. 


CHAP.  IT.]  TEE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON".  9T 

Though  she  be  there,  and  perhaps  has  been  there  many  years  since  she  was  united  to 
Christ,  yet  He  haa  not  forgot  her,  but  kindly  remembers  her  still,  whatever  she  may 
think  otherwise.     3.  The  world  is  not  a  place  for  Christ's  spouse  to  rest  in,  she  is  in 

great  danger  there.  4.  Yet  sometimes  the  foolish  creature  lies  down  even  among  the 
ons'  dens,  and  being  charmed  with  the  deceitful  mountains  is  averse  to  come  away. 
6.  Our  Lord  takes  notice  of  and  is  concerned  for  the  soul's  danger  from  the  deceitful 
world.    And  therefore  He  cries  with  earnestness  to  come  away.     II.  Explain  this 

COMING  FROM  THE  WOKLD,    OR  SHOW  WHAT  IS  IMPLIED  IN   IT.      There  is  a  twofold 

coming  away  from  the  world,  1.  There  is  a  natural  coming  out  of  it.  By  the  course 
of  nature,  we  are  all  on  our  way  out  of  it.  2.  There  is  a  spiritual  coming  out  of  it, 
namely,  in  heart  and  affection.  This  is  what  Christ  is  calling  you  to  this  day. 
(1)  Take  your  last  look,  the  parting  look  of  the  world  by  faith  even  as  Moses  did  of 
the  profits  and  pleasures  of  Egypt.  (2)  Turn  your  backs,  then,  upon  the  things  of  the 
world.  Be  mortified  to  them.  (3)  Give  up  this  day  with  the  men  of  the  world, 
never  more  to  mix  with  the  natives  of  the  weary  land  ;  who  labour  for  nothing  but 
the  entertainment  of  Lebanon,  and  who  have  taken  up  their  home  among  the  lions' 
dens.  III.  Show  the  import  of  coming  away  with  Christ  from  the  world. 
1.  Our  Lord  has  a  better  place  for  your  reception,  than  the  world  can  be  in  its  best 
dress.  This  is  the  new  Jerusalem.  There  His  Father's  house  stands.  And  in  that 
house  are  many  mansions.  The  society  of  saints,  angels,  and  to  be  ever  with  the 
Lord  constitute  the  felicity  of  the  place.  2.  Our  Lord  can  assuredly  bring  you  into 
this  glorious  and  happy  place.  But  oh  !  will  I  obtain  admission  ?  Why,  come  with 
Me,  says  Christ,  there  will  be  no  hindrance  if  you  enter  along  with  Me.  3.  That 
place  is  His  own  choice.  4.  Christ  is  in  His  way  thither,  out  of  the  world  to  His 
Father's  house,  the  better  country.  What,  is  not  Christ  there  already?  True, 
Christ  personal  is  there,  but  Christ  mystical  is  not  there  yet.  5.  Our  Lord 
is  very  desirous  of  your  company  by  the  way,  yes,  and  to  have  you  away  with 
Him  for  altogether.  6.  Our  Lord  displays  His  glory  to  you  in  the  Gospel,  to  win  your 
hearts  and  get  you  away  with  Him.  7.  Our  Lord  offers  you,  not  only  better  in  hope, 
but  better  in  hand  than  the  world  can  give  you.  8.  If  you  will  come  away,  you 
shall  go  as  He  goes,  you  shall  go  together.  Go  as  He  goes  in  point  of  duty.  Esteem 
all  things  as  He  does.  Let  His  choice  be  your  choice.  Rejoice  in  those  things  in 
which  He  rejoices  ;  and  be  grieved  for  what  grieves  His  Spirit.  Love  what  He  loves, 
and  hate  what  He  hates.  9.  He  will  lead  you  and  support  you  through  the  whole 
of  the  way.  You  are  now  in  the  fields  of  the  world,  and  there  will  be  diflicult  steps 
in  your  way  to  the  city  ;  these  will  not  be  easily  discerned,  but  come  with  Him,  He 
will  keep  you  from  stumbling  on  the  dark  mountains.  10.  He  will  be  all  to  you  in 
all.  Leave  all  the  world  and  "come  with  Me,"  for  all,  as  the  espoused  bride  goes 
with  her  husband.  Whatever  comfort,  pleasure  and  delight  you  drew  out  of  the 
muddy  streams,  you  may  now  draw  in  a  far  superior  manner  from  the  fountain. 
Thus  it  shall  be  your  duty  and  privilege  too,  to  live  as  people  of  another  world. 
"  For  our  conversation  is  in  heaven  ;  from  whence  also  we  look  for  the  Saviour,  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."    {T.  Boston,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  How  fair  is  thy  love,  My  sister,  My  spouse!  how  much  better  is 
thy  love  than  wine !  and  the  smell  of  thine  ointments  than  all  spices  I — Christ's 
estimate  of  His  people : — I.  Christ  first  PKAISES  His  people's  love.  Dost  thou 
love  God,  my  hearer  ?  Dost  thou  love  Jesus  ?  Hearken,  then,  to  what  the  Lord 
Jesus  says  to  thee,  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  from  this  Song !  Thy  love,  poor,  feeble,  and 
cold  though  it  be,  is  very  precious  unto  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  fact  it  is  so  precious,  that 
He  Himself  cannot  tell  how  precious  it  is.  He  does  not  say  how  precious,  but  He 
says,  "how  fair."  Pause  here,  my  soul,  to  contemplate  a  moment,  and  let  thy  joy 
wait  a  while.  Jesus  Christ  has  banquets  in  heaven,  such  as  we  have  never  yet  tasted, 
and  yet  He  does  not  feed  there.  He  has  wines  in  heaven  richer  far  than  all  the 
grapes  of  Eshcol  could  produce,  but  where  does  he  seek  His  wines !  In  our  hearts. 
Not  all  the  love  of  angels,  nor  all  the  joys  of  Paradise,  are  so  dear  to  Him  as  the 
love  of  His  poor  people  compassed  with  infirmity.  The  love  of  the  believer  is  sweet 
to  Christ.  II.  Do  not  imagine,  however,  that  Christ  despises  our  faith,  or  our 
hope,  or  our  patience,  or  our  humility.  All  these  graces  are  precious  to  Him,  and 
they  are  described  in  the  next  sentence  under  the  title  of  ointment,  and  the  working 
of  these  graces,  their  exercise  and  development,  are  compared  with  the  smell  of  oint- 
ment. Now  both  wine  and  ointment  were  used  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  Jews  ;  sweet- 
smeUing  myrrh  and  spices  were  used  in  meat-offerings  and  drink-offerings  before  the 
Lord.     "But,"  saith  Jesus  Christ  to  His  Church,  "all  these  offerings  of  wine,  and 


98  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

all  that  burning  of  incense,  Ib  nothing  to  Me  compared  to  your  graces.  Your  lov» 
is  My  wine,  your  virtues  are  My  sweet-smelling  ointments."  Yes,  believer,  when 
you  are  on  your  sick-bed  and  are  suffering  with  patience  ;  when  you  go  about  your 
humble  way  to  do  good  by  stealth  ;  when  you  distribute  of  your  alms  to  the  poor  ; 
when  you  lift  up  your  thankful  eye  to  Heaven  ;  when  you  draw  near  to  God  with 
humble  prayer  ;  when  you  make  confession  of  your  sin  to  Him  ;  all  these  acts  are 
like  the  smell  of  ointment  to  Him,  the  smell  of  a  sweet  savour,  and  He  is  gratified 
and  pleased.  0  Jesus,  this  is  condescension  indeed,  to  be  pleased  with  such  poor 
things  as  we  have.  Oh,  this  is  love  ;  it  proves  Thy  love  to  us,  that  Thou  canst  mak& 
so  much  out  of  little,  and  esteem  so  highly  that  which  is  of  such  littlfe  worth ! 
III.  Now  we  come  to  the  third,  "Thy  lips,  0  My  spouse,  drop  as  the  honeycomb." 
Christ's  people  are  not  a  dumb  people,  they  were  once,  but  they  talk  now.  I  do 
not  believe  a  Christian  can  keep  the  secret  that  God  gives  him  if  he  were  to  try  ;  it 
would  burst  his  lips  open  to  get  out.  Now  it  is  but  poor,  poor  matter  that  any  of 
us  can  speak.  When  we  are  most  eloquent  in  our  Master's  praise,  how  far  our  praises 
fall  beneath  His  worth !  When  we  are  most  earnest  in  prayer,  how  powerless  is  our 
wrestling  compared  with  the  great  blessing  that  we  seek  to  obtain !  But  Jesus 
Christ  does  not  find  any  fault  in  what  the  Church  speaks.  He  says,  "No,  *Thy 
lips,  0  My  spouse,  drop  as  the  honeycomb.' "  You  know  the  honey  that  drops  out 
of  the  honeycomb  is  the  best — it  is  called  the  life-honey.  So  the  words  that  drop 
from  the  Christian's  lips  are  the  very  words  of  his  life,  his  life-honey,  and  they 
ought  to  be  sweet  to  every  one.  They  are  as  sweet  to  the  taste  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as 
the  drops  of  the  honeycomb.  And  now,  Christians,  will  you  not  talk  much  about 
Jesus  ?  Will  you  not  speak  often  of  Him  1  Will  you  not  give  your  tongue  more 
continually  to  prayer  and  praise,  and  speech  that  ministers  to  edifying,  when  you 
have  such  a  listener  as  this,  such  an  auditor  who  stoops  from  heaven  to  hear  you, 
and  who  values  every  word  you  speak  for  Him?  "But,"  says  one,  "if  I  were  to 
try  to  talk  about  Jesus  Christ,  I  do  not  know  what  I  should  say."  If  you  wanted 
any  honey,  and  nobody  would  bring  it  to  you,  I  suppose  the  best  way,  if  you  were 
in  the  country,  would  be  to  keep  some  bees,  would  it  not  ?  It  would  be  very  well 
for  you  Christian  people  if  you  kept  bees.  "Well,"  says  one,  "I  suppose  our 
thoughts  are  to  be  the  bees.  We  are  always  to  be  looking  about  for  good  thoughts, 
and  flying  on  to  the  flowers  where  they  are  to  be  found  ;  by  reading,  by  meditation, 
and  by  prayer,  we  are  to  send  bees  out  of  the  hive."  Certainly,  if  you  do  not  read 
your  Bibles,  you  will  have  no  honey,  because  you  have  no  bees.  But  when  you 
read  your  Bibles,  and  study  those  precious  texts,  it  is  like  bees  settling  on  flowers, 
and  sucking  the  sweetness  out  of  them.  IV,  This  brings  us  to  the  next  topic — • 
"  Honey  and  milk  are  under  thy  tongue."  I  find  it  necessary  when  I  preach  to 
keep  a  good  stock  of  words  under  my  tongue  as  well  as  those  that  are  on  it.  Very 
often  I  have  got  a  simile  just  ready  to  come  out,  and  I  have  thought,  "  Ah,  that  is 
one  of  your  laughable  similes,  take  that  back."  I  am  obliged  to  change  it  for 
something  else.  If  I  did  that  a  little  oftener  perhaps  it  would  be  better,  but  I 
cannot  do  it.  I  have  sometimes  a  whole  host  of  them  under  my  tongue,  and  I  am 
obliged  to  keep  them  back.  "Honey  and  milk  are  under  thy  tongue."  That  is 
not  the  only  meaning.  The  Christian  is  to  have  words  ready  to  come  out  by  and 
by.  You  kiow  the  hypocrite  has  words  upon  his  tongue.  We  speak  about  solemn 
sounds  upon  a  thoughtless  tongue  ;  but  the  Christian  has  his  words  first  under  the 
tongue.  There  they  lie.  They  come  from  his  heart ;  they  do  not  come  from  the 
top  of  his  tongue, — they  are  not  superficial  surface-work,  but  they  come  from  under 
the  tongue — down  deep, — things  that  he  feels,  and  matters  that  he  knows.  Nor  is 
this  the  only  meaning.  The  things  that  are  under  the  tongue  are  thoughts  that 
have  never  yet  been  expressed  ;  they  do  not  get  to  the  top  of  the  tongue,  but  lie 
there  half  formed  and  are  ready  to  come  out ;  but  either  because  they  cannot  come 
out,  or  we  have  not  time  to  let  them  out,  there  they  remain,  and  never  come  into 
actual  words.  Now  Jesus  Christ  thinks  very  much  even  of  these  ;  He  says,  "  Honey 
and  milk  are  under  thy  tongue  "  ;  and  Christian  meditation  and  Christian  contem- 
plation are  to  Christ  like  honey  for  sweetness  and  like  milk  for  nourishment. 
V .  And,  then,  last  of  aU,  "  the  smell  of  thy  garments  is  Like  the  smell  of  Lebanon." 
The  odoriferous  herbs  that  grew  on  the  side  of  Lebanon  delighted  the  traveller,  and, 
perhaps,  here  is  an  allusion  to  the  peculiarly  sweet  smell  of  the  cedar  wood.  Now, 
the  garments  of  a  Christian  are  twofold — the  garment  of  imputed  righteousness, 
and  the  garment  of  inwrought  sanctification.  I  think  the  allusion  here  is  to  the 
second.  The  garments  of  a  Christian  are  his  every-dat  actions — the  things  that 
he  wean  upon  him  wherever  he  goes.    Now  these  smell  very  sweet  to  the  Lord 


CHA».  IT.]  TEE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  90 

Jesus.  What  should  you  think  if  Jesus  should  meet  you  at  the  close  of  the  day, 
and  say  to  you,  "I  am  pleased  with  the  works  of  to-day"?  I  know  you  would 
reply,  "  Lord,  I  have  done  nothing  for  Thee."  You  would  say  like  those  at  the  last 
day,  "  Lord,  when  saw  we  Thee  himgry  and  fed  Thee  ?  when  saw  we  Thee  thirsty  and 
gave  Thee  drink  ?"  You  would  begin  to  deny  that  you  had  done  any  good  thing. 
He  would  say,  ' '  Ah,  when  thou  wast  under  the  fig  tree  I  saw  thee  ;  when  thou 
wast  at  thy  bedside  in  prayer  I  heard  thee  ;  I  saw  thee  when  the  tempter  came,  and 
thou  saidst,  *  Get  thee  nence,  Satan ' ;  I  saw  thee  give  thine  alms  to  one  of  My  poor 
«ick  children  ;  I  heard  thee  speak  a  good  word  to  the  little  child  and  teach  him  the 
name  of  Jesus  ;  I  heard  the  groan  when  swearing  polluted  thine  ears :  I  heard  thy 
sigh  when  thou  sawest  the  iniquity  of  this  gieat  city  ;  I  saw  thee  when  thine  hands 
were  busy  ;  I  saw  that  thou  wast  not  an  eye- servant  or  a  man-pleaser,  but  that  in 
singleness  of  purpose  thou  didst  serve  God  in  doing  thy  daily  business  ;  I  saw  thee, 
when  the  day  was  ended,  give  thyself  to  God  again  ;  I  have  marked  thee  mourning 
■over  the  sins  thou  hast  conmiitted,  and  I  tell  thee  I  am  pleased  with  thee."  "Tha 
emell  of  thy  garments  is  like  the  smell  of  Lebanon."    (C.  E.  Spurgeon.) 

Yet.  12.  A  garden  inclosed  is  My  sister,  My  spouse;  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fonntain 
sealed. — The  Lord's  own  view  of  Eis  Church  and  people: — 1.  The  nearness  OF 
KIN  OF  THE  Chtjuch  TO  CHRIST,  AND  CHRIST  TO  THE  Church.  He  calls  her  in 
the  text,  "My  sister.  My  spouse."  As  if  He  could  not  express  His  near  and  dear 
relationship  to  her  by  any  one  term,  He  employs  the  two.  "  My  sister" — that  is, 
one  by  birth,  partaker  of  the  same  nature.  "My  spouse" — that  is,  one  in  love, 
joined  by  sacred  ties  of  affection  that  never  can  be  snapped.  "  My  sister  "  by  birth, 
"My  spouse"  by  choice.  "My  sister"  in  communion,  "My  spouse"  in  absolute 
union  with  Myself.  Oh,  how  near  akin  is  Christ  to  all  His  people !  But  first,  do 
try  to  realize  the  person  of  Christ.  Believe  that  He  truly  is,  and  that  He  truly  is 
here — as  much  here  and  as  really  here  as  He  was  at  Jerusalem,  when  He  sat  at  the 
head  of  the  table,  and  entertained  the  twelve  at  the  last  supper.  Jesus  is  a  real 
Man,  a  real  Christ — recollect  that.  Then  let  this  further  truth  be  equally  well 
Tcalized,  that  He  has  so  taken  upon  Himself  our  human  nature  that  He  may 
correctly  call  His  Church  His  sister.  He  has  become  so  truly  man  in  His  incarnation, 
that  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren.  He  calls  us  so  because  we  are  so. 
Change  of  place  has  made  no  change  of  heart  in  Hun.  He  in  His  glory  is  the  same 
Jesus  as  in  His  humiliation.  No  man  is  so  fully  a  man  as  Jesus  Christ.  If  you 
speak  of  any  other  man,  something  or  other  narrows  his  manhood.  You  think  of 
Milton  as  of  a  poet  and  an  Englishman,  rather  than  as  a  man.  You  think  of 
Cromwell  rather  as  of  a  warrior,  than  as  a  man.  The  second  Adam  is,  par  excellence, 
man.  We  may  not  think  of  Him  as  one  amongst  a  vast  number  who  may  be 
distantly  akin  to  us,  as  all  men  are  akin  to  one  another  by  descent ;  but  the  Lord 
comes  near  to  each  individual.  He  takes  each  one  of  His  believing  people  by  the 
hand,  and  says,  "My  brother."  In  our  text  He  salutes  the  whole  Church  aa 
"My  sister."  He  says  this  with  tender  emphasis.  As  we  have  already  observed, 
the  first  term,  "sister,"  implies  kinship  of  nature;  but  the  second  term,  "My 
spouse,"  indicates  another  kinship,  dearer,  and,  in  some  respects,  nearer  ;  a  kinship 
undertaken  of  choice,  but,  once  undertaken,  is  everlasting.  This  kinship  amounts 
to  unity,  insomuch  that  the  spouse  loses  her  name,  loses  her  identity,  and,  to  a 
high  degree,  is  merged  in  the  greater  personality  to  which  she  is  united.  Such  is 
our  union  to  Christ,  if  indeed  we  be  His,  that  nothing  can  so  well  set  it  forth  as 
marriage  union.  He  loves  us  so  much  that  He  taken  us  up  into  Himself  by  the 
absorption  of  love.  If  you  are  true  believers,  if  you  have  been  bom  again,  if  you  are 
really  looking  to  Christ  alone  for  salvation,  He  has  brought  you  into  a  condition  of 
the  utmost  conceivable  nearness  with  Himself :  He  has  participated  in  your  nature, 
and  He  has  made  you  a  partaker  of  His  nature,  and  in  so  many  words  He  says,  "  I  will 
betroth  thee  unto  Me  for  ever ;  yea,  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  Me  in  righteousness, 
and  in  judgment,  and  in  lovingkindness,  and  in  mercies.  I  will  even  betroth  thee 
unto  Me  in  faithfulness:  and  thou  shalt  know  the  Lord."    II.  The  security  of 

THE  PEOPLE  OF  GOD   IN   CONSEQUENCE    OF   BEING  WHAT   THEY  ARE,        "A    garden 

inclosed  is  My  sister.  My  spouse  ;  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed."  We  are 
not  only  like  a  garden,  but  a  garden  "  inclosed."  If  the  garden  were  not  inclosed, 
the  wild  boar  out  of  the  wood  would  bark  the  vines,  and  uproot  the  flowers ;  but 
infinite  mercy  has  made  the  Church  of  God  an  inclosure,  into  which  no  invader  may 
dare  to  come.  ' '  For  I,  saith  the  Lord,  will  be  unto  her  a  wall  of  fire  round  about,  and 
will  be  the  gloiy  in  the  midst  of  her. "    Is  she  a  spring  %    Are  her  secret  thoughts. 


100  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it. 


and  loves,  and  desires  like  cool  streams  of  water  ?  Then  the  Bridegroom  calls  her 
"  a  spring  shut  up."  Otherwise,  every  beast  that  passed  by  might  foul  her  waters, 
and  every  stranger  might  quafif  her  streams.  She  is  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fountain 
sealed,  like  some  choice  cool  spring  in  Solomon's  private  garden  around  the  house 
of  the'  forest  of  Lebanon — a  fountain  which  he  reserved  for  his  own  drinking,  by 
placing  the  royal  seal  upon  it,  and  locking  it  up  by  secret  means,  known  only  to 
mmself.  The  legend  hath  it  that  there  were  fountains  which  none  knew  of  but 
Solomon,  and  he  had  so  shut  them  up  that,  with  his  ring  he  touched  a  secret 
spring,  a  door  opened,  and  living  waters  leaped  out  to  fill  his  jewelled  cup.  No  one 
knew  but  Solomon  the  secret  charm  by  which  he  set  flowing  the  pent-up  stream, 
of  which  no  lip  drank  but  his  own.  Now,  God's  people  are  as  much  shut  up,  and 
preserved,  and  kept  from  danger  by  the  care  of  Christ,  as  the  springs  in  Solomon's 
garden  were  reserved  expressly  for  himself.  Are  you  really  in  Christ  ?  If  so,  who 
is  to  pluck  you  thence?  Are  you  really  trusting  Him?  How  can  He  fail  you! 
Have  you  been  begotten  again  into  the  Divine  family  ?  How  can  that  new  life  be 
quenched?  III.  The  most  striking  idea  of  the  text  is  that  of  sepaka- 
TION:  "A  garden  inclosed  is  My  sister,  My  spouse ;  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fountain 
sealed."  A  garden  is  a  plot  of  ground  separated  from  the  common  waste  for  a 
special  purpose  :  such  is  the  Church.  The  Church  is  a  separate  and  distinct  thins 
from  the  world.  Let  us,  however,  take  heed  that  our  separateness  from  the  world 
is  of  the  same  kind  as  our  Lord's.  We  are  not  to  adopt  a  peculiar  dress,  or  a 
singular  mode  of  speech,  or  shut  ourselves  out  of  society.  He  did  not  so  ;  but  He 
was  a  man  of  the  people,  mixing  with  them  for  their  good.  He  was  seen  at  a 
wedding- feast,  aiding  the  festivities:  He  even  ate  bread  in  a  Pharisee's  house, 
among  captious  enemies.  He  neither  wore  phylacteries,  nor  enlarged  the  borders 
of  his  garments,  nor  sought  a  secluded  cell,  nor  exhibited  any  eccentricity  of 
manner.  He  was  separate  from  sinners  only  because  He  was  holy  and  harmless,  and 
they  were  not.  The  Church  is  to  be  a  garden,  walled,  taken  out  of  the  common, 
and  made  a  separate  and  select  plot  of  ground.  She  is  to  be  a  spring  shut  up,  and 
a  fountain  sealed,  no  longer  open  to  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field. 
Saints  are  to  be  separate  from  the  rest  of  men,  even  as  Abraham  was  when  he  said 
to  the  sons  of  Seth,  "  I  am  a  stranger  and  a  sojourner  with  you,"    IV.  The  text 

BEARS   EVEN   MORE   FORCIBLY    ANOTHER   IDEA,    NAMELY,    THAT    OF    RESERVATION. 

The  Church  of  God  is  "a  garden  inclosed."  What  for?  Why,  that  nobody  may 
come  into  that  garden,  to  eat  the  fruit  thereof,  but  the  Lord  Himself.  It  is  "a 
spring  shut  up,"  that  no  one  may  drink  of  the  stream  but  the  Lord  Jesus.  "But," 
cries  one,  "  are  we  not  to  seek  the  good  of  our  fellow-men  ? "  Assuredly  we  are  to 
do  so  for  Christ's  sake.  "  Are  we  not  to  seek  to  help  on  sanitary,  educational,  and 
purifying  processes,  and  the  like  ? "  Yes,  so  far  as  all  can  be  done  for  His  sake.  We 
are  to  be  the  Lord's  servants  for  the  blessing  of  the  world,  and  we  may  do  anything 
which  He  would  have  done.  In  such  a  garden  as  the  text  speaks  of,  every  plant 
bears  flowers  for  its  owner,  every  tree  yields  fruit  for  him.  "  All  for  Jesus,"  is  to 
be  our  motto.  No  one  among  us  may  dare  to  live  unto  himself,  even  in  the  refined 
way  in  which  many  are  doing  it,  who  even  try  to  win  souls  that  they  may  have 
the  credit  of  being  zealous  and  successful.  We  may  so  far  degenerate  as  even  to 
attempt  to  glorify  Christ  that  we  may  have  the  credit  of  glorifying  Him.  It  will 
not  do.  We  must  be  truly,  thoroughly,  really  living  for  Jesus:  we  must  be  a 
garden  inclosed,  reserved,  shut  up  for  Him.  The  wall  must  wholly  inclose  the 
garden,  for  a  gap  anywhere  will  admit  an  intruder  everywhere.  If  one  part  of  our 
Being  be  left  under  the  dominion  of  sin,  it  will  show  its  power  eveiywhere.  The 
spring  must  be  sealed  at  the  very  source,  that  every  drop  may  be  for  Jesus  through- 
out the  whole  of  its  course.  Oxa  first  thoughts,  desires,  and  wishes  must  be  His, 
and  then  aU  our  words  and  deeds.  We  must  be  "wholly  reserved  for  Christ  that 
died,  surrendered  to  the  Cnicified. "  [C.H.  Spurgeon. )  The  garden  of  the  soul : — ^Your 
soul  is,  or  should  be,  the  Beloved's  vineyard,  God's  fruitful  field,  God's  garden  and 
your  own.  The  history  of  this  garden  of  gardens  falls  into  four  chapters — I.  Thb 
COMMON  GROUND.  That  beautifiil  garden  was  once  a  bit  of  heath  or  moorland, 
over  which  the  beasts  ranged.  In  its  natural  state  it  was  worthless.  About  one 
hundred  years  ago  the  finest  garden  in  the  world  was  the  palace-garden  of  Versailles. 
But  when  the  French  king  chose  the  spot  it  was  a  marshy  moor.  It  cost  twenty- 
five  years  of  toil  and  forty  millions  of  money  to  change  it  into  the  royal  garden. 
And  every  garden  was  a  waste  till  the  busy  hand  of  cultivation  clothed  it  with 
rarious  beauties.  And  are  not  greater  wonders  wrought  in  the  soul  reclaimed  from 
the  outfield  of  tlxe  world  I    II.  ^1^  ground  cultivated,  ob  thb  garden.    L  It 


CHAP.  IT.]  TEE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  101 

must  first  be  inclosed.  "A  garden  inclosed  is  my  spouse,"  says  Solomon.  Of 
every  Christian  soul  we  may  say,  as  Satan  said  of  Job,  * '  Thou  hast  made  a  hedge 
about  him."  2.  The  soU  must  next  be  broken  up.  What  hard  and  rough  work  ia 
the  digging,  the  trenching,  and  the  uprooting  I  But  as  the  confusion  in  our  gardens 
in  spring  does  not  discourage  us,  so  we  should  not  be  discouraged  by  those  sorrows 
that  belong  to  the  cultivation  of  the  soul.  3.  Then  without  wise  sowing  all  the 
gardener's  pains  would  be  lost.  Fill  mind  and  memory  with  the  delightful  truths 
of  the  Bible,  and  let  them  sink  deep,  that,  seed-like,  they  may  swell,  and  sprout, 
•nd  bring  forth  fruits  and  flowers  of  choicest  perfume  and  colour.  And  you  must 
be  ever  tending  them,  for  to  let  your  garden  alone  is  to  spoil  all.  4.  The  gardener's 
utmost  art  would  be  in  vain  without  the  sunshine,  the  snower,  and  the  quickening 
breath  of  spring.  That  philosopher,  famed  for  his  contentment,  was  right,  who, 
when  asked  by  a  friend  to  show  him  the  splendid  garden  of  which  he  was  always 
boasting,  led  him  into  a  bare,  rocky  space  behind  his  house.  "Where  is  your 
garden  ? "  the  friend  asked.  "  Look  up,"  said  the  philosopher,  "  heaven  is  a  part  of 
my  garden."  Every  good  gift  in  the  garden  really  comes  from  above ;  for  should 
God  command  the  clouds  to  rain  no  rain,  the  earth  would  soon  be  as  iron.  Heaven 
shields,  broods  over,  and  enriches  every  fruitful  sod.  It  is  a  great  truth  that  Paul 
planteth  and  Apollos  watereth,  but  God  giveth  the  increase.  Turn,  then,  your 
whole  being  fairly  towards  the  sunshine  of  God's  grace,  and  pray  that  the  garden  of 
your  soul  may  always  be  as  ready  to  receive  heavenly  blessing  as  is  the  garden 
around  your  dwelling.  III.  The  garden  neglected.  A  neglected  garden  is  one 
of  the  completest  pictures  of  desolation  in  the  world :  it  is  desolation's  throne  in  the 
deserted  village.  IV.  The  garden  well  kept.  Solomon  gives  a  picture  of  what 
your  soul  should  be,  and  Isaiah  of  what  it  should  not  be.  Everything  had  been 
done  for  the  Beloved's  vineyard,  and  in  return  He  received  only  wild  grapes 
(Isa.  v.).  But  the  garden  in  the  Song  was  stocked  with  all  rich  and  beautiful 
things.  It  gave  pleasure  to  every  sense :  its  fine  forms  and  colours  gladdened  the 
eye,  its  ripe  fruits  gratified  the  palate,  its  exquisite  perfumes  gave  delight,  and  its 
leaves  jdelded  an  additional  joy  by  their  agreeable  shade.  A  holy  soul  is  compared 
to  such  a  garden.  It  is  the  most  beautiful  thing  in  the  world,  a  paradise  of  heaven 
on  earth.  "How  can  my  soul  be  a  fruitful  garden  of  God!"  do  you  ask.  The 
answer  is,  by  good  cultivation  ;  and  that  is  the  work  of  God  and  man.  For  "we 
are  labourers  together  with  God :  ye  are  God's  husbandry"  (1  Cor.  iii.  9).    All  your 

fowers  should  be  gladly  devoted  to  this  God-like  work  of  keeping  your  own  vineyard, 
remember  visiting  in  spring  a  poor  widow  residing  in  a  miserable  comer  of  the 
city.  Her  soul  was  a  garden  of  God.  On  the  window-siU  she  had  some  flowers  in 
jelly-dishes  and  spoutless  teapots — a  touching  proof  of  that  love  of  the  country  which 
city  life  wakens  in  all  but  the  broken-hearted.  I  took  notice  of  the  flowers.  "Yes," 
Bhe  said,  ' '  I  take  many  a  bit  lesson  from  them ;  if  I  neglect  them  for  a  day  or  two, 
they  hang  their  bit  heads  and  wither.  And  my  soul  does  the  veiy  same  if  it  is  not 
always  watered  with  the  grace  of  God."  God  help  you  so  to  cultivate  the  garden 
of  your  soul  as  that  you  shaU  bring  much  fruit  to  His  praise !  {James  Wells. ) 
A  secret  and  yet  no  secret  (with  ver.  15)  : — Observe  the  contrast  which  the  two  verses 
present  to  us.  There  are  two  works  of  the  Holy  Spirit  within  us.  The  first  is  when 
He  puts  into  us  the  living  waters  ;  the  next  is  when  He  enables  us  to  pour  forth 
Btreams  of  the  same  living  waters  in  our  daily  life.  The  Spirit  of  God  first  implants 
in  us  the  new  nature.     This  is  His  work — to  regenerate  us,  to  put  into  us  the  new 

{principle,  the  life  of  God  in  Christ.  Then  next,  He  gives  us  power  to  send  forth  that 
ife  in  gracious  emanations  of  hoUness  of  life,  of  devoutness  of  communion  with  God, 
of  likeness  to  Christ,  of  conformity  to  His  image.  The  streams  are  as  much  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  as  the  fountain  itself.  He  digs  the  well,  and  He  afterwards  with  heavenly 
rain  fills  the  pools.  He  first  of  all  makes  the  stream  in  the  desert  to  flow  from  the 
flinty  rook,  and  afterwards  out  of  His  infinite  suppKes  He  feeds  the  stream  and  bids 
it  follow  us  all  our  days.  Now,  we  think  the  first  verse,  to  a  great  extent,  sets  forth 
the  secret  and  mysterious  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  creation  of  the  new  man  in 
the  soul.  Into  this  secret  no  eye  of  man  can  look.  The  inner  life  in  the  Christian 
may  well  be  compared  to  an  inclosed  garden — to  a  spring  shut  up— to  a  fountain 
Bealed.  But  the  second  verse  sets  forth  the  manifest  effects  of  grace,  for  no  sooner  is 
that  life  given  than  it  begins  to  show  itself.  No  sooner  is  the  mystery  of  righteous- 
ness in  the  heart,  than,  like  the  mystery  of  iniquity,  it  "  doth  aheady  work."  It 
cannot  lie  still  ;  it  cannot  be  idle  ;  it  must  not  rest ;  but,  as  God  is  ever  active,  so 
this  God-like  principle  ia  active  too  ;  thus  you  have  a  picture  of  the  outer  life  pro- 
ceeding from  the  inner.     "A  fountain  of  gardens,  a  well  of  living  waters,  and 


103  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

Btreams  from  Lebanon."  The  first  is  what  the  Christian  is  before  God  ;  the  next 
is  what  the  Christian  will  become  before  men.  The  first  is  the  blessedness  which  he 
receives  in  himself ;  the  next  is  the  blessedness  which  he  diffuses  to  others.  I.  With 
regard  to  the  first  text,  you  wiU  clearly  perceive  that  in  each  of  the  three  metai)hor3 
you  have  very  plainly  the  idea  of  secrecy.  There  is  a  garden.  A  garden  is  a  place 
where  trees  have  been  planted  by  a  skilful  hand  ;  where  they  are  nurtured  with  care, 
and  where  fi-uit  is  expected  by  its  owner.  Such  is  the  Church  ;  such  is  each  renewed 
soul.  But  it  is  a  garden  inclosed,  and  so  inclosed  that  one  cannot  see  over  its 
walls — 80  shut  out  from  the  world's  wilderness,  that  the  passer-by  must  not  enter 
it — so  protected  from  all  intrusion  that  it  is  a  guarded  paradise — as  secret  as  was 
that  inner  place,  the  holy  of  holies,  within  the  tabernacle  of  old.  The  Church — 
and  mark,  when  I  say  the  Church,  the  same  is  true  of  each  individual  Christian — is 
set  forth  next  as  a  spring.  "  A  spring  " — the  mother  of  sweet  draughts  of  refreshing 
water,   reaching  down  into  some  impenetrable    caverns,   and  bubbling  up  with 

Eerennial  supplies  from  the  great  deeps.  Not  a  mere  cistern,  which  contains  only, 
ut  a  fresh  spring,  which  through  an  inward  principle  within,  begets,  continues, 
overflows.  But  then,  it  is  a  spring  shut  up  :  just  as  there  were  springs  in  the  East, 
over  which  an  edifice  was  built,  so  that  none  could  reach  the  springs  save  those  who 
knew  the  secret  entrance.  So  is  the  heart  of  a  believer  when  it  is  renewed  by  grace  ; 
there  is  a  mysterious  life  within  which  no  human  skill  can  touch.  And  then,  it  is 
said  to  be  a  fountain  ;  but  it  is  a  fountain  sealed.  The  outward  stones  may  be  discovered, 
but  the  door  is  sealed,  so  that  no  man  can  get  into  the  hidden  springs  ;  they  are 
altogether  hidden,  and  hidden  too  by  a  royal  will  and  decree  of  which  the  seal  is  the 
emblem.  I  say  the  idea  is  very  much  that  of  secrecy.  Now,  such  is  the  inner  life 
of  the  Christian.  It  is  a  secret  which  no  other  man  knoweth,  nay,  which  the  very 
man  who  is  the  possessor  of  it  cannot  tell  to  his  neighbour.  A  second  thought  is 
written  upon  the  surface  of  the  text.  Here  you  see  not  only  secrecy,  but  separation. 
That  also  runs  through  the  three  figures.  It  is  a  garden,  but  it  is  a  garden  inclosed 
— altogether  shut  out  from  the  surrounding  heaths  and  commons,  inclosed  with 
briars  and  hedged  with  thorns,  which  are  impassable  by  the  wild  beasts.  There  is  a 
gate  through  which  the  Great  Husbandman  Himself  can  come  ;  but  there  is  also  a  gate 
which  shuts  out  all  those  who  would  only  rob  the  keeper  of  the  vineyard  of  His 
rightful  fruit.  There  is  separation  in  the  spring  also.  It  is  not  the  common  spring, 
of  which  every  passer-by  may  drink  ;  it  is  one  so  kept  and  preserved  distinct  from 
men,  that  no  lip  may  touch,  no  eye  may  even  see  its  secret.  It  is  a  something  which 
the  stranger  intermeddleth  not  with  ;  it  is  a  Ufe  which  the  world  cannot  give  and 
cannot  take  away.  All  through,  you  see,  there  is  a  separateness,  a  distinctness.  If 
it  be  ranged  with  springs,  still  it  is  a  spring  specially  shut  up  ;  if  it  be  put  with 
fountains,  still  it  is  a  fountain  bearing  a  particular  mark — a  king's  royal  seal,  so 
that  all  can  perceive  that  this  is  not  a  general  fountain,  but  a  fountain  that  has  a 
proprietor,  and  stands  specially  by  itself  alone.  So  is  it  with  the  spiritual  life.  It 
18  a  separate  thing.  I  would  not  give  a  farthing  for  that  man's  spiritual  life  who 
can  live  altogether  with  others  ;  if  you  do  not  sometimes  feel  that  you  must  be  a 
garden  inclosed,  that  you  must  enter  into  your  closet,  and  shut- to  the  door  ;  if  you 
do  not  feel  seasons  when  the  society  of  your  dearest  friend  is  an  impediment,  and 
when  the  face  of  your  sweetest  relation  would  but  be  a  cloud  between  you  and 
Christ,  I  cannot  understand  you.  Be  ye,  0  ye  children  of  Christ,  as  chaste  virgins 
kept  alone  for  Christ.  In  the  third  place,  you  have  in  the  text  the  idea  of  sacredness. 
The  garden  inclosed  is  waUed  up  that  it  may  be  sacred  to  its  owner  ;  the  spring 
shut  up  is  preserved  for  the  use  of  some  special  person  ;  and  the  fountain  sealed  more 
eminently  still  bears  the  mark  of  being  sacred  to  some  distinguished  personage. 
Now  such  is  the  Christian's  heart.  It  is  a  spring  kept  for  Christ.  Oh,  I  would  thafc 
it  were  always  so.  Every  Christian  should  feel  that  he  is  God's  man — that  he  has 
God's  stamp  on  him — and  he  should  be  able  to  say  with  Paul,  ' '  From  henceforth 
let  no  man  trouble  me,  for  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus. "  But  I 
think  there  is  another  idea  prominent,  and  it  is  that  of  security — security  to  the 
inner  life.  "  A  garden  inclosed."  "The  wild  boar  out  of  the  wood  shall  not  break 
in  there,  neither  shall  the  little  foxes  spoil  the  vines. "  "A  fountain  shut  up. "  The 
bulls  of  Bashan  shaD  not  mud  her  streams  with  their  furious  feet ;  neither  shall  the 
wild  beast  of  Lebanon  come  there  to  drink.  "A  fountain  sealed."  No  putrid 
streams  shall  foul  her  springs  ;  her  water  shall  be  kept  clear  and  living  ;  her  fountains 
shall  never  be  filled  up  with  stones.  Oh,  how  sure  and  safe  is  the  inner  life  of  the 
believer.  Satan  does  not  know  where  it  is,  for  "our  life  is  hid  with  Christ."  The 
world  cannot  touch  it;    it  seeks  to  overthrow  it  with  troubles  and  trials  and 


CHAP.  IT.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  lOt 

persecutions,  but  we  are  covered  with  the  Eternal  wings,  and  are  safe  from  fear  of 
evil.  How  can  earthly  trials  reach  the  spirit  ?  As  well  might  a  man  try  to  strike 
a  soul  with  a  stone,  as  to  destroy  a  spirit  with  afllictions.  We  are  one  with  Christ, 
even  as  Christ  is  one  with  the  Father ;  therefore  as  imperishable  through  Christ's 
life  as  Christ  Himself.  Truly  may  we  rejoice  in  the  fact  that  "because  He  lives  wa 
shall  live  also. "  Once  more  only.  I  think  in  looking  at  the  text  y^ou  receive  the 
thought  of  imity.  You  notice,  it  is  but  one  garden — "a  garden  inclosed."  "A 
garden."  It  is  but  one  spring,  and  that  is  shut  up  ;  it  is  but  one  fountain.  So  the 
inner  life  of  the  Christian  is  but  one.  If  you  could  imagine  two  bodies  quickened 
by  the  very  same  mind,  what  a  close  connection  would  that  be  I  But  here  are 
hundreds  of  bodies,  hundreds  of  souls,  quickened  by  the  self-same  Spirit.  Brethren, 
indeed  not  only  ought  we  to  love  one  another,  but  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth 
us,  so  that  we  cannot  resist  the  impulse ;  we  do  love  each  other  in  Christ  Jesus. 
II.  I  shall  now  try  to  open  the  second  text,  which  presents  a  decided  contrast, 
because  it  deals  not  so  much  with  the  inner  life  as  with  the  active  life  which  goes 
abroad  into  all  the  deeds  of  the  Christian  in  the  world,  and  is  the  natural  outgoing 
of  the  life  within.  First,  notice  that  in  contradistinction  to  our  first  thought  of 
secrecy  you  have  in  the  text  manifestation.  "  A  fountain  of  gardens."  Everybody 
can  see  a  fountain  which  runs  streaming  through  many  gardens,  making  deserts 
fertile.  "  A  well  of  living  waters."  Whatever  the  traveller  does  not  see,  when  he 
is  riding  along  on  a  thirsty  day,  he  is  sure  to  see  the  fountain  ;  if  there  be  one  any- 
where he  is  certain  to  observe  that.  "And  streams  from  Lebanon."  So  that  any 
passer-by  in  the  valley,  looking  up  the  side  of  the  mountain,  will  see  by  the  clusters 
of  trees  which  skirt  the  stream  where  the  stream  is  ;  or,  if  it  be  a  smaller  brook, 
just  as  sometimes  in  Cumberland  and  Westmoreland,  on  a  rainy  day  you  see  the 
mountain  suddenly  marked  with  streaks  of  silver  all  adown  its  brown  sides,  where 
the  brooks  are  rippUng,  so  the  Christian  becomes  like  the  streams  leaping  adown 
Lebanon's  steep  sides,  clearly  perceived  even  from  a  distance,  manifest  to  the  most 
casual  observer.  Now,  brethren,  this  is  what  you  and  I  ought  to  be.  No  man  ought 
to  court  publicity  for  his  virtue,  or  notoriety  for  his  zeal  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  it 
is  a  sin  to  be  always  seeking  to  hide  that  which  God  has  bestowed  upon  us  for  the 
good  of  others.  The  inner  life  is  secret — mind  that  you  have  this  inner  mystery  ; 
but  out  of  the  secret  emanates  the  manifest ;  the  darkness  becomes  the  mother  of 
light ;  from  the  dark  mines  comes  the  blazing  coal.  Oh  !  see  to  it,  that  from  all 
that  is  hidden  and  secret  and  mysterious  there  comes  out  the  plain  and  the 
manifest  that  men  may  see  the  holiness,  truthfulness  and  zeal  of  God  in  thy  life. 
But  clearly  enough,  again,  we  have  in  the  second  text,  in  opposition  to  the  separation 
of  the  first,  diflfusiveness.  The  garden  was  inclosed  before,  now  it  is  "a  fountain 
of  gardens  "  ;  the  well  was  shut  up,  now  it  is  a  well  of  living  waters  ;  before  we  had 
the  fountain  sealed,  now  we  have  streams  dashing  adown  the  sides  of  Lebanon.  So 
a  Christian  is  to  be  separate  in  his  inner  life  ;  but  in  the  outer  manifestations  of 
that  inner  life,  he  is  to  mingle  for  good  among  his  fellow-men.  We  must  let  the 
streams  flow  abroad  ;  we  must  seek  to  give  to  others  what  Christ  has  given  to  us. 
Briefly  we  are  obliged  to  speak  on  each  of  these  points  ;  but  notice,  thirdly,  that  in 
opposition  to  the  sacredness  of  the  first  text  we  have  in  the  second  verse  an  imlimited 
freeness,  especially  in  that  last  expression — "streams  from  Lebanon."  What  can 
be  freer  than  the  brook,  which  leaps  along  the  mountain-side  ?  There  the  bird  wets 
its  wings  ;  there  the  red  deer  comes  to  drink  ;  and  even  that  wild  beast  of  Lebanon, 
of  which  we  read  in  the  Book  of  the  Kings,  comes  there,  and  without  let  or  hindrance 
slakes  its  thirst.  What  can  be  freer  than  the  rivulet  singing  with  liquid  notes 
adown  the  glen  ?  It  belongs  to  no  one  ;  it  is  free  to  all.  Whosoever  passeth  by,  be 
he  peer  or  peasant,  may  stoop  there  and  refresh  himself  from  the  mountain-stream. 
So  be  it  with  you.  Christian.  Carry  about  with  you  a  piety  which  you  do  not  wish 
to  keep  for  yourself.  A  light  loses  none  of  its  own  lustre  when  others  are  Lit  at  its 
flame.  We  must  be  hidden  springs  within,  but  let  us  be  sweetly  flowing  rivulets 
without,  giving  drink  to  every  passer-by.  And  notice  that,  while  we  had  in  the 
other  text  the  idea  of  security,  in  connection  with  that  we  have  here  in  this  text  the 
idea  of  approach.  The  garden  was  shut  up — that  was  to  keep  it.  There  are  no  walls 
here,  so  that  all  may  come  to  it.  The  streams  were  shut  up  before  ;  here  it  is  an 
open  well.  The  fountain  was'sealed  in  the  first  verse  ;  here  it  is  a  flowing  stream,  which 
is  to  teach  us  this — that  the  way  God  keeps  His  people  in  security  is  not  by  shutting 
out  their  enemies  from  attacking  them,  but  while  laying  them  open  to  temptation 
and  attack.  He  yet  sustains  them.  And  last  of  all,  in  opposition  to  the  unity  of 
•which  I  spake,  we  have  in  our  second  text  great  diversity.     You  have  "  a  fountain," 

28 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ilk 

not  of  ft  garden,  but  "  of  gardens  ";  you  have  a  well,  but  it  is  a  well  of  living  waters  ; 
you  have  not  a  stream,  but  streams — streams  from  Lebanon.  So  a  Christian  is  to 
do  good  in  all  sorts  of  ways,  and  his  fruits  are  to  be  of  many  kinds  ;  he  is  to  be  like 
the  trees  of  Paradise,  which  bear  twelve  manner  of  fruits.  The  Christian  is  to  have 
all  sorts  of  graces.  Oh  !  if  the  fountain,  the  secret  fountain,  were  better  seen  to,  I 
think  there  would  be  more  of  these  outward  streams  ;  and  if  the  sealed  well  were 
better  guarded,  we  should  see  more  of  these  rapid  streams  from  Lebanon,  which 
would  make  glad  the  people  of  God,  and  the  world  at  large.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Christ's  Church: — I.  It  is  A  sacked  inclostjke.  Inclosed:  1.  For  protection — 
against  the  many  foes  that  would  injure  it.  2.  For  enjoyment — Christ  has  a  right 
to  witness  its  beauties  and  enjoy  its  fiodts.  II.  The  means  by  which  it  is 
INCLOSED.  1.  By  sovereign  electing  grace — this  sweeps  round  His  Church  as  a 
boundary  line— grand,  comprehensive,  invisible.  2.  By  the  ministrations  of  angels 
— these  are  its  guardians,  servants,  etc.  3.  By  restraining  grace — this  is  needed  by 
every  plant  in  this  garden  and  every  member  in  Christ's  Church.  4.  By  Christian 
ordinances — baptism,  the  seal  of  separation.  5.  By  Christian  doctrine — no  man 
can  be  a  Christian  without  believing  some  fundamental  doctrines.   (J.  F.  Elder,  D.D.) 

Yers.  13,  14.  Thy  plants  are  an  orchard  of  pomegranates,  with  pleasant  frniti; 
eamphire,  with  spikenard,  spikenard  and  saffron ;  calamus  and  cinnamon,  with  all 
trees  of  frankincense ;  myrrh  and  aloes,  with  all  the  chief  spices. — Fragrance : — 
Of  all  man's  sources  of  enjoyment,  none  display  more  clearly  the  bountihilness  of 
God  than  the  fragrant  odours  of  nature.  Fragrance  seems  so  wholly  superfluous 
and  accidental,  that  we  cannot  but  infer  that  it  was  imparted  to  the  objects  which 
possess  it,  not  for  their  own  sakes,  but  for  our  gratification.  We  regard  it  as  a 
peculiar  blessing,  sent  to  us  directly  from  the  hand  of  our  Heavenly  Father ;  and 
we  are  the  more  confirmed  in  this  idea  by  the  fact  that  the  human  period  is  the 
principal  epoch  of  fragrant  plants.  Geologists  inform  us  that  all  the  eras  of  the 
earth's  history  previous  to  the  Upper  Miocene  were  destitute  of  perftimes.  Forests 
of  club-mosses  and  ferns  hid  in  tiieir  sombre  bosom  no  bright-eyed  floweret,  and 
shed  fix)m  their  verdant  boughs  no  scented  richness  on  the  passing  breeze.  Palms 
and  cycads,  though  ushering  in  the  dawn  of  a  brighter  floral  day,  produced  no 
perfume-breathing  blossoms.  It  is  only  when  we  come  to  the  periods  immediately 
antecedent  to  the  human  that  we  meet  with  an  odoriferous  flora.  God  placed  man 
in  a  sweet-scented  garden  as  his  home.  No  sense  is  more  closely  connected  with  the 
sphere  of  soul  than  the  sense  of  smell.     Its  agency  is  most  subtle  and  extensive— 

foing  down  to  the  very  depths  of  our  nature,  and  back  to  the  earliest  dawn  of  life, 
lemory  especially  is  keenly  susceptible  to  its  influence.  The  acceptance  of  man's 
offerings  by  God  is  usually  represented  in  the  anthropomorphism  of  the  Bible,  as 
finding  its  expression  in  the  sense  of  smelL  When  Noah  offered  the  first  sacrifice 
after  the  flood,  "the  Lord,"  we  are  told,  "smelled  a  sweet  savour."  The  drink- 
offerings  and  the  various  bumt-offerings  prescribed  by  Levitical  law  were  regarded 
08  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord.  Christ,  the  antitype  of  these  institutions,  is 
spoken  of  as  having  given  Himself  for  us  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a 
Bweet-smeUing  savour.  And  the  Apostle  Paul,  employing  the  same  typical  language, 
speaks  of  himself  and  the  other  apostles  as  "unto  God  a  sweet  savour  of  Christ," 
•tc.  The  Psalms  and  the  prophetic  writings  are  full  of  the  most  beautiftil  and 
expressive  metaphors,  applied  to  the  most  solemn  persons  and  things,  borrowed 
from  perfumes  ;  whUe  the  whole  of  the  Song  of  Solomon  is  like  an  oriental  garden 
stocked  with  delicious  flowers,  as  grateful  to  the  sense  of  smell  as  to  the  sense  of 
sight.  In  the  gorgeous  ceremonial  worship  of  the  Hebrews,  none  of  the  senses  were 
excluded  from  taking  part  in  the  service.  The  eye  was  appealed  to  by  the  rich 
vestments  and  the  splendid  furniture  of  the  holy  place ;  the  ear  was  exercised  by 
the  solemn  sound  of  the  trumpet,  and  the  voice  of  praise  and  prayer ;  and  the 
nostril  was  gratified  by  the  clouds  of  fragrant  smoke  that  rose  from  the  golden  altar 
of  incense  and  filled  all  the  place.  Doubtless  the  Jews  felt,  when  they  saw  the  soft 
white  clouds  of  fragrant  smoke  rising  slowly  from  the  altar  of  incense,  as  if  the  voice 
of  the  priest  were  silently  but  eloquently  pleading  in  that  expressive  emblem  in  their 
behalf.  The  association  of  sound  was  lost  in  that  of  smell,  and  the  two  senses  were 
blended  in  one.  And  this  symbolical  mode  of  supplication,  as  Dr.  George  Wilson 
has  remarked,  had  this  one  advantage  over  spoken  or  written  prayer,  that  it  appealed 
to  those  who  were  both  blind  and  deaf,  a  class  that  are  usually  shut  out  from  social 
worship  by  their  affliction.  Those  who  could  not  hear  the  prayers  of  the  priest 
could  join  in  devotional  exercises  symbolized  by  incense,  through  the  medium  of 


CHAP.  IT.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  105 

their  sense  of  smell ;  and  the  hallowed  impressions  shut  out  by  one  avenue  were 
admitted  to  the  mind  and  heart  by  another.  But  not  in  the  incense  of  prayer  alone 
•were  perfumes  employed  in  the  Old  Testament  economy.  The  oil  with  which  the 
altars  and  the  sacred  furniture  of  the  tabernacle  and  temple  were  anointed — with 
which  priests  were  consecrated  for  their  holy  service,  and  kings  set  apart  for  their 
lofty  dignity — was  richly  perfumed.  One  of  the  sweetest  names  of  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Anointed  One,  because  He  was  anointed  with  the  fragrant  oil  of  con- 
secration for  His  great  work  of  obedience  and  atonement.  As  our  King  and  Great 
High  Priest,  He  received  the  outward  symbolical  chrism,  when  the  wise  men  of  the 
East  laid  at  His  feet  their  gifts  of  gold,  myrrh  and  frankincense  in  token  of  His 
royal  authority,  and  Mary  and  Nicodemus  anointed  Him  with  precious  spikenard 
and  costly  spices  for  His  priestly  work  of  sacrifice.  His  name  is  as  ointment  poured 
forth  ;  and  He  is  a  bundle  of  myrrh  to  the  heart  that  loves  Him.  The  ingredients 
of  the  Hebrew  perfumes  were  principally  obtained  in  traffic  from  the  Phoenicians. 
A  few  of  them  were  products  of  native  plants,  but  the  great  majority  of  them  came 
from  Arabia,  India  and  the  spice  islands  of  the  Indian  Archipelago.  So  great  was 
the  skill  required  in  the  mixing  of  these  ingredients,  in  order  to  form  their  most 
valued  perfumes,  that  the  art  was  a  recognized  profession  among  the  Jews  ;  and  the 
rokechim,  translated  "apothecary"  in  our  version,  was  not  a  seller  of  medicines  as 
with  us,  but  simply  a  maker  of  perfumes.  Perfumes  were  at  one  time  extensively 
employed  as  remedial  agents,  particularly  in  cases  of  nervous  disease.  They  are 
still  used  freely  in  the  sick-room,  but  more  for  the  purpose  of  refreshment  and 
overpowering  the  noxious  odours  of  disease  than  as  medicines.  How  important  they 
are  in  the  economy  of  nature  we  learn  from  the  fact  that  when  the  Dutch  cut  down 
the  spice  trees  of  Temate,  that  island  was  immediately  visited  with  epidemics  before 
"unknown ;  and  it  has  been  ascertained  that  none  of  the  persons  eirployed  in  the 
perfume  manufactories  of  London  and  Paris  were  attacked  by  cholera  during  the 
last  visitation.  From  the  recent  experimental  researches  of  Professor  Mantegazza, 
we  learn  the  important  fact  that  tlio  easeuces  of  l^nvers  such  as  lavender,  mint, 
thyme,  bergamot,  in  contact  with  atmospheric  oxygen  in  sunlight,  develop  a  very 
large  quantity  of  ozone,  the  purifying  and  health-inspiring  element  in  the  air.  And 
as  a  corollary  from  this  fact,  he  recommends  the  inhabitants  of  marshy  districts, 
and  of  places  infected  with  animal  exhalations,  to  surround  their  houses  with  beds 
of  the  most  odorous  flowers,  as  the  powerful  oxidizing  influence  of  the  ozone  may 
destroy  those  noxious  influences.  Many  of  the  most  delicious  perfumes,  however, 
are  dangerous  in  large  quantities.  Taken  in  moderation  they  act  as  stimulants, 
exhilarating  the  mental  functions,  and  increasing  bodily  vigour.  But  in  larger  and 
more  concentrated  doses  they  act  as  poisons.  If  we  pursue  them  as  pleasures  for 
their  own  sake,  they  will  soon  pall  upon  us,  however  delicious  ;  and  if  we  concentrate 
them  so  as  to  produce  a  stronger  sensation,  they  become  actually  repulsive  and 
sickening.  God  has  given  them  to  us  to  cheer  us  in  the  path  of  duty,  not  to 
minister  to  our  love  of  pleasure  and  self-indulgence  ;  and  in  this  respect  the  laws  of 
the  unwritten  revelation  of  nature  give  their  sanction  to  the  laws  of  the  written 
revelation  of  the  Bible,  indicating  a  common  source  and  pointing  to  a  common  issue. 
{H.  Macmillan,  D.I).) 

Yer.  15.  A  fountain  of  gardens,  a  well  of  living  waters,  and  streams  from 
Lebanon. — The  Church  a  garden : — Again  and  again  the  Church  is  represented  as  a 
garden,  all  up  and  down  the  Word  of  God,  and  it  is  a  figure  specially  suggestive  at 
this  season  of  the  year,  when  the  parks  and  the  orchards  have  put  forth  their  blossom 
and  the  air  is  filled  with  bird- voices.  1.  It  is  a  garden  because  of  the  rare  plants 
in  it.  Sometimes  you  will  find  the  violet,  inconspicuous,  but  sweet  as  heaven — 
Christian  souls,  with  no  pretence,  but  of  much  usefulness,  comparatively  unknown 
on  earth,  but  to  be  glorious  in  celestial  spheres.  In  this  garden  of  the  Lord  I  find 
the  Mexican  cactus,  loveliness  within,  thorns  without,  men  with  great  sharpness  of 
behaviour  and  manner,  but  within  them  the  peace  of  God,  the  love  of  God,  the  grace 
of  God.  They  are  hard  men  to  handle,  ugly  men  to  touch,  very  apt  to  strike  back 
when  you  strike  them,  yet  within  them  aU  loveliness  and  attraction,  while  outside 
eo  completely  unfortunate.  But  I  remember  in  boyhood  that  we  had  in  our  father's 
garden  what  we  called  the  Giant  of  Battle — a  peculiar  rose,  very  red  and  very  fiery. 
Suggestive  flower,  it  was  called  the  Giant  of  Battle.  And  so  in  the  garden  of  the 
Lord  we  find  that  kind  of  flower — the  Pauls  and  Martin  Luthers,  the  Wyclifies,  the 
John  Knoxes — Giants  of  Battle.  What  in  other  men  is  a  spark,  in  them  is  a  con- 
flagration ;  when  thej  pray,  their  prayers  take  fire.    When  they  suffer,  they  sweat 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

great  drops  of  blood  ;  when  they  preach,  it  is  a  pentecost ;  when  they  fight,  it  is  » 
Thermopylae  ;  when  they  die,  it  is  martyrdom — Giants  of  Battle.  But  I  find  also 
in  the  Church  of  God  a  plant  that  I  shall  call  the  snowdrop.  Very  beautiful  but 
cold  ;  it  is  very  pure,  pure  as  the  snowdrop,  beautiful  as  the  snowdrop,  and  cold  aa 
the  snowdrop,  I  would  rather  have  one  Giant  of  Battle  than  5000  snowdrops. 
You  have  seen  in  some  places,  perhaps,  a  century-plant.  You  look  at  it  and  say, 
*'  This  flower  has  been  gathering  up  its  beauty  for  a  whole  century,  and  it  will  not 
bloom  again  for  another  hundred  years."  Well,  I  have  to  tell  you  that  in  thia 
garden  of  the  Church,  spoken  of  in  my  text,  there  is  a  century -plant.  It  has 
gathered  up  its  bloom  from  all  the  ages  of  eternity,  and  nineteen  centuries  ago  it 
put  forth  its  glory.  It  is  not  only  a  century-plant  but  a  passion-flower — the  passion- 
flower of  Christ ;  a  crimson  flower,  blood  at  the  root,  and  blood  on  the  leaves,  th« 
passion-flower  of  Jesus,  the  century-plant  of  eternity.  Come,  0  winds  from  the 
north,  and  winds  from  the  south,  and  winds  from  the  east,  and  winds  from  the  west, 
and  scatter  the  perfume  of  this  flower  through  all  nations.  Thou,  the  Christ  of  all 
the  ages,  hast  garments  smelling  of  myrrh  and  aloes  and  cassia,  out  of  the  ivory 
palaces.  2.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  appropriately  compared  to  a  garden  because  of 
its  thorough  irrigation.  There  can  be  no  luxuriant  garden  without  plenty  of  water. 
I  saw  a  garden  in  the  midst  of  the  desert,  amid  the  Rocky  Mountains.  I  said,  How 
is  it  possible  you  have  so  many  flowers,  so  much  rich  fruit,  in  a  desert  for  miles 
around  ?  I  suppose  some  of  you  have  seen  those  gardens.  Well,  they  told  me  they 
had  aqueducts  and  pipes  reaching  up  to  the  hills,  and  the  snows  melted  on  the  Sierra 
Nevada  and  the  Rocky  Mountains,  and  then  poured  down  in  water  to  those  aque- 
ducts,  and  it  kept  the  fields  in  great  luxuriance.  And  I  thought  to  myself — how 
like  the  garden  of  Christ !  All  around  it  the  barrenness  of  sin  and  the  barrenness 
of  the  world,  but  our  eyes  are  unto  the  hUls,  from  whence  cometh  our  help.  There 
is  a  river  the  streams  whereof  shall  make  glad  the  city  of  our  God,  the  fountain  of 
gardens  and  streams  from  Lebanon.  Water  to  slake  the  thirst,  water  to  refresh  the 
fainting,  water  to  wash  the  unclean,  water  to  toss  up  in  fountains  under  the  sun  of 
righteousness,  until  you  can  see  the  rainbow  around  the  throne.  I  wandered  in  a 
royal  garden  of  choicest  plants,  and  I  saw  the  luxuriance  of  those  gardens  were 
helped  by  the  abundant  supply  of  water.  I  came  to  it  on  a  day  when  strangers 
were  not  admitted,  but,  by  a  strange  coincidence,  at  the  moment  I  got  in  the  king's 
chariot  passed,  and  the  gardener  went  up  on  the  hill  and  turned  on  the  water, 
and  it  came  flashing  down  the  broad  stairs  of  stone  untU  sunlight  and  wave  ia 
gleesome  wrestle  tumbled  at  my  feet.  And  so  it  is  with  this  garden  of  Christ. 
Everything  comes  from  above — pardon  from  above,  peace  from  above,  comfort  from 
above,  sanctification  from  above.  Streams  from  Lebanon — oh  !  the  consolation  in 
this  thought.  How  many  have  tried  all  the  fountains  of  this  world's  pleasure,  but 
never  tasted  of  the  stream  from  Lebanon  !  How  many  have  revelled  in  other 
gardens,  to  their  soul's  ruin,  but  never  plucked  one  flower  from  the  garden  of  our 
God  !  I  swing  open  aU  the  gates  of  the  garden  and  invite  you  in,  whatever  your 
history,  whatever  your  sins,  whatever  your  temptations,  whatever  your  trouble. 
The  invitation  comes  no  more  to  one  than  to  all :  '*  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come.** 
(T.  Be  Witt  Talmage.) 

Yer.  16.  Awake,  0  north  wind ;  and  come,  thoa  sonth ;  blow  upon  my  garden, 
that  the  spices  thereof  may  flow  out. — Grace  for  communion: — The  loved  one  in  the 
text  desired  the  company  of  her  Lord,  and  felt  that  an  inactive  condition  was  not 
altogether  suitable  for  His  coming.  Her  prayer  is  first  about  her  garden,  that  it  may 
be  made  ready  for  her  Beloved  ;  and  then  to  the  Bridegroom  Himself,  that  He  would 
come  into  His  garden,  and  eat  its  pleasant  fruits.  She  pleads  for  the  breath  of 
heaven,  and  for  the  Lord  of  heaven.  I.  First  she  cries  for  the  breath  of  heaven 
to  break  the  dead  calm  which  broods  over  her  heart.  In  this  prayer  there  is  au 
evident  sense  of  inward  sleep.  She  does  not  mean  that  the  north  wind  is  asleep :  it 
is  her  poetical  way  of  confessing  that  she  herself  needs  to  be  awakened.  She  has  a 
sense  of  absentmindedness,  too,  for  she  cries,  "Come,  thou  south."  If  the  south 
wind  would  come,  the  forgetful  perfumes  would  come  to  themselves,  and  sweeten  all 
the  air.  The  fault,  whatever  it  is,  cannot  lie  in  the  winds ;  it  lies  in  ourselves. 
Notice  that  the  spouse  does  not  mind  what  form  the  Divine  visitation  takes  so  long 
as  she  feels  its  power.  "  Awake,  0  north  wind  ; "  though  the  blast  be  cold  and  cut- 
ting, it  may  be  that  it  will  efl'ectuaUy  fetch  forth  the  perfume  of  the  soul  in  the  form 
of  repentance  and  self-humiliation.  The  rough  north  wind  has  done  much  for  some 
of  us  in  the  way  of  arousing  our  best  graces.    Yet  it  may  be  that  the  Lord  will  send 


CHA>.  IT.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  lOT 

something  more  tender  and  cheering  ;  and  if  so,  we  would  cry,  "  Coroe,  thou  south.'* 
Divine  love  warming  the  heart  has  a  wonderful  power  to  develop  the  best  part  of  a 
man's  nature.  Many  of  our  precious  things  are  brought  forth  by  the  sun  of  holy 
joy.  Either  movement  of  the  Spirit  will  sufficiently  bestir  our  inner  life  ;  but  the 
spouse  desires  both.  Although  in  nature  you  cannot  have  the  north  wind  and  the 
south  blowing  at  the  same  time;  yet  in  grace  you  can.  The  prayer  is  "blow," 
•nd  the  result  is  "flow."  Lord,  if  thou  blowest,  my  heart  floweth  out  to  Thee  ! 
"Draw  me,  we  will  run  after  Thee."  11.  The  second  half  of  the  prayer  expresses 
our  central  desire  :  we  long  for  the  Lobd  of  heaven  to  visit  us.  The  bride  does 
not  seek  that  the  spices  of  her  garden  may  become  perceptible  for  her  own  enjoy- 
ment, nor  for  the  delectation  of  strangers,  nor  even  for  the  pleasure  of  the  daughters 
of  Jerusalem,  but  for  her  Beloved's  sake.  He  is  to  come  into  His  garden,  and  eat  His 
pleasant  fruits.  Note  well  the  address  of  the  spouse  to  her  Beloved  in  the  words 
before  us.  She  calls  Him  hers — "my  Beloved."  "When  we  are  sure  that  He  is  ours 
we  desire  Him  to  come  to  us  as  ours,  and  to  reveal  Himself  as  ours.  While  He  is  hers 
she  owns  that  she  is  wholly  His,  and  all  that  she  has  belongs  to  Him.  In  the  first 
clause  she  says,  "Awake,  0  north  wind  ;  and  come,  thou  south  ;  blow  upon  my 
garden  "  ;  but  now  she  prays,  ' '  Let  my  Beloved  come  into  His  garden. "  She  had 
spoken  just  before  of  her  fruits,  but  now  they  are  His  fruits.  She  was  not  wrong 
when  she  first  spoke  ;  but  she  is  more  accurate  now.  We  are  not  our  own.  We  do 
not  bring  forth  fruit  of  ourselves.  The  Lord  saith,  "  From  Me  is  thy  fruit  found." 
The  garden  is  of  our  Lord's  purchasing,  enclosing,  planting,  and  watering  ;  and  all 
its  fruit  belongs  to  Him.  This  is  a  powerful  reason  for  His  visiting  us.  Should  not 
•  man  come  into  his  own  garden,  and  eat  his  own  fruits  ?  Oh,  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
may  put  us  into  a  fit  condition  to  entertain  our  Lord  !  The  spouse  further  cries, 
"  Let  Him  eat  His  pleasant  fruits."  I  have  often  felt  myself  overcome  with  the  bare 
idea  that  anything  I  have  ever  done  should  give  my  Lord  pleasure.  Can  He  perceive 
any  perfume  in  my  spices,  or  taste  any  flavour  in  my  fruits  ?  This  is  a  joy  worth 
worlds.  It  is  one  of  the  highest  tokens  of  His  condescension.  0  Lord  Jesus,  come 
into  our  hearts  now  !  0  Holy  Spirit,  blow  upon  our  hearts  at  this  moment !  Let 
faith,  and  love,  and  hope,  and  joy,  and  patience,  and  every  grace  be  now  Like  violets 
which  betray  themselves  by  their  perfume,  or  like  roses  which  load  the  air  with 
their  fragrance  !  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Church's  prayer : — Let  us  consider  the 
prayer  of  those  who  are  planted  in  this  garden,  and  who  are  represented  in  the  text, 
as  imploring  the  Holy  Spirit  to  descend  upon  them.  I.  In  His  convincing  and 
HUMBLING  POWER,  AS  THE  PIERCING  NORTH  WIND.  As  the  cold  north  wind  pre- 
pares the  soil,  and  fits  it  for  vegetation,  so  are  the  sharper  operations  of  the  Spirit 
needful  for  the  believer,  when,  as  too  often  happens,  he  is  under  a  decay  in  grace  ; 
when  the  things  that  are  in  him  are  ready  to  die.  When  He  thus  comes.  He  uses 
various  means  of  awakening.  1.  His  grand  instrument  is  "  the  sword  of  the  Spirit, 
which  is  the  Word  of  God,"  "sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword,"  etc.  When  a 
believer  grows  cold  and  careless  in  his  walk,  God  directe  to  him  some  text,  some 
threatening,  or  warning,  or  promise.  2.  He  often  comes  with  awakening  power  in 
the  shape  of  afflictions.  II.  In  His  comforting  and  enlivening  power,  as 
THE  gentle  south  WIND.  When  He  has  pierced  the  backsliding  heart  with 
sorrow  for  sin.  He  binds  up  the  wound ;  shines  upon  the  heart,  like  the  cheer- 
ing son  ;  and  breathes.  Like  the  mild  and  gentle  south.  {E.  Blencowe,  M.A.)  The 
graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit  implored: — "The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth. "  The 
Spirit  of  God  is  an  unshackled  agent,  acting  freely  in  the  first  application  of  grace 
to  the  sinner's  soul,  and  in  all  its  future  operations.  1.  Pray  that  your  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus  may  be  greatly  strengthened.  If  faith  be  the  element  of  a  Divine  life, 
will  not  that  Life,  in  its  exercise  and  development,  be  more  vigorous,  according  as 
God  shall  give  us  a  stronger  and  a  larger  measure  of  faith  1  2.  Again,  a  believer  will 
plead  with  Christ,  that  the  Spirit  may  give  him  a  more  lively  hope.  3.  And  should 
not  a  believer  say,  ' '  Awake,  0  north  wind,  and  come,  thou  south  " — let  my  love 
abound  ?  But  is  not  this  love  ?  Doth  the  love  of  Christ,  producing  a  corresponding 
Bff"ection  within  us,  constrain  us  aa  it  ought  ?  4.  And  is  it  not  fitting  that  a  child 
of  God  should  say.  Let  my  humility  be  deepened  ?  It  is  the  great  business  of  the 
Gospel  to  hinder  the  poor  guilty  worm  of  the  earth  from  saving,  "  I  am  rich,  and 
increased  in  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing."  5.  Should  not,  moreover,  a  be- 
liever pray,  "  Come,  thou  south  wind,  breathe  upon  my  garden,  that  the  spices 
thereof  may  flow  out,"  that  my  joy  may  be  increased?  (k.  P.  Bvddicom,  M.A.) 
North  and  south  winds : — There  is  a  law  of  classification  and  contrasts  in  all  life. 
Tlungi  are  paired  off.    They  present  themselves  in  sets  or  classes.    We  have  stars  in 


108  THE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lY. 

galaxies,  and  the  rolling  worlds  arranged  into  systems.  "Vegetable  and  animal  life 
are  known  by  their  genus  and  species.  The  principle  of  order  characterizes  the  con- 
ditions of  man  in  the  complexity  of  his  nature  and  the  diversity  of  his  life.  Our 
main  purpose  is  to  trace  the  Divine  plan  of  working  in  the  developing  and  perfecting 
of  God's  image  in  a  human  soul.  In  the  text  we  are  taught  that  it  is  by  contrary 
and  conflicting  forces  that  perfection  of  character  is  attained.  I.  The  text  is  tbub 
OF  NATUKAL  LIFE.  "  North  and  south "  are  the  two  extremes  of  this  sphere. 
Between  these  two  extremes  exist  all  the  fluctuating  variations  of  the  earth's 
condition.  The  day's  weather  depends  very  largely  upon  the  point  from  which 
the  wind  will  blow.  We  divine  the  meteorological  conditions  of  the  day  by  the 
prophecy  of  the  morning.  North  winds  bring  cold,  hail  and  snow ;  south  winds 
are  balmy  and  warm.  These  facts  find  their  analogue  in  our  higher  experiences. 
What  contrasts  there  are  in  the  conditions  of  our  everyday  life !  This  is  true 
Bocially.  When  all  things  are  going  smoothly  in  the  home,  when  health  and  plenty 
abound — ^when  children  are  dutiful  and  diligent,  parents  revel  in  the  gentle  breezes 
as  they  waft  down  from  the  southern  sky.  But,  alas  I  the  wind  sometimes  veers 
round  to  the  opposite  point  with  a  surprising  suddenness,  and  the  chilly  blasts  beat 
upon  ns  with  pitiless  fury  and  pierce  our  spirits  to  the  quick.  How  true  is  the  text 
to  business  life.  Prosperity  is  verUy  a  congenial  south  wind.  We  all  aim  at  and 
desire  success.  But  the  winds  of  commercial  enterprises  do  not  always  blow  from 
the  south  ;  and  for  aught  we  know  to  the  contrary,  there  may  be  more  perfect 
developments  of  character  under  the  latter  than  by  the  agency  of  the  former.  Tte 
two  winds  are  useful  and  necessary.  The  south  for  the  comfort  and  nourishing  of 
young  elements  and  principles  in  their  more  incipient  stages,  and  the  north  wind  for 
giving  setness  and  endurance  to  these  essential  qualities.  II.  The  text  is  also 
TKUE  OF  SPIRITUAL  LIFE.  The  life  of  the  soul  is  promoted  by  principles  similar  to 
those  which  rule  in  our  physical  nature.  There  are  opposing  elements  even  in  our 
food.  Some  are  alimentary,  building  up  the  body,  repairing  waste  tissue ;  while 
others  are  poisonous,  rendering  innocuous,  or  eliminating  elements  that  are  dele- 
terious,  and  that  would,  if  permitted  to  operate  unchecked,  kill  the  body.  The 
value  of  foods  depends  upon  their  adaptation  to  the  peculiar  and  varying  states  and 
requirements  of  the  physical  system.  In  the  childhood  of  our  divine  life  we  need  the 
tender  and  sympathetic.  Either  through  sin  or  neglect  of  duty,  or  strange  provi- 
dences, or  the  wearing  power  of  temptation  and  persecution,  or  the  ordinary  and 
inevitable  friction  of  life,  we  become  attenuated  in  our  spiritual  proportions  and 
correspondingly  feeble.  The  "north  wind  "is  too  strong  for  us,  and  so  we  need 
the  southern  breezes  to  soothe  back  into  strength  the  weakened  energies  of  the  souL 
But  then  spiritual  athletes  are  not  braced  into  might  by  south  winds  only.  Wo 
need  to  cry,  "  Awake,  0  north  wind."  Too  many  of  the  avowed  followers  of  Hirn 
"who  was  rich  yet  foroursakes  became  poor,"  "who  pleased  not  Himself,"  who 
"  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head,"  are  resting  in  the  warmth  of  the  southern  sphere, 
thus  taking  no  part  in  the  great  activities  of  the  Christian  Church.  If  all  were  as 
they  are  what  would  be  the  future  of  Christianity,  aye  I  and  of  the  world,  too  ?  It 
is  a  good  thing  to  get  out  into  the  refreshing  breezes  which  come  even  from  the 
northern  regions.  Many  a  Christian  will  have  to  thank  God  for  pain  and  trial  and 
losses.  As  the  north  and  south  winds  are  essential,  we  do  well  to  keep  ourselves  in 
the  line  of  both.  True  greatness  is  attained  by  a  combination  of  opposite  qualities. 
It  is  the  strong  man  tender,  the  great  man  lowly,  the  rich  man  humble,  the  wise 
man  with  condescending  simplicity  we  most  admire.  Do  not  arraign  the  Divine 
government  if  north  winds  blow,  but  keep  well  in  mind  the  great  fact  that  He 
is  designing  and  evolving  your  good  in  all  things  so  that  you  may  attain  the  stature 
of  a  perfect  man ;  and  in  the  last  day  you  shall  be  presented  perfect,  wanting 
nothing.  {M.  Brokenshire.)  Let  my  Beloved  come  into  His  garden,  and  eat  His 
pleasant  fruits. — "My  garden  " — ' '  His  garden  " : — What  a  difference  there  is  between 
what  the  believer  was  by  nature  and  what  the  grace  of  God  has  made  bim  | 
Naturally  we  were  like  the  waste  howling  wilderness,  like  the  desert  which  yields 
no  healthy  [>lant  or  verdure.  But  now,  as  many  of  us  as  have  known  the  Lord  are 
transformed  into  gardens  ;  our  wilderness  is  made  like  Eden,  our  desert  is  changed 
into  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  In  a  garden  there  are  flowers  and  fruits,  and  in  every 
Ohristian  s  heart  you  will  find  the  same  evidences  of  culture  and  care  ;  not  in  all 
alike,  for  even  gardens  and  fields  vary  in  productiveness.  StiU,  there  are  the  finiits 
and  there  are  the  flowers,  in  a  measure  ;  there  is  a  good  beginning  made  wherever 
the  grace  of  God  has  undertaken  the  culture  of  our  nature.  I.  Now  coming  to  oar 
text,  «nd  thinking  of  Christians  as  the  Lord's  garden,  I  want  you  to  observe,  firsts 


CHAP.  IT.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOIT.  lOd 

that  THEKE  ARE  SWEET  SPICES  IN  BELiEVEBS.  For  instance,  there  ia  faith ;  is 
there  anything  out  of  heaven  sweeter  than  faith — the  faith  which  trusts  and  clings, 
which  believes  and  hopes,  and  declares  that,  thoixgh  God  shall  slay  it,  yet  will  it 
trust  in  Him  ?  Then  comes  love  ;  and  again  I  must  ask.  Is  there  to  be  found 
anywhere  a  sweeter  spice  than  this — the  love  which  loves  God  because  He  first  loved 
us,  the  love  which  flows  out  to  all  the  brotherhood,  the  love  which  knows  no  circle 
within  which  it  can  be  bounded,  but  which  loves  the  whole  race  of  mankind,  and 
seeks  to  do  them  good  ?  And  there  is  also  hope,  which  is  indeed  an  excellent  grace, 
a  far-seeing  grace  by  which  we  behold  heaven  and  eternal  bliss.  You  do  not  need 
that  I  should  go  over  all  the  list  of  Christian  graces,  and  mention  meekness,  brotherly 
kindness,  courage,  uprightness  or  the  patience  which  endures  so  much  from  the  hand 
of  God  :  but  whatsoever  grace  I  might  mention,  it  would  not  be  difficult  at  once  to 
convince  you  that  there  is  a  sweetness  and  a  perfume  about  aU  grace  in  the  esteem  of 
Him  who  created  it,  and  it  delights  Him  that  it  should  flourish  where  once  ita 
opposite  alone  was  found  growing  in  the  heart  of  man.  These,  then,  are  some  of 
the  saints'  sweet  spices.  Next  notice  that  these  sweet  spices  are  delightful  to  God. 
He  has  joy  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth,  though  repentance  is  but  an  initial  grace  ; 
and  when  we  go  on  from  that  to  other  graces,  and  take  yet  higher  steps  in  the  Divine 
life,  we  may  be  sure  that  His  joy  is  iu  us,  and  therefore  our  joy  may  well  be  fulL 
These  spices  of  ours  are  not  only  delightful  to  God,  but  they  are  healthful  to  man, 
A  man  of  faith  and  love  in  a  Church  sweetens  all  his  brethren.  Give  us  but  a 
few  such  in  our  midst,  and  there  shall  be  no  broken  spiritual  unity,  there  shall  bo 
no  coldness  and  spiritual  death  ;  but  all  shall  go  well  where  these  men  of  God  aro 
among  us  as  a  mighty  influence  for  good.  And,  as  to  the  ungodly  around  us,  the 
continued  existence  in  the  earth  of  the  Church  of  Christ  is  the  hope  of  the  world. 
It  sometimes  happens  that  these  sweet  odours  within  God's  people  lie  quiet  and  stilL 
You  cannot  stir  your  own  graces,  you  cannot  make  them  move,  you  cannot  cause 
their  fragrance  to  flow  forth.  At  such  times,  a  Christian  is  very  apt  to  ask,  "  Am  I 
indeed  planted  in  God's  garden  ?  Am  I  reaUy  a  child  of  God  ? "  Now,  I  will  say 
what  some  of  you  may  think  a  strong  thing  ;  but  I  do  not  believe  that  he  is  a  child 
of  God  who  never  raised  that  question.  II.  What  is  wanted  is  that  those  sweet 
ODDITES  SHOULD  BE  DIFFUSED.  Observe,  first,  that  until  our  graces  are  diflused,  it 
is  the  same  as  if  they  were  not  there.  We  may  not  know  that  we  have  any  faith 
till  there  comes  a  trial,  and  then  our  faith  starts  boldly  up.  We  can  hardly  know 
how  much  we  love  our  Lord  till  there  comes  a  test  of  our  love,  and  then  we  so 
behave  ourselves  that  we  know  that  we  do  love  Him.  Notice  next,  that  it  is  very 
paiuful  to  a  Christian  to  be  in  such  a  condition  that  his  graces  are  not  stirring.  He 
cannot  endure  it.  We  who  love  the  Lord  were  not  born  again  to  waste  our  time  in 
sinful  slumber;  our  watchword  is,  "Let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others."  "Quicken 
Thou  me,  0  Lord,  according  to  Thy  word  " — ^whichever  word  Thou  shalt  choose  to 
apply,  only  do  quicken  Thy  servant,  and  let  not  the  graces  within  me  be  as  if  they 
were  dead !  Kemember,  however,  that  the  best  quickener  is  always  the  Holy 
Spirit ;  and  that  blessed  Spirit  can  come  as  the  north  wind,  convincing  us  of  sin, 
and  tearing  away  every  rag  of  our  self-confidence,  or  He  may  come  as  the  soft  south 
wind,  aU  fiill  of  love,  revealing  Christ,  and  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  all  the 
blessings  treasured  for  us  therein.  You  see,  also,  from  this  text,  that  when  a  child 
of  God  sees  that  his  graces  are  not  difiused  abroad,  then  is  the  time  that  he  should 
take  to  prayer.  Let  no  one  of  us  ever  think  of  saying,  "  I  do  not  feel  as  if  I  could 
pray,  and  therefore  I  will  not  pray."  On  the  contrary,  then  is  the  time  when  you 
ought  to  pray  more  earnestly  than  ever.  Say,  "  O  my  Father,  I  cannot  endure 
this  miserable  existence !  Thou  hast  made  me  to  be  a  flower,  to  shed  abroad  my 
perfume,  yet  I  am  not  doing  it.  Oh,  by  some  means,  stir  my  flagging  spirit,  tiU 
I  shall  be  full  of  earnest  industry,  fall  of  holy  anxiety  to  promote  Thy  glory,  O 
my  Lord  and  Master  1  "  III.  "Let  my  Beloved  come  into  His  garden,  and  eat 
His  pleasant  fruits."  These  words  speak  of  the  company  of  Christ  and  the 
ACCEPTANCE  OP  OUR  FRUIT  BY  Christ.  I  want  you  Specially  to  notice  one 
expression  which  is  used  here.  While  the  spouse  was,  as  it  were,  shut  up  and 
frozen,  and  the  spices  of  the  Lord's  garden  were  not  flowing  out,  she  cried  to  the 
winds,  "  Blow  upon  my  garden."  She  hardly  dared  to  call  it  her  Lord's  garden ; 
but  now,  notice  the  alteration  in  the  phraseology:  "Let  my  Beloved  come  into 
His  garden,  and  eat  His  pleasant  finiits.'  The  wind  has  blown  through  the  garden, 
and  made  the  sweet  odours  to  flow  forth ;  now  it  is  no  longer  "my  garden,"  but 
"  His  garden."  It  is  wonderful  how  an  increase  of  grace  transfers  our  properties  ; 
while  we  have  but  little  grace,  we  cry,  "  my,"  but  when  we  get  great  grace,  we  cry. 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

"His."  He  planted  every  flower,  and  gave  to  each  its  fragrance;  let  Him  coma 
into  His  garden,  and  see  what  wonders  His  grace  has  wrought.  Do  you  not  feel, 
beloved,  that  the  one  thing  you  want  to  stir  your  whole  soul  is  that  Christ  shall 
come  into  it  ?  The  best  condition  a  heart  can  be  in,  if  it  has  lost  fellowship  with 
Christ,  is  to  resolve  that  it  will  give  God  no  rest  till  it  gets  back  to  communion 
with  Him,  and  to  give  itself  no  rest  till  once  more  it  finds  the  Well-beloved.  Next 
observe  that,  when  the  Beloved  comes  into  His  garden,  the  heait's  humble  but 
earnest  entreaty  is,  *'  Let  Him  eat  His  pleasant  fruits."  The  greatest  joy  of  a 
Christian  is  to  give  joy  to  Christ;  I  do  not  know  whether  heaven  itself  can 
overmatch  this  pearl  of  giving  joy  to  the  heart  of  Jesus  Christ  on  earth.  It  can 
match  it,  but  not  overmatch  it,  for  it  is  a  superlative  joy  to  give  joy  to  Him — the 
Man  of  sorrows,  who  was  emptied  of  joy  for  our  sakes,  and  who  now  is  filled  up 
again  with  joy  as  each  one  shall  come  and  bring  his  share,  and  cause  to  the  heart  of 
Christ  a  new  and  fresh  delight.    (C.  E.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAPTER  V. 

YxK.  1.  I  am  come  into  Uy  garden,  My  sister,  Uy  sponse. — The  Kirig  feasting  (m 
His  garden : — I.  The  voice  of  the  Master  Himself  calls  ua  to  consider  His  presence  : 
"  I  am  come."  He  teUs  us  He  is  come.  What  I  Could  He  come  without  our  per- 
ceiving it  ?  Is  it  possible  ?  May  we  be  like  those  whose  eyes  were  holden  so  that 
thej  knew  Him  not  ?  Is  it  possible  for  us  to  be  like  Magdalen,  seeking  Christ,  while 
He  is  standing  very  near  us  ?  Yes,  and  we  may  even  be  like  the  disciples  who,  when 
they  saw  Him  walking  on  the  water,  were  afraid,  and  thought  it  was  a  spirit,  and 
cried  out,  and  had  need  for  Him  to  say,  "It  is  I,  be  not  afraid,"  before  they  knew 
who  it  was  !  Here  is  our  ignorance,  but  here  is  His  tenderness.  Observe,  first,  this 
coming  was  in  answer  to  prayer.  How  quickly  the  spouse  was  heard  !  Scarce  had 
the  words  died  away,  "  Let  my  Beloved  come,"  before  she  heard  Him  say,  *'  I  am 
come  !  "  "  Before  they  call,  I  will  answer  ;  and  while  they  are  yet  speaking,  I  will 
hear. "  Now,  observe  what  an  unspeakable  blessing  this  is !  If  the  voice  had  said, 
"  I  have  sent  My  angel,"  that  would  have  been  a  precious  boon  ;  but  it  is  not  so 
spoken ;  the  word  is,  "  I  am  come. "  If  you  take  each  word  of  this  remarkable 
sentence,  you  will  find  a  meaning.  "  I  am  come."  There  is  the  personal  presence  of 
Christ,  '*  I  am  oome. "  There  is  the  certainty  that  it  is  so.  It  is  no  delusion,  no  dream, 
no  supposition.  *  *  I  am  truly  come. "  This  is  a  solemn  as  well  as  a  pleasant  fact.  You 
who  are  members  of  this  church,  recollect  that  Jesus  is  come  into  the  church,  that 
He  is  now  going  his  rounds  among  you,  and  marking  your  feelings  towards  Him  ;  Ha 
knows  to-day  who  is  in  fellowship  with  Him,  and  who  is  not ;  He  discerneth  between 
the  precious  and  the  vile.  "I  am  come  into  My  garden,"  saith  He.  Note  here  the 
possession  which  Christ  claims  in  the  Church.  If  it  were  not  His  garden.  He  would 
not  come  into  it.  A  church  that  is  not  Christ's  church  shall  have  none  of  His 
presence,  and  a  soul  that  is  not  Christ's  has  no  fellowship  with  Him.  The  next 
word  denotes  cultivation.  "  I  am  come  into  My  garden."  The  Church  is  a  culti- 
vated spot ;  it  did  not  spring  up  by  chance,  it  was  arranged  by  Himself,  it  has  been 
tended  by  Himself,  and  the  fruits  belong  to  Himself.  And  then  there  are  the  two 
choice  words  at  the  close,  by  which  He  speaks  of  His  Church  herself  rather  than  of 
her  work.  As  if  He  would  draw  the  attention  of  His  people  to  themselves  and  to 
Himself,  rather  than  to  their  work  ;  He  says,  "  My  sister.  My  spouse."  There  ia 
one  name  for  the  garden,  but  there  are  two  names  for  herself.  The  work  is  His 
work,  the  garden  is  His  garden,  but  see,  He  wants  communion  not  so  much  with  the 
work  as  with  the  worker.  He  speaks  to  the  Chm-ch  herself.  He  calls  her,  "  My 
sister,  My  spouse."  "Spouse"  has  something  in  it  of  dearness  that  is  not  in  the 
first  word,  for  what  can  be  dearer  to  the  husband  than  the  bride  ?  But  then  there 
was  a  time  when  the  spouse  was  not  dear  to  the  Bridegroom,  there  was  a  period 
perhaps  when  He  did  not  know  her,  when  there  was  no  relationship  between  them 
twain  ;  though  they  are  made  of  one  flesh  by  marriage,  yet  they  were  of  difl'erent 
families  ;  and  for  this  cause  He  adds  the  dear  name  of  "  sister,"  to  show  an  ancient 
relationship  to  her,  a  closeness  and  nearness  by  blood,  by  birth,  as  well  as  by 
betrothal  and  wedlock.  The  two  words  put  together  make  up  a  confection  of 
inexpressible  sweetness,    II.  Oub  Loed's  satisfaction  in  His  Church.    Observe, 


t!HAP.  T.]  TEE  SONO  OF  SOLOMON.  Ill 

first,  that  Christ  is  delighted  with  the  oflFeringa  of  His  people.  He  says,  "  I  hare 
gathered  My  myrrh  with  My  spice."  We  may  consider  myrrh  and  spice — sweet 
perfumes — offered  by  way  of  incense  to  God,  as  being  indicative  of  the  offerings 
which  His  people  bring  to  Him.  "What  if  I  say  that  prayer  is  like  sweet-smeUing 
myrrh,  and  that  the  BeloTed  has  been  gathering  the  myrrh  of  holy  prayer,  the 
bitter  myrrh  of  repenting  sighs  and  cries,  in  the  midst  of  this  church,  lo,  these 
many  months  1  No  faithful  prayer  is  lost.  The  groanings  of  His  people  are  not 
forgotten,  He  gathers  them  as  men  gather  precious  products  from  a  garden  which 
they  have  tilled  with  much  labour  and  expense.  And  then,  may  not  spice  represent 
our  praises  ?  for  these,  as  well  as  prayer,  come  up  as  incense  before  His  throne. 
Praise  is  pleasant  and  comely,  and  most  of  all  so  because  Jesus  accepts  it,  and  says, 
"Whosoever  offereth  praise  glorifieth  Me."  The  Saviour's  satisfaction  is  found, 
next,  in  His  people's  love — "  I  have  eaten  My  honeycomb  with  My  honey."  Ho 
takes  an  intense  satisfaction  in  the  sweet  fruits  which  He  Himself  has  caused  us  to 
produce  ;  notwithstanding  every  imperfection.  He  accepts  our  love,  and  says,  "  I 
nave  eaten  My  honeycomb  with  My  honey."  Turning  again  to  our  precious  text, 
we  observe  that  our  Lord's  satisfaction  is  compared  to  dnnking  as  well  as  eating, 
and  that  drinking  ia  of  a  twofold  character.  "  I  have  drunk  My  wine."  Does  he 
intend  by  this  His  joy  which  is  fulfilled  in  us  when  our  joy  is  full  ?  Does  He  mean 
that,  as  men  go  to  feasts  to  make  glad  their  hearts  with  wine,  so  He  comes  to  His 

Sople  to  see  their  joy,  and  is  fiUed  with  exultation  f  Meaneth  He  not  so  1  Surely 
e  doth.  And  the  milk,  may  not  that  mean  ths  Christian's  common,  ordinary 
life  ?  As  milk  contains  all  the  constituents  of  nourishment,  may  He  not  mean  by 
this  the  general  life  of  the  Christian  ?  Our  Lord  takes  delight  in  the  graces  of  our 
lives.  Permit  me  now  to  call  your  attention  to  those  many  great  httle  words, 
which  are  yet  but  one — I  refer  to  the  word  "My."  Observe,  that  eight  or  nine 
times  it  is  repeated.  Here  is  the  reason  for  the  solace  which  the  Bridegroom  finds 
in  His  Church.  If  He  has  gotten  anything  out  of  us.  He  must  first  have  put  it  in  us : 
if  He  sees  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  it  is  because  the  travail  came  first.  Note  well, 
ye  lovers  of  Jesus,  that  our  Lord  in  this  heavenly  verse  is  fed  first.  "  I  have 
eaten,"  says  He,  and  then  He  turns  to  us  and  says,  "  Eat,  0  friends."  If  any  of  you 
seek  friendship  with  the  Well-beloved,  you  must  commence  by  preparing  Him  a 
feast.  Be  assured  that  after  you  have  so  done,  your  barrel  of  meal  shall  not  waste, 
neither  shall  the  cruse  of  oil  fail.  The  way  for  believers  to  be  fed  by  Christ  is  to 
seek  to  feed  Him ;  look  to  His  being  satisfied,  and  He  will  assuredly  look  to  yoo. 
III.  We  must  now  remember,  that  the  text  contains  an  invitation.  The  Beloved 
says,  *'  Eat,  O  friends  ;  drink,  yea,  drink  abundantly,  0  beloved."  In  the  invita- 
tion we  see  the  character  of  the  invited  guests ;  they  are  spoken  of  as  "  friends." 
We  were  once  aliens,  we  are  now  brought  nigh  ;  we  were  once  enemies,  we  are  made 
servants,  but  we  have  advanced  from  the  grade  of  service  (though  servants  still)  into 
that  of  friends,  henceforth  He  calls  us  not  servants,  but  friends,  for  the  servant 
knoweth  not  what  his  Lord  doeth,  but  all  things  that  He  has  seen  of  His  Father  He 
has  made  known  unto  us.  He  next  calls  His  people  beloved  as  well  as  friends. 
He  multiplieth  titles,  but  all  His  words  do  not  express  the  fall  love  of  His  heart. 
"  Belovei"  Oh,  to  have  this  word  addressed  to  us  by  Christ  1  It  is  music  !  Here, 
then,  you  have  the  character  of  those  who  are  invited  to  commune  with  Christ ;  He 
calls  His  friends  and  His  beloved.  The  provisions  presented  to  them  are  of  two 
kinds  ;  they  are  bidden  to  eat  and  to  driiik.  You,  who  are  spiritual,  know  what 
the  food  is,  and  what  the  drink  is,  for  you  eat  His  flesh  and  drink  His  blood.  The 
incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  tne  death  of  Jesus  the  Saviour,  these  are  the 
two  sacred  viands  whereon  faith  is  sustained.  Note  that  delightful  word,  "abun- 
dantly." Some  dainties  satiate,  and  even  nauseate  when  we  have  too  much  of 
them,  but  no  soul  ever  had  too  much  of  the  dear  love  of  Christ,  no  heart  did  ever 
complain  that  His  sweetness  cloyed.  That  can  never  be.  Your  eating  and  your 
drinking  may  be  without  stint.  Ye  cannot  impoverish  the  Most  High  God, 
possessor  of  heaven  and  earth.  When  ye  are  satiated  with  His  love,  His  table  shall 
still  be  loaded.  Your  cups  may  run  over,  but  His  flagons  will  still  be  brimmed.  If 
you  are  straitened  at  all  you  are  not  straitened  in  Him,  you  are  straitened  in  your- 
selves. (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Sunday-school  garden: — By  the  garden,  here, 
Jesus  means  His  Church.     But  the  Svmday-school  is  one  of  the  most  important 

farts  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  I.  Why  is  the  Sunday-school  like  a  garden  ? 
.  The  Sunday-school  is  like  a  garden  because  of  what  is  done  for  it.  (1)  The  first 
thing  done  for  a  garden  is  to  fence  it.  These  fences  are  made  out  of  the  command- 
ment He  has  given  us  in  the  Bible.     (2)  When  we  have  fenced  oar  garden,  the  next 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  r.' 


thing  to  do  is  to  weed  it.  But  you  may  ask,  what  are  the  weeds  that  grow  in 
God's  garden  ?  Pride  is  one  of  these  weeds.  It  is  a  tall,  strong  weed,  with  a  glar- 
ing, disagreeable  flower.  Anger  is  another  of  these  weeds  ;  impatience  \s  another  ; 
selfishness  is  another  ;  idleness  is  another.  (3)  The  next  thing  to  be  done  for  it  _i3 
to  improve  the  soil.  Some  soil  is  so  very  poor  that  nothing  will  grow  in  it. 
When  this  is  the  case,  the  gardener  has  many  ways  of  curing  it.  I  will  only  speak 
of  one.  He  will  have  the  poor  soil  taken  away,  and  some  good,  rich  soil  put  in  its 
place.  And  this  is  just  what  Jesus  does  to  His  people.  He  improves  the  soil  of 
their  hearts  by  changing  it  and  making  it  new.  Everything  that  Jesus  loves  will 
grow  iu  the  soil  of  the  new  heart.  (4)  Now  we  are  ready  to  sow  the  seed,  and  put  in 
the  plants  we  want  to  have  growing  there.  (5)  Now  it  must  be  watered  and  cared  for. 
Suppose  no  raia  comes  down  and  no  dew  distils  upon  it,  will  the  seed  sown  there  ever 
spring  up  and  grow  ?  And  just  ia  this  way  Jesus  waters  and  cares  for  His  garden. 
His  grace  is  the  rain  and  dew  that  soften  the  soil  of  our  hearts.  His  Holy  Spirit  is 
like  the  sun  that  shines  on  and  warms  them.  Jesus  has  pipes  in  His  garden  to 
carry  the  water  of  His  grace  wherever  it  is  needed.  The  Bible  that  we  read  and 
have  explained  to  us  is  one  of  these  pipes.  And  then  our  blessed  Saviour  watches 
carefully  over  His  garden  all  the  time  to  keep  anything  from  hurtiag  the  plants,  or 
from  hindering  their  growth.  2.  But  then  there  is  another  reason  why  the  Simday- 
school  may  be  compared  to  a  garden,  because  of  what  gi'ows  in  it.  In  a  garden 
we  expect  to  find  beautiful  flowers  and  delicious  fruit.  And  so  in  the  Sunday-school, 
which  is  the  garden  of  Christ,  many  sweet  flowers  and  fruits  are  found  growing. 
Every  good  feeling  that  we  cherish  in  our  hearts  is  a  spiritual  flower,  and  every 
good  deed  that  we  perform  in  our  lives  is  a  spiritual  fruit,  which  Jesus  loves  to  see 
blooming  and  ripening  in  His  garden.  II.  What  does  Jestjs  come  into  it  foe  ? 
1.  He  comes  to  watch  the  growth  of  the  plants.  2.  He  comes  to  enjoy  the  beauty 
of  the  flowers.  No  gardener  ever  took  half  as  much  delight  in  the  flowers  he  ia 
raising  as  Jesus  takes  in  His.  Every  Christian  chUd,  and  every  one  who  is  trying 
to  become  a  Christian,  is  a  flower  in  the  Saviour's  garden,  and  nobody  can  teU  how 
much  pleasure  Jesus  takes  in  watching  them.  Oh,  who  would  not  wish  to  be  one 
of  the  flowers  of  Jesus  ?  3.  He  comes  to  gather  the  flowers.  You  know  how  many 
dear  children  die  while  they  are  quite  young.  But  what  should  we  think  if  we 
could  see  them  now,  as  they  are  blooming  and  flourishing  in  the  Saviour's  garden 
above?  {R.  NevAon,  D.D.)  I  have  gathered  My  myrrh  with  My  spice.— iore 
joying  in  love : — 1.  It  is  evident  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  made  happy  by  us.  These 
poetical  sentences  must  mean  that  He  values  the  graces  and  works  of  His  people. 
He  gathers  their  myrrh  and  spice  because  He  values  them ;  He  eats  and  drinks  the 
honey  and  the  mUk  because  they  are  pleasant  to  Him.  It  is  a  wonderftd  thought 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  joy  of  us.  We  cost  Him  anguish,  even  unto  death, 
and  now  He  finds  a  reward  in  us.  This  may  seem  a  small  thing  to  an  unloving 
mind,  but  it  may  well  ravish  the  heart  which  adores  the  Well -beloved.  2.  The  Lord 
Jesus  will  not  and  cannot  be  happy  by  Himself :  He  will  have  \is  share  with  Him. 
Note  how  the  words  nm— " I  have  eaten  ; "  "  Eat,  0  friends  1 "  "I  have  drunk  ; " 
"Drink,  yea,  drink  abundantly,  0  beloved  !"  His  union  with  His  people  is  so 
close  that  His  joy  is  in  them,  that  their  joy  may  be  full.  He  cannot  be  alone  in  His 
joy.  He  will  not  be  happy  anywhere  without  us.  He  will  not  eat  without  our 
eating,  and  He  will  not  djink  without  our  drinking.  Does  He  not  say  this  in  other 
words  in  the  Revelation — "If  any  man  hear  My  voice,  and  open  the  door,  I  will 
come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  Me"  ?  The  inter-commimion 
is  complete  :  the  enjoyment  is  for  both.  To  make  our  Lord  Jesus  happy  we  must  be 
happy  also.  3.  If  we  have  already  enjoyed  happy  fellowship  with  Him,  the  Lord  Jesus 
calls  upon  us  to  be  still  more  happy.  Though  we  may  say  that  we  have  eaten.  He 
wUl  again  say,  "  Eat,  0  friends  !  "     He  presses  you  to  renew,  repeat,  and  increase 

f'our  participation  with  Him.  It  is  true  we  have  drunk  out  of  the  chalice  of  His 
ove ;  but  He  again  invites  us,  saying,  "  Drink,  yea,  drink  abundantly,  0  beloved  !  " 
Must  it  not  mean  that,  though  we  know  the  Lord  Jesus,  we  should  try  to  know 
more  of  Him,  yea,  to  know  aU  that  can  be  known  of  that  love  which  passeth  know- 
ledge ?  Oh  for  grace  to  appropriate  a  whole  Christ,  and  all  the  love,  the  grace,  the 
glory  that  is  laid  up  in  Him  !  Does  it  not  also  mean — have  greater  enjoyment  of 
divine  things  1  Partake  of  them  without  stint.  Do  not  restrict  yourself  as  though 
you  could  go  too  far  in  feeding  upon  the  Lord  Jesus.  Do  not  be  afraid  of  being  too 
happy  in  the  Lord,  or  of  being  too  sure  of  His  salvation,  or  too  much  devout  emotion. 
Dread  not  the  excitements  which  come  from  fellowship  with  Christ.  Do  not  believe 
that  the  love  of  Jesus  can  be  too  powerfully  felt  in  the  soul.     Permit  the  fuU  sweep 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  113 

and  current  of  holy  joy  in  the  Lord  to  carry  you  away  :  it  will  be  safe  to  yield  to  it. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yer.  2.  I  sleep,  bat  my  heart  waketh:  it  is  the  voice  of  my  Beloved  that 
knocketh. — Asleep  arid  yet  awake — A  Riddle : — We  are  glad  to  perceive  in  this  Song 
the  varied  experience  of  the  bride.  She  was  the  well-beloved  of  the  heavenly  Bride- 
groom, but  she  was  not  without  her  faults.  Let  us  bless  God  that  in  the  Book  of 
revealed  truth  He  has  not  merely  given  us  the  ideal  standard  after  which  we  are  to 
seek,  but  He  has  also  preserved  for  us  the  humbler  patterns  of  those  who  have  striven 
to  reach  to  the  utmost  height,  and  who  have  climbed  a  good  way  towards  it,  but 
who,  nevertheless,  have  proved  that,  though  they  were  the  best  of  men,  they  were 
men  at  the  best.  Thus  our  Lord  has  saved  us  from  despair  by  making  us  to  know 
that  we  may  be  sincere,  and  true,  and  accepted,  though  we,  too,  fall  short  as  yet  of 
the  holiness  which  we  pant  after  with  our  whole  hearts.  I.  First,  then,  here  is 
SLITMBER  CONFESSED.  The  spousc  laments  her  state,  and  sighs  out,  "  I  sleep."  It 
strikes  us  at  once  that  her  sleep  is  a  state  recognized.  "We  are  astonished  that  she 
should  say,  "  I  sleep,"  and  we  conclude  that  it  is  not  so  profound  a  sleep  as  it  might 
be  ;  for  when  a  man  can  say,  "  I  sleep,"  he  is  not  altogether  steeped  in  slumber.  I 
would  not  give  you  encouragement,  if  you  are  asleep  at  all  to  continue  it ;  but  yet  I 
would  say  this,  that  if  you  mourn  over  your  sluggishness  you  are  not  altogether  a 
sluggard,  if  you  feel  uneasy  in  your  dulness  you  are  not  altogether  given  over  to 
spii-itual  stupidity,  if  you  are  anxious  to  be  aroused  out  of  your  slumber  it  is  certain 
that  you  are  not  given  over  to  sleep  yourself  into  the  sepulchre  of  insensibility. 
Cultivate  a  quick  perception,  and  when  you  are  aware  of  the  slightest  defalcation  or 
decline,  confess  at  once  to  God  that  you  begin  to  sleep.  Further,  as  this  sleep  is  a 
matter  recognized,  so  it  is  a  matter  complained  of.  The  spouse  is  not  pleased  with 
her  condition.  It  is  well  for  saints,  when  they  perceive  that  they  are  in  the  least 
degree  backsliding,  that  they  should  mourn  before  God,  and  accuse  themselves 
before  Him.  Act  tenderly  to  others,  but  severely  towards  yourselves.  So  all 
prudent  men  wUl  do  if  God  keep  them  prudent.  This  sleepiness  is  not  a  thing  to  be 
indulged  in,  but  to  be  abhorred.  To  say  the  least  of  it,  it  is  a  low  state  of  enjoy- 
ment. Sleep  is  peaceful  and  quiet,  but  it  cannot  enjoy  the  sweets  of  the  senses,  and 
the  delights  which  the  mind  can  receive  thereby.  If  we  fail  to  enjoy  the  banquets 
of  our  Bridegroom's  love  it  must  be  because  a  deadness  is  stealing  over  us,  and  we 
are  not  so  thoroughly  alive  and  awake  as  we  were  in  days  gone  by  ;  and  this  is  a 
condition  to  be  deplored  as  soon  as  it  is  perceived.  We  ought  to  complain  of  our- 
selves if  we  sleep,  because  it  is  a  state  of  danger.  While  men  slept  the  enemy  came 
and  sowed  tares  among  the  wheat.  It  is  bad,  then,  to  have  a  drowsy  minister  and 
drowsy  church  officers,  for  these  will  not  watch  the  fields  for  God.  Sleep  is  a  state  of 
inaction.  A  man  cannot  do  his  daily  business  while  his  eyes  are  closed  in  slumber. 
Yet  again  ;  this  slumber  should  be  not  only  a  matter  of  complaint  as  an  ill  to  be 
dreaded,  but  it  should  be  regarded  as  a  fault  to  be  ashamed  of.  Make  excuses  for 
others,  and  let  your  Lord  make  excuses  for  you,  but  do  not  frame  apologies  on  your 
own  account.  Furthermore,  it  is  an  evil  to  be  fought  against.  When  a  man  is 
obliged  to  say,  "  I  sleep,"  let  him  not  content  himself  with  sleeping  on.  Now  is  the 
time  for  much  prayer  :  let  him  wrestle  with  this  deadly  foe  till  he  is  folly  aroused. 
Falling  into  indifference  on  the  road  to  heaven  is  something  like  sleeping  on  the  vast 
plains  of  snow,  where,  if  a  man  give  way  to  the  natural  inclination  to  slumber  which 
comes  on  throiTgh  the  intense  cold,  he  may  lie  down  and  never  rise  again.  II.  Wa 
reach  the  point  of  the  paradox  ;  here  is  watchfulness  claimed  by  one  who 
confessed  to  sleep.  "  My  heart  waketh,"  says  the  bride,  "  I  sleep,  but  my  heart 
waketh."  Somewhat  of  heaven  is  about  the  man  of  God  when  the  earth  encompasses 
him  most:  "Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you":  God  has  the  throne  stUl, 
even  when  Satan  rages  most.  This  inward  life  shows  itself  usually  in  the  uneasiness 
of  the  declining  heart.  When  a  believer  feels  that  he  is  not  what  he  ought  to  be, 
nor  what  he  wants  to  be,  he  cannot  be  happy.  He  cannot  rest  and  be  content.  He 
sleeps,  but  his  heart  beats,  sighs,  and  palpitates  with  dire  unrest.  The  inner  life 
shows  itself,  too,  in  desire,  for  the  heart  is  the  seat  of  desire,  and  it  leads  the  man  to 
say  "I  am  not  what  I  would  be.  I  live  at  a  poor  dying  rate  :  Christ's  love  is  so 
great  to  me,  and  mine  to  Him  so  chill.  Lord,  lift  me  out  of  this  frozen  state.  I 
cannot  bear  this  grave  of  lethargy.  Lord,  bring  my  soul  out  of  prison !  Give 
me  more  grace  ;  give  me  to  love  Jesus  better,  and  to  be  more  like  Him.  Poor  as  I 
am,  I  long  to  be  enriched  by  Thy  love  and  mercy  ;  0  visit  me  with  Thy  salvation  !  " 
Such  a  phading  heart  is  still  awake,  though  the  mind  may  be  dull.     The  spoua% 


114  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t» 

gave  another  proof  of  her  wakefulness  by  her  discernment.  She  says,  "  It  is  the 
voice  of  my  Beloved  that  knocketh. "  Even  when  half  asleep  she  knew  her  Lord's 
voice.  You  may  catch  a  true  believer  at  his  worst,  but  he  still  knows  the  Gospel 
from  anything  else,  and  can  detect  another  gospel  in  a  moment.  This  wakefulness 
of  heart  shows  itself  often  in  the  soul  chiding  itself.  "I  sleep,"  saith  she.  She 
would  not  have  blamed  herself  as  I  have  tried  to  describe  her  doing  if  she  had  not 
been  in  some  measure  awake.  This  blessed  living  wakefulness  within  the  heart  will 
by  and  by  display  itself  in  action.  The  heart  will  wake  up  all  that  is  within  us,  and 
we  shall  hasten  to  our  Beloved.  III.  Mystery  solved.  "  I  sleep,  but  my  heart 
waketh."  How  doth  her  heart  wake  ?  It  is  because  the  voice  and  knock  of  her 
Beloved  are  heard.  Every  child  of  God  has  a  wondrous  union  with  Christ.  "  Be- 
cause I  Uve,"  saith  Christ,  "  ye  shall  live  also."  Ask  you  why  you  are  alive  in  such 
a  body  of  death  and  grave  of  sin  as  your  poor  nature  is  ?  You  live  because  Christ 
lives  ;  and  you  cannot  die  till  He  does.  This  is  why  you  cannot  sleep  as  do  others, 
because  He  does  not  so  sleep.  What  a  blessing  is  this  vital  union  with  the  ever- 
blessed  Head,  immortal  and  unslumbering !  IV.  Now  for  the  lesson  learned. 
It  is  this,  be  very  careful  when  you  possess  great  joys,   for  in  this  instance  the 

Souse  had  been  with  the  Beloved  in  choice  fellowship,  and  yet  was  soon  drowsy, 
igh  joys  may  produce  slumber  ;  the  chosen  three  upon  the  mount  Tabor  were  soon 
overcome  with  heaviness.  Mind  what  you  do  when  on  the  mount ;  be  careful  ta 
carry  a  full  cup  with  a  steady  hand.  Next,  when  you  are  blaming  yourselves  for 
your  own  work,  do  not  forget  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  you.  "  I  sleep :  "  smite 
your  heart  for  that,  but  do  not  forget  to  add  if  it  be  true,  **  My  heart  waketh.  "^ 
Bless  God  for  any  grace  you  have,  even  if  it  be  but  little.  Lastly,  make  sure 
above  all  things  that  you  have  that  true  faith  which  knows  the  voice  of  Jesus. 
He  saith,  "  Incline  your  ear,  and  come  unto  Me :  hear,  and  your  soul  shall 
live.  My  sheep  hear  My  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  Me,  and  I 
give  unto  them  eternal  life."  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Nearer  arid  dearer: — Spiritual 
sickness  is  very  common  in  the  Church  of  God,  and  the  root  of  the  mischief 
lies  in  distance  from  Jesus,  following  Christ  afar  off,  and  yielding  to  a  drowsy 
temperament.  Away  from  Jesus,  away  from  joy.  Without  the  sun  the  flowers 
pine  ;  without  Jesus  our  hearts  faint.  I.  The  spouse  confesses  A  very  common  sin  : 
she  cries,  "  /  sleep."  She  had  no  right  to  be  asleep,  for  her  Beloved  knew  no  rest. 
He  was  standing  without  in  the  cold  street,  with  His  head  wet  with  dew,  and  His 
locks  with  the  drops  of  the  night,  why  should  she  be  at  ease  ?  He  was  anxiously 
seeking  her,  how  was  it  that  she  could  be  so  cruel  as  to  yield  to  slumber  !  Do  you 
not  find,  that  almost  unconsciously  to  yourselves,  a  spirit  of  indifference  steals  over 
you  ?  You  do  not  give  up  private  prayer,  but,  alas  !  it  becomes  a  mere  mechanical 
operation.  Shall  such  a  King  be  served  by  lie-a-bed  soldiers  ?  Shall  His  midnight 
pleadings  be  repaid  by  our  daylight  sleepiness  ?  Shall  an  agony  of  bloody  sweat  be 
recompensed  by  heavy  eyelids  and  yawning  mouths?  II.  The  song  before  us 
reminds  us  of  A  hopeful  sign.  "  My  heart  waketh."  What  a  riddle  the  believer 
is !  He  is  asleep,  and  yet  he  is  awake.  His  true  self,  the  I,  the  veritable  Ego  of  the 
man  is  asleep  ;  but  yet  his  heart,  his  truest  self,  his  affections,  are  awake.  It  is  a 
hopeful  sign  when  a  man  can  conscientiously  say  as  much  as  the  spouse  in  this  case, 
but  remember  it  is  not  much  to  say.  Do  not  pride  yourself  upon  it.  Be  ashamed 
that  you  should  be  asleep  at  all.  Do  not  congratulate  yom-self  that  your  heart  is 
awake.  Be  thankful  that  infinite  love  affords  you  grace  enough  to  keep  your  heart 
alive,  but  be  ashamed  that  you  have  no  more  when  more  may  be  had  and  should  be 
had.  III.  The  third  thing  is  A  loving  caIiL.  Asleep  as  the  spouse  was,  she  knew 
her  Husband's  voice,  for  this  is  an  abiding  mark  of  God's  people.  ' '  My  sheep  hear 
My  voice."  A  half-sleeping  saint  still  has  spiritual  discernment  enough  to  know 
when  Jesus  speaks.  At  first  the  Beloved  One  simply  knocked.  His  object  was  to 
enter  into  fellowship  with  His  Church,  to  reveal  Himself  to  her,  to  unveil  His  beauties, 
to  solace  her  with  His  presence.  Such  is  the  object  of  our  blessed  Lord,  this 
morning,  in  bringing  us  to  this  house.  Then  the  Bridegroom  tried  His  voice.  If 
knocking  would  not  do,  he  would  speak  in  plain  and  plaintive  words,  "  Open  to  Me, 
My  sister.  My  love.  My  dove,  My  undefiled."  The  Lord  Jesus  Oluist  has  a  sweet 
way  of  making  the  word  come  home  to  the  conscience ;  I  mean,  not  now,  that 
effectual  and  irresistible  power  of  which  we  shall  speak  by  and  by,  but  that  leaser 
force  which  the  heart  may  resist,  but  which  renders  it  very  guilty  for  so  doing. 
Now,  observe  the  appeals  which  the  Beloved  here  makes.  He  says,  "Open  to  Me," 
and  His  plea  is  the  love  the  spouse  has  to  Him,  or  professed  to  have,  the  love  He  has 
|0  her,  and  the  xelatioQahip  which  exists  between  them.    Did  you  notice  that  power- 


CHIP.  ▼.]  TEE  SONO  OF  SOLOMOHT.  115 

fal  argument  with  which  the  heavenly  Lover  closed  His  cry  ?  He  said,  "  My  head  is 
filled  with  dew,  and  My  locks  with  the  drops  of  the  night."  Ah,  sorrowful 
remembrances,  for  those  drops  were  not  the  ordinary  dew  that  fall  upon  the  houseless 
traveller's  unprotected  head,  His  head  was  wet  with  scarlet  dew,  and  His  locks  with 
crimson  drops  of  a  tenfold  night  of  God's  desertion,  when  He  "sweat  as  it  were 
great  drops  of  blood  falling  down  to  the  ground."  My  heart,  how  vile  art  thou,  for 
thou  shuttest  out  the  Crucified.  Behold  the  Man  thorn-crowned  and  scourged,  with 
traces  of  the  spittle  of  the  soldiery,  canst  thou  close  the  door  on  Him  ?  Wilt  thou 
despise  the  "despised  and  rejected  of  men"1  Wilt  thou  grieve  the  "Man  of 
sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief  "  ?  IV.  Yet  the  spouse  hastened  not  to  open  the 
door,  and  I  am  afraid  the  like  delay  may  be  charged  upon  some  of  us.  Our  shame 
deepens  as  we  pursue  our  theme,  and  think  how  well  our  own  character  is  photo- 
graphed here  by  the  wise  man  ;  for  notice,  that  after  the  knocking  and  the  pleading, 
the  spouse  made  a  most  ungenerous  excuse.  She  sat  like  a  queen,  and  knew  no 
sorrow.  She  had  put  off  her  garments  and  washed  her  feet  as  travellers  do  in  the 
East  before  they  go  to  rest.  Shall  I  English  the  excuse  she  made  ?  It  is  this :  "  0 
Lord,  I  know  that  if  I  am  to  enter  into  much  fellowship  with  Thee,  I  must  pray  very 
differently  from  what  I  have  done  of  late,  but  it  is  too  much  trouble  ;  I  cannot  stir 
myself  to  energy  so  great.  My  time  is  so  taken  up  with  my  business,  I  am  so 
constantly  engaged  that  I  could  not  afford  even  a  quarter  of  an  hour  for  retirement. 
I  have  to  cut  my  prayers  so  short. "  Is  this  the  miserable  excuse  in  part  ?  Shall  I 
tell  out  more  of  this  dishonourable  apology !  It  is  this :  I  do  not  want  to  begin  an 
examination  of  myself :  it  may  reveal  so  many  unpleasant  truths.  I  sleep,  and  it  is 
very  comfortable  to  sleep  ;  I  do  not  want  to  be  driven  out  of  my  comforts.  Perhaps 
if  I  were  to  live  nearer  to  Christ,  I  should  have  to  give  up  some  of  the  things  which 
I  so  much  enjoy.  I  have  become  conformed  to  the  world  of  late  ;  I  am  very  fond  of 
having  Mr.  So-and-so  to  spend  an  hour  with  me  in  the  evening,  and  his  talk  is  any- 
thing but  that  which  my  Master  would  approve  of,  but  I  cannot  give  him  up.  I 
have  taken  to  read  religious  novels.  I  could  not  expect  to  have  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ's  company  when  I  am  poring  over  such  trash  as  that,  but  still  I  prefer  it  to 
my  Bible  ;  I  would  sooner  read  a  fool's  tale  than  I  would  read  of  Jesus'  love. 
V.  StiU,  as  a  wonder  of  wonders,  although  shamefully  and  cruelly  treated,  the 
beloved  Husband  did  not  go  away.  We  are  told  that  He  "  put  in  His  hand  by  the 
hole  of  the  door,"  and  then  the  bowels  of  His  spouse  were  moved  for  Him.  Does  not 
this  picture  the  work  of  effectual  gbace,  when  the  truth  does  not  appeal  to 
the  ear  alone,  but  comes  to  the  heart,  when  it  is  no  longer  a  thing  thought  on,  and 
discussed  and  forgotten,  but  an  arrow  which  has  penetrated  into  the  reins,  and 
sticks  fast  in  the  loins  to  our  wounding,  and  ultimately  to  our  spiritual  healing  ? 
No  hand  is  like  Christ's  hand.  When  He  puts  his  hand  to  the  work  it  is  well  done. 
He  "  put  in  His  hand  "  :  not  His  hand  on  me  to  smite  me,  but  His  hand  in  me  to 
comfort  me;  to  sanctify  me.  He  put  in  His  hand,  and  straightway  His  beloved  began 
to  pity  Him,  and  to  lament  her  unkindness.  VI.  But  now,  observe  the  deserved 
chastisement  which  the  Bridegroom  inflicted.  When  her  Spouse  was  willing  to 
commune,  she  was  not ;  and  now  that  she  is  willing,  and  even  anxious,  what 
happens!  "  I  opened  to  my  Beloved,  but,"  says  the  Hebrew,  " He  had  gone.  He 
had  gone."  The  voice  of  lamentation  the  reduplicated  cry  of  one  that  is  in  bitter 
distress.  There  must  have  been  a  sad  relief  about  it  to  her  sinful  heart,  for  she  must 
have  felt  afraid  to  look  her  dear  One  in  the  face  after  such  heartless  conduct ;  but 
sad  as  it  would  have  been  to  face  Him,  it  was  infinitely  sadder  to  say,  "  He  is  gone. 
He  is  gone."  Now  she  begins  to  use  the  means  of  grace  in  order  to  find  Him.  "  I 
sought  Him,"  said  she,  "  and  I  found  Him  not.  I  went  up  to  the  house  of  God  ; 
the  sermon  was  sweet,  but  it  was  not  sweet  to  me,  for  He  was  not  there.  I  went  to 
the  communion  table,  and  the  ordinance  was  a  feast  of  fat  things  to  others,  but  not 
to  me,  for  He  was  not  there.  I  sought  Him,  but  I  could  not  find  Him."  'Then  she 
betook  herself  to  prayer.  She  had  neglected  that  before,  but  now  she  supplicated  in 
real  earnest,  "  I  called  Him ;  I  said  to  Him,  Come,  my  Beloved,  my  heart  wakes  for 
Thee.  Jesus,  reveal  Thyself  to  me  as  Thou  dost  not  to  the  world."  Her  prayers 
were  many  ;  she  kept  them  up  by  day  and  by  night.  "  I  called  Him,  but  He  gave 
me  no  answer."  She  was  not  a  lost  soul,  do  not  mistake  that.  Chjist  loved  her 
just  as  much  then  as  before,  nay,  loved  her  a  great  deal  more.  If  there  can  be  any 
change  in  Christ's  love,  He  must  have  much  more  approved  of  her  when  she  was 
seekmg  Him  in  sorrow,  than  when  she  was  reclining  upon  the  couch  and  neglecting 
Him.  But  He  was  gone,  and  all  her  calling  could  not  hring  Him  back.  What  did 
she  then  t    Why,  she  went  to  His  ministers,  she  went  to  those  who  were  the  watch- 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.?. 

men  of  the  night,  and  what  said  they  to  her  t  Did  they  cheer  her  ?  Perhaps  they 
had  never  passed  through  her  experience  ;  perhaps  they  were  mere  hirelings.  How- 
ever it  might  be,  they  smote  her.  VII.  As  the  poor  spouse  did  not  then  find 
Christ,  but  was  repulsed  in  all  ways,  she  adopted  A  last  expedient.  She  knew 
that  there  were  some  who  had  daily  fellowship  with  the  King,  daughters  of 
Jerusalem  who  often  saw  Him,  and  therefore  she  sent  a  message  by  them,  "  If  ye  see 
my  Beloved,  tell  Him  that  I  am  sick  of  love."  Enlist  your  brother  saints  to  pray 
for  you.  Go  with  them  to  their  gatherings  for  prayer.  Their  company  will  not 
satisfy  you  without  Jesus,  but  their  company  may  help  you  to  find  Jesus.  Follow 
the  footsteps  of  the  flock,  and  you  may  by  and  by  discover  the  Shepherd.  [C.  E. 
Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  3.  I  have  put  oflf  my  coat ;  how  shall  I  put  it  on  ! — Profession  tested  hf 
the  umisual : — It  is  when  we  are  asked  to  do  unusual  things  that  we  find  out  the  scope 
and  the  value  of  our  Christian  profession.  How  diflBcult  it  is  to  be  equally  strong 
at  every  point !  How  hard,  how  impossible,  to  have  a  day-and-night  religion  ;  a 
religion  that  is  in  the  light  and  in  the  darkness  the  same,  as  watchfiil  at  midnight 
as  at  midday ;  as  ready  to  serve  in  the  snows  of  winter  as  amid  the  flowers  of  the 
simimer-time  !  So  the  Shulamite  breaks  down.  She  has  been  rhapsodizing,  calling 
to  her  Love  that  He  would  return  to  her  ;  and  now  that  He  has  come  she  says :  "  I 
have  put  ofl"  my  coat ;  how  shall  I  put  it  on  ? "  What  a  refrain  to  all  the  wild 
rhapsody !  When  the  Shulamite  ones  that  her  loving  and  loved  one  may  return, 
always  add,  I  have  put  ofl"  my  coat ;  how  shall  I  put  it  on  ?  I  have  laid  myself 
down  ;  how  can  I  rise  again  to  imdo  the  door  ? — Oh  that  he  would  come  at  regular 
times,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  that  he  would  not  put  my  love  to  these 
imusual  and  exceptional  tests :  for  twelve  hours  in  the  day  I  should  be  ready,  but 
having  curtained  myself  round,  and  lain  down  to  sleep,  how  can  I  rise  again  1  Thus 
all  mere  sentiment  perishes  in  the  using ;  it  is  undergoing  a  continual  process  of 
evaporation.  Nothing  stands  seven  days  a  week  and  four  seasons  in  the  year  but 
reasoned  love,  intelligent  apprehension  of  great  principles,  distinct  inwrought  con- 
viction that  without  Christ  life  is  impossible,  or  were  it  possible  it  would  be  vain, 
painful,  and  useless.  Have  we  any  such  excuses,  or  are  these  complaints  historical 
noises,  unknown  to  us  in  their  practical  realization  ?  Let  the  question  find  its  way 
into  the  very  middle  of  the  heart.  There  is  an  ingenuity  of  self-excusing,  a  depart- 
ment in  which  genius  can  find  ample  scope  for  all  its  resources.  The  ailment  that 
would  not  keep  a  man  from  business  will  confine  him  all  day  when  it  is  the  Church 
that  requires  his  attendance,  or  Christ  that  asks  him  to  deliver  a  testimony  or  render 
a  sacrifice.  Who  can  escape  from  that  suggestion  ?  Who  does  not  so  far  take 
Providence  into  his  own  hand  as  to  arrange  occasionally  that  his  ailments  shall  come 
and  go  by  the  clock  ?  Who  has  not  found  in  the  weather  an  excuse  to  keep  him 
from  spiritual  exercises  that  he  never  would  have  found  there  on  the  business  days 
of  the  week  ?  How  comes  it  that  men  look  towards  the  weather  quarter  on  the  day  of 
the  Son  of  Man  ?  Where  do  we  begin  to  economize  ?  Do  we  begin  in  the  region  of 
luxury  ?  Where  is  there  a  man  who  can  truthfully  say  that  when  he  begins  to 
economize  he  begins  in  the  wine-cellar  ?  How  often  have  we  risen  at  midnight  to 
help  the  poor,  the  helpless,  the  lost  1  Of  how  many  meals  have  we  denied  our 
hunger  that  we  might  help  a  hunger  greater  than  our  own  ?  How  often  have  we 
put  ourselves  out  of  the  way  to  do  that  which  is  good,  benevolent,  and  helpful  ? 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Yer.  8.  I  charge  yon,  0  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  if  ye  find  my  Beloved,  that  ye 
tell  Him,  that  I  am  sick  of  love. — Heavenly  love-sickness : — Sick  I  that  is  a  sad  thing ; 
it  moves  your  pity.  Sick  of  love — love-sick  1  that  stirs  up  other  emotions  which  we 
shall  presently  attempt  to  explain.  There  is  a  twofold  love-sickness.  Of  the  one 
kind  is  that  love-sicloiess  which  comes  upon  the  Christian  when  he  is  transported 
with  the  full  enjoyment  of  Jesus,  even  as  the  bride,  elated  by  the  favour,  melted 
by  the  tenderness  of  her  Lord,  says  in  the  fifth  verse  of  the  second  chapter  of  the 
Song,  "Stay  me  with  flagons,  comfort  me  with  apples:  for  I  am  sick  of  love." 
Another  kind  of  love-sickness,  widely  different  from  the  first,  is  that  in  which 
the  soul  is  sick,  not  because  it  has  too  much  of  Christ's  love,  but  because  it  has 
not  enough  present  consciousness  of  it ;  sick,  not  of  the  enjoyment,  but  of  the 
longing  for  it ;  sick,  not  because  of  the  excess  of  delight,  but  becaiise  of  sorrow  for  an 
absent  lover.  I.  First,  consider  our  text  as  the  language  of  a  soul  longing  for 
THE  VIEW  OF  Jesus  Christ  in  grace.     1.  Do  ye  ask  me  concerning  the  sickness 


CHAP.  T.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  117 


itself :  what  is  it  ?  It  is  the  sickness  of  a  soul  panting  after  communion  with  Christ. 
Gracious  souls  are  never  perfectly  at  ease  except  they  are  in  a  state  of  nearness  to 
Christ ;  for,  mark  you,  when  they  are  not  near  to  Christ,  they  lose  their  peace. 
The  nearer  to  Jesus,  the  nearer  to  the  perfect  calm  of  heaven  ;  and  the  further  from 
Jesus,  the  nearer  to  that  troubled  sea  which  images  the  continual  unrest  of  the 
wicked.  The  heart  when  near  to  Jesus  has  strong  pulsations,  for,  since  Jesus  is  in 
that  heart,  it  is  full  of  life,  of  vigour,  and  of  strength.  Peace,  liveliness,  vigour— all 
depend  upon  the  constant  enjoyment  of  conxmunion  with  Christ  Jesus.  The  soul  of 
a  Christian  never  knows  what  joy  means  in  its  true  solidity,  except  when  she  sits  like 
Mary  at  Jesus'  feet.  What  the  sun  is  to  the  day,  what  the  moon  is  to  the  night, 
what  the  dew  is  to  the  flower,  such  is  Jesus  Christ  to  us.  What  the  turtle  is  to  her 
mate,  what  the  husband  is  to  his  spouse,  what  the  head  is  to  the  body,  such  is  Jesus 
Christ  to  us  ;  and  therefore,  if  we  have  Him  not,  nay,  if  we  are  not  conscious  of 
having  Him  ;  if  we  are  not  one  with  Him,  nay,  if  we  are  not  consciously  one  with 
Him,  little  marvel  if  our  spirit  cries  in  the  words  of  the  Song,  "I  charge  you,  O 
daughters  of  Jerusalem,  if  ye  find  my  Beloved,  tell  Him,  that  I  am  sick  of  love." 
Such  is  the  character  of  this  love-sickness.  We  may  say  of  it,  however,  that  it  is  a 
sickness  which  has  a  blessing  attending  it :  "Blessed  are  they  that  do  hunger  and 
thirst  after  righteousness  ; '  and  therefore,  supremely  blessed  are  they  who  thirst 
after  the  Righteous  One — after  Him  who  in  the  highest  perfection  embodies  pure, 
immacidate,  spotless  righteousness.  Blessed  is  that  hunger,  for  it  comes  from  God. 
Yet  it  is  a  sickness  which,  despite  the  blessing,  causes  much  pain.  The  man  who  is 
sick  after  Jesus  will  be  dissatisfied  with  everything  else  ;  he  will  find  that  dainties 
have  lost  their  sweetness,  and  music  its  melody,  and  light  its  brightness,  and  life  itself 
will  be  darkened  with  the  shadow  of  death  to  him,  till  he  finds  his  Lord,  and  can  rejoice 
in  Him.  Ye  shall  find  that  this  thirsting,  this  sickness,  if  it  ever  gets  hold  upon  you,  is 
attended  with  great  vehemence.  As  lovers  sometimes  talk  of  doing  impossibilities  for 
their  fair  ones,  so  certainly  a  spirit  that  is  set  on  Christ  will  laugh  at  impossibility, 
and  say,  ' '  It  shall  be  done. "  It  will  venture  upon  the  hardest  task,  go  cheerfully  to 
prison  and  joyfully  to  death,  if  it  may  but  find  its  beloved,  and  have  its  love-sick- 
ness satisfied  with  His  presence.  2.  What  maketh  a  man's  soul  so  sick  after  Christ  ? 
Understand  that  it  is  the  absence  of  Christ  which  makes  this  sickness  in  a  mind  that 
really  understands  the  preciousness  of  His  presence.  The  spouse  bad  been  very 
wilfol  and  wayward ;  she  had  taken  off  her  garments,  had  gone  to  her  rest,  her 
sluggish,  slothful  rest,  when  her  Beloved  knocked  at  the  door.  Mingled  with  the 
sense  of  absence  is  a  consciousness  of  wrong-doing.  Something  in  her  seemed  to  say, 
**  How  couldst  thou  drive  Him  away  ?  That  heavenly  Bridegroom  who  knocked  and 
pleaded  hard,  how  couldst  thou  keep  Him  longer  there  amidst  the  cold  dews  of 
night  1  0  unkind  heart  1  what  if  thy  feet  had  been  made  to  bleed  by  thy  rising  ? 
What  if  all  thy  body  had  been  chilled  by  the  cold  wind,  when  thou  wast  treading  the 
floor  I  What  had  it  been  compared  with  His  love  to  thee  ? "  So,  too,  mixed  with 
this,  was  great  wretchedness  because  He  was  gone.  She  had  been  for  a  little  time 
easy  in  His  absence.  That  downy  bed,  that  warm  coverlet,  had  given  her  a  peace 
— a  false,  cruel,  and  a  wicked  peace — but  she  has  risen  now,  the  watchmen  have 
smitten  her,  her  veil  is  gone,  and,  without  a  friend,  the  princess,  deserted  in  the 
midst  of  Jerusalem's  streets,  has  her  soul  melted  for  heaviness,  and  she  pours  out  her 
heart  within  her  aa  she  pineth  after  her  Lord.  To  gather  up  the  causes  of  this  love- 
sickness  in  a  few  words,  does  not  the  whole  matter  spring  from  relationship  ?  She  is  His 
spouse  ;  can  the  spouse  be  happy  without  her  beloved  Lord  ?  It  springs  from  union  ; 
she  is  part  of  Himself.  Can  the  hand  be  happy  and  healthy  if  the  life-floods  stream 
not  from  the  heart  and  from  the  head  ?  Fondly  realizing  her  dependence,  she  feels 
that  she  owes  all  to  Him,  and  gets  her  all  from  Him.  If,  then,  the  fountain  be  cut  off, 
if  the  streams  be  dried,  if  the  great  source  of  all  be  taken  from  her,  how  can  she  but 
be  sick  ?  And  there  is  besides  this  a  life  and  a  nature  in  her  which  makes  her  sick. 
There  is  a  life  like  the  life  of  Christ,  nay,  her  life  is  in  Christ,  it  is  hid  with  Christ 
in  God  ;  her  nature  is  a  part  of  the  Divine  nature  ;  she  is  a  partaker  of  the  Divine 
nature.  Moreover  she  is  in  imion  with  Jesus,  and  this  piece,  divided,  as  it  were, 
from  the  body,  wriggles,  like  a  worm  cut  asunder,  and  pants  to  get  back  to  where  it 
came  from.  3.  What  endeavours  such  love-sick  souls  will  put  forth.  Those  who 
are  sick  for  Christ  will  first  send  their  desires  to  Him.  Go,  go,  sweet  doves,  with 
swift  and  clipping  wings,  and  tell  Him,  I  am  sick  of  love.  Then  she  would  send  her 
prayers.  She  is  afraid  they  wUl  never  reach  Him,  for  her  bow  is  slack,  and  she 
knoweth  not  how  to  draw  it  with  her  feeble  hands  which  hang  down.  So  what  does 
ehe  ?    She  has  traversed  the  streets ;  she  has  used  the  means ;  she  has  done  every- 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

thing  ;  she  has  sighed  her  heart  out,  and  emptied  her  soul  out  in  prayers.  She  ia 
all  wounds  till  He  heals  her  ;  she  is  all  a  hungry  mouth  till  He  fills  her  ;  she  is  all 
an  empty  brook  till  He  replenishes  her  once  again,  and  so  now  she  goeth  to  her  com- 
panions, and  she  saith,  "  If  ye  find  my  Beloved,  tell  Him,  I  am  sick  of  love."  This 
18  using  the  intercession  of  the  saints.  But  after  all,  how  much  better  it  would 
have  been  for  her  to  tell  Him  herself.  "  But,"  you  say,  "  she  could  not  find  Him." 
Nay,  but  if  she  had  faith  she  would  have  known  that  her  prayers  could  ;  for  our 
prayers  know  where  Christ  is  when  we  do  not  know,  or  rather,  Christ  knows  where 
our  prayers  are,  and  when  we  cannot  see  Him  they  reach  Him  nevertheless.  4. 
Blessed  love-sickness  !  we  have  seen  its  character  and  its  cause,  and  the  endeavoura 
of  the  soul  under  it ;  let  us  just  notice  the  comforts  which  belong  to  such  a  state  as 
this.  Briefly  they  are  these — you  shall  be  filled.  It  is  impossible  for  Christ  to  set 
you  longing  after  Him  without  intending  to  give  Himself  to  you.  He  makes  you, 
long  :  He  will  certainly  satisfy  your  longings.  Remember,  again,  that  He  will  give 
you  Himself  all  the  sooner  for  the  bitterness  of  your  longings.  The  more  pained 
your  heart  is  at  His  absence  the  shorter  will  the  absence  be.  Then,  again,  when  He 
does  come,  as  come  He  will,  oh,  how  sweet  it  will  be  !  11.  This  love-sickness  may 
be  seen  in  a  soul  longing  fob  a  view  of  Jesus  in  His  glory.  1.  And  here 
we  will  consider  the  complaint  itself  for  a  moment.  This  ailment  is  not  merely  a 
longing  after  communion  with  Christ  on  earth — that  has  been  enjoyed,  and  generally 
this  sickness  follows  that.  It  is  the  enjoyment  of  Eshcol's  first-fruits  which  makes 
us  desire  to  sit  under  our  own  vine  and  our  own  fig  tree  before  the  throne  of  God 
in  the  blessed  land.  This  sickness  is  characterized  by  certain  marked  symptoms  ;  I 
will  tell  you  what  they  are.  There  is  a  loving  and  a  longing,  a  loathing  and  a  lan- 
guishing. As  the  needle  once  magnetized  will  never  be  easy  until  it  finds  the  pole, 
so  the  heart  once  Christianized  never  will  be  satisfied  until  it  rests  on  Christ — rests 
on  Him,  too,  in  the  fulness  of  the  beatific  vision  before  the  throne.  2.  As  to  ita 
object — what  is  that  ?  ' '  Tell  Him,  that  I  am  sick  of  love ; "  but  what  is  the  sickness  for  I 
When  you  and  I  want  to  go  to  heaven  I  hope  it  is  the  true  love-sickness.  The  soul 
may  be  as  sick  aa  it  will,  without  rebuke,  when  it  is  sick  to  be  with  Jesus.  You 
may  indulge  this,  carry  it  to  its  utmost  extent  without  either  sin  or  folly.  What 
am  I  sick  with  love  for  ?  For  the  pearly  gates  ? — No  ;  but  for  the  pearls  that  are  in 
His  wounds.  What  am  I  sick  for  ?  For  the  streets  of  gold  ? — No  ;  but  for  His  head, 
which  is  as  much  fine  gold.  For  the  melody  of  the  harps  and  angelic  songs  ? — No  ; 
but  for  the  melodious  notes  that  come  from  His  dear  mouth.  What  am  1  sick  for! 
For  the  nectar  that  angels  drink  ? — No  ;  but  for  the  kisses  of  His  lips.  For  the 
manna  on  which  heavenly  souls  do  feed  ? — No  ;  but  for  Himself,  who  is  the  meat 
and  drink  of  His  saints  ;  Himself,  Himself — my  soul  pines  to  see  Him.     3,  Ask  ye, 

J^et  again,  what  are  the  excitements  of  this  sickness.  What  is  it  makes  the  Christian 
ong  to  be  at  home  with  Jesus  ?  I  do  believe  that  all  the  bitters  and  all  the  sweets 
make  a  Christian,  when  he  is  in  a  healthy  state,  sick  after  Christ :  the  sweets  make 
his  mouth  water  for  more  sweets,  and  the  bitters  make  him  pant  for  the  time  when 
the  last  dregs  of  bitterness  shall  be  over.  Wearying  temptations,  as  well  as  rapt 
enjoyments,  all  set  the  spirit  on  the  wing  after  Jesus.  4,  Well  now,  what  is  the 
cure  of  this  love-sickness  ?  Is  it  a  sickness  for  which  there  is  any  specific  remedy  ? 
There  are  some  palliatives,  and  I  will  recommend  them  to  you.  Such,  for  example, 
is  a  strong  faith  that  realizes  the  day  of  the  Lord  and  the  presence  of  Christ,  as 
Moses  beheld  the  promised  land  and  the  goodly  heritage,  when  he  stood  on  the  top  of 
Pisgah.  If  you  do  not  get  heaven  when  you  want  it,  you  may  attain  to  that  which 
is  next  door  to  heaven,  and  this  may  bear  you  up  for  a  little  season.  If  you  cannot 
get  to  behold  Christ  face  to  face,  it  is  a  blessed  make-shift  for  the  time  to  see  Him  in 
the  Scriptures,  and  to  look  at  Him  through  the  glass  of  the  Word.  These  are 
palliatives,  but  I  warn  ye,  I  warn  ye  of  them.  I  do  not  mean  to  keep  you  from 
them,  use  them  as  much  as  ever  you  can,  but  I  warn  you  from  expecting  that 
it  will  cure  that  love-sickness.  It  will  give  you  ease,  but  it  will  make  you  more  sick 
still,  for  he  that  lives  on  Christ  gets  more  hungry  after  Christ.  But  there  is  a  cure, 
there  is  a  cure,  and  you  shall  have  it  soon — a  black  draught,  and  in  it  a  pearl ; 
a  black  draught  called  Death.  Ye  shall  drink  it,  but  ye  shaU  not  know  it  i> 
bitter,  for  ye  shall  swallow  it  up  in  victory.    {0.  E.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  9-16.  What  is  thy  Beloved  more  than  another  beloved,  0  thou  fairest 
among  women  1 — Tfie  incomparable  Bridegroom  and  His  bride: — I  want  to  address 
some  earnest  words  to  the  people  of  God  upon  certain  practical  truths  that  arise  out 
of  our  text ;  and  the  first  thing  I  have  to  say  is  this,  that  the  daughters  of  Jeru- 


CHAP.  ▼.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOy.  119 

salem  recognized  in  the  spouse  an  exceeding  beauty,  which  dazzled  and  charmed 
them,  so  that  they  could  not  help  calling  her  the  "fairest  among  women."  This 
was  not  her  estimate  of  herself ;  for  she  had  said,  "I  am  black,  but  comely,"  Nor 
was  it  the  estimate  of  her  enemies  ;  for  they  had  smitten  her,  and  wounded  her^ 
But  it  was  the  estimate  of  fair,  candid,  and  impartial  onlookers.  I,  Ouk  character 
SHOULD  GIVE  WEIGHT  TO  QUE  PROFESSION  OF  RELIGION.  I  suppose  it  is  the  eamest 
wish  of  every  Christian  to  win  for  Christ  some  new  converts,  to  bring  some  fresh 
province  under  the  dominion  of  the  King  of  kings.  I  will  tell  you  how  this  may  be 
accomplished.  Your  power  to  achieve  this  noble  purpose  must  largely  depend  upon 
yonr  own  personal  consistency.  It  little  availeth  what  I  say  if  I  do  the  reverse. 
The  world  will  not  care  about  my  testimony  with  the  lip,  unless  there  be  also  a 
testimony  in  my  daily  life  for  God,  for  truth,  for  holiness,  for  everything  that  ia 
honest,  lovely,  pure,  and  of  good  report.  If  your  life  be  not  all  of  a  piece,  the 
world  wiU  soon  learn  how  to  estimate  your  testimony,  and  wiU  count  you  to  be 
either  s  fool  or  a  knave,  and  perhaps  both.  But  it  is  not  enough  to  be  barely 
consistent ;  what  the  world  expects  in  Christians  ia  real  holiness  as  well  as  con- 
eistenoy.  Holiness  is  something  more  than  virtue.  Virtue  is  like  goodness  frozen 
into  ice,  hard  and  cold  ;  but  holiness  is  that  same  goodness  when  it  is  thawed  into 
a  clear,  running,  sparkling  stream.  If  you  are  just  barely  honest  and  no  more,  if 
yon  are  barely  moral,  and  no  more,  it  is  of  no  service  that  you  should  try  to  speak 
of  Christ ;  the  world  will  not  reckon  you  as  the  fairest  among  women,  and  it  wiU 
not  inquire  anything  about  your  Well-beloved.  II.  We  shoitld  charge  others 
CONCERNING  CHRIST.  "What  is  thy  Beloved  more  than  another  beloved,  that 
thou  dost  so  charge  us  !  "  The  "  fairest  among  women  "  was  asked  why  she  had  so 
spoken  :  "I  charge  you,  O  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  if  ye  find  vxj  Beloved,  that  ye 
tell  Him,  that  I  am  sick  of  love. "  By  this  ' '  charge  "  is  meant,  1  suppose,  that  the 
spouse  adjured  them,  and  spoke  solemnly  to  them  about  her  Beloved.  Christians, 
be  troublesome  to  the  world  !  0  house  of  Israel,  be  like  a  burdensome  stone  to  the 
world  I  While  your  conduct  should  be  courteous,  and  everything  that  could  be 
desired  as  between  man  and  man,  yet  let  your  testimony  for  Christ  be  given  without 
any  flinching  and  without  any  mincing  of  the  matter.  We  must  speak  up  for 
Christ,  and  so  speak  up  for  Him  that  men  will  be  moved  to  ask  us  the  question, 
"What  is  thy  Beloved  more  than  another  beloved,  that  thou  dost  so  charge  us? " 
III.  It  is  important  for  us  to  make  all  who  come  in  contact  with  us  feel 
THAT  Christ  Jesus  is  first  and  foremost  with  us.  It  is  clear  that  Christ  is  not 
first  in  every  nominal  Christian's  heart.  No,  alas  !  He  is  not  first,  and  He  is  not 
even  second.  He  is  very  far  down  in  the  scale.  Look  at  them, — good  honest  trades- 
people, perhaps,  but  from  the  first  dawn  of  Monday  morning  to  the  putting  up  of 
the  shutters  on  Saturday  night,  what  is  the  main  business  of  their  life  ?  It  is  only, 
"  What  shall  we  eat  ?  or  what  shall  we  drink  ?  or  wherewithal  shall  we  be  clothed  1 " 
Now,  where  is  Christ  in  such  a  case  as  that  ?  This  is  not  the  case  with  the  truly 
Christ-like  man.  With  him,  Christ  is  first,  Christ  is  last,  Christ  is  midst,  Christ  is 
all  in  all ;  and  when  he  speaks  about  anything  connected  with  Christ,  his  words 
come  with  such  a  solemn  earnestness,  that  men  are  impressed  with  what  he  says, 
and  they  turn  round  to  him,  and  ask,  as  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  inquired  of  the 
spouse,  ' '  What  is  thy  Beloved  1 "  etc.  IV.  If  ever,  through  the  grace  of  God,  we 
should  possess  such  a  character,  and  bear  such  a  testimony  as  we  have  been  talking 
about,  so  that  men  shall  ask  us  the  question  of  the  text,  IT  will  be  well  for  us 
TO  BE  prepared  TO  ANSWER  IT.  See  how  the  spouse  does ;  she  does  not  pause  a 
minute  before  she  gives  her  reply.  She  is  asked,  "What  is  thy  Beloved  more  than 
another  beloved  ?  "  and  she  has  the  answer,  as  we  say,  at  her  fingers'  ends,  and  why 
was  this?  Why,  because  she  had  it  in  her  heart.  So  she  says,  "My  Beloved  is 
white  and  ruddy,  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand."  She  does  not  say,  "Stop  a 
bit,  I  must  read  up  on  that  question ;  I  must  get  myself  well  instructed  upon  it," 
but  it  is  such  a  vital  point,  and  one  so  dear  to  her,  as  it  touches  the  person  of  her 
Lord,  that  she  answers  at  once,  "Is  my  Beloved  better  than  any  other  beloved? 
Certainly  He  is,  and  here  are  the  reaaons."  She  puts  them  together  one  after 
another  without  a  pause,  so  that  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  must  have  been  con- 
vinced ;  and  I  commend  her  example  to  you  also,  my  beloved  in  Christ  Jesus.  Do 
study  the  Word,  that  your  faith  may  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the 
power  of  God.  (C.  H.  Sjmrgeon.)  The  best  Beloved: — I.  All  have  some  beloved. 
By  a  beloved  I  mean  any  person  or  anything  that  more  than  any  other  occupies  the 
thoughts — entwines  about  itself  the  affections  and  constitutes  the  mainspriug  of  the 
person's  actions.     The  beloved  of  many  is  money.     Their  thoughts  can  only  run  on 

29 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  V, 

golden  rails.  But  there  are  others  of  lighter,  gayer  dispositions  who  laugh  to  scorn 
the  miser's  treasure  and  cast  their  offerings  at  the  feet  of  pleasure.  For  it  thej 
live,  in  it  they  revel.  The  world  and  the  things  of  the  world  constitute  their 
beloved,  and  they  woo  it  with  a  blind  devotion.  No,  my  desire  is  to  show  and  feel, 
and  make  you  feel,  that  Jesus  is  infinitely  more  than  any  other,  and  that  no  other 
beloved  can  possibly  be  compared  to  Him.  II.  Christ  stjepasses  all  beloveds. 
1.  He  does  so  first  in  beauty.  How  magnificent  is  the  description  that  flows  from  the 
lips  of  the  spouse,  when  she  is  challenged  to  show  the  superiority  of  her  Beloved. 
"My  Beloved,"  she  exclaims,"  is  white  and  ruddy,  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand." 
Here  you  have  the  perfection  of  loveliness — not  merely  ruddy,  nor  only  pale,  though 
there  may  be  beauty  in  both,  but  white  and  ruddy,  the  rose  and  the  lily  united, 
the  fairest  contrasts  meeting  in  the  same  person.  On,  is  it  not  so  with  our  Beloved  ? 
Your  Beloved  is  white  and  ruddy  now.  2.  Our  Beloved  is  more  than  others  in  that  He 
reciprocates  my  love.  For  everv  drop  of  love  I  have  towards  Him,  there  is  in  His 
heart  an  ocean  fiiU  for  me.  3.  He  is  more  than  any  other  beloved  also,  because  He  is 
never  a  cause  of  sorrow.  Can  you  point  me  to  any  other  love  that  never  gives  a 
pang  or  brings  a  tear  ?  Earthly  honey  is  always  mixed  with  gall,  and  this  world's 
fairest  rose  is  ever  accompanied  with  thorns.  But  Jesus  is  a  beloved  who  is  all  joy. 
His  friendship  is  sweeter  than  honey,  and  the  rose  of  Sharon  has  no  thorns. 
4.  Other  beloveds  may  be  loved  too  well,  but  Jesus  never.  Love  to  Him  can  never 
become  a  snare — love  to  Him  need  not  and  should  never  have  any  restraint.  Love 
Him  to  a  passion,  and  you  will  not  love  Him  half  enough.  6.  Our  Beloved  is  more 
than  others  in  that  death  robs  us  not  of  Him.  6.  No  other  beloved  died  for  me, 
but  Jesus  did.  Great  and  wonderful  are  the  sacrifices  that  have  been  made  through 
love.  Remember  our  Beloved  loved  us  unto  the  death,  not  because  we  loved  Him, 
but  because  He  would  love  us.  So  you  will  perceive  that  we  here  have  love  beyond 
that  ever  shown  by  friend  to  friend  displayed  to  enemies.  7.  Our  Beloved  is  more  than 
any  other  belovea  in  our  estimation.  Whatever  others  may  think  of  Him,  to  me  He 
is  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand.  {A.  G.  Brown.)  The  Christianas  Beloved: — 
I.  What  ake  the  chief  objects  of  man's  love  ?  1.  Money. — What  is  there  men 
•will  not  do  or  suffer  for  the  sake  of  wealth  ?  2.  Fashion. — There  is  a  Baal  as  well  as 
a  Moloch  in  the  Pantheon — a  god  of  splendour  as  well  as  a  god  of  fire  1  And  Baal 
has  his  sacrifices  too.  To  enter  a  circle  a  little  above  their  own,  to  stand  out 
prominently  before  the  world — what  imworthy  artifices !  what  mean  flatteries ! 
How  low  men  wiU  stoop  to  raise  themselves  a  little  higher  !  3.  Science. — Here  we 
feel  that  we  are  getting  to  a  loftier  elevation,  and  breathing  purer  air.  Heaven  and 
earth — sea  and  shore — the  mineral,  vegetable,  and  animal  kingdoms,  are  full  of 
treasures  for  the  lover  of  science.  And  here  he  revels.  Day  is  as  night,  and  night 
as  day — ' '  the  hours  uncounted,  meals  untasted  pass  ; "  whilst  his  whole  soul  is  in 
commimion  with  his  beloved.  4.  Literature. — And  surely  such  a  study  is  not  with- 
out its  fascinations.  And  cultivated  minds  there  are  that  make  an  idol  of  this 
object — Literature  is  the  beloved  of  their  souls.  II.  Why  does  Christ  deserve  a 
WARMER  love?  1.  Because  He  can  love  us  in  return.  Money,  Fashion,  Science, 
Literature,  are  dead  things  ;  and  the  dead  have  no  power  to  sympathize — they  give 
not  "smile  for  smile,  or  sigh  for  sigh."  But  Christ  is  a  living  one!  "He  was 
dead,  but  is  alive  again."  There  glows  a  heart  in  His  bosom  that  can  hear  and 
answer  the  yearnings  of  ours.  And  seeking  sympathy  anywhere  beside  is  "  seeking 
the  living  among  the  dead  "  I  Seek  it  in  Christ !  He  lives  and  loves  1  2.  Because 
He  is  so  exceeding  lovely.  See  Him  encompassed  with  a  body  like  our  own — going 
about  doing  good.  Can  you  imagine  a  character  more  attractive?  Is  He  not 
"altogether  lovely"?  3.  He  has  shown  us  so  much  love  already.  4.  We  may 
depend  upon  His  love  for  all  time  to  come.  The  future — untried,  imknown  !  it  is 
this  which  weighs  on  us.  What  evils,  trials,  sufferings  may  there  not  be  in  store  ! 
The  only  thing  to  bring  us  peace  is — the  assurance  that  our  future  is  in  the  hands  of 
aU-wise,  unwearied,  almighty  Love  !  And  is  not  this  the  assurance  that  Christ 
gives  to  His  people?  "Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway."  "My  grace  is  sufficient  for 
you."  "  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  Me."  Is  not  this 
comforting?    {F.  Tucker,  B. A.) 

Yer.  10.  My  Beloved  is  white  and  ruddy,  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand. — 

Christ's  perfection  and  precedence  : — The  spouse  in  this  verse  styles  her  Lord,  "my 
Beloved,"  from  which  it  is  easy  for  us  to  gather  that  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance 
that  our  heart's  aff'ection  should  be  really  and  truly  set  upon  Christ  Jesus,  our  Lord. 
We  must  trust  Him,  and  we  must  love  Him.     Christ  on  the  cross  saves  us  when  He 


CHAP.  T.]  THE  SONQ  OF  SOLOMON.  121 

becomes  to  us  Christ  in  the  heart.  If  we  have  reached  that  stage  in  our  journey 
heavenwards,  it  will  be  well  if  we  go  on  a  step  further.  Loving  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  in  our  heart,  and  being  assured  of  that  love  in  our  inmost  conscience  after 
earnest  heart-searching,  it  will  be  well  if  we  have  the  courage  never  to  hesitate  in 
the  avowal  of  that  love.  We  must  not  cast  our  pearls  before  swine  ;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  is  so  ennobling  a  passion  that  we  need  never  blush  to  own  it  in  any 
company.  If  we  ever  are  ashamed  of  loving  Christ,  we  have  good  reason  to  be 
ashamed  of  such  shameful  shame.  Loving  Jesus,  knowing  that  we  love  Him,  and 
boldly  confessing  our  love  to  Him,  let  us,  next,  so  study  His  person  and  His  char- 
acter that  we  shall  be  able  to  give  a  reason  for  the  love  that  is  in  us  to  any  who  make 
the  inquiry,  "  What  is  thy  Beloved  more  than  another  beloved  ? "  I.  First,  then, 
the  spouse  saith,  "my  Beloved  is  white  and  ruddy,"  and  so  she  sets  forth  his 
CHAEMiNG  COMPLEXION.  1.  Our  Lord  is,  first  of  all,  in  Himself  white ;  that  is, 
He  has  immaculate  perfection  of  character.  In  His  Godhead,  Jesus  Christ  is  per- 
fection itself.  As  to  His  manhood,  the  term  whiteness  well  describes  Him  who  was 
bom  without  natural  corruption,  or  taint  of  hereditary  depravity — "that  holy 
thing, "  the  Christ  of  God,  who  became  incarnate,  yet  without  sin.  Doth  not  this 
word  "  white  "  describe  Him  also  in  His  actual  life  ?  There  was  never  any  sin  in 
Christ.  As  to  Christ's  actions,  they  are  matchless  and  perfect  in  every  respect ;  the 
two  great  objects  of  His  life  were  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  man.  There  is 
no  spot  in  Him ;  He  is  the  Lamb  of  God  without  blemish,  the  perfect  Christ,  and 
hence  it  is  that  we  love  Him.  2.  But,  next,  we  come  to  the  blood-shedding,  the 
sacrificial  character  of  Christ.  This  is  the  chief  reason,  after  all,  why  Christ's 
people  love  Him,  because,  in  His  precious  blood,  they  see  the  pardon  of  all  their 
sins,  they  see  the  lifting  of  themselves  up  into  the  life  of  God,  they  see  the 
open  way  of  access  imto  the  Father,  they  see  the  gates  of  heaven  opened  to  all 
believers.  II.  Now  notice  that  the  spouse  saith  of  her  Beloved  that  He  is  "  the 
chiefest  among  ten  thousand. "  These  words  set  forth  His  pbrsonai,  precedence. 
He  is  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand,  and  it  so  happens  that  this  word  "  chiefest " 
may  mean  any  one  of  three  or  four  things.  1.  First,  take  it  as  it  stands — 
"Chiefest,"  that  is  to  say,  Christ  is  higher,  better,  lovelier,  more  excellent  than 
any  who  are  round  about  Him.  If  you  shall  bring  ten  thousand  angels.  He  is  the 
chiefest  Angel,  the  Messenger  of  the  covenant.  If  you  shall  bring  ten  thousand 
friends.  He  is  the  chiefest  Friend,  the  "  Friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother." 
Christ  is  the  chiefest,  the  best,  the  highest  of  all  beings  ;  whatever  excellences  there 
may  be  in  others,  they  are  all  eclipsed  by  the  surpassing  excellences  that  are  found 
in  Him.  2.  Chiiat  is  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand  ;  that  is  to  say.  He  is  the 
Head,  the  Ruler,  the  Prince,  the  King,  the  Lord  over  all.  Let  Christ,  and 
Christ  alone,  wear  the  crown  He  bought  with  His  own  blood  ;  He  alone  is  King, 
and  let  Him  ever  be  so  proclaimed  and  acknowledged.  3.  According  to  the 
Septuagint,  the  text  has  another  meaning.  Our  Lord  in  Scripture  is  called  the 
chosen  One,  the  elect  of  God.  As  the  psalmist  puts  it,  speaking  by  prophecy,  "  I 
have  exalted  One  chosen  out  of  the  people."  Christ  is  chosen  out  of  ten  thousand, 
as  the  Mediator  to  stand  between  God  and  men.  Whoever  else  might  have  been 
employed  by  God  for  this  service — and  we  are  not  able  to  think  of  any  other — yet 
first  of  all  was  Christ  chosen  of  God  ;  and  to-day  we  may  call  Him  the  chosen  One 
because  He  is  the  chosen  of  His  Church.  4.  Lastly,  according  to  the  margin  of  our 
Bible,  the  text  should  be  thus  read,  "He  is  the  Standard-bearer  among  ten 
thousand."  Now,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  come  into  this  world,  and  set  up  a 
standard  because  of  the  truth,  and  well  does  He  handle  it,  firmly  doth  He  grasp  it. 
When  on  the  cross,  the  battle  thickened  round  Him  ;  aU  the  hosts  of  heU  and  all 
the  bands  of  cruel  ones  on  earth  sought  to  smite  Him,  and  to  seize  the  standard, 
too,  but  He  bore  it  still  aloft  through  all  the  dreadful  fray  I  and  this  day,  though 
He  is  now  in  heaven,  yet  by  His  blessed  Spirit  that  standard  is  stiU  unfurled  to  the 
breeze.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yer.  13.  His  cheeks  are  as  a  bed  of  spices,  as  sweet  flowers:  His  lips  like 
lilies,  dropping  sweet-smelling  m3n:rh. — Spices,  flowers,  lilies,  and  myrrh: — 
It  is  of  Christ,  the  heavenly  Bridegroom,  that  we  perceive  the  spouse  to  be  speak- 
ing, and  mentioning  in  detail  at  least  ten  particulars,  dwelling  with  delight  upon 
the  beauties  of  His  head  and  His  locks,  His  eyes  and  His  cheeks,  His  lips  and  His 
hands,  and  every  part  of  Him  ;  and,  beloved  friends,  I  think  it  shows  true  love  to 
Christ  when  we  want  to  speak  at  length  upon  everything  that  concerns  Him.  True 
love  to  Christ  seeks  to  get  to  Him,  to  live  with  Him,  to  live  upon  Him,  and  thus 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 


to  know  Him  so  intimately  that  things  which  were  vmobserved  and  passed  over  at 
the  first,  stand  out  in  clear  light  to  the  increased  joy  and  delight  of  the  contem- 
plative mind.     I.  Christ  looked  upon  is  very  lovely.     '*  His  cheeks  are  as  a 
Bed  of  spices,  as  sweet  flowers."     1.  But  why  do  they  mention  His  cheeks?    (1)  I 
suppose,  first,  because  every  part  of  Christ  is  inexpressibly  delightful.     Take  any 
portion  of  His  countenance  that  you  va&j,  and  it  has  surpassing  beauty  about  it. 
Think  for  a  moment  what  is  meant  by  a  sight  of  "  His  cheeks."     Though  you  may 
not  yet  see  the  majesty  of  His  brow  as  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords, — though 
you  may  not  perceive  the  brightness  of  the  lightning  flashes  of  His  eyes,  which  are 
as  a  flame  of  fire, — though  you  may  scarcely  be  able  to  imagine  at  present  what 
will  be  the  glory  of  His  second  advent, — yet,  if  you  can  but  see  the  cheeks  that  He 
gave  to  the  smiters,  if  you  do  but  know  something  of  Him  as  the  suffering  Saviour, 
you  shall  find  that  there  is  inexpressible  delight  in  Him,  and  with  the  spouse  you  will 
say,  "  His  cheeks  are  as  a  bed  of  spices."     (2)  But,  methinks,  the  saints  see  great 
loveliness  in  those  parts  of  Christ  which  have  been  most  despised.      Oh !    if  we 
could  but  see  Him  now,  if  we  could  but  gaze  upon  His  face  as  it  is  in  glory, 
what  a  subject  of  meditation  it  would  be  to  think  that  even  the  spittle  of  cruel 
mockers  did  run  a-down  those  blessed  cheeks, — that  infinite  loveliness  was  insulted 
with  inconceivable  contempt, — ^the  holy  face  of  the  Incarnate  Son  of  God  distained 
with  the  accursed  spittle  of  brutal  men.     "  It  was  I,  with  my  vain  and  idle  talk, 
with  my  false  and  proud  speech,  that  did  spit  into  that  dear  face."    How  sad  that 
He  should  ever  have  been  made  to  suflFer  so !     0  glorious  love,  that  He  should  be 
willing  even  to  stoop  to  this  terrible  depth  of  ignominy  that  He  might  lift  us  up  to 
dwell  with  Him  on  nigh  I    (3)  And  next,  those  parts  of  Christ  in  which  we  do  not 
immediately  see  any  special  office  or  use  are,  nevertheless,  peculiarly  lovely  to  the 
saints.     Do  you  care  only  for  the  lips  that  speak  to  you  ?    Have  you  no  love  for  the 
eheeks  that  are  silent  ?    "Do  you  care  for  nothing  but  for  the  eyes  that  are  watching 
over  you  ?    If  there  come  to  you  nothing  from  those  cheeks  of  your  Lord,  yet  shaU 
they  not  be  to  you  "  as  a  bed  of  spices,  as  sweet  flowers  "  ?    The  fact  is,  we  are  not 
to  judge  concerning  Christ  in  any  such  fashion  as  this  ;  on  the  contrary,  if  there  is 
any  duty  which  C&ist  has  commanded,  but  which,  instead  of  seeming  to  be  easy 
and  profitable  to  us,  is  hard,  and  requireth  that  we  should  give  so  much  that  Judas 
will  cry  out,  "  To  what  purpose  is  this  waste  ?  "  let  us  never  mind  him,  but  break 
our  alabaster  boxes,  and  pour  out  the  sweet  perfume  upon  our  dear  Master.    (4)  But 
fiurther,  the  followers  of  Christ  have  an  intense  admiration,  an  almost  infinite  love  for 
that  part  of  Christ  by  which  they  are  able  to  commune  with  Him,  and  perhaps  that 
is  one  reason  why  His  cheeks  are  here  speciallymentioned.   The  cheek  is  the  place  of 
fellowship  where  we  exchange  tokens  of  love.    What  a  blessing  it  is  that  Christ  should 
have  had  a  cheek  for  the  lips  of  love  to  approach,  and  to  kiss !     2.  The  spouse, 
however,  in  our  text  tries  to  speak  of  the  loveliness  of  Christ  by  comparisons.     She 
eannot  do  it  with  one  emblem,  she  must  have  two  even  concerning  His  cheeks  ;  they 
are  "as  a  bed  of  spices,"  "as  sweet  flowers."    (1)  Notice,  in  the  metaphors  used  br 
the  spouse,  that  tnere  is  a  blending  of  sweetness  and  beauty ;  "  as  a  bed  of  spices,  ' 
— there  is  sweetness;  and  then,  "as  sweet  flowers," — there  is  beauty.     There  is 
sweetness  to  the  nostrils  and  beauty  to  the  eye,  spice  for  its  fragrance  and  flowers  for 
their  loveliness.     In  Christ,  there  is  something  for  every  spiritual  sense,  and  for 
every  spiritual  sense  there  is  a  complete  satisfaction  and  delight  in  Him.    (2)  Notice 
that,  ^dien  the  spouse  is  speaking  even  of  the  cheeks  of  her  Beloved,  she  brings  iu 
the  idea  of  abundance  ; — spices,  aye,  "a  bed  of  spices";  flowers, — not  one  or  two, 
but,  according  to  the  Hebrew,  "towers  of  perfume,"  which  I  understand  to  mean 
those  raised  beds  which  we  delight  to  have  in  our  gardens,  where  there  are  many 
flowers  set  in  order,  forming  charming  banks  of  beauty.     No  doubt  Solomon  had 
some  of  those  in  his  garden,  for  "there  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun"  ;  and  those 
raised  beds  of  dainty  flowers  are  fit  emblems  of  the  beauteous  cheek  of  Christ,  with 
its  delicate  tints  of  white  and  red.     So  in  Christ  there  is  infinite  abundance.     (3) 
There  is  also  in  Christ  infinite  variety  ;  there  is  in  Him  all  you  can  want  of  any  one 
thing,  and  there  is  more  than  all  you  can  want  of  everything.     (4)  The  spouse's 
metaphors  seem  to  me  also  to  suggest  use  and  delight.     She  speaks  of  spices,  for 
which  there  is  practical  use  in  surgery  and  in  medicine,  for  preservation  and  for 
perfume ;  and  she  also  mentions  sweet  flowers,  for  which  there  may  not  be  any 
particular  use,  but  which  are  charming  for  ornament,  and  for  the  delectation  of 
taste.     So,  dear  Mends,  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is  all  that  we  want,  but  there  is  a 
great  deal  more.    There  is  something  beside  and  beyond  our  actual  necessities,  thero 
•I*  many  spititnal  luxuries.    II.  Now  let  us  turn  to  the  other  part  of  our  text  :-< 


cSap.  t.]  tee  song  of  Solomon:  123 

"His  lips  like  lilies,  dropping  sweet-smelling  myrrh."  These  words  teach  us  that 
Christ  listened  to  is  vert  precious.  When  He  is  silent,  and  we  only  look  at 
Him,  He  is  lovely  to  our  eyes  ;  but  when  He  speaks,  we  can  see  ' '  His  lips  like  lilies, 
dropping  sweet-smelling  myrrh."  1.  Notice,  first,  that  it  is  well,  whenever  we  hear 
the  voice  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  try  to  see  the  blessed  Person  who  is  speaking.  The 
spouse  does  not  say  in  our  text,  "His  words  are  sweet,"  but  she  speaks  of  "His  lips 
iflce  lilies,  dropping  sweet-smelling  myrrh. "  Why  should  we  not  believe  more  in  a 
personal  Christ,  and  why  should  we  not  always  see  the  connection  between  the 
mercy  and  the  hand  that  gives  it,  and  between  the  promise  and  the  lips  that  speak 
it  ?  2.  Notice  the  comparison  in  the  text, — lilies  ;  not  white  lilies,  of  course,  but 
red  lilies,  crimson  lilies,  lilies  of  such  a  colour  ais  are  frequently  to  be  seen,  which 
■Would  be  a  suitable  emblem  of  the  Beloved's  lips.  Christ's  lips  are  peculiarly 
delightful  to  us,  for  it  is  with  them  that  He  speaks  to  us,  and  intercedes  with  the 
Father  for  us.  When  He  pleads  as  the  Intercessor  on  behalf  of  a  poor  soul  like  me, 
His  Hps  are  indeed  in  God's  sight  like  lovely  lilies.  The  Father  looks  at  His  dear 
Son's  lips,  and  He  is  charmed  with  them,  and  blesseth  us  because  of  Christ's  inter- 
cession. And  whenever  Christ  turns  round,  and  speaks  to  us,  shall  we  not  listen  at 
once,  with  eyes  and  ears  wide  open,  as  we  say,  "  I  like  to  watch  His  lips  as  He  is 
speaking,  for  His  lips  are  to  me  as  lilies  "  ?  I  suppose  this  comparison  means  that 
Christ's  lips  are  very  pure,  as  the  lily  is  the  purest  of  flowers  ;  and  that  they  are 
very  gentle,  for  we  always  associate  the  lily  with  everything  that  is  tender  and  soft 
and  kind.  3.  But  the  spouse's  comparison  fails,  for  she  said,  "  His  lips  like  lilies, 
dropping  sweet-smelling  myrrh."  "This  lilies  do  not  do,  but  Christ  does.  He  is 
more  than  a  lily,  or  He  is  a  lily  of  such  a  sort  as  never  bloomed  on  earth  except  once. 
He  was  the  only  lily  that  ever  dropped  sweet-smelling  myrrh.  The  spouse  says  that 
His  lips  do  that ;  what  means  this  ?  Does  it  not  mean  that  His  Word  is  often  full  of 
a  very  sweet,  mysterious,  blessed  influence?    (C.  E.  Spurgeon.) 

'  Ver.  16.  Yea,  He  is  altogether  lovely. — Altogether  lovely: — When  the  old  Puritan 
minister  had  delivered  his  discourse,  and  dwelt  upon  firstly  and  secondly  and 
thirdly,  before  he  sat  down  he  usually  gave  a  comprehensive  summary  of  all  that  he 
had  spoken.  In  these  five  words,  the  spouse  here  gives  you  her  summary.  Remem- 
ber these  words,  and  know  their  meaning,  and  you  possess  the  quintessence  of  the 
spouse's  portion  of  the  Song  of  Songs.  This  verse  has  been  translated  in  another 
■way  :  "  He  is  all  desires  "  ;  and  so  indeed  Jesus  is.  He  was  the  desire  of  the  ancients, 
He  is  the  desire  of  all  nations  still.  To  His  own  people  He  is  their  aU  in  all ;  they  are 
complete  in  Him  ;  they  are  filled  out  of  His  fulness.  But  we  will  not  dispute  about 
translations,  for,  after  all,  with  such  a  text,  so  full  of  unutterable  spiritual  sweetness, 
every  man  must  be  his  own  translator,  and  into  his  own  soul  must  the  power  of  the 
message  come,  by  the  enforcement  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  I.  We  shall  consider  three 
POINTS  OF  CHARACTER  which  are  very  noticeable  in  these  words.  1.  The  first  which 
suggests  itself  is  this :  the  words  are  evidently  uttered  by  one  who  is  under  the 
influence  of  overwhelming  emotion.  The  words  are  rather  a  veil  to  the  heart  than  a 
glass  through  which  we  see  its  emotions.  The  sentence  labours  to  express  the 
mexpressible  ;  it  pants  to  utter  the  unutterable.  Lost  in  adoring  wonder,  the 
gracious  mind  desists  from  description,  and  cries  with  rapture,  "  Yea,  He  is  altogether 
lovely."  It  has  often  been  thus  with  true  saints  ;  they  have  felt  the  love  of  Jesus 
to  be  overpowering  and  inebriating.  I  believe  those  are  the  happiest  saints  who  are 
most  overwhelmed  'with  a  sense  of  the  greatness,  goodness  and  preciousness  of 
Christ.  Oh  1  to  be  carried  right  away  with  the  Divine  manifestation  of  the  chief 
among  ten  thousand,  so  that  our  souls  shall  cry  out  in  rapture,  ' '  Yea,  He  is  altogether 
lovely."  This  is  one  characteristic  of  the  text:  may  it  be  transferred  tons.  2.  A 
second  is  this,  and  very  manifest  it  is  upon  the  surface  of  the  verse — here  is  undivided 
affection.  "He  is  altogether  lovely."  Note  that  these  words  have  a  world  of 
meaning  in  them,  but  chiefly  they  tell  us  this,  that  Jesus  is  to  the  true  saint  the 
only  lovely  one  in  the  world.  Our  text  means,  again,  that  in  Jesus  loveliness  of  all 
kinds  is  to  be  found.  If  there  be  anything  that  is  worthy  of  the  love  of  an  immortal 
spirit,  it  is  to  be  seen  in  abundance  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  is  not  this  flower  or  that, 
but  He  is  the  Paradise  of  perfection.  He  is  not  a  star  here  or  a  constellation  there. 
He  is  the  whole  heaven  of  stars,  nay,  He  is  the  heaven  of  heavens  ;  He  is  all  that  is 
hir  and  lovely  condensed  in  one.  When  the  text  says,  again,  that  Jesus ' '  is  altogether 
lovely,"  it  declares  that  He  is  lovely  in  all  •views  of  Him.  It  generally  happens  that 
to  the  noblest  building  there  is  an  unhappy  point  of  view  from  which  the  architec- 
tore  appears  at  a  disadvantage ;  the  choicest  piece  of  workmanship  may  not  be  equally 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T. 

complete  in  all  directions  ;  the  best  human  character  is  deformed  by  one  flaw,  if  not 
with  more  ;  but  with  our  Lord  all  is  lovely,  regard  Him  as  you  will.  Under  all 
aspects,  and  in  all  offices  and  in  relations,  at  all  times  and  all  seasons,  under  all 
circumstances  and  conditions,  anywhere,  everywhere,  "He  is  altogether  lovely."  I 
will  close  this  point  by  saying,  every  child  of  God  acknowledges  that  Christ  Jesua  is 
lovely  altogether  to  the  whole  of  Himself.  He  is  lovely  to  my  judgment ;  but 
many  things  are  so,  and  yet  are  not  lovely  to  my  affections  ;  I  know  them  to  be  right, 
and  yet  they  are  not  pleasant :  but  Jesus  is  as  lovely  to  my  heart  as  to  my  head,  as 
dear  as  He  is  good.  He  is  lovely  to  my  hopes  ;  are  they  not  all  in  Hrm  ?  Is  not  this 
my  expectation — to  see  Him  as  He  is  ?  But  He  is  lovely  to  my  memory  too  :  did  He 
not  pluck  me  out  of  the  net  ?  Lovely  to  all  my  powers  and  all  my  passions,  my 
faculties  and  feelings.  3.  The  third  characteristic  of  the  text  is  ardent  devotion.  It  is 
the  language  of  one  who  feels  that  no  service  would  be  too  great  to  render  to  the 
Lord.  I  wish  we  felt  as  the  apostles  and  martjrrs  and  holy  men  of  old  did,  that 
Jesus  Christ  ought  to  be  served  at  the  highest  and  richest  rate.  "We  do  little,  very 
little  :  what  if  I  had  said  we  do  next  to  nothing  for  our  dear  Lord  and  Master  nowa- 
days ?  The  love  of  Christ  doth  not  constrain  us  as  it  should.  Is  Christ  less  lovely, 
or  is  His  Church  less  loyal  ?  Would  God  she  estimated  Him  at  His  right  rate,  for 
then  she  would  return  to  her  former  mode  of  service.  Oh,  for  a  flash  of  the  celestial 
fire  !  Oh,  when  shall  the  Spirit's  energy  visit  us  again  !  "When  shall  men  put  down 
their  selfishness  and  seek  only  Christ  ?  "When  shall  they  leave  their  strifes  about 
trifles  to  rally  round  His  Cross  ?  "When  shall  we  end  the  glorification  of  ourselves, 
and  begin  to  make  Him  glorious,  even  to  the  world's  end  ?  II.  Thus  I  have  shown 
you  the  characteristics  of  the  text,  and  now  I  desire  to  use  it  in  three  ways  for 
PRACTICAL  PURPOSES.  1.  The  first  word  is  to  you.  Christians.  Here  is  very  sweet 
instruction.  The  Lord  Jesus  "is  altogether  lovely."  Then  if  I  want  to  be  lovely,  I 
must  be  like  Him,  and  the  model  for  me  as  a  Christian  is  Christ.  "We  want  to  have 
Christ's  zeal,  but  we  must  balance  it  with  His  prudence  and  discretion  ;  we  must 
seek  to  have  Christ's  love  to  God,  and  we  must  feel  His  love  to  men.  His  forgiveness 
of  injury,  His  gentleness  of  speech.  His  incorruptible  truthfulness.  His  meekness  and 
lowliness,  His  utter  unselfishness,  His  entire  consecration  to  His  Father's  business. 
2.  The  second  use  to  which  we  would  put  the  verse  is  this,  here  is  a  very  gentle 
rebuke  to  some  of  you.  You  do  not  see  the  lowliness  of  Christ,  yet  "  He  is  altogether 
lovely. "  Now,  you  who  have  never  heard  music  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  you  are  to  be 
greatly  pitied,  for  your  loss  is  heavy.  You  who  never  saw  beauty  in  Jesus,  and  who 
never  will  for  ever,  you  need  all  our  tears.  The  Lord  open  those  blind  eyes  of  yours, 
and  unstop  those  deaf  ears,  and  give  you  the  new  and  spiritual  life,  and  then  will 
you  join  in  saying,  "  Yea,  He  is  altogether  lovely."  3.  The  last  use  of  the  text  is, 
that  of  tender  attractiveness.  "  Yea,  He  is  altogether  lovely. "  Where  are  you  this 
morning,  you  who  are  convinced  of  sin  and  want  a  Saviour,  where  have  you  crept  to  ? 
You  need  not  be  afraid  to  come  to  Jesus,  for  "  He  is  altogether  lovely. "  It  does  not 
say  He  is  altogether  terrible — that  is  your  misconception  of  Him  ;  it  does  not  say  He 
is  somewhat  lovely,  and  sometimes  willing  to  receive  a  certain  sort  of  sinner  ;  but 
"  He  is  altogether  lovely, "  and  therefore  He  is  always  ready  to  welcome  to  Himself  the 
■\nlest  of  the  vile.  Think  of  His  name.  It  is  Jesus,  the  Saviour.  Is  not  that  lovely  ? 
Think  of  His  work.  He  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  This  is  His 
occupation.  Is  not  that  lovely  ?  Think  of  what  He  has  done.  He  hath  redeemed  our 
souls  with  blood.  Is  not  that  lovely  ?  Think  of  what  He  is  doing.  He  is  pleading  before 
the  throne  of  God  for  sinners.  Think  of  what  He  is  giving  at  this  moment — He  is 
exalted  on  high  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins.  Is  not  this  lovely  ?  Under 
every  aspect  Christ  Jesus  is  attractive  to  sinners  who  need  Him.  Come,  then,  come 
and  welcome,  there  is  nothing  to  keep  you  away,  there  is  everything  to  bid  you  come. 
(C. //.  Spurgeon.)  The  loveliness  of  Christ : — I.  In  the  spotless  purity  of  His  nature. 
II.  In  His  unrivalled  perfections.  III.  In  His  varied  offices  of  Prophet, 
Priest,  and  King.  IV.  In  His  temper  and  spirit.  Love,  meekness,  tenderness  and 
benignity  marked  His  whole  earthly  career.  (/.  N,  Norton,  D.D.)  The  best  beloved : — 
I  am  not  about  to  speak  of  Christ's  loveliness  after  the  flesh,  for  now  after  the  flesh 
know  we  Him  no  more.  It  is  His  moral  and  spiritual  beauty,  of  which  the  spouse 
in  the  Song  most  sweetly  says,  "Yea,  He  is  altogether  lovely."  The  loveliness  which 
the  eye  dotes  on  is  mere  varnish  when  compared  with  that  which  dwells  in  virtue 
and  holiness  ;  the  worm  will  devour  the  loveliness  of  skin  and  flesh,  but  a  lovely 
character  will  endure  for  ever.  I.  This  is  rare  praise.  What  if  I  say  it  is 
unique  ?  For  no  other  being  could  it  be  said,  "  Yea,  He  is  altogether  lovely."  It 
means,  first,  that  all  that  is  in  Him  is  lovely,  perfectly  lovely.     There  is  no  ppint  io. 


CHAP.  T.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  125 


our  Lord  Jesus  that  you  could  improve.     To  paint  the  rose  were  to  8|)oil  its  ruddy 
hue.     To  tint  the  lily,  for  He  is  lily  as  well  as  rose,  were  to  mar  its  whiteness. 
Each  virtue  in  our  Lord  is  there  in  a  state  of  absolute  perfection :  it  could  not  be 
more  fully  developed.     He  is  altogether  lovely  at  every  separate  point,  so  that  the 
spouse,  when  she  began  with  His  head,  descended  to  His  feet,  and  then  lifting  her 
«yes  upward  again  upon  a  return  voyage  of  delight,  she  looked  into  His  countenance 
and  summed  up  all  that  she  had  seen  in  this  one  sentence,  "  He  ia  altogether  lovely. " 
This  is  rare  praise.     And  He  is  all  that  is  lovely.     In  each  one  of  His  people  you 
will  find  something  that  is  lovely, — in  one  there  is  faith,  in  another  abounding  love  ; 
in  one  tenderness,  in  another  courage,  but  you  do  not  find  all  good  things  in  any  one 
saint — at  least  not  all  of  them  in  full  perfection  ;  but  you  find  all  virtues  in  Jesus, 
and  each  one  of  them  at  its  best.     In  Jesus  Christ — this,  moreover,  is  rare  praise 
again — there  is  nothing  that  is  unlovely.     You  never  need  put  the  finger  over  the 
scar  in  His  case,  as  Apelles  did  when  he  painted  his  hero.    Nothing  about  our  Lord 
needs  to  be  concealed  ;  even  His  cross,  at  which  his  enemies  stumble,  is  to  be  daily 
proclaimed,  and  it  will  be  seen  to  be  one  of  His  choicest  beauties.    II.  As  this  is  rare 
praise,  so  likewise  it  is  perpetual  praise.     You  may  say  of  Christ  whenever  you 
look  at  Him,  "Yea,  He  is  altogether  lovely."     He  also  was  so.     As  God  over  all, 
He  is  blessed  for  ever.  Amen.     When  in  addition  to  His  Godhead,  He  assumed  our 
mortal  clay,  was  He  not  inimitably  lovely  then  ?    He  is  lovely  in  all  His  offices. 
"What  an  entrancing  sight  to  see  the  King  in  His  beauty,  with  His  diadem  upon  His 
head,  as  He  now  sits  in  yonder  world  of  brightness  !     How  charming  to  view  Him 
as  a  Priest,  with  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  wearing  the  names  of  His  people  bejewelled 
on  His  breastplate !     And  what  a  vision  of  simple  beauty,  to  see  Him  as  a  Prophet 
teaching  His  people  in  touching  parables  of  homely  interest,  of  whom  they  said, 
"  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man  "  !   Let  Him  be  what  He  may — Lamb  or  Shepherd, 
Brother  or  King,  Saviour  or  Master,  Foot- washer  or  Lord — in  every  relation  He  is 
altogether  lovely.     III.  Though  this  praise  is  rare  praise  and  perpetual  praise,  yet 
«.lso  IT  is  totally  insufficient  praise.     Say  ye  that  He  is  altogether  lovely  ?    It 
is  not  enough.     It  is  not  a  thousandth  part  enough.     No  tongue  of  man,  no  tongue 
of  angel,  can  ever  set  forth  His  unutterable  beauties.     "  Oh,"  say  you,  "  but  it  is  a 
great  word,  though  short ;  very  full  of  meaning  though  soon  spoken — altogether 
lovely. "     I  tell  you  it  is  a  poor  word.     It  is  a  word  of  despair.     The  praise  of  the 
text  is  insufficient  praise,  I  know,  because  it  is  praise  given  by  one  who  had  never 
seen  Him  in  His  glory.    It  is  Old  Testament  praise  this,  that  He  is  altogether  lovely  : 
praise  uttered  upon  report  rather  than  upon  actual  view  of  Him.     Truly  I  know  not 
how  to  bring  better,  but  I  shall  know  one  day.     Till  then  I  will  speak  His  praise  as 
best  I  can,  though  it  fall  far  short  of  His  infinite  excellence.     IV.  This  praise  is 
VERT  SUGGESTIVE.     If  Christ  be  altogether  lovely  it  suggests  a  question.     Suppose 
I  never  saw  His  loveliness.     This  world  appreciates  the  man  who  makes  money,  how- 
ever reckless  he  may  be  of  the  welfare  of  others  while  scheming  to  heap  up  riches  for 
himself.     As  for  this  Jesus,  He  only  gave  His  life  for  men,  He  was  only  pure  and 
perfect,  the  mirror  of  disinterested  love.     The  vain  world  cannot  see  in  Him  a  virtue 
to  admire.     It  is  a  blind  world,  a  fool  world,  a  world  that  lieth  in  the  wicked  one. 
Not  to  discern  the  beauties  of  Jesus  is  an  evidence  of  terrible  depravity.     (C.  H. 
Spurgeon. )    This  is  my  Beloved,  and  this  is  my  Friend,  0  daughters  of  Jerusalem. 
Christ  the  Beloved,  and  the  Friend  of  His  people : — I.  Christ  the  Beloved  of  His 
PEOPLE.     1.  They  love  Him  for  His  own  gieat  and  glorious  perfection.     In  Him  all 
beauty  centres.     In  Him,  whatever  qualities  excite  admiration,  or  engage  esteem, 
whatever  excellence  adorns,  dignifies,  or  endears  the  character,  unite  without  dimi- 
nution or  alloy.     2.  They  love  Him  for  His  suitableness  to  their  necessities.     Are 
they  in  a  lost  and  perishing  condition  ?    Christ  is  a  Saviour  and  a  great  one.     Are 
they  blind  and  ignorant  ?     In  Christ  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge.    Are  they  tied  and  bound  with  the  chain  of  their  sins  ?    Christ  proclaims 
liberty  to  the  captives,  and  the  opening  of  the  prisons  to  them  that  are  bound.    Are 
they  weak  and  helpless  ?     Christ  will  give  strength  to  His  people.     He  is  a  strength 
to  the  poor,  a  strength  to  the  needy  in  distress.     In  a  word,  Christ  is  a  remedy 
exactly  suited  to  every  want.     3.  They  love  Him  for  the  special  benefits  which  He 
hath  conferred  upon  them.     (1)  They  have  experienced  the  freeness  of  His  love. 
(2)  They  have  experienced  the  efficacy  of  His  pardoning  mercy.    (3)  They  have  experi- 
enced the  power  of  His  sanctifying  grace.     (4)  They  have  experienced  the  faithful- 
ness of  His  Word.     They  have  trusted  in  Him  and  have  been  holpen.     They  have 
loalled  upon  Him  and  have  been  delivered.     II.  Christ  is  the  Friend  of  His 
PEOPLE.     1.  Christ  is  a  Friend,  who  tenderly  loves  His  people,  and  is  cordially 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  T. 


attached  to  their  interests.  2.  Chriat  is  an  all-powerftd  Friend.  The  kingdoms  of 
nature,  of  providence,  of  grace,  are  under  His  control.  3.  Chriat  is  an  unchangeabia 
Friend.  4.  Christ  is  a  seasonable  Friend.  The  friend  who  ministers  to  our  support, 
when  other  Mends  forsake  us,  and  when  we  stand  most  in  need  of  his  support,  pre- 
eminently shows  himself  to  be  a  friend.  Such  a  friend  is  Christ  to  His  people. 
III.  Some  mabks,  by  which  you  may  judge  whethek  you  love  Christ  oa 
KOT.     1.  If  you  love  Christ,  you  love  His  cause.     That  His  kingdom  may  come,  is 

J'ow  prayer.     That  His  kingdom  will  come,  is  your  joy.     2.  If  you  love  Christ,  you 
ove  His  people.     The  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus  you  wili  account  the  truly  honourable 
on  earth ;  the  excellent,  in  whom  is  all  your  delight.     3.  If  you  love  Christ,  you 
love  His  ordinances.     4.  If  you  love  Christ  you  love  to  do  His  wul.  {K  Cooper,  M.A. ) 
Christ  the  Friend  of  His  people:— I.  Because  of  what  He  undertook  and 
what  He  has  accomplished  for  them.     1.  When  their  cause  was  desperate  with 
God,  He  engaged  to  remedy  it — to  answer  every  charge  to  which  they  were  liable, 
and  He  did  it.    2.  He  purchased  their  persons,  that  He  might  be  free  to  bless  them 
as  He  saw  meet.     (1)  Having  them  as  His  own,  it  is  His  delight  to  enrich  and 
honour  them  to  the  utmost.     (2)  Having  them  as  His  own.  He  strips  them  of  their 
filthy  garments — He  washes  them  from  their  sins.     (3)  Having  them  as  His  own. 
He  reveals  Himself  to  them.     He  cures  the  blindness  with  which  the  God  of  this 
world  had  aiflicted  them.      (4)  Having  them  as  His  own.  He  puts  His  law  in  their 
hearts  and  writes  it  in  their  minds.     With  their  whole  soul  they  consent  unto  it 
as  "holy,  just,  good."    3.  He  has  gone  before  to  the  place  of  final  rest,  there  to 
appear  for  them,  thence  to  hold  communication  with  them,  and  thither  to  take 
them  at  last.     II.  The  character  of  His  friendship.     1.  It  is  an  indissoluble 
friendship.      It  is  not  a  friendship  which,  having  viewed  its  object  at  first,  through 
the  false  and  delusive  medium  of  an  absorbing  passion,  has  been  deceived  in  it,  and, 
on  discovery  of  the  deception,  cools,  fades,  falls  away,  until  it  ceases  altogether, 
or  sinks  into  indifiierence,  bearing  proportion  in  its  extent  to  the  blind  ardour  that 
once  raged.      But  it  is  a  friendship  based  on  intelligent,  holy,  as  well  as  afifectionate 
choice  ;  He  that  led  to  it,  that  formed  it,  being  the  Father  who  so  loved  us  that 
"  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,   that  we  might  live  by  Him."     It  never 
wearies  of  its  object,   for  it  is  never  disappointed,   never  deceived.     It  grows, 
it  increases  continually.      On  Christ's  side  it  is    jperfect    from   the    beginning, 
as  existing  in  His  heart ;  but  the  manifestations  of  it  to  us  multiply  every  day. 
2.  It  is  marked  by  uniform  constancy.     Christ  is  a  Friend  that   "loves  at  aU 
times."    3.  It  is  distinguished  by  unswerving  faithfulness.    {A.  Beith.)    This  is  my 
Friend : — I.  The  need  of  this  Friend.    This  wiU  be  evident  if  you  reflect  upon 
the  sad  state  and  condition  in  which  all  mankind  are  involved  by  sin.     II.  Somb 
proofs  and  instances  of  Christ's  friendship  towards  us.    1.  His  engaging 
in  our  cause  as  our  Surety  in  the  everlasting  covenant,  which  is  ordered  in  all 
things  and  sure,  and  entered  into  between  the  Persons  of  the  Trinity,  ia  a  manifest 
proof  and  indication  of  His  friendship  towards  us.     2.  He  has  not  only  undertaken 
to  do  all  this,  but  He  has  done  what  He  undertook  to  do.     He  has  paid  the  very 
last  farthing  for  us.    3.  He  has  proved  Himself  to  be  our  Friend  by  having  wrought 
out  a  righteousness  for  us,  a  righteousness  which  ensures  us  against  all  the  demands 
both  of  law  and  of  justice  ;  a  righteousness  which  shall  be  for  ever,  a  salvation  which 
shall  not  be  abolished.    4.  He  has  proved  Himself  to  be  our  Friend  by  His  dying  in 
our  stead,  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might  bring  us  to  God.     5.  He  has 
proved  Himself  to  be  our  Friend  by  His  having  purchased  our  persons,  and  procured 
all  things  needful  for  us.    Look  at  the  price  which  He  has  ]paid.  His  own  blood.     6. 
He  has  proved  Himself  to  be  our  Friend  by  His  having  risen  again  in  our  behalf ; 
by  His  having  ascended  to  His  Father  and  to  our  Father,  to  His  God,  and  our  God ; 
by  His  taking  possession  of  heaven  for  us.     7.  He  has  proved  Himself  to  be  our 
Friend  by  interceding  for  us.    III.  Some  op  the  properties  of  this  Friend. 
Christ  ia  a  nonsuch  ;  there  is  none  like  Him ;  none  to  be  compared  to  Him.     He  is 
the  ohiefest  among  ten  thousand,  He  is  altogether  lovely.     He  is  all  desires,  and 
the  Desire  of  all  nations,  "Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee?  and  there  is  none 
upon  earth  that  I  desire  besides  Thee."    1.  He  is  a  rich  Friend.     Such  an  one 
ia  often  osefol  and  needfuL     A  man  may  have  a  friend  that  has  the  heart  to  help 
ftinti  but  who  has  not  got  the  means ;   but  Christ  as  He  is  vrilling,  so  also  He 
ia  able.     2.  He  is  a  faithftd  Friend.     You  may  safely  trust  Him  with  your  all.     He 
is  Mthfol  to  the  Father,  having  perfectly  fulfilled  His  covenant  engagements  with 
pim,  in  fulfilling  the  law  and  suffering  the  penalty.    And  He  is  faithful  to  Hia 
Mople  ia  gJYJBg  them  eternal  life.     8.  He  is  a  tender-hearted  Friend.     He  sympa- 


CHAP,  VI.]  THE  SOIVG  OF  SOLOMOy.  127 

thizea  with  Hia  people  in  all  their  aflflictiona,  their  trials,  their  difficulties,  their 
disappointments,  their  sicknesses.  4.  He  is  an  unchangeable  and  unchanging 
Friend.  We  may  grow  cold  to  Him.  He  grows  not  cold  towards  us.  He  is  ever 
the  same.  5.  Eie  is  an  everlasting  Friend.  A  man  may  have  a  Mend  and  he  may 
die,  and  then  all  his  dependence  upon  him  is  gone  ;  but  Christ  ever  lives  to  be  the 
Friend  of  His  people.  Death  separates  friends,  but  over  Christ  it  hath  no  power. 
IV.  Who  that  individual  is  that  can  claim  Christ  as  his  or  her  Friend. 
And  here  we  observe,  that  no  person  in  a  state  of  nature  can  make  this  claim,  since 
Christ  is  neither  beloved  by  such,  nor  are  they  acquainted  with  that  friendship 
which  dwells  in  His  breast  towards  aU  those  whom  He  has  redeemed  with  His  most 
precious  blood.  And  as  they  are  unacquainted  with  His  friendship,  they  cannot 
claim  Him  as  their  Friend.  Neither  is  it  the  privilege  of  every  one  who  is  called  by 
grace  to  claim  Christ  as  his  Friend.  Although  every  regenerate  person  has  faith, 
yet  every  regenerate  person  may  not  have  the  fuU  assurance  of  faith.  When  faith 
does  rise  to  this  full  assurance,  the  possessor  thereof  can  say  as  Paul  did,  "  He  loved 
me  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  Such  can  say  with  holy  Job,  "I  know  that  my 
Eedeemer  liveth : "  not  the  Redeemer,  but  my  Redeemer;  "and  that  He  shall 
stand,  etc.  Such  can  say  as  Thomas  did,  * '  My  Lord  and  my  God. "  Such  can  say 
as  the  Church  does,  "This  is  my  Beloved,  and  this  is  my  Friend."  (W.  D.  Long, 
M.A.)  Our  Friend: — To  have  a  true  friend  is  a  blessing  beyond  all  price.  I  wish 
to  show  that  there  is  a  loving  Friend  for  all  mankind.  1.  Who  is  our  Friend? 
Men  have  always  been  asking,  Who  is  God  ?  In  reply,  the  Lord  our  God  appeared 
in  a  human  body,  called  Jesus,  and  showed  that  He  is  the  Friend  of  Man.  2.  Our 
Friend  sees  all  our  trouble.  O  friendless  one,  tossed  about  on  the  sea  of  life, 
car  Friend  sees  you,  and  is  at  hand  to  comfort  you.  3.  Our  Friend  is  always 
present  with  us.  i.  Our  Friend  can  help  us  all  times.  5.  Our  Friend  is  our 
Mediator,  who  saves  us  from  the  result  of  our  sins.  6.  Brothers,  love  our  Friend  ! 
And,  like  Him,  love  the  friendless  1  7.  Let  us  also  show  friendship  to  sJl  creatures 
which  Grod  has  made.    (  W.  Birch. ) 


CHAPTER  VL 


TsBS.  2,  8.  My  Beloved  haa  gone  down  into  His  garden,  to  the  heds  of  spiceB. — 
Communion : — The  exquisite  pastoral  from  which  our  text  is  taken  is  peculiarly  fitted 
for  Sacramental  meditation — becaiise  its  design  is  to  set  forth  the  mutual  love  of 
Christ  and  His  disciples  ;  and  because  His  disciples,  in  approaching  the  Saci-ament, 
should  be  in  frames  of  mind  fitted  to  appreciate  its  exquisite  imagery.  I.  Christian 
dutt.  The  Church  is  here  represented  as  Christ's  garden,  into  which  He  then  descends 
to  delight  Himself  with  the  gracious  fruits  of  the  believer's  spiritual  life.  And  our 
lesson  of  duty  is,  that  the  Sacrament  we  should  experience  and  exhibit  such  spiritual 
afifections  as  seem  unto  Christ  precious — fruits  to  be  eaten — lilies  to  be  gathered ! 
Consider  these  graces : — 1.  Faith.  This  is  the  foundation  of  all  religious  life.  Now 
this  grace  Christ  delights  in,  for  it  greatly  honours  and  glorifies  Him.  In  its  ascrip- 
tion of  salvation  to  Him  alone  it  virtually  places  the  mediatorial  crown  upon  His 
head.  2.  Love, — the  soul's  crowning  grace,  or  a  grand  composite  of  all  graces.  For, 
in  strict  speech,  they  are  all  modifications  of  love.  Penitence  is  love  grieving — faith 
is  love  resting — obedience  is  love  working — hope  is  love  waiting.  So  that  love 
toward  man  and  toward  God  is  at  once  the  law  fulfilled,  and  holiness  perfected. 
And  in  this  Christ  delights.  II.  Thb  Christlan's  privilege.  Regarding  the 
believer  as  the  subject  it  represents  his  soul  6is  greatly  rejoicing  in  the  Sacrament, 
gathering  in  Christ's  garden  the  heavenly  fruit.  These  fruits  are  the  gracious  gifts 
imparted  by  the  Saviour.  Consider  a  few  of  them.  Take  them  a.s  they  are  presented 
in  Christ's  discourse  in  that  guest-chamber.  1.  Peace.  Quiet,  tranquillity,  spiritual 
and  immortal  rest  1  And  for  this  we  come  to  Christ  in  the  Sacrament.  Behold  a 
garden  walled  up  to  heaven.  And  through  its  open  portal  the  soul  passes  leaning 
on  the  Beloved!,  to  bathe  heart  and  spirit  in  the  everlasting  fulness  of  God's 
glorious  peace  1  2.  Joy.  "These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  My  joy 
might  remain  with  you,  and  that  your  joy  might  be  full."  And  what  glorious,  joy- 
imparting  words  they  were  1  And  this  is  better  than  peace  ;  for  that  is  out  a  passive 
rest,  this  is  a  reigping  rapture.    (^O,  Wadsworth.) 


189  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Yer.  3.  He  feedeth  among  the  lilies. — Feeding  amwng  (he  lilies: — ^The  literal 
reference  is  simple  and  obvious.  The  bride  represents  her  husband  as  going  down 
to  the  garden  where  the  fruits  grew  among  the  flowers — where  what  was  good  for 
food  was  associated  with  what  was  fair  to  the  eyes  and  pleasant  to  all  the  senses. 
The  plain  of  Sharon,  the  lower  slopes  of  Lebanon,  the  shores  of  Galilee,  and  even  the 
hare  craggy  terraces  of  the  hiU  country  of  Judaea  are  illumined  with  gorgeous  gleams 
of  white,  and  scarlet,  and  golden  lilies,  whose  f '  --ry  is  the  most  peculiar  of  all  the 
common  aspects  of  the  country.  The  bulbous  roots  of  many  of  them,  containing  a 
reserve  of  nourishment  for  imfavourable  times,  and  guarding  as  in  a  secure  citadel 
the  principle  of  life,  specially  adapt  these  lUies  for  growing  in  the  most  unpromising 
looking  places.  And  not  only  are  they  enabled  themselves  to  extract  nourishment 
from  the  driest  soil  and  atmosphere,  but  they  also  create  around  them,  by  the 
shadow  of  their  leaves  and  blossoms,  and  by  the  moisture  which  they  attract, 
conditions  suitable  for  the  growth  of  other  plants  less  richly  endowed  ;  take  species 
tinder  their  protection  whose  forms  are  tougher  and  whose  constitution  is  hardier, 
but  which  have  no  reserved  stores  like  them  for  times  and  spots  of  scarcity.  No- 
where is  the  herbage  so  luxuriant  as  under  the  shadow  of  these  beautiful  and  graceful 
flowers.  Such  spots  are  therefore  the  favourite  feeding-places  of  flocks  and  herds. 
They  seek  them  out  as  the  traveller  in  the  desert  seeks  out  the  oasis  ;  and  they  are 
as  sure  to  find  sweet  and  tender  grass  where  the  lilies  are  growing,  as  the  traveller  is 
to  find  a  well  where  the  palm-grove  flourishes.  The  idea  the  text  conveys  is  that  aa 
the  roedeer  or  the  gazelle  feeds  on  the  grass  which  grows  among  the  lilies  on  the 
mountains,  so  is  the  bridegroom  satisfied  with  the  sterling  useful  qualities  that  are 
betokened  by  the  beauties  of  mind  and  heart  of  the  bride.  Her  fair  exterior,  her 
beautiful  face  indicate  the  possession  of  solid  and  substantial  endowments  beneath. 
In  the  shadow  of  the  lily-Uke  charms  of  her  person,  he  finds  not  only  what  pleases 
his  eye,  but  also  what  satisfies  his  mind  and  heart.  The  believer  says  of  Jesus,  "  I 
am  my  Beloved's,  and  my  Beloved  is  mine :  He  feedeth  among  the  lilies," — eats  of 
the  finiits  that  grow  among  the  flowers  of  the  garden  of  my  heart.  I  am  filled  with 
His  fulness,  and  He  sees  in  me  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  is  satisfied.  But 
separating  the  passage  from  its  literal  and  symbolical  reference  in  the  text,  it  ia 
susceptible  of  a  wide  signification.  The  Creator  may  be  said  to  feed  among  the  lilies, 
in  the  enjoyment  which  He  receives  from  the  beauties  of  creation.  We  can  see  no 
end  in  the  existence  of  all  this  inaccessible  beauty  except  to  gratify  the  love  of  beauty 
in  the  heart  of  God  Himself.  And  to  this  Divine  feeling.  He  who  was  the  express 
image  of  the  Father's  person  gave  frequent  expression  on  earth.  The  whole  life  of 
Jesus  was  a  feeding  among  the  lilies,  which  illimiinated  His  thoughts  of  God  and 
His  lessons  for  man.  They  helped  to  develop  the  nature  which  grew  in  wisdom  aa 
in  stature  by  the  aid  of  the  same  influences  which  develop  ours.  His  soul  fed  upon 
those  visions  of  the  beauty  of  holiness,  and  those  high  impulses  and  deep  emotiona 
which  the  beauty  of  nature  produced.     He  saw  the  spiritual  in  them  behiad  the 

Ehysical ;  and  their  perishing  beauty  was  to  Him  but  the  veil  which  concealed  the 
oiy  of  holies  of  a  nobler  and  more  enduring  beauty,  a  shadow  glassed  in  the  unstable 
element  of  time,  of  the  steadfast  light  of  God  in  heaven.  The  Jews  of  old  fed  among 
the  lilies,  for  their  land  was  pre-eminently  the  Flowery  Land.  Dr.  Tristram  calls  it 
"  the  garden  of  Eden  run  wUd."  Every  traveller  is  struck  with  the  immense  pro- 
fosion,  variety,  and  brilliancy  of  the  flowers.  And  as  with  the  Land,  so  with  the 
Book.  The  Bible  is  the  book  of  flowers  :  its  language  is  the  language  of  flowers :  it 
is  full  of  the  highest  poetry  and  truest  philosophy  of  these  fair  creations.  The 
sweetest  and  most  satisfying  promises  of  God  come  to  us  in  the  midst  of  the  most 
beautiful  poetry  ;  the  plainest  and  simplest  precepts  aire  set  forth  in  glowing  images  ; 
the  highest  revelations  reach  us  in  lessons  of  the  lowly  lilies  that  grow  beside  our 
door.  The  whole  of  human  life  is  a  feeding  among  liKes.  All  our  food  and  clothing 
and  fuel  come  to  us  through  beautiful  forms  and  colours.  In  this  respect  how 
different  are  the  manufactories  of  nature  from  those  of  man !  In  human  works 
beauty  is  often  eliminated  and  only  what  is  useful  is  preserved  ;  but  in  nature  the 
useful  and  the  beautiful  always  keep  pace  with  one  another.  In  the  most  carefully 
weeded  field  the  eye,  wearied  with  the  monotony  of  the  green  stalks  and  the  shimmer- 
ing of  the  freckled  glumes  in  the  sunshine,  is  refreshed  here  and  there  with  the  blaze 
of  scarlet  poppy,  and  the  azure  gleam  of  the  com-bluebottle,  and  the  mimic  sunshine 
of  the  yelfow  corn-marigold.     The  wild  mint  perfumes  its  roots,  and  the  white  com- 

Surry  and  scarlet  pimpernel  lend  to  it  all  the  tender  grace  of  their  hue  and  shape, 
le  com  itself  feeds  among  the  lilies  ;    it  draws  its  nourishment  from  soil  and 
atmosphere  in  the  company  of  a  bright  sisterhood  of  flowers  which  crown  its  sober 


CHAP.  Ti.]  TEE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON".  129 

nsefolness  with  a  garland  of  beauty.  And  is  not  this  feature  common  to  all  of  nature 
that  is  associated  with  man  ?  The  green  grass  of  the  meadows  and  pastures  is  never 
•llowed  to  grow  in  dull  uniformity  :  nature  spreads  her  golden  buttercups  and  snow- 
white  dedsies  and  purple  prunellas  over  it,  so  that  the  beasts  of  the  field  feed  among 
the  lilies.  How  beautiful  are  the  white  and  crimson  blossoms  of  the  clover,  and  the 
slender  scented  spikes  of  the  vernal  grass,  which  feed  the  bee  with  honey  and  load 
the  air  with  a  delicious  fragrance,  ere  they  yield  their  succulent  herbage  to  the 
browsing  cattle,  or  fill  the  bams  of  the  farmer  with  their  tedded  hay  !  God  has 
ordained  that  in  everything  man  should  feed  among  the  lilies  ;  that  the  useful  should 
be  produced  by  or  among  the  beautiful.  The  arms  of  our  orchard  trees  are  clasped 
witn  bracelets  of  emerald  moss,  and  their  trunks  are  adorned  with  brooches  of  golden 
lichens  ;  and  thus  bedecked,  they,  Hebe-like,  offer  to  us,  year  after  year,  the  fruit 
they  have  produced, — the  rich  harvest  of  their  life.  And  these  mosses  and  lichens 
are  to  our  fruit  trees  what  the  poppies  and  marigolds  are  to  our  com, — ^the  lilies 
among  which  we  gather  our  foodt  This  association  of  beauty  with  man's  food  is 
designed  for  a  wise  and  ^acious  purpose.  As  flowers  on  a  (unner-table  cast  the 
shadow  of  their  own  loveliness  upon  all  the  viands  around  them,  and  change  what  is 
the  mere  gratification  of  a  physical  appetite  into  the  fulfilment  of  a  heaven-bom 
longing,  so  the  lilies  among  which  we  feed  redeem  that  feeding  from  its  grossness 
and  lidk  the  man  that  feeds  upon  bread  with  the  angels  that  feed  upon  every  word 
of  God.  They  show  that  eating  is  not  an  end,  but  a  means  to  a  higher,  nobler  end, 
and  connect  the  means  by  which  our  lower  nature  is  siipported  with  the  means  by 
which  our  higher,  spiritual  nature  is  trained  and  educated.  And  what  a  purifying 
and  refining  influence  have  these  lilies  upon  ns !  Their  purity  shames  our  impurity, 
their  grace  our  ungraciousness,  their  meekness  our  pride,  their  lavish  fragrance  our 
thanklessness.  How  greatly,  too,  is  our  feeling  of  confidence  in  God  increased  as  we 
feed  among  the  lilies  !  If  He  has  provided  mese  superfluous  things  for  us,  it  is  a 
pledge  and  a  guarantee  that  He  will  provide  the  things  that  are  necessary.  As  the 
blossom  on  the  individual  plant  is  a  prophecy  that  fruit  will  be  produced,  so  the 
appearance  of  the  lilies  among  the  com  is  an  assurance  that  bread  will  be  given  to 
US,  and  we  shall  not  want  any  good  thing.  If  God  so  clothe  the  grass  of  the  field, 
which  to-day  shines  in  the  glow  of  the  sun,  and  to-morrow  shrivels  in  the  flame  of 
the  oven,  how  much  more  will  He  clothe  the  creatures  whom  He  has  made  in  His 
own  image  !  But  more  than  all,  the  Ulies  among  which  we  feed  speak  to  us  of  our 
immortality.  The  com  is  the  meat  that  perisheth  ;  but  the  beauty  of  the  lilies  and 
the  lessons  of  Divine  wisdom  which  they  teach  is  the  meat  that  endureth  unto  ever- 
lasting life.  By  the  food  of  garden  and  field  our  decaying  bodies  are  sustained  ;  by 
the  lilies  our  never-dving  souls  are  nourished.  While  feeding  among  the  lilies  there 
is  thus  provision  made  for  our  twofold  nature  :  we  have  in  every  feast  a  reminder  that 
man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  cometh  out  of  the  mouth 
of  God,  and  that  is  expressed  on  earth  in  eveiy  bright  hue  and  beautiful  form  around 
ns.  Rightly  viewed  the  com  exists  for  the  sake  of  the  lilies.  They  stand  among  the 
com  like  the  priests  of  old  among  the  people,  clothed  in  priestly  garments  of  glory 
and  beauty.  They  are  the  ministers  of  God  serving  at  His  altar,  appealing  to  the 
higher  faculties  of  man,  and  bearing  their  witness  to  the  Divine  love  that  formed 
them ;  and  thus,  though  they  themselves  die  in  succession,  like  the  sons  of  Aaron, 
their  priesthood  abideth  for  ever.  The  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  thereof 
fadeth  ;  but  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  that  speaksan  and  through  them,  endureth  for 
ever.  The  lilies  fade  and  pass  away  ;  but  the  troth  which  they  teach  and  the 
character  which  they  help  to  form  are  enduring  as  the  soul  itself,  and  shall  be  wrought 
into  its  very  torture,  and  bloom  in  its  beauty  in  the  paradise  above.  {H, 
Macmillan,  D.D.) 

Yer.  4.  Thou  art  beantifol,  0  my  love,  as  Tirzah,  comely  as  Jemsalem,  terrible 
as  an  army  with  banners. — The  Church  as  she  should  be: — Though  the  words  before 
ns  are  allegorical,  and  the  whole  Song  is  crowded  with  metaphor  and  parable,  yet 
the  teaching  is  plain  enough  in  this  instance  ;  it  is  evident  that  the  Divine  Bride- 
groom gives  His  bride  a  high  place  in  His  heart,  and  to  Him,  whatever  she  may  be 
to  others,  she  is  fair,  lovely,  comely,  beautiful,  and  in  the  eyes  of  His  love  without 
a  spot.  Moreover,  even  to  Him  there  is  not  only  a  beauty  of  a  soft  and  gentle  kind 
in  her,  but  a  majesty,  a  dignity  in  her  holiness,  in  her  earnestness,  in  her  consecration, 
which  makes  even  Him  say  of  her  that  she  is  "  terrible  as  an  army  with  baimers," 
"  awfal  as  a  bannered  army."  She  is  every  inch  a  queen  :  her  aspect  in  the  sight 
of  her  Beloved  is  majestic.    I.  Why  it  is  that  the  Chuboh  of  God  is  said  to  bb 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

AN  ARMY  WITH  BANNERS.  That  she  is  "  an  army  "  is  true  enough,  for  the  Church 
is  one,  but  many  ;  and  consists  of  men  who  march  in  order  under  a  common  leader, 
with  one  design  in  view,  and  that  design  a  conflict  and  a  yiatorj.  But  why  an  army 
"  with  banners  "  1  Is  not  this,  first  of  all,  for  distinction  1  How  shall  we  know  to 
which  king  an  army  belongs  unless  we  can  see  the  royal  standard  ?  The  Ohurch 
unfolds  her  ensign  to  the  breeze  that  all  may  know  whose  she  is  and  whom  she 
seryes.  Unfurl  the  old  primitive  standard,  the  all-victorious  standard  of  the  Cross 
of  Christ.  In  very  deed  and  truth — in  hoc  signo  vinces — the  atonement  is  the 
conquering  truth.  Let  others  believe  as  they  may,  or  deny  as  they  will,  for  you  the 
truui  as  it  is  in  Jesus  is  the  one  thing  that  has  won  your  heart  and  made  you  a 
soldier  of  the  Cross.  Banners  were  carried,  not  merely  for  distinctiveness,  but  also 
to  serve  the  purposes  of  discipline.  Hence  an  army  with  banners  had  one  banner 
as  a  central  standard,  and  then  each  regiment  or  battalion  displayed  its  own 
particular  flag.  An  army  with  banners  majr  be  also  taken  to  represent  activity. 
When  an  army  folds  up  its  colours  the  fight  is  over.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  some 
Churches  have  hung  up  their  flags  to  rot  in  state,  or  have  encased  them  in  dull 
propriety.  It  is  high  time  that  each  Church  should  feel  that  if  it  does  not  work,  the 
sole  reason  for  its  existence  is  gone.  M^  we  aU  in  our  Church  fellowship  be  active 
in  the  energy  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Does  not  the  description,  "  an  army  with 
banners,"  imply  a  degree  of  confidence  ?  Banners  uplifted  are  the  sign  of  a  fearlessness 
which  rather  courts  than  declines  the  conflict.  Ho  !  warriors  of  the  Cross,  unfold 
the  Gospel's  ancient  standard  to  the  breeze  ;  we  will  teach  the  foeman  what  strength 
there  is  in  hands  and  hearts  that  rally  to  the  Church  of  God.  Once  more,  an  amy 
with  banners  may  signify  the  constancy  and  perseverance  in  holding  the  truth.  If 
we  give  up  the  things  which  are  verily  believed  among  us  we  shaU  lose  our  power, 
and  the  enemy  alone  will  be  pleased :  but  if  we  maintain  them,  the  maintenance  of 
the  old  faith,  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  shall  make  us  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the 
power  of  His  might.  II.  The  Church  is  said  to  be  tebeible.  To  whom  is  she 
terrible  ?  I  answer,  first,  in  a  certain  sense  she  is  terrible  to  all  ungodly  men.  Even 
in  the  most  ribald  company,  when  a  Christian  of  known  consistency  of  chsiracter  has 
wisely  spoken  the  word  of  reproof,  a  solemn  abashment  comes  over  the  majority  of 
those  present ;  their  consciences  have  borne  witness  against  them,  and  they  have 
felt  how  awful  goodness  is.  Not  that  we  are  ever  to  try  and  impress  others  with 
any  dread  of  us  ;  such  an  attempt  would  be  ridiculed,  and  end  in  deserved  failure ; 
but  the  influence  which  we  woiild  describe  flows  naturally  out  of  a  godly  life.  If 
there  be  real  goodness  in  us — if  we  really,  fervently,  zealously  love  the  right,  and 
hate  the  evil — the  outflow  of  our  life  almost  without  a  word  will  judge  the  ungodly 
— and  condemn  them  in  their  heart  of  hearts.  Holy  Uving  is  the  weightiest  condem- 
nation of  sin.  There  will  be  always  in  proportion  to  the  real  holiness,  earnestness, 
and  Christ-likeness  of  a  Church  something  terrible  in  it  to  the  perverse  generation  in 
which  it  is  placed  ;  it  will  dread  it  as  it  does  the  aU-reveahng  day  of  judgment. 
So  is  there  something  terrible  in  a  living  Church  to  all  errorists.  They  do  not  dread 
those  platform  speeches  in  which  they  are  so  furiously  denounced  at  public  meetings, 
nor  those  philosophical  discussions  in  which  they  are  overthrown  by  argument :  but 
they  hate,  but  they  fear,  and  therefore  abuse  and  pretend  to  despise,  the  prayerful, 
zealous,  plain,  simple  preaching  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Even  to  Satan  himself 
the  Church  of  God  is  terrible.  He  might,  he  thinks,  deal  with  individuals,  but 
when  these  individuals  strengthen  each  other  by  mutual  converse  and  prayer,  when 
they  are  bound  to  each  other  in  holy  love,  and  make  a  temple  in  which  Christ  dwells, 
then  is  Satan  hard  put  to  it.  It  is  not  every  Church  that  is  terrible  thus,  but  it  is  a 
Ohurch  of  God  in  which  there  is  the  life  of  God,  and  the  love  of  God ;  a  Church  in  which 
tiiere  is  the  uplifted  banner,  the  banner  of  the  Cross,  high-held  amid  those  various 
bannerets  of  truthful  doctrine  and  spiritual  grace,  of  which  I  have  just  now  spoken. 
III.  Why  is  the  Chtjboh  of  Christ  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners? 
First,  because  it  consists  of  elect  people.  The  elect  shall  overcome  through  the  blood  of 
the  Lamb,  and  none  shall  say  them  nay.  Ye  are  a  royal  priesthood,  a  peculiar  people, 
a  chosen  generation  ;  and  in  you  the  living  God  will  gloriously  declare  His  sovereign 
grace.  The  Church,  again,  consists  of  a  praying  people.  Now  prayer  is  that  which 
Hnks  weakness  with  infinite  strength.  We  cry  unto  the  Lord,  and  He  heareth  us  ; 
He  breaketh  through  the  ranks  of  the  foe ;  He  giveth  us  triumph  in  the  day  of  battle : 
therefore,  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners  are  those  who  wield  the  weapon  of  aU* 
prayer.  Again,  a  true  Church  is  based  upon  eternal  truth.  Men  who  love  the  truth 
are  building  gold  and  silver,  and  precious  stones  ;  and  though  their  architecture  may 
progress  but  slowly,  it  is  built  for  eternity.  Eamparts  of  truth  may  often  be  assaile(i. 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  SONO  OF  SOLOMON.  131 


but  they  will  never  be  carried  by  the  foe.  We  are  now  to  observe,  that  the  chief  glory 
and  majesty  of  the  Church  lies  mainly  in  the  banner  which  she  carries.  What  cause 
for  ten-or  is  there  in  the  banner  ?  We  reply,  the  enemies  of  Christ  dread  the  Cross, 
because  they  know  what  the  Cross  has  done.  Wherever  the  crucified  Jesus  has  been 
preached,  false  systems  have  tottered  to  their  fall.  Dagon  has  always  fallen  before 
the  ark  of  the  Lord.  Rage  the  most  violent  is  excited  by  the  doctrine  of  the  atone- 
ment, a  rage  in  which  the  first  cause  for  wrath  is  fear.  The  terribleness  of  the  Church 
lies  in  her  banners,  because  those  banners  put  strength  into  her.  Drawing  near  to 
the  standard  of  the  Cross  the  weakest  soldier  becomes  strong :  he  who  might  have 
played  the  coward  becomes  a  hero  when  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  is  felt  with  power 
in  his  soul.  Martyrs  are  born  and  nurturea  at  the  Cross.  Moreover,  the  powers  of 
evil  tremble  at  the  old  standard,  because  they  have  a  presentiment  of  its  future 
complete  triumph.  Jesus  must  reign  ;  the  crucified  One  must  conmier.  Will  each 
one  here  say  to  himself:  "An  army,  a  company  of  warriors,  am  1  one  of  them  ? 
Am  I  a  soldier  ?  I  have  entered  the  Chiirch  ;  I  make  a  profession  ;  but  am  I  really 
a  soldier  ?  Do  I  fight  ?  Do  I  endure  hardness  ?  Am  I  a  mere  carpet-knight,  a  mere 
lie-a-bed  soldier,  one  of  those  who  are  pleased  to  put  on  regimentals  in  order  to  adorn 
myself  with  a  profession  without  ever  going  to  the  war ? "  And  then  ' 'terrible. " 
Am  I  in  any  way  terrible  through  being  a  Christian  ?  Is  there  any  power  in  my  life 
that  would  condemn  a  sinner  ?  Any  holiness  about  me  that  would  make  a  wicked 
man  feel  ill  at  ease  in  my  company  ?  If  I  am  not  a  soldier,  if  I  am  not  a  servant  of 
Christ  in  very  truth,  ana  yet  I  come  to  the  place  of  worship  where  Christians  meet, 
and  where  Christ  is  preached,  the  day  will  be  when  the  church  of  God  will  be  very 
terrible  to  me.    (fl.  JET.  Sjmrgeon.) 

Ver.  5.  Turn  away  thine  eyet  from  Me,  for  they  have  overcome  Me. — Overcoming 
Christ : — This  is  the  language  of  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  to  His  spouse.  In  great 
condescension  He  speaks  to  her,  and  bids  her  take  note  that  her  eyes  have  overcome 
Him.  Now,  it  must  not  be  supposed,  because  of  the  language  of  the  text,  that 
there  is  any  opposition  between  Christ  and  His  people  which  has  to  be  overcome. 
He  loves  His  bride  far  too  well  to  allow  any  division  of  feeling  to  separate  them  in 
heart  firom  one  another.  Nor  is  it  to  be  imagined  that  the  spouse  had  to  gain  some 
blessing  from  an  imwilling  hand,  and  therefore  pleaded  with  her  eyes  as  well  as  with 
her  lips.  Oh,  no !  There  is  a  holy  discipline  in  Christ's  house  that  sometimes 
withholds  the  coveted  blessing  till  we  have  learned  to  pray  in  downright  earnest ; 
but  the  power  that  wins  the  victory  in  prayer  has  its  real  basis  in  the  love  of  Christ 
Hunselfl  I.  First,  notice  that  looking  on  His  Chuech  has  already  ovERCOJtB 
THE  HEART  OF  OUR  HEAVENLY  BRIDEGROOM.  It  was  SO  in  the  far-distaut  past,  not 
when  she  looked  at  Him,  but  when  He  looked  at  her,  that  she  overcame  Him.  You 
know,  too,  when  He  lived  down  here  among  men,  how  often  His  inmost  heart  was 
stirred  as  He  looked  upon  the  people  whom  He  loved.  And,  now  that  our  Lord  is  risen 
from  the  dead.  He  still  feels  the  power  of  the  sight  of  His  redeemed.  He  looks  down  to 
the  saints  on  earth,  and  sees  the  myriads  who  are  all  trusting  in  Him,  all  conquering 
sin  by  His  might,  and  all  spared  from  going  down  to  the  pit  by  the  merit  of  His 
precious  blood;  and  He  seems  again  to  say,  "Turn  away  thine  eyes  from  Me,  for 
they  have  overcome  Me  "  ;  as  if  Christ  felt  that  a  glance  at  His  people  brought 
almost  too  much  joy  for  Him.  What  a  day  will  that  be  when  He  shall  descend  from 
heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God  ; 
when  all  His  people,  raised  from  the  dead,  or  changed  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye, 
shall  admire  Him,  and  He  shall  be  admired  in  them !  I  can  well  conceive  of  Him 
saying  in  that  day,  "Turn  away  thine  eyes  from  Me,  for  they  have  overcome  Me." 
The  joy  that  Christ  will  feel  in  His  own  sight  of  His  people,  and  in  the  glances  of 
the  multitudes  that  He  has  saved,  must  be  a  delight  beyond  anything  we  can  even 
imagine.  II.  The  eyes  of  Christ's  chosen  ones  still  overcome  Him.  And, 
first,  the  eyes  of  His  chosen  overcome  Him,  when  they  look  up  in  deep  repentance, 
glancing  at  Him  hopefully  through  their  tears.  There  is  a  wondrous  power  in  the 
penit<'nt  eye,  in  the  full  confession  that  makes  a  clean  breast  of  every  sin  before  the 
face  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Remember  that  when  we  have  once  repented,  we  do 
not  leave  off  repenting,  for  penitence  is  a  grace  that  is  as  long-lived  as  faith  ;  and  as 
long  as  we  are  capable  of  believing,  we  shall  also  necessarily  need  to  repent,  for  we 
shall  be  always  sinning.  So,  whenever  the  child  of  God  feels  that  he  has  gone  astray 
in  any  way,  that,  though  he  did  live  near  to  God,  he  has  gone  back,  and  grown  cold 
in  heart,  he  has  only  to  come  to  Christ  again,  and  cry  after  Him,  and  confess  his 
foUj  in  having  left  Him,  and  his  ingratitude  in  having  been  so  indifferent  to  Him, 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

and  Christ  will  receive  him  back  again.  Another  kind  of  glance  that  haa  great 
power  with  the  Lord  Jesus  is  when  the  soul  looks  to  Christ  for  salvation.  Then  it  ia 
that  the  eyes  vanquish  the  Saviour.  Many  times  since  then,  you  and  I  have  looked 
to  Jesus  Christ  when  a  sense  of  sin  has  been  very  heavy  upon  us.  While  the  eyes 
of  faith  are  thus  resting  upon  Jesus,  He  is  overcome  by  them,  and  He  darts  in- 
expressible joy  into  our  hearts  as  He  says  to  us,  "  Turn  away  thine  eyes  from  Me, 
for  they  have  overcome  Me. "  His  heart  is  carried  by  storm  by  the  faith-looks  of  HJa 
children.  "We  also  give  another  overcoming  glance  when  we  look  to  the  Lord  Jesoa 
Christ  for  all  things.  When  thine  eyes  are  full  of  submission,  full  of  hope,  fall  of  trust, 
it  cannot  be  long  before  the  Lord  will,  somehow  or  other,  deliver  thee,  for  He  will  say, 
"  I  cannot  hold  out  against  thee  any  longer.  'Turn  away  thine  eyes  from  Me,  for 
they  have  overcome  Me. '  '  I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt  glorify  Me. '  "  Again, 
there  are  the  eyes  of  prayer  which  often  overcome  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  this 
victoiy  comes,  sometimes,  when  we  are  praying  for  ourselves.  You  cannot  look 
steadily  to  God  and  say,  "Lord,  I  am  sure  about  Thy  faithfulness,  I  am  sure  about 
Thy  promise,  and  I  cannot  and  will  not  doubt  it, "  but  before  long  you  shall  see  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  made  bare  for  your  deliverance,  and  you  also  shall  be  among  the 
happy  number  who  have  to  bear  witness  that,  verily,  there  is  a  God  in  Israel.  Thua 
does  prayer  prevail  with  God  when  we  present  it  for  ourselves.  So  does  it  also 
overcome  TTim  when  we  pray  on  behalf  of  others.  Once  again,  there  ia  another  time 
when  the  eyes  of  the  believer  seem  to  overcome  the  heart  of  Christ,  and  that  is, 
when  we  have  turned  right  away  from  the  world,  and  looked  to  Him  alone.  I  have 
known  it  so  again  and  again  ;  have  not  you  ?  At  such  seasons  my  soul  has  felt 
ready  to  swoon  away  in  His  presence.  You  remember  how  John  in  Patmos,  when 
Jesus  appeared  to  him,  said,  ' '  When  I  saw  Him,  I  fell  at  His  feet  as  dead ; "  and 
well  he  might,  for  he  had  a  brighter  vision  of  his  Lord  than  you  and  I  can  have  at 

E resent.  But  even  faith's  view  of  Him  is  enough  to  transport  us  straight  away  into 
eaven  itself.  Well,  whenever  we  are  thus  happily  engaged  in  contemplation  of 
our  Lord,  not  only  is  He  very  near  to  us,  but  He  is  greatly  moved  by  our  love,  and 
He  says  to  us,  "Turn  away  thine  eyes  from  Me,  for  they  have  overcome  Me."  And, 
meanwhile,  to  prove  how  overcome  He  is.  He  begins  to  reveal  Himself  more  fully  to 
us.  Last  of  all,  sometimes  the  eyes  of  Christians  have  great  power  in  overcoming 
Christ  when  they  long  for  His  appearing.  Have  you  never  seen  the  saints  lie  dying 
with  such  language  as  this  on  their  lips,  * '  Why  are  His  chariots  so  long  in  coming  ? 
Why  tarrieth  He?"  I  have  heard  them  say,  with  evident  regret,  "I  thought  to 
have  been  in  heaven  long  ere  now.  Why  not  let  me  go  ? "  And  they  have  been 
like  a  poor  thrush  which  I  have  sometimes  seen  a  boy  try  to  keep  upon  a  little  bit  of 
turf ;  it  longed  for  the  broad  fields,  and  beat  itself  against  the  wires  of  its  cage.  So 
is  it  with  our  dear  suffering  friends,  at  times  ;  yet  they  have  learned  patiently  to 
wait  till  their  change  came  ;  but  often,  their  eyes  have  been  so  fixed  upon  their  Lord 
that  they  have  said  to  Him,  "  Wilt  Thou  never  come?"  And,  at  last,  Christ  has 
looked  out  of  heaven  so  sweetly  on  those  sick  ones,  and  He  has  said,  * '  Your  eyes 
have  overcome  Me,  come  up  higher  ; "  and  they  have  leaped  out  of  their  body  into 
His  bosom,  and  the  pierced  hands  have  received  their  blood-washed  spirits,  and  they 
have  been  "  for  ever  with  the  Lord."    (C7.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yet.  8.  There  are  threescore  queens. —  Woman's  rights: — So  Solomon,  by  one 
stroke,  sets  forth  the  imperial  character  of  a  true  Christian  woman.  She  is  not 
a  slave,  not  a  hireling,  not  a  subordinate  ;  but  a  queen  :  and  in  my  text  Solomon 
sees  sixty  of  these  helping  to  make  up  the  royal  pageant  of  Jesus.     I.  Woman  has 

THE   SPECIAL  AND  SUPERLATIVE  RIGHT  OF   BLESSING  AND    COMFORTING   THE   SICK. 

The  Lord  God  who  sent  Miss  Dix  into  the  Virginia  hospitals,  and  Florence  Nightin- 
gale into  the  Crimea,  and  the  Maid  of  Saragossa  to  appease  the  wounds  of  the  battle- 
field, has  equipped  wife,  mother,  and  daughter,  for  this  delicate  but  tremendous  mission. 
IL  Woman  has  a  superlative  eight  to  take  care  of  the  poor.  III.  It  is 
woman's  specific  right  to  comfort  under  the  stress  of  dire  disaster.  IV. 
It  is  woman's  right  to  bring  to  us  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  v.  One  of  the 
specific  rights  of  women  is,  through  the  grace  of  Christ,  finally  to  reach 
HEAVEN.  0,  what  a  multitude  of  women  in  heaven  !  Mary,  Christ's  mother,  in 
heaven  ;  Elizabeth  Fry  in  heaven  ;  Charlotte  Elizabeth  in  heaven ;  the  mother  of 
Augustine  in  heaven  ;  the  Countess  of  Huntingdon — who  sold  her  splendid  jewels 
to  build  chapels — in  heaven  ;  whUe  a  great  many  others  who  have  never  been  heard 
of  on  earth,  or  known  but  little,  have  gone  into  the  rest  and  peace  of  heaven.  What 
a  rest  1    (T.  2>e  JFitt  TcUmage.) 


CHAP.  Ti.]  TSE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  183 

Ver.  9.  My  doTe,  My  nndefiled  is  but  one. — The  Chwrch — a  dove: — I.  Comparino 
THE  Ohttrch  to  A  DOVE.  1.  The  dove  is  a  beautiful  bird,  especially  in  Eastern 
conntries,  -where  their  plumage  is  so  dazzling,  and  in  tlus  particular  typifies  the 
Church  (Ezek.  xvi.  14).  2.  The  believer's  righteous  beauty  is  from  Chriat  alone 
(Ps.  xc.  17).  8.  The  dove  is  remarkable  for  her  cleanliness  ;  so  the  Church  is  both 
clean  and  cleanly  (Heb.  x.  22).  4.  Doves  will  feed  only  on  pure  grain  ;  so  true 
believers  can  only  live  on  Christ  (Ps.  cxix.  140  ;  Tit.  i.  15  ;  John  vi.  35).  5.  The  dove 
delights  to  be  fed  by  her  own  mate  ;  so  does  the  Church  by  Christ  (Song  i.  7).  6. 
The  dove  is  remarkable  for  its  love  to  its  mate ;  so  is  the  Church  to  Christ  (Ps.  Ixxiii. 
23-28).  7.  The  dove  is  remarkable  for  its  deep  grief  when  separated  from  its  mate 
(Ezek.  vii  16).  8.  Doves  are  sociable  creatures,  and  delight  in  each  other's  com- 
pany (1  John  iv.  7).  9.  Doves  are  fearful  and  timid  birds  (Matt.  viii.  96).  10. 
Doves  are  swift  on  the  wing ;  so  David  wished  for  the  wings  of  a  dove  (Ps.  Iv.  6). 
II.  The  oneness  of  the  CJhukch.  1.  The  Church  is  but  one  in  respect  of  the 
world  (John  xv.  19).  2.  One  in  respect  of  unity  and  communion  with  herself  (Eph. 
iv.  13  ;  CoL  ii.  2).  3.  She  has  but  one  faith  (Eph.  iv.  4, 5).  4.  One  in  her  conduct 
and  practice  (Heb.  xii.  14).  5.  One  in  the  spirit  and  object  of  love  (1  Cor.  vi.  17). 
C.  Ajid  one  in  Christ  their  living  Head,  by  whom  they  are  saved  (1  Cor.  xiL  12). 
7.  And  because  Christ  has  no  other  spouse  than  the  Church  (Lev.  xx.  24).  III. 
"Why  she  is  called  His.  She  belongs  unto  Him  by  right  of  creation,  donation, 
redemption,  predestination,  regeneration,  or  baptism,  sanctification,  and  salvation. 
And  as  such — 1.  She  will  never  be  lost  while  residing  in  the  wilderness,  for  the 
Spirit  is  her  guide.  2.  No  creatures  of  prey  shall  ever  rob  her  of  life,  because  Christ 
is  her  Protector.  3.  Nothing  shaU  keep  her  ftoxa.  glory,  for  Christ  is  in  heaven  to 
secnre  her  entrance  there.     (2*.  B.  Baker.) 

Yer.  10.  Who  ia  she  that  looketh  forth  ai  the  morning,  fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as 
fhe  inn,  and  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners  ! — The  davm  of  abetter  day,  celdrrated 
in  sacred  song: — There  is  a  beautiful  upward  gradation  indicated,  a  progression 
towards  a  glorious  climax  ;  there  is  the  dawn  of  a  better  day  seen  by  the  wise  man's 
prophetic  eye,  and  we  will  prayerfully  consider  the  prophetic  inquiry  as  foreshadowing 
the  mission  of  Christ,  and  the  nature  of  His  glorious  kingdom.  "  Who  is  she  that 
looketh,"  etc.  Apply  these  words :  I.  To  the  history  of  Christ.  Christ  looked 
"  forth  as  the  morning  "  in  the  first  promise  made  to  our  first  parents  in  Eden.  The 
Mosaic  dispensation  may  be  considered  as  daybreak,  flim  and  hazy,  the  prophetic  age 
may  be  regarded  as  "  fair  as  the  moon,"  it  was  brighter  than  the  former,  and  it  shone, 
as  the  moon  shines  with  light  borrowed  from  the  unseen  Sun.  When  the  fulness  of 
time  came,  and  Jesus  was  bom  in  Bethlehem  of  Judea,  then  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness 
arose  with  healing  in  His  wings,  and  throughout  the  whole  of  our  Lord's  public 
ministry  He  marched  forth  "clear  as  the  sun."  Christ  went  forth  "terrible  as  an 
army  with  banners. "  He  vanquished  Satan  in  the  Temptation  of  the  wilderness.  He 
was  a  terror  to  evil-doers,  and  planted  His  standard  in  the  centre  of  the  kingdom  of 
darkness.  Especially  was  He  ' '  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners  "  when  He  entered 
upon  His  Passion.  And  He  shall  be  "terrible  as  an  army  with  banners"  when  He 
shaU  come  in  His  glory,  and  all  His  holy  angels  with  £[im,  to  gather  all  nations 
together,  and  separate  the  righteous  from  the  wicked.  II.  To  the  history  of  the 
Church.  The  Jewish  Church  was  only  the  dawn  of  Gospel  times,  it  looked  "  forth 
as  the  morning" — it  was  "fair  as  the  moon,"  but  not  clear  as  the  sun.  The  day 
broke  when  the  day  of  Pentecost  came,  and  the  Spirit  rested  upon  the  Apostles' 
heads  as  tongues  of  flame.  In  that  sunlight  the  Evangelists  wrote  their  Gospels,  and 
the  Apostles  their  Epistles  ;  and  in  the  warmth  and  blessed  life-giving  influence  of 
the  rays  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  the  early  preachers  of  the  Cross  went  forth 
pieacmng  Jesus  and  the  Resurrection  ;  they  went  forth  "  terrible  as  an  army  with 
banners,"  and  the  world  was  won  by  them,  for  by  the  end  of  the  third  century  the 
Gospel  had  been  preached,  and  converts  had  been  won  in  every  part  of  the  then 
known  world.  The  Church  is  still  going  on  from  victory  unto  victory.  III.  To  the 
HISTORY  OF  EVERY  CHRISTIAN  BELIEVER.  The  rise  and  progress  of  the  soul  in 
religion  are  gradual  and  progressive.  Religious  impression  and  conviction  may  be 
regarded  as  the  looking  "forth  as  the  morning."  In  the  dawn  of  religious  life  there 
is  much  cloud,  and  the  shadows  of  the  night  move  but  slowly  away.  We  cannot  teU 
just  when  the  night  ends  and  the  morning  breaks — and  daybreak  differs  in  different 
climes,  so  is  it  in  the  history  of  the  regenerate :  many  rejoicing  in  the  light  of  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness  can  omy  say,  "  One  thing  I  know,  whereas  I  was  in  the  dark, 
2I0W  I  am  in  the  light — the  day  hae  dawned,  and  the  shadows  have  fled  away."  Light 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 


shines  upon  the  sonl  "  fair  as  the  moon,"  and,  at  first,  often  as  cold.     But  soon  the 
light  shines  brighter  and  wanner,  the  soul  is  filled  with  life  and  joy  and  glory,  for, 
"clear  as  the  sun,"  Jesus  sheds  His  love  abroad  there.     {F.  W.  Brown.)     The  glory 
of  the  Church : — God,  who  has  determined  that  everything  shall  be  beautiful  in  its 
season,  has  not  left  the  night  without  a  charm.     The  moon  rules  the  night.     The 
stars  are  only  set  as  gems  in  her  tiara.    Now,  says  my  text,  "  Who  is  she,  fair  as  the 
moon  ? "    Our  answer  is,  the  Church.     Like  the  moon,  she  is  a  borrowed  light.    She 
gathers  up  the  glory  of  a  Saviour's  sufferings,  a  Saviour's  death,  a  Saviour's  resurrec- 
tion, a  Saviour's  ascension,  and  pours  that  light  on  palace  and  dungeon,  on  squalid 
heathenism  and  elaborate  scepticism,  on  widow's  tears  and  martyr's  robe  of  flame,  on 
weeping  penitence  and  loud-mouthed  scorn.     She  is  the  only  institution  to-day  that 
gives  any  light  to  our  world.     After  a  season  of  storm  or  fog  how  you  are  thrilled 
when  the  sun  comes  out  at  noonday  !    The  same  sun  which  in  the  morning  kindled 
conflagrations  among  the  castles  of  cloud,  stoops  down  to  paint  the  lily  white  and 
the  buttercup  yellow  and  the  forget-me-not  blue.     What  can  resist  the  sun  ?     Light 
for  voyager  on  the  deep.     Light  for  shepherds  guarding  the  flocks  afield.     Light  for 
the  poor  who  have  no  fights  to  bum.    Light  for  the  downcast  and  the  weary.    Now, 
says  my  text,  "  Who  is  she  that  looketh  forth,  clear  as  the  sun  ? "    Our  answer  ia, 
the  Church.    You  have  been  going  along  a  road  before  daybreak,  and  on  one  side  you 
thought  you  saw  a  Uon,  on  the  other  side  you  thought  you  saw  a  goblin  of  the  dark- 
ness ;  but  when  the  sun  came  out  you  found  these  were  harmless  apparitions.     And 
it  is  the  great  mission  of  the  Churcn  of  Jesus  Christ  to  come  forth  "  clear  as  the  sun," 
to  illuminate  all  earthly  darkness,  to  explain  as  far  as  possible  all  mystery,  and  to 
make  the  world  radiant  in  its  brightness.    0  Sun  of  the  Church,  shine  on  until  there 
is  no  sorrow  to  soothe,  no  tears  to  wipe  away,  no  shackles  to  break,  no  more  souls  to 
be  redeemed !    I  take  one  more  step  in  this  subject  and  say  that  if  you  were  placed 
for  the  defence  of  a  feeble  town,  and  a  great  army  were  seen  coming  over  the  hilla 
with  flying  ensigns,  then  you  would  be  able  to  get  some  idea  of  the  terror  that  will 
staike  the  hearts  of  the  enemies  of  God  when  the  Church  at  last  marches  on  like  ' '  an 
army  with  banners."    You  know  there  is  nothing  that  excites  a  soldier's  enthusiasm 
80  much  as  an  old  flag.    Many  a  man  almost  dead,  catching  a  glimpse  of  the  national 
ensign,  has  sprung  to  his  feet  and  started  again  into  the  battle.     Now  I  don't  want 
you  to  think  of  the  Church  of  Christ  as  a  defeated  institution — as  the  victim  of  infidel 
sarcasm,  something  to  be  kicked  and  trampled  on  through  all  the  ages  of  the  world. 
It  is  "an  army  with  banners."    It  has  an  inscription  and  colours  such  as  never 
stirred  the  hearts  of  any  earthly  soldiery.     We  have  our  banner  of  recruit,  and  on 
it  is  inscribed,  "  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  ? "  our  banner  of  defiance,  and  on  it  is 
inscribed,  "  The  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it ";  our  banner  of  triumph, 
and  on  it  is  inscribed,  "Victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  1 "  and  we  mean  to 
plant  that  banner  on  every  hUl-top  and  wave  it  at  the  gate  of  heaven.     Oh,  what  a 
shout  of  triumph  when  all  the  armies  of  earth  and  all  the  armies  of  heaven  shall 
celebrate  the  victory  of  our  King,  aU  at  once  and  all  together :  "  Hallelujah,  for  the 
Lord  God  Omnipotent  reigneth  1    Hallelujah,  for  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  hav« 
become  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Chiist  I "    (2*.  D»  Witt  Talmage.) 

Yet.  11.  I  went  down  into  the  garden  of  nuts  to  see  the  fruits  of  the  valley.^ 
The  Church,  the  garden  of  the  Lord : — I.  The  Ohtiech  IS  A  GAKDEN.  There  are  four 
gardens  which  may  famish  us  with  ample  materials  for  meditation.  1.  The  garden 
of  Eden,  where  man  was  formed,  and  where  man  fell.  2.  The  garden  of  Gethsemane, 
where  the  Saviour  often  resorted  with  His  disciples.  3.  The  garden  of  Calvary, 
belonging  to  Joseph  of  Arimathea.  4.  The  Church.  Now  the  three  former  gardens 
were  real  gardens  ;  the  latter  is  a  garden  metaphorically  considered  only  ;  a  spiritual 
garden,  a  garden  for  the  soul,  and  for  eternity.  A  garden  requires  much  careful 
attention.  A  rarden  is  a  place  of  pleasure  and  delight.  In  a  word,  it  is  also  a  place 
of  profit  too.  It  yields  not  only  flowers,  but  fruits.  The  Church  is  always  "  fiUed 
with  all  the  fruits  of  righteousness,  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ,  unto  the  glory  and 
praise  of  God."  Some  gardens  yield  the  owner  ms  chief  income.  God  derives  His 
principal  revenue  of  honour  from  His  Church.  II.  In  this  garden  there  is  a 
VARIETY  OF  TREES.  There  are  three  kinds  of  trees  spoken  of  here.  Now  I  am  not 
going  to  make  a  comparison  between  Christians,  comparing  some  of  them  to  nut 
trees,  and  some  to  vines,  and  some  to  pomegranates.  But  as  you  find  all  these, 
however  they  differ,  in  the  same  garden,  so  it  is  with  the  subjects  of  Divine  grace. 
They  are  aA,  however  they  differ  from  each  other,  "trees  of  righteousness,  the 
planting  of  tiie  Lord,  that  He  may  be  glorified."    And  however  distinguished  from 


CHAP.  Ti.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON".  135 

each  other,  they  stand  in  the  very  same  state,  and  are  in  the  same  relation  to  Hun 
and  to  each  other.  What  do  we  learn  from  hence  ?  Why,  that  you  should  never 
oppose  Christians  to  each  other,  crying  up  one,  and  crying  down  another,  because 
they  are  not  the  same,  but  valuing  them  all,  loving  tliem  all,  praying  for  them  all — 
' '  Grace  be  with  ail  them  that  love  our  Lord  Jesiis  Christ  in  sincerity. "  What  do  we 
learn  from  hence  1  Why,  that  you  should  not  look  for  everything  from  the  same 
individual.  Do  not  go  to  the  nut-bush  for  the  grapes,  and  do  not  go  to  the  vine  for 
the  pomegranate.  You  cannot  expect  all  these  fruits  upon  the  same  tree.  III.  He 
ENTERS  THIS  GARDEN  FOR  THE  PURPOSE  OF  INSPECTING  IT.  He  enters  His  garden 
indeed  for  other  purposes,  too.  He  enters  it  to  walk  there  ;  He  enters  it  to  enjoy 
His  pleasant  fruits  there,  and  He  loves  to  hold  intercourse  and  communion  with  His 
saints.  But  here  He  speaks  of  entering  it,  you  see,  for  another  purpose  ;  for  as  the 
garden  is  His  own,  it  is  so  valuable  that  He  will  not  treat  it  with  neglect  or  over- 
look it.  No  ;  "  I  went  down,"  says  He,  "to  see  the  fruits  of  the  valley"  :  for  the 
garden  is  low,  and  the  Church  is  lowly:  "I  went  down  to  see  the  fruits  of  the 
vaUey. "  He  is  continually  inspecting  His  Church  ;  and  how  qualified  is  He  for  this  ! 
"  His  eyes  are  as  a  flame  of  fire  :  "  distance  is  nothing  to  Him  ;  darkness  is  nothing 
to  Him.  And  what  is  His  aim  when  He  comes  to  examine  ?  Not  to  ascertain  whether 
you  are  learned,  but  whether  you  are  * '  wise  unto  salvation  "  ;  not  whether  yon  are 
rich,  but  whether  you  are  ' '  rich  towards  God  "  ;  not  whether  your  bodies  are  in  nealth, 
but  whether  "your  souls  prosper  "  ;  and  so  of  the  rest.  IV.  When  He  comes  to 
BXAMiNB  His  garden,  He  looks  after  even  the  first  beginnings  of  grace. 
"  I  went  down  to  see  whether  the  vines  flourished,  and  the  pomegranates  budded." 
Observe,  not  only  to  look  after  the  flourishing  of  the  vine,  but  the  budding  of  the 
pomegrfinates.  Oh  !  that  is  a  fine  bud  when  a  man  no  longer  restrains  prayer  before 
God,  but  cries,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  I "  When  his  tear  drops  upon  his 
Bible,  and  he  says,  "Lord,  save,  or  I  perish."  One  of  the  earliest  buddings  of 
religion,  I  am  persuaded,  is  love  to  the  Lord's  people,  and  tenderness  towards  them, 
and  delight  in  them.  But  why  does  the  Saviour  look  after  the  very  buddings  of  grace, 
and  value  these  ?  We  answer,  because  they  are  His  own  producing,  the  work  of  His 
own  Spirit  in  the  heart.  And  because  they  are  necessary :  for  though  there  may  be 
buds  without  fruit,  there  can  be  no  fruit  without  buds ;  though  there  may  be  a 
beginning  without  advancing  or  finishing,  there  can  be  no  advancing  or  finishing 
'without  a  beginning.  These  things,  therefore,  are  essentially  necessary.  Ana 
because  also  they  are  sure  pledges  of  something  more.  He  sees  in  them  the  peace  of 
God — sees  in  them  pardon — sees  in  them  the  comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Oh  !  there 
is  heaven  in  that  bud  !  Oh  !  there  is  an  immensity,  an  eternity  of  glory  and  blessed- 
ness in  that  bud  !  It  will  biing  forth  fruit  unto  life  eternal.  (  W.  Jay. )  Fruits  of 
the  valley : — What  do  we  mean  by  the  valley  ?  There  are  two  things  to  which  I  think 
the  figure  is  fairly  applicable,  viz.  outward  estate  and  inward  condition,  both  yielding 
fruit.  1.  The  former  is  often  experienced,  and  is  requisite  for  us  all.  (1)  I  speak  to 
some  who  are  young.  You,  in  reference  to  age,  are  in  the  valley,  not  yet  ascended 
to  the  higher  levels  of  matiire  life,  of  paternity  and  seniority.  There  are  fruits  to  bo 
borne  in  this  valley,  "fruits  in  their  season,"  and  in  this  condition — obedience, 
diligence,  docility,  consecration  to  Christ.  (2)  I  speak  to  some  who  are  poor  ;  you 
«re  in  the  valley  in  reference  to  social  position.  There  are  frniits  in  this  condition  ; 
and  beautiful  it  is  to  see  how  by  many  patience,  submission,  contentment,  thankful- 
ness, practical  generosity,  are  borne  here.  (3)  I  speak  to  some  who  are  in  affliction. 
This  is  a  valley  through  which  all  pass,  young,  old,  rich  and  poor  alike.  Need  I  say 
it  has  fruit  ?  "Tribulation  worketh  patience,  patience  experience,  experience  hope." 
(4)  There  is  yet  a  valley  before  us  all,  and  through  which  all  must  pass — "  the  valley 
of  the  shadow  of  death."  There  will  be  fruit  to  be  borne  there.  Grace  will  not  cease 
its  exercise  with  the  activities  of  life.  2.  But  I  would  more  especially  urge  the  thought 
that  there  is  a  valley  in  inward  experience,  and  that  this  is  especially  fruitful. 
Humility.  I  need  not  attempt  to  define  this  grace,  nor  yet  to  extol  it.  Both  will 
best  be  done,  perhaps,  in  exhibiting  some  of  its  friiita.  (1)  There  are  many  that 
relate  to  God.  True  humility  is  a  grace  of  God's  Spirit.  It  thus  comes  from  God, 
and  it  has  many  bearings  towards  God.  It  best  qualifies  us  for  knowing  God. 
Nothing,  however,  so  hides  God  frx)m  us  as  pride,  which  is  like  a  vapour  concealing 
the  stm.  The  humble  spirit,  low  in  its  own  estimation,  looking  up  to  God,  sees 
•xoeUences,  beauties  in  Him,  which  to  others  are  concealed.  As  faiowledge  of  God, 
«o  repentance  towards  God  springs  from  humility.  Nor  less  is  it  the  source  of  faith. 
To  trust  wholly  in  the  merits  of  another,  to  forego  all  claim  to  personal  merit  or 
ffighteoosness,  is  a  plan  of  salvation  which  staggers  and  offends  many.    The  sanrtj 

80 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

^— ^^^— ^^— — ^^■—*—  ^ 

2irit  is  equally  valuable  in  producing  submission,  contentment  under  affliction. 
id  so  in  many  ways  bearing  on  the  nature  and  government  of  God,  humility  ia 
most  fruitful.  Thus  we  humble  ourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God.  And  thus 
it  secures  God's  favour.  As  the  springs  flow  down  from  the  mountain,  leaving  it  bare, 
but  into  the  valleys,  making  them  fertUe,  so  do  God's  choicest  influences  avoid  the 
proud  spirit,  but  descend  on  the  humble  and  the  meek.  "  Unto  that  man  will  I  look, 
and  with  him  will  I  dwell,"  says  the  High  and  Lofty  One,  "  who  is  humble,  and  of  a 
contrite  spirit."  (2)  Nor  are  the  fruits  borne  by  this  lowly  grace  less  important  in 
relation  to  man.  We  are  boimd  together  in  life  by  indissoluble  ties,  domestic,  social 
ftnd  civil.  Christianity  claims  to  regulate  all  these,  and  it  does  so  by  regulating  and 
rectifying  the  spirit  which  underlies  them  all.  And  it  will  be  found  that  of  all  the 
dispositions  most  likely  to  remedy  whatever  is  wrong  in  social  life,  and  to  confirm  all 
that  is  good,  is  this  spirit  of  humility.  The  more  you  look  into  yourself  and  observe 
others,  the  more  I  think  you  will  find  that  the  cause  of  nearly  all  that  aff'ects  our 
social  life,  injuriously  taints  it,  casts  a  shadow  over  it,  makes  it  a  jarring,  distasteful, 
unattractive  thing,  when  it  ought  to  be  only  transparent,  noble  and  pure,  is  the  spirit 
of  pride.  It  is  this,  unconsciously  often,  but  really,  which  gives  censoriousness  to 
judgment,  asperity  to  feeling,  bitterness  to  expression,  unkindness  to  act.  We  thiii 
so  much  of  ourselves,  that  we  despise  and  offend  others.  The  Lord  help  us  all,  for 
the  sake  of  each  other,  to  walk  more  in  this  valley.  (3)  While  this  spirit,  this  valley, 
like  grace,  bears  such  blessed  fruit  towards  God  and  towards  man,  it  does  so  equally 
to  its  possessor.  We  cannot  have  a  "  conscience  void  of  offence  "  in  these  two  ways 
■without  having  the  comfort  of  it  ourselves.  It  often  secures  material  advantages, 
fieest  thou  a  proud  man,  a  boaster,  or  "one  wise  in  his  own  conceit,  there  is  more 
hope  of  a  fool  than  of  him."  Seest  thou  a  truly  humble  man,  one  willing  to  stoop 
to  do  anything,  go  anywhere,  serve  any  one,  that  man  is  on  the  road  to  preferment. 
Far  more  important  than  any  material  benefit  is  the  spiritual  blessing  it  secures. 
What  peace  it  brings !  While  the  proud  spirit,  like  the  lofty  mountain-top,  ia 
exposed  to  constant  storms,  the  humble  spirit,  like  the  valley,  escapes  them,  and  its 
peace  flows  like  the  river,  of  which  it  is  the  bed.  What  leisure  it  gives,  too  I  While 
pride  is  ever  busy  on  the  watch  for  the  appropriate  tokens  of  respect,  and  like  the 
swelling  Haman,  has  all  else  embittered  if  these  are  withheld,  humility  cares  little 
for  these  things,  and,  like  Mordecai,  has  leisure  to  think  about  others,  to  care  for  a 
loved  Esther,  and  to  save  a  nation  besides.  What  influence,  too !  When  Moses 
descended  from  the  mountain,  subdued,  overwhelmed  by  a  sense  of  God's  greatness 
and  his  own  littleness,  he  "  wist  not  that  the  skin  of  his  face  shone,"  but  it  did  so, 
and  his  power  over  the  people  was  never  greater  than  then.  These,  however,  are  only 
moral  results,  though  as  such  they  indicate  God's  approval  of  the  spirit  He  thus  causes 
to  be  honoured.  There  are  more  directly  spiritual  ones.  "  God  giveth  grace  to  the 
humble, "  and  that  in  a  most  signal  manner.  He  does  not  give  it  except  to  the  humble. 
Only  the  empty  vessel  is  receptive,  and  only  in  proportion  as  it  is  so.  Faith  is  the 
glance  of  humility,  prayer  its  sigh  ;  this  sweet  grace  underlies  all  graces,  and  is  the 
BoU  in  which  all  ^ow ;  and  it  secures  more,  "grace  for  grace."  As  by  the  law  of 
nature,  water,  with  all  the  virtue  it  holds  in  solution,  seeks  the  lowest  level, 
fertilizing  the  vaUey  and  making  it  "bring  forth  and  bud"  ;  so  grace  from  Ohrist 
in  all  its  various  forms  descends  to  the  humblest  spirit,  causing  it  to  bear  "much 
fruit."  If  we  would  learn  of  Ohrist,  receive  from  Ohrist,  be  filled  with  the  fiilness  of 
Ohnst,  be  qualified  for  the  service  of  Ohrist,  receive  commission  fix)m  Ohrist,  be 
imbued  with  the  spirit  of  Ohrist,  we  must  be  humble ;  like  Maiy,  must  sit  at  the 
Master's  feet ;  like  the  beloved  disciple,  must  fall  down  before  Him ;  like  Isaiah, 
most  be  awed  by  a  sense  of  His  glory,  and  say,  "  Woe  is  me  "  ;  like  Paul,  must  in  a 
sense,  suffer  the  loss  of  aU  things,  be  weak  in  order  to  be  strong.  There  are  laws  in 
the  spiritual  universe  as  in  the  natural,  a  Ohristian  philosophy  as  well  as  a  secular  ; 
and  one  of  the  principles  of  the  former,  as  of  the  latter,  ia  that  the  lowest  level  ia 
the  most  receptive,  and  that  which  seeks  and  obtains  most  of  all  that  is  fertilizing 
and  good.  '^Though  the  Lord  be  high,  He  hath  respect  unto  the  lowly."  (J, 
Viney,  D.D.) 

Yer.  12.  Or  ever  I  was  aware,  my  aool  made  me  like  the  chariots  of  Ammio 
VMWa.—T7u  inflttence  of  the  unseen: — ^The  world  passeth  away  and  the  lusts  thereof! 
The  spiritual  alone  is  permanent.  Some  men  acquire  notoriety  in  their  day,  their 
same  passes  into  a  proverb,  and  yet,  singular  to  say,  in  after  times,  we  find  their 
names  recorded,  but  we  are  at  a  loss  to  know  what  their  deeds  were  which  made 
tham  80  fiunooa,    I  have  read  out  a  text  in  which  a  man's  name  oooors  about  whom 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  1»7 

we  know  nothing.  As  a  proverbial  saying,  it  may  be  regarded  as  an  illustration  of 
the  spontaneity  and  intuition  of  the  heart.  The  aflfections  under  the  guidance  of  the 
will  becoming  a  chariot,  in  which  the  man  is  borne  away.  I.  Spiritual  spontaneity. 
Spontaneity  signifies  that  which  is  voluntary  and  unconstrained,  free  and  instant- 
aneous action.  Without  spontaneity  our  lives  would  sink  to  the  dull,  dead  level  of 
things,  we  should  be  mere  links  in  the  great  chain  of  cause  and  efiFect.  Without 
spontaneity  we  should  be  things,  not  men.  This  power,  this  pure  activity  is 
necessary  to  our  personality.  We  are  about  to  speak  of  the  spontaneity  of  life — that 
is,  spiritual  life.  Bj  the  spontaneity  of  this  life,  we  mean  that  its  impulses, 
sensibilities,  and  affections  are  not  the  result  of  a  painful  and  protracted  effort,  but 
spring  from  life  as  its  natural  manifestation  and  development.  There  is  Tuduralness 
in  all  the  forms  of  life.  We  are  often  struck  with  the  unnatural  character  of  some 
men's  religion.  It  seems  like  something  that  belongs  to  the  man,  a  mere  accident 
or  appendage  ;  he  can  put  it  on  as  a  garment,  but  he  can  divest  himself  of  it  at  any 
moment.  What  naturalness  there  is  in  life,  in  the  modest,  quiet  beauty  of  the 
flower,  that  opens  itself  to  drink  in  the  dew  and  the  sunlight,  and  gives  its  perfume 
to  every  breath  that  passes  by,  and  does  this  spontaneously,  for  it  is  the  law  of  its 
life.  Some  few  illustrations  of  the  spontaneity  of  life  may  make  our  meaning  more 
apparent.  When  the  physical  organization  is  perfect,  when  there  is  health  as  well 
as  life,  the  body  performs  many  of  its  functions  without  effort  and  unconsciously. 
The  man  runs  without  weariness,  and  walks  without  fainting.  Life  is  like  a  stream 
sparkling  in  the  sunshine,  making  its  own  music  as  it  flows  on,  sustained  and 
nourished  by  the  fountain  that  gave  it  birth.  It  is  the  sick  man  who  frequently 
places  his  finger  on  the  pulse.  It  is  the  man  out  of  health  who  has  the  study  of  ma 
own  nature  forced  upon  him,  and  who  is  constantly  seeking  to  reproduce  and  restore 
harmony.  A  man  who  lives  near  to  God  and  has  constant  communion  with  Him, 
will  have  Divine  beauty  put  upon  him.  He  may,  like  Moses,  put  a  veil  over  his 
face,  but  at  any  moment  he  can  put  off  the  veil,  and  go  in  and  speak  with  God. 
There  is  no  necessity  (or  the  soul  to  see  tliat  the  strings  of  the  instniment  are  tuned 
concert  pitch,  at  any  instant  she  can  awaken  music  and  call  on  all  spiritual  faculties 
like  80  many  choristers  to  blend  their  voices  in  one  song.  A  man  need  not,  like 
Sanl,  the  first  king  of  Israel,  **  force  himself  to  offer  sacrifice."  There  are  spiritual 
instincts:  "My  heart  and  my  flesh  cry  out  for  God."  There  is  no  fixedness  of 
heart :  "0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed."  There  is  spontaneity :  "Or  ever  I  was  aware, 
my  soul  made  me  like  the  chariots  of  Ammi-nadib. "  The  highest  acts  of  the  spiritual 
life  are  for  the  most  part  acts  of  pure  spontaneity.  Life  is  in  its  incipient  and 
undeveloped  forms,  when  we  must  team  to  see,  to  speak,  to  walk ;  and  so  in  the 
beginning  of  the  spiritual  life,  there  must  be  effort,  and  painful  consciousness,  till 
we  grow  up  into  Him  who  is  the  Head,  even  Christ.  How  may  we  attain  this  high 
spiritual  state  ?  We  must  seek  the  constant  actings  of  the  Spirit,  and  yield  ourselves 
to  the  felt  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Spirit  is  to  help  our  infirmities, — that 
is,  the  Spirit  is  to  lift  us  up,  to  raise,  to  elevate  us ;  the  Spirit  gives  vrings  to  the 
soul,  so  that  we  may  be  borne  up  into  a  spiritual  region,  and  commune  with  spiritual 
things.  We  must  get  the  unity  of  our  whole  nature.  You  must  live  in  constant 
communion  with  God.  Let  me  say,  there  is  real  happiness  and  great  peace  resulting 
from  this  spontaneity  of  life.  There  is  the  Sabbath  of  the  soul ;  the  work  of  the 
new  creation  being  over,  God  still  comes  to  man,  and  walks  in  the  garden  in  the  cool 
of  the  day.  Love  manifests  itself  to  love ;  a  living  God  to  a  living  soul.  In  this 
state  you  will  be  prepared  to  use  all  things  ;  you  will  be  ready  to  receive  Divine 
communications ;  you  will  be  fitted  for  all  seasons  of  fellowship.  Worldly  men 
instinctively  go  after  the  world.  They  come  to  the  sanctuary,  but  they  go  where 
their  heart  goes :  "  Or  ever  I  was  aware,  my  soul  made  me  like  the  chariots  of  Ammi- 
nadib.  "  There  is  spontaneity  in  sin.  It  becomes  natural — it  awakens  no  astonish- 
ment— man  seeks  his  gratification  in  it.  II.  The  intttitions  of  the  heart.  The 
circumstances  in  the  chapter  are  these :  The  bridegroom  is  without  the  bride,  but 
he  goes  into  scenes  where  she  has  been,  which  seem  to  him  filled  with  her  presence  ; 
evexything  reminds  him  of  her — his  heart  goes  after  her,  he  instinctively  feels  that 
she  is  near,  though  he  does  not  see  her.  We  are  influenced  by  the  unseen.  The 
true  centre  of  our  life — of  all  its  thoughts,  feelings,  and  energies — is  the  unseen. 
There  is  an  attractive  force,  of  even  higher  power  than  the  force  which  draws  bodies 
to  the  earth.  Our  life  is  in  God  ;  our  holiness  is  the  shadow  of  His  light ;  our  love 
the  birth  of  His  love.  The  regenerated  soul  goes  to  God  to  find  satisfaction  in  Him  ; 
it  goes  instinctively,  by  the  law  of  its  new  life,  to  have  communion  with  God.  The 
spiritual  man  finds,  "  or  ever  he  is  aware,"  his  heart  has  lifted  him  up  to  heaven. 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tl. 


The  unseen  influences  us.  There  are  inflnences  which  do  not  act  on  the  senses,  but 
on  the  spirit,  which  do  not  proceeed  from  anything  that  may  be  seen  or  that  is 
handled,  but  from  the  spiritual.  Men  are  influenced  by  fellowship,  by  example,  by 
mind  acting  on  mind,  by  the  literature  of  the  day,  by  the  daily  papers.  We  ara 
influenced  by  the  past,  by  the  writings  of  men  who  have  entered  the  unseen  world. 
And  are  not  our  minds  open  to  the  direct  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God  I  Cannot 
the  Father  of  our  spirits  draw  near  to  us,  and  Uluminate,  sanctify,  and  commune 
with  our  hearts  ?  A  man  must  be  spiritual  to  recognize  and  appropriate  spiritual 
things.  What  is  meant  by  a  man  being  spiritual  ?  That  he  is  bom  of  the  Spirit, 
that  he  lives  in  the  Spirit,  that  his  own  spiritual  nature  has  the  mastery  over  the 
outward  and  the  physical — that  there  is  a  state  of  real  spiritual  unity.  With  his 
well-balanced  mind  he  can  respond  to  spiritual  impressions,  and  make  use  of  spiritual 
opportunities.  This  ready  response  is  indispensable  ;  the  "  vision  will  not  tarry." 
A  right  state  of  heart  is  necessary  that  we  may  be  able  to  take  advantage  of  all 
opportunities,  that  we  may  be  prepared,  not  only  for  the  Sabbath,  but  for  all  times, 
80  as  to  respond  to  all  spiritual  impressions  and  impulses.  A  right  state  of  heart  is 
necessary  that  we  may  be  fitted  for  manifestations.  We  must  be  prepared,  like  the 
disciples  in  the  upper  room,  waiting  for  the  promise  of  the  Father,  for  suddenly  there 
may  come  "a  sound  from  heaven."  We  must  be  prepared,  like  mariners  who  have 
long  been  becalmed,  but  who  see  indications  of  a  breeze  springing  up,  and  so  make 
all  ready  to  take  every  possible  advantage  of  the  wind  which  presently  wUl  sweep 
over  the  waters.  We  must  be  prepared  to  ascend  the  mount,  so  that  at  any  moment 
we  hear  the  Divine  voice  saying, — Come  up,  and  "  I  will  make  all  My  goodness  pass 
before  you,"  we  may  go  up  and  see  the  glory.  We  must  walk  in  the  light,  as  He  ia 
in  the  light,  that  we  may  have  fellowship  one  with  another.  {H.  J.  Bevis. )  The  chariot* 
of  Amini-nadib  : — It  apears  to  me  that  without  in  the  slightest  degree  wresting  the 

})assage,  or  deviating  from  an  honest  interpretation,  we  may  understand  that  this  is  the 
anguage  of  the  Church  concerning  Christ.  If  so,  Christ's  words  conclude  at  the 
end  of  the  tenth  verse,  and  it  is  the  Church  that  speaks  at  the  eleventh.  There  is 
not  an  instance  in  the  whole  Song,  so  far  as  I  can  remember,  of  the  Prince  Himself 
speaking  in  the  first  person  singular  ;  either,  therefore,  this  would  be  a  solitary 
exception,  or  else,  following  the  current  plan,  where  the  same  pronoun  is  used,  the 
Church  is  speaking  to  Christ,  and  telling  him  of  herself.  I.  What  is  the  most  wanted 
in  all  religious  exercises  is  the  motion,  the  exercise  of  the  soul.  ' '  Or  ever  I 
was  aware,  my  soul  made  me" — or  my  soul  became — "like  the  chariots  of  Ammi- 
nadib. "  Soul-worship  is  the  soul  of  worship,  and  if  you  take  away  the  soul  from  the 
worship,  you  have  killed  the  worship  ;  it  becomes  dead  and  barren  henceforth.  There 
are  professors  in  this  world  who  are  perfectly  content  if  they  have  gone  through  the 
mechanical  part  of  public  devotion.  If  they  have  occupied  their  seats,  joined  in  the 
hymns  and  the  prayers,  and  listened  to  the  preaching,  they  go  away  quite  content 
and  easy.  Only  that  prayer  which  comes  from  our  heart  can  get  to  God's  heart. 
Oh,  that  we  may  be  more  and  more  scrupulous  and  watchful  in  these  things  !  In 
the  diary  of  Oliver  Heywood,  one  of  the  ejected  ministers,  he  often  says,  "  God  helped 
me  in  prayer  in  my  chamber  and  in  the  family."  And  once  he  writes  thus — "  In 
my  chamber  this  morning  I  met  with  more  than  ordinary  incomings  of  grace  and 
outgoings  of  heart  to  God. "  Be  it  always  recollected  that  we  do  not  pray  at  all, 
nnless  the  soul  is  drawn  out  in  pleading  and  beseeching  the  Lord.     II.  Sometimes 

IT  HAPPENS  that  THE  HEART  IS  NOT  IN  THE  BEST  STATE  FOR  DEVOTION.      If  religion 

be  a  matter  of  soul,  it  cannot  always  be  attended  to  with  equal  pleasTire  and  advantage. 
You  can  always  grind  a  barrel-organ  ;  it  will  invariably  give  you  the  same  discordant 
noise,  which  people  call  music,  but  the  himian  voice  will  not  admit  of  being  wound 
np  in  the  same  fashion,  nor  will  it  for  the  most  part  discharge  the  same  monotonous 
fanctions.  The  great  singer  finds  that  his  voice  changes,  and  that  he  cannot  always 
use  it  with  the  same  freedom.  If  the  voice  is  a  delicate  organ,  how  much  more 
delicate  is  the  soul  !  The  soul  is  continually  the  subject  of  changes.  Ah,  how  often 
it  changes  because  of  its  contact  with  the  body  !  If  we  could  be  disembodied,  oh, 
how  we  would  praise  God  and  pray  to  Him  !  "The  spirit  truly  is  willing,  but  the 
flesh  is  weak."  And  then,  alas,  our  sins  are  a  much  more  serious  hindrance  to  our 
devotion.  Perhaps  we  have  been  angry.  How  can  we  come  before  the  Lord  calmly 
when  our  spirit  has  been  just  now  tossed  with  tempest  ?  Probably  we  have  been 
seeking  the  world,  and  going  after  it  with  all  our  might.  How  can  we  suddenly 
piill  up,  and  put  all  our  strength  into  a  vigorous  seeking  of  the  kingdom  of  God  and 
His  righteousness  in  a  moment  1  Now  God's  grace  can  help  us  to  overcome  all  these 
things,  and  can  even  make  oar  souls  like  the  chariots  of  Ammi-nadib.     We  do  not 


.  Ti.]  THE  SONO  OF  SOLOMOy.  1S0 

want  grace  for  such  emergencies.  The  soul,  in  its  different  phases  and  states,  has 
need  of  help  from  the  sanctuary  to  which  it  repairs.  III.  There  ake  seasons 
WHEN  otTB  HEAET  IS  SWEETLY  MOVED  TOWARDS  GoD.  "  Or  ever  I  Was  aware,  mr 
soul  made  me  like  the  chariots  of  Ammi-nadib."  Have  ye  not  proved  welcome 
opportunities  when  all  your  thoughts  have  been  quickened,  enlivene(^  and  stimulated 
to  activity  in  the  highest  degree  about  your  highest  interests  ?  All  within  us  was 
•wake  ;  tnere  was  not  a  slumbering  faculty.  Our  memory  told  ub  of  the  goodness 
of  the  Lord  in  days  gone  by  ;  and  our  hopes  were  regaled  by  the  mercy  which  we 
had  not  tasted  yet,  but  which  was  made  sure  to  us  by  promise,  and  brought  near  to 
us  by  faith.  Our  faith  was  active  and  bright  of  eye.  Our  love  especially  shed  a 
clear  light  over  our  prospects.  Oh,  we  have  had  our  blessed  times,  when  our  soul 
hafi  been  light  and  rapid  as  the  chariots  of  Ammi-nadib  !  And  at  such  times  we 
were  conscious  of  great  elevation.  The  chariots  of  Ammi-nadib  were  those  of  a 
prince.  And  oh,  we  were  no  more  mean,  and  low,  and  beggarly,  and  grovelling, 
but  we  saw  Christ,  and  were  made  kings  and  princes  and  priests  with  Hmi.  Then 
we  could  have  performed  martyr's  deeds.  Then  we  were  no  cowards,  we  were  afraid 
of  no  foes.  We  had  princely  thoughts  then,  large,  liberal,  generous,  capacious 
thoughts  concerning  Christ  and  His  people,  His  cause,  and  His  conquests :  our  souls 
were  like  the  chariots  of  Ammi-nadib.  At  the  same  time  they  were  full  of  power ; 
for,  when  the  chariots  of  Ammi-nadib  went  forth,  who  could  stop  them  ?  Such  was 
our  spirit.  We  laughed  at  thoughts  of  death,  and  poured  contempt  upon  the  trials 
of  life.  We  were  "  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  His  might."  Oh,  what 
splendid  times  we  have  had  when  God  has  been  with  us.  Oh,  yes  !  in  God's  house 
you  have  known  the  days  of  heaven  upon  earth.  Not  unfrequently  too  have  I  known 
that  the  Lord  has  appeared  to  His  people  and  warmed  their  hearts  when  they  have 
been  working  for  Him.  IV.  Sometimes  the  sweet  seasons  come  to  us  when 
WE  DO  NOT  EXPECT  THEM.  "  Or  ever  I  was  aware,  my  soul  made  me  like  the  chariots 
of  Ammi-nadib."  Some  poor  hearts  do  not  reckon  ever  to  have  these  joys  again. 
They  say,  "  No,  no,  they  are  all  gone  ;  the  last  leaf  has  blown  from  the  tree  ;  the 
last  flower  hats  faded  in  the  garden.  My  summer  is  past.  It  is  all  over  with  me  !  " 
That  is  the  bitter  complaint  and  the  hollow  murmuring  of  unbelief.  But  the  Lord 
for  whom  ye  wait  can  suddenly  appear,  and  while  you  are  saying  hard  things  of 
yourself  He  can  refute  them  with  the  beams  of  His  countenance.  Even  at  this  very 
moment  you  may  stand  like  Hannah,  a  woman  of  sorrowful  spirit,  feeling  as  if  you 
would  be  sent  away  empty  ;  yea,  and  God's  servant  himself  may  address  you  with 
rough  words  as  Eli  did  her,  and  may  even  tell  you  that  you  are  drunken,  when  it  is 
deep  grief  that  enfeebles  your  steps  and  chokes  your  voice  ;  and  all  the  while  the  Lord 
may  have  in  store  for  you  such  a  blessing  as  you  have  never  dreamed  of ;  and  He  may 
say  to  thee,  "  Go  thy  way,  My  daughter ;  I  have  heard  thy  petition,  thy  soul  shall 
have  its  desire."  Or  ever  I  was  aware,  while  my  unbelief  led  me  to  think  such  a 
thing  impossible.  Thou  hast  made  me  like  the  chanots  of  Ammi-nadib.  (C.  E.  Spurgeon, ) 

Yer.  13.  Betum,  return,  0  Shulamite ;  return,  return,  that  we  may  look  upon 
thee. — RetwrUy  return,  0 Shulamite ;  return,  return ! — The  translation  "Shulamite" 
is  unhappy  :  it  is  unmusical,  and  misses  the  meaning.  The  Hebrew  word  is  a  femi- 
nine of  "Solomon."  "Solomon"  may  stand  for  the  bridegroom's  name,  and  then 
the  well-beloved  bride  takes  her  husband's  name  in  a  feminine  form  of  it,  which  ia 
Shulamith,  Salome,  or  perhaps  better  "Solyma."  The  King  has  named  his  name 
upon  her,  and  as  Caius  has  his  Oaiia,  so  Solomon  has  his  Solyma.  He  is  the  Prince 
of  Peace,  and  she  is  the  Daughter  of  Peace.  Aforetime  she  was  called  "the  fairest 
among  women,"  but  now  she  is  espoused  unto  her  Lord,  and  has  a  fulness  of  peace. 
Therefore  is  she  called  the  Peace-laden,  or  the  Peace-crowned.  You  know  how  truly 
it  is  so  with  the  justified  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  appears  that  the  Church  in  her  beauty 
had  gone  down  to  attend  to  her  work.  "  I  went  down  into  the  garden  of  nuts  to  see 
the  fruits  of  the  valley,  and  to  see  whether  the  vine  flourished,  and  the  pomegranates 
budded. "  She  did  not  sit  down  in  the  house  to  admire  herself,  nor  go  into  the  street 
to  show  herself :  she  went  down  into  her  Lord's  garden  to  attend  to  her  proper  work, 
and  then  it  was  that  they  cried,  "Return,  return."  Neither  the  world  nor  Christ 
Himself  will  call  much  after  us  if  we  go  forth  to  make  display  of  our  own  exceUencea. 
•'  Come,  see  my  zeal  for  the  Lord  of  Hosts,"  is  a  wretched  piece  of  self-consciousness, 
which  disgusts  more  than  it  attracts.  A  diligent  life  is  an  attractive  life.  Do  thou, 
like  an  ant,  work  in  thy  season,  carrying  thy  due  burden  upon  the  ant-hUl,  and  if 
thou  doest  this  for  love  of  Jesus  thou  doest  nobly.  Plod  on  without  courting  appro- 
bation, and  rest  content  to  do  thine  utmost  for  the  common  weal.    Ask  not  to  role 


l40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

in  the  court,  but  be  willing  to  work  in  the  field ;  seek  not  to  recline  on  the  couch, 
but  take  thy  pruning-knife,  and  go  forth  among  the  vines,  to  fulfil  thine  office,  and 
in  that  self- forgetting  service  thy  beauty  shall  be  manifested,  and  voices  shall  salute 
thee,  crying,  "Return,  return."  It  appears,  too,  that  while  she  was  thus  engaged, 
she  was  the  subject  of  a  great  stir  and  emotion  of  heart.  Perhaps  she  had  felt  dull 
and  dreary  till  she  entered  on  her  work,  but  while  she  was  busy  with  her  pome- 
granates and  her  nuts,  she  cries,  "  Or  ever  I  was  aware,  my  soul  made  me  like  the 
chariots  of  Ammi-nadib."  She  felt  that  she  could  hasten  like  the  chariots  of  a  will- 
ing people,  who  rush  to  the  fight  from  love  of  their  prince.  She  felt  as  if  she  could 
run  after  her  Beloved  ;  she  could  leap,  she  could  fly.  Thus  vigorous  and  active,  she 
was  watched  by  many  eyes,  and  soon  she  heard  voices  coming  from  the  four  quarters 
of  the  universe,  crying,  "Return,  return,  0  Shulamith  ;  return,  return."  I.  Let  ua 
listen,  but  ovlj  with  our  ears,  not  with  our  hearts,  to  the  lower  voices.  Whence 
come  these  voices  ?  There  are  voices  from  the  vasty  deep  of  sin  and  hell,  voices 
from  the  tombs  which  we  have  quitted,  voices  from  the  Egypt  from  which  we  have 
fled.  They  are  crying  evermore,  like  unquiet  ghosts,  "  Return,  return. "  The  devil 
is  not  altogether  a  fool,  although  he  is  great  in  that  direction ;  and  therefore  he  does 
not  continue  for  ever  to  use  nets  which  have  failed  to  entangle  the  birds.  If  he  finds 
that  cajolery  will  not  ensnare  us,  he  leaves  his  old  tactics  and  tries  other  methods. 
"When  "  Return,  return  "  will  not  woo  us,  he  puts  on  his  lion  form,  and  roars  till  the 
mountains  shake.  By  old  companions  he  does  this.  They  say,  "You  have  left  us 
all,  we  do  not  know  why.  You  have  turned  a  fanatic  ;  you  have  joined  with  gloomy 
Christian  people,  and  you  are  not  half  the  good  fellow  you  used  to  be.  Are  you  not 
getting  a  little  tired  of  those  dreary  ways  ?  Are  not  the  rules  of  Christ  too  precise 
and  Puritanic  ? "  Thus  do  her  former  comrades  cry,  "  Return,  return,  O  Solyma." 
The  old  joys  sometimes,  in  moments  of  weakness  which  will  come  upon  us,  revive 
upon  the  memory,  and  attempt  to  mislead  us.  When  do  these  voices  come  ?  Their 
sound  is  heard  lull  often.  "  Return,  return,  return,  return  " — foui-  times  over  the 
text  hath  it.  They  come  so  often  that  the  word  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is 
more  than  justified,  "And  truly,  if  they  had  been  mindful  of  that  country  from 
whence  they  came  out,  they  might  have  had  opportunity  to  have  returned."  These 
opportunities  come  in  our  way  everywhere,  and  at  all  times.  If  you  wish  to  leave 
off  being  a  Christian,  if  you  wish  to  follow  the  world  in  its  pleasures  or  in  its 
labours,  the  doors  are  always  open.  It  is  a  fight  to  reach  to  heaven,  and  few  there 
be  to  help  us  in  it ;  but  the  path  to  hell  is  downward,  and  multitudes  thrust  out 
their  hands  to  urge  us  to  the  infernal  deeps.  These  cries  are  borne  to  us  by  every 
gale,  in  tones  both  loud  and  gentle,  "  Return,  return."  And  we  shall  find  that 
they  solicit  us  in  our  best  moments.  I  cannot  fully  account  for  the  fact,  but  so 
it  is,  that  I  am  most  liable  to  speak  unadvisedly  with  my  lips  when  I  have  just 
enjoyed  the  raptures  of  high  fellowship  with  God.  Yonder  shines  the  Mountain 
of  Transfiguration  in  its  unrivalled  splendour ;  but  lo,  at  the  very  foot  of  it  the 
devil  rages  in  the  lunatic  child  !  Our  highest  graces  are  not  to  be  trusted,  for,  as 
the  most  venomous  serpents  lurk  among  the  brightest  flowers,  so  are  temptations 
most  abundant  hard  by  our  most  spiritual  and  heavenly  joys.  Notice  that  our  text 
goes  on  to  say  why  they  wish  us  to  return.  "  Return,  return,  that  we  may  look 
upon  thee."  And  is  that  all  ?  Am  I  to  be  a  traitor  to  my  Lord,  and  quit  His  holy 
ways,  and  forfeit  heaven,  to  be  made  a  show  of  by  thee,  0  Satan  ?  or  by  thee,  O 
world  %  Is  this  a  full  reward  for  treachery — * '  that  we  may  look  upon  thee  "  ? 
Why,  their  looks  are  daggers.  As  the  eyes  of  basilisks  are  the  eyes  of  the  ungodly 
world ;  as  malignant  stars  that  blast  the  soul.  When  the  world  loves  the  holy  man 
it  is  the  love  of  the  vulture  for  the  sick  lamb.  Fear  you  the  worldling,  even  when 
he  bears  ^ou  gifts.  Now  hear  Solyma's  wise  answer  to  her  tempters.  She  sajrs, 
"What  win  ye  see  in  Solyma?"  Dost  thou  ask  me,  0  world,  to  come  back  and 
show  myself  to  be  thy  friend  ?  Dost  thou  promise  me  approbation  ?  Dost  thou 
vow  to  look  upon  me,  and  admire  me,  and  take  me  for  an  example  ?  What  is  there 
in  me  that  thou  canst  approve  of?  What  wilt  thou  see  in  Solyma  ?  What  can  the 
world  see  in  a  believer  ?  The  world  knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew  Christ  not. 
II.  Now  we  turn  to  listen,  not  with  our  ears  only,  but  with  our  hearts  too,  to 
the  call  of  the  higher  voices  which  cry,  "Return,  return."  Brethren,  to  go 
to  heaven,  to  go  to  Christ,  to  go  towards  holiness,  is  a  return  to  God's  people :  for 
God's  people  are  originally  His  children.  Though  they  are  prodigals,  and  have  gone 
into  a  far  country,  they  always  were  His  children ;  even  when  they  spent  their 
substance  in  riotous  living  they  were  still  His  sons,  and  each  of  them  could  speak 
of  "My  Father's  house."    To  come  to  Christ,  and  holiness,  and  heaven,  is  to  return. 


CHAi".  vn.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOIT.  141 


Notice  that  in  the  text  that  word  "  return  "  is  put  four  times  over.  Is  it  not 
because  it  is  of  the  highest  importance  that  every  child  of  God  should  keep  returning, 
and  coming  nearer  to  the  Father's  house  ?  Is  it  not  because  it  is  our  highest  joy, 
our  strongest  security,  our  best  enrichment,  to  be  always  coming  to  Christ  as  unto 
a  living  stone,  and  getting  into  closer  fellowship  with  Him  ?  As  He  calls  four  times, 
is  it  not  a  hint  that  we  are  slow  to  come !  "We  ought  to  come  to  Jesus  not  only  at 
His  first  call,  but  even  at  the  glances  of  His  eyes,  when  He  looks  as  though  He 
longed  for  our  love :  it  ought  to  be  our  rapture  to  think  only  of  Him,  and  live 
whoUy  to  Him ;  but  as  we  fail  to  answer  to  first  pleas.  He  cries  foui-  times,  "  Return, 
return,  0  Solyma;  return,  return.  Come  to  thme  own  Husband,  thine  own  loving 
Lord."  He  ceases  not  to  entreat  until  we  do  return.  Do  not  the  reduplications  of 
this  call  hint  at  His  strong  desire  after  us,  His  condescending  love  for  us  ?  I  beg 
you  to  observe  what  the  spouse  has  to  say  to  this  when  she  is  thus  called  upon  to 
return  to  the  Lord.  The  Lord  saith  to  her,  "  Return,  return,  that  we  may  look 
upon  thee."  Is  not  that  a  reason  for  coming  back  ?  The  Lord  says,  "  That  I  may 
look  upon  thee."  He  desires  your  society,  and  seems  gently  to  hmt  that  you  have 
kept  aloof  from  Him.  He  seems  to  say,  "  You  have  not  been  much  with  Me  alone 
lately,  you  have  neglected  the  reading  of  the  Word,  and  the  hearing  of  it ;  I  have 
scarcely  seen  thy  face  ;  therefore  return,  that  I  may  look  upon  thee. "  Cover  your 
face  and  say,  "  Lord,  why  shouldst  Thou  look  on  me  I  I  am  fidl  of  sin  ; "  but  then 
draw  near  to  Him,  that  His  look  of  love  may  bring  thee  to  repentance,  and  cause 
thy  sin  to  pass  away.  Remember  He  hath  power  in  His  eyes  to  look  thee  into 
purity  and  beauty.  Come  and  say,  "  Look  upon  me.  Lord  ;  search  me,  try  me,  and 
know  my  ways."  Return,  that  with  infinite  pity  thy  Beloved  may  see  what  aileth 
thee,  and  then  with  His  dear  pierced  hand  may  perform  a  Divine  surgery  upon  thee, 
and  make  thee  well  again,    {fi.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAPTER  VII. 


Veb.  1.  How  beaatifal  are  thy  feet  with  shoes,  0  Prince's  daughter  \— Beautiful 
with  aandals : — The  Great  Redeemer,  the  Heavenly  Bridegroom,  is  now  represented 
under  the  leading  emblem  of  the  Book,  as  surveying  the  beauties  and  excellences  of 
His  betrothed  bride.  The  whole  chapter  is  an  apostrophe  to  her.  _  She  is  in  herself 
full  of  conscious  unworthiness.  But  He  sees  her  clothed  in  the  bridal  attire  of  His 
own  righteousness,  and  instead  of  upbraiding  her  for  avowed  imperfections,  He  begins 
with  the  words,  "How  beautiful  are  thy  sandalled  feet,  0  Prince's  daughter!" 
I.  The  Church's  or  the  Believer's  name— "  Daughter  "  and  "Prince's  daughter." 
1.  She  is  called  "  daughter."  TMs  points  to  the  tender  relation  subsisting  between 
Christ  and  His  people.  When  Jehovah  in  the  Old  Testament  speaks  most  endearingly 
of  His  ancient  Church,  He  calls  it  "  The  Daughter  of  Zion."  He  employs,  indeed, 
manifold  figures,  all  indicative  of  strong  and  ardent  attachment.  "As  one  whom 
his  mother  comforteth."  *'  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child  ?"  "  Like  as  a 
father  pitieth  his  children."  "  I  will  be  a  Father  unto  you."  2.  But  again,  she  ia 
a  "  Prince's  daughter."  He  reminds  her  of  her  pedigree.  It  is  no  ordinary  birth. 
She  is  one  of  the  adopted  children  of  the  "  King  of  kings."  Their  glory  is  Hia 
glory.  II.  The  subject  of  commendation:  "How  beautifiil  are  thy  feet  with 
shoes."  1.  The  shoe,  or  sandal,  in  ancient  times,  and  in  Oriental  countries,  was 
the  badge  of  freedom  and  honour.  The  crouching  slave  never  wore  a  sandal.  The 
unsand^ed  feet  was  the  badge  and  mark  of  subjection,  if  not  of  degradation. 
When  the  Lord,  therefore,  in  the  text  speaks  of  His  betrothed  bride's  feet  being 
"beautiful  with  shoes,"  what  is  this  but  to  proclaim  that  she — type  of  every 
believer — is  translated  from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  "the  glorious  liberty 
of  the  children  of  God  "  ?  2.  Shoes  or  sandals  were  emblems  of  joy :  while  the  want 
of  these  was  equally  recognized  and  regarded  as  a  symbol  of  grief  and  sorrow.  And 
is  not  the  Christian  called  to  be  joyful  1  Yes,  God's  children  are  indeed,  reaUy, 
and  in  truth,  alone  of  all,  in  this  sin-stricken  world,  entitled  to  the  epithet  of 
"  happy."  3.  The  sandals  on  the  feet  speak  of  activity  and  duty,  and  preparedness 
for  Christ's  service.  They  point  to  the  nature  of  the  journey  the  believer  is  pursuing. 
Though  a  pleasant  road,  and  a  safe  road,  and  a  road  with  a  glorious  termination, 
it  is  at  times  rough  ;  a  path  of  temptation  and  trial.     Unshod  feet  would  be  cut 


^«:  n.     Til  tiTSirv, 


S.  Tbf  rar 


j:±s  s. 


t«K- 


X  -as 


"^nm  X 


-ui*^^  Snrt 


IS    E^ 


-m-nff 


wi  .rff- 


xnr  SIT 


•    jii     •pp-w^     "^r^     I-l-_; 


X 


jzrt  ir  a:  ■_ 


^  I    Mil  I    KT^      ojZ 


'•'Ill  ■«"_ 


■Jff 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  to. 

^-^^■■"■■■"■^■^"■"^■^^■■^  ■ 

wrong  principle.  You  take  Moses  with  you  when  you  examine  yourself,  and 
consequently  you  fall  into  despair.  I  do  not  want  you  to  look  at  Christ  so  as  to 
think  less  of  your  sin,  but  to  think  more  of  it ;  for  you  can  never  see  sin  to  be  so 
black  as  when  you  see  the  suffering  which  Christ  endured  on  its  behalf :  but  I  do 
desire  you,  dear  friends,  never  to  look  at  sin  apart  from  the  Saviour.  Examine 
yourselves,  but  let  it  be  in  the  light  of  Calvary  ;  not  by  the  blazing  fires  of  Sinai'a 
lightnings,  but  by  the  milder  radiance  of  the  Saviour's  griefs.  It  appears,  from  the 
words  of  the  spouse,  that  the  work  of  self-examination  should  be  carried  on  in 
detail,  if  it  is  to  be  of  real  service.  It  is  written,  "  Let  us  see  if  the  vine  flourish, 
the  tender  grape  appear,  and  the  pomegranates  bud  forth."  We  must  not  take  a 
general  view  of  the  garden,  but  particularize,  and  give  special  attention  to  each 

goint.  Oh !  to  have  our  great  pattern  ever  before  our  eye  !  Jesus  should  not  be  a 
lend  who  caUs  upon  us  now  and  then,  but  one  with  whom  we  walk  evermore. 
Thou  hast  a  difBcult  road  to  travel ;  see,  0  traveller  to  heaven,  that  thou  go  not 
without  thy  Guide.  In  eveiy  case,  in  every  condition,  thou  needest  Jesus  ;  but  most 
of  all,  when  thou  comest  to  deal  with  thine  own  heart's  eternal  interests.  0,  keep 
thou  close  to  Him,  lean  thy  head  upon  His  bosom,  ask  to  be  refreshed  with  the 
spiced  wine  of  His  pomegranate,  and  then  there  shaU  be  no  fear  but  that  thou  shalt 
be  found  of  Him  at  the  last,  without  spot,  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing.  II.  The 
Ohxtrch  was  about  to  engage  in  earnest  labour,  and  desires  her  Lord's 
company.  It  is  the  business  of  God's  people  to  be  trimmers  of  God's  vines.  Like 
our  first  parents,  we  are  put  into  the  garden  of  the  Lord  for  usefulness.  Observe 
that  the  Ohm-ch,  when  she  is  ia  her  right  mind,  in  all  her  many  labours  desires  to 
retain  and  cheerfully  to  enjoy  communion  with  Christ.  Taking  a  survey  of  Christ's 
Church,  you  will  find  that  those  who  have  most  fellowship  with  Christ  are  not  the 
persons  who  are  recluses  or  hermits,  who  have  much  time  to  spend  with  themselves, 
but  they  are  the  useful  indefatigable  labourers  who  are  toUing  for  Jesus,  and  who  in 
their  toil  have  Him  side  by  side  with  them,  so  that  they  are  workers  together  with 
God.  Let  me,  then,  try  and  press  this  lesson  upon  you,  that  when  we  as  a  Church, 
and  each  of  us  as  individuals,  have  anything  to  do  for  Christ,  we  must  do  it  in 
communion  with  Him.  Let  me  hold  up  for  your  imitation  some  in  modem  times 
who  by  works  of  faith  and  labours  of  love  have  made  us  feel  that  the  old  spirit  of 
Christianity  is  not  dead.  Our  beloved  friend  Mr.  George  Miiller,  of  Bristol,  for 
instance.  There  bums  a  holy  devotedness,  an  intensity  of  faith,  a  fervour  of 
perseverance  which  I  would  to  God  we  all  possessed.  May  we  have  more  of  this, 
and  so  by  keeping  close  to  Jesus,  we  shall  produce  better  fruits,  richer  clusters  and 
more  luscious  grapes  than  are  commonly  produced  upon  those  vines  which  are  in  a 
less  happy  part  of  the  vineyard.  III.  The  Church  desires  to  give  to  Christ 
ALL  that  she  produces.  She  has  "all  manner  of  pleasant  fruits,"  both  "new 
and  old,"  and  they  are  laid  up  for  her  Beloved.  We  have  some  new  fruits.  I  hope 
we  feel  new  life,  new  joy,  new  gratitude :  we  wish  to  make  new  resolves  and  cany 
them  out  by  new  labours.  Our  heart  goes  up  in  new  prayers,  and  our  soul  is 
pledging  herself  to  new  efforts.  But  we  have  some  old  things  too.  There  is  our  first 
love :  a  choice  ftiiit  that !  and  Christ  delights  in  it.  There  is  our  first  faith :  that 
simple  faith  by  which,  having  nothing,  we  become  possessors  of  aU  things.  There 
is  our  joy  when  first  we  knew  the  Lord ;  let  us  revive  it.  Old  things  !  why  we  have 
the  old  remembrance  of  the  promises.  How  faithful  has  God  been !  Old  sins  we 
must  regret,  but  then  we  have  had  repentances  which  He  has  given  us,  by  which  we 
have  wept  our  way  to  the  Cross,  and  learned  the  merit  of  His  blood.  We  have  fiTiits, 
both  new  and  old ;  but  here  is  the  point — they  are  all  to  be  for  Christ.  ( C.  R.  Spurgeon. ) 
A  call  for  revival : — I.  The  fact  which  is  implied  in  the  text,  that  love  is  the 
great  motive  for  action  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  This  love  has  about  it  certain 
marked  peculiarities.  1.  It  is  first  a  love  which  realizes  the  person  of  the  Beloved. 
Jesus  must  be  to  us  no  historical  personage  who  was  once  on  earth,  but  is  now  dead 
and  powerless  ;  he  must  be  an  actual  person  living  still  in  our  midst.  2.  The  love 
here  spoken  of  was  weU  assured  of  the  affection  of  its  Beloved.  Note  the  verse 
which  precedes  our  text,  ' '  I  am  my  Beloved's,  and  His  desire  is  towards  me. "  A 
Christian  is  never  strong  for  service  when  he  does  not  know  whether  Christ  loves 
him  or  not.  Strive  then  for  a  well-assured  sense  of  the  Saviour's  love.  Be  not 
content  tUl  you  possess  it,  for  it  will  be  health  to  your  spirit  and  marrow  to  your 
bones  :  it  wUl  be  a  girdle  of  strength  to  your  loins  and  a  chain  of  honour  about  your 
neck.  3.  The  love  of  the  spouse  lived  in  fellowship  with  the  WeU-beloved,  "Come, 
my  Beloved,  let  us  go,  let  us  lodge,  let  us  get  up,  let  us  see.  There  will  I  give  Thee 
my  loves."    True  love  to  Jesus  grows  stronger  and  stronger  in  proportion  as  it  abides 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  145 

in  Him.  If  we  have  abounding  love  to  Jesus  we  can  prosper  under  disadvantages, 
but  if  we  have  it  not  we  have  lost  the  great  secret  of  success.  It  yokes  us  with  the 
strong  Son  of  God,  and  so  makes  our  infirmities  to  be  but  opportunities  for  the  dis- 
play of  His  power.  4.  This  love  leads  the  Church  to  hold  all  things  in  joint 
possession  with  Christ.  Observe  that  word,  ' '  at  our  gates  are  all  manner  of 
pleasant  fruits."  Love  to  Jesus  constrains  us  to  make  over  all  that  we  hold  to  Him, 
while  faith  appropriates  all  that  Jesus  has  to  itself.  5.  The  love  which  is  the  great 
motive  to  Christian  action  is  a  love  which  looks  to  Jesus  for  united  operation.  It 
is,  "Come,  my  Beloved,  let  us  go  forth  into  the  field,  let  us  get  up  early  to  the 
vineyard. "  All  is  well  when  the  Redeemer  leads  the  way.  Be  not  afraid,  for  you 
go  in  good  company.  Who  among  us  will  be  afraid  to  do  anything  or  go  anywhere 
if  Jesus  saith,  "  I  wiU  go  with  you  "  ?  II.  Love  leads  us  to  go  afield  in  thb 
SERVICE  OF  Jestts.  ' '  Come,  my  Beloved,  let  us  go  forth  into  the  field. "  1.  A  loving 
Church  spontaneously  puts  herself  upon  widened  service.  She  has  a  large  heart 
towards  her  Lord,  and  longs  to  see  Him  reign  over  aU  mankind.  She  does  not  wait 
to  hear  again  and  again  the  Macedonian's  cry,  "  Come  over  and  help  us,"  but  she  is 
prompt  in  mission  enterprise.  2.  The  spouse,  when  she  said,  "  Let  us  go  forth  into 
the  field,"  knew  that  the  proposal  would  please  her  Lord  ;  for  the  nature  of  Christ 
ia  a  large  and  loving  one,  and,  therefore,  He  would  bless  the  far-off  ones.  His  is  no 
narrow  heart ;  His  thoughts  of  love  are  far-reaching,  and  when  the  Church  says, 
"Let  us  go  forth  into  the  field,"  truly  her  Lord  is  not  backward  to  accept  the 
invitation.  3.  The  spouse  is  evidently  prepared  for  any  discomfort  that  may  come 
as  the  result  of  her  labour.  She  must  needs  leave  the  fair  palaces  of  her  royal 
husband  and  lodge  in  rustic  cottages.  Poor  lodgings  there  for  Solomon's  fair  spouse ; 
but  what  cares  she  ?  4.  The  spouse  is  quite  ready  to  continue  in  this  uncomfortable 
service.  She  says,  "  I  will  lodge  in  the  villages,"  there  will  she  abide  a  while,  not 
paying  a  flying  visit,  but  stopping  until  the  good  work  is  done,  for  which  her  Lord 
and  she  went  forth.  Oh,  get  ye  out,  ye  Christians,  into  the  distant  fields  of  labour. 
For  our  Master's  sake,  and  in  His  strength  and  company,  we  must  compass  sea  and 
land  for  His  redeemed  ones.  Only,  if  any  of  vou  go,  do  not  try  to  go  alone.  Stop 
nntU  yon  breathe  the  prayer,  "  My  Beloved,  let  us  go."  You  go  in  vain  when  you 
go  not  with  the  Master,  but  when  you  have  secured  His  company,  then  go  and 
welcome,  for  you  "shall  doubtless  come  again  rejoicing,  bringing  your  sheaves  with 
you. "  III.  Love  labotjbs  also  at  home.  Nearer  the  palace  there  were  vineyards, 
and  the  spouse  said,  "  Let  us  get  up  early  to  the  vineyards."  1.  Note,  then,  that 
the  Church  does  her  work  at  home  as  well  as  abroad.  When  she  loves  her  Lord  she 
works  Avith  zeal,  she  gets  up  early.  All  men  in  Holy  Scripture  who  loved  God  much 
rose  early  to  worship  Him.  We  never  read  of  one  saint  engaged  upon  sacred  service 
who  rose  late.  Abraham  rose  early,  David  rose  early.  Job  rose  early,  and  so  did  they 
aU.  It  ifl  put  here  as  the  very  type  and  symbol  of  an  earnest,  vigorous  service  of 
Christ.  2.  Notice  that  God's  people,  when  they  are  awake,  first  Took  well  to  the 
Church.  "Let  us  see  if  the  vine  flourish."  The  Church  is  Christ's  vine.  Let  us 
take  stock  of  it.  3.  Then  the  Church  looks  after  the  little  ones.  "Let  us  see  if 
the  vine  flourish,  whether  the  tender  grape  appear."  No  earnest  Church  forgets  the 
children  of  her  Sabbath  school,  and  every  other  agency  for  the  yoimg  will  be  sure 
to  be  well  minded.  4.  Then  the  Church  also  takes  notice  of  all  inquiries.  "  Let 
us  see  whether  the  pomegranates  bud  forth."  If  a  Church  be  alive,  there  will  be 
always  many  to  observe  where  the  first  tear  of  repentance  is  glistening.  IV.  Love 
IN  A  Church  beings  forth  all  its  stores  for  the  Beloved.  The  Church  of 
God  has  in  herself,  through  the  rich  love  of  her  Husband,  all  manner  of  pleasant 
fhiits.  Some  of  these  fruits  are  new,  and  oh,  how  full  of  savour  they  are.  Our  new 
converts,  thank  God  for  them,  what  a  freshness  and  power  there  is  about  their  love  ! 
Then  there  are  old  fruits,  the  experience  of  believers  who  are  ripening  for  heaven, 
the  well-developed  confidence  which  has  been  tried  in  a  thousand  battles,  and  the 
faith  which  has  braved  a  lifetime  of  difl5culties.  These  old  fruits — the  deep  love  of 
the  matron  to  Christ,  the  firm  assurance  of  the  veteran  believer — there  is  a  mellow- 
ness about  them  which  the  Lord  delights  in.  All  these  choice  things  ought  to  be 
laid  up.  Every  good  thing  in  a  Church  is  meant  to  be  stored  up,  not  to  be  despised 
and  forgotten  ;  and  the  point  of  all  is  that  all  in  the  Church  ought  to  be  laid  up  for 
our  Beloved.  {Ibid.)  Standiiig  com: — I  want  you  to  go  with  me  in  thought 
and  spirit  while  I  try  to  reproduce  the  lessons  taught  me  in  the  rustling  language  of 
the  standing  com.  "  Let  us  go  forth  into  the  field."  I.  Here  are  revelations 
FROM  God.  I  feel  myself  to  be  in  the  presence  of  my  Creator ;  and  all  the  question- 
ings of  doubt,  and  all  the  vain  philosophies  of  the  sceptic,  vanish  like  the  morning 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  m. 

mist.  My  intellect,  my  conscience,  my  heart,  my  instinct  if  you  will,  prompts  with 
remembrance  of  a  present  God.  In  this  bright  field  of  waving  com  I  see  His  power. 
What  mighty  forces  are  here  at  work  !  I  see  His  wisdom.  What  harmony  in  the 
whole  operations,  with  never  a  collision,  accident,  or  blunder  !  What  exact  adapta- 
tion of  means  to  an  end  !  I  am  led  to  say  with  Cowper,  "  There  lives  and  works  a 
soul  in  all  things,  and  that  soul  is  God. "  I  see  His  goodness.  Not  only  has  its  wise 
Contriver  had  in  view  its  useful  service,  but  He  has  clothed  it  with  rare,  refreshing 
beauty.  I  see  His  faithfulness.  After  the  desolating  flood,  God  declared  that  hence 
on  for  ever  ' '  summer  and  seedtime,  autumn  and  harvest  should  not  cesise. "  Since 
then  thousands  of  years  have  passed,  stars  have  fallen,  mountains  have  been  engulfed, 
nations  have  perished,  mighty  changes  have  been  wrought,  but  this  rich,  ripe  field 
of  standing  corn  in  every  waving  stem  declares  the  steadfast  faithfulness  of  God. 
II.  Life  comes  out  of  death.  Out  of  death  and  decay  come  life  and  beauty  f 
Behold,  I  show  you  a  mystery  !  A  few  months  ago  this  bright  field  of  teeming  life 
was  a  graveyard,  and  every  individual  giain  died,  and  was  buried  here,  in  sure  and 
certain  hope  of  a  glorious  resurrection.  In  due  time  the  tnmipet  of  the  spring  winds 
announced  the  grand  arising  day,  and  here  the  dead-alive  are  standing  arrayed  in 
bright  raiment  and  clad  in  a  glory  that  excelleth.  Standing  here,  the  mystery  of 
the  resurrection,  it  is  true,  remams,  but  the  impossibility  dies  out  for  ever !  The 
cemetery  is  the  field  of  God.  I  hear  the  winds  of  heaven  making  music  through  the 
standing  com  ;  and  this  is  the  burden  of  their  song,  "  Sown  in  dishonour  and  raised 
in  glory  1 "  III.  Like  comes  forth  from  like.  This  heavy  crop  of  wheat  is  all 
the  outcome  of  scattered  wheat,  and  no  other  kind  of  plant  could  possibly  arise.  As 
the  tall  com  mstles  beneath  the  light  autmnnal  wind  I  hear  it  say,  "  What  a  man 
soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  IV.  Much  comes  from  little.  In  a  small  com- 
pass of  bag  and  basket  was  the  seed-corn  contained  !  What  spacious  yard,  capacious 
bam,  and  extensive  granary  will  be  required  to  hold  the  vast  result !  Mark  you, 
it  would  have  been  much  the  same  had  cockle,  tares,  or  darnel  been  scattered  on 
the  soil.  Little  seeds  bring  great  harvests,  in  some  thirty-,  in  some  sixty-,  and  in 
some  a  hundred-fold.  "Despise  not  the  day  of  small  things."  V.  Fruit  comes 
FROM  labour.  This  field  of  waving  wheat  is  the  farmer's  fee  for  hard  and  willing 
work.  You  will  find  the  truth  hold  good  in  your  own  daily  labour,  your  handicrafb, 
your  profession,  or  your  trade.  You  will  find,  too,  that  diligent  effort  will  bring 
into  your  bosom  rich  sheaves  of  saving  grace  ;  that  hard  labour  in  the  Church  or  the 
school,  Christ's  great  field  of  toil,  will  bring  harvests  of  spiritual  success.  VI.  With 
PROGRESS  COMES  MATURITY.;  As  you  look  at  this  field  now,  remember  what  it  was. 
From  the  day  the  life-germs  broke  through  their  decaying  shells,  advancement  has 
been  the  order  of  the  day,  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  then  the  full  corn  in  the  ear, 
then  the  ripe  and  mellow  grain  ready  for  the  gamer.  Little  by  little,  higher  and 
greener,  stronger  and  riper,  ever  maturing,  ever  progressing,  until  the  stage  of  per- 
fection is  reached  at  last.  It  is  so  in  the  moral  world.  Constant  progression  in  evil 
fits  the  sinner  at  last  for  the  hopeless  destiny  of  the  oven  and  the  fire.     Growth  in 

frace  brings  maturity  of  Christian  character.  Faith  and  hope  and  love  grow  stronger, 
righter  as  the  years  go  by.  The  life  grows  purer  and  more  like  the  great  Exemplar 
as  the  harvest-time  draws  near,  until  the  "shock  of  com  "  is  garnered,  being  made 
meet  for  the  paradise  of  God.  VII.  Advantage  comes  from  trial.  As  you  look 
npon  this  sea  of  waving  glory  you  remember  that  once  it  was  as  naked  as  the  high- 
way. Think  of  the  bitter  winds  that  swept  it,  the  biting  frosts,  the  drenching  rains, 
the  cutting  ploughshare,  the  tearing  harrow,  the  crushing  roller,  and  all  the  severity 
of  discipline  required.  Then  came  the  hard  fortunes  of  the  tender  plant,  scorched 
and  tossed,  and  battered  by  wind  and  sun,  until  it  lay  limp,  flaccid,  and  yeliow  on 
the  ungenial  ground ;  and  yet  all  these  adverse  seemings  had  a  part  in  producing 
the  golden  gloiy  that  waves  in  triumph  now.  It  is  just  so  in  the  Lord's  spiritual 
and  human  field  ;  crosses,  trials,  reverses,  and  disappointments  are  all  necessary 
preliminaries  and  preparatories  to  the  joy  of  harvest.  VIII.  Destiny  comes  from 
character.  By  and  Dy  the  reapers  will  put  in  the  sickle.  What  for!  In  order 
that  the  prostrate  crop  may  be  trodden  under  foot  or  bundled  for  the  fire  t  No,  no. 
It  is  wheat,  precious  and  good,  therefore  its  destiny  is  the  bam,  and  even  the  glean- 
ings shall  be  gathered  and  housed  with  care.  The  weeds,  the  thistles,  these  are 
noxious  and  must  feel  the  fire.  Their  character  is  bad,  and  that  decides  their 
destiny.  O  men  and  women  !  your  character  shall  decide  yours.  IX.  Fettition' 
ooiuss  FROM  FAITH.  Many  months  ago,  the  farmer  set  to  work  here,  but  he  could 
•xeroise  bat  small  control ;  for  aught  he  knew  the  land  might  have  lost  its  fertility, 
^cr  th«  wed  might  havclost  its  germinating  power.     Perhaps  the  snn  might  forbear 


CHAP.  Tnx.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOK  147 

to  shine,  or  the  rain  to  fall.  There  might  be  no  return  for  all  his  anxious  care.  But 
he  had  faith :  faith  in  the  soil,  faith  in  the  seed,  faith  in  the  sun,  faith  in  the  sure 
processes  that  he  could  neither  control  nor  understand.  He  had  faith  and  patience, 
too,  and  all  this  sterling  gold  is  his  reward.  Learn  the  lesson :  God's  promise  cannot 
faU.  No  good  deed  is  lost.  Incorruptible  seed  cannot  die.  X.  The  sben  comes 
VROM  THE  UNSEEN.  The  buried  com  was  hidden.  What  was  going  on  beneath  the 
surface  was  hidden  from  human  ear  and  eye.  What  is  going  on  t  You  do  not  know. 
What  kind  of  seed  is  it  t  You  cannot  tell.  How  much  will  there  be  from  it  f  You 
cannot  possibly  predict.  It  is  all  secret,  hidden — as  secret,  my  friend,  as  the 
thoughts  of  your  heart,  as  the  secret  sins  of  your  life,  as  the  germ  or  bias  of  evil  in 
your  nature.  It  is  as  secret,  Christian,  as  the  depth  of  vour  loyalty  and  love,  the 
private  deeds  of  godly  sacrifice,  brave  endurance,  pious  beneficence,  closet  prayers. 
But  wait  a  while  ;  the  secret  of  the  soil  is  revealed  ;  the  day  hath  declared  it :  and 
this  fair  field  is  the  answer  for  all  the  world  to  read,  "  There  is  nothing  hidden  that 
shall  not  be  known."  XI.  Gain  comes  from  opportunity.  If  the  farmer  had  let 
the  ploughing  season  pass,  if  he  had  permitted  the  sowing  season  to  slip  by,  no  such 
glorious  sight  as  this  golden  treasure  would  have  gladdened  his  eye.  No  ;  he  caught 
the  season  while  it  lasted,  he  seized  the  opportunity  while  he  had  it.  Last  winter  was 
the  parent  of  this  success ;  last  spring  was  the  foster-mother  of  this  field  of  com. 
He  turned  to  use  the  precious  present ;  he  put  out  to  usury  the  golden  now  ;  and 
this  is  the  usury  that  has  come  of  it,  this  golden  guerdon,  this  wealth  of  grain. 
Don't  you  hear  every  bended  head,  as  the  bright  field  shimmers  in  the  wind,  saying 
"  What  thine  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might,  etc."!  XII.  All  oomss 
moM  God.  That's  the  crowning  lesson.  His  the  soil,  the  seed,  the  sower,  the  son, 
the  success.  All  are  the  absolute  gift  of  His  gracious  providenoe  and  tender  love. 
^J.J,  Wray.) 


CHAPTER  VIIL 


Ybk.  5.  Who  Is  this  that  cometh  up  from  the  wildemess,  leaning  upon  her  Selovedl 

— The  state  amdaititude  of  a  believer : — I.  The  believer's  spiritual  state.  "Who 
is  this  that  cometh  up  from  the  wildemess  ? "  From  this  desolate  wildemess,  the 
Church,  and  by  consequence  every  believer,  is  represented  as  departing.  The  deliver- 
ance is  not  complete,  the  departure  is  not  entire,  while  the  foUower  of  Christ  is  in 
the  present  state  of  being.  11.  The  attitude  of  a  believer's  soul.  1.  Depend- 
ence on  Christ.  By  faith,  believers  lean  upon  the  person  of  their  glorious  Redeemer 
for  acceptance  with  God  ;  upon  His  power  for  help  ;  upon  His  love  for  joy ;  upon 
His  faithfulness  for  hope.  2.  Delighted  afiection.  8.  Entire  devotedness.  {R.  P. 
Buddicom,  M.A.)  The  Christian  renouTicing  the  world : — I.  The  representation 
HERE  given  op  THE  WORLD  ;  it  is  Called  a  wildemess.  By  the  world,  I  mean  the 
things  of  the  world,  regarded  as  sources  of  happiness  and  satisfaction.  It  is  totally 
insufficient  for  the  supply  of  true  and  lasting  happiness.  II.  The  conduct  of  evert 
TRUE  Christian  with  respect  to  the  world.  1.  The  trae  Christian  no  longer 
seeks  his  chief  happiness  from  worldly  things.  2.  The  real  Christian  uses  great 
moderation,  in  his  enjoyment  even  of  lawful  things.  He  does  not  venture  to  the 
edge  of  forbidden  ground,  but  keeps  at  a  cautious  distance.  He  allows  himself  no 
gratification  which  is  of  a  doubtful  character.  And  even  when  he  has  reduced  Ma 
cares  and  his  pleasures  to  a  much  smaller  compass  than  his  worldlv  neighbours 
would  think  needlul,  he  stUl  sets  a  guard  over  his  heart,  lest  it  should  be  betrayed 
into  too  great  an  attachment  to  the  things  which  remain.  3.  The  real  Christian 
longs  for  his  final  translation  to  a  better  world.  III.  The  secret  source  and 
spring  of  the  Christian's  conduct.  1.  He  is  influenced  to  do  this  by  the  Love 
of  Christ.  2.  He  is  encouraged  by  the  promises  of  Christ.  3.  He  is  strengthened 
by  the  grace  of  Christ.  (J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  True  believers,  espoused  to  Christ,  turning 
their  hack  on  the  world,  and  walking  heavenward  with  Him,  are  a  mystery,  a  stratig* 
sight  in  the  world : — I.  I  shall  premise  some  things  for  right  understandino 
the  doctrine.  Sin  turned  this  world  into  an  enemy's  country  in  respect  of  heaven, 
and  so  into  a  wilderness.  This  her  going  away  up  irom  the  wildemess  with  her 
espoused  Husband,  is  a  going  away  in  heart  and  affections  ;  it  is  the  soul's  motion 
heavenwards  in  this  life,  the  last  step  of  which  is  made  at  death.    Christ's  biidt 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TRAT0E.  [chap.  Tta, 

ftt  her  waygoing,  and  ongoing  with  Him  thus,  is  a  mystery,  a  strange  sight  in 
the  world.  II.  I  shall  show  in  what  rbspects  belibvbes  aek  a  mystbrt, 
A  STKANOE  6IOHT  IN  THK  woBLD  ;  the  power  of  godliness  appearing  in  their  walk 
at  this  rate,  so  that  it  is  said  of  them,  "  Who  is  this  ? "  There  is  something  very 
amiable  about  them,  as  we  are  told  of  the  primitive  Christians  (Acts  IL  46,  47), 
that  "they  oontinoing  daily  with  one  accord  in  the  temple,"  etc.  They  are  like 
foreigners  in  a  count^,  apt  to  become  a  gazing-stock,  a  wonder,  about  which  the 
natives  cannot  satisfy   themselves.      III.  I   shall   oive  the   bkasons   of   thx 

1>0IKT,    that  TEUB  belibvbes  AEB  a  MTSTBET,  a  8TEANGB  SIGHT  IN  THE  WOBLD. 

1.  Because  they  are  so  unlike  the  world,  they  are  like  speckled  birds  among  th» 
rest  (1  Pet.  iv.  4).  2.  Because  they  are  so  unlike  themselves  in  former  tunes. 
8.  Because  they  are  very  rare  in  the  world ;  they  are  but  here  and  there  one  for 
a  marvel  (Jer.  iii.  14).  UsB  I.  Of  information.  1.  Serious  souls  need  not  think 
it  strange,  if  they  become  a  wonder  to  many  (Ps.  Ixxi.  7).  2.  The  world  is  no 
idle  spectator  of  those  who  have  given  themselves  to  Christ,  and  profess  to  follow 
Him.  8.  Those  who  shall  stiU  walk  after  the  course  of  the  world,  continue  sons  of 
earth,  not  making  away  heavenward  in  the  tenor  of  their  life  and  conversation,  are 
not  espoused  to  (Sirist ;  tiiough  they  have  given  Him  the  hand,  they  have  not  given 
Him  the  heart  Uss  II.  Of  exhortation.  0  Christians,  communicants,  walk  so  as 
the  world  may  bear  witness,  that  ye  are  going  up  out  of  the  wilderness,  leaning  on 
your  Beloved  ;  that  your  faces  and  hearts  are  heavenward ;  that  ye  have  set  off  from 
them,  and  are  no  more  theirs.  And  further,  if  ye  be  clothed  with  humility  and  with 
humanity,  meek,  ruling  your  own  spirit,  doing  good  to  all,  even  to  those  that  wrong 
you ;  and  are  patient  under  trouble,  and  living  by  faith.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  The  I'^e 
of  believers  <is  espovLsed  to  Christ,  is  a  going  vjpfrom,  the  wildenuss  of  this  world,  with 
Him,  to  His  Father's  house  in  the  heavenly  Comaan : — I.  I  shall  take  notice  ov 
SOME  things  supposed  IN  THIS  DOCTBiNE.  1.  As  soon  as  a  soul  is  espoused  to 
Christ,  it  is  loosed  from  the  world.  2.  The  soul  espoused  to  Christ,  being  loosed 
from  the  world,  is  set  in  motion  heavenwards,  away  from  the  world  (Ps.  Ixzziv. 
5-7).  8.  The  l^liever's  journeying  heavenwards  is  attended  with  many  difficulties. 
It  is  an  np-going,  and  that  through  a  wilderness.  4.  The  believers  passage  ta 
heaven  is  also  a  work  of  time.  It  is  not  a  leaping  out  of  the  wilderness  into  Canaan, 
but  a  going  up  out  of  it  by  degrees.  It  cost  Israel  long  forty  years  in  the  wilderness. 
5.  Christ  is  with  the  believer  in  the  journey.  It  is  a  weary  land  they  have  to  ga 
through,  but  they  are  not  alone  in  it  (Cant.  iv.  8).  6.  The  end  of  this  journey  is  a 
most  comfortable  one  (John  ziv.  2).  II.  I  shall  unfold  the  believbe's  life,  as 
▲  going  up  fboh  the  wildebnbss  of  this  woeld,  typified  bt  the  Isbablites 
eoiNG  UP  FEOM  THE  wiLDBENEss  TO  Canaan.  1.  I  shall  show  you  how  believers 
are  brought  unto  the  wilderness.  The  world  is  not  a  wilderness  to  them  and  in 
thefr  esteem,  till  they  be  brought  out  of  the  Egyptian  bondage  of  their  natural  state. 
Then,  and  not  till  then,  they  enter  into  their  wilderness-state.  2.  I  shall  show  how 
the  believer  is  set  into  the  wilderness.  When  once  converting  grace  has  made  a  fair 
separation  betwixt  the  sinner  and  the  world,  presently  he  enters  into  a  wilderness- 
state.  (1)  He  cares  not  for  the  world  as  he  was  wont  (Gal.  vi  14).  (2)  The  world 
cares  not  for  him  as  before  (GaL  vi.  14).  (3)  Then  it  becomes,  by  God's  appoint- 
ment, the  place  of  trial  for  him,  as  the  wilderness  was  to  the  Israelites  (Deut.  vliL  2). 
(4)  It  is  no  more  Ms  home  or  his  rest ;  but  the  place  of  his  pilgrimage,  the  place  h© 
most  travel  through  in  his  way  home  to  his  eternal  rest  (Heb.  zi.  13).  3.  I  shall  show 
how  the  believer  is  going  up  from  the  wilderness.  (1)  By  the  course  of  nature, 
which  is  swift  as  a  post,  a  ship,  and  as  an  eagle's  flight.  (2)  In  the  habitual  bent 
of  his  heart  and  affections.  Believers'  hearts  are  turned  off  the  world,  and  set  on 
things  above.  (8)  In  progressive  sanctification  (Prov.  iv.  18).  (4)  In  obtaining 
victory  over  the  world  (1  John  v.  4).  4.  The  hardships  and  inconveniencies  of  the 
mldemess-road,  which  the  believer  must  lay  his  account  with,  while  he  goes  up 
from  the  wilderness.  It  is  a  difficult  way  through  the  wilderness.  The  road  the 
travellers  must  go  will  try  their  patience,  their  strength,  eto.  5.  I  now  come  to 
show  the  advantages  and  convenieucies  of  the  wilderness-road.  The  people  of  God, 
vhile  in  the  wilderness-world,  have  as  much  allowed  them  from  heaven  as  may 
balance  the  hardships  of  the  wilderness.  (1)  The  pillar  of  cloud  to  go  before  them 
in  the  wilderness.  (2)  They  have  provision  allowed  them  from  heaven  in  the  waste 
wilderness.  The  King's  country  affords  them  provision  for  their  journey.  (8) 
Sometimes  they  are  allowed  a  song  in  the  weary  land,  for  their  comfort  and 
recreation  by  the  way  (Ps.  cxiz.  64).  (4)  The  Lord  is  their  banner  in  the  wilder- 
ness, and  so  they  may  be  sure  of  victory,  they  shall  be  conquerors  in  the  war 


CHAP.  Tin.]  THE  BONO  OF  SOLOMON.  li» 

(Ezod.  xvli.  15).     (5)  There  is  healing  in  the  wilderness  for  them,  for  the  wounds 
got  there.     (6)  We  must  not  forget  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness,  which  was 
the  comfort  of  the  godly  Israelites  there.     The  tabernacle  of  Gospel-ordinances 
is  the  great  comfort  of  the  travellers  towards  Zion.    Use  1.  Of  information.     1.  The 
people  of  God  need  not  be  surprised,  that  they  meet  with  many  hardships  and  trials 
in  the  world,  and  that  it  is  a  strange  world  to  tiiem.     While  they  are  in  it,  they 
are  in  a  wilderness.    How,  then,  can  they  expect  other  than  a  wilderness-life  ?    2. 
They  have  good  reason  to  bear  all  the  hardships  of  their  wilderness-lot  patiently, 
and  with  Christian  fortitude  and  cheerfulness.     And  that  (1)  Because  they  will  not 
last,  they  will  be  over  ere  long ;  they  are  going  up  from  the  wilderness.     (2)  Because 
the  heavenly  Canaan  which  the  wilderness-road  leads  to,  will  make  amends  for  all. 
(8)  Their  lot  is  a  wise  mixture,  take  it  at  the  worst.     3.  They  are  not  Israelites 
indeed,  nor  espoused  to  Christ,  who  are  not  going  up  from  this  world  as  a  wilder- 
ness, in  heart  and  affection,  in  life  and  conversation.     Use  II.  Of  caution.     While 
ye  are  in  the  wilderness,  beware  of  wilderness  sins  and  snares.     1.  Unbelief  (Ps. 
IxxviiL  22).    2.  Murmuring  (1  Cor.  x.  10).     3.  Lusting  (1  Cor.  x.  6).     4.  Looking 
back  to   Egypt  (Num.  xiv.  4).     5.  Fawning  and  flattering  enemies  (Num.  xxv. 
17,  18).     e.^rhe  mixed  multitude  (Exod.  xii.  38).     Use  III.  Of  exhortation.     1. 
Ye  who  profess  to  be  espoused  to  Christ,  evidence  the  reality  of  it  by  your  going 
up  from  the  wilderness-world  with  Him  in  heart  and  affection,  in  the  progress 
of  sanctification,  and  contempt  of  the  world,  holding  off  from  the  ways  of  it.     2. 
Strangers  to  Christ,  be  espoused  to  Him,  that  ye  may  go  up  with  Him  from  this 
wilderness-world,  to  His  Father's  house  in  the  heavenly  Canaan  ;  believe  that  Christ 
is  offered  in  an  everlasting  marriage-covenant  to  you.     Embrace  ye  and  accept, 
and  so  close  with  Him  as  your  Head  and  Husband,  for  time  and  eternity.     {Ibid.) 
The  believer's  journey  from  the  wilderness  of  this  world  to  the  heavenly  Canaan : — 

I.  The  charactee  of  a  soul  tktjlt  espoused  to  Christ.  He  is  one  that  is  aye 
breathing  to  more  and  more  nearness  to  the  Lord,  and  a  more  intimate  fellowship 
and  acquaintance  with  Him.  The  soul  espoused  to  Christ  is  one  who  is  bending  his 
coarse  neavenwards,  and  has  his  back  tmned  upon  this  world  as  a  howling  wilder- 
ness.    He  is  one  whose  life  in  this  world  is  a  life  of  faith  and  dependence  on  Christ. 

II.  The  place  of  the  present  residence  of  the  spouse  of  Christ  ;  it  is  a 
wilderness,  a  very  unheartsome  lodging.    III.  The  course  that  the  spouse  is 

taking,  OB  THE  EARTH  TOWARD  WHICH  SHE  IS  BENDING  WHILE  IN  THE   WILDER- 

»Ess  ;  ahe  is  not  going  down,  but  coming  up  from  the  wUdemess.  And  tMs,  I  con- 
ceive, may  imply  these  things  following.  1,  That  believers,  or  those  who  have 
wally  taken  Christ  by  the  hand,  have  turned  their  back  on  the  ways  of  sin,  which 
"  lead  down  to  the  chambers  of  death."  2.  That  believers  are  pilgrims  on  the  earth, 
and  that  this  world  is  not  their  home.  3  A  dissatisfaction  with,  and  a  disesteem  of, 
this  world,  and  all  things  in  it ;  and  therefore  she  has  her  back  turned  upon  it,  and 
her  face  toward  a  better  earth.  4.  That  though  she  could  find  no  rest  nor  quiet  here- 
•waj,  yet  she  expected  a  quiet  rest  on  the  other  side,  or  beyond  the  wUdemess. 
6.  This  coming  up  from  the  wilderness  implies  motion,  and  progress  in  her  motion 
heavenwards.  6.  This  phrase  of  coming  up  from  the  wilderness  implies,  that 
religion  is  an  up-the-hill  work  and  way ;  for  the  spouse's  way  here  is  represented 
under  the  notion  of  an  ascent.  IV.  The  spouse's  posture  ;  she  comes  up  leaning 
on  her  Beloved.  It  is  the  life  of  faith  upon  the  Son  of  God  that  is  here  intended. 
And  this  expression  of  faith  implies  these  particulars  following.  1.  The  spouse's 
weakness  and  inability  in  herself  to  grapple  with  the  difficulties  of  her  way  through 
the  wilderness  ;  that  she  could  never  surmoimt  them  by  the  strength  of  natural,  or 
yet  of  any  created  grace  in  her.  2.  That  however  weak  and  insufficient  she  was  in 
herself,  yet  there  was  almighty  strength  in  her  Husband  and  Head,  on  whom  she 
leaned.  3.  A  blessed  knowledge  or  acquaintance  with  the  Lord  Jesus.  4.  The 
expression  implies,  not  only  knowledge,  but  intimacy  and  familiarity  ;  for  we  use  to 
lean  upon  them  with  whom  we  are  intimately  acquainted.  5.  This  leaning  posture 
implies  Christ's  nearness  to  the  spouse ;  for  we  cannot  well  lean  upon  a  person  that  is 
at  a  distance.  6.  It  implies  a  trusting,  resting,  or  recumbency  of  ner  soul  upon  him, 
nnder  all  her  weights  and  burdens,  which  she  rolls  over  on  Christ  (Ps.  Iv.  22  ;  Matt. 
zi.  28  ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  7).  7.  It  implies,  that  there  is  something  in  Christ  that  the 
hand  or  arm  of  faith  stays  and  leans  upon,  as  we  come  up  from  the  wilderness. 
Sometimes  faith  stays  itself  on  the  person  of  Christ,  as  He  is  "  Emmanuel,  God  with 
us  "  ;  sometimes  upon  His  love,  which  passeth  knowledge  (Ps.  xxxvi.  7).  Sometimes 
it  stays  itself  upon  His  name  ;  for  "they  that  know  His  name  will  put  their  trust  in 
Him":  sometimes  on  His  mission,  as  tiie  Sent  of  God,  "the  great  Apostle  of  our 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  tiA. 

profession  "  ;  it  takes  Him  up  as  God's  legate,  His  ambassador-extraordinary,  sent  to 
seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  It  leans  upon  His  general  oflBce  as  Mediator, 
for  peace  and  reconciliation  with  God ;  upon  His  prophetical  office,  for  instruction 
and  illumination  in  the  knowledge  of  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  ;  upon  Hia 
priestly  office,  for  reconciliation  and  acceptance  ;  upon  His  regal  or  kingly  office,  for 
sanctincation  and  deliverance  from  the  power  of  sin  and  Satan.  {E.  Erskine.) 
Leaning  upon  her  Beloved. — Leaning  on  our  Beloved : — In  the  verses  which  preceda 
my  text,  the  spouse  had  been  particularly  anxious  that  her  communion  with  her 
Lord  might  not  be  disturbed.  Her  language  is  intensely  earnest,  "  I  charge  you, 
O  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awake  my  Love,  until  He  please. " 
She  valued  much  the  fellowship  with  which  ner  Beloved  solaced  her  ;  she  was  jeal- 
ously alarmed  lest  she  should  endanger  the  continuance  of  it ;  lest  any  sin  on  her 
part  or  on  the  part  of  her  companions  should  cause  the  Beloved  to  withdraw  Himself 
in  anger.  Now  it  is  a  very  striking  fact  that  immediately  after  we  read  a  verse  so 
fall  of  solicitous  care  concerning  the  maintenance  of  communion,  we  immediately  fall 
upon  another  verse  in  which  the  upward  progress  of  that  selfsame  spouse  is  the 
theme  of  admiration  ;  she  who  would  not  have  her  Beloved  disturbed  is  the  selfsame 
bride  who  cometh  up  from  the  wilderness,  leaning  herself  upon  Him  ;  from  which  it  is 
clear  that  there  is  a  most  intimate  connection  between  communion  with  Christ  and 
progress  in  grace,  and  therefore  the  more  careful  we  are  to  maintain  fellowship  with 
our  Lord,  the  more  successful  shall  we  be  in  going  from  strength  to  strength  in  all 
those  holy  graces  which  are  landmarks  on  the  road  to  glory.     I.  We  notice  thk 

HEAVENLY  PILGRIM  AND  HER  DEAR  COMPANION.      "  Who  is  that  COmeth  up  from 

the  wilderness,  leaning  upon  her  Beloved  1 "  Every  soul  that  journeys  towards 
heaven  has  Christ  for  its  associate.  Jesus  suffers  no  pilgrim  to  the  New  Jerusalem 
to  travel  unattended.  He  is  with  us  in  sympathy.  He  has  trodden  eveiy  step  of 
the  way  before  us  ;  whatever  our  temptations,  He  has  been  so  tempted  ;  whatever 
our  afflictions.  He  has  been  so  afflicted.  He  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our 
infirmities,  having  been  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are.  Nor  is  Jesus  near  us  in 
sympathy  alone.  He  is  with  us  to  render  practical  assistance.  When  we  least 
perceive  Him,  He  is  often  closest  to  us.  When  the  howling  tempest  drowns  His  voice, 
and  the  darkness  of  the  night  hides  His  person,  still  He  is  there,  and  we  need  not  be 
afraid.  Courage,  then,  ye  wayfarers  who  traverse  the  vale  of  tears  ;  you  come  up 
from  the  wilderness  in  dear  company,  for  One  like  unto  the  Son  of  God  is  at  your 
side.  Note  the  title  that  is  given  to  the  Companion  of  the  spouse.  "Her  Beloved." 
Indeed,'  He  of  whom  the  Song  here  speaks  is  beloved  above  all  others.  He  was  the 
Beloved  of  His  Father  or  ever  the  earth  was  ;  He  was  declared  to  be  the  Lord's 
Beloved,  in  the  waters  of  Jordan,  and  at  other  times,  when  out  of  the  excellent  glory 
there  came  the  voice,  "This  is  My  beloved  Son  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased.  ' 
Beloved  of  His  Father  now,  our  Jesus  sits  for  ever  glorious  at  God's  right  hand. 
Jesus  is  the  Beloved  of  every  angel,  and  of  all  the  bright  seraphic  spirits  that  crowd 
around  the  throne  of  His  augrist  majesty,  casting  their  crowns  before  His  feet,  and 
lifting  up  their  ceaseless  hymns.  He  is  the  Beloved  of  every  being  of  pure 
heart  and  holy  mind.  II.  We  have  said  that  the  pilgrim  has  a  dear  Com- 
panion, but  that  much  of  the  blessedness  of  the  text  lies  in  her  posttjrb 
TOVTARDS  Him.  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  up  from  the  wilderness  leaning  upon 
her  Beloved  ? "  Her  posture,  then,  is  that  of  "  leaning."  His  relation  to  her  is  that 
of  a  Divine  supporter.  What  does  this  leaning  mean  ?  Why,  first  of  aU,  there  can 
be  no  leaning  on  another  unless  we  believe  in  that  other's  presence  and  nearness.  A 
man  does  not  lean  on  a  staff  which  is  not  in  his  hand,  nor  on  a  friend  of  whose 
presence  he  is  not  aware.  Christ  Jesus  is  with  thee  ;  though  thou  hearest  not  Hia 
voice,  and  seest  not  His  face.  He  is  with  thee.  Try  to  grasp  that  truth,  and  to  realize 
it  clearly,  for  thou  wilt  never  lean  imtil  thou  dost.  Leaning  also  implies  nearness. 
We  cannot  lean  on  that  which  is  far  off  and  unapproachable.  Now,  it  is  a  delightful 
help  to  us  in  believing  repose  if  we  cannot  understand  that  Christ  is  not  only  with 
us,  but  to  an  intense  degree  near  us.  A  sacred  unity  exists  between  thee  and  Him, 
80  that  thou  dost  diink  of  His  cup,  and  art  baptized  with  His  baptism,  and  in  all 
thy  sorrows  and  thine  afflictions  He  Himself  doth  take  His  share.  These  two  things 
being  attended  unto,  leaning  now  becomes  easy.  To  lean  iinplies  the  throwingof 
one's  weight  from  oneself  on  to  another,  and  this  is  the  Christian's  life.  The 
leaning  place  of  a  Christian  is,  first  of  all,  Christ's  person.  We  depend  upon  the 
Lord  Jesus  as  God  and  as  man.  As  God,  He  must  be  able  to  perform  every  promise, 
and  to  achieve  every  covenant  engagement.  We  lean  upon  that  Divinity  which 
bean  up  the  f  illowg  of  the  uniyerse.    Our  dependence  h  upon  the  Almighty  Grod, 


CHAP,  vni.]  TSE  SOJ\rG  OF  SOLOMOy.  161 

incarnate  in  human  fonn,  by  whom  all  things  were  created,  and  by  whom  all  things 
consist.  We  lean  also  upon  Christ  as  man  ;  we  depend  upon  His  generous  human 
sympathies.  Of  a  woman  bora,  He  is  partaker  of  our  flesh  ;  He  enters  into  our  sick- 
nesses and  infirmities  with  a  pitiful  compassion,  which  He  cotild  not  have  felt  if  He 
had  not  been  the  Son  of  man.  We  depend  upon  the  love  of  His  humanity  as  well  as 
upon  the  potency  of  His  deity.  We  lean  upon  our  Beloved  as  God  and  man.  Wa 
lean  upon  Christ  Himself  in  all  His  offices.  We  lean  upon  Him  as  Priest ;  we  expect 
our  offerings,  and  our  praises,  and  our  prayers  to  be  received,  because  they  are 
presented  through  Him.  Our  leaning  for  acceptance  is  on  Him.  We  lean  upon  Him 
as  our  Prophet.  We  do  not  profess  to  know  or  to  be  able  to  discover  truth  ot 
ourselves,  but  we  sit  at  His  feet,  and  what  He  teaches  that  we  receive  aa  certainty. 
We  lean  upon  Him  as  our  King.  He  shall  fight  our  battles  for  us,  and  manage  all 
the  affairs  of  our  heavenly  citizenship.  We  nave  no  hope  of  victoir  but  in  the 
strength  of  Him  who  is  the  Son  of  David  and  the  King  of  kings.  We  lean  upon 
Christ  in  all  His  attributes.  Sometimes  it  is  His  wisdom — in  our  dilemmas  He  directs 
us  ;  at  other  times  it  is  His  faithfulness — in  our  strong  temptations  He  abides  the 
same.  At  one  time  His  power  gleams  out  like  a  golden  pillar,  and  we  rest  on  it,  and 
at  another  moment  his  tenderness  becomes  conspicuous,  and  we  lean  on  that. 
There  is  not  a  trait  of  His  character,  there  is  not  a  mark  of  His  person,  whether 
human  or  divine,  but  what  we  feel  it  safe  to  lean  upon,  because  He  is  as  a  whole 
Christ,  perfection's  own  self,  lovely  and  excellent  beyond  all  description.  We  lean 
our  entire  weight  upon  Him,  not  on  His  arm  ;  not  on  any  part  of  Hia  person,  but 
npon  Himself  do  we  depend.  III.  Hee  reasons  for  thus  leaking.  She  leaned 
on  her  Beloved  because  she  was  weak.  Strength  will  not  lean,  conscious  strength 
eeorns  dependence.  My  soul,  dost  thou  know  anything  of  thy  weakness  I  It  is  a 
sorrowful  lesson  to  learn ;  but  oh  !  it  is  a  blessed  and  profitable  lesson,  which  not 
only  must  be  learned,  but  which  it  were  well  for  thee  to  pray  to  learn  more  and 
more,  for  there  is  no  leaning  upon  Christ  except  in  proportion  as  you  feel  you  must. 
She  leaned,  again,  on  her  Beloved,  because  the  way  was  long.  She  had  been  going 
through  the  wilderness.  It  was  a  long  journey,  and  she  began  to  flag,  and  therefore 
she  leaned  ;  and  the  way  is  long  with  us,  we  have  been  converted  to  God  now  some 
of  us  these  twenty  years,  others  these  forty,  and  there  are  some  who  have  known  the 
Lord  more  than  sixty  years,  and  this  is  a  long  time  in  which  to  be  tempted  and 
tried,  for  sin  is  mighty  and  flesh  is  weak.  She  leaned,  again,  because  the  road  was 
perilous.  Did  you  notice,  she  came  up  from  the  wilderness  ?  The  wilderness  is  not 
at  all  a  safe  place  for  a  pilgrim.  Here  it  is  that  the  lion  prowls,  and  the  howl  of  the 
woK  is  heard,  but  she  leaned  on  her  Beloved,  and  she  was  safe.  If  the  sheep  fears 
the  wolf,  he  had  better  keep  close  to  the  shepherd,  for  then  the  shepherd's  rod  and 
staff  will  drive  the  wolf  away.  There  is  no  safety  for  us  except  in  close  communion 
with  Christ.  Again,  she  leaned  on  the  Beloved  because  her  route  was  ascending. 
Did  you  notice  it  ?     "  Coming  up."    The  Christian's  way  is  up — never  content  wiui 

fast  attainments,  but  up  ;  not  satisfied  with  graces  to  which  he  has  reached,  but  up. 
f  we  are  to  go  up,  we  must  lean.  Christ  is  higher  than  we  are  ;  if  we  lean,  we  shsQl 
rise  the  more  readily  to  His  elevation.  He  comes  down  to  us  that  we,  leaning  upon 
Him,  may  go  up  to  Him.  He  is  made  of  God  unto  you  sanctification  as  well  as 
redemption.  Again  the  spouse  leaned  on  her  Beloved  because  her  walk  was  daily 
separating  her  more  and  more  from  the  whole  host  of  her  other  companions.  The 
Church  is  in  the  wilderness,  but  this  traveller  was  coming  up  from  the  wilderness. 
She  was  getting  away  from  the  band  marching  through  the  desert,  getting  more  and 
more  alone.  It  is  so,  and  you  will  find  it  so  ;  the  nearer  you  get  to  Christ,  the 
more  lonely  you  must  necessarily  be  in  certain  respects.  The  spouse  leaned  upon 
her  Beloved  because  she  felt  sure  that  He  was  strong  enough  to  bear  her  weight. 
He  upon  whom  she  leaned  was  no  other  than  God  over  afl  blessed  for  ever,  who 
cannot  faU,  nor  be  discouraged.  She  leaned  yet  again,  because  He  was  her  Beloved. 
She  would  have  felt  it  unwise  to  lean  if  He  were  not  mighty  ;  she  would  have  been 
afraid  to  lean  if  He  had  not  been  dear  to  her.  So  it  is,  the  more  you  love  the  more 
you  trust,  and  the  more  you  trust  the  more  you  love.  IV.  The  person  and  the 
PEDIGREE  of  her  who  leaned  upon  her  Beloved.  The  text  says,  "Who  is  this? " 
What  made  them  inquire,  "Who  is  this  ?  "  It  was  because  they  were  so  astonished 
to  see  her  looking  so  happy  and  so  little  wearied.  Nothing  amazes  worldlings  more 
than  genuine  Christian  joy.  Who,  then,  is  this  that  leans  on  her  Beloved  ?  Her 
name  was  once  called  * '  outcast, "  whom  no  man  seeketh  after,  but  according  to  this 
old  book  her  name  is  now  Hephzibah,  for  the  Lord  delighteth  in  her.  The  name  of 
the  soul  that  trusts  in  God,  and  finds  peace  in  so  doing,  was  by  nature  a  name  of 

31 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  toc 


shame  and  sin.  We  were  afar  ofif  from  God  even  as  others  ;  and  if  anj  seal  is 
brought  to  trust  in  Christ,  it  is  not  from  any  natural  goodness  in  it,  or  any  innate 
propensity  towards  such  trusting ;  it  is  because  grace  has  wrought  a  wondrous  trans* 
formation,  and  (3od  the  Holy  Ghost  has  made  those  who  were  not  a  people  to  b« 
called  the  people  of  God.  Good  news  this  for  any  of  you  who  feel  your  guilt  this 
morning,     (fi.  H.  Spwgeon.) 

Yen.  6,  7.  Set  me  m  a  teal  upon  Thine  heart,  as  a  seal  upon  Thine  arm. — Tks 
ShvZamUe's  choice  prayer : — This  is  the  prayer  of  one  who  hath  the  present  enjov- 
ment  of  fellowship  with  Christ,  but  being  apprehensive  lest  this  communion  should 
be  interrupted,  she  avails  herself  of  the  opportunity  now  afforded  her  to  plead  for 


seal  upon  Thine  heart,  as  a  seal  ujwn  Thine  arm."  Oh  1  Lord,  let  me  know  that 
my  name  is  engraven  on  Thy  heart ;  not  only  let  it  be  there,  but  let  me  know 
it.  Write  my  name  not  only  in  Thy  heart,  but  may  it  be  as  a  signet  on  Thy  heart 
that  I  may  see  it.  II.  The  spouse  argues  with  her  liord  thus.  It  is  my  advantage 
that  Thou  shouldst  thus  wnte  my  name  upon  Thine  hand  and  heart,  for  I  know 
this  concerning  Thy  love,  that  it  is  strong  ;  that  it  is  firm  ;  that  it  has  a  wondrous 
intensity  ;  and  that  it  has  a  sure  and  unquenchable  eternity.  With  these  fottk 
rucAS  sine  backeth  up  her  suit.  1.  She  pleadeth  that  He  would  show  her  His  love, 
because  of  the  strength  of  it.  "  For  love  is  strong  as  death."  Death  is  but 
weakness  itself  when  compared  with  the  love  of  Christ.  What  a  sweet  reason  why 
I  should  have  a  share  in  it  1  What  a  blessed  argument  for  me  to  use  before  the 
throne  of  God !  Lord,  if  Thy  love  be  so  strong,  and  my  heart  be  so  hard,  and 
myself  so  powerless  to  break  it,  oh !  let  me  know  Thy  love,  that  it  may  overcome 
me,  that  it  may  enchain  me  with  its  sure  but  soft  fetters,  and  that  I  may  be  Thy 
willing  captive  evermore.  2.  Let  us  now  turn  to  the  second  plea — "  Jealousy  is 
cruel  as  the  grave."  The  idea  is  just  this,  that  the  love  of  Christ  in  the  form  of 
jealousy  is  as  hard  and  as  sternly  relentless  as  is  the  grave  and  heU.  Now  hell 
never  looses  one  of  its  bond-slaves.  Once  let  the  iron  gate  be  shut  upon  the  soul 
and  there  is  no  escape.  Well,  but  such  is  the  love  of  Christ.  If  just  now  we  had 
to  speak  of  its  strength,  we  have  now  to  speak  of  its  tenacity,  its  hardness,  its 
attachment  to  those  whom  it  has  chosen.  You  may  sooner  unlock  Hades  and  let 
loose  the  spirits  that  are  in  prison  there  than  ye  could  ever  snatch  one  from  the 
right  hand  of  Christ.  Ye  may  sooner  rob  death  of  its  prey  than  Jesus  of  His 
purchased  ones.  3.  If  the  love  of  Christ  is  strong  as  death  ;  if  it  be  such  that  it 
ean  never  be  moved  from  its  object,  yet  the  question  arises,  may  not  the  love  itself 
die  out !  Even  should  it  abide  the  same  in  its  purpose,  yet  may  not  its  intensity  be 
diminished  t  "No,"  says  the  Shulamite,  "it  is  an  attribute  of  Christ's  love  that 
•the  coals  thereof  are  coals  of  fire  which  hath  a  most  vehement  flame.'"  More 
forcible  is  the  language  of  the  original — "  The  coals  thereof  are  the  coals  of  God," — 
a  Hebrew  idiom  to  express  the  most  glowing  of  all  flames — "  the  coals  of  God  ! "  as 
though  it  were  no  earthly  flame,  but  something  far  superior  to  the  most  vehement 
affection  among  men.  It  is  not  like  fire  merely,  but  like  coals  of  fire,  always 
having  that  within  itself  which  supports  it.  Why  did  Christ  love  the  spouse  ! 
What  lit  the  fire  at  first  I  He  kindled  it  Himself.  There  was  no  reason  whatever 
why  Christ  should  love  any  of  us,  except  the  love  of  His  own  bowels.  And  what  is 
the  fuel  that  feeds  the  fire  1  Your  works  and  mine  ?  No,  brethren,  no,  no,  a 
thousand  times  no  ;  all  the  fuel  comes  from  the  same  place  ;  it  is  all  from  His 
bowels.  Well,  then,  may  we  understand  that  it  never  shall  grow  less,  but  always 
be  as  a  vehement  flame.  4.  We  shall  now  turn  to  the  last  argument  of  this  choice 
wayer,  which  is  equally  precious.  It  is  the  unquenchable  eternity  of  this  love, 
l^ere  is  that  in  its  very  essence  which  defies  any  opposite  quality  to  extinguish 
it.  The  argument  seems  to  me  to  run  thus — "  Yes,  but  if  Christ's  love  do  not  die 
out  of  itself — ^if  it  has  such  intensity  that  it  never  would  of  itself  fail,  yet  may  not 
you  and  I' put  it  out!"  No,  says  the  text,  "Many  waters  cannot  quench  love, 
neither  can  the  floods  drown  it'     (C.  E.  Spurgeon.) 

Yet.  7.  If  a  man  would  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house  for  love,  it  would 
utterly  be  contemned. — Unpurchasable  love : — ^That  is  a  general  truth,  applying  to 
all  forms  of  real  love  ;  you  cannot  purchase  love.  Who,  for  instance,  could  purchase 
a  mother's  love !    Take,  agaiu,  even  the  love  of  friends  ;  I  only  instance  tiiat  just 


'.  Tin.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  153 


to  show  how  true  our  text  is  in  relation  to  all  forms  of  love.  Damon  loyed  Pythias  ; 
the  two  friends  were  so  bound  together  that  their  names  became  household  words 
and  their  conduct  towards  one  another  giew  into  a  proverb.  Yet  Damon  never 
poTohased  the  heart  of  Pythias,  neither  old  Pythias  think  to  pay  a  yearly  stipend 
for  the  love  of  Damon.  No  ;  if  a  man  should  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house 
•Ten  for  human  love,  for  the  common  love  that  exists  between  man  aud  man. 
It  would  utterly  be  contemned.  Rest  assured  that  this  is  pre-eminently  true  wiien 
we  get  into  higher  regions,  when  we  come  to  think  of  the  love  of  Jesus,  and  when 
we  think  of  that  love  which  springs  up  in  the  human  breast  towards  Jesus  when  the 
Spirit  of  God  has  renewed  the  heart  and  shed  abroad  the  love  of  God  within  the 
Boul.  If  a  man  should  oflFer  to  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house  for  either  of  these 
forma  of  love,  it  would  utterly  be  contemned.  I.  We  will  begin  at  the  highest 
manifestation  of  love,  and  commime  together  upon  it.     So  let  me  say,  first,  that 

THB    LOVB    OF    OTTB    LORD  JeSUS  OhRIST  IS   ALTOGETHER  UN1URCHA8ABLE.      This 

fact  will  be  clear  to  us  if  we  give  it  a  moment's  careful  thought.  It  must  be  quite 
impossible  to  purchase  the  love  of  Christ,  because  it  is  inconceivable  that  He  ever 
could  be  mercenary.  The  pure  stream  of  His  love  leaps  like  the  crystal  rill,  and 
there  is  no  sediment  that  can  be  found  in  it ;  it  is  altogether  unmixed  love  to 
hb.  Besides,  there  is  another  point  that  renders  this  idea  of  purchasing  Christ's  love 
as  impossible  as  the  first  thought  shows  it  to  be  incrediWe  ;  for  all  things  are 
already  Christ's.  Therefore,  what  can  be  given  to  Him  wherewith  His  love  could 
be  purchased  f  Let  us  also  note  that,  if  Christ's  love  could  be  won  by  us  by  some- 
thing we  cordd  bring  to  Him  or  do  for  Him,  it  would  suppose  that  there  was 
■omething  of  ours  that  was  of  equal  merit  and  of  equal  value  with  His  love,  or, 
at  any  rate,  something  which  He  was  willing  to  accept  as  bearing  some  proportion 
to  His  love.  But,  indeed,  there  is  nothing  of  the  sort.  But  what  a  blessing  it 
is  that  we  have  the  love  of  Christ,  though  we  could  not  purchase  it  I  The  Son 
of  God  hath  loved  ua  ;  He  has  bestowed  upon  us  what  He  never  would  have 
gold  ns  ;  and  He  has  given  to  us  freely,  "  without  money  and  without  price."  The 
greatest  wonder  to  me  is  that  this  unpurchasable  love,  this  imendrng  love  is  mine  ; 
and  you  can  always  say,  each  one  of  you,  if  you  have  been  regenerated,  "  This  love 
is  mine  ;  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  loves  me  with  a  love  I  never  could  have  purchased." 
Peradventure,  some  one  is  saying  just  now,  "  I  wish  I  could  say  that."  Do  you 
really  wish  it  t  Then,  let  the  text  serve  to  guide  you  as  to  the  way  by  which  you 
may  yet  know  Christ's  love  to  you.  Do  not  try  to  purchase  it,  abandon  that  idea 
at  once.  "But  surely,  surely  we  may  do  something.  We  will  give  up  this  vice, 
we  will  renoimce  that  bad  habit,  we  will  be  strict  in  our  religiousness,  we  will  be 
attentive  to  all  moral  duties. "  So  you  should  ;  but  when  you  have  done  all  that, 
do  yon  think  you  have  done  enougn  to  win  His  love !  Is  the  servant  who  has  only 
done  what  he  ought  to  have  done  entitled  to  the  love  of  Us  master's  heart  because 
of  that  f  Thou  shalt  not  win  Christ's  love  so  ;  if  thou  hast  His  love  shed  abroad  in 
thy  heart,  thou  hast  infinitely  more  than  thou  hast  ever  earned.     II.  In  our  case, 

UOTHING  CAN  EVER  SERVE  AS  A  SUBSTITUTE  FOR  LOVE.      If  Christ  has  loved  US, 

or  if  we  are  desirotis  of  realizing  that  He  has  done  so,  the  one  thing  needful  and 
•Bsential  ia  that  we  have  true  love  to  Him.  God's  demand  of  each  one  who 
professes  to  be  His  child  is,  "  My  son,  give  me  thine  heart."  Love  He  must  have  ; 
this  is  His  lawful  demand.  His  people  delight  to  render  it ;  if  thou  dost  not,  then 
thou  art  none  of  His.  III.  The  saints'  love  is  not  purchased  bt  Christ's 
GIFTS.  The  love  of  sainte  to  their  Lord  is  not  given  to  Christ  because  of  His  gifte 
to  them.  We  love  our  Lord,  and  we  love  Him  all  the  more  because  of  the  many 
gifts  He  bestows  upon  ns  ;  but  His  gifts  do  not  win  our  love.  Oh,  it  is  "  Jesus 
Christ  Himself"  who  wins  the  love  of  our  hearte  !  If  He  had  not  given  us  Himself, 
we  should  never  have  ^ven  to  Him  ourselves.  All  else  that  may  be  supposed  to  be 
of  the  substance  of  His  house  would  not  have  won  His  people's  hearts,  imtil  at  last 
they  learnt  this  truth,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  made  them  feel  the  force  of  it,  "  He 
loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  "My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  His,"  is 
now  one  of  the  sweetest  stanzas  in  love's  canticle.  The  spouse  does  not  say,  ' '  His 
crown  is  mine.  His  throne  is  mine.  His  breastplate  is  mine,  His  crook  is  mine  "  ; 
she  delighte  in  everything  that  Chnst  has  as  a  King,  and  a  Priest,  and  a  Shepherd  ; 
but,  above  all  else,  that  which  wins  and  charms  her  heart  is  this,  "  He  Himself  is 
mine,  and  I  am  His."  But  I  meant  mainly  to  say,  under  this  head,  that  there  are 
some  of  Christ's  gifte  that  do  not  win  our  hearte,  that  is  to  say,  our  hearte  do  not 
depend  upon  them.  And  they  are,  first.  His  temporal  gifts.  I  am  very  thankful, 
.ana  I  trait  tiiat  all  Qod's  people  are  also,  for  health  and  strength.     I  have  lost 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  via. 

these  sometimes,  but  I  did  not  love  my  Lord  any  the  less  then  ;  neither  do  I  love 
Christ  this  day  because  I  am  free  from  pain.  If  I  were  not  free  from  pain,  I  would 
still  love  Him.  I  meant  also  to  say  that  we  do  not  love  Christ  because  of  His 
temporary  indulgence  of  us  in  spiritual  things.  You  know  our  Saviour  very 
frequently  favours  us  with  manifestations  of  His  presence.  We  are  overjoyed  when 
He  comes  very  near  to  us,  and  permits  us  to  put  our  fingers  into  the  prints  of  th« 
nails.  He  takes  aU  the  clouds  out  of  our  sky,  and  gives  us  the  bright  shining  of 
the  sun  ;  or  He  opens  the  lattices,  and  shows  us  Himself  in  a  way  only  second 
to  that  in  which  we  shall  see  Him  when  we  behold  Him  face  to  face.  And  oh,  how 
we  love  Him  then !  But,  thank  God,  when  He  draws  the  lattice  back  again,  and 
hides  His  face,  we  do  not  leave  ofif  loving  Him  because  of  that.  Our  love  to  oar 
Lord  does  not  depend  upon  the  weather.  Even  if  we  should  be  called  to  pasa 
through  terrible  trials  and  adversities,  and  should  have  to  walk  a  long  time  in 
clouds  and  darkness,  yet  still  would  we  love  Him  and  rejoice  in  Him.     IV.  Thi 

l^VB    OF    SAINTS    CANNOT    BE    BOUGHT    OFF    FROM    ChBIST    AT    ANY    PRICB.      The 

saints  sell  Christ  ?  No,  they  are  too  much  like  their  Master  to  do  that.  You 
recollect  how  Satan  took  their  Master  to  the  top  of  a  high  moimtain,  and  showed 
Him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the  ^ory  of  them,  and  said,  "All  these 
things  wiU  I  give  Thee,  if  Thou  wilt  faU  down  and  worship  me."  Wicked  thief  1 
It  was  not  his  to  give ;  yet  he  tempted  Christ  in  that  way,  but  Jesus  answered, 
"  Get  thee  hence,  Satan  :  for  it  is  written,  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God, 
and  Him  only  shalt  thou  serve."  If  any  of  Christ's  followers  are  tempted  in  the 
same  fashion,  let  them  give  the  same  reply.  All  the  substance  of  the  devil's 
house  could  not  win  the  love  of  that  man  who  has  set  hia  affection  on  Jesoa. 
(lUd.) 

Yer.  12.  Uy  vineyard,  which  is  Mine,  is  before  Me :  thou,  0  Solomon,  must  have 
a  thonsand,  and  those  that  keep  the  fruit  thereof  two  hundred. — Christ's  love  for 
His  vineyard: — You  are  aware  that  these  Canticles  are  responsive  songs, — that  one 
sentence  is  uttered  by  Solomon,  and  the  next  by  Solyma,  his  spouse.  We  believe 
that,  in  this  "Song  of  Songs,  which  is  Solomon's,"  we  also  hear  Christ  speaking 
to  His  Church,  His  bride,  and  the  Church  responding  to  His  words  of  love  in  tones 
which  His  love  has  suggested  to  her.  The  fact  that  it  is  a  responsive  song  some- 
times renders  it  the  more  difficult  to  understand,  because  it  is  not  easy,  in  every 
case,  to  discover  whether  it  is  Solomon  or  Solyma — Christ  or  His  Church — that  is 
speaking.  The  first  sentence  in  our  text  is  just  of  that  character  ;  it  may  be  Christ 
who  says,  ' '  My  vineyard,  which  is  Mine,  is  before  Me  ; "  or  it  may  be  His  Church 
which  is  saying,  "My  vineyard,  which  is  mine,  is  before  me."  With  regard  to  the 
latter  part  of  the  verse,  we  have  no  difficulty,  for  we  can  see,  upon  the  very  face  of 
it,  that  it  is  addressed  by  the  spouse,  the  bride,  to  her  Divine  Bridegroom,  to  whom 
she  says,  "Thou,  0  Solomon,  must  have  a  thousand."  I.  Let  us  look  at  the  first 
sentence:  "My  vineyard,  which  is  Mine,  is  before  Me."  We  have  no  difficulty  in 
understanding  that  this  vineyard  is  Christ's  Church.  The  Master  here,  then,  claims 
a  special  property  in  His  Church.  Twice  does  He  mention  that  claim :  "My  vine- 
yard, which  is  Mine,"  as  if  He  meant  to  assert  His  rights,  and  to  maintain  them 
against  all  comers ;  being  ready  to  defend  them  in  Heaven's  High  Court  of 
Chancery,  or  before  all  the  hosts  of  His  enemies  who  might  seek  to  snatch  His 
inheritance  from  Him.  "Whatever  is  not  Mine,"  saith  the  Divine  Lover,  "My 
Church  is.  She  is  so  mine  that,  if  I  gave  up  Lebanon,  if  I  should  renounce  Bashan, 
and  give  up  all  the  rest  of  My  possessions,  I  must  retain  Zion,  My  vineyard.  My 
best-beloved."  First,  He  claims  the  Church  as  His  own  by  His  Father's  gift.  You 
know  that  the  Church  is  the  property  of  all  the  three  Persons  of  the  holy  and 
blessed  Trinity.  She  is  the  Father's  property  by  election  ;  she  is  the  Son's  property 
by  donation,  passing  from  the  hand  of  the  Father  to  that  of  the  Mediator ;  a,n% 
then,  the  Church  is  the  Spirit's  by  His  indwelling  and  inhabitation ;  so  that  all 
three  of  the  Divine  Persons  have  a  right  to  the  Church  for  some  special  office  which 
they  exercise  towards  her.  So  Christ  claims  His  Church  as  His  Father's  gift,  a 
love-token,  a  reward,  a  sign  of  the  Father's  favour  and  regard  towards  Him.  Next, 
Christ's  Church  is  His  by  purchase.  More  than  this,  the  Church  is  Christ's  by  ona 
other  tie,  which,  perhaps,  makes  it  dearer  still  to  Him.  She  is  His  bride,  Hia 
spouse.  But  we  must  pass  on  to  notice  that,  in  the  first  sentence  of  our  text,  we 
are  not  only  told  about  Christ's  special  right  to  His  Church,  but  also  about  His 
special  care  and  observation  of  her:  "My  vineyard,  which  is  Mine,  is  before  Me." 
The  Church  is  "before  "  Christ  in  the  sense  that  He  so  loves  her  that  He  never  ha* 


CHAP,  yiii.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOIT.  185 

her  out  of  His  presence.  The  vineyard  is  so  dear  to  the  Husbandman  that  He  never 
leaves  it.  His  Church  may  be  willing  to  endure  His  absence  for  a  while,  but  He 
loves  her  so  much  that  He  cannot  bear  to  be  away  from  her.  He  will  always  pour 
upon  her  the  beams  of  His  love,  and  ever  fix  upon  her  the  affection  of  His  whole 
heart.  The  expression,  "My  vineyard,  which  is  Mine,  is  before  Me,"  may  also 
mean  that  Jesus  is  always  caring  for  it,  as  well  as  always  loving  it.  There  is  also, 
in  this  expression,  not  only  the  sense  of  love  and  care,  but  also  of  knowledge  :  "  My 
vineyard,  which  is  Mine,  is  before  Me."  Christ  knows  every  vine  in  the  vineyard, 
and  He  knows  all  the  fruit  that  is  on  each  vine,  and  how  much  there  was  last  year, 
and  how  much  there  will  be  in  years  to  come.  II.  Now,  regard  this  first  sentence 
of  our  text  as  thk  langtiagb  of  the  Chttrch  itself.  According  to  the  eleventh 
verse,  "Solomon  had  a  vineyard  at  Baal-hamon ;  he  let  out  the  vineyard  unto 
keepers  ;  every  one  for  the  fruit  thereof  was  to  bring  a  thousand  pieces  of  silver." 
So,  dear  brethren,  every  one  of  us  whom  the  Lord  has  brought  to  Himself  has  a  part 
of  His  vineyard  to  keep  for  Him.  We  leave  the  work  of  saving  our  souls  in  higher 
Hands  than  our  own ;  but  after  our  souls  are  saved,  then  we  have  a  charge  to  keep, 
and  that  charge  is,  to  publish  the  name  and  fame  of  Jesus  to  the  utmost  of  our 
power,  to  seek  to  bring  others  under  the  sound  of  the  Gospel,  and  to  tell  them  what 
they  must  do  to  be  saved.    III.  I  will  now  turn  to  the  second  part  of  our  text,  which 

is  THE  LANGUAGE  OF  THE  ChURCH  TO  HER  GREAT  PROPRIETOR  AND  LORD  :    "ThoU, 

O  Solomon,  must  have  a  thousand" — "wMsfhave  a  thousand."  Whatever  others 
have,  our  Lord  must  have  Solomon's  portion;  "and  those  that  keep  the  fruit 
thereof  two  hundred. "  So,  then,  in  the  first  place,  the  finit  of  the  vineyard  belongs 
to  Christ ;  but,  in  the  second  place,  both  Christ  and  His  Church  agree  to  reward  the 
keepers  of  the  vineyard,  and  to  let  them  have  their  two  hundred.  First,  then,  all 
the  fruit  of  the  vineyard  belongs  to  Christ,  and  He  must  have  it.  Dwell  on  that  word 
"must,"  and  let  each  one  of  you  feel  the  blessed  necessity.  The  ministry  must 
etiU  be  powerful,  the  prayer-meetings  must  continue  to  be  full  of  faith  and  fervour, 
the  members  must  keep  on  striving  together  in  love  for  the  extension  of  Christ's 
kingdom.  His  kingdom  must  come,  and  His  will  must  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  heaven. 
We  will  not  put  in  an  "if"  or  a  "  perhaps  ";  it  «iws<  be  so  and  we  will  not  be  satisfied 
unless  it  is.  "Thou,  0  Solomon,  must  have  a  thousand."  Now  I  will  conclude 
with  a  few  remarks  upon  the  last  words  of  the  text :  "and  those  that  keep  the  fruit 
thereof  two  hundred,  '  which  means  that  the  keepers  of  the  vineyard  are  to  receive 
a  reward.  Christ's  ministers  are  to  receive  the  love,  and  regard,  and  esteem  of  His 
people  for  His  sake.  Our  Master  is  a  blessed  Paymaster,  for  He  pays  us  while  we 
are  doing  His  work,  in  the  work  itself ;  He  pays  us  when  the  work  is  done,  and  then 
He  says  that  He  has  only  begun  to  pay  us  ;  for,  when  the  whole  of  our  work  here  is 
over,  we  shall  enter  into  His  joy,  and  receive  the  fulness  of  our  reward.     {Ibid.) 

Yet.  18.  Then  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens,  the  companions  hearken  to  thy 
voice :  cause  Me  to  hear  it. — The  Bridegroom's  parting  word : — The  Song  is  almost 
ended  :  the  bride  and  Bridegroom  have  come  to  their  last  stanzas,  and  they  are  about 
to  part  for  a  while.  They  utter  their  adieux,  and  the  Bridegroom  says  to  his  beloved, 
"Thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens,  the  companions  hearken  to  thy  voice :  cause 
Me  to  hear  it."  In  other  words — when  I  am  far  away  from  thee,  fill  thou  this 
garden  with  My  Name,  and  let  thy  heart  commune  with  Me.  She  promptly  replies, 
and  it  is  her  last  word  till  He  cometh,  "  Make  haste,  my  Beloved,  and  be  Thou  like 
to  a  roe  or  to  a  young  hart  upon  the  mountains  of  spices."  These  farewell  words  of  the 
Well-beloved  are  very  precious  to  His  chosen  bride.  Last  words  are  always  noticed : 
the  last  words  of  those  who  loved  us  dearly  are  much  valued  ;  the  last  words  of  one 
who  loved  us  to  the  death  are  worthy  of  a  deathless  memory.  I.  We  notice,  first  of 
all,  AN  APPOINTED  RESIDENCE.  The  Bridegroom,  speaking  of  His  bride,  says,  "Thou 
that  dwellest  in  the  gardens. "  This  title  is  given  to  believers  here  on  earth,  first, 
by  way  of  distinction — distinction  from  the  Lord  Himself.  He  whom  we  love 
dwelleth  in  the  ivory  palaces,  wherein  they  make  Him  glad :  He  has  gone  up  into 
His  Father's  throne,  and  has  left  these  gardens  down  below.  He  Himself  is  an 
inhabitant  of  the  palaces,  for  there  He  best  accomplishes  the  eternal  purposes  of 
love  ;  but  His  Church  is  the  inhabitress  of  the  gardens,  for  there  she  best  fulfils  the 
decrees  of  the  Most  High.  Here  she  must  abide  a  while  until  all  the  will  of  the 
Lord  shall  be  accomplished  in  her  and  by  her,  and  then  she  also  shall  be  taken  up, 
and  shall  dwell  with  her  Lord  above.  The  title  is  given  by  way  of  distinction,  and 
marks  the  difference  between  her  condition  and  that  of  her  Lord.  Next,  it  is  given 
by  way  of  eigoyment.    She  dwells  in  the  gardens,  which  are  plaoei  of  deught. 


156  THE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tm. 

Your  portion  is  with  the  Lord's  saints,  yea,  with  Himself ;  and  what  can  be  a  better 
portion  ?  Is  it  not  as  the  garden  of  the  Lord  ?  You  dwell  where  the  great  Husband- 
man spends  His  care  upon  you  and  takes  a  pleasure  in  you.  You  dwell  where  the 
infinite  skill  and  tenderness  and  wisdom  of  God  manifest  themselves  in  the  training 
of  the  plants  which  His  own  right  hand  has  planted  ;  yon  dweU  in  the  Church  of 
God,  which  is  laid  out  in  due  order,  and  hedged  about  and  guarded  by  heavenly 
power ;  and  you  are,  therefore,  most  fitly  said  to  dwell  in  the  gardens.  Be  thank- 
ful:  it  is  a  place  of  enjoyment  for  you :  awake  and  sing,  for  the  lines  have  fallen 
unto  you  in  pleasant  places.  The  title  is  also  used  by  way  of  employment  as  well 
as  enjoyment.  If  we  had  not  our  daUy  tasks  to  fulfil,  rest  would  corrode  into  rust, 
and  recreation  would  soon  gender  corruption.  You  and  I  are  set  in  the  garden  of 
the  Church  because  there  is  work  for  us  to  do  which  will  be  beneficial  to  others  and 
to  ourselves  also.  Some  have  to  take  the  broad  axe  and  hew  down  mighty  trees  of 
error ;  others  of  a  feebler  sort  can  with  a  child's  hand  train  the  tendril  of  a  climbing 
plant,  or  drop  into  its  place  a  tiny  seed.  One  may  plant  and  another  may  water : 
one  may  sow  and  another  gather  fruit.  One  may  cut  up  weeds  and  another  prune 
vines.  God  hath  work  in  His  Church  for  us  all  to  do,  and  He  has  left  us  here  that  we 
may  do  it.  "0  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens  1 "  The  title  sets  forth  employment 
constant  and  engrossing.  It  means  also  eminence.  It  speaks  with  emphasis  to  those 
who  dwell  where  sweet  spiritual  fruits  are  plentiful,  where  odours  and  perfumes  load 
the  air,  where  the  land  floweth  with  milk  and  honey.  If  suiy  of  you  happen  to  dwell 
where  Christ  is  set  forth  evidently  crucified  among  you,  and  where  your  hearts  do 
leap  for  very  joy  because  the  King  Himself  comes  near  to  feast  His  saints  and  make 
them  glad  in  His  presence,  then  it  is  to  you  that  my  text  hath  a  voice  and  a  caU : 
"Thou  that  dweUest  in  the  gardens,  in  the  choicest  places  of  all  Immanuel's  land, 
let  Me  hear  thy  voice."  Yet  one  more  word.  The  title  here  employed  is  not  only 
for  eminence  but  for  permanence.  "  0  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens."  If  you 
are  only  permitted  to  enjoy  sound  gospel  teaching  now  and  again,  and  then  are 
forced  to  cry,  "It  maybe  another  twelve  months  before  I  shaU  be  again  fed  on 
royal  dainties."  Then  you  are  in  a  trying  case,  and  you  need  to  cry  to  God  for 
help :  but  blessed  are  those  who  dwell  in  the  good  land,  and  daily  fill  their  homera 
with  heavenly  manna.  "Blessed  are  they  that  dwell  in  Thy  house:  they  will  be 
still  praising  Thee."  No  spot  on  earth  is  so  dear  to  the  Chnstian  as  that  whereon 
he  meets  h£  Lord.  Beloved,  if  you  dwell  in  the  gardens  you  have  a  double  privi- 
lege, not  only  being  found  in  a  fat  and  fertile  place,  but  in  living  there  continually. 
You  might  well  forego  a  thousand  comforts  for  the  sake  of  this  one  delight,  for  under 
the  Gospel  your  soul  is  made  to  drink  of  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined.  II.  Secondly, 
iet  us  note  the  eecorded  converse:  "Thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens,  the 
companions  hearken  to  thy  voice."  She  was  in  the  gardens,  but  she  was  not  quiet 
there,  and  why  should  she  be  ?  God  gives  us  tongues  on  purpose  that  they  should 
be  used.  Now,  observe  that  evidently  the  spouse  held  with  her  companions  frequent 
intercourse, — "The  companions  hearken  to  thy  voice."  There  should  be  among 
those  who  are  children  of  the  common  Father  a  mutual  love,  and  they  should  show 
this  by  frequent  commerce  in  their  precious  things,  making  a  sacred  bai'ter  with  one 
another.  Such  converse  ought  to  be  as  usual  as  the  talk  of  children  of  one  family. 
And  next,  it  should  be  willing  and  influential ;  for  if  you  notice,  it  is  put  here : 
"  Thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens,  the  companions  hearken  to  thy  voice."  They 
do  not  merely  hear  it,  and  say  to  themselves,  "  I  wish  she  would  be  quiet,"  but 
they  hearken,  they  lend  an  ear,  they  listen  gladly.  The  converse  of  the  bride  in 
the  gardens  was  constant,  and  it  was  greatly  esteemed  by  those  who  enjoyed  it.  I 
gather  from  the  text,  rather  by  implication  than  otherwise,  that  the  converse  was 
commendable ;  for  the  Bridegroom  does  not  say  to  the  spouse,  "Thou  that  dwellest 
in  the  gardens,  thy  companions  hear  too  much  of  thy  voice."  No ;  He  evidently 
mentions  the  fact  with  approval,  because  He  draws  an  argument  from  it  why  He  also 
should  hear  that  selfsame  voice.  Brothers,  I  leave  it  to  yourselves  to  judge  whether 
your  communications  with  one  another  are  always  such  as  they  should  be.  Are 
they  always  worthy  of  you  I  Brethren,  make  your  conversation  such  that  it  may 
be  commended  by  Christ  Himself.  These  communications  were,  no  doubt,  very  bene< 
ficial.  As  iron  sharpeneth  iron,  so  does  a  man's  countenance  his  iriend.  In  fact, 
our  communications  with  one  another  ought  to  be  preparatory  to  higher  communica« 
tions  still.  The  converse  of  saints  on  earth  should  be  a  rehearsal  of  their  everlasting 
communion  in  heaven.  III.  Now  comes  the  pith  of  the  text :  intitbd  fellowship 
— "The  companions  hear  thy  voice :  cause  Me  to  hear  it."  Now,  I  note  concerning 
this  invitation,  first  of  all,  tnat  it  is  very  loving  and  condescending  to  us  that  the 


CHAi'.  Till.]  TEE  SONG  OF  SOLOMOJT.  15T 


Lord  should  wish  to  hear  our  voice.  Is  it  not  marvellous  that  He,  the  infinitely 
blessed,  should  want  to  hear  our  voices  when  all  that  He  hath  heard  from  us  has  been 
begging,  sighing,  and  a  few  poor  broken  hymns  ?  It  is  condescending  and  gracious, 
ana  yet  how  natural  it  is  !  How  like  to  Christ  1  Love  ever  seeks  the  company  of 
that  which  it  loves.  We  may  truly  add,  that  this  invitation  to  fellowship  is  a 
blessed  and  profitable  request.  We  shall  find  it  so  if  we  carry  it  out,  especially 
those  of  us  who  ai'e  called  by  God  to  use  our  voices  for  Him  among  the  crowds  of 
our  companions.  We  shall  never  fitly  handle  the  word  of  God  without  prayer. 
When  we  pray  we  are  taught  how  to  speak  the  words  to  others.  Salvation  and  sup- 
plication are  a  blessed  pair.  Put  the  two  together,  so  that,  when  ^ou  speak  to 
others  about  salvation,  you  do  it  after  having  baptized  your  own  soul  into  supplica- 
tion. ' '  The  companions  hear  thy  voice  :  cause  Me  to  hear  it :  before  thou  speakest 
with  them  speak  to  Me  :  whilst  thou  art  still  speaking  with  them  still  speak  with 
Me  ;  and  when  thy  speaking  to  men  is  done,  return  imto  thy  rest  and  again  speak 
with  Me. "  This  invitation  is  a  many-sided  one ;  for  when  the  Bridegroom  says, 
•'  Cause  Me  to  hear  it,"  He  means  that  she  should  talk  to  Him  va.  all  sorts  of  ways. 
Frequently  we  should  be  heard  in  praise.  Oh,  let  the  Lord  hear  your  voice  !  Get 
up  early  to  be  alone  with  Him.  So  let  it  be  with  all  your  complaints  and  petitions  ; 
let  them  be  for  Jesus  only.  Speak  with  Jesus  Christ,  in  little  broken  accents,  by  way 
of  frequent  ejaculation.  The  best  of  Christian  fellowship  may  be  carried  on  in 
single  syllables.  When  in  the  middle  of  business  you  can  whisper,  "My  Lord  and 
my  God !  "  You  can  dart  a  glance  upward,  heave  a  sigh,  or  let  fall  a  tear,  and  so 
will  Jesus  hear  your  voice  1  IV.  I  find  according  to  the  Hebrew  that  the  text  has 
in  it  a  bequested  testimony.  According  to  learned  interpreters  the  Hebrew  runs 
thus :  " Cause  to  hear  Me."  Now,  that  may  mean  what  I  have  said,  "Cause  Me  to 
hear  "  ;  but  it  may  also  mean,  "  Cause  them  to  hear  Me. "  Now  hearken  ;  you  thali 
are  in  Christ's  garden :  make  those  who  dwell  in  that  garden  with  you  to  hear  from 
you  much  about  Him.  In  the  Church  every  one  has  a  right  to  talk  about  the  Head 
of  the  Church.  In  the  garden,  at  any  rate,  if  not  in  the  wild  wilderness,  let  the 
Rose  of  Sharon  be  sweetly  spoken  of.  Let  His  name  be  as  ointment  poured  forth  in 
all  the  Church  of  God.  Again,  you,  according  to  the  text,  are  one  that  can  make 
people  hear,  so  that  "the  companions  hearken  to  thy  voice  ;"  then  make  them  to 
Lear  of  Jesus.  If  you  do  not  speak  about  Christ  to  strangers,  do  speak  to  your 
companions.  They  wiU  hearken  to  you  ;  therefore  let  them  hearken  to  the  word  of 
the  Lord.  Oh,  cause  Christ  to  be  heard.  Hammer  on  that  anvil  always :  if  you 
make  no  music  but  that  of  the  harmonious  blacksmith  it  wiU  suffice.  Ring  it  out 
with  sturdy  blows — "Jesus,  Jesus,  Jesus  crucified."  Hammer  away  at  that.  "  Now 
you  are  on  the  right  string,  man,"  said  the  Duke  of  Argyle,  when  the  preacher 
came  to  speak  upon  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  needed  no  duke  to  certify  that.  Harp  on 
that  string.  Make  Jesus  to  be  as  commonly  known  as  now  He  is  commonly 
unknown.  So  may  God  bless  you  as  long  as  you  dwell  in  these  gardens,  tiU  the 
day  break  and  the  shadows  flee  away,     (ifeid.) 

Yer.  14.  Hake  haste,  my  Beloved,  and  be  Thou  like  to  a  roe  or  to  a  young  hart 
upon  the  mountains  of  spices. — Come,  my  Beloved : — The  Song  of  Songs  describes  the 
love  of  Jesus  Christ  to  His  people,  and  it  ends  with  an  intense  desire  on  the  part  of 
the  Church  that  the  Lord  Jesus  should  come  back  to  her.  The  last  word  of  the 
lover  to  the  beloved  one  is,  "Speed  thy  return  ;  make  haste  and  come  back." 
I.  Notice,  first,  what  the  Church  here  calls  her  Lord.  Observe,  the  spouse 
first  calls  her  Lord,  "Beloved,"  and  secondly,  "My  Beloved."  Christ  is  our 
"  Beloved."  This  is  a  word  of  affection  ;  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  object  of 
affection  to  us.     Brethren,  true  religion  has  many  sides  to  it ;  true  religion  is 

{)ractical,  it  is  also  contemplative ;  bnt  it  is  not  true  religion  at  all  if  it  is  not  full  of 
ove  and  affection.  Jesus  must  reign  in  your  heart,  or  else,  though  you  may  give 
Him  what  place  you  like  in  your  head,  you  have  not  truly  received  Him.  To  Jesus, 
beyond  all  others,  is  applicable  this  title  of  the  Beloved,  for  they  who  know  Him 
love  Him.  "  My  Beloved."  If  nobody  else  loves  Him,  I  do.  This  is  a  distingiiish- 
ing  affection  ;  and  I  love  Him  because  He  belongs  to  me  ;  He  is  mine.  He  has  given 
Himself  to  me  ;  and  I  have  chosen  Him  because  He  first  chose  me  ;  He  is  "  my 
Beloved."  I  am  not  ashamed  to  put  Him  in  front  of  all  others  ;  and  when  men  say, 
"What  is  thy  Beloved  more  than  another  beloved  ?  "  I  can  tell  them  that  "  My 
Beloved  "  is  more  than  all  the  earthly  beloveds  put  together.  II.  Now  I  will  lead 
you  on  to  the  second  division  of  my  subject.  I  have  shown  you  what  the  Church 
calls  her  Lord ;  now,  in  the  second  place,  I  wiU  tell  you  whencs  shs  calls  Him  : 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin. 

"  Make  haste,  my  Beloved,  and  be  Thou  like  to  a  roe  or  to  a  young  hart  upon  tha 
mountains  of  spices."  What  does  that  mean  t  She  cries  to  Him  to  come  from  the 
place  where  He  now  is,  which  she  calls  the  "  mountains  of  spices."  "What  are  these 
epices  1  Are  they  not  Christ's  infinite  merits,  which  perfume  heaven  and  earth  ! 
The  foul  corruption  of  our  sins  is  not  perceptible,  because  of  the  mountains  of  spices. 
Behold  this  wondrous  sanitary  power  of  Divine  grace  ;  these  mo\mtains  of  spicea 
more  than  nullify  the  foulness  of  our  sins.  Christ's  merit  is  perpetually  before  the 
eye  of  His  Father,  so  that  no  longer  does  He  perceive  our  sins.  What  shall  I  say 
next  of  these  mountains  of  spices  I  Are  they  not  our  Lord's  perpetual  and  prevail- 
ing prayers  ?  He  intercedes  for  His  people  before  the  throne  of  God.  Now,  this  is 
where  Jesus  is  now  ;  not  here,  in  this  foul,  polluted  world,  but  up  yonder  He  resta 
in  the  mountains  of  spices  ;  and  the  prayer  of  His  Church  continually  is,  '*  Come, 
my  Beloved  !  Make  haste,  my  Beloved  t  Be  Thou  like  to  a  roe  or  a  young  hart 
upon  the  mountains  of  spices."  III.  We  have  noticed  what  the  Church  calls  her  Lord, 
and  whence  she  calls  Him  ;  now,  thirdly,  note  how  she  calls  Him.  She  says, 
"  Make  haste,  my  Beloved,  make  haste.  '  Why  is  it  that  all  the  Church  of  God, 
and  each  individual  Christian  in  particular,  should  be  found  anxious  for  the  speedy 
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  I  think,  surely,  that  this  is  the  result  of  true 
love.  If  we  love  our  Lord,  we  shall  long  for  His  appearing ;  be  you  sure  of  that,  it 
is  the  natural  result  of  ardent  affection.  But,  notwithstanding  this,  beloved,  w« 
sometimes  need  certain  incentives  to  stir  up  our  souls  to  cry  for  our  Lord's  return. 
One  reason  that  ought  to  make  the  believer  long  for  Christ  s  coming  is  that  it  will 
end  this  conflict.  Our  lot  is  cast  in  a  wretched  time,  when  many  things  are  said  and 
done  that  grieve  and  vex  God's  Holy  Spirit,  and  all  who  are  in  sympathy  with  Him. 
"Come,  Lord  !  Make  haste,  my  Beloved  1  Come  to  the  rescue  of  Thy  weak  and 
feeble  servants ;  come,  come,  come,  we  beseech  Thee  !  "  Put  yourself  into  this  great 
fight  for  the  faith  ;  and  if  you  have  to  bear  the  brunt  of  the  battle,  you  will  soon  be  as 
eager  as  I  am  that  Jesus  should  make  haste,  and  come  to  your  rehef.  You  also  will 
cry,  *'  Make  haste,  my  Beloved,"  when  you  think  what  wonders  He  will  work  at 
His  coming.  What  will  Christ  do  at  His  coming  ?  He  will  raise  the  dead.  Mine 
eyes  shall  see  Him  in  that  day.  "I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,"  etc.  And 
when  He  comes,  beloved,  remember  that  then  shall  be  the  time  of  the  glory  of  Hia 
people  :  "Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their 
Father."  Slander  will  be  rolled  away  in  the  day  when  Christ  cometh.  The  wicked 
shall  awake  to  everlasting  contempt,  but  the  righteous  to  an  everlasting  justification. 
StUl,  there  is  another  reason  why  we  say,  "  Make  haste,  my  Beloved."  It  is  this. 
We  desire  to  share  in  Christ's  glory ;  but  our  chief  desire  is  that  our  Lord  may  be 
glorified.  To  every  loyal  soldier  of  King  Jesus,  this  is  the  best  thought  in  con- 
nection with  His  Second  Advent,  that  when  He  comes,  it  will  be  to  be  admired  in 
His  saints,  and  to  be  glorified  in  all  them  that  believe.  Then  shall  there  b« 
universal  acclamations  to  Him,  and  His  enemies  shall  hide  their  heads  in  shame  and 
dismay.    (<7.  H,  Spwrgeon.) 


rrri  I  III"  i  Jnits ,  ^v"'""^-^""'  '-■fary 


1    1012  01128  4926 


Date  Due 

^            ■■« 

-^'  ^  3  '41, 

—* 

^ — 

i 

^  2l     i- 

■  lAP  r      -  - 1^ 

^'^^Wl 

^^^^^ 

f) 

