DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe19wesl 


THE 


WORKS 

OF  THE 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY*  M.  A« 

Late  Fellow  of  Lincoln-College,  Oxford, 




Volume  XIX. 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  Wine-Street* 

MDCCLXXIII, 


r 


* 


' 


: . - 


i. 


■ 


C 3 3 


ZChr  i ‘ fc'<VS 

vys-is,  we* 

V > I H, 

- f—r 


A- 

LETTER 

TO  A 

ROMAN  CATHOLIC. 


a.  '\7"  O U have  heard  ten  thoufand  Rories  of 
us  who  are  commonly  called  Proteftants, 
of  which  if  you  believe  only  one  in  a thoufand, 
you  mull  think  very  hardly  of  us.  But 
this  is  quite  contrary  to  our  Lord’s  rule,  Judge 
not  that  ye  be  not  judged ; and  has  many  ill  confe- 
rences, particularly  this,  It  inclines  us  to  think 
as  hardly  of  you.  Hence  we  are  on  both  fides 
lefs  willing  to  help  one  another,  and  more  ready 
to  hurt  each  other.  Hence  brotherly  love  is  ut- 
terly deltroyed : and  each  fide  looking  on  the 
other  as  monitors,  gives  way  to  anger,  hatred, 
malice,  to  every  unkind  affedtiont  which  have 
frequently  broke  out  in  fuch  inhuman  barbari- 
ties, as  are  fcarce  named  among  the  Heathens. 

A 2 2 . Now 


I 4 J 

2.  Now  can  nothing  be  done,  even  allowing 
vs  oa  both  Tides  to  retain  our  own  opinions,  for 
the  foftening  our  hearts  towards  each  other,  the 
giving  a check  to  this  flood  of  unkindnefs,  and 
reftoring  at  leaft  fome  fmall  degree  of  love  a* 
mong  our  neighbours  and  countrymen  ? Do  not 
you  wifh  for  this  ? Are  you  not  fully  convinced, 
that  malice,  hatred,  revenge,  bitternefs,  whether 
in  us  or  in  you,  in  our  hearts  or  yours,  are  an 
abomination  to  the  Lord  ? Be  our  opinions  right 
or  be  they  wrong,  thefe  tempers  are  undeniably 
wrong.  They  are  the  broad  road  that  leads  to 
deftruftion,  to  the  nethermofl  hell. 

g.  I do  not  fuppofe  all  the  bitternefs  is  on  your 
fide.  I know  there  is  too  much  on  our  fide 
alfo.  So  much  that  I fear  many  Proteftants  (fo 
called)  will  be  angry  at  me  too,  for  writing  to 
you  in  this  manner  ; and  will  fay,  “ ’Tis  {hewing 
you  too  much  favour ; you  deferve  no  fuch 
treatment  at  our  hands.” 

4.  But  I think  you  do.  I think  you  deferve 
the  tenderefl  regard  I can  {hew,  were  it  only 
becaufe  the  fame  God  hath  raifed  you  and  me 
from  the  dull  of  the  earth,  and  has  made  us  both 
capable  of  loving  and  enjoying  him  to  eternitv  : 
were  it  only  becaufe  the  Son  of  God  has  bought 
you  and  me  with  his  own  blood.  How  much 
more,  if  you  are  a perfon  fearing  God  ("as  with- 
out queftior.  many  of  you  are)  and  fludying  to 
have  a confcience  void  of  offence  towards  God 
and  towards  man  P 


5.  I fliall 


[ 5 J 

5.  I fhall  therefore  endeavour  as  mildly  and 
inoffenfively  as  I can,  to  remove  in  fome  mea- 
fure  the  ground  of  your  unkindnefs,  by  plainly 
declaring  what  our  belief,  and  what  our  pia&ice 
is  : that  you  may  fee,  we  are  not  altogether  fuch 
monfters  as  perhaps  you  imagined  us  to  be. 

A true  Protefiant  may  exprefs  his  belief  in 
thefe,  or  the  like  words. 

6.  As  I am  allured,  that  there  is  an  infinite 
and  independent  Being,  and  that  it  is  impoflible 
there  fhould  be  more  than  One  ; fo  I believe, 
that  this  One  God  is  the  Father  of  all  things,  ef- 
pecially  of  angels  and  men  : That  he  is  in  a pe- 
culiar manner  the  Father  of  thofe  whom  he  re- 
generates by  his  Spirit,  whom  he  adopts  in  his 
Son,  as  co-heirs  with  him,  and  crowns  with  an 
eternal  inheritance  : but  in  a Hill  higher  fenfe, 
the  Father  of  his  only  Son,  whom  he  hath  be- 
gotten from  eternity. 

I believe  this  Father  of  All,  not  only  to  be 
able  to  do  whatfoever  pleafeth  him,  but  alfo  to 
have  an  eternal  right  of  making  what  and  when 
and  how  he  pleafeth,  and  of  polfelfing  and  dif- 
pofing  of  all  that  he  has  made:  and  that  he  of 
his  own  goodnefs  created  heaven  and  earth,  and 
all  that  is  therein. 

7.  I believe  that  Jefus  of  Nazareth  was  the  Sa- 
viour of  the  world,  the  Mefliah  fo  long  foretold  : 
That  being  anointed  with  the  Holy  Gholl,  he 
was  a Prophet,  revealing  to  us  the  whole  will  o'f 
God  : That  he  was  a Prieft,  who  gave  bimfe]f  a 
A 3 facrifice 


[ 6 ] 

facrifice  for  fin,  and  ftill  makes  interceffion  for 
iranfgrefTors  : That  he  is  a King,  who  has  all 
power  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  and  will  reign  till 
he  has  fubdued  all  things  to  himfelf. 

I believe,  he  is  the  proper,  natural  Son  of 
God,  God  of  God,  very  God  of  very  God  : 
And  that  he  is  the  Lord  of  AH,  having  abfolute, 
fupreme,  univerfal  dominion  over  all  things  : 
but  more  peculiarly  our  Lord,  who  believe  in 
him,  both  by  conqueft,  purchafe,  and  voluntary 
obligation. 

I believe,  that  he  was  made  man,  joining  the 
human  nature  with  the  divine  in  oneperfon:  be- 
ing conceived  by  the  lingular  operation  of  the 
Holy  Ghoft,  and  born  of  the  blelfed  Virgin 
Mary,  who  as  well  after  as  before  Ihe  brought 
him  forth,  continued  a pure  and  unfpotted  Vir- 
gin. 

I believe,  he  fuffered  inexprelfible  pains  both 
of  body  and  foul,  and  at  laft  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  crofs,  at  the  time  that  Pontius  Pi- 
late governed  Judea,  under  the  Roman  emperor: 
That  his  body  was  then  laid  in  the  grave,  and 
his  foul  went  to  the  place  of  feparate  fpirits  : 
That  the  third  day  he  rofe  again  from  the  dead: 
That  he  afcended  into  heaven ; where  he  re- 
mains in  the  midlt  of  the  throne  of  God,  in  the 
highefl:  power  and  glory,  as  Mediator  till  the 
end  of  the  world,  as  God  to  all  eternity  : That 
in  the  end,  he  will  come  down  from  heaven,  to 

judge 


t 7 f 

judge  every  man  according  to  his  works ; both 
thofe  who  fhall  be  then  alive,  and  all  who  have 
died  before  that  day. 

8.  I believe  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  Spirit  of 
God,  equal  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  to  be 
not  only  perfe&ly  holy  in  himfelf,  but  the  imme- 
diate caufe  of  all  holinefs  in  us;  enlightning 
our  underftandings,  re&ifying  our  wills  and  af- 
fections, renewing  our  natures,-  uniting  our  per- 
fons  to  Chrift,  affuring  us  of  the  adoption  of 
fons,  leading  us  in  our  aCtions ; purifying  and 
fanCtifying  our  fouls  and  bodies,  to  a full  and 
eternal  enjoyment  of  God. 

g.  I believe,  that  Chrift  and  his  apoftles  -ga- 
thered unto  himfelf  a church,  to  which  he  has 
continually  added  fuch  as  fhall  be  faved  : That 
this  Catholic,  that  is.  Uni verfal  Church,  extend- 
ing to  all  nations  and  all  ages,  is  holy  in  all  its 
members,  who  have  fellowlhip  with  God  the  Fa- 
ther, Son  and  Holy  Ghoft  j That  they  have  fel- 
lowlhip with  the  holy  angels,  who  conftantly  mi- 
nifter  to  thefe  heirs  of  falvation : And  with  all 
the  living  members  of  Chrift  on  earth,  as  well  as 
all  who  are  departed  in  his  faith  and  fear. 

10.  I believe  God  forgives  all  the  fins  of  them 
that  truly  repent  and  unfeignedly  believe  his  holy 
gofpel ; and  that  at  the  laft  day,  all  men  fhall 
rife  again,  every  one  with  his  own  body. 

I believe,  that  as  the  unjuft  fhall  after  their 
refurre&ion  be  tormented  in  hell  for  ever,  fo  the 
. A 4 juft 


C 8 ] 

juft  fhall  enjoy  inconceivable  happinefs  in  the 
prefence  of  God  to  all  eternity. 

ll.  Now  is  there  any  thing  wrong  in  this  ? Is 
there  any  one  point  which  you  do  not  believe  as 
well  as  we  ? 

But  you  think  we  ought  to  believe  more  ? We 
will  not  now  enter  into  the  difpute.  Only  let 
me  afk.  If  a man  fincerely  believes  thus  much, 
and  praftifes  accordingly,  can  any  one  poflibly 
perfuade  you  to  think,  that  fuch  a man  fhall  perifh 
everlaflingly  ? 

“ But  does  he  praftice  accordingly  ?”  If  he 
does  not,  we  grant  all  his  faith  will  not  fave  him. 
And  this  leads  me  to  fhew  you  in  few  and 
plain  words,  what  the  praftice  of  a true  protef- 
tant  is. 

* I fay,  a true  proteftant : for  I difclaim  all 
common  fwearers,  fabbath  breakers,  drunkards: 
all  whoremongers,  liars,  cheats,  extortioners  : in 
a word,  all  that  live  in  open  fin.  Thefe  are  no 
proteftants : they  are  no  Chriftians  at  all.  Give 
them  their  own  name  : they  are  open  Heathens. 
They  are  the  curfe  of  the  nation,  the  bane  of 
fociety,  the  fhame  of  mankind,  the  fcum  of  the 
earth. 

* 13.  A true  proteftant  believes  in  God,  has  a 
full  confidence  in  his  mercy,  fears  him,  with  a 
filial  fear,  and  loves  him  with  all  his  foul.  He 
worfhips  God  in  fpirit  and  in  truth,  in  every 
thing  gives  him  thanks ; calls  upon  him  with 
his  heart  as  well  as  his  lips,  at  all  times  and  in 

all 


[ 9 3 


all  places ; honours  his  holy  name  ami  his 
word,  and  ferves  him  truly  all  the  Says  of  his 


life. 

Now,  do  not  you  yourfelf  approve  of  this  ? Is 
there  any  one  point  you  can  condemn  ? Do  not 
you  pra&ice,  as  well  as  approve  of  it  ? Can  you 
ever  be  happy  if  you  do  not  ? Can  you  ever  ex- 
pend true  peace  in  this,  or  glory  in  the  world  to 
come,  if  you  do  not  believe  in  God  through 
Chrift,  if  you  do  not  thus  fear  and  love  God  ? 
My  dear  friend  confider,  I am  not  perfuading 
you  to  leave  or  change  your  religion,  but  to  fol- 
low after  that  fear  and  love  of  God,  without 
which  all  religion  is  vain.  I fay  not  a word  to 
you  about  your  opinions  or  outward  manner  of 
worlhip.  But  I fay  all  w or  {hip  is  an  abomina- 
tion to  the  Lord,  unlefs  you  worfhip  him  in  fpi- 
rit  and  in  truth,  with  your  heart  as  well  as  your 
lips,  with  your  fpirit  and  with  your underftanding 
alfo.  Be  your  form  of  worfhip  what  it  will;  but 
in  every  thing  give  him  thanks ; elfe  it  is  all  but 
loft  labour.  Ufe  whatever  outward  obfervances 
you  pleafe,.  but  put  your  whole  truft  in  him  : but 
honour  his  holy  name  and  his  word,  and  ferve, 
him  truly  all  the  days  of  your  life,. 

14.  Again.  A true  proteftant  loves  his  neigh- 
bour, that  is,  every  man,  friend  or  enemy,  good, 
or  bad,  as  himfelf,  as  he  loves  his  own  foul,  as 
Chrift  loved  us.  And  as  Ghrift  laid  down  his 
life  for  us,  fo  is  he  ready  to  lay  down  his  life  for 
his  brethren.  He  {hews  this  love,  by  doing, to 
A 4 ali  i 


[ io  ] 

all  men  in  all  points  as  he  would  they  fhould  do 
unto  him.  He  loves,  honours,  and  obeys  his 
father  and  mother,  and  helps  them  to  the  utter- 
moft  of  his  power.  He  honours  and  obeys  the 
king,  and  all  that  are  put  in  authority  under 
him.  He  chearfully  fubmits  to  all  his  governors, 
teachers,  fpiiitual  pallors  and  mailers.  He  be- 
haves lowly  and  reverently  to  all  his  betters.  He 
hurts  no  body  by  word  or  deed.  He  is  true  and 
juft  in  all  his  dealings.  He  bears  no  malice  or 
hatred  in  his  heart.  He  abftains  from  all  evil 
fpeaking,  lying  and  llandering,  neither  is  guile 
found  in  his  mouth.  Knowing  his  body  to  be  the 
temple  of  the  Holy  Gholl,  he  keeps  it  in  fobriety, 
temperance  and  challity.  He  does  not  defire  other 
mens  goods,  but  is  content  with  that  he  hath,  la- 
bours to  get  his  own  living,  and  to  do  the  whole 
will  of  God  in  that  Hate  of  life  unto  which  it  has 
pleafed  God  to  call  him. 

15.  Have  you  any  thing  to  reprove  in  this  ? 
Ate  you  not  herein  even  as  he?  If  not  (tell  the 
truth)  are  you  not  condemned,  both  bv  God  and 
your  own  confcience  ? Can  you  fall  fhort  of  any 
one  point  hereof  without  falling  fhort  of  being  a 
Chriftian  ? 

Come,  my  brother,  and  let  us  reafon  together. 
Are  you  right  if  you  only  love  your  friend  and 
hate  your  enemy  ? Do  not  even  the  Heathens 
and  Publicans  fo  ? You  are  called  to  love  your 
enemies  : to  blefs  them  that  curfe  you,  and  to 
pray  for  them  that  defpightfully  ufe  you  and  per- 

fecute 


[ » ] 

fecute  you.  But  are  you  not  difobedient  to  the 
heavenly  calling  ? Does  your  tender  love  to  all 
men,  not  only  the  good,  but  alfo  the  evil  and 
unthankful,  approve  you  the  child  of  your  Father 
which  is  in  heaven  ? Otherwife  whatever  you 
believe  and  whatever  you  pradtife,  you  are  of 
your  father  the  devil.  Are  you  ready  to  lay  down 
your  life  for  your  brethren  ? And  do  you  do  unto 
all  as  you  would  they  fhould  do  unto  you  ? If 
not,  do  not  deceive  your  own  foul.  You  are  but 
a Heathen  full.  Do  you  love,  honour,  and  obey 
your  father  and  mother,  and  help  them  to  the 
utmoit  of  your  power  ? Do  you  honour  and  obey 
all  in  authority  ? All  your  governors,  fpiritual 
pallors  and  mailers  ? Do  you  behave  lowly  and 
reverently  to  all  your  betters?  Do  you  hurt  no 
body  by  word  or  deed  ? Are  you  true  and  juft  in 
all  your  dealings  ? Do  you  take  care  to  pay  what- 
ever you  owe  ? Do  you  feel  no  malice,  or  envy, 
or  revenge,  no  hatred  or  bitternefs  to  any  man  ? 
If  you  do,  it  is  plain,  you  are  not  of  God;  for  all 
thefe  are  the  tempers  of  the  devil.  Do  you  fpeak 
the  truth  from  your  heart  to  all  men,  and  that  in 
tendernefs  and  love  ? Are  you  an  Ifraelite  indeed, 
in  whom  is  no  guile  ? Do  you  keep  your  body 
in  fobriety,  temperance  and  chaltity,  asknowing 
it  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Gholl,  and  that  if 
any  man  defile  the  temple  of  God,  him  will  God 
deltroy  P Have  you  learned  in  every  Hate  wherein 
you  are,  therewith  to  be  content  ? Do  you  labour 
to  get  your  own  living,  abhorring  idlenefs  as  you 
A 6 abhor 


[ 12  3 

abhor  hell-fire  ? The  devil  tempts  oiher  men ; 
but  an  idle  man  tempts  the  devil.  An  idle  man’s 
brain  is  the  devil’s  fhop,  where  he  is  continually 
working  mifchief.  Are  you  not  flothful  in  bufr- 
nefs  ? Whatever  your  hand  finds' to  do,  do  you 
do  it  with  your  might  ? And  do  you  do  all  as 
unto  the  Lord,  as  a facrifice  unto  God,  accept- 
able in  Chrift  Jefus  ? 

This,  and  this  alone  is  the  old  religion.  This  is 
true,  primitive  Chriflianity.  O when  (hall  it 
fpread  overall  the  earth  ! When  {hall  it  be  found 
both  in  us  and  you?  Without  waiting  for  others, 
let  each  of  us,  by  the  grace  of  God,  amend  one. 

16.  Are  we  not  thus  far  agreed  ? Let  us  thank 
God  for  this,  and  receive  it  as  a frelh  token  of 
his  love.  But  if  God  hill  !ovt:;  us,  we  ought 
alfo  to  love  one  another.  We  ought,  without  this 
endiefs  jangling  about  opinions  to  provoke  one 
another  to  love  and  to  good  vcrks.  Let  the 
points  wherein  we  differ  hand  a fide  ; here  are 
enough  wherein  we  agree,  enough  to  be  the 
ground  of  every  Chriftian  temper,  and  of  every 
Chriflian  aftion. 

O biethren,  let  us  not  ftj  rail  out  by  the  way. 
I hope  to  f ee  you  in  heave  ; And  if  I pra&ife 
the  religion  above  defcribed,  you  dare  not  fay  I 
fhall  go  to  hell.  You  cannot  think  fo.  None  can 
perluade  you  to  it.  Your  own  confcience  tells 
you  the  contrary.  Then  if  we  cannot  as  yet  think 
alike  in  all  things,  at  leaf!  we  may  love  alike. 
Herein  we  cannot  pofiibly  do  amifs.  For  of  one 

point 


C 13  ] 

point  none  can  doubt  a moment,  God  is  love; 
and  he  that  dvvelleth  in  love,  dwelleth  in  God 
and  God  in  him. 

17.  In  the  name  then,  and  in  the  (Length  of 
God  let  us  refolve,  fil'd,  not  to  hurt  one  another: 
to  do  nothing  unkind  or  unfriendly  to  each 
other,  nothing  which  we  would  not  have  done  to 
ourfelves.  Rather  let  us  endeavour  after  every 
inifance  of  a kind,  friendly,  and  Chridian  beha- 
viour towards  each  other. 

Let  us  refolve,  fecondly,  God  being  our  helper, 
to  fpeak  nothing  harfh  or  unkind  ol  each  other. 
The  fure  way  to  avoid  this,  is  to  fay  all  the  good 
we  can,  both  of  and  to  one  another  : in  all  our 
conveifation,  either  with,  or  concerning  each 
other,  to  ufeonly  the  language  of  love  : to  fpeak 
with  all  foitnefs  and  tendernefs ; with  the  moll 
endearing  expreffion,  which  is  confident  with 
truth  and  fincerity. 

Let  us,  thirdly,  refolve,  to  harbour  no  unkind 
thought,  no  unfriendly  temper  towards  each  other. 
Let  us  lay  the  axe  to  the  root  of  the  tree  ; let  us 
examine  all  that  rifes  in  our  heart,  and  fuffer  na 
difpofition  there  which  is  contrary  to  tender  af- 
feflion.  Then  dial!  we  eafily  refrain  from  unkind 
actions  and  words,  when  the  very  root  of  bitter— 
nefs  is  cut  up. 

Let  us,  fourthly,  endeavour  to  help  each  other 
on  in  whatever  we  are  agreed  leads  to  the  king- 
dom. So  far  as  we  can,  let  us  always  rejoice  to 
Jlrengthen  each  others  hands  in  God.  Above  all, 

let 


[ »4  ] 

let  us  each  take  heed  to  himfelf  (fince  each  mud 
give  an  account  of  himfelf  to  God)  that  he  fall 
not  fhort  of  the  religion  of  love;  that  he  be  not 
condemned  in  that  he  himfelf  approveth.  O let 
you  and  I (whatever  others  do)  prefs  on  to  the 
prize  of  our  high  calling  : that  being  juflified  by 
faith  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift:  that  we  may  rejoice  in  God  through 
Jefus  Chrift,  by  whom  we  have  received  the 
atonement : that  the  love  of  God  may  be  fhed 
abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghofl  which 
is  given  unto  us.  Let  us  count  all  things  but 
lofs  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Jefus 
Chrift  our  Lord;  being  ready  for  him  to  fuffer 
the  lofs  of  all  things,  and  counting  them  but 
dung;  that  we  may  win  Chrift. 

Dublin,  I am, 

July  1 8,  1749.  Your  ajfeRionatefervant, 

for  Chrfi’s fake. 


A Roman 


[ ts  ] 


A Rim  an  CATECHISM  : 

With  a REPLY  thereto. 


The  PREFACE. 

jT  has  been  a frequent-  complaint  amongfome  of  the  Ro- 
mifi  church,  that  the  Protefants  have  mifreprejented 
the  doctrine  of  their  church  : on  the  other  fide,  the  Protef- 
tants  accufe  the  writers  in  that  church,  of  concealing,  dif- 
guifing  and  palliating  their  doElrines.  The  latter  jufify 
their  charge  by  producing  fuch  authors  as  have  in  feveral 
ages  not  only  taught  that  doElrine,  but  taught  it  as  the 
doElrine  of  their  church  : the  former  deny  the  charge,  by 
appealing  from  particular  authors,  to  an  higher  autho- 
rity, to  councils  and  public  alls  and  decrees,  to  miffals , 
breviaries  and  catechifns.  Now  though  thofe  Protejlants 
art  not  to  be  blamed,  when  the  authors  they  quote  have  been 
firfi  licenced  and  approved  in  that  church,  and  were 
never  afterward  condemned  by  it ; yet  in  compofing  this 
Catechfm,  to  avoid  contention  as  much  as  I can,  I have 
generally  obferved  their  directions,  and  have  feldom  made 
vfe  of  particular  authors,  but  when  it  is  for  the  explica- 
tion of  a doElrine  that  is  not  fujficiently  explained,  or  for 
confirmation  of  a doEirine  generally  received.  I am  very 
confident  that  the  quotations  throughout  are  true,  having 
again  and  again  examined  them  j and  I have  been  as  care- 
ful as  I could  not  to  mifiab.e  the  ftnft  of  them  ; that  I might 
rightly  underfland  and  truly  reprefent  the  doElrine  which  I 
profefs  to  cenfure  ; for  without  afaitfful  and  impartial  exa- 
mination of  an  error , there  can  be  no  folid  confutation  of  it, 

A 


[ i6  ] 


a 


A Roman  CATECHISM, 

Faithfully  drawn  out  of  the  allowed  writings  of  the 
church  of  Rome. 


SECT.  I. 

Of  the  Church,  and  Rule  of  Faith. 


c- 


*-w 


HAT  is  the  church  of Rome? 

A.  The  church  of  Rome  is 


that  fociety  of  Chriftians,  which  profefles  it  ne- 
cefTay  to  falvation  t to  be  fubjeft  to  the  pope  of 
Rome,  as  the  alone  vifible  head  of  the  ehurch.x 

d 2. 


+ Dicimus,  definimus,  pronunciamus,  abfolute  neccfTaiium  ad 
falutem,  omni  humanaa  creaturae  fubefle  Romano  Pontifici.  Ex* 
travag.  c.  Unam  finclam  dt  majoritate  & obedient ’a. 

We  Jay,  defne  and  pronounce,  that  it  is  alfoiutely  necejfary  to  Jcza- 
tion,  for  every  man  to  be  fubjetl  to  the  pope  of  Rome. 

+ Bcllarra.  de  Ecclef.  milit.  1.  3.  c.  4.  !T.  Noftra  autem  fenter.» 
tia.  & cap.  ,5.  (T.  refpondeo  r.emijiern. 


[ *7  3 


The  REPLY  to  the 

Roman  CATECHISM. . 


SECT.  I. 

Of  the  Church , and  Rule  of  Faith . 


R.  i.  /CHRIST  is  the  head,  from  whom  the 
whole  body  is  fitly  joined  together. 
And  the  holding  to  that  head  [Col.  ii.  19.]  is  the 
one  great  note  of  the  church,  given  by  St.  Aufiin 
de  unit.  Ecdef.  c.  3.  & 4.  But  there  is  neither 
in  fcripture,  nor  antiquity  any  evidence  for  a 
vifible  head,  and  much  lefs  for  the  vifible  head 
the  pope,  and  lead  of  all,  that  it  is  neceffary 
to  falvation  to  be  fubjefl  to  him. 

If  it  is  neceffary  to  falvation  to  be  fubjefl  to 
him,  it  is  neceffary  to  know  who  is  the  pope  ; 
but  that  the  world  hath  often  been  divided  about, 
when  there  were  fometimes  three,  and  for 
about  forty  years  together  two  popes.  Vid^ 
Theod.  Niem.  de  Schifin.  univerf. 

R.  a* 


C -18  ] 

Q.  2.  How  comes  fubjeaion  to  the  pope  to 
be  neceffary  to  falvation,  and  an  effential  note  of 
the  church  ? 

A.  Becaufe  the  pope  is  Chrifl's  vicar,  St.  Peter  % 
fuccefior  t and  hath  the  fupreme  power  on  earth 
over  the  whole  church  The  church  is  called 
one,  as  it  has  one  invifible  head,  Chrift  ; and  one 
vijible,  who  doth  poffefs  the  chair  at  Rome,  as 
the  lawful  fuccejfor  of  St.  Peter,  prince  of  the 
apofles.  Catech.  Rom.  par.  1.  c.  10.  n.  11. 

+ Concil.  Trid.  SefT.  6.  Decret.  de  Reform,  cap  i.  Bulli  Pii, 
4.  fup.  form.  Juram. 
f Con.  Trid.  SefT.  14,  c.  7. 


0.  3.  What  authority  doth  the  church  of  Rome 
challenge  ? 

A.  She  declares  that  fhe  is  the  mother  and 
miftrefs  of  all  churches  ||,  and  that  to  believe  her 
fo  to  be  is  neceffary  to  falvation  §.  Pope  Inno- 
cent the  third,  thus  decreed,  As  God  is  called 
univerfal  Lord,  becaufe  all  things  are  under  his 
dominion  : fo  the  church  of  Rome  is  called  ca- 
tholic or  univerfal,  becaufe  all  churches  are 
fubjeft  unto  her.  Apud  Bzovium  Annal.  1199. 

||  Concil.  Later.  4.  Can.  2.  Concil.  Trid.  Seff;  7.de  Bapt,  Cam 

3.  &c. 

§ Bulla  Pii  4.  fuper  form.  Jur«  ' 


2-  ii 


C 19  ] 

R.  2.  If  Chrijl  gave  no  fuch  power  to  St.  Peter , 
or  the  pope  be  not  St.  Peter’s  fuccefTor,  then  the 
pope  has  no  pretence  to  this  power.  Now 
we  read  that  Chriji  gave  fome  qpojlles,  and  fome 
prophets,  for  the  work  of  tke  minifry  and  the 
edifying  the  body , Ephef.  iv.  11,  12.  But  that  he 
gave  one  apoftle  pre-eminence  above  the  reft, 
much  lefs  abfolute  power  over  them,  we  read 
not.  This  power  they  were  forbidden  to  attempt 
or  defire,  Mat.  xx.  2 6.  and  St.  Paul  was  fo  far 
from  acknowledging  it,  that  he  challenged  an 
equality  with  the  reftofthe  apo  files,  Gal.  i.  15, 17. 
and  upon  occafion  withftood  St.  Peter,  Gal.  ii.  11. 

To  this  we  may  add  the  judgment  of  Si.  Cy- 
pnan.  The  other  apofles  are  the  fame  St.  Peter 
was,  endowed  with  an  equal  fellowjhip  of  honour 
and  power.  Epift.  de  unit.  Ecclef. 

R.  3.  As  it  was  foretold  [lfaiah  ii.  3.)  fo  it  was 
fulfilled,  Out  of  Zion  Jhall  go  forth  the  law,  and 
the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerufalem.  There 
the  church  began,  and  therefore  in  the  fynodical 
epiftle  of  the  fecond  general  council  of  Confanti- 
nople,  Jerufalem  is  called  the  mother  of  all  churches. 
Bur  on,  A.  D.  382.  p.  461. 

If  (he  is  the  mifirefs,  becaufefhe  is  the  mother, 
(as  pope  Innocent  the  firft  would  have  it,  Epifi.  1. 
Concil.  Tom.  4.  p.  5.)  then  Jerufalem  was  the  mif- 
trefs.  If  the  miftrefs,  becaufe  fhe  was  once  the 
imperial  city,  then  Conflantinople  was  fo  likewife; 
and  accordingly  it  was  decreed  in  the  4th  general 

council. 


[ 20  } 


£.  4-  What  ufe  doth  (he  make  of  this  autho- 
rity ? 

A.  She  requires  all  perfons  upon  her  foie  au- 
thority, to  receive  and  believe  the  doflrines  £he 
propofes  to  be  received  and  believedt,  and  with- 
out the  belief  of  which  fhe  declares  there  is  no  fal- 
vationij:. 

+ Concil.  Trid.SefT.  13.  Decret.  de  Euchar.  Sacrofanfla fy- 
nodus  omnibus  Chiifti  fidelibus  interdicit,  nepofthac  de  fanftif- 
fima  Euchariftia  alitcr  credere,  aocere  aut  prredicare  audeant, 
quam  ut  eft  hoc  pra-fenti  dccreto  explicatum.  atque  definitum. 
So  again,  Self.  25.  Decret.de  Purgatorio.  And  there  art  doit  100 
Anathema's  in  that  council  in  point  of  doclrine  againfi  fuck  as  do  not  fo  be- 
line. 

J Bulla  Pii.  4.  fuper  form.  Juram,  Hanc  teram  CathoUcan  fdem, 
extra  quam  nemo falvus  ejfe  potcfl.  i.  e.  This  is  the  true  Catholic  faith, 
without  which  no  man  can  be  fated. 

5.  Doth  not  the  church  of  Rome  acknow- 
ledge the  holy  feripture  to  be  a fufficient  rule  for 
faith  and  manners  ? 

A.  No  : For  there  are  fome  do£lrines  propofed 
by  that  church  as  matters  of  faith,  and  fome 
things  required  as  necefTary  duty,  which  are  by 

many 


r >i  ] 

•Council,  that  of  Chalcedon,  Can.  28.  That  the. 
church  of  Conftantinople  fiould  have  equal  privi- 
leges with  that  0/  Rome,  becaufe fie  is  the  imperial 
feat. 

And  if  (he  claims  this  fovereign  authority  upon 
any  other  reafon,  {he  never  had,  nor  can  ever 
prove  a right  to  it. 

R.  4.  Gal.  i.  it,  12.  The  gofpel  which  was 
preached  of  me,  is  not  after  man  ; for  l neither  re- 
ceived it  of  man,  neither  was  I taught  it,  but  by  the 
revelation  of  Jefus  Chrift. 

Verfe  8,  9.  Though  we  or  an  angel from  heaven 
preach  any  other  go/pel  unto  you,  than  that  which 
we  have  preached,  let  him  be  accurjed. 

The  church  of  Rome  cannot  avoid  St.  Paul's 
Anathema,  when  fhe  requires  to  bow  down 
before  rn  image,  which  the  feripture  forbids  ; 
and  forbids  to  read  the  feripture,  which  it  re- 
quires. 

And  without  doubt  the  text  of  the  apoftle  holds 
as  much  againft  any  other,  as  againft  bimfelf  or 
an  aegel  from  heaven. 

R.  5.  We  read  in  feripture  of  the  faith  once  de- 
livered to  the  faints,  Jude  3,  and  2 Tim.  iii.  16, 
17.  All  for  the  whole]  feripture  is  prof  table 
for  doctrine,  for  reproof  fur  correction,  for  induc- 
tion in  righteoufnefs,  that,  the  man  of  God  maybe 
perfect,  throughly  ) unified  unto  all  good  works. 

The  feripture  therefore  is  a rule  fufficient  in 

itfelf 


[ 22  ] 

many  learned  men  among  themfelves  confeffed 
not  to  be  contained  in  fcripture. 

This  is  confirmed  by  pope  Pius  II.  (when  a 
cardinal)  Epijl.  288.  p.  802,  who  faith,  that  before 
the  time  of  the  Nicene  council , little  regard  was 
had  to  the  church  of  Rome. 

<2-  6.  What  do&rines  of  faith  and  matters  of 
praftice  are  thus  acknowleged  not  to  be  in  fcrip- 
ture ? 

A.  The  doftrines  of  tranfubfiantiationf, 
of  the  feven  facraments  i,  of  purgatory  §,  and 
the  practice  of  balf-communion||,  worfhipping  of 
faints  and  images?,  indulgences  ++,  and  fervice 
in  an  unknown  tongue  £j:. 

+ Scotus  in  4.  fent.  did.  n.q.  3.  & Yribarnin  Scot. 

J Bellarm,  1.  2.  de  effe&u  Sacram,  c.  25.  ff.  fecunda  probalic. 

J|  Roffenf.  contr.  Luther,  art.  18. 

^ Concil.  Conftan.  Seflf  13.  Caflandcr.  Art.  22. 

5 Bellarm.  de  cult  San£t.  1.  3.  c.  9.  IT.  pr*terea.  Cafland.  Cotv. 
•fult.  Art.  2i.tr.  4. 

+ + Polyd.  Virg.  de  invent,  lib.  8.  c.  1. 

Bellarm.  de  verb.  Dei.  It.  2.  c.  26. 

{).  7.  What  doth  the  church  of  Rome  propound 
to  herfelf  as  an  entire  rule  of  faith  ? 

A.  Scripture  with  tradition  ; and  fhe  requires 
that  the  traditions  be  received  and  reverenc- 
ed with  the  like  pious  regard  and  veneration  as 
the  feriptures  ; and  tvhofoever  knowingly  con- 
temns them,  is  declared  by  her  to  be  accurfed. 
Concil . Trid.  Sejf.  4 Decret.  de  can.  'Script. 

d-  8. 


[ 23  3 

itfelf  and  was  by  man  divinely  infpired  deli- 
vered to  the  world ; and  fo  neither  needs, 
nor  is  capable  of  any  further  addition. 

So  Tertullian , Let  Hermogenes JJiem  that  this 
thing  is  written.  Jfit  be  not  written , let  him  fear 
the  woe  pronounced  agairf  them  that  add  to,  or  take 
from fcripture.  Contr.  Hermog.  c.  22. 

R.  6.  On  the  contrary;  St.  Augufin  lib. 
contr.  Petil.  1.  3.  c.  6.  writes,  If  any  one  concern - 
ing  Chrijl  and  his  church,  or  concerning  any  other 
things  which  belong  to  faith  or  life,  1 will  not fay 
if  we,  but  (which  St.  Paul  hath  added ) if  an  an- 
gelfrom  heaven  preach  unto  you  befdes  zuhat  ye 
have  received  in  the  law  and  evangelical  writings, 
let  him  be  accurfed.  For  as  all  faith  is  founded 
upon  divine  authority,  fo  there -is  now  no  divine 
authority  but  the  fcriptures:  and  therefore  no 
one  can  make  that  to  be  of  divine  authority, 
which  is  not  contained  in  them.  And  iftranfub- 
flantiation  and  purgatory,  &c.  are  not  delivered 
in  fcripture,  they  cannot  be  doctrines  of  faith. 

R.  7.  Matt.  xv.  9.  In  vain  do  they  worjhip  me , 
teaching  for  do&rine  the  commandments  of  men ; 
forbidding  that  as  unlawful  which  God  hath  not 
forbidden,  and  requiring  that  as  neceffary  duty 
which  God  hath  not  required. 

So  St.  Hierom , in  cap.  1.  Aggaei,  The  fword  of 
God  [his  wordj  doth  finite  thofe  other  things, 

which 


[ H ] 


8.  What  do  they  underftand  by  tradition  ? 

A.  Such  things  belonging  to  faith  and  manners 
as  were  di&ated  by  Chrifl  or  the  Holy  Ghoft  in 
the  apoftles,  and  have  been  preferved  by  a con- 
tinual fucceffion  in  the  catholic  church,  from 
hand  to  hand  without  writing,  Concil.  Trid.  ibid, 

Q.  9.  What  are  thofe  traditions,  which  they 
profefs  to  have  received  from  Chriji  and  his 
apohles  ? 

A.  The  offering  the  facrifice  of  the  mafs  for 
the  fouls  in  purgatory, t the  myllical  benedictions, 
jncenfings,  garments,  and  many  other  things  of 
the  like  kind,i;  fait,  fpittle,  exorcifms,  and  wax 
candles  ufed  in  baptifm,  § &c.  the  prieffs  fhaving 
the  head  after  the  manner  of  a crown. || 

+ Cone.  Trid.  SetT.  22.  c.  2. 

J Ibid.  c.  5. 

\ Catech.  Rom.  par.  2.  c.  2.  n.  59,  65,  &c . 

(I  Ibid. c.  7.  n.  14. 

<2-  10.  Doth  the  church  of  Rome  agree  with 
other  churches  in  the  number  of  canonical  books 
el  feripture  ? 

A.  No  : for  fhe  hath  added  to  the  canonical 
books  of  theOld  Teftament,  Tobit , Judith,  Wif- 
dom,  Ecclefiafticus , Baruch,  the  two  books  of  Mac- 
cabees, + and  a new  part  of  EJUier  and  Davie!', 
which  whole  books,  with  all  their  parts, ^ whofo- 

ever 


C 25  ] 

which  they  find  and  hold  of  their  own  accord , as  by 
apofiolical  tradition,  without  the  authority  and  tef- 
iimony  of  fcripture. 

R.  8.  But  St.  Cyril  affirms.  It  bekoveth  us  not 
to  deliver,  no  not  fo  much  as  the  leaf  thing  oj  the 
holy  myfieries  of  faith,  without  the  holy  fcripture. 
Thai  is  the fecurity  of  our  faith,  not  which  is  from 
cur  own  inventions,  but  from  the  demonfir  ahon  of 
the  holy  fir  iptures.  Catechef.  5. 

R.  9.  Mark  vii.  8.  Laying  afide  the  command- 
ment of  God,  ye  hold  the  tradition  of  men. 

St.  Bafil  in  Reg.  brev.  Reg.  95.  It  is  necejfary 
even  for  novices  tv  learn  the  fir  iptures,  that  the 
mind  may  be  well  confirmed  in  piety,  and  that  they 
may  not  be  accufiomed  to  human  traditions. 

The  church  of  Rome  hath  no  more  to  fhew  for 
their  holy  water,  and  incenfings,  and  fait,  and  < 
fpittle,  &c.  than  the  Pharifees  for  their  traditi- 
ons: and  fince  they  no  lefs  impofe  them  as  di- 
vine than  the  other,  they  are  alike  guilty  with 
them. 


R.  10.  Thefe  apocryphal  books  were  wrote 
after  prophecy  and  divine  infpiration  ceafed,  rnd 
fo  were  not  received  by  the  Jewiffi  church  (to 
whom  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God,  Rom. 
iii.  2.)  nor  the  Chriftian  church,  as  the  60th 
canon  of  the  council  of  Laodicea  fhews,  where 
there  is  a catalogue  of  the  canonical  books,  with- 
out any  mention  of  thefe. 

Vol.  XIX. 


B 


St. 


[ 26  ] 

ever  rejefls  as  not  canonical,  is  accurfed.  Concil 
Trident.  Sejf.  4.  Decret,  de  Scriptur. 

+ Thefe  books  are  To  facred,  as  that  they  are  of  infallible 
truth.  Bellarm.  de  vttbo  /.  1.  c.  10 ,JJ.  Ecclefia hero. 

f Wherefore  doth  the  council  add  with  all  their  parts ; thofe 
parts  alfo,  about  which  there  was  fometiraea  difpute,  belong  to 
the  facred  canon  of  the  bible  ? Ibid.  c.  7.  jj.  Deraque. 


0.  11.  Are  the  people  of  the  church  of  Rome 
permitted  to  read  the  fcripture  in  a tongue  vul- 
garly known  ? 

A . No:  they  were  for  a time  permitted  to 
read  it,  under  the  caution  § of  a licenfe,  where  it 
could  be  obtained  ; but  fince  they  are  forbid  it, 
or  to  have  fo  much  as  any  fummary  or  hiftorical 
compendium  of  it  in  their  own  tongue. J| 

§ Reg.  Ind.  libr.  prohib.  Reg. 

(1  Index  libr.  prohib.  auftor.  Sixti  v.  & Clem.  viii.  obfervat. 
circa  4.  Regulam. 


Q.  12.  For  what  reafon  is  the  fcripture  thus 
prohibited  among  them  ? 

A.  Becaufe  (fay  they)  if  it  be  permitted  to  be 
read  every  where,  without  difference,  there 
would  more  prejudice  than  profit  proceed  from 
it.  Teg.  Ind.  libr.  prohib.  Reg.  4. 

Q.  J3* 


C 2'7  ] 

St.  Jerora  In  prologo  proverb.  As  therefore 
the  church  doth  read  Tobias , Judith , and  the  books 
of  the  Maccabees,  but  doth  not  receive  them  into 
the  canonical  fcriptures : fo  it  doth  read  the  two 
volumes  ofWifdomandEcclefiaJhcusfor  the  edifica- 
tion of  the  people,  not  to  eflablifh  the  authority  of 
ecclefiaf  ical  principles . See  Bellarm.  de  verbo,  1. 
a.  c.  10,  init. 

R.  11.  Under  the  law,  the  people  had  the 
fcriptures  in  a tongue  vulgarly  known;  and  they 
were  required  to  read  the  law,  and  to  beconver- 
fant  in  it,  Deut.  vi.  6.  Thefe  words  which  I com- 
mand thee  this  day  Jhall  be  in  thine  heart , &c.  and 
accordingly  our  Saviour  fends  them  thither,  John 
v.  39.  Search  the  fcriptures.  So  St.  Paul  requires 
that  his  epifile  be  read  to  all  the  brethren,  1 Theff. 
v.  27.  and  if  fo,  it  was  wrote  in  a language  they 
underftood.  And  fo  it  was  in  the  primitive 
church  ; therefore  St'.  Chryfoftom  exhorts  his 
hearers,  though  fecular  men,  to  provide  them- 
felves  bibles,  the  medicines  of  their  fouls,  to  be 
their  perpetual  inftruftiors.  Comment,  in  Colof. 
iii.  16. 

R.  12.  In  the  apoftles  times  there  were  fome 
that  wrefed  the fcriptures  to  their  own  defrufdion j 
and  yet  the  apollle  thought  of  no  other  expedient 
than  to  give  the  Chriftians  a caution,  that  they 
were  not  alfo  led  away  with  the  err  01  of  the  voick- 
ed^ 2 Pet , iii.  16,  17.  The  way  to  prevent  this 
B 2 therefore 


[ ] 


Q.  xg.  Since  the  fcripture  may'  be  mifunder- 
flood,  have  they  no  judge  to  determine  the  fenfe 
of  it  ? 

A.  They  fay%  it  belongs  to  the  church  (of 
Rome)  to  judge  of  the  fenfe  of  fcripture,  and  no 
one  may  prefume  to  interpret  the  fcripture,  con- 
trary to  the  fenfe  which  Mother  Church  hath 
held  and  doth  hold.  Concil.  Trid.  Seff.  4.  Decret. 
dt  Edit,  t?  uju  Script. 

It  cannot  be  called  the  church  of  God  where 
the  legitimate  FoccefforofSt.  Peter  in  the  Roman 
chair,  and  the  undoubted  vicar  of  Chrift  doth 
not  prefide : — What  the  church  doth  teach  is 
the  exprefs  word  of  God,  and  what  is  taught 
againft  the  fenfe  and  confent  of  the  church,  is 
the  exprefs  word  of  the  devil.  Cardinal  Hofius 
dt  exprejfo  Dti  verbo , p.  642,  643. 


SECT. 


[ 29  ] 

therefore  is,  not  to  keep  the  fcriptures  from  the 
people  (which  were  written  for  our  learning,  Rom. 
xv.  4.)  but  to  exhort  them  to  a diligent  perufal 
of  them.  Matt.  xxii.  29.  Ye  err,  not  knowing  the 
fcriptures. 

The flieep  Jhould  not  cajl  away  their  fin,  becaufe 
wolves  fometimes  hide  thenfelves  under  it.  St. 
Auftin  de  Serm.  Dorn,  in  monte; 

R.  13.  While  the  apoftles  were  alive  the 
churches  of  Chrift  in  matters  of  difpute,  applied 
themf elves  to  them,  as  in  the  point  of  circumcifion, 
A£ls  xv.  2 but  fince  they  of  the  church  of  Rome 
can  never  prove  the  like  infallibility  in  their 
church,  nor  direft  us  where  it  is*  w&  think  our- 
felves  as  well  in  our  church,  as  they  can  be  in 
theirs;  and  that  as  long  as  we  have  the  Ccripture, 
the  church  is  to  be  referred  to  the  fcripture,  and 
not  the  fcripture  to  the  church  and  that  as  the 
fcripture  is  the  bed  expounder  of  itfelf,  fo  the  belt 
way  to-  know  whether  any  thing  be  of  divine  au- 
thority, is  to  apply  ourfelvesto  the  fcripture. 

If  I would  have  the  church  demonftrated,  it  is 
not  by  human  teachings,  but  by  the  divine  ora- 
cles. St.  Aug.  de  unit.  Eccl'ef.  cap.  3. 

The  way  for  underflanding  the  fcriptures,  is  to 
demonjlrate  out  of  themfelves,  concerning  themf  elves. 
Clem.  Alex.  Strom.  1.  7.  p.  757. 


b3 


SECT 


C 3°  ] 


SECT.  II. 

Of  Repentance  and  Obedience. 

Q • 7T  THAT  doth  the  church  of  Rome 

* » teach  concerning  repentance  ? 

A.  1.  It  teacheth  that  contrition  (which  is  a 
forrow  for  fins  pafi,  and  a purpofe  of  not  com- 
mitting it  for  the  future)  though  perfefted  with 
charity,  is  not  fufficient  to  reconcile  a perfon  to 
God  without  penance,  or  confeflion  to  a prieft 
either  in  afl  or  defire.  Concil.  Trid.  Sejf.  14. 
c.  4.  Catech.  Rom , Pars  2.  de  Sacrament,  pcenit. 
n.  38, 

A.  2.  She  teacheth  that  attrition,  or  imper- 
fe£t  contrition,  proceeding  meetly  from  the 
fear  of  hell,  is  equivalent  to  contrition,  by 
virtue  of  confeflion:  and  that  attiition  doth  dif- 
pofe  to  receive  the  grace  of  the  facrament  of  pe- 
nance, and  leads  to  juftification.+ 

+ Seff.  14.  cap.  4.  Bellarm.  de  poenit.  1.  2.  c.  18.  IT.  Std 
fciendum  eft  .[See  Qutjl . 77.] 

Q.  15.  What  is  the  judgment  of  the  church  of 
Rome  as  to  good  words  ?j 

A.  The  church  of  Rome  doth  affirm  that  the 
goods  works  of  juftified  perfons  do  truly  deferve 
eternal  life  ;t  and  if  any  one  fay  that  fuch  works 

do 


C 31  ] 


SECT.  II. 

Of  Repentance  and  Obedience. 

R.  14. /CONTRITION  is  but  another  word 
V_y  for  repentance,  and  repentance  is  a 
qualification  for  pardon  and  reconciliation.  A 
broken  and  contrite  heart , 0 God,  thou  wilt  not 
defpife , Pfalm  li.  17.  Repent,  and  be  converted , 
that  your  fins  may  be  blotted  out.  Ads  iii.  19. 
The  fame  texts  which  make  contrition  fufficient, 
without  confeffion  to  the  pried,  make  attrition 
inefficient  without  there  be  contrition.  And  as 
the  former  dofdrine  of  the  infufficiency  of  con- 
trition without  confeffion,  makes  that  neceffary 
which  God  hath  not  made  necefTary  : fo  this 
latter  of  the  efficiency  of  attrition  upon  con- 
feffion to  the  pried,  without  contrition,  makes 
that  unnecedary  which  God  hath  made  necef- 
fary. 

R.  15.  Truly  to  deferve,  is  to  make  God  our 
debtor;  to  him  that  worketh  (i.  e.  that  meriteth) 
is  the  reward  not  reckoned  of  grace,  but  of  debt, 
Rom,  iv.  4.  But  can  a man  be  prof  table  to  God ? 
Job  iv.  4.  Our  Saviour  teaches  us  otherwife, 
B 4 Luke, 


[ 32  ] 

do  not  truly  deferve  an  increafe  of  grace  here, 
and  eternal  life  hereafter,  let  him  be  accurfed.}: 

Our  good  works  do  merit  eternal  life , not  only  by 
virtue  of  God's  covenant  and  acceptation , but  alfo 
by  reafon  oj  the  work  it/e  If. § 

+ Concil.  Trid.  Sell.  6.  c.  16. 

J Ibid . Can.  32. 

\ Bellarm.  dc.  juftif.  1. 5.  0.17, 


0.  16.  But  is  there  no  allowance  for  fuch  as 
have  not  good  works  of  their  own,  fufficient  to 
merit  for  themfelves  ? 

A.  Yes:  there  are  indulgencies  to  be  obtained, 
by  which  perfons  may  be  difcharged  from  the 
puniffiment  of  fin  here  and  in  purgatory:  and  if 
any  affirm  thefe  indulgencies  to  be  ufelefs,  or 
that  the  church  hath  no  power  to  grant  them, 
he  is  accurfed.  Concil.  Trid.  Sff.  zg.  Decret  de 
indulg. 

The  popes  and  prelates  of  the  church  are 
judges  appointed  by  God  to  remit  faults  and  pu- 
niffiments  in  his  name  by  an  indulgence,  if  fo  be 
juflice  be  fatisfied  through  the  application  of  the 
fatisfa&ion  of  Chrifl  and  his  faints.  Bellarm.  de 
Indulg.  1.  c.  1.  g.Jf.  Jam  vero. 

0.  17.  How  far  does  tfyofe  indulgencies  ex- 
tend ? 


A.  Sometimes 


[ 33  3 

Luke  xv ii.  10.  When  ye  Jhall  have  done  all  thofe 
things  which  are  commanded  you,  Jay,  we  are 
unprofitable fervants : we  home  done  that  which  was 
our  duty  to  do.  A command  to-do  it,  and  grace 
to  obey  that  command,  and  a jar  more  exceeding 
and  eternal  weight  ofi glory,  as  a reward , (2  Cor. 
iv.  17.)  will  fhame  the  pretence  of  real-merit, 
and  turn  the  anathema  upon  themfelves.  And 
they  may  as  foon  reconcile  light  and  darknefs,  as 
the  grace  of  God  and  merit  of  Chrill  to  this  doc- 
trine. 

2?.  16.  What  God  binds,  no  perfon  can-untie ; , 
and  what  he  unties,  no  man  can  bind.  But  this  . 
courfe  of  indulgence,  Hill  upheld  in  the  church 
of  Rome,  doth  untie  what  God  doth  bind ; it 
makes  fin  eafy  and  cheap,  and  prollitutes  the 
ftrift  rules  of  Chrifiianity  to  the  bafeft  purpofes. 
For  when  a perfon  can  have  a plenary  indulgence 
for  fo  trivial  a fatisfaftion  as  the  Handing  before, 
the  doors  of  St.  Peter’s  church  at  Rome,  when 
the  Pope  blelfes  the  people  atEafler,  it  makes  fin 
as  eafy  to  be  committed  as  pardoned. 


Ri  17,  18;  The  fcandal  given  .by  them  was.  fo 
notorious,  that  order  was  given  by  the  council  of 
R £ - Trento 


C 34  3 

A.  Sometimes  to  days,  fometimes  to  years, 
nay  fome  of  them  were  plenary  t indulgences ; 
fome  were  for  a difcharge  from  punifhments 
here,  others  from  the  pains  of  purgatory,!  and 
fome  granted  an  eternal  reward. 

+ Bellarm.  de  indulget.  1.  l.c.  9.  init.  Plenary  indulgence 
doth  take  away  all  the  punifhment  due  to  Jin . Ibid.  ff.  Indulgenda 
Quadragen. 

J Ibid.  c.  7.  ff.  Et  quidem. 

<2-  18.  Upon  what  terms  were  thofe  indulgen- 
ces to  be  obtained  P 

A.  By  moneyt,  pilgimages j,  aflifting  the  pope[|, 
reciting  certain  prayers^. 

+ This  is  implied  Concil.  Trid.  Sejf.  21.  c.  9.  though  it  is  cal- 
led by  the  foft  name  of  alms. 

! So  many  are  granted  to  particular  churches  in  Rome,  for  the 
benefit  of  pilgrims. 

||  So  thofe  that  upon  his  motion  took  up  arms  againft  the  AH 
g'enfes,  had  by  an  indulgence  the  promife  of  an  eternal  reward. 
Baron,  ad  A.  D.  1179.  n.  7. 

§ So  pope  Alexander  the  fixth,  granted  to  thofe  that  recited 
this  prayer  to  the  blefled  Virgin,  and  St  Ann  her  mother,  30,000 
years  indulgence. 

“ Hail  Mary  full  of  grace,  the  Lord  he  with  thee,  thy  grace  with  me. 
RlcJJed  be  thou  among  women  : and  blcffed  be  St.  Ann  thy  mother,  front 
whom,  0 Virgin  Mary,  thou  hajl  proceeded  without  fin  and  fpot : but  of  thee 
hath  Jefus  Chri/l  been  born,  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  Amen.” 

Thefaur.  Var.  Exercit.  in  grat.  Sodal,  B.  V.  M.  Bruxcl.  Edit. 
2.  An.  1658.  p.  287. 

<2*  19.  Upon  what  pretence  or  reafon  is  the 
do&rine  and  pra&ice  of  indulgenes  founded  ? 

A.  Upon 


[ 35  3 

Trent  for  reforming  the  abufes  of  them  ; but  when 
the  fathers  thought  fit  not  to  difcover  thofe  abufes, 
and  only  forbad  wicked  gaint,  they  left  a large 
fcope  for  making  a gain  of  them.  And  two  of 
the  popes  under  whom  that  council  fat,  (viz. 
Paul  3.  and  Julius  34)  proceeded  in  the  fame 
conrfe  as  their  predeceffors,  if  they  did  not  exceed 
them:  for  by  their  bulls,  there  is  granted  to  all 
fuch  of  the  fraternity  of  the  holy  altar,  as  vifit 
the  church  of  St.  Hilary  of  Chartres,  during  the 
fix  weeks  of  Lent,  775,700  years  pardon,  befides 
fourteen  or  fifteen  plenary  indulgences.  And 
fince  that  Urban  the  eighth[|,  and  Clement  the 
tenth§,  have  granted  by  their  indulgence  a ple- 
nary remiffion  of  fins. 

+ Se(T.  25'  Decret.  de  Indulg- 

$ A bull  of  indulgence  to  th  e fraternity  of  the  altar,  Paris  1550.  v,  Bi 
Taylor’s,  deforce-,  part  2.  1.  2.  p.8. 

||  Bullar.  to.  3.  pag.  74. 

^ A,  D.  1671.  Bull  upon  the  canonization  tf  fivefaints, 


i?.  19.  Romans  vi-ii.  18.  The Jujferings  of  this 
prejent  time , are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with 
the  glory  that  Jhall  be  revealed  in  its.:  fo  2 Cor.  iv. 


[ 36  ] 

A.  Upon  works  of  fupererogationt,  that  is, 
the  overplus  of  the  fatisfa&ions  of  Chrift  and  the 
faints,  which  is  a treafury  \ committed  to  the 
church’s  cuftody||,  and  to  be  difpofed  of  as  (he 
fees  meet.§ 

+ That fupererogat'um  is  ncccjfary  to  indulgence,  no  one  can  deny , faith 
Bellarm.  de  Iodulg.  1.  1.  c.  2.  init. 

J Concil.  Trid.  Self  2».  c.  9. 

jj  So  pope  Clem.  6.  Conftit.  extrav.  in  Bellarm.  ibid  f.  ult. 

$ Bellarm.  ibid.  c.  3. 


Q.  20.  Whither  do  the  fouls  of  thofe  go  that 
die  in  a ftate  of  grace,  but  are  not  fufficiently 
purged  from  their  fins,  or  have  not  had  a plenary 
indulgence  for  the  remiffion  of  them  ? 

A.  Such  go  to  purgatory,  a place  of  torment  in 
the  other  world,  near  to  hell+,  where  they  are  to 
continue  till  they  have  made  full  fatisfaition  for 
their  fins,  and  are  throughly  purged  and  prepar- 
ed for  heaven,  whereinto  no  unclean  thing  can 
enter.]; 

+ Bellarm.  de  Purg.  1.  2.  c.  6.  SS.  Quinta  eft. 

^ Cateeh.  Rom.  par.  1.  c.  6.  n.  3. 

Q.  21.  How  come  thofe  perfons  to  be  punifh- 
ed  in  the  other  world,  who  depart  in  a ftate  of 
grace  out  of  this  ? 

A.  Becaufe  they  have  not  here  fulfilled  the  pe- 
nance impofed  upon  them,  or  due  from  them  to 
God.  t 

d Eellarm.  de  Indulg*  I.  »•  c.  6,  7.  [ SetQuejl . 91.] 

. 22. 


[ 37  ] 

ij.  Every  one  of  its  fall  give  an  account  of  himfelf 
to  God , Rom.  xiv.  12.  If  there  be  no  compari- 
fon  betwixt  the  reward  and  our  fufferings  for  if, 
then  no  one  has  merit  to  transfer  to  another  : 
and  if  every  man  mull  give  an  account  of  himfelf, 
then  no  man  can  be  faved  by  the  merits  of  ano- 
ther. But  fuppofe  there  is  a fuper-abundance  of 
fatisfaftions  in  the  faints  ; yet  what  need  is  there 
of  them,  when  there  is  fuch  an  infinite  value  in 
the  fufFerings  of  Chrijl , who  by  one  offering  hath 
for  ever  perfieRed  them  that  are  fanRified,  Heb.  x. 
14.  Or  who  gave  the  church  the  power  fo  to 
apply  them  ? 

R.  20,  ot.  That  thofe  that  die  in  a Hate  of 
grace,  are  yet  in  a Hate  of  torment,  and  are  to 
be  purged  in,  the  other  world,  is  contrary  to  fcrip- 
ture  and  antiquity.  Rom.  viii.  1.  There  is  no 
condemnation  to  them  which  are  in  Chrift  Jefus, 
verfe  30.  Whom  he  jujhfed,  them  he  alfo glorified, 
verfe  33,  34.  Who  fhall  lay  any  thing  ta  the 
charge  of  God’s  eleR?  It  is  God  that  jufitified . 
Who  is  he  that  condemneth?  As  juftrification  and 
condemnation  are  here  oppofed  by  the  apoftle, 
fo  are  condemnation  and  glorification  ; and  he 
that  is  juftified  upon  the  fame  reafon  that  he 
cannot  be  condemned,  lhall  be  glorified.  Now 
the  ele£l  are  juftified  before  they  go  out  of  this 
world  ; and  confequently  fhall  have  nothing  laid 
to  their  charge  in  the  next. 

The  fervants  of  God  then  have  peace,  then  enjoy 

quiet 


[ 3<?  ) 


Q-  22.  Of  what  continuance  is  the  punifh- 
ment  of  that  ftate  ? 

A.  It  is  but  for  an  appointed  time ; and  the 
peifon  is  to  continue  in  it  till  he  is  purged  from 
his  fin,  and  has  fuffered  the  punifhment  due  to 
it. 

Catch,  ibid,  Bellarum.  de  purg.  1.  2tc.  B.-SS.  Quantum  ad 
piimum, 

Q.  23.  Is  there  no  way  by  which  the  fouls  of 
thofe  that  are  in  purgatory  may  be  delivered  out 
of  that  prifon,  and  their  time  of  torment  fbort- 
ened  ? 

Ak  They  may  be  helped  and  delivered  by  the  - 

fuffrages 


[ 39  3 

quiet  rcjl  and fecurity  ; when  being  drawn from  thef 
forms  of  the  world , we  arrive  at  the  haven  of  our 
everlajhng  habitation  and  fecurity  ; when  this 
death  being  ended,  we  enter  into  immortality.  St. 
Cypr.  de  Mortal.  SS.  2. 

Luke  xxiii.  43.  To  day Jhall  thou  be  with  me 
paradife.  Paradife  is  acknowledged  to  be  the 
feat  of  the  bleffed.  t Now  if  there  was  a purga- 
tion neceffary  for  finners,  he  that  believed  and 
repented  not  till  the  laft  moment  of  his  life,  might 
be  well  fuppofed  to  need  it : and  fhould  have 
been  fent  rather  to  purgatory  than  paradife. 

After  the  night  of  this  life  there  is  no  purga- 
tion ; and  it  is  better  to  be  corredled  and  purged 
now,  than  to  be  fent  to  the  torment  there,  yehere  the 
time  of punijhingis  and  not  of  purging.  Greg.  Na- 
zianz.  Orat.  15.  in  plag.-  grand. 

+ Bellarm.  de  S.  n Et.  Beat.  1.  i . c.  3.  Teftim,  4. 

R.  22.  The  ftate  that  believers  immediately 
enter  upon  after  death,,  is  Paid  to  be  life  for  the 
comfort,  and  everiafting  for  the  continuance  of  it. 

John  v.  24,  He  that  believelh  on  him  that  fent 
me,  hath  everlafing  life,  and Jhall  not  come  into 
condemnation  ; but  is  paffed from  death  unto  life. 

So  St.  Cyprian  ; The  end  of  this  life  being  com*, 
pleated , we  are  divided  into  the  habitations  of  ever - 
lafhng  either  death  or  immortality,.  Ad  demetr,  J 
4.6. 

R.  23,  Luke  16.  26.  Betwixt  us  and  you  there 

2$, 


[ 4°  ] 

fuffrages  | of  the  faithful  that  are  alive ; that  is, 
by  prayers,  alms,  and  malfes:  § and  oiher  works 
of  piety,  fuch  as  indulgences.|| 

t C0U9I.  Trid.  SefT,  25.  Deer,  de  Purgat. 

* Se(T  22.  Can.  3. 

j|  BeUarm  de  Pargat.  ].  2.  c.  16.  SS.  Ad.  h*c. 


Q.  24.  Is  the  doflrine  of  purgatory  a matter  of 
faith,  and  neceffary  to  be  believed  ? 

A.  Yes : for  whofoever  lhall  fay,  that  there 
is  no  debt  of  temporal  puni  fhment  to  be  paid, 
either  in  this  world  or  in  purgatory,  before  there 

can 


[ 4i  J 

is  a great  gulph  jixed , Jo  that  they  winch  would 
pafs  from  hence  to  you  [to  relieve  you]  cannot. 

As  the  Hate  in  which  Abr aham  and  Lazarus 
were  needed  no  relief ; fo  that  in  which  the  rich 
man  was,  could  not  obtain  it.  After  death  is  no 
kelp  to  be  gotten  by  godlinefs  or  repentance. 
Lazarus  doth  not  there  go  to  the  rich  man,  nor  the 
rich  man  unto  Lazarus.  For  the  garners  are  fealed 
up,  and  the  time  is  fulflled.  Epiphanius  contr. 
Cather.  Haer.  gg. 

And  if  a man’s  own  repentance  cannot  help 
him,  much  lefs  can  another’s  good  works  profit 
him. 

So  St.  Jerom  ; IVhile  we  are  in  this  world , 
we  may  be  able  to  help  one  another,  either  by  our 
prayers,  or  by  our  counfels  : but  when  we  Jhall 
come  before  the  judgment  feat  of  Chrift,  neither  Job 
nor  Daniel,  nor  Noah,  can  intreat  for  any  one, 
but  every  one  muji  bear  his  own  burden.  + And  he 
elfe where  faith,  What Jhall  be  to  all  in  the  day  of 
judgement,  this  is  accomplifhed  to  every  one  at  the 
day  of  death. \ 

+ Lib.  3.  Com.  in  Galat.  c.  6. 

J In  Joel  c.  2. 

R.  24.  Bifhop  Fifher  faith,  That  there  is  none 
or  very  little  mention  of  purgatory  among  the 
antients  It  is  then  no  little  incroachment  on 
the  Chriftian  world,  to  make  it  now  a doftrine 
of  faith,  and  to  require  it  upon  pain  of  damna- 
tion to  be  believed. 

£ Roffens  Lutheri  confut.  Art.  t8.  & Polyd.  Vire.  de 

Inventl.  8.  c.  1.  ' 

R.  25. 


[ 42  ] 

can  be  an  admiffion  into  heaven,  is  accurfed  +. 
And  whofoever  /ball  fay,  the  facrifice  of  the 
mafs  is  not  to  be  ufed  for  the  dead,  is  accurfed  J. 
This  is  one  of  the  principles,  without  the  belief 
of  which  there  is  no  falvation  |j. 

+ Concil.  Trid.  Seff.  6.  Can.  30.  & SefT.  24.  Decret.  de 

Purg. 

f Ibid.  Se(T.  22.  Can.  3; 

||  Bulla.  Pii  4ti. 

0.  25.  In  what  place  were  the  fouls  of  the 
patriarchs,  and  other  good  men,  before  the  com- 
ing of  Chrifl:  ? 

A.  Before  the  death  and  refurre£lion  if,  or 
afcenfton  of  Chrift  |j,  the  gates  of  heaven  were 
open  to  none ; and  the  fouls  of  good  men  de- 
parted, were  detained  in  a certain  place  called 
limbus  patrum,  which  is  the  uppermoft  part  of 
hell : the  lowermoft  being  the  place  of  the  damn- 
ed ; next  above  that  purgatory  ; next  to  that  lim- 
bus vfantum  ; above  that  limbus  patrum  §. 

} Catch.  Rom.  par.  1.  c.  6.  n.  3,  6. 

||  Bcllarm.  de  Chrift.  1.  4.  c.  11. 

^ Bellarm.  de  Purg.  1.  2.  c.  6.  SS.  Quod  autem. 

Q.  26.  In  what  condition  were  they  while 
thus  detained  in  limbo  ? 

A.  They  are  not  agreed  in  the  nature  and  con- 
dition of  the  place  ; for  the  Catechifm  faith, 
N.  3.  They  were  fujiained  by  hope,  and  were  with- 
out any  fenfe  of  grief.  And  prefently,  N.  4. 
That  although  they  were  without  other fenfe  of  grief 

yet 


[ 43  ] 


R.  25.  We  read  that  Elijah  was  taken  up  into 
heaven,  2 Kings  ii.  11.  and  he  and  IVJofes  appear- 
ed in  glory,  Luke  ix.  31.  Matt.  xvii.  2.  And 
Abraham  is  reprefented  (Luke  xvi.  32.)  as  in  pa- 
radife,  the  blefled  abode  of  good  men  in  the 
other  world. 

So  St.  Auflin  expounds  it,  The  bofom  of  Abra* 
ham  is  the  reft  of  the  bleffed  poor,  zvhofe  is  the 
kingdom  of  heaven , into  which  after  this  life  they 
are  received.  Quaeft.  Evangel.  1.  2.  c.  38. 


R.  26.  But  the  fcripture  tells  us,  that  the  {fate 
where  Abraham  was,  was  not  only  a {fate  of  ref , 
but  alfo  of  comfort , Luke  xvi.  25. 


R.  27. 


[ 44  ] 


yzt  being  kept  infufpence , they  were  tormented  with 
the  hope  of  that  blfjed  glory  which  they  did  expect. 


0.  27.  How  and  when  were  they  delivered 
thence  ? 

A.  They  were  delivered  by  Chrift  at  his  de- 
fcent  into  hell  + ; fo  that  ever  ftnce  that  place  re- 
mains empty  :£. 


+ Catch.  Rom.  ibid.  n.  5,  6. 

J Bellarm.  de  Purg.  1.  2.  c.  6.  ^ o&avaeft. 

g.  28.  What  ufe  do  they  make  of  this  doc- 
trine ? 

A.  Hereby  they  give  a reafon  why  there  is 
neither  precept  nor  example  in  the  Old  Tefta- 
ment  for  the  invocation  of  faints  departed  be- 
caufe  they  were  for  their  puniftiment  inclofed  in 
this  place,  and  were  there  held  bound  by  the  de- 
vils till  delivered  by  (Thrift.  And  fo  the  peo- 
ple of  thofe  times  only  prayed  to  God,  and  did 
not  ufe  to  fay,  Holy  Abraham,  pray  for  me  ||. 


J Bellarm.  deSanft.  bear.  1.  1.  c.  19.  § Item  Exod. 
ij  Catch.  Rom,  ibid.  n.  5. 

||  Bellarm.  ibid. 


SECT. 


[ 45  ] 


R.  27.  The  fcripture  fays  not  one  word  of 
this. 


R.  28.  There  is  neiiher  precept  nor  example 
for  the  invocation  of  faints  in  the  New  Tefta- 
ment ; and  if  that  be  the  reafon  for  a limbus  be- 
fore Chrifl,  it  may  be  a reafon  for  a limbus  flill : 
and  they  may  as  well  exclude  the  faints  from 
heaven  now  as  then,  if  there  be  no  more  for  their 
invocation  in  the  New  Telfament  than  was  in 

I the  Old.  Thus  Salermo  (a  learned  difputant  in 
the  council  of  Trent)  Invocations  of  faints  have 
no  exprefs  ground  in  all  the  fcriptures  :t. 

£ Ad  1 Tim.  z,  Difp.  7,  § Sed  cum  aute  & nee  obftst* 

I 


SECT. 


[ 46  ] 


SECT.  III. 

Of  Divine  Worjhip. 

Q.  F what  doth  the  fervice  in  the  Roman 

' Church  confift  ? 

A.  It  confifls  of  prayers  and  hymns  offered  to 
God,  angels,  and  faints;  of  leffons  taken  out  of 
the  fcriptures,  and  legends  ; and  of  profeffion  of 
faith  in  the  creeds. 

to 

0.  30.  In  what  language  is  their  fervice  per- 
formed ? 

A.  It  is  performed  in  all  places  among  them  in 
the  Latin  tongue,  which  is  in  no  place  vulgarly 
underflood. 

0.  31.  Is. the  havingthe  fervice  in  an  unknown 
tongue  enjoined  in  the  church  of  Rome  ? 

A.  Yes:  it  is  required  that  it  fhould  be  cele- 
brated in  the  Latin  tongue  ; and  whofoever  (hall 
fay  that  it  ought  only  to  be  adtniniflered  in  the 
vulgar  tongue,  is  accurfedt.  Hence  when  of  late 
years  the  miffal,  orMafs-book,  was  trandated  in- 
to French,  it  was  declared  bv  Pope  Alexander 
the  7th,  to  be' a feed-plot  of  difobedience,  rajhnefs , 
and Schijm ; and  he  calls  them  that  did  it,  Sens  of 

perdition, 

+ Cencil.  Trid,  SelT.  23.  c.  8.  & Can.  9, 


[ 47  ] 


SECT.  III. 

Of  Divine  Worjhip. 

R.  29. /CARDINAL  Ouignonius  at  the  in- 
fiance  of  Pope  Paul  the  3d.  reformed 
the  breviary;  and  inflead  of  legends,  fetfcriptures 
for  the  Leffons.  But  Pope  Pius  Quintus,  who 
afterward  undertook  to  reform  it  alfo,  prohibited 
that  of  Quignonius,  t and  inflead  of  the  fcriplures, 
placed  legends  again,  and  fo  it  continues. 

t Bulla  prefixa  Brcviar.  Rom.  JuJfa  Pii  V . Edit. 

R.  30,  31.  In  divine  worfhip  (as  in  all  other 
adlions)  the  firfl  thing  to  be  confidered  is  the 
end,  and  the  next  thing  is  the  means  conducing 
to  that  end.  The  end  is  the  honour  of  God,  and 
the  edification  of  the  church;  and  then  God  is 
honoured,  when  the  church  is  edified.  The 
means  conducing  to  that  end,  are  to  have  the 
fervice  fo  adminifilred,  as  may  inform  the  mind, 
engage  the  affefilions,  and  increafe  devotion. 
But  that  cannot  be  done,  where  the  tongue  it  is 
celebrated  in,  is  not  underflood. 

Thus  we  are  taught  by  the  apoflle,  1 Cor.  xiv, 
2.  lie  that  fpeaketh  in  an  unknown  tongue,  fpeaketh 
not  unto  men.,  verfe  11,  Jj  1 know  not  the  mean- 
ing of  the  voice,  he  that  fpeaketh  fiall  be  a barba- 
rian unto  me.  Verfe  16.  If  thou  Jhalt  blefs  with 
the  Spirit,  [by  the  gift  of  an  unknown  tongue] 

how 


C 48  ] 


perdition,  and  doth  condemn,  reprobate  and forbid 
that  Miffal. 


0.  32.  What  are  the  objetls  of  worlhip  in  the 
church  of  Rome  ? 

A.  Befides  the  blefled  Trinity,  angels,  the 
Virgin  Mary,  and  Saints. 


g.  33.  What  honour  do  they  give  to  the 
angels  ? 


) flow Jliall  he  that  occupieth  the  room  of  the  learned 
fay , Amen,  at  the  giving  of  thanks  f How  can  the 
people  be  attentive  to  the  le'fTons,  anfwer  at  the 
refponfes,  be  devout  in  the  prayers,  profefs  their 
faith  in  the  creeds,  when  they  do  not  underftand 
what  is  read,  prayed,  or  profeffcd  ? Thus  St. 
Ambrofe  on  1 Cor.  xiv.  It  is  evident  that  the 
mind  is  ignorant  where  the  tongue  is  not  under - 
food . The  unfilful  perfon  hearing  what  he  doth 
not  underfand,  knoios  not  the  conclufion  of  ihe 
prayer,  and  doth  not  anfwer  Amen, 

R.  32.  Matt.  iv.  10.  Our  Saviour  fays,  Thou 
Jhalt  worfup  the  Lord  thy  God , and  him  only  fialt 
thou  ferve.  As  divine  worfhip  is  due  to  God  ; 
fo  it  is  not  lawful  to  give  k to  any  other. 

The  church  of  Rome  doth  acknowledge  this, 
but  fays.  The  worfhip  they  give  to  faints  and 
angels  is  not  of  that  kind.  Cateck.  Rom.  Part  .3. 
c.  2.  ru  8.  Part  4.  c , 6.  n.  3. 

But  what  worfhip  is  peculiar  to  God,  if  prayer 
is  not  ? So  thought  St.  Ambrofe,  Thou  only  art 
to  be  invocated.  De  obitu  Theodof. 

For  God  alone  can  receive  our  prayer,  or  can 
give  what  we  pray  for,  or  be  the  objeft  of  our 
faith  and  truft. 

P-  33 ■ honour  the  holy  angels,  as  they 
are  God’s  miniflers,  and  are  fent forth  to  minifer 
unto  them  that  fhall  be  heirs  of  falvation,  Heb,  i. 
*4.  But  to  worfhip  or  pray  to  them  we  dare  not. 


C 5°  ] 

A.  i.  The  church  of  Rome  teaches  that  angels 
are  to  be  worfhipped,  ^ invoked,  and  prayed  to.$ 
And  they  have  litanies  and  prayers  compofed  for 
this  purpofe.|| 

+ Catech.  Rom.-  par.  3,  c!  2.  n!  8,  9,  vtncrart,  adorare,  colerfl 

§ Ibid.  n.  10,  ||  Litani®  IT,  Angelorum  vid.  Horologium 

Tutelaris  Angeli  a drexlio.  p 84.  Cuac  1623. 

A.  2 They  teach,  that  as  every  particular  per- 
fon  hath  a guardian  angel  from  his  birth, t fo  it  is 
fit  to  commit  themfelves  more  particularly  to 
him  after  this  manner, ||  Elejfed  angel ! to  whofe 
care  our  loving  Creator  hath  committed  me,  de- 
fend me  this  day,  / befeech  you,  from  all  dangers , 
and  direEl  me  in  the  way  I ought  to  walk. 

+ Catecb.  Rom.  par.  4.  cap.  g,  §.  1.  n.  4.  6/ 

J Horolog.  Drex.  p.  108. 

H The  child's  catcckifm.  1678. 

Q.  34.  What  religious  honour  do  they  give 
to  the  faints  ? 

A . They  pray  to  them  as  their  interceffors, 
make  confeflions  to  them;  offer  incenfe,  and 
make  vows  to  them;  venerate  their  images  and 
reliques. 

Q.  35.  For  whatreafon  do  they  pray  to  faints  ? 

A.  That  by  their  help  they  may  obtain  bene- 
fits from  God,t  who  doth  confer  many  favours 
upon  mankind,  by  their  merit,  and  grace,  and 
interceflion.t 

d Concil.  Trid.  Sell.  25.  de  invocat. 

J Catech.  Rom.  par.  3.  c.  2.  § 12. 

Miflal.  Rom.  proprium  lvIilTaium  de  fanflis. 

£•  36- 


[ 51  ] 


as  it  is  what  they  themfeives  refufe  and  abhor. 
Rev.  xix.  10.  and  the  fcripture  doth  condemn  as 
a fign  of  a flefhly  mind,  vainly  intruding  into  thofe 
things  which  we  have  not  feen.  Col.  ii.  18.  Theo- 
doret  upon  this  text  faith,  That  the  pra&ice  of 
worlhiping  angels  continued  a long  time  in 
Phrygia  and  Pifidia  : wherefore  the  Synod  of  La- 
odicea  doth  forbid  praying  to  angels : For  Chrif 
tians  ought  not  to  forfake  the  church  of  God , and 
depart  afde  and  invocate  angels , whick  are  forbid - 
den.  Cone.  Laod.  Can.  35. 


R • 34,  35,  36,  37.  There  is  one  God,  and  one 
Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  Man  Chrif  Je- 
fus,  who  gave  himfelf  aranfoin  for  all.  1 Tim.  ii» 
5’  6- 

Rom.  viii.  34.  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ? It  is 
Ckrf  that  died,  yea  rather,  that  is  rifen  again,  who 
is  even  at  the  right-hand  of  God,  who  alfo  maketk 
inter  cejfon Joyous. 

As  there  is  but  one  God  to  us,  though  there 
are  gods  many,  and  lords  many,  ft  Cor.  viii,  5.] 
So  to  us  there  is  but  or.e  MeTator,  or  Intercef- 
for,  though  we  fhould  grant  there  are  many  in- 
terceffbrs  and  mediators^  Per  though  the  angels 
and  faints  may  intercede  for  us  in  heaven,  that 
C 2 n« 


[ s2  3 

Q.  3 6.  After  what  manner  do  they  pray  t« 
faints  ? 

^4.  They  pray  to  them  as  favourites  with  God, 
that  they  would  take  them  into  their  protection, 
and  would  obtain  thofe  things  of  God  for  them 
which  they  want.  Therefore  they  plead  that 
they  have  two  different  forms  of  prayer ; for 
to  God  they  properly  fay,  Have  mercy  upon  us, 
hear  us  : to  a faint,  Pray  for  us. 

Catech.  Rom.  par.  4.0.  6.  n.  3. 

37-  But  have  they  not  thofe  forms  in  their 
miffals,  breviaries,  and  common  books  of  devo- 
tion, which  are  particularly  and  immediately  ap- 
plied to  the  faints  for  obtaining  what  they  want  f 

A.  Yes  :.It  is  too  manifeft  to  be  denied  ; and 
though  they  have  been  more  fparing  of  late  years, 
yet  nothing  formerly  more  frequent.  As  for  in- 
ftance,  in  a miffal  printed  at  Paris,  An.  1520. 
jol.  51.  there  is  this  prayer  to  St.  Agnes. 

0 Agnes , woman  of  the  Lamb,  do  thou  enlighten 
us  within.  Dejlroy  the  roots  of  fin,  0 excellent 
Lady,  after  the  grievances  of  the  world  do  thou 
tran/late  us  to  the  company  of  the  Blejfed. 


£•3*- 


C 53  ] 

no  more  makes  them  fuch  interceffors  as  we  ma)r 
pray  to,  than  becaufe  there  are  gods  many,  we 
may  pray  to  them,  as  we  do  to  the  true  God. 

The  fcripture  knows  no  difference,  between  a 
Mediator  of  interceffion  and  redemption  ; he 
alone  makes  interceffion  for  us,  that  died  and 
rofe,  and  is  at  the  right-hand  of  God.  And  he 
alone  has  a right  to  our  prayers,  and  to  him  alone 
may  we  addrefs  them. 

So  Origen  : All  prayers,  and f applications,  and 
thankfgivings,  are  to  befent  up  to  God  the  Lord  of 
all,  by  that  high-prief  who  is  above  all  angels,  be- 
ing the  living  word  of  God.  L.  g.  cont.  Cels.  p. 
233.  2 39* 

So  again  ; We  ought  to  pray  only  to  the  God  over 
all,  and  his  only  Son  the  firjl-born  of  every  creature, 
who  as  our  High-priejl,  offers  his  prayers  to  his 
God,  and  our  God.  Lib.  8.  p.  395,  402. 

To  have  other  mediators  and  interceffors,  is 
not  to  hold  the  head,  Colof.  ii.  19.  in  the  judgment 
of  the  apoftle,  and  the  council  of  Laodicea, 
where  it  is  faid,  Chrifians  ought  not  to  foffake  the 
church,  and  invocate  angels. — If  any  man  there- 
jore  be found  to  give  himfelf  to  this  privy  idolatry , 
let  him  be  anathema  ; becaufe  he  hath  forfaken  our 
Lord  Jefus,  the  Son  of  God,  and  betaken  himfelf 
to  idolatry. 


C 3. 


R.  38. 


[ 54  1 

Q-  38.  What  is  the  worfhip  they  give  to  the 
virgin  Mary ? 

A.  They  fly  unto  her  as  the  advocatrix  of  the 
faithful,  the  mother  of  God,  that  by  prayer  to  her 
they  may  obtain  help,  through  her  moft  excel- 
lent merits  with  God. 

Q.  39-  Have  they  not  fome  Angular  forms  of 
devotion  to  her  P 

A.  Yes:  for  apprehending  her  to  be  in  glory 
fuperior  to  all  created  beings,  they  offer  a fervice 
to  her,  beyond  what  they  give  either  to  angels 
or  faints. 

g.  40.  After  what  manner  do  they  apply 
themfelves  to  her? 

A.  According  to  fome  miffals,  they  afk  her  to 
to  command,  her  Son,  by  the  right  and  authority 
oj a mother\ ; or,  as  it  is  in  the  breviaries  ufed  at 
this  day,  Jhew  thyfelf  a mother. ||  They  pray  to 
her,  thatfhe  would  loofe  the  bands  of  the  guilty, 
bring  light  to  the  blind,  would  make  them  mild 
and  chaft,  and  caufe  their  hearts  to  burn  in  love 
to  Chrijl\. 

$ MiflTal.  Parif.  Anno  1520,  Folio  65. 

jl  Brev.  Rom.  Feft.  Affurap. 

$ Officium.  B.  M in  the  hymn  called  Planfhis  B.  M.  Antwerp, 
1641. 

In  a book  printed  lately  in  London , the  author 
faith,  that  whatever  gifts  are  befiowed  upon  us  by 

Je/us 


C 55  ] 

R . 38.  We  honour  this  blefTed  virgin  as  the 
mother  of  the  holy  Jefus,  and  as  fhe  was  a per- 
fon  of  eminent  piety  ; but  we  do  not  think  it 
lawful  to  give  that  honour  to  her,  which  belongs 
not  to  a creature,  and  doth  equal  her  with  her 
Redeemer. 

R.  39,  40.  We  cannot  but  wonder  at  the  ap- 
plications made  to  the  blefTed  Virgin  in  the 
church  of  Rome,  whofe  a6bs  on  earth,  and 
whofe  power  in  heaven,  the  fcripture  doth  very 
fparingly  relate,  or  is  altogether  filent  in.  We 
read  nothing  there  of  her  bodily  affumption  into 
heaven,  nor  of  her  exaltion  to  a throne  above 
angels  and  arch-angelst.  We  read  nothing  there 
of  her  being  the  mother  of  grace  and  mercy,* 
the  queen  and  gate  of  heaven,  the  advocatrix  of 
finners.J  and  of  her  power  in  deflroying  all  here- 
fies  in  the  world, ||  and  being  all  things  to  all.§ 

f Brev.  Rom.  JEhiv.  Fell.  A (Tump. 

* Officium  parvum  B.  M.  ad  Matutin.  ) Catech.  par.  4.  c, 

$ Completor.  $ 5.  n.  8. 

|J  Feft.  AlTiunp. 

§ Miffale  Parif.  ibid,  & Le  Pfaultier  de  Jefus.  Pavif,  1620.  p. 

126. 

When  we  read  fo  much  of  the  blefTed  Virgin 
in  books  of  this  kind,  and  fo  little  of  her  in  the 
divine  writings,  we  cannot  but  refleft  upon  what 
is  faid  by  Epiphanius , of  a certain  feft  of  women 
that  in  his  time  offered  cakes  to  the  virgin  Mary , 
which  he  calls  an  impious  iking,  and  altogether 
C 4 contrary 


t 6*  ] 


Jefus,  we  receive  them  by  the  mediation  of  Mary » 
Mo  one  being  gracious  to  Jefus  that  is  not  devoted 
to  Mary . That  the  power  of  Mary  in  the  kingdom 

of  Jefus,  is  fuitable  to  her  maternity. And 

though  the  condition  offome  great /inner s may  be  fo 
deplorable , that  the  limited  excellency  and  merits 
cannot  effectually  bend  the  mercies  of  Jefus  to  relieve 
them  ; yet  fuch  is  the  acceptablene/s  of  the  mother  of 
Jefus  to  Jefus,  that  whofoever  is  under  the  verge 
of  her  proteElion,  may  confde  in  her  interajfion  to 
Jefus.  That  the  perfon  devoted  to  her,  is  to  beg 
of  her  to  accompany  him  as  his  facred guide,  ad- 
vocate, and  champion , againjl  the  affaults  of  fin 
and fenfuality. 

Contemplations  of  the  life  and  glory  of  holy  Mary,  3tc.  p, 
7,(^8,  g,  14.  Printed,  Anno  1685. 

Much  after  the  forecited  manner  did  the  coun- 
cil of  Con/lance  invoke  the  blefled  Virgin,  as 
other  councils  ufed  to  do  the  Holy  Ghoft,  calling 
her  the  mother  of  grace,  the  fountain  of  mercy  ; 
and  they  call  on  her  for  light  from  heaven. 


41.  What  external  reprefentations  or  me- 
morials 


[ 57  ] 

contrary  to  the.  do&rine  of  the  Holy  Gkojl.  + And 
he  farther  adds  ; This  the  Holy  Ghofi  doth  warn 
us  of,  in  that  Cbrift  faith.  Woman  what  have  1 to 
do  with  thee  ? Where  he  calls  her  woman  and  as 
it  were  prophefying , to  refute  thofe  fchifmsand 
herefes  which  he  knew  would  arifein  the  world  ; 
and  that  no  one  being  moved  by  a certain  admira- 
tion of  the  bleffed  Virgin,  might  turn  himfelfto  thofe 
dotages  of  herefies.  And  he  adds,  Let  the  virgin 
Mary  be  honoured,  but  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy. 
Ghojl  be  adored,  t Much  more  hath,  that  father 
there  to  this  pnrpofie. 

+ Hiref.  78.  p,  1054.  Par.  1622; 

| Haeref.  79.  N.  4,  7,  &c. 

But  what  would  this  father  have  faid,  inflead 
of  a chair  adorned  and  fet  forth  in  honour  of  the 
Virgin  Mary  (as  thofe  women  did]  he  had  found 
her  advanced  to  a throne  of  a mediatrix  in  hea- 
ven ? What  if  inftead  of  cakej,  there  had  been 
litanies  and  prayers  offered  to  her,  and  that  in 
more  abundance  than  to  Chrift  himfelf  ? What  if 
he  had  found  them  praying,  0 holy  mother,  fuc- 
cour  the  miferable-,  help  the  weak,  comfort  thofe 
that  mourn  ? (Breviar.  Rom.  vEftiv.  Suffragia.)  E 
doubt  not  but  he  would  have  faid  ofih'is.what  he 
doth  of  the  other,  that  they  would  obtrude  her 
upon  us  for  God,  and  have  called  it  herefy  and. 
and  idolatry. 

i?,  41,  42.  Deut. . xxxiv.  6.  He  [God  by  Mi- 
ckaeL\  buried  Mofes,  but  no  man  know eth  of  his 
C 5-  fpulchre 


C 58  ] 

morials  have  they  in  the  church  of  Rome,  which 
they  give  veneration  and  worfhip  to  ? 

A.  They  have  the  relics  and  images  of  the  Vir- 
gin Mary  and  faints. 

Concil.  Trid.  Sell.  25.  de  invoc. 

£.  42.  What  do  they  mean  by  relics? 

A.  The  bodies  or  remainders  of  them,  or  par- 
ticular things  belonging  or  relating  to  them 
when  alive,  as  an  arm,  or  thigh,  bones,  or 
afhes ;+  and  the  part  in  which  they  fuffered,^:  or 
the  things  by  which  they  fuffered,  as  the  chains 
with  which  St.  Peter  was  bound. jj 

d Ex  Decret.  Regift.  Prasfix.  Brev.  Rom. 

j:  Catech.  Rom.  Par.  3.  c.  2.  n.  15. 

JBrcv.  Rom.  Par-  /Eftiv.  Aug.  Feft.  Petri,  ad  vine. 

{ £ . 43.  For  what  caufe  do  they  fhew  this  re- 
gard to  reli  s ? 

A.  By  he  veneration  of  them  they  obtain  the 
help  of  the  faints, t whom  the  relics  relate  to ; 
and  many  benefits  are  thereby  conferred  by  God 
upon  mankind  ; for  by  thefe  the  dead  have  been 
jaifed,  the  infirm  cured,  and  devils  caft  out.:£ 

d Cfcncil.  Tiid.  Scft.  25.  de  invocat. 

$ Catech.  Rom.  ibid,  Breviar.  Rom,  ibid. 


[ 59  3 

Jepulchre  unto  this  day.  S.  Barradas  the  Jefuit  up- 
on the  place  faith,  It  is  the  common  opinion  of\y~ 
ra,  Abulenfis,  Cajetan,  and  others,  that  the Jepul- 
chre  was  hid , left  the  Ifraelites,  who  were  inclined 
to  the  zuorjhip  of  idols,  Jhould  worjhip  Mofes  as 
God.  For  they  fay,  that  when  the  devil  would for 
that  reafon  have  Jhewed  the  grave  and  the  body  of 
Mofes  to  the  Ifraelites,, St.  Michael  hindered  ; and 
this  was  the  contention fpoken  of  Jude  ix. 

Seb.  Barrad.  Iiinerar.  Fil.  Ifrael, 

i : l ) i i . 

They  could  give  no  greater  honour  to  the  bo- 
dy of  Mofes,  than  is  given  to  relics  in  the  church 
of  Rome;  and  if  that  was  idolatry,'  knd  MofcV 
body  was  concealed  to  prevent  it,  then  there  is  as 
much  reafon  to  think  it  unlawful  now  in  this 
cafe,  as  it  Was  then  in  that. 

. ' ' ' • ’ ■ J 

R.  43.  We  read  of  Hezekiak,  2 Kings  xviii.  4. 
that  he  brake  in  pieces  the  brazen  ferpent  that-: 
Mofes  had  made ; and  the  reafon  was,  becaufe  the1 
children  of  Ifrael  did  burn  incenfe  to  it.  The 
brazen  ferpent  was  of  God’s  own  inflitution, 
Numb.  xxi.  8.  By  looking  up  to  which^  the 
people  were  formerly  cured.  And  though  it  was 
preferved  as  a memorial  of  that  divine  operation;., 
yet  when  abufed  to  idolatry,  he  cut  it  in  pieces. . 
And  were  thefe  truly  relics  of  faints,  and  did 
work  thofe  miracles  they  pretend,  it  would:  be  no 
reafon  for  that  reverence  and  worfhip  they  give 
to  them but  the  reverence  and  worihip  given  to 
& 6 them 


[ * ] 


<2_  44.  What  kind  of  reverence  or  worlhip  is 
required  to  be  given  to  images  and  pi&ures  in 
the  church  of  Rome  ? 

A.  They  kifs  them,  uncover  the  head,  and 
fall  down  before  them ; offer  incenfe,  and  pray 
to  them,  and  ufe  all  fuch  poftures  of  worlhip  as 
they  would  do  to  the  perfon  or  perfons  thereby 
reprefented  (whether  Chriit,  the  Virgin  Mary,, 
or  other  faints)  df  they  were  prefent : and  who* 
foever  doth  think  otherwife  is  accurfed.t  And 
accordingly  th.e  prieft  is  to  dirett  the  people  to 
them,  that  they  may  be  worfhipped.;}: 

+ Concil.  Trid.  Seff.  25.  de  invocat.  CaUch.  Rom.  Par,  4. 
t.  6.  n.  4. 

J Uvcolantur  Catech,  Rom.  Par,  3.  c.  2.  a.  24, 


£•  45* 


[ 6,  ] 

them  Ihould,  according  to  good  king  Hezekiab’s 
practice,  be  areafonto  give  them  a- decent  inter- 
ment. 

R.  44.  On  the  contrary,  tbe-fecontfco-mmand- 
ment  teaches  us,  Thou  Jha/t  not  make  unto  thee  any 
graven  image,  or  any  likenejs  of  any  thing  that  is 
in  heaven  above,  &c.  Thou  Jhalt  not  bow  down  ter 
them,  nor  ferve  them.  In  which  there  are  two 
words  to  be  confidered,  the  one  pefel,  which  we 
rightly  tranflate  graven  image ; for  it  properly 
fignifies  any  thing  carved,  and  cut  out  of  wood 
or  done;  and  fo  it  is  about  forty  times  rendered 
in  the  Greek  tranflation  \yXvT\of\  a graven  thing*. 
So  that  an  idol  and  an  image  are  there  forbidden. 
The  next  word  is  themunah,  which  doth  properly 
fignify  zjmilitude  or  likenejs  (as  is  confeffed)  and 
is  always  fo  mandated.  And  thus  it  was  under- 
flood by  the  fathers.  So  Judin  Martyr  when, 
he  recites  this.  law„  faith,  God  forbad  every  image 
and  Jimilitude..  [iiy.ova.  »» And  therefore 
Callander  grants  that  the  ancient  Gbri/tians  ab- 
horred all' veneration  of  images.  Gonjult.  Art.  21  de 
Imagin.  Indeed  the  command  is  fo  exprefs 
againft  this-  practice,  that  there  has  been  a kind 
of  felf-condemnation  in  the  church  of  Rome  ; 
whilll  they  commonly  either  altogether  leave 
out  this  commandment,.  + or  render- it  imper- 
fectly and  by  halves,  Thou  Jhalt  not  make  to  thee 
an  idol. 

+ The  Children’s  Catechifro,  printed  1678.. 

R'  i5 > 


[ 62  ] 

g.  45.  What  do  they  profefs,  is  their  inten- 
tion in  the  reverence  they  give  to  images  and 
pi&ures  ? 

A.  They  declare  that  the  honour  given  to 
images  and  pictures,  is  referred  to  the  prototypes, § 
or  the  perfons  reprefented  by  them,  whether 
God  the  Father,  Chrift,  angels  or  faints : and 
when  they  fall  down  before  the  image  or  pic- 
ture, they  worfhip  God,  or  Chrift,  the  angel  or 
faint. 

^ Concil.  Trid.  ibid. 


<2.  46.  Wh3t  regard  have  they  to  the  material 
crofs  or  crucifix  ? 

A.  1.  They  afcribe  peculiar  virtue  to  it,  and 
pray  that  God  would  make  the  wood  of  the  crof3 
to  be  the  f ability  of  faith,  an  increafe  of  good. 
7 vorks,  the  redemption  of  fouls  A 

+ Pontificals  in  bened.  novae  Crucis. 

2.  They  ufe  all  expreffions  of  outward  adora- 
tion, by  killings,  and  proftrations,  &c.± 

3.  They  pray  direclly  to  it,  to  increafe grace  in 
the  godly , and  blot  out  the  fins  of  the  guilty ■% 

4..  They 


[ 63  ] 

R.  45.  If  an  image  be  a reprefentation  of  a 
divine  perfon,  and  worfhip  be  due  to  the  image 
for  the  fake  of  the  perfon  reprefented  in  it;  then 
fuch  as  the  perfon  is,  fuch  muff  the  worfhip  be 
that  is  due  to  his  image  ; and  what  is  due  to  the 
perfon  if  prefent,  is  due  to  the  image  in  his  ab. 
fence.  For  to  give  one  honour  to  the  perfon, 
and  another  to  the  image,  a fuperior  to  the  per- 
fon, and  an  inferior  to  the  image,  is  to  terminate 
the  worfhip  in  the  image,  and  not  pafs  it  from 
thence  to  the  perfon,  as  Gretfer  the  Jefuit  ar- 
gues :+  but  if  it  be  to  pafs  from  the  image  unto 
the  perfon,  then  we  know  what  they  do  when 
they  kifs,  and  uncover  their  heads,  and  bow 
down  to,  and  worfhip  an  image : and  have  rea- 
fon  to  remember  the  apoffle’s  advice,  1 John  v. 
21.  Keep  yourjelves from  idols. 

+ De  cruce,  1. 1.  c.  49.  § Sccunda  itaque. 

R.  46.  The  church  of  Rome,  though  without 
any  authority  from  fcripture  (which  ufes  the 
words  promifcuoufly,J  makes  a diftin£lion  be- 
tween latna  and  deluia',  the  former  is  the  wor- 
fhip  they  give  to  God,  the  latter  the  worfhip  they 
give  to  faints.  Now  they  grant,  that  to  give 
latria,  or  fovereign  worfhip  to  any  befides  God, 
is  idolatry  ; and  that  were  not  the  hofl  the  very 
body  and  blood  ©f  Chrift,  it  would  be  no  lefs 
than  idolatry  to  give  that  honour  to  the  hofl, 
which  they  give  to  Chrift  : we  underftand  then 
how  to  call  that  worfhip  they  give  to  the  crofs ; 

they 


[ 64  ] 

4«  They  give  latria  to  it,  which  is  the  fove- 
reign  worihip  that  is  peculiar  to  God.|| 

$ Miflale  Fer.  6.  in  Parafc. 

^ Ibid,  fubante  Domin.  pa(T.  & Fell.  invent,  crucis. 

}f  Pontif.  Bom.  otdo  ad  recep.  Imper.  Rubr.  1.  & Gretfer  de 
crufe,  1.  i.  e.  qg. 


Q.  47.  Do  they  think  it  lawful  to  reprefent 
God  and  the  blefTed  Trinity  by  pidlures  and  ima- 
ges, and  to  worihip  them? 

A.  Such  piftures  are  not  only  almoft  every  where 
received  in  the  church  of  Rome,  but  univerfally 
tolerated, t and  are  both  recommended  as  expe- 
dient for  the  people,^  and  propofed  to  them  to  be 
worlhipped.§ 

i Bellarm.  de  Imag.  L2.  c.  8.  $ ultimo  probatur. 

J Coneil.  Trid.  Self,  25.  de  facr.  Imag.  Catccb.  Rons.  par.. 
3.  c.  2.  n.  20. 

^ Cajctan,  in  Aquin.  q.  25.  art.  3. 


£h  48.  Upon  what  pretence  do  they  make 
fuch  reprefentations  of  God  ? 

A.  They  fay,  they  hereby  reprefent  not  God^ 
but  fome  of  his  properties  and  actions,  after  the 
manner  they  are  defcribed  in  feripture  : as  when 
Damvii.  9,  10.  The  Ancient  of  days  is  faid  to fit  ona 

thr.om , 


[ es  ] 

they  themfelves  call  it  latna ; To  we  may  by  their 
leave  call  it  idolatry.  For  whatever  the  haft 
is,  the  crofs  is  but  a reprefentation,  and  not  the 
perfon  worfhipped. 

+ Gal.  iv.  8.  llu'KtvtfCL'ri  Ye  did  fervice  to  them  that 
were  no  gods . Rom.  i.  25.  ’ixd/r^vi root,  They  ferved  ths 
creature. 

R.  47.  There  is  nothing  more  exprefly  for- 
bidden in  fcripture,  than  the  making  any  image 
or  reprefentation  of  God,  Deut..  iv.  15,  16.  Take 
ye  good  heed  unto  yourf  elves  (for  ye faw  no  manner 
oj fimilitude)  left  ye  corrupt  yourf  elves  ; and  make 
you  a graven  image,  the Jimilitude  of  any  figure. 
If  it  had  been  acceptable  to  God,  he  would  have 
chofen  a fimilitude  to  appear  in;  but  feeing  he 
did  not,  they  were  not  to  prefume  to  make  one 
for  him.  This  is  to  change  his  glory , Rom.  i.  21, 
8cc.  And  to  place  fuck  an  image  in  a Chriflian 
temple  is  abominable , faith  St.  A tiffin. + And  thus 
to  defcnbe  the  Trinity , is  a deformation  of  it,  faith 
Cafiand  er.J 

+ De  Fide  & fymb.  c. 

^ Art.  21.  tj.  de  Imag, 

R.  48.  But  what  is  this  to  thofe  images  and 
pifiures  ufed  by  them,  which  have  no  refem- 
blance  in  fcripture;  fuch  are  their  deferiptions  of 
the  Trinity  in  Unity,  as  of  God  the  Father  like 
an  old  Man,  having  the  Son  lying  in  his  bofom, 
the  Holy  Ghoff  over  his  head  like  a dove  ? 

g.  God  himfelf  never  appeared  in  any  form, 

and 


[ 66  ] 

throne , having  the  books  opened  before  him  ; there- 
by fignifying  his  eternity  and  infinite  wifdom  [|. 

1)  Catech;  Rem.  Ibid, 


g.  49.  But  are  not  fuch  defcriptions  of  God, 
the  way  to  reprefent  him,  as  if  he  was  like  unto 
one  of  us  ? 

A.  Such  piftures  are  not  without  danger  to  be 
expofed  to  fuch  as  cannot  read  the  fcriptures,  if 
they  are  not  taught  that  they  are  to  be  taken  me- 
taphorically f . 

I Bellarm.  de  Ima,g.  1.  2.-  c.  8.  SS.  RefpondenW 


SECT.  IV. 

Of  the  Sacraments. 

£.  ^o.TlIT’HAT  is  a facrament  ? 

V V /i.  A facrament  is  a fenfible  thing 
which  by  the  inftitution  of  God  hath  a power,  as 

well 


[ 6/  ] 


and  fo  the  refemblance  in  Daniel  was  only  a pro* 
phetical  fcheme,  and  did  no  more  belong  to  God, 
than  the  eyes  and  ears  that  are  afcribed  to  him  in 
fcripture. 

3.  God  cannot  be  reprefented  at  all,  but  by 
fuch  properties  and  effefts : But  if  an  image  of 
God  be  forbidden  to  be  worfhipped,  then  the 
image,  even  by  fuch  properties  and  effefts,  is  for- 
bidden to  be  worfhipped. 

R.  49.  Caflander  faith,  I wifh  thofe from  whom 
this  information  is  to  he  received,  were  not  the  au- 
thors of  thefe fuperflitions ; and  he  adds,  That  the 
teaching  is  not  enough,  without  the  otcafons  be  re- 
moved. This  he  faith  of  all  images,  but  more 
efpecially  of  fuch  as  are  made  to  reprefent  God. 
Art.  <ix.de  Imag. 


SECT.  IV. 

Of  the  Sacraments. 

R.  50,  ASSANDER  faith^that  we  lhall  not 
51,  52.  eafilyfind  any  before  Peter  Lombard, 
who  lived  about  1139,  that  did  define  the  number 

of 


[ es  ] 

well  of  caufing  as  of  fignifying  holinefs  and  rigb- 
teoufnefs  +. 

0.  5.1.  How  many  facraments  are  there  In  the 
church  of  Rome  ? 

A.  There  are  feven,.  viz.  Baptifm,  Confirma- 
tion, Eucharift,  Penance,  Extreme  Un£lion,. Or- 
ders and  Matrimony  ±. 

0.  52.  Is  this  number  determined  to  be  a mat- 
ter of  faith  ? 

A.  Whofoever  faith,  that  there  are  more  or 
fewer  than  feven  inflituted  by  Chrifl ; or  that  any 
of  the  feven  are  not  truly  and  properly  facraments, 
is  accurfed  §. 

f Catech.  Rom.  par.  2.  cap.  1.  n.  11. 
if  Concil.  Trid.  Se(T.  7. Can.  1.  ibid.  § Ibid. 

Q.  53.  What  are  the  parts  of  a facrarrrent? 

A.  The  parts  of  a facrament  are  the  matter  or 
element,  and  the  form  of  words  of  confecration  : 
fo  the  matter  in  Baptifm  is  water;  the  form  is, 
I baptize  thee,  &l\ 


Q.  54.  Of  what  virtue  are  the  facraments? 

A.  The  facraments  contain  the  grace  which 
they  fignify,  and  confer  grace  ( ex  opere  operate) 
by  the  work  itfelf,  upon  fuch  as  do  not  put  an 

obflruc- 


[ % ] 

thefacraments  +.  And  St.  Auftin  is  very  pofL 
tive  that  there  are  but  two  of  divine  inflitution 
Now-that  there  ihould  be  facraments  of  divine 
inflitution,  that  are  neither  inftituted  in  the  gof- 
ple,  nor  known  to  be  fo-,  till  1100  years  after  our 
Saviour,  nor  be  made  a matter  of  faith  till  1,500, 
may  be  a dofflnne  received  in  the  church  of 
Rome,  but  will  not  eafiiy  be  believed  by  any 
out  of  it. 

f Art.  13.  §.  de  num.  Sacram. 

4 E-pift.  ad  Januar.  118.  Our  Lord  jefas  Chitp,  faith  he,  hath 
knit  Chri/Hans  together,  zuith  facraments  moji  few  in  number,  moft 
eafy  to  be  kept,  moji  excellent  in  fgnif cation,  as  are  Baptifm  end  the 
Lord's  Supper. 


R.  £3.  That  a facrament  Ihould  conFift  of  mat- 
ter and  form,  and  yet  either  have  no  form,  as 
Confirmation  and  extreme  Unflion;  or  have 
neither  matter  nor  form,  of  divine  inflitution,  as 
Penance  and  Matrimony  ; is  to  make  them  facra- 
mentc,  and  to  be  none.  Our  church  rightly  af- 
firms of  the  additional  facraments,  they  have  not 
any  vifible  fign  ordained  of  God,  Article  25. 

R.  54.  It  is  not  fufhcient  that  adult  perfbns 
have  no  indifpofition  to  receive  the  grace  of  the 
facraments;  for  there  is  alfo  required  a mind 
well  iriflru&ed,  a found  belief,  and  a heart  well 
inclined  for  that  purpofe.  2.  The  virtue  in  the 
facraments  doth  not  proceed  from  the  mere  ele- 
ments 


[ 70  ]! 

©bftru&ion  For  thefe  fenfible  and  natural  things 
work  by  the  almighty  power  of  God  in  the  facra- 
ments,  what  they  could  not  do  by  their  own 
power 

\ Concil.  Trid.  ibid.  Can. 6.  Sc  8. 

$ Catech,  Rom.  ibid.  n.  27. 

Q-  55-  What  is  neceflary  to  a facrament  on  the 
part  of  thofe  that  officiate  ? 

A.  It  is  abfolutely  neceffiary,  that  thofe  that 
make  and  confecrate  the  Sacraments,  have  an  in- 
tention of  doing  at  lead;  what  the  church  doth, 
and  doth  intend  to  do. 

Cone.  Trid.  ibid.  can.  11. 


Of  Baptifm. 

2*  56.  \X7’  H O may  adminifler  the  Sacrament 
of  Baptifm  ? 

A.  It  chiefly  belongs  to  bifhops,  priefts,  and 
deacons,  but  in  cafe  of  neceffity  men  or  women, 
Jews,  Infidels  or  Heretics  may  do  it,  if  they  in- 
tend to  do  what  the  church  doth. 

Concil.  Trid.  Self.  2.  de  bapt.  can.  4. 

Catech.  Rom.  par.  2.  c.  2.  n.  24. 

0.  57.  What  ceremonies  ate  ufed  in  the  ad- 
miniftration  of  Baptifm  in  the  church  of  Rome  ? 

A.  Before  baptifm,  there  is  1.  Chrifm  or  oil 
mixed  with  water  in  the  confecration  of  it.f 

2.  Exorcifm 


merits  and  words,  but  from  the  blefling  of  God  in 
confequence  of  his  promife  to  fuch  only  as  right- 
ly partake  of  them,  and  are  qualified  for  it. 

1 / \'t  ■.  ■ , 

R.  55.  From  hence  it  follows,  that  if  there  be 
no  intention,  the  facraments  are  none.  And  fo 
there  is  no  certainty  whether  the  pried  be  a pried, 
or  whether  in  the  eucharid  the  elements  continue 
not  elements  after  confecration,  and  what  is  taken 
for  the  hod  be  no  other  than  bread.  For  without 
the  intention,  neither  is  the  pried  ordained,  nor 
ll  are  the  elements  confecrated. 

Of  Baptijm. 

<5^’  Saviour  gave  commiffiion  to  the 

apodlesand  their  fuccelfors  in  the 
office  of  the  minidry,  to  teach  all  nations,  baptizing 
them.  Matt,  xxviii.  ip,  20.  So  that  women, 
Jews  and  Infidels,  have  no  more  a power  to  ad- 
minider  baptifm,  than  they  have  to  teach,  or  to 
be  prieds. 

R.  57.  It  is  pleaded  for  thefe  ceremonies,  that 
they  are  appointed  for  the  rnajedy  of  divine  wor- 


[ 72  ] 

2.  Exorcifm  compofed  of  certain  words,  pray- 
ers and  aftions,  for  driving  away  the  devil  4:  out 
of  the  child,  ami  the  fait,  &c.  And  the  pried  is 
to  blow  in  the  face  of  the  child,  after  the  form 
of  a crofs,  faying,  Go  out  of  him  Satan,  &c.  § 

3.  The  forehead,  eyes,  bread,  &c.  are  to  be 
eroded,  to  Ihew  that  by  the  myftery  of  baptifm, 
the  fenfes  are  opened  to  receive  God,  and  to 
underhand  his  commands,  Cate.  n.  67.  Pajlor.ibid. 

4.  Then  fbme  exorcifed  fait  is  to  be  put  into  the 
mouth,  to  dignify  a deliverance  from  the  putre- 
faftion  of  fin,  and  the  favour  of  good  works.* 
And  the  pried  in  putting  it  into  the  mouth,  faith, 
N.  Take  the  fait  ofwifdom,  and  let  it  be  a pr  opiti- 
ation  for  thee  to  eternal  lift.  Amen. 5 

g.  Then  the  nofe  and  cars  are  to  be  anointed 
with  fpittle,  and  then  the  child  is  to  be  brought  to 
the  water,  as  the  blind  man  to  Siloa/n,  to  dignify 
it  brings  light  to  the  mind.  Catech.  ibid.  n.  60. 

After  baptifm,  1.  The  pried,  anoints  the  top  of 
the  head  with  chrifm,||  and  he  adds,  Let  him  a- 
noint  thee  with  the  ckrfm  ojjalvation 

2.  He  puts  a white  garment  on  the  baptized, 
faying.  Take  this  -white  garment,  which  thou  ma)ejl 
bring  before  the  judgment  feat  of  Chrif,  that  thou 
mayfl  have  life  eternal.  Catech.  ibid.  n.  73. 

3.  A lighted  candle  is  put  into  the  hand,  to 
fhew  a faith  inflamed  with  charity,  and  nourifhed 
with  good  works.  Ibid.  n.  74. 

Of 

+ Catech.  ibid’  n.  11.  & 60.  J Catech.  ibid,  n 65- 

Paftorale  Antwerp.  1625.  * Catech.  ibid.  n.  66,  2 Paftor  ibid. 

U Catech.  ibid.n.  72.  iff  Paftor.  tbid. 


[ 73  ] 

Jhip,  and  that  the  benefits  contained  in  the  facra- 
ments,  may  be  better  imprinted  on  the  mind.t 
But  can  we  think  it  for  the  majefty  ofbaptifm 
to  have  it  dreffed  up  like  a form  of  conjura- 
tion, that  the  child  mufl  he  fuppofed  to  be  pof- 
fejfed  with  the  devil,  and  the  pried  mufl  blow  in 
his  face  three  times,  with  get  thee  out , Satan, 
before  he  can  fay  peace  be  with  thee  ; and  that  he 
mufl  crofs  him  half  a fcore  times  or  more,  from 
'part  to  part,  in  preparation  to  baptiftn  P 

Can  we  think  it  for  the  majefly  ox  it,  to  have 
fait  exorcifed  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son  and 
Holy  Ghofl ; and  to  be  put  into  the  mouth  of  the 
child,  for  a propitiation  unto  eternal  life?  Can 
we  think  it  for  the  majefly  of  this  ordinance,  that 
the  pried  fhould  put  fome  of  his  own  fpittle  in 
his  left-hand,  and  then  taking  it  thence  with  the 
thumb  and  fore-finger  of  his  right-hand,  touch 
both  ears  of  the  infant,  and  fay  Epkphatha , be 
thou  opened ; and  then  his  nodrils,  and  fay,  For 
the  odour  of fweetnefs  ; but  thou,  0 devil,  fly  ; and 
then  on  bis  right-hand,  after  the  manner  of  a 
crofs,  faying,  N.  I deliver  unto  thee,  the.  mark  of  our 
Lordjefus  Chrid  t ,that  thou  mayjl  drive  the  adver- 
faryfrom  thee  on  every  fide,  and  have  If e eternal  ? 

And  what  are  the  benefits  imprinted  on  the 
mind  by  thefe  fantadical  ceremonies  ? Or  when 
is  it  fuch  benefits  are  promifed  as  thefe  are  faid  to 
fignify  ? Is  it  not  rather  a debating  of  it,  to  have 
Vol.  XIX.  D fuch 

J Catch,  pt,  2.  c.  2.  n.  59. 

N.  B.  Where  this  mark  t Hands,  the  figri  of  the  crofs  is  made. 


[ 74  ] 


Of  Confirmatien. 


Q.  ^8.  TS  confirmation  a facrament  ? 

X A.  It  is  properly  and  truly,  and 
whofoever  holds  otherwife  is  accurfedt. 

0.-59 • 


4 Cone.  Tiid.SefT.  7.  de  confirm.  Can.  1, 


r 75  ] 

fuch  rites  and  prayers  introduced  into  it,  as  figni- 
fy  that  which  baptifm  was  never  appointed  for? 
To  give  an  inftance  in  the  fait  ufed  in  it. 

The  Exorcifn  of  the  Salt. 

IExorcife  thee , 0 creature  of  fait,  in  the  name  of 
the  Father  t omnipotent,  and  in  the  love  of  our 
t Jefus  Chmf,  and  in  the  virtue  of  the  Holy  + 
Spirit.  I exorcife  thee  hy  the  living  f God,  by  the 
true  t God,  by  the  holy  + God,  who  hath  creat- 
ed thee  for  the  fafeguard  of  mankind,  and  hath 
commanded  it  to  be  confecrated  by  his  fervants for  the 
people  that  come  to  believe,  that  in  the  name  of  the 
holy  Trinity  thou  be'Jl  made  a wholefome  facrament 
to  put  the  enemy  to  fight.  Therefore  we  pray  thee 
0 our  Lord  God  that  in  fanchjying  + thou  doji 
fandify  this  creature  of  fait,  and  in  bleffirg  + 
thou  dof  blefs  it,  that  it  may  be  a perfetl  medicine 
to  all  that  take  it. 

Of  Confirmation. 

R.  58.  r | "'HE  Roman  catechifm  faith,  That 
facraments  cannot  be  inftituted  by 
any  but  God  And  yet  the  great  fchoolman 
Alex.  Ales  faith,  Chrift  did  not  injlitute  nor  declare 
confirmation  to  be  a facrament  So  by  their 
own  confedion  it  is  none. 

D 2 

$ Catecb.  ibid.  n.  6.  J Par,  4.  Q.  4.  M,  i. 


R.  59. 


[ 76  ] 

<2-  59*  What  is  the  matter  of  the  facrament  of 
confirmation  ? 

A.  The  matter  is  chrifm,  which  is  an  ointment 
compounded  of  oil,  olive,  and  balfam,  and 
confecrated  by  the  bifhopt,  upon Maunday  Thurf 
dayt. 

-+  Catcch.  Rom.  par  2.  c . g.  n.  2,  7-  and  27. 
f Sum  of  Chriftian  do&rine,  Lond.  1686. 

Q.  60.  What  is  the  form  of  confecration  ? 

-A.  The  form  is  the  words  ufed  by  the  bifliop, 
when  hecroffes  the  forehead  with  the  chrifm,  viz. 
I jf/gn  thee  with  the  fign  of  the  coifs , and  I confirm 
thee  with  the  chrifm  ofjalvation  in  the  name  of  the 
lather,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghojl.  Catech.  n.  2. 
.and  11. 


0.  61.  What  ceremonies  are  ufed  in  con- 
firmation ? 

A.  In  the  anointing,  the  bifliop  dips  the  tip 
of  his  finger  in  the  chrifm,  and  making  a crofs, 
faith,  I fign  thee,  &c.+ 

2.  After  confirmation,  he  flrikes  the  perfon 
f ightly  on  the  cheek,  that  he  may  remember  he 
is  to  fuffer  all  injuries  for  the  name  of  Chrift, 
with  patience  and  courage.^ 

g.  Then 

+ Pontif.  de  Confirm, 
f .Catecli.  n.  25. 


[ 77  ] 

R.  59.  That  chrifm  is  either  of  divine  infti- 
tution  or  the  matter  of  a facrament  may  be  faid, 
but  cannot  be  proved. 


R.  60.  It  is  laid  that  Chrifl  inftituted  the  mat- 
ter and  form  of  confirmation  from  the  authority 
of  pope  Fabian  + ; but  Alex.  Aits  faith,  is  was  or- 
dained by  the  Meldenfian  council  And  in- 
deed the  Roman  catechifm,  after  fome  pretence 
to  divine  inRitution  thinks  it  fafeft  to  refolve  it 
into  the  authority  of  the  church. 

+ Par.  4.  Q 3.  M-.  2.  N.  3.  Sc  Q.g.  M.  1. 

} Catech,  Rom.  ibid.  N.  6.  & 12.  6c  Bcllarminus  dc 
confiim.  c.  2. 


R.  61.  Whether  we  con  (Her  tjie  far  fetched 
fignifications  of  thefe  ceremonies  or  the  virtue 
put  in  them  ; the  abufe  is  intolerable  ; as  for 
inflance  that  in  confecration  of  the  chrifm,  the 
bifhop  blows  upon  it,  to  fignify  the  defeent  of  the 
Holy  Ghoft  lor  the  fanBification  of  it  ~f,  and 
that  it  hath  a power'  oi  fan'dihoation  as  the  in- 
itrument  of  God  +.  So  the  bifhop  prays  in  the 
confecration  ol  it,  That  God  in  befiowmg  fpiri- 
iaal  grace  upon  this  ointment , would pour  out  the 
D 2 julneji , 

Bt  11.11  in.  dc  confirm.  1.  2.  c«  13,  Tcvfcio  babet 
J Ibid.  V O uaita  cxremonia. 


[ ] 

g.  Then  the  perfon  to  be  confirmed  fetting 
his  foot  upon  the  right  foot  of  the  godfatherh,  is 
to  have  his  head  bound  with  a clean-head  band 
for  fome  days  more  or  lefs  with  reverence  to  the 
holy  chrifrn,  which  done  the  band  is  to  be  pre- 
ferved  in  the  Jacrarium,  or  other  clean  place, 
’till  the  following  /. IJh-JVednfday  to  be  burnt  to 
holy  afhes||. 

+ Pont  f.  ibid. 

||  Paitoiale. 

Of  the  Eucharifl. 

Q.  62.  TT  THAT  is  the  eucharifl  ? 

V V A.  It  is  a facrament  wherin  is 
truly,  and  fubflantially  contained  whole  Clu ill, 
God-Man,  body  and  blood,  bones  and  nerves  t, 
foul  and  divinity,  under  the  fpecies  or  appear- 
ance of  bread  and  wine 

+ Catcch.  Romr  par.  2.  c.  4.  n.  33. 

J Coniil.  Trid.  SelT.  13.  de  real,  pratf.  c.  1. 

Q.  How  do  they  attempt  to  prove  this  ? 

A.  From  the  words  of  our  Saviour,  this  is  my 
body  ; which,  fay  they  clearly  demonflrate,  that 
the  fame  body  which  was  born  of  the  Virgin,  and 
is  now  in  heaven,  is  in  the  facrament.  Cateck. 
par.  2.  c.  4.  n.  26. 

2-  63. 


A Sum  of  Chrfti.n  Doflrint,  Printed  1686, 


t 79  1 

fulnefs  of  fanQification,  and  that  it  may  It  to  att 
that  are  to  be  anointed  with  it,  for  the  adoption  of 
fons  by  the  Holy  Spirit. ||  Amen, 
jj  Pointif.  Rom. 


Of  the  Eucharfi. 

R.  6 2,  \TO  fuch  change  of  the  fubftance  of 
63.  JJN  the  bread;  (1.)  into  the  fubftance 
of  Chrift’s  body,  can  be  infered  from  our  Saviour’s 
words,  This  is  my  body,  Matt.  xxvi.  26.  for  it  is 
not  faid  this  is  turned  into  my  body,  but  This  is 
my  body,  which  if  to  be  taken  literally,  would  ra- 
ther prove  the  fubftance  of  the  bread  to  be  his  bo- 
dy. Therefore  cardinal  Cajetan  acknowledges  it 
is  no  where  faid  in  the  gofpel,  that  the  bread  is 
changed  into  the  body  of  Chrift  ; but  they  have  it 
from  the  authority  of  the  church.  Cajet.  in  Again. 
3- par.  £•  75-  art-  1- 

2.  It  is  farther  evident  that  the  words  are  not 
to  be  taken  in  their  proper  fenfe  ; for  it  is  called 
bread  as  well  after  confecration  as  before  it,  1 
Cor.  x.  17.  xi.  26,  2 7,  28.  So  that  what  was 
called  his  body  was  alfo  bread  at  the  fame  time. 

3.  The  myftical  relation  which  the  bread  by 

D 4 confecration 


[ §0  ] 

<2,  63.  What  becomes  of  the  bread  and  wine 
after  confecration  ? 

■d.  Upon  co.nfccration  there  is  a eonverfion  of 
tlie  whole  fubflance  of  the  bread,  into  the  fub- 
f!  ance  of  Chrill’s  bod)';  and  of  tlie  whole  fnb- 
fiance  of  the  wine,  into  the  fubflance  of  Cbrift’s 
blood  ; which  eonverfion  is  ufually  called  tran- 
fubfiantiation.  C.  Trid.  ibid.  c.  4.  Concil. 
deter.  4.  Can.  l. 


<2-  64.  What  is  then  that,  which  is  feen  and 
tailed  in  the  eucharifl  ? 

A.  Tlie  things  feen  and  tailed  are  the  accidents 
only  of  bread  and  wine;  there  is  the  favor,  co- 
lour and  quantity  of  bread  and  wine,  tvirhout 
any  of  their  fubflance  ; but  under  thofe  accidents 
there  is  only  the  body  and  blood  of  Chrijl.  Ca- 
ttch.  Rom.  n.  37  & 44. 

0,  65.  Is  the  body  and  blood  of  Chrif:  bro- 
ken, when  the  hod  is  broken  and  divided  ? 

A.  No,  becaufe  Chrill  is  impaffible  t;  and 
befides  there  is  whole  and  entire  Chrill  under 

either 

+ Abridgment  of  Chrift.  Dofbioe,  c*  n.  % Eucbar. 


C 3!  ] 


confecralion  has  to  ChrifFs  body,  is  fufficient  to 
give  it  the  name  of  his  body.  For  it  is  the  ufual 
way  of  fcripture,  to  call  things  of  a facramental 
nature,  by  the  name  of  thofe  things  they  are  the 
figure  of.t  So  circumcifion  is  called  the  cove- 
nant, Gen.  xvii.  13.  And  the  killing,  dre fling, 
and  eating  the  Lamb  is  called  the  paflover,  Exo- 
dus xii.  11.  And  after  the  fame  manner  is  the 
bread  in  the  facrament  Chrifl’s  body  ; that  is,  as 
circumcifion  was  the  covenant,  and  the  Lamb  the 
paflover,  by  fignification  and  reprefentation,  by 
type  and  figure.  And  fo  the  elements  are  called 
by  the  fathers,  The  images ,+  the fymbols ,'j;  the fi- 
gure]j|,  ol  Chilli’s  body  and  blood. 

+ Aug.  Epift.  23.  ^ Orig.  dial.  3.  tontr.  Marclon.- 

|]  Euleb.  dem.  Evang.  1.  1.  c.  & lilt.  t)  Aug.  conlr.  Adimant.- 

c.  12. 

R.  64.  Our  Saviour  appealed  to  the  fenfes  of 
his  difciples,  Luke  xxiv.  39.  Handle  and Jee  me,  for 
a fpirit  hath  not  JleJh  and  bones  as  you  fee  me  have. 
Take  away  the  certainty  of  fenfe,  and  there 
is  no  difcerning  a body  from  a fpirit  ; and  grant 
tranfubflantiation,  and  we  take  away  the  certain- 
ty of  fenfe. 

R.  63.  If  every  particle  of  the  hoffrs  as  much' 
the  whole  body  of  Chrifl,  as  the  whole  lioft  is  be- 
fore it  be  divided,  then  a whole  may  be  divided 
into  wholes;  for  divide  it  and  fub-divide.it,  it 
is  fill  whole.  Whole  it  is  before  the  divifion, 
D 3 whole 


[ 82  ] 

either  fpecies  or  element,  under  the  fpecies  of 
bread,  and  under  every  particle  ol  it  ; under 
the  fpecies  of  wine,  and  under  every  drop  of 
it  ||. 

||  Cone.  Trid.  ibid.  c.  3 

Q.  66.  Do  they  adminifter  the  facrament  in 
both  kinds  of  bread  and  wine  ? 

A-  No,  the  people  are  permitted  to  receive  it 
only  in  one  kind,  and  are  denied  the  cup.  Trid. 
Sejf.  21.  c.  1 . 


<2..  67.  For  what  reafon  doth  the  church  of 
Rome  deprive  the  people  of  what  our  Lord  is 
granted  to  have  inflituted  ? 

A.  For  jujl  and  weighty  caufes  fucli  as  thefe 
1.  Left  the  blood  of  Chrift  fhould  be  fpilt  upon 
the  ground.  2.  Left  the  wine  by  being  kept 
for  the  fick,  fhould  grow  eager.  3.  Becaufe 
many  cannot  bear  the  taffe  or  fmell  of  wine.  4. 
Becaufe  in  many  countries,  there  is  fuch  a fcarci- 
ty  of  wine  as  is  not  to  be  had  without  great  charge 
and  tedious  journies.  3.  To  difprove  thofe  that 
deny  whole  Chrift  to  be  contained  under  each 
fpeciesh. 

J Con.  Trid.  ibid.  c.  9.' 

■f  Cawch,  Rom.  ibid.  n.  66. 


£ 68. 


[ s3  ] 

whole  it  is  in  the  divifion,  and  whole  it  is 
after  it.  Thus  unreafonabie,  as  well  as  falfe,.  is 
the  doQrine  of  tranfubllantiation. 


R.  66.  It  is  acknowledged,  that  our  Saviour 
inftituted  and  delivered  the  facrament  in  both 
kinds  t.  And  that  it  fo  continued  even  in  the 
church  of  Rome  for  above  1000  years  after  j;. 
And  yet  with  a non  obftante  to  both,  they  forbid 
the  people  to  drink  of  it ; and  declare,  whoever 
thinks  it  necefi'ary  to  revive  in  both  kinds,  is  ac- 
cur  fed  ? § 

+ Conci.  Conllant.  ScfT.  13.— Trid.  SefT.  21.  c.  1,2. 

^ Confult.  Caflandri.  Art.  22. 

f)  Concil.  Trid.  ibid  Can.  1. 

R.  67.  Thefe  are  the  juft  and  weighty  caufes 
for  their  over-ruling  the  plain  precept  of  our  Sa- 
viour, Matt,  xxv i.  27,  Drink  ye  all  of  this  : 
And  yet  whofoever  (hall  fay  they  are  not  juft 
and  fufficient  reafons,  is  accurfedt.  As  if  it  was 
fufficient  to  forbid  wine  in  the  facrament  to  all, 
becaufe  fome  few  cannot  bear  the  tafte  or  fmell 
©f  it  ; and  it  was  a juft  caufe  to  deprive  all  coun- 
tries of  it,  becaufe  fome  have  not  wine,  or  can*, 
not  obtain  it  without  difficulty! 

t ConcilTrid.  ibid.  Can.  2, 


D 6 


A-  68* 


[ 84  ] 

Q.  68.  What  is  the  mafs  ? 

A.  In  the  facrifice  of  the  mafs,  the  fame  Chrift 
is  contained,  and  unbloodily  offered,  who  bloodi- 
ly offered  himfelf  upon  the  altar  of  the  crofs.  Cone. 
Trid.  Sejf.  22.  cap.  1. 

0.  6g.  Of  what  virtue  is  the  facrifice  in  the 
mafs  ? 

A.  It  is  truly  a propitiatory  facrifice,  and  is  a- 
vailable,  not  only  for  the  fins,  punifhments,  and 
fatisfa&ions  of  the  living,  butalfo  for  thofe  of  the 
fouls  in  purgatory.  Ibid. 

Q.  70.  Is  this  neceffary  to  be  believed  ? 

A.  Yes,  and  whofoever  denies  any  of  this  is 
accurfedt,  and  incapable  of  falvation.i 

+ Conc.  Tiid.SelT.  22.  Can.  1. 

J Bulla.  Pii.  4. 


j | , ■ 

(?.  71.  May  the  prieft  communicate  alone, 
though  there  be  nonebefides  to  communicate? 

A.  Yes,  the  church  of  Rome  doth  approve 
and  commend  folitary  maffes,  and  accounts  them 
a communion  ; partly,  becauTe  the  people  do  fpiri- 
tually  communicate  in  it,  and  partly  becaufe  it  is 
celebrated  by  a public  minifter,  not  onlv  for  him- 
felf, but  alfo  for  the  people.  Cone.  Trid.  ibid.  cap.  6. 

&72* 


[ S5  ] 

R.  68,  69,  70.  The  fcripture  when  it  extols 
the  perfection  and  infinite  value  of  Chrifl  s faci  i- 
fice,  doth  infer  from  it,  that  there  needed  not 
therefore  any  repetition  of  it.  Heb.  vii.  27.  He 
jieedeth  not  daily , as  thoje  kigh-pnejls , to  offer  up 
facrifce,  See.  for  this  he  did  once,  when  he  offered 
up  himfelf.  But  if  the  fame  Chrifl  is  offered  in  the 
mafs  as  was  on  the  crofs,  and  that  unbloody  fa- 
crifice is  alike  propitiatory  as  the  blood)’,  there  is 
then  a repetition  of  the  fame  facrifice,  and  he  is 
daily  offered.  And  what  is  it  to  fay  the  one  was 
bloody  and  the  other  is  unbloody,  when  the  un- 
bloody is  of  the  fame  virtue,  and  is  applied  to  the 
fame  end  as  the  bloody  ? So  that  as  if  Chrifl  had 
again  been  bloodily  offered  up,  there  had  been  a 
repetition  of  that  facrifice;  fo  there  is  a repeti- 
tion of  it  when  he  is  offered  up  unbloodily.  To 
have  then  a perfefl  facrifice  daily  repeated,  and  a 
facrifice  without  fuffering,  and  a propitiation  and 
and  remiffton  without  blood,  are  alike  irreconci- 
lable to  the  apoflle,  Heb.  Lx.  22,  25,  &c. 

R.  71.  The  apoflle  calls  the  Lord’s  fupper  a 
communion,  and  faith,  all  arc  partakers  of  that 
one  bread,  1 Cor.  x.  16,  17,  And  Ciffander  faith, 
It  cannot  properly  be  a communion  unlejs  many  par- 
take of  it ; and  adds  from  the  council  of  Nanis, 
That  it  is  abfurd  to  fay,  Lift  up  your  hearts,  when 
there  is  none  communicates  with  the  prieflt.  And 
yet  the  council  of  Trent  declares,  w'nofoever  fhall 

fay 


L §6  ] 


O.72.  What  honour  is  to  be  given  to  the 
confecrated  hold  ? 

A.  Latna,  or  the  fame  fovereign  worfhip 
which  is  due  only  to  God  +,  adore  it  i;  pray  to 
it||.  And  whofoever  holds  it  unlawful  or  idola- 
trous fo  to  do,  is  accurfedV 

+ Concil  Trid.  SefT.  13.  cap.  5. 

+ MitTalc  Kom  Can.  Miifie. 

||  Brev.  Rom.  Hym.  in  F.  Corp.  Ch. 

I)  Concil.  Trid.  ibid.  Can.  o. 

Q.  73.  What  are  the  ceremonies  ufed  in  the 
mafs  ? 

A.  The  ceremonies  in  the  mafs,  refpeft  either 
things,  a&ions  or  words;  among  the  things,  are 
garments,  places,  time,  veffels,  cloths,  incenfe, 
lights,  £?c..  Bellarmin.  Doftr.  Trid.  de  Suer , 

w- 

0.  74.  What  are  the  garments  ufed  by  the 
prieft  in  the  mafs,  and  what  is  their  fignification  ? 

A.  1.  The  amice  or  white  veil,  which  he  puts 
over  his  head,  fignifies  myftically,  either  the  di- 
vinity of  Chrijl  covered  under  bis  humanity,  or 
the  crown  of  thorns;  and  morally,  contempla- 
tion or  hope.  In  putting  it  on,  he  faith,  Put  on, 

0 Lord , 


[ 8;  ] 

fay  fuch  mafles  are  unlawful,  and  to  be  abrogated, 
is  accurfed^;. 

+ Confult.  Art.  24.  de  folit.  Miff. 

J S.'lL  22.  Can.  8. 

R.  72.  We  freely  own  that  Chrifl  is  to  be  a- 
dored  in  the  Lord’s  fupper;  but  that  the  elements 
are  to  be  adored,  we  deny.  II  Chrilt  is  not  cor- 
porally prefent  in  the  hoft,  they  grant  their  adora- 
tion to  be  idolatry!.  And  that  he  is  not  corporally 
prefent  any  where  but  in  heaven,  we  are  taught, 
Afts  i.  11.  iii.  21,  whither  he  went,  and  where 
he  is  to  continue,  till  his  fecond  coming  to  judg-' 
ment. 

J Coffer.  Encliir.  c.  8.  n.  10. 

R.  73,  74.  The  council  of  Trent  faith,  that 
the  ceremonies  of  the  mafs,  fuch  as  myllical  be- 
nedictions, lights,  incenfmgs,  garments,  £?<;. 
are  from  apoftolical  tradition^,  or  as  others,  were 
initituted  by  the  Holy  Gholt  :§  and  that  they 
ferve  for  the  majelty  of  that  facrifice,  and  to  raife 
the  mind  to  the  contemplation  of  the  divine 
things  concealed  in  it : fo  none  of  them  are  fu- 
perfluous  and  vain!. 

[|  Scff.  22.  c.  5. 

^ Bellarminus  cap.  de  Sacr.  Mif. 

! Catcch.  par.  2,  c.  4.  n.  81. 

But  how  fhall  we  reconcile  this  to  the  numerous 
croflings  and  fprinklings,  ufed  in  the  celebration 
of  the  mafs?  For  example,  When  the  prieft  is 

clothed 


[ B8  ] 

0 Lord,  the  helmet  offalvation  upon  in',  head,  that 

1 may  overcome  alt  diabolical  temptations. 

2.  I'he  alb  or  long  while  garment,  fignifies 
myflically,  the  white  robe  put  on  our  Saviour; 
and  morally,  faith  and  innocency.  In  putting  it 
on,  he  faith,  Make  me  white,  0 Lord,  and  cleanfe 
my  heait  that  being  whitened  in  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb,  I may  enjoy  everlafhng  gladncfs. 

g.  The  girdle  fignifies  myflically  the  cords 
wherewith  our  Saviour  was  bound  ; and  morally 
(being  turned  up  on  both  Tides)  the  two  means 
to  preferve  chaiflity,  viz.  falling  and  praver. 
When  he  puts  it  about  him,  he  prays,  Gird  me, 
0 Lord,  with  the  gridle  of  purity  and  quench  in 
my  loins  the  humour  oflujl,  that  there  may  remain 
in  me  the  virtue  of  continency  and  chaflily.  The 
like  account  is  given  of  the  maniple,  veftment 
and  Hole,  and  of  the  divers  colours  of  the  fur- 
niture ufed  in  the  feveral  feafons,  in  the  manual 
ef  the  poor  man's  devotion,  Chap.  Of  the  orna- 
ments of  the  mafs. 


Of  Penance. 


a 


' 75’~W  T is  the  matter  and  form  of 

* * the  facrament  of  penance  ? 

A.  The  matter  is  contrition,  confeflion  and 

fatisfaflion 


[ §9  ] 


clothed  with  the  garments,  rehearfed  before,  he 
comes  to  the  altar,  and  handing  on  the  lowed 
dep juft  againft  the  middle  of  it,  he  makes  a pro- 
found reverence  to  the  altar  and  crucifix.  Then 
he  afcends,  and  having  placed  the  books,  &c.  in 
order,  he  defcends  to  the  loweft  ftep,  and  turning 
himfelf  to  it,  with  his  hands  joined  before  his 

I bread,  and  making  a reverence  to  the  altar  or 
crucifix,  he  begins  the  mafs  Handing  upright, 
and  drawing  with  his  right-hand  (his  leh-hand 
laid  on  his  bread)  the  fign  of  the  crofs  from  his 
forehead  to  his  bread.  Then  he  joins  his  hands 
before  his  bread  ; the  minider  Handing  on  his 
left-hand  behind  him  bowing,  faith  Ad  Deum , 
&c.  Then  the  pried  with  the  minider  fay  the 
pfalm,  Judica  me,  with  Gloria  Patri,  at  which  he 
is  to  bow  his  head  to  the  crofs.  Then  he  repeats 
the  Introibo,  making  with  his  right-hand  the  fign 
of  the  crofs  from  the  forehead  to  the  bread.  Then 
he  bows  his  head  and  body  to  the  altar,  and  there 
he  Hands  bowing  till  the  minider  faith  mifereatur. 
When  he  faith  mea  culpa,  he  fmites  thrice  upon 
his  bread  with  the  right-hand  ; and  thus  the  mif- 
fal  proceeds  in  its  ceremonies  in  all  the  remain- 
ing parts  of  the  fervice. 


Of  Penance. 

R.  75.  ''^7'E  are  told,  that  the  matter  of  a fa- 
crament  is  fomewhat  fenfibie  :+ 
then  how  is  penance  a facrament  which  has  no 

fuch 

f Catech,  Ro  m.  par,  2,  c.i.n.  ix, 


r 9°  ] 

fatisfa&ion.  The  form  is,  I abfolve.  Cateck  Rom. 
par.  2.  c.  5.  n.  14.  & jj. 


Q.  76.  What  is  confefiion  ? 

A.  Confefiion  is  a particular  difcovery  of  all 
mortal  fins  to  the  prieft,  with  all  their  circura- 
ftances  that  increafe  or  diminifh  the  fin,  as  far  as 
can  be  called  to  mind  ;+  without  which,  neither 
forgivenefs  nor  falvation  is  to  be  obtained. £ 

+ Concil.Trid.  Sell  14.  c.  5.  & Catech.  ibid.  n.  48. 

tj;  Trid.  ibid.  Can.  6,  7.  Catech.  n.  44. 


Q.  77.  Of  what  kind  is  the  abfolution,  which 
the  prieft  grants  upon  confefiion  ? 

A.  The  abfolution  is  not  only  declarative,  but 
judicial,  and  the  fentence  pronounced  by  the 
prieft,  is  as  if  pronounced  by  the  Judge  himfelfjt 
he  perfefting  what  God  caufes.j; 

+ Concil.  Trid.  i<bid.  c.  6.  Sc  Can.  g. 

J Catech.  par.  2.  5.  n.  17. 


Q-  78. 


A.  Although 


What  is  the  benefit  of  abfolution  ? 

finner  is  not  fo  affefled  with 
fuch 


C 91  ] 

fuch  matter  ? For  where  is  the  matter  that  is  fen- 
fible  in  contrition  ? The  council  to  avoid  this, 

[call  it  Qua/i  materia , a matter  after  a Jort.Y 

+ Concil.  Trid.  Seff.  14.  cap.  3. 

R.  76.  We  grant  confeftion  to  men  to  be  in 

I many  cafes  of  ufe,  public  in  cafe  of  public  fcan- 
dal ; private  to  a fpiritual  guide  for  difburthening 
of  the  confcience,  and  as  an  help  to  repentance. 
But  to  make  auricular  confeftion,  or  particular 

[confeftion  to  a prieff,  neceflary  to  forgivenefs  and 
falvation,  when  God  has  not  fo  made  it,  is  ap- 
parently to  teach  for  doctrine  the  commandment 
of  men;  and  to  make  it  neceffary  in  all  cafes,  is 

I to  make  of  what  may  be  a ufeful  means,  a dan- 
gerous fnare,  both  to  the  confeftor,  and  thofe 
that  confefs. 

R-  77.  To  pardon  fin,  and  abfolve  the  (inner 
judicially,  fo  as  the  confcience  may  reft  firmly 
upon  it,  is  a power  referved  by  God  to  himfelf. 
So  1 John  i.  9.  If  we  confefs  our  fins , he  is  faith- 
ful and  juft  to  forgive  us  our fns,  and  to  cleanfe  us 

I from  all  unrighteou/nejs.  And  therefore  the  au- 
thority of  the  prieft  is  only  minifterial,  declara- 
tive and  conditional.  Men  Jheiu  a minifry  in  the 
forgivenefs  of  fins,  but  do  not  exercife  a right  of 
[power.  They  pray,  but  it  is  God  forgives,  faith 
St.  Ambrofe,  deSpir.  I.  3.  c.  19. 

R.  78.  The  grief  which  is  fufficient  to  obtain 
pardon,  is  contrition ; and  fo  the  grief  which  is 


not 


[ 9 2 ] 

iuch  grief  for  liis  fin,  as  may  be  fufficient  to  ob* 
tain  pardon  ; yet  when  be  has  rightly  conieffed 
to  a prieft,  all  his  fins  are  pardoned,  and  an 
entrance  is  opened  into  heaven*  Catcch.  ibid, 
n.  38. 

Q.  79.  What  is  fatisfaflion  ? 

A.  It  is  a compenfation  made  to  God,  by  prat  - 
er,  falling,  alms,  § &c.  for  all  offences  committed 
jjgainft  him  ;||  lo  that  the  offender  is  thereupon 
purged  from  the  defilement  of  fin,  and  difcharged 
from  all  temporal  punifhments  due  to  him,  either 
here  or  in  purgatory. 5 

§ Catcch.  ibid.  n.  75. 

l|  Bellarminus  de  fatisfaft.  Bcllarm.  de  Indulg.  1.  1.  c.  7. 
tj  Quarta.  pvopofitio. 

5 Catech.  Rom.  ibid.  n.  65,  66; 

0.  80.  How  do  thefe  works  become  thus  fatis- 
faclory  ? 

A.  They  are  meritorious  and  fatisfaclorv,T  as 
they  are  united  to-  the  fatisfaflion  of  Chrifl.;j; 

+ Catcch.  ibid.  n.  72,  73. 

J Bcllarm  de  forma  fatisfa£L  Bcllarm.  de  Indulg.  1.  1.  c.  4. 
If..  Refponf.  non  eft  quidem.. 


The  Sacrament  of  Extreme  Unction 


0.81. 


WH  \T  is  the  matter  of  tf 
of  Extreme  Unflion  ? 


the  facrament 


A.  Oil  of  olive-berries  t confecraled  by  a bi- 

fhop. 


[ 93  ] 

not  fuflkient  to  obtain  pardon,  muft  be  contriti- 
on: and  the  meaning  then  is,  that  attrition  with 
abfolntion,  is  as  effefitual  as  contrition. 


R.  79,  80.  The  giving  fatisfatUon  to  the  church 
in  cafe  of  fcandal,  and  the  impofing  penances 
upon  notorious  offenders,  is  an  ufeful  part  of  ec- 
clefiaflical  difcipfine.  But  to  make  that  a fatis- 
faftion  to  God  which  is  given  to  the  church  ; 
and  to  make  our  works  to  fatisfy,  though  but  as 
an  appendant  to  the  fatisfaftion  of  Chrifi,  we  can 
bv  no  means  allow.  Not  the  former  becaufe  it 
is  derogatory  to  the  juftice  of  God  ; not  the  latter, 
becaufe  it  is  derogatory  to  the  merits  of  our  Savi- 
our. For  what  can  make  a fatisfa£iion  to  God, 
but  the  obedience  and  buffering  of  his  Son  ? Or 
what  need  is  there  of  another  fatisfaffion  after 
1 that  of  our  Saviour?  Heb.  x.  14.  By  one  offer- 
ing he  hath  perjeQed for  ever,  them  that  are  fanc- 
i tifed. 


Of  Extreme  UnElion. 

| 

' 

I 

R.  8i,TX7’E  read,  Mark  vi.  13.  when  the 
V * twelve  apoflles  were  fent  forth, 
they  anointed  with  oil  many  that  were  fck,  and 

healed 


C 94  ] 

(hop,  which  aptly  dignifies  the  grace  of  the  Spi- 
rit with  which  the  foul  of  the  fick  is  invifibly 
anointed. £ 

+ Catech.  Rom.  par.  2.  c.  6.  n.  5. 

J Concil.  Trid  Seff.  14.  be  Extr.  Un£t.  c.  l. 

0.  82.  What  is  the  form  of  it  ? 

A.  The  form  is,  By  this  holy  anointing , God 
pardon  thee,  by  whatever  thou  hajl  offended  by  the 
fault  of  the  eyes , nofe  or  touch.  Catech.  ibid.  n.  6. 

Q_.  83.  What  are  the  parts  anointed  ? 

A.  The  eyes  becaufe  of  feeing,  the  ears  becaufe 
of  hearing,  the  mouth  becaufe  of  tailing  or 
fpeech,  the  hands  becaufe  of  touching,  the  feet 
becaufe  of  motion  ; the  reins  becaufe  the  feat  of 
lull.  Catech.  ibid.  n.  10. 

Q.  84.  When  is  this  anointing  adminidered  ? 

A.  It  is  to  be  adminidered  on'y  when  perfons 
are  fuppofed  to  be  near  the  point  of  death, + 
whence  it  is  called  Extreme  Unction. i 

+ Concil.  Trid.  ibid.  c.  3.  Bellarm.  Extr.  Un&.  1.  1.  c.  2.£T, 
Accedit. 

J Catech.  ibid.  n.  2,  & 14, 


C 95  ] 

healed  them. ; making  ufe  of  that  anointing,  hot 
as  a natural  means,  but  as  a myflical  fign  of  the 
miraculous  cure  to  be  wrought  by  the  power  of 
Chrift.  And  as  long  as  this  power  continued  in 
the  church,  fo  long  there  was  a reafon  for  conti- 
nuing this  rite.  Accordingly  the  apoftle  direfts, 
Jam.  v.  14,  1,5.  Is  any  fick  ? Let  him  call for  the 
elders  of  the  church , and  let  them  pray  over  him , 
anointing  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
And  the  prayer  of  faith  fiall  fave  the  fick.  But 
when  the  power  ceafed,  there  was  no  reafon  for 
the  continuance  of  this  fign.  And  yet  this  cere- 
mony of  anointing  is  not  only  continued  in  the 
church  of  Rome  without  any  pretence  to  the 
power,  but  the  nature  and  the  ufe  of  it  is  wholly 
perverted  from  what  it  was  in  apoflolical  times. 
For  1.  This  rite  was  then  ufed  in  curing  the  fick, 
but  was  not  necefiTary  to  it ; for  we  find  them  alfo 
cured  by  impofition  of  hands,  Mark  xvi.  18. 
A£is  ix.  17.  or  by  a word,  Afts  ix.  34.  But  in 
the  church  of  Rome  it  is  made  abfolutely  necef- 
fary.  2.  In  apoflolical  times  it  was  a mere  rite, 
but  in  the  church  of  Rome  it  is  made  a facra- 
ment,  and  whofoever  faith  it  is  a mere  rite,  is 
accurfed.f  3.  It  was  ufed  in  apoflolical  times 
properly  for  corporal  maladies;  but  in  the  church 
of  Rome  properly  for  the  foul,  and  but  acciden- 
tally for  the  body4  4.  It  was  ufed  then  for  the 
recovery  of  the  fick ; but  here  it  is  to  be  applied 
only  to  thofe  that  are  judged  to  be  paft  it. 

■tConcil.  Trid.  Se(T.  14.  Can.  1. 

/Bellarm,  de  Extrem,  Un£t,  1,  i.e.  2,  t.  Probo  igitur, 

Of 


[ 9^  ] 


Of  the  Sacrament  of  Orders ; 

Q.-  83.  TS  ordination  a facrament  ? 

-A-  A.  It  is  truly  and  properly  a facrament. 
and  doth  confer  grace  ; and  whofo  denies  this,  is 
accurfed.  Concil.  frid.  Sff.  7.  Can.  1.  and  23. 
cap.  3.  and  Can.  3. 


Q.  86.  What  are  the  feveral  orders  inflituted 
for  the  ferv’ice  of  the  church  P 

A.  The  orders  always  received  by  the  catholic 
church  are  feven,  the  greater  and  lefs;  the  greater 
are  the  prieft,  deacon  and  fubdeacon  ; the  lefs 
are  the  acolythus,  who  is  to  carry  the  candle  and 
a-flill  the  fubdeacon  ; the  exorcift,  who  is  to  at- 
tend, and  pray  over  them  that  are  poffefTed  with 
the  devil ; the  reader,  and  the  oftiarius,  or  door- 
keeper. Catech.  par.  2.  c.  7.  n.  12,  13, 


u 


[ 97  ] 


Of  Orders. 

R.  85.TX  7E  account  ordination  to  be  of  divine 
* ’ inftitution,  and  that  by  it  a minif- 
terial  commiffion  is  conveyed ; but  how  necef- 
fary  foever  this  office  is  to  the  church,  and  grace 
for  the  exercife  of  it,  yet  as  that  grace  is  not  pro- 
mifed  to  it,  we  cannot  admit  it  to  be  properly 
and  truly  a facrament. 

R.  86.  We  know  of  no  authority  there  is  for 
any  order  under  a deacon,  fo  as  to  anathematize 
them  that  do  not  receive  thein.h  We  know  of 
no  authority  for  the  forms  ufed  in  the  ordination 
of  thofe  lower  orders ; as,  when  the  biffiop  ad- 
mits any  to  that  of  exorcifts,  he  reaches  to  them 
a book  in  which  the  exorcifms  are  contained,  and 
faith,  Receive , and  commit  to  memory , and  take 
the  power  of  laying  on  of  hands  upon  the  poffeffcdt 
or  baptized,  or  catechumens 

+ Concil.  Trid.  ibid.  Can.  2. 

J Catech.ibid.  n.  17. 

We  know  of  no  authority  for  this  kind  of  pro- 
cedure ; for  thofe  forms  of  conjuration  contained 
in  thofe  books,  or  for  the  ufe  of  thofe  rites  there- 
in prefcribed,  for  exorcifing  perfons,  houfes, 
cattle,  milk,  butter,  fruits,  & c.  infefted  with  the 
devil.  See  the  Pajlorale  Mechlin , and  the  Manual 
of  Exorcifms,  Antwerp  1626. 

Vol.  XIX.  E 


Of 


[ 98  ] 


Of  the  facramtnt  of  Marriage . 

87.YS  marriage  truly  and  properly  a facra« 
ment? 

A.  Yes,  and  whofoever  denies  it  fo  to  be,  is 
accurfed.  Canal.  Trid.  Sejf.  2^.  Can.  1, 


£2.  88.  May  t'nofe  that  are  in  holy-orders  marry, 
or  thofe  that  are  married  be  received  into  orders 
in  the  church  of  Rome  ? 

A.  No,  thefe  that  are  married  may  not  be  ad- 
mitted^ thofe  that  are  admitted  may  not  marry, 
and  thofe  that  being  admitted  do  marry,  are  to  be 
feparated. 

+ Condi.  Later,  1 Can.  21 . & Later.  2.  Can.  6. 

<2-  89.  If  marriage  is  a facrament,  and  fo  con- 
fers grace,  how  comes  it  to  be  denied  to  thofe 
that  are  in  holy  orders  ? 

Catcch.  Rom.  par.  2,  c,  8,  n.  17, 


A.  Thofe 


[ 99  J 


Of  Marriage.  . , r 

c>  . sx  3^ 

R.  87.  QT,  Auflin  faith,  that  figns  when  applied 
riJ  to  religious  things,  are  called  facra- 
ments.t  And  in  this  large  fenfe  he  calls  the  fign 
of  the  crofs  a facrament;J  and  others  give  the 
fame  name  to  wafhing  the  feet,§  and  many  other 
myfleries.  But  then  matrimony  doth  no  more 
confer  grace,  than  wafhing  the  feet,  or  ufing  the 
fign  of  the  crofs ; which  Bellarmin,  after  all  the 
virtue  he  afcribes  to  it,  will  not  allow  to  be  pro- 
perly and  truly  a facrament.|| 

+ Epift.  5.  J In  Pfal.  141. 

^ Cypr.  de  lotione  pednm. 

[|  Dc  Iraag.  1.  2.  c.  30.  IT.  Dices  ergo. 

R.  88,  89.  The  apoflle  on  the  contrary,  faith, 
Marriage  is  honourable  in  all,  Heb.  xiii.  4.  and 
gives  a hard  chara&er  of  that  doblrine  which 
forbids  it,  1 Tim.  iv.  x — 3.  And  how  lawful  it 
was,  the  direblion  of  the  apoflle  about  it,  x Tim. 
iii.  2.  doth  fhew.  And  how  convenient  it  is,  is 
manifeft  from  the  mifehiefs  attending  the  prohi- 
bition of  it  in  the  Rornifh  church  (which  wife 
men  among  themfelves  have  lamented.t) 

+ Polyd,  Virgil,  de  invest.  1.  3.  c.  4,  Si  Callander.  Confult, 
Art,  23. 


E 2 


[ 160  ] 

A . Thole  in  holy  orders  are  the  temple 
of  :God,  and  it  is  a fliameful  thing  that  they 
(hould  ferve  uncicannefs.  Later.  Concil.  2. 
Can.  6. 


The  CONCLUSION. 

I Might  have  added  the  5th  feftion  about  jn- 
rifdiflion  which  the  church  of  Rome  chal- 
lenges over  princes,  and  about  their  canonization 
of  faints,  their  confecration  of  Agnus  Dei’s,  and 
beads,  & c.  and  the  ufe  thefe  and  the  like  are  ap- 
plied to.  I might  have  further  confidered  their 
notes  of  a church,  and  fhewed  how  many  of  them 
are  not  true,  or  however  do  not  belong  to  the 
church  of  Rome  ; but  that  would  be  too  large  a 
fubjeft  to  enter  upon  : and  what  has  been  faid 
will  be  fufficient  to  fhew  how  far  that  church 
bath  erred  from  truth  and  reafon.  For  if  we  fet 
their  councils,  mifTals,  breviaries,  rituals  and 
catechifms  on  -one  fide,  and  feripture  and  anti- 
quity on  the  other  ; we  fhall  find  their  doctrines 
and  practices  as  well  oppofite  to  thofe  as  they 
are  oppofite  to  ours  : and  may  be  affured  that 
perfons  may  foorrer  lofe  their  eyes,  than  find 
there  fuch  a primacy  of  St.  Peter  as  they  contend 
for,  or  their  vicarfhip  of  the  pope,  the  invocation 
of  faints,  the  worfhip  of  images,  fervice  in  an 
unknown  tougue,  tranfubftantiation,  purgatory  ; 

and 


[ *01  ] 

and  the  reft  that  we  contend  againft.  Scripture 
and  indubitable  antiquity  are  the  authority  we 
appeal  to,  thither  we  refer  our  cafe;  and  can 
heartily  conclude  with  that  ofVincentius  Ly- 
rin,  That  is  to  be  held,  which  hath  been  believed 
every  where , always , and  by  all.  Contr.  Hter. 
c.3. 


A fhort 


[ 102  ] 


A fhort  method  of  converting  all  the 

ROMAN  CATHOLICS, 

In  the  kingdom  of  Ireland. 


Humbly  propofed  to  the  bifhops  and  clergy  of 
that  kingdom. 


1.  TTisa  melancholy  confideration  to  thofe 
JL  who  love  the  proteflant  interefl,  that  fo 
fmall  a part  of  this  nation  is  yet  reformed  from 
popery.  They  cannot  obferve  without  a very 
fenfible  concern,  that  in  many  parts  of  the  king- 
dom, there  are  frill  ten,  nay  fifteen,  perhaps 
upwards  of  twenty  papifls  to  one  proteflant.  Nor 
can  thev  fee  any  profpeft  of  its  being  otherwife; 
few  papifls  being  brought  over  to  our  church, 
[ notwithftanding  all  the  methods  which  have  been 
ufed,  while  many  proteflants  are  feduced  from  it. 

II.  Yet  they  cannot  but  earnelllv  defire,  that 
all  the  papifls  were  convinced  of  their  errors. 

How 


f[  103  ] 

How  much  would  this  redound  to  the  glory  of 
God,  who  willeth  all  to  come  to  the  knowledge 
of  his  truth  ? How  greatly  would  it  advantage 
their  own  fouls  both  in  this  world  and  in  the 
world  to  come  ? What  an  advantage  would  it 
be  to  the  kingdom  in  general  to  be  no  longer 
divided  againft  itfelf,  to  have  that  grand  caufe  of 
contention  removed,  and  all  its  inhabitants  of  one 
heart  and  one  mind  ? And  how  highly  woi>id 
it  advance,  both  the  honour  and  intereff  of  our 
gracious  fovereign,  to  have  all  his  ftibje&s  cor- 
dially united  together  thinking  and  fpeaking  the 
fame  thing  P 

III.  Why  then  is  not  this  defirable  end  purfued' 
with  a vigour  proportionable  to  its  importance  ? 
Is  it  becaufe  we  defpair  of  any  fuccefs  ? Becaufe 
we  think  it  impoflible  to  be  attained  ? But  why 
fhould  we  imagine  it  to  be  impoiTible  ? A com- 
mon and  plaufible  anfweris,  becaufe  the  papifls 
are  fo  bigotted  to  their  clergy  ; believing  all  that 
they  affirm,  however  contrary  both  to  fcripture 
and  reafon,  and  doing  all  that  they  d-ire£i,  whom 
they  generally  believe  to  be  the  holiefl  and  wife  It 
of  men. 


IV.  Undoubtedly  this  is  a ccnfiderable  diffi- 
culty in  the  way.  And  yet  I cannot  think  it 
is  unfurmountable.  Still  I conceive  it  is  poffible 
to  convince  all  the  papifls,  provided  there  are 
E 4 proper 


[ ioq  ] 

proper  infhuments  for  the  work.  And  what 
inflruments  are  fo  proper  as  the  clergy  ? Not 
only  as  they’  are  in  every  place,  diffributed  thro' 
the  whole  nation  and  always  ready  on  the  fpot 
for  the  work  : but  hkewife  as  it  more  immedi- 
ately belongs  to  them  : as  it  is  no  inconfiderable 
hianch  of  their  bufinefs  who  are  peculiarly  fet 
apart  to  u'atch  ever  the  fouls  of  men  as  they  that 
muf  give  account, 

V.  But  what  way  can  the  clergy  take,  with 
any  probability  of  fuccefs  P There  is  one  w’ay, 
and  one  only  ; one  that  will  (not  probably’,  but) 
infallibly  fucceed.  If  this  way  is  taken,  I atn 
willing  to  flake  my  life  upon  the  fuccefs  of  it. 
And  it  is  a plain,  fimple  way,  fuch  as  may  be 
taken  by  any  man,  tho’  but  of  a fmall  capacity’. 
For  it  requires  no  peculiar  depth  of  undetflanding, 
no  extraordinary  height  of  learning  ; but  only 
a fhare  of  common  fenfe,  and  an  honefl  upright 
heart. 

VI.  It  was  obferved  that  the  grand  difficulty 
of  the  work  lies,  in  the  flrong  attachment  of  the 
papifls  to  their  clergy.  Here  therefore  we  are 
to  flrike  at  the  root.  And  if  this  bigotry  be  but 
removed,  wdiatever  error  or  fuperflition  is  built 
upon  it  will  of  courfe  fall  to  the  ground. 

Now  this  may  be  effectually  done  thus.  The 
papifls  themfelves  allow  that  one  fet  of  clergy 
were  holier  and  wifer  even  then  their  own,  narne- 

ly, 


[ 105  ] 

}y,  the  apoftles.  They  allow  thefe  both  to  have 
lived  and  preached  better  than  the  prefent  clergy 
even  of  the  Roman  church. 

Here  therefore  is  the  fhort  and  fure  method. 
Let  all  the  clergy  of  the  church  ol  Ireland  only 
live  like  the  apoftles,  and  preach  like  the  apoftles, 
and  the  thing  is  done. 

The  Romans,  on  the  fame  ground  that  they 
prefer  the  apoftles  before  their  own  clergy,  will 
then  prefer  ours  before  them.  And  when  they 
once  do  this,  when  we  have  carried  this  point, 
when  their  attachment  to  our  clergy  is  Itronger 
than  that  to  their  own  ; they  will  lie  convinced 
by  hundreds,  till  there  is  not  a Roman  left  in  the 
kingdom  of  Ireland. 

VII.  If  it  be  afked,  but  how  did  the  apoftles 
live  and  preach  ? I anfwer  (not  to  defcend  to  par* 
ticulars)  as  to  their  inward  life  (if  I may  fo  fpeakj 
they  lived  the  life  which  is  hul  with  Chrift  in  God. 

They  were  crucified  with  Chrijl.  NevertheJefs 
they  lived  ; yet  not  they,  but  Chrift  lived  in  thcnu 
So  that  each  of  them  could  fay,  the  life  which  I 
■now  live  in  the  fief i,  #even  in  this  mortal  body,  I 
live  by  faith  in  the  Son  <7/  God,  who  loved  me,  and 
gave  himfelj for  me. 

And  this  faith  continually  wrought  by  love,  that 
love  of  God  which  was  fed  abroad  in  their  hearts, 
and  was  a perennial fountain  of  water,  Jpr  ingin?, 
up  into  everlafing  life. 

By  tin's  loving  faith  their  hearts  were  pu- 
rified from  anger,  from  pride,  from  all  vile. 

E 5 affeftigus, 


[ *°6  ] 

affeffions,  from  the  love  of  money,  of  power,  of 
pleafure,  of  eafe,  from  the  defire  of  the  flelh,  the 
the  defire  of  the  eve,  and  the  pride  of  life  : All 
their  ajfedions  being  Jet  no  things  above,  not  on. 
things  of  the  earth.  In  a word,  that  mind  was  in 
them  which  was  in  Chrifl  JeJus. 

Let  but  this  mind  be  in  every  clergyman  of 
our  church,  and  popery  will  vanifh  out  of  the 
kingdom. 

VIII.  As  to  the  outward  life  of  the  apoftles,  it 
was  in  the  general,  holy  and  unblameatle  in  all 
things.  Herein  did  they  exercife  themfelves  day 
and  night,  with  regaul  to  every  word  and  action, 
to  have  a conference  void  of  offence,  toward  God  and 
man.  And  their  continual  ground  of  rejoicing  was 
this , the  lejlvnony  of  their  corfitnce  that,  in  fvnpii- 
city,  and  godly  finality  they  had  had  their  cunver- 
fatioh  in  the  world. 

They  were  temperate  in  all  things.  They  de- 
nied themfelves,  and  took  up  their  crofs  daily. 
Tltey  kept  under  their  bodies  and  brought  them  into 
fubjeffion,  even  in  the  midll  of  d i fired es  and  per- 
fections; leaf  by  any  means,  after  they  Lad  preach- 
ed to  others,  they  themfelves fioiild  have  become  cafi- 
azoays. 

They  were  in  every  refpeft,  burning  and  (Inn- 
ing; lights  ; they  went  about  doing  good  as  they 
bad  opportunity,  doing  good  of  every  kind,  and 
in  every  poifible  degree  to  all  men.  1 hey 
abftained  from  all  appearance  of  evil.  They  over- 


came 


r io7  ] 

came  evil  with  good.  If  their  enemy  hungered, 
they  fed  him,  if  he  thirfted  they  gave  him  drink; 
and  by  patiently  continuing  fo  to  do,  heaped 
coa's  of  fire  upon  his  head,  and  melted  his  hard- 
nefs  into  love. 

In  fine,  it  was  their  meat  and  drink,  to  do  the 
will  of  their  Father  which  was  in  heaven.  And 
hence  vvhatfoever  they  did,  whether  in  word  or 
deed,  they  did  all  to  the  glory  of  God. 

Let  every  clergyman  of  our  church  hve  thus, 
and  in  a fhort  time  there  will  not  be  a papill  in 
the  nati  on. 

IX.  As  to  the  preaching  of  the  apoflles,  with, 
regard  to  the  matter  of  it,  they  preached  Jefus,  _ 
the  author  and  fnijher  of  out  faith,  having  deter- 
mined not  to  know  any  thing,  fave  Jefus  Chrifl  and 
him  crucified.  They  preached  Jefus  Chrift  as 
of  God  made  unto  us  wifidom,  and  righteoufinefs , 
and fiantlifi cation,  and  redemption.  They  de- 
clared, other  foundation  of  morality,  religion, 
hoiinefs,  happinefs  can  no  man  lay.  All  they 
fpoke  either  in  public  or  private,  centered  in  this 
one  point,  Jefus  Chrifi,  the  fame  y filer  day,  aud- 
io-day,  and  for  ever . 

More  particularly,  they  preached,  that  a man , 
is  jufiifed  by  faith,  without  the  works  of  the  lazu  ; 
that  to  him  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth  on  him 
thatjufiificth  the  ungodly , his  faith  is  counted  to 
him  for  righteoufinefs. 

E 6 X.  They;. 


[ io8  ] 

X.  They  preached  iarther,  that  except  a 'man 
be  born  again,  he  cannot Jte  the  kingdom  oj God; 
except  he  be  bornjrom  above,  bom  not  only  of 
water,  but  of  the.  Holy  Ghojl : and  that  the  pre- 
sent kingdom  of  God  is  net  meats  and  drinks, 
(lies  not  in  externals  ol  any  kind)  but  ngkteouf 
nefs,  the  image  of  God  on  the  heart,  peace, 
even  a peace  that  paffeth  all  underflanding,  and 
jcv  in  the  Holy  Ghcjl,  whereby  they  rejoiced 
with  jov  unfpeakable  and  full  of  glory. 

They  declared,  that  he  that  is  thus  born  oj  God 
doth  not  commit  Jm  ; that  he  that  is  begotten  of 
God,  leepeth  himfelj,  and  the  wicked  one  toucheth 
him  not-,  but  that  as  Chi  id  who  hath  called  him 
is  holy,  fo  is  he  holy  in  all  manner  of  conver- 
fation. 

XI.  As  to  the  manner  of  their  preaching, 
they  fpoke  with  authority,  as  fpeaking  not  their 
own  word,  but  the  woid  of  him  that  fent  them, 
and  by  manifjlation  cj  the  truth,  commending 
thnn/tlves  to  every  man’s  conjeience  in  the  fight 
oj  God.  They  were  not  as  many  that  cauponize 
the  uord  of  God,  debafe  and  adulteiate  it  with 
foreign  mixtures,  lut  as  oj fncerity,  but  as  of  God, 
in  the  fight  of  God , Jpake  they  in  Chrift.  They 
approved  themfelves  the  miniflers  of  God,  in 
much  patience,  in  labours,  in  watchings,  m fafr 
tags:  by  purenefs,  by  knowledge,  knowing  all 
their  flock  by  name,  all  their  circumftances,  all 
their  wants : by  longfujfering,  never  weary  of  well- 
doing. 


[ 109  ] 

doing,  by  kmdnefs,  by  love  unfeigned:  by  the 
word  of  truth,  by  the  power  oj  God  attending 
it,  by  the  armour  oj  righleoufnefs  on  the  right 
hand,  and  on  the  left.  Hence  they  were  in- 
jlant  in  feafon,  out  of  feafon,  being  never  afraid 
of  the  faces  of  men,  never  afhamed  of  Chrift  or 
of  his  words,  even  before  an  adulterous  and  fin- 
ful  generation.  They  wrent  on  unmoved  through 
honour  and  difnonour,  through  evil  report  and 
good  report.  They  regarded  not  father  or  mo- 
ther, or  wife  or  children,  or  houfes  or  lands,  or 
eafe  or  pleafure  : but  having  this  tingle  end  in 
view,  to  fave  their  own  fouls,  and  thofe  that  heard 
them,  they  counted  not  their  lives  dear  unto 
t hem j elves,  fo  that  they  might  make  full  proof  of 
their  miniffry,  lo  they  might  finjh  their  courje 
with  joy,  and  tefify  the  gofpel  oj  the  grace  of 
God. 

Let  ail  the  right  reverend  the  bifhops,  and  the 
reverend  the  clergy,  only  walk  by  this  rule  : 
let  them  thus  live,  and  thus  teffify  with  one  heart 
and  one  voice,  the  gofpel  of  the  grace  of  Cod; 
and  every  papifl  within  thefe  four  fe as,  will  foon 
acknowledge  the  truth  as  it  is  in  jefus. 


A PESER- 


[ 110  ] 


A 

PRESERVATIVE 

Againft  Unsettled  Notions  in 

R E L I G I O N. 


To  the  READER. 


- dtfign  in  pubhjliing  the  following  trafls,  is 
net  to  reclaim,  but  to  prcjtive:  not  to  con- 
vince thofe  who  are  already  perverted , but  to  pre- 
vent the  perverfon  of  others.  I do  not  therefore 
enter  deep  into  the  controvcrfy  even  with  Deifls, 
Socinians,  Arians,  or  Papifts  : much  lefs  with  thofe 
who  are  not  fo  dangeroufly  mifaken,  Myftics, 
Quakers,  Anabaptifts,  Prefbyterians,  Pfedeflina- 
rians,  or  Antinomians.  I only  recite  under  each 

head, 


[ 3 

head,  a few  plain  arguments,  which  by  the  grace  of 
God,  may  farther  confirm  thofe  who  already  know 
the  truth  as  it  is  in  fefus. 


An  Extract  of 

A Short  and  Easy  METHOD 
With  the  DEISTS. 


I.  rT''HE  truth  of  the  dodrine  of  Ohrid  will  be 
fufficiently  fliewn,  if  the  fads  recorded 
of  him  in  the  gofpels  be  true.  For  his  miracles, 
if  true,  evidence-the  truth  of  what  iie  delivered. 

The  fame  is  to  be  faid  as  to  Mofes.  . it'  he 
brought  the  children  of  Ifrael  through  the  Red 

o c? 

Sea,  in  the  miraculous  manner  related  in  Exodus, 
and  did  fuch  other  wonderful  things  as  are  there 
told  of  him,  it  mud  follow,  that  he  was  fent  from 
God.  Therefore  the  whole  of  this  caufe  will 
depend  upon  the  proof  of  thefe  matters  of  fad. 

l.  And  the  method  I fhal!  take  is,  firfi,  To  lay 
down  fuch  rules,  as  to  the  truth  of  matters  off  ad 
in  general,  that  where  they  all  meet,  fuch  mat- 
ters of  faPi  cannot  be  falfe  : and  then,  fecondiy , 
To  fhew  that  all  thefe  titles  meet  in  the  matters 
of  fad  of  Mofes  and  of  Chrifl;  and  that  they 

do 


[ 112  ] 

do  not  meet,  or  poflibly  can,  in  any  impofture 
what  foe  ver. 

2.  The  rules  are  thefe,  1.  That  the  mailer  of 
faEi  be  fitch,  as  mens  fenfes,  their  eyes  and  ears 

may  be  judges  of : 2.  That  it  be  done  publicly , 
in  the  face  of  t he  world  ; 3.  That  both  public 
monuments  be  kept  up  in  memory  of  it,  and  fome 
outward  aElions  be  performed;  4.  That  fuch 
monuments  and  fuch  aElions  or  ob ftrvances  be  in- 
ftituted,  and  do  commence  from  the  time  that  the 
matter  of faEl  was  done. 

3.  The  two  fit  ft.  rules  make  it  impoflible  for 
any  fuch  matter  cf  faft  to  be  impoTed  upon  men, 
at  the  time  when  fuch  matter  of  fact  was  laid  to 
be  done.  For  example  : fuppofe  any  man  Oiould 
pretend,  that  yefterday  he  divided  the  Thames, 
in  prefence  of  all  the.  people  of  London,  and 
carried  the  whole  city,  men,  women  and  chil- 
dren, over  to  Southwark  on  dry  land,  the '.eaters 
Handing  like  walls  on  both  fides  : I fay, -ft t is  itn- 
poffible  he  could  perfuade  the  people  of  London, 
that  this  was  true,  when  every  man,  woman, 
and  child  could  contradict  him,  and  declare,  they 
had  not  feen  the  Thames  fo  divided,  neither  had 
gone  over  on  dry  land.  Therefore  it  is  plain  no 
fuch  impofition  could  be  put  upon  men  at  the 
time  when  fuch  public  matter  of  fatl  was  fmd  to 
be  done. 

4.  Therefore  it  only  remains,  that  fuch  matter 
of  faEl  might  be  invented  fome  time  after,  when 
the  men  of  that  generation  wherein  the  thing 


was 


[ »3  3 

was  laid  to  be  done  were  all  dead  ; and  after- 
ages might  be  impofed  upon,  fo  as  to  believe 
that  things  were  done  in  former  ages,  which 
were  not. 

But  againft  this  the  two  laft  rules  fecure  us. 
For  whenever  fueh  a matter  of  faC  came  to  be 
invented,  if  not  only  monuments  were  faid  to 
remain  of  it,  but  likewife  public  aBions  and 
observances  to  be  conftantly  ufed  ever  fince  the 
matter  offaC  was  done,  the  deceit  mull  be  detect- 
ed by  no  fuch  monuments  appearing,  and  by  the 
experience  of  every  man,  woman  and  child,  -who 
mud  know  that  no  fuch  aBions  ox  ob/ervances  were 
ever  ufed  by  them.  For  example,  fuppofe  I 
Ihould  invent  a ftory  of  fuch  a thing,  done  a 
thoufand  years  ago,  I might  perhaps  get  fome  to 
believe  it.  But  if  I fay,  that  not  only  fuch  a 
thing  was  done,  but  that  from  that  day  to  this 
every  man  at  the  age  of  twelve  years  had  a joint 
of  his  little  finger  cut  off,  and  that  every  man  in 
the  nation  wanted  a joint  of  fuch  a finger , and 
that  this  obfervance  was  part  of  the  matter  of  faC 
done  fo  many  years  ago,  as  a proof  of  it ; and 
had  defcended  without  interruption,  and  had  been 
conftantly  praCifed  ever  fince  the  matter  of  fa£l 
was  done;  I fay  it  is  impoffible  I fhould  be  be- 
lieved in  fuch  a cafe,  becaufe  ever)'  one  could 
contradiC  me  as  to  the  mark  of  cutting  off  a 
joint  of  the  finger,  which  therefore  would  prove 
the  whole  to  be  falfe. 


II,  Let 


C ] 

II.  Let  us  come  now  to  the  fecond  point, 
to  fhew,  That  the  matters  of  fa£t  of  Mofes  and 
of  Chrift,  have  all  thefe  marks,  whereas  r.o  impof- 
ture  ever  had,  neither  can  have  them  all. 

1*  As  to  Mofes,  I fuppofe  it  will  be  allowed 
that  he  could  not  have  perfuaded  600,000  man, 
that  he  had  brought  them  through  the  Red  Sea, 
and  done  the  other  matters  of  fact  recorded  in  his 
books,  if  they  had  not  been  true  : becaufe  every 
man’s  fenfes  that  was  then  alive  mull  have  con* 
tradi&ed  it.  So  that  here  are  the  firft  and  fecond 
of  the  four  marks. 

It  was  equally  imp,offible  for  him  to  have  made 
them  receive  his  five  books  as  truth,  and  not  to 
have  rejeQed  them  as  a manifeft  impollure, 
which  told  of  all  thefe  things  as  done  before  their1 
eyes,  if  they  had  not  been  done.  See  how  pofi- 
tively  he  fpeaks,  Dent.  xi.  2,  &x.  Know  you  this 
day  : For  l /peak  not  with  your  cluldi  en,  which, 
have  not  known  and  feen  the  chafijement  oj  the 
Lord  your  God, — his  miracles  and  his  acls  which 
he  did  in  the  midjl  of  Egypt,  unto  Pharaoh  and 
all  his  land  and  what  he  did  unto  the  army  oj  Egypt 
how  he  made  the  water  oj  the  Red  Sea  to  over  jaw 
them,  as  they  purjued  after  you — And  what  he 
did  unto  Dathan  and  Abiram,  how  the  earth  opened 
her  mouth  and  fwallowed  them  up — But  your  eyes 
have  J'een  all  the  great  adds  of  the  Laid  which  he 
did. 

Hence  we  mull  allow  it  was  impoffible  that 
thofe  books  of  Mofes.  if  an  impofiure,  could 

have 


have  been  put  upon  the  people,  who  were  theta 
alive  when  all  thefe  things  were  faid  to  be  done. 

The  uimoft  then  that  can  be  fuppofed,  is, 
that  thefe  books  were  wrote  in  feme  age  after 
Mofes,  and  put  out  in  his  name. 

But,  if  fo,  it  was  impolhble  that  thofe  books, 
fhould  have  been  received  as  the  books  of 
Mofes  in  that  age  wherein  they  are  fuppofed  to 
have  been  invented.  Why?  Becaufe  they 
fpeak  of  themfelves  as  delivered  by  Mofes, 
and  kept  in  the  ark  from  his  time.  And  there 
was  a copy  of  this  book  to  be  left  likewife  with 
the  king.  And  it  Jhall  be  when  he  fitteth  on  the 
throne  of  his  kingdom , that  he  Jhall  zerite  him  a co- 
py of  this  law  in  a book  : and  it  Jhall  be  with  him , 
and  he  Jhall  read  therein  all  the  days  of  his  life , 
that  he  may  learn  to  keep  all  the  words  of  this  law 
and  thefe fatutes,  Deut.  xvii,  18,  19. 

Here  you  fee  this  book  of  the  law  fpeaks  of 
itfelf,  not  only  as  a relation  of  what  things  were 
then  done,  but  as  the  handing  law  and  fatutes 
of  the  nation,  binding  the  king  as  well  as  the 
people. 

Now  in  whatfoever  age  after  Mofes  you  fup. 
pofe  this  book  to  have  been  forged , it  was  impof- 
fible  it  could  have  been  received  as  truth  : becaufe 
it  was  not  then  to  be  found,  either  in  the  ark,  or 
with  the  king,  or  any  where  elfe.  For  when  in- 
vented, every  one  mull  know,  that  he  had  never 
heard  of  it  before. 

And  therefore  they  could  lefs  believe  it,  to  be 

the 


L «*6  ] 

the  book  of  their  JIatutes,  and  the  (landing  law 
of  the  land  which  they  had  all  along  received, 
and  by  which  they  had  been  governed. 

Could  any  man  at  this  day  invent  a book  of 
jl&tutes  or  acts  of  parliament  for  England,  and 
makeitpafs  upon  the  nation,  as  the  only  book  of 
flatutes  that  ever  they  had  known  ? As  impof- 
fible  was  it  for  the  books  of  Mofes,  if  they  were 
invented  in  any  age  after  Mofes,  to  have  been  re- 
ceived for  what  they  declare  themfelves  to  be, The 
flatute  law  of  the  nation  of  the  Jews  : and  to  have 
perfuaded  the  Jews , that  they  had  acknowledged 
tbefe  books  all  along  from  the  days  of  Mofes,  to 
that  day  in  which  they  were  firft  invented  ; that  is, 
that  they  had  owned  them,  before  they  had  ever 
fo  much  as  heard  of  them.  Nay  more,  the  whole 
nation  mull  in  an  inflant forget  their  former  laws, 
if  they  could  receive  thefe  as  fuch.  And  they 
could  not  receive  them  otherwife,  becaufe  they 
vouched  themfelves  fo  to  be. 

But  farther.  Thefe  books  not  only  tell  of 
wonderful  things  done  in  the  days  of  Mofes,  but 
that  all  along  from  that  time,  public  infitutions 
wereobferved  in  memory  of  them.  As,  the  paf- 
fover , in  memory  of  ihzdeathoiihefrf-born, 
and  that  the  fame  day  all  the  firfl-horn  of  Ifrael 
were  dedicated  to  God  by  a perpetual  law  ; and 
the  Levites  taken  for  all  the  firjl-born  of  the  If- 
raelites : that  Aaron’s  rod  which  budded  was 
kept  in  the  ark,  in  memory  of  the  definition  of 
Korah,  Dathan  and  Abiram  : that  the  brazen fer~ 

pent 


C 117  3 

pent  was  kept  (which  remained  to  the  days  of 
Hezekiah)  in  memory  of  that  wonderful  delive- 
rance by  looking  upon  it ; and  the  feafi:  of  pente- 
cojt , in  memory  of  the  dreadful  appearance  of 
God  upon  mount  Horeb. 

And  befide  thefe  remembrances  of  particular 
occurrences , there  were  other  folemn  injlitutions, 
in  memory  of  their  deliverance  out  of  Egypt, 
which  included  all  the  particulars  : as,  the  fab- 
bath  ; their  daily  facrifices  and  yearly  expiation  ; 
their  new-moo  ns  and  feveral  fealis  and  falls.  So 
that  there  were  yearly , monthly , weekly,  and 
daily  remembrances  of  thefe  things. 

And  not  only  fo,  but  the  fame  books  tell  us, 
that  a particular  tribe  was  appointed  by  God 
as  his  prieff s j by  whom  alone  the  Jacrifices  were 
to  be  offered,  and  thefe  folemn  injlitutions  cele- 
brated : and  that  thefe  Levites  were  likewife  the 
chief  judges,  even  in  all  civil  caufes.  Now 
whenever  it  be  fuppofed  thefe  books  were  forged, 
after  Mofes,  it  is  impofhble  they  could  have  been 
received  as  true,  unlefs  the  forgers  could  have 
made  the  whole  nation  believe,  that  they  had  re- 
ceived thefe  books  from  their  fathers,  had  been 
inftrufted  in  them  when  they  were  children,  and 
had  taught  them  to  their  children.  Moreover, 
that  they  had  all  been  circumcifed,  and  did  cir- 
cumcife  their  children,  purfuant  to>the  command 
in  thefe  books.  That  they  had  obferved  the  paf- 
fover,  the  new-moons,  the  fabbaths,  with  all  the 
feafis,  fads,  and  ceremonies  there  enjoined  : 

that 


[ 1.8  3 

that  they  had  never  eaten  any  meats  prohibited 
in  thefe  books:  that  they  had  a magnificent  ta- 
bernacle, and  a priefthood  confined  to  the  tribe 
of  Levi.  Now  was  it  poffible  to  perfuade  a whole 
nation,  that  they  had  known  and  pra&ifed  all 
thefe  things,  if  they  had  not?  Or,  Secondly,  to 
have  received  a book  for  truth,  which  faid  they 
had  praffifed  them,  and  appealed  to  that  pra&ice  ? 
So  that  here  are  the  third  and  fourth  of  the  marks 
above-mentioned : which  as  much  fecure  any 
matter  of  facl  from  being  invented  in  any  after- 
age, as  at  the  time  when  fuch  matters  of  facl 
were  faid  to  be  done. 

2.  I come  rrow  to  fhew,  that  all  thefe  marks 
meet  likewife,  in  the  matter s of f acl  recorded  of 
our  blelTed  Saviour.  And  my  work  will  be  the 
fhorter,  becaufe  all  that  is  faid  before  of  Mofes 
and  his  books  is  equally  applicable  to  Chrift  and 
his  gofpel.  His  miracles  are  there  faid  to  be  done 
publiclv,  in  the  face  of  the  world.  It  is  faid, 
that  3000  at  one  time,  and  about  5000  at  ano- 
ther, were  converted  on  conviftion  of  what  was 
done  before  their  eyes,  wherein  it  was  impoffible 
to  have  impofed  upon  them.  Therefore  here  the 
two  firft  rules  hold. 

And  as  to  the  two  fecond,  baptifn  and  the 
Lord's J upper  were  infiituted,  as  perpetual  me- 
morials of  thefe  things,  at  the  very  time  when 
they  were  faid  to  have  been  done,  and  have  been 
obfervedin  the  whole  Chrifiian  world,  all  along 
from  that  time  to  this.  And  Chrift-  himfelf  or- 
dained 


[ ”9  ] 

dained  his  minijiers  to  preach  and  adminifter 
thefe  facraments  and  to  govern  his  church,  always 
even  to  the  end  of  the  world . Accordingly  they 
have  continued  to  this  day,  and  doubtlefs  will, 
while  the  earth  {hall  laid.  So  that  the  Chrijlian 
clergy  are  as  notorious  a matter  of  faEl,  as  the 
tribe  of  Levi  among  the  Jews.  And  the  gofpel 
is  as  much  a law  to  the  Chiiflians,  as  the  books 
ofMofes  to  the  Jews.  And  it  being  part  of  the 
matters  of  fa£f  related  in  the  gofpel,  that  fuch  an 
order  of  men  were  appointed  by  Chrift,  to  con- 
tinue to  the  end  of  the  world,  confequently  if  the 
gofpel  was  a fiflion,  invented  after  Chrift,  then 
at  the  time  when  it  wasfirft  invented,  there  could 
be  no  fuch  order  of  men,  which  mull  give  the 
lie  to  the  gofpel,  and  demonftrate  the  *vhole  to 
be  falfe.  But  there  ever  hath  been  fuch  an  or- 
der of  men,  and  facraments  publicly  adminifter- 
ed  by  them.  It  was  therefore  as  impoffible  man- 
kind ffiould  have  been  impofed  upon  in  this 
matter  by  inventing  it  in  after-ages,  as  at  the 
time  when  thofe  things  were  faid  to  be  done. 

III.  To  apply  what  has  been  faid.  Let  any 
Deift  in  the  world  fhew  any  fabulous  a6Vion 
which  has  all  thefe  marks.  No;  it  is  impoffible. 
I do  not  fay,  that  every  thing  which  wants 
ihefe four  marks  is  falfe  : but  that  nothing  can  be 
falfe  which  has  them  all. 

I have  no  doubt  that  there  was  fuch  a man  as 
Julius  Caefar  that  he  fought  at  Pharfalia  was  killed 

in 


[ 120  3 

in  the  fenate-houfe^  nor  of  many  other  amient 
matters  offacl , tho’  we  keep  no  public  obfer- 
vancesin  memory  of  them. 

But  this  fhews  that  the  matters  of  fad  of  Mofes 
and  of  Chrift,  have  come  down  to  us  better 
guarded  than  any  others  whatfoever. 

And  yet  thofe  who  would  laugh  any  man  out 
of  the  world  that  would  offer  to  deny  Catfar  or 
Alexander  their  public  aftions,  do  at  the  fame 
time  value  themfelves  for  ridiculing  the  hiflories 
of  Mofes  and  of  Chrift,  which  are  infinitely 
better  attefted  and  guarded  by  infallible  marks, 
which  the  others  want. 

IV.  There  are  feveral  other  topics,  from 
which  the  truth  of  Chriflainity  is  proved  to  all 
who  wifl  give  themfelves  leave  to  confider.  As 
the  improbabilitv  that  ten  or  twelve  poor  illi- 
terate fjhermen  fhould  form  a defign  of  bring- 
ing the  whole  world  to  believe  their  dclifions, 
and  the  impoffibility  of  their  effefting  it  without 
force  of  arms , learning,  oratory,  or  any  one 
vifible  thing  that  could  recommend  them!  And  to 
impofe  a do&rine  quite  oppofite  to  the  lufls  and 
pleafures  of  men,  and  all  worldly  advantages  or 
enjoyments  ! And  this  in  an  age  of  fo  great  learn- 
ing or  fagacity,  as  that  wherein  the  gofpel  was 
firft  preached.  That  thefe  apoflles  fhould  not  on- 
ly undergo  all  the  contempt,  but  the  feverefl  per- 
forations, and  the  moll  cruel  deaths  that  could 
be  inflicted,  in  atteftation  of  what  themfelves 

knew 


[ 121  ] 

knew  to  be  mere  deceit  and  forgery  of  their  own 
contriving.  Some  have  fuffered  for  errors,  which 
they  thought  to  be  truth  : but  never  any  for  what 
themfelves  knew  to  be  lies.  And  the  apoftles 
moll  know  what  they  taught  to  be  lies,  if  it  was 
fo,  becaufe  they  fpake  of  thofe  things,  which  they 
faid,  they  had  both  fcen  and  heard,  had  looked 
upon  and  handled  with  their  hands. 

Neither  can  it  be  faid,  that  they  might  have 
propofed  fome  temporal  advantages  to  themfelves, 
but  miffed  of  them.  For  had  it  been  fo,  when 
they  faw  their  difappointment,  they  would  have 
difeovered  their  confpiracy  : efpecially  when 
they  might  not  only  have  faved  their  lives,  but 
got  great  rewards  for  doing  it.  How  is  it  then, 
that  not  one  of  them  fhould  ever  have  been 
brought  to  do  this  ? 

But  this  is  not  all.  For  they  tell  us,  that  their 
Matter  bid  them  expeCt  nothing  but  fufferings  in 
this  world.  And  they  told  the  fame  to  all  whom 
they  converted.  So  that  here  was  no  difappoint- 
ment. All  that  were  converted  by  them  were 
converted  on  the  certain  expectation  of  buffer- 
ings, and  bid  to  prepare  for  them.  Chrift  com- 
manded his  difciples  to  take  up  their  crofs  daily 
and  fallow  him. ; and  told  them,  that  whoever 
did  not  forfake,  father , mother,  children,  lands , 
and  their  very  lives,  could  not  be  his  difciples. 

Now  that  this  doftrine  of  the  crofs  fhould  pre- 
vail fo  univerfally  againft  the  allurements  of  flefh 
and  blood,  and  all  the  blandifhments  of  the 
Vol.  XIX.  F world  : 


[ 122  } 

world  : againft  the  rage  and  perfection  of  all  tire 
icings  and  powers  of  the  earth,  mull  (hew  its  ori- 
ginal to  be  divine,  and  its  Protector,  almighty. 
What  is  it  elfe  could  conquer  without  arms,  per- 
fuade  without  rhetoric  ; overcome  enemies,  dif- 
arm tyrants,  and  fubdue  empires,  without  oppo- 
iition  ? 

V.  We  may  add,  the  teflimonies  of  the  moll 
bitter  enemies  of  Chriftianity,  both  Jews  and 
•Gentiles,  to  the  truth  of  the  matter  of  fafl  of 
Chrift,  ftich  as  Jofephus  and  Tacitus  ; of  whom 
the  firft  Pourifhed  about  forty  years  after  the 
death  of  Chrift,  the  other  about  feventy  : fo  that 
they  were  capable  of  examining  into  the  truth, 
and  wanted  not  inclination  to  deny  the  fafl  itfelf. 
But  their  confefting  it,  as  alfo  Lucian,  Celfus, 
Porphyry  and  Julian  the  apoftate,  is  an  undenia- 
ble teftimony  to  the  truth  of  tbefe  matters  of 
faff. 

VI.  Thefe  topics,  which  have  been  largely  in- 
filled upon  by  many,  cannot  be  denied  by  any 
man  of  found  reafon.  But  I wave  them  for  the 
prefent,  and  infill  an  one.  And  it  now  lies  on 
the  Deifls,  to  (hew,  any  matter  of  faff  of  former 
ages,  which  they  allow  to  be  true,  that  has  great- 
er evidences  of  its  truth,  than  the  matters  of  faff 
of  Mofes  and  of  Chrift. 

But  I have  given  them  greater  latitude  than 
this.  For  I have  fhewn  fuch  marks  of  the  truth 

of 


C i23  3 

of  thefe  matters  of  faff,  as  no  other  fa&s  of  thofe 
times,  however  true  have,  but  thefe  only.  And 
I put  it  upon  them,  to  fhew  any  forgery  that  has 
all  thefe  marks. 

This  is  a fhort  iftue.  Keep  them  clofe  to  this. 
This  determines  the  caufe  ali  at  once. 

VII.  l.  Bui  if  they  dill  maintain,  that  all  this 
is  the  invention  of  priefts,  they  muff  own  thefe 
priefts  to  be  the  wifeft  and  cunningeft  of  man- 
kind, who  have  fuch  power  as  to  impofe,  .at 
their  pleafure,  upon  the  fenfes  of  all  mankind, 
and  to  make  them  believe,  that  they  had  prafiif- 
ed  fuch  public  inftitutions,  enafted  them  by  laws, 
taught  them  to  their  children,  when  they  had  .ne- 
ver done  any  of  thefe  things,  or  ever  fo  much  as 
■heard  of  them  before.  Such  a power  as  this, 
muft  exceed  all  that  is  human,  and  confequently 
place  thefe  priefts  above  the  condition  of  mortals. 

2.  Nay,  this  were  to  make  them  outdo  all  that 
has  ever  been  related  of  the  infernal  powers  : for, 
though  they  have  deceived  fome  unwary  behold- 
ers by  lying  wonders , yet  their  power  never 
reached,  nor  was  ever  fuppofed  to  reach  fo  far, 
as  to  deceive  the  fenfes  of  all  mankind,  in  things 
of  fo  public  and  notorious  a nature  as  thefe,  to 
make  them  believe,  that  they  had  enafted  laws 
for  fuch  public  obfervances,  continually  pra&ifed 
them,  taught  them  to  their  children,  and  had 
been  inftru&ed  in  them  themfelves  from  their 
F 2 childhood, 


I 124  3 

•childhood,  if  they  had  never  enafted,  pra&ifed, 
taught,  or  been  taught  fuch  things. 

3.  And  as  this  exceeds  all  the  powers  of  hell,  fo 
it  is  more  than  ever  God  has  done  from  the  foun- 
dation of  the  world.  None  of  the  miracles  that 
he  has  fhewn,  or  belief  that  he  has  required  to 
any  thing  revealed,  has  ever  contradified  the 
outward  lenfes  of  any  one  man  in  the  world, 
jnuch  iefs  of  all  mankind  together.  For  mira- 
cles, being  an  appeal  to  our  outward  fenfes,  if 
they  ihould  overthrow  the  certainty  of  our  out- 
ward fenfes,  mufl  dehroy  with  it  all  their  own 
Gertaintv  as  to  us  : fince  we  have  no  wav  to  judge 
of  a miracle  exhibited  to  our  fenfes,  but  upon 
the  fuppofjtion  of  the  certainty  of  our  fenfes. 

If  then  the  Chr i 11  ian  religion  be  a cheat,  and 
nothing  elfe  but  the  invention  of  prielts,  it  makes 
their  power  and  wifdom  greater,  than  that  of 
men,  angels,  or  devils  ; yea,  more  than  God 
himfelf  ever  fhewed  : to  impofe  upon  the  fenfes 
of  mankind,  in  fuch  public  and  notorious  mat- 
ters of  fa£l. 

4.  And  this  miracle  which  the  Deills  mud  run 
into  to  avoid  thofe  recorded  of  Mofes  and  Chrift, 
is  much  greater  and  more  aftonilhing  than  all  the 
fcriptures  tell  of  them. 

So  that  thefe  men,  who  laugh  at  all  miracles, 
are  now  obliged  to  account  for  the  greateft  of  all. 
How  the  fenfes  of  mankind  could  be  impofed  on, 
in  fuch  public  matters  of-faft. 


VIII.  Unlefs 


[ *25  I 

VIII.  Unlefs  they  can  do  this,  it  muft  appear* 
ihat  religion  is  no  invention  of  men,  but  of  db< 
vine  original : that  priefts  are  of  the  fame  origin/ 
and  that  their  order  is  a perpetual  and  living 
monument  of  the  matters  of  faft  of  their  religion  * 
inftituted  from  the  time  when  thofe  fafts  were 
done  ; the  Levites  from  Mofes,  the  apoflles  and 
Chriftian  clergy  from  Chrift  to  this  day.  And-' 
thefe  are  as  flagrant  a teftimony  to  the  truth  of  the; 
matters  of  faft  of  Chrift,  as  the  facrament  or  any 
other  public  inftitution  : befides-  that  if  thefe- 
were  taken  away,  the  facrament?  and  other  pub-' 
lie  inftitutions,  which  are  adminiftered  by  them, 
muft  of  courfe  fall  with  them. 

Let  us  then  confider  the  priefthood,  facra-" 
ments,  and  other  public  inftitutions  of  Chrift,  not 
only  as  means  of  grace,  and  helps  to  devotion, 
but  as  the  great  evidences  of  the  Chriftian  reli- 
gion : fuch  evidences  as  no  pretended  revelation 
ever  had  or  can  have  : fuch  as  plainly  diftinguifh 
it  from  all  legends  and  impoftures  whatfoever. 

IX.  What  a condition  then  are  they  in,  who 
fpend  that  life  and  fenfe  God  has  given  them,  in 
ridiculing  the  greateft'  of  his  blefllngs,  his  revela- 
tion by  Chrift,  to  redeem  thofe  from  eternal  mi- 
fery,  who  fhall  believe  in  him  ? God  in  his  infi- 
nite mercy  and  wifdom  has  fo  guarded  his  reve- 
lations, as  it  is  paft  the  power  of  men  or  devils 
to  counterfeit.  And  there  is  no  denying  them, 
unlefs  we  will  be  fo  abfurd  as  to  deny,  not  only 
F 3 the 


[ 126  ] 

the  reafon,  but  the  certainty  of  the  outward  fenfes, 
not  only  of  one  or  two  or  three,  but  of  man- 
kind in  general.  This  cafe  is  fo  very  plain,  that 
nothing  but  want  of  thought  can  hinder  any  from 
difcovering  it.  And  they  muft  yield  it  to  be  fo 
plain,  unlefs  they  can  fhew  fome  forgery,  which 
has  all  the  four  marks  before  fet  down.  But  if 
they  cannot  do  this,  they  muft  quit  their  caufe, 
and  yield  a happy  vi£tory  over  themfelves.  O- 
therwife  they  muft  fit  down  under  the  ignominy 
of  being  not  only  the  moft  pernicious,  but  the 
tnoft  inconfiderate  and  fuperficial  of  mankind. 


A 

TREATISE 


concerning 

The  GODHEAD  of  Jefus  Chriji. 

Tranflated  from  the  French, 


WE  cannot  carefully  examine  the  grounds 
which  eftablifh  the  truth  of  the  Chriftian 
religion  without  being  convinced,  that  the  fame 
principles  eftablifhed  the  Godhead  of  our  Lord 

Jefus 


[ *27  ] 


Jefus  Chrifl.  ; infomuch  that  he  who  doubtsy 
whether  Jefus  Chrifl  be  indeed  the  fupremc  God, 
ought  alfo  to  doubt  of  thofe  oracles  on  which 
Chriflianity  is  founded  : and  he  who  is  allured 
thofe  oracles  are  true,  cannot  doubt  of  the  God- 
head of  Chrifl. 

We  do  not  attempt  to  explain  the  myftery  of 
this,  but  to  prove  the  truth  of  it.  Therefore 
we  do  not  endeavour  to  fhew,  how  the  thing  is, 
by  human  fpeculations,  but  to  prove,  that  it  is, 
by  proofs  drawn  from  divine  revelation.  Mean- 
time, as  it  is  my  defign  to  fhew  the  effential  con- 
nexion which  there  is,  between  the  Godhead  of 
Chrifl,  and  the  truth  of  the  Chriflian  religion, 
it  is  my  principal  point,  to  prove  that  either  both' 
muff  be  faved,  or  both  perifh  in  one  common- 
wreck. 


SECT.  I. 

Wherein  is Jheivn , that  if  Jefus  Chrifl  is  not  the 
true  God,  of  the  fame  e fence  zvith  the  Father, 
the  Mahometan  religion,  is  preferable  to  the 
Chnjhan , and  Jefus  Chrifl  inferior  to  Mahomet , 

^ 4 


CHAP.  L 


[ 128  3 


CHAP.  I. 

That  if  Jefus  Chrijl  is  not  of  the  fame  ffenee  with 
the  Father,  the  Chrijlianity  which  we  profefs  is 
the  corruption  of  the  Ckrijlian  religion,  and  Ma - 
kometanifm  the  r e-efahlfhment  of  it . 

IT  is  a principle  of  natural  religion,  more  an- 
tient  than  all  other  religions,  that  there  is  an 
infinite  diflance  between  the  Creator  and  the 
creature.  Hence  we  cannot  without  impiety 
debafe  God  to  a level  with  the  creature : nor 
can  we  without  idolatry  raife  any  creature  to  a 
level  with  God.  If  then  Chrilt  is  the  Creator, 
the  molt  high  God,  we  cannot  without  impiety  fay 
lie  is  a mere  creature ; and  if  he  is  a mere  crea- 
ture we  cannot  without  idolatry  own  him  to  be 
the  moll  high  God.  So  that  if  we  are  deceived  in 
ihinking  he  is  the  fupreme  God,  and  worlhipping 
him  as  fuch,  we  can  in  no-wife  excufe  ourfelves 
from  the  charge  of  flat  idolatry. 

It  avails  not  to  fay,  that  we  really  believe  he 
is  fo,  and  that  our  worfhip  at  the  bottom  is  meant 
to  the  fupreme  God.  The  fame  plea  may  be 
urged  for  all  idolatries,  pall,  prefent,  and  polfible. 
The  Heathens  who  worfhipped  Jupiter  really 

believed. 


[ m ] 

believed,,  that  he  was  the  molt-  high  God, 
and  their  worfhip  was  at  the  bottom  meant  to  the 
fupreme  Being.  But  they  were  no  lefs  idolaters 
for  this.- 

Nor  mull  we  imagine,  that  any  creature,  how 
excellent  foever,  can  be  the  objedb  of  divine 
worfhip.  Thofe  who  worfhip  the  flars  are  not 
lefs  idolaters  then  thofe  who  worfhip  wood  and 
Hone  : and  thofe  who  worfhip  angels  are  equally  ■ 
idolaters  with  thofe  who  Worfhipped  the  flars. 
The  idolatry  of  the  latter  is  not  fo  grofs,  but  it  is  - 
as  real  as  that  of  the  former  : for  idolatry  confifts  - 
not  in  worfhipping  a mean  creature,  butany  crea- 
ture at  all. 

Now  idolatry  is  a crime  which  fo  violates  the 
law  of  God,  as  wholly  to  deflroy  the  fpirit  of 
piety.  In  truth  it  is  direflly  oppofite  to  the 
two  great,  ends  of  religion.  It  evidently  oppofes 
the  glory  of  God,  fpoiling  him  thereof  to  beftow 
it  on  a creature.  It  oppofes  our  falvation  : for 
the  fcripture  declares,  Idolaters  Jkall  net  inherit 
the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

Hence  it  follows,  that,  the  Chriftianity  which 
we  profefs  is  the  corruption  of  the  Chriftian 
religion,  and  that  Mahometamfm  is  the  re- 
eftablifhment.  of  pure  original  Chriflianityv  For 
if  this  religion  when  in  its  purity  acknowledged  - 
Jefus  Chrift  as  a mere  creature  only,  we  turn  it  up---- 
fidedown  whenwe  worfhip  Jefus  Chrift  as  being 
effentially  God  mod  high.  And  if  the  religion 
of  thofe 'who  worfhip  him  -as.  the  iiipreme.  God,  . 

F 5 : is 


[ »3®  3 

is  the  corruption  of  Chriftianity,  then  Maho- 
roetanifm,  which  fets  God  infinitely  above  Chrift, 
is  in  this  refpeft  the  re-eftablifhment  of  it. 

We  allow  that  Chriftianity  confifts  more  in 
praftice  than  in  bare  abftra&ed  fpeculations.  But 
can  we  treat  as  bare,  abftratfed  fpeculations, 
principles  of  fo  vaft  importance,  that  according  as 
they  are  falfe  or  true  we  are  idolaters,  or  we  are 
not  ? If  Jefus  Chrift  is  fupreme  God,  he  ought 
to  be  worfhipped  as  fuch.  Nor  can  our  adver- 
saries without  the  utmoft  impiety,  refufe  to  ac- 
knowledge him  as  the  fupreme,  and  to  worfhip 
him  under  that  character:  but  if  he  is  not,  we  can- 
not without  idolatry  confound  him  with  the  fu- 
preme God.  The  point  in  view  is  to  avoid  im- 
piety or  idolatry  : confequently  this  is  not  a point 
of  mere  fpeculation,  but  clofely  connected  with 
our  pra&ice  and  that  in  things  of  the  higheft 
importance. 


CHAP.  II. 

That  if  Jefus  Chrif  is  not  of  the fame  ejftnce  with 
the  Father , we  muf  regard  Mahomet  as  fnt  cf 

God. 

IT  has  been  {hewn,  that  if  Jefus  Chrift  is  not 
the  fupreme  God,  Mahometanifm  is  in  this 
iefpeft  at  leaft  the  re-eftablifhment  of  pure  Chrif- 

tianitv. 


C *3*  3 

tianity.  If  it  may  be  faid,  bis  religion  is  in  other 
refpe&s  full  of  fi&ion  and  impodure  : I afk* 
how  came  truth  and  error  to  make  fo  clofe  an 
alliance?  Mahomet  is  an  impodor.  We  all 
acknowledge  this ; but  Mahomet  has  abolifhed 
idolatry.  This  we  fuppofe.  See  how  the  two 
mod  oppofite  characters  meet  in  one  perfon  ! 
If  Mahomet  has  undeceived  the  world  with  re- 
gard to  the  Chridian  idolatry  .(for  fo  I mud  term 
the]  worfhip  Chriflians  pay  to  Chrid,  if  he  is  not 
the  fupreme  Being)  by  what  fpirit  did  he  fo  great 
a work  ? By  the  Spirit  of  God,  or  the  devil?  How 
came  he  to  abolifh  idolatry  ? If  he  a£led  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  how  is  he  an  impodor? 

Heathen  idolatry  was  overthrown,  before  he 
appeared,  by  the  preaching  of  the  apodles  and  ■ 
the  firlf  Chridians.  It  was  not  Mahomet  there- 
fore who  did  this.  But  it  was  he  who  taught,., 
that  the  Chridians  were  idolaters,  by  worfhipping 
Chrid  as  the  fupreme  God.  He  counted  no 
pains  more  eflential,  than  to  recover  thofe  from 
their  error,  who  under  the  name  of  the  Trinity, 
wordiipped  in  edeft  more  Gods  than  one.  For 
it  is  thus  he  fpeaks  in  his  Koran.  Chrid  then  j 
and  his  apodles  were  the  reformers  oL  the  Hea- 
then world,  by  dedroying  Heathen  idolatry.  But 
Mahomet  ought  to  be  confidered  as  the  reformer 
of  the  Chridian,  by  dedroying  the  Chridian  ido- 
latry. 

As  then  we  fhould  have  been  much  amazed,  if  t 
the  apodles  had  dedroyed  Heathen  idolatry  by . 

F 6 preachings 


[ *3a  1 

preaching  fables,  is  it  not  equally  amazing,  that 
Mahomet  fhould  have  abolilhed  the  Cbriftian  ido- 
latry by  impoftures? 

Chrift  declares,  we  are  to  know  teachers  by 
their  fruits.  Now,  judging  by  this  principle,  we 
cannot  but  have  a very  high  opinion  of  Mahomet, 
and  acknowledge  him  as  a great  prophet,  if  in- 
deed he  has  taught  men  not  to  confound  the  fu- 
preme  God  with  a creature.  He  has  enlightened 
many  nations  and  many  ages.  He  has  placed 
God  on  the  throne  of  God,  and  the  creature  in 
the  rank  of  a creature.  What  could  be  more 
holy  than  fuch  a defign  ? What  more  grand  than 
fuch  a work  ? 

Certainly,  if  Mahomet  has  enlightened  the 
world,  by  fcattering  the  darknefs  of  this  deep  fu- 
perflition,  it  would  be  a great  injury  to  conteft 
any  of  thofe  titles  which  the  Mufulmen  give  him  : 
nay,  we  may  boldly  fay,  he  ought  to  be  regard- 
ed as  a teacher  of  truth,  as  a prophet,  as  greater 
than  the  prophets  of  the  law,  yea  as  a greater 
prophet  than  Jefus  Chrift  himfelf!  Strange 
paradoxes  thefe  ! Yet  they  are  certain  and 
evident  truths,  if  Jefus  Chrift  is  not  the  fupreme 
God. 

I fay,  a teacher  of  truth.  None  can  doubt  of 
ihis,  fince  he  taught  men  the  moll  efiential  truths, 
the  firft  element  of  religion.  “ No  creature  ought 
to  be  worfhipped  as  the  fupreme  God,”  is  the 
ground  of  natural  religion  diftinguilhed  from  fu- 

per- 


[ ’33  3 

perdition,  of  the  Jewifh  religion  didinguifhed 
from  Heathen  idolatry,  and  of  the  Chriflian  re- 
ligion in  its  purity.  Mahomet  then,  who  has 
eilablifhed  his  religion  upon  this  grand  princi- 
ple, is  not  only  a teacher  of  truth,  but  likewife 
, a teacher  who  re-edablifhes  all  tbofe  truths, 
which  are  mod  important  and  mod  eflentiaJ  to 
religion. 

“ However  you  cannot  deny,  that  Maho- 
met flatters  our  word  paffions,  and  is  rather 
a carnal  than  a fpiritual  teacher.”  If  this 
is  fo,  how  adonifhing  is  it,  that  fo  much 
truth  fhould  be  joined  with  fo  much  vice 
and  impurity  ! For  we  know,  that  there  is 
no  communion  between  light  and  darknejs:  and 
confequently,  that  if  Mahomet  did  not  aft 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  he  afted  by  the  fpirit 
of  the  world  : if  he  did  not  aft  by  the 
fpirit  of  the  world,  he  afted  by  the  Spirit  of 
God.  Let  us  then  fearch  in  him  for  the 
charafters  of  the  one  or  the  other  of  thefe 
fpirits.  We  are  told,  that  Mahomet  is  impure 
both  in  his  maxims  and  morals.  This  is  the 
charafter  of  the  fpirit  of  the  world:  but  it  is 
conteded.  We  know  he  has  reformed  reli- 
gion by  abolifhing  the  Chridian  fuperdition, 
and  caufed  one  God  to  be  worfhipped  every 
where.  This  is  the  charafter  of  the  Spirit  of 
God^  and  the  faft  is  incontedable.  It  is  then 
more  certain  with  regard  to  us,  that  Mahomet 

has 


[ m ] 

has  more  the  character  of  the  divine,  than  of  the 
diabolical  fpirit. 

If  he  was  an  impoflor,  how  came  an  impoflor 
to  profper  the  good  pleafure  of  God,  inlighten 
the  world,  deftroy  idolatry?  Would  God  have 
made  an  impoflor  the  inflrument  of  his  mercy, 
and  the  minifler  of  his  glory  ? What  fhould  we 
have  thought  ofDivineProvidence  if  he  had  chofe 
devils,  appearing  like  men,  to  preach  thegofpel  ? 
We  fhould  have  believed,  either  that  God  de- 
figned  to  make  the  gofpel  dctefled,  by  putting  it 
in  the  devil’s  mouth:  or  to  confecrate  the  devil, 
notwithflanding  his  wickednefs,  by  making  him 
the  depofitory  of  the  gofpel.  The  more  hdious 
this  comparifon  is,  the  more  it  illuflrates  the 
truth.  For  what  we  fay  of  the  devil,  we  fay  of  fe- 
ducers,  his  miniflers  ; of  Mahomet  in  particular. 
If  fuch  an  impoflor  was  chofen  by  Providence  to 
re-eflablifh  the  true  religion.  Providence  defigned 
either  to  make  religion  infamous  in  re-eflablifh- 
ing  it  by  an  impoflor,  or  to  confecrate  impoflure 
by  making  choice  of  it  to  re-eflablifh  religion: 
but  the  one  or  the  other  of  thefe  fuppofitions  is 
impious  and  extravagant. 


CHAP. 


C >35  ] 


CHAP.  III. 

That  if  Jefus  is  not  of  one  offence  with  the  Father , 
Mahomet  is  a great  prophet,  the  greatef  of  the 
prophets,  and  even  prefer  able  in  all  refpecls  to 
Jefus  Chrif. 

BUT  we  may  go  farther  {till.  According  to 
this  fuppofition,  Mahomet  may  be  regarded 
not  only  as  a prophet,  but  as  a greater  prophet 
than  any  of  thofe  of  the  Old  Teffament.  They 
fpake  only  to  a fingle  nation : but  he  to  the  then 
molt  civilized  and  moll  confiderable  part  of  the 
world.  They  fucceeded  each  other,  becaufe  no 
one  of  them  lived  long  enough  to  in  Pom  & the  men 
of  different  ages.  Mahomet  needed  neither  com- 
panion nor  fucceffor  to  banifh  idolatry  for  ever 
out  of  the  countries  which  received  his  do&rine. 
The  ancient  prophets  wrought  divers  miracles  to 
deflroy  fuperflition  and  idolatry.  Mahomet,  with- 
out any  miracle,  ruined  the  idolatry  fpread  over 
the  world.  Even  Mofes  did  not  know  God  as  he 
is.  Chrifi  alone  both  knew  and  revealed  him.  But 
on  that  fuppofnion,  Mahomet  has  revealed  him 
more  perfe&ly  than  Jefus  Chrift:  and  ought  there- 
fore, if  that  fuppofition  hold,  to  be  effeemed  a 
^greater  prophet  than  him  : and  that,  whether  we 

confider 


[ *36  ] 

confider  his  do&rine,  or  the  fuccefs  of  his  mini- 
ftry.  As  to  the  fuccefs,  the  thing  itfelf  fpaaks. 
Chrift  caufed  his  gofpel  to  be  preached  in  all  the 
■world.  But  fcarce  had  he  deftroyed  one  fort  of 
fuperftition;  when  men  fell  into  another  no  lefs 
dangerous.  They  were  no  fooner  delivered  from 
the  Heathen  idolatry,  than  they  fell  into  the 
Chriflian.  Mahomet  cllablifhed  his  religion  upon 
firmer  foundations;  and  took  furer  meafures  to 
hinder  idolatry  from  reviving,  after  it  had  been 
deftroyed : fo  that  ever  finee  his  religion  fub- 
fi fled,  his  followers  have  never  relapfed  into  it. 

Nor  is  this  flrange.  For  (on  the  Aricn  fcheme) 
the  doftrine  of  Mahomet  has  a natuial  charafter 
more  oppofite  to  idolatry  than  that  of  Jefus  Chrift: 
of  which  any  one  will  be  convinced,  who  com- 
pares the  language  of  Chrift,  whether  fpeaking 
himfelf,  or  by  his  apoftles,  with  the  language  of 
Mahomet. 

Jefus  Chrift  fays,  That  he  was  before  John  the 
Baptift,  yea,  before  Abraham  : that  he  wTas  in 
glory  with  the  Father  before  the foundation  of  the 
1 world ; that  he  is  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning 
and  the  end,  the  frf  and  the  lajl : that  he  was  in 
the  beginning ; that  he  was  with  God,  and  that 
he  was  God : that  all  things  were  made  by  him , 
and  without  him  was  not  any  thing  made  that  was 
made : that  the  worlds  were  made  by  him ; that 
he  was  before  all  things,  and  by  hi  n all  things 
conffl.  He  tells  you,  that  there  is  one  Lord  Je- 
fus Chrift,  through  whom  are  all  things,  and  wt 

through 


through  him  : that  it  is  he  who  hath  laid  the  foun- 
dations of  the  earth , and  the  heavens  are  the  work 
oj  his  hands. 

He  ftiies  himfelf  (he  Son  g^God,  the  only  Son 
of  God,  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father  : Immanuel , 
that  is,  God  with  us  ; God  manijejled  in  the flejh: 
the  Lord  and  God  ; the  Saviour,  the  great  God, 
the  God  and  Saviour  of  the  whole  world. 

And  that  ,we  may  not  doubt,  in  what  fenfe 
thefe  exprefftons  belong  to  Jefus  Chrift,  it  is 
highly  remarkable,  that  (fpeaking  himfelf  or  by 
his  apoftles)  he  applies  to  himfelf  thofe  words  of 
the  prophets,  which  clearly  belong  to  the  fupreme 
God,  and  contain  the  moft  peculiar  and  moll  in- 
communicable chara&ers  of  his  glory.  It  was 
faid  in  the  law,  Thou  Jhalt  worfiip  the  Lord 
thy  God,  and  him  only  fialt  thou  J'erve  : but  St. 
Paul  informs  us,  that  God  bringing  his  firft !- 
begotten  into  the  world,  faid.  Let  all  the  angels  of 
God  worjhip  him.  God  hath  faid  by  Ifaiah 
(c.  xxxv.)  Say  to  the  faint-hearted.  Be Jlrong,fear 
not.  Behold  your  God  will  come,  taking  vengeance-, 
God  will  come  with  a recompence , and  he  will  fave 
you.  Then  the  eyes  of  the  blind Jhall  be  opened , and 
the  ears  of  the  deaf  Jhall  be  unjlopped : then  the  lame 
Jhall  leap  as  an  hart,  and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb 
Jhall  fing.  Now  this  fcripture  Chrift  plainly  ap- 
plies to  himfelf,  in  his  anfwer  to  John’s  difcipl.es, 
hereby  declaring  himfelf  to  be  the  God  oj  If rael ; 
the  God  of  vengeance  and  recompence,  the  God  of 
their  falvation  : all  which  are  titles  applied  in  the 

antieat 


C 138  ] 

antient  oracles  to  the  fupreme  God  alone.  God 
had  faid  by  the  pfalmtft,  Thou  in  the  beginning 
laidjl  the  foundations  oj  the  earth , and  the  heavens 
ere  the  work  of  thy  hands.  They full  perijh ; but 
thou  remainejt : they  all  fiall  wax  old  as  doth  a 
garment : as  a vefure Jhalt  thou  change  them  and 
they  fiall  be  changed ; but  thou  art  the  fame , and 
thy  years  fiall  not  fail.  It  cannot  be  denied,  that 
all  thefe  things  are  fpokcn  of  and  to  the  mod 
high  God : no  more  than  that  they  are  all  ap- 
plied to  Jefus  Chrift  in  the  firft  chapter  of  the 
epiftle  to  the  Hebrews.  It  was  faid  by  Zecha- 
riah,  God  will  pour  upon  the  koitfe  of  David , and. 
upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jerufalem,  the  Spirit  of 
grace  and  of f up  plication : and  they  fall  lock  unto 
him  whom  they  have  pierced  and  mourn,  as  a man 
viourneth for  his  only  fon . One  cannot  doubt  but 
it  is  the  mofi  high  God  who  fpeaks  in  this  pro- 
phecy. Juft  before  the  prophet  had  faid,  The 
Lord  who  fretcketh  out  the  heavens,,  and  layeth  the 
foundations  of  the  earth,  and  formed  thefpirit  of 
man  within  him,  hath  faid, — l will  pour  upon  the 
koufe  of  David,  &c.  But  this  St.  John  applies  to 
Chrift.  Again,  another  fcripture  faith,  They  fall 
look  on  him  whom  they  have  pierced.  It  is  the  mod 
high  God,  whom  Ifaiah  introduces  fpeaking 
thus,  By  myfelf  have  I [worn,  that  every  knee  fall 
bow  before  me,  and  every  tongue  fall  fwear  unto 
me;  mean  time  it  is  certain  that  St.  Paul  applies 
this  alfo  to  Jefus  Chrift.  For  after  having  faid, 

We 


[ *39  ] 

We  Jfiall  all  appear  before  the  judgment-feat  of 
Chrijl ; he  adds,  For  it  is  written,  As  I live  faith 
the  Lord,  every  kneejhall  hew  before  me,  and  every 
tongue Jhall  give  praife  to  God. 


CHAP.  IV. 

That  if  Jefus  Chrijl  is  not  of  the  fame  fence  with 
the  Father , Mahomet  was  more  true , more  wife , 
more  charitable , and  more  zealous  for  the  glory 
a/- God  than  him. 

SEE  how  Jefus  Chrift,  fpeaking  by  himfelf  or 
by  his  followers,  equals  and  confounds  him- 
felf with  the  Moll  High ! Sometimes  faying  of 
himfelf  the  things  which  can  belong  to  none  but 
the  fupreme  God  : fometimes  applying  to  himfelf 
thofe  oracles  which  can  agree  to  no  other. 

Mahomet  has  not  done  this.  He  continually 
declares,  that  there  is  no  God  but  the  eternal 
Father.  He  (tiles  himfelf  a prophet,  a man  fent 
of  God  ; but  he  never  aims  at  palling  for  God. 
He  grants  that  Jefus  Cbrift  was  fent  of  God  ; 
but  he  would  not  have  him  (tiled  either  God,  or 
the  Son  of  God.  His  words  are  neither  equivo- 
cal nor  obfeure.  He  fays  in  exprefs  terms,  They 
are  Inf  dels  who  fay  that  the  Son  of  Mary  is  God. 

He 


[ 140  ] 

He  fays.  The  Chrijlians  are  Inf  dels , making  three 
Gods,  whereas  there  is  but  one. 

Mahomet  therefore,  if  our  adverfaries  are 
right,  was  both  more  true,  more  wife,  more 
charitable,  and  more  zealous  for  the  gloty  of 
God  than  Chrift.  Thefe  are  confequences  which 
cur  foul  abhors;  but  which  we  cannot  but  allow 
ifjefus  Chrift  is  not  of  one  effence  with  the  Father. 

in  this  cafe,  Mahomet  would  be  more  true  ; 
at  Ieaft,  in  what  is  the  effence  of  religion,  what 
concerns  the  glory  of  the  mod  high  God.  This 
will  be  clear,  if  we  recolleft  the  furprizing  propo- 
fitions,  wherein  Chrift:  equals  himfelfwith  the  Moll 
High,  and  compare  them  with  thofe  propofitionsof 
Mahomet,  which  are  flatly  contradifforv  to  them. 

Chrift:  fays,  That  he  was  in  the  beginning , and 
that  he  was  God.  Mahomet,  That  Jefus  Chnft, 
was  not  in  the  beginning , and  that  he  was  not 
God.  The  doftrine  of  Chrift  is,  That  ait  things 
arc  made  by  him  ; that  he  created  all  things,  vifible 
and  invifible  : that  he  laid  the  foundations  of  the 
earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  work  cf  his  hands. 
The  do&rins  of  Mahomet  is,  That  all  things 
were  not  made,  nor  any  thing  made  by  Jefus  Chri/l: 
that  he  neither  created  things  vifible  nor  invifible, 
and  that  neither  earth  nor  heaven  are  the  work  cf 
his  hands.  The  evangelifts  tell  us,  That  God  has 
given  his  glory  to  Chrif,  and  that  we  are  to  honour 
him  even  as  we  honour  the  Father.  Mahomet  on  the 
contrary,  maintains,  That  God  has  not,  and  can- 
net  give  his  glory  to  Jefus  Claijl : and  that  when 

any 


any  one  thus  honours  the  Son,  he  thereby  dishonours 
the  Father.  Chrift  applies  to  himfelf  all  tbofe 
antient  oracles  which  defcribe  the  fupreme  God: 
Jehovah,  a God  loving  right toufnefs  and  hating 
iniquity ; . he  who  trea/ures  the  waters  oj  the  fca  in 
the  hollow  of  his  hand,  who  weighs  the  mountains 
in  a balance ; the  Creator  of  the  earth  and  the  hea- 
vens, the  firf  and  the  lajl,  the  beginning  'and  the 
end  of  all  things.  He  who  /wears  by  himfelf : he 
io  whom  every  knee  [hall  bow,  and  every  tongue 
give  praifer,  he  who  hveth,  the  Lord,  the  Redeemer, 
the  God  of  Ifrael ; who  faith,  There  is  no  God 
befide  me.  Whereas  Mahomet  fays,  All  thefe 
titles  belong  only  to  the  Father,  and  are  impi- 
ous and  blafphemous  if  applied  to  any  other. 
Now  the  language  of  Mahomet  and  Chrift 
cannot  both  be  true,  for  they  are  flatly  contra- 
dictory. One  therefore  muft  be  true  and  the 
other  falfe.  If  then  Chrift  is  a mere  creature, 
that  of  Mahomet  is  true  ; and  confequently,  that 
of  Jefus  Chrift  is  lalfe.  So  that  on  this  fuppofi- 
tion  it  is  manifeft,  that  Mahomet  is  more  true 
than  Jefus  Chrift. 

It  would,  fecondly,  follow,  that  he  was  more 
wife.  Wifdom  is  {hewn  in  chufing  the  moft 
proper  means  to  attain  the  end  propofed.  Now 
the  end  which  Mahomet  declares  he  propofes, 
is.  To  have  the  fupreme  God  acknowledged  as  the 
only  God,  as  raifed  above  all  other  beings,  and 
to  be  diftinguifhed  in  all  a£ls  of  religion  from 
every  other,  even  from  Jefus  Chrift.  And  h« 

has 


[ H*  ] 

has  chofen  the  mod  clear  and  proper  expreflions 
in  the  world,  to  attain  this  end.  He  declares 
aloud,  that  all  who  acknowledge  Chrift  to  be 
God,  are  real  idolaters.  This  is  the  certain  way 
to  attain  that  end.  See  whether  Chrift  takes 
as  fure  a way  to  attain  his.  His  end,  we  fup- 
pofe  is  to  glorify  God.  To  glorify  God  is 
evidently  to  exalt  him  above  all  other  beings. 
But  at  the  fame  time  that  Chrift. ’s  defign  was,  to 
exalt  him  thus,  he  abafes  him  by  confounding 
hinjfelf  with  him,  to  call  himfelf  God  ? To 
afcribe  to  himfelf  the  work  of  creation,  with 
the  attributes  of  God,  and  to  apply  or  fuffer  to 
be  applied  to  himfelf,  thofe  antient  oracles  which 
contain  the  moll  ellential  charafters  of  the  glory 
of  the  moft  high  ? Do  you  fay,  “ It  fuftices,  that 
he  declares,  the  Father  is  greater  than  I.”  Not  fo. 
For  firlf,  it  would  be  a moft  arrogant  modefty  for 
a bare  creature  to  fay,  the  moft  high  God  is  great- 
er than  me.  And  again  what  does  it  avail  for 
Chrift  to  fay  this  one  Tingle  time  on  one  Tingle 
occafton,  while  his  conftant  behaviour,  his  lan- 
guage, and  the  language  which  he  taught  all  his 
difciples,  fay  continually,  that  he  and  the  Father 
are  one,  and  confound  him  with  the  fupreme 
God  ? 

If  it  be  faid,  “ This  is  not  the  meaning  of 
thofe  expreflions  I anfwer,  If  they  have  any 
other  meaning,  they  are  not  a little  obfcure 
and  equivocal.  And  this  cannot  be  denied, 
feeing  men  have  read  and  heard  them  for  fo 

many 


[ M3  ] 

many  ages  without  underflanding  them.  Nay 
and  the  firft  impreffion  which  they  naturally  make 
on  our  underflanding,  leads  to  no  other  meaning 
than  this. 

Now  this  fuffices  to  prove,  that  Jefus  Chrift 
was  lefs  wife  in  his  expreflions  than  Mahomet. 
For  Mahomet  has  fpcken  clearly  and  flrongly  to 
fhew,  that  the  fupreme  God  mull  not  be  con- 
founded with  any  creature.  Jefus  Chrifl  on  the 
contrary  ufes,  or  (which  comes  to  the  fame)  per- 
mits his  difciples  to  ufe,  expreflions  obfcure, 
equivocal,  and  which  by  the  impreffion  they  na- 
turally make,  confound  Chrift  with  the  fupreme 
God.  It  follows,  that  the  language  of  Mahomet 
is  more  proper  than  that  of  Jefus  Chrift  to  glorify 
the  fupreme  God,  and  confequently,  that  if  the 
defign  of  Chrift  was  to  glorify  God,  he  has  lefs 
fucceeded  therein  than  Mahomet  : a conclufion 
equally  impious  and  extravagant. 

1 add,  Thirdly,  That  were  the  opinion  of  our 
adverfavies  true,  Mahomet  would  be  more  chari- 
table than  Jefus  Chrift.  For  two  things  are  cer- 
tain. The  one,  that  there  is  no  greater  charity, 
than  to  keep  men  from  idolatry,  fince  it  is  death 
to  the  foul,  and  no  idolater  Jhall  inherit  the  king- 
dom of  heaven.  The  other,  that  it  is  Mahomet, 
and  not  Chrift  (if  he  is  not  of  the  fame  effence 
with  the  Father)  who  has  taken  the  proper  mea- 
fures  to  hinder  men  from  falling  into  idolatry. 
Mahomet  abolilhed  the  Chriftian  idolatry,  and 
laid  fuch  a foundation  for  bis  religion,  that  no  man 

begins 


[ M4  ] 

begins  to  bean  idolater,  but  by  ceafing  to  be  bis 
difciple.  But  Jefus  Chrift  (if  our  opponents  be 
right)  has  by  his  conftant  manner  of  fpeaking, 
given  occafion  to  as  real  idolatry  as  ever  was  in 
the  world.  For  he  not  only  permits  man  to 
treat  him  as  God,  but  to  afcribe  to  him  the 
incommunicable  attibutes  of  the  Godhead,  and 
apply  to  him  the  antient  oracles,  which  exprefs 
the  moft  peculiar  chara&ers  of  the  fupreme  Be- 
ing. It  is  a fnrprizing  thing,  for  example,  that 
Chrift  appearing  to  Thomas  after  his  refurreftion, 
permits  him  to  fay.  My  Lord  and  my  God,  with- 
out any  reproof  for  confounding  the  creature 
with  the  Creator.  Thomas  had  been  an  unbe- 
liever, and  was  now  an  idolater.  Of  the  two  ex- 
tremes Purely  the  laft  is  the  word.  His  unbelief 
is  lefs  criminal  than  his  idolatry.  The  former 
ftruck  direftly  at  Chrift  only,  but  the  latter  at 
God.  Therefore  Thomas  had  better  have  re- 
mained in  unbelief,  than  to  change  from  unbelief 
to  idolatry.  Yet  Chrift  reproves  him  for  the 
former,  and  not  for  the  latter,  which  is  quite 
aftonifhing.  And  this  appears  the  more  uncha- 
ritable, becaufe  he  could  not  but  know  what  im- 
preflion  thefe  exprefhons  made  upon  men  in  ge- 
neral, upon  his  friends,  and  upon  his  enemies. 
He  knew  both  the  paft  and  future.  He  knew  the 
Jews  had  accufed  him  of  blafphemy,  for  expref- 
fions  lefs  ftrong  than  thefe.  He  was  not  ignorant, 
that  the  fame  expreffions  would  give  occafion  to 
Chriftians  in  following  ages,  to  confound  him 

with 


[ H 5 ] 

with  the  fupreme  God,  by  maintaining  that  he 
was  of  the  fame  effence  with  him.  Knowing  all 
this,  charity  doubtlefs  required,  that  he  fhould 
fupprefs  and  avoid  all  thefe  expreffions.  Yet  he 
not  only  permits  his  difciples  to  fpeak  thus,  but 
likewife  to  leave  them  in  writing,  without  any  ex- 
planation or  foftning. 

Fourthly,  If  Jefus  Chi  ill  was  not  the  fupreme 
God,  Mahomet  was  more  zealous  for  the  glory 
of  God  than  Chrifr.  The  effential  glory  of  God 
con  fills  in  the  eminence  of  his  perfeftions,  which 
raife  him  above  all  other  beings;  the  exterior 
glory  of  God  in  thofe  a£ts  of  worfhip,  which 
difli nguifh  him  from  all  creatures.  Now  we 
gafily  comprehend  that  Mahomet  has  glorified 
God, by  difiinguifhing  him  from  all  other  beings: 
but  how  doe3  Chrill  glorify  him  when  all  his  ex- 
prefiions  tend  to  confound  a mere  creature  with 
the  Moll  High  ? Thefe  expreflions  which  afcribe 
to  a creature  the  glory  of  the  Creator,  are  truly 
facril’egious.  If  they  were  equivocal  they  would 
be  impious  /till  ; but  they  are  not  equivocal  at 
all.  They  are  a plain  direCt  application  of  the 
glory  of  the  fupreme  God  to  Jefus  Chrill  : con- 
fequently,  they  are  plain  direCt  blafpbemy,  if 
he  is  not  the  fupreme  God. 

Therefore  il  Jefus  Chrill  is  a mere  creature,  it 
manifeilly  follows,  that  Mahomet  who  had  no- 
thing more  at  heart,  than  to  ellabltlh  the  worfhip 
oi  the  one  fupreme  God,  has  fpoken  agreeably 
to  truth,  to  wifdcrm,  to  charity,  and  to  piety. 

\ol.  XIX.  G Whereas 


L H6  ] 

Whereas  Chrift  if  he  be  not  God,  has  fpoken 
falfely,  unvvifely,  uncharitably  and  impioufly. 

But  if  on  the  contrary,  Jefus  Chrift  be  of 
one  eftence  with  the  fupreme  God,  it  is  plain 
that  Chrift  fpoke  agreeably  to  truth,  when  he 
afcribed  to  himfelf  the  names,  titles  and  works 
of  God  : he  fpoke  in  the  wifeft  manner,  feeing 
he  ufed  thofe  expreffions  which  w’ere  moft  pro- 
per to  declare  this  grand  pinciple.  He  fpoke  cha- 
ritably, fince  he  w’ould  not  leave  us  in  ignorance 
of  fo  neceftary  a truth ; and  in  a manner  promo- 
tive of  piety  ; fince  to  difhonour  the  Son,  is  to 
diftionour  the  Father  alfo. 


SECT.  II. 

Wherein  is Jhewn,  That  if  Jefus  Chri/l  was  not  the 
true  God,  of  the  fame  ejfence  with  the  Father,  the 
Sanhedrim  did  an  ad  of jufice , in  putting  him 
to  death. 


CHAP.  I. 

That  Jefus  Clirif  takes  the  name  of  God. 

AS  the  fentiment  of  thofe  who  believe  Chrift 
to  be  a mere  man,  would  confecrate  the 
Mahometan  religion,  fo  it  would  juftify  the  moft 

execrable 


£ H7  1 

execrable  paricide  which  was  ever  committed. 
Namely,  The  murder  of  our  bleffed  Saviour. 

To  juftify  this,  we  need  only  fhew,  Fvji,  That 
the  Sanhedrim  had  a right  to  judge  him  : Second- 
ly, That  they  had  reafon  to  condemn  him  as  a 
blafphemer,  and  Thirdly,  That  they  had  a right 
to  put  him  to  death.  But  it  is  certain,  all  thofe 
propofitions  are  true,  if  Jefus  Chrift  is  a mere 
creature. 

As  to  the  right  which  they  had  tojudge  Jefus 
Chrift  it  is  inconteftable.  For  the  Sanhedrim  was 
the  council  eftablifhed  by  God  himfelf,  to  take 
cognisance  of  all  capital  offences,  relating  either 
to  the  tranquility  of  the  ftate  or  the  preferva- 
tion  of  religion. 

It  is  no  lefs  certain,  that  they  had  aright  to 
put  him  to  death,  if  he  was  convifted  of  blaf- 
phemy.  So  that  all  the  queftion  is,  whether 
he  really  could  be  convifted  of  it  ? And  nothing 
is  more  fure  : nothing  can  be  more  plain,  if  we 
obferve  either  his  own  words,  or  thofe  of  his  dif- 
ciples.  From  thence  it  manifeftly  appears,  1.  That 
Chrift  was  called  God  : 2.  That  the  attributes 
of  God  were  aferibed  to  him,  and  the  honour 
which  had  never  been  paid  to  any  but  God  : 3. 
That  he  caufed  himfelf  to  be  worfhipped  ; and. 
That  he  applied  to  himfelf  all  thofe  antient  ora- 
cles which  exprefs  the  glory  of  God : 4.  That 
he  made  himfelf  equal  with  God  : now  it  is  evi- 
dent, that  all  this  cannot  be  faid  of  any  creature, 
without  the  moft  apparent  blafphemy. 

G 2 


There 


[ i48  ] 

There  are  but  two  poftible  ways  of  evading 
this : either  to  prove,  that  Jefus  Chrift  was  not 
called  God,  that  he  did  not  caufe  himfelf  to  be 
worfhipped,  that  he  did  not  pretend  to  be  equal 
with  the  Father,  and  that  he  did  not  pretend  to 
apply  to  himfelf  thofe  antient  oracles  which 
exprefs  the  glory  ol  the  fupreme  God:  or  to 
fhew,  that  a mere  man  may  without  impiety  af- 
fume  the  name  of  God,  with  all  the  attributes 
which  it  include.*,  and  the  glory  and  worfhip 
which  are  due  to  it. 

To  prove  the  fir-ft  is  impcffible.  Jefus  Chrift 
is  called  God.  He  is  termed,  The  great  God. 
Thomas  fays  to  him.  My  .Lord  and  my  God.  St. 
John  fays,  The  u'ord  wai  God.  St.  Paul  terms 
him,  God  mamfeji&d  in  the 'JleJh.  And  every  one 
knows,  this  name  exprelfes  the  glory  of  a Being, 
railed  above  all  creatures  : that  it  is  peculiar  to 
the  fupreme  Being.  What  then  can  we  think  of 
any,  who  is  not  the  fupreme  Being,  and  yet  dares 
to  a flu  me.  that  name  ? Without  queftion  he  would 
bejuftly  condemned  lor  blafphemous  impiety. 

Had  not  the  Jews  then  reafon  to  be  offended, 
that  Jefus  Chrift  being  but  a mere  man,  fhould 
make  himfelf  God  ? And  can  we  ce.ofurc 
thefentcnce  they  paffed  upon  him,  ii  he  was  not 
the  God  that  cieated  heaven  and  earth  ? 

They  attached  the  idea  of  the  fupreme  Being 
to  this  name  of  God,  becaufe  they  had  learned 
from  the  prophets,  that  there  is  but  one  God.  who 
made  heaven  and  earth  ; that  all  other  gods  are 

but 


[ {49  ] 

but.  vanity,  and  fhould  perifh  from  off  the  earth. 
If  they  were  deceived,  they  were  deceived  toge- 
ther with  the  prophets,  who  threw  them  into  that 
error.  If  they  were  not  deceived,  they  had  rea- 
fon  to  condemn  all  thofe  who  ufurped  the  name 
of  God. 

Perhaps  it  will  be  faid,  That  Jefus  Chrift  did 
not  ftile  himfelf  God,  but  the  Son  of  God  : and 
that  he  juflifies  himfelf  therein,  in  a mannerwhich 
fhewed,  that  he  did  notafpire  to  the  former  title, 
feeing;  he  cites  for  that  end  thofe  words  of  the 
pfalmiff,  I have  faid  ye  are  Gods.  But  our  ad- 
verfaries  themfelves  agree,  that  Chrift  on  this 
occafion,  as  on  feveral  others,  as  it  Were  con- 
ceals his  glory,  and  does  not  fay  to  the  Jews  all 
that  he  might  have  faid.  For  although  thefe 
words  might  feem  to  imply,  that  he  was  God  in 
no  other  fenfe  than  as  magi  Urates  are  fo  fliled  in 
fcripture,  yet  themfelves  allow  him  to  be  God 
in  a far  higher  fenfe  than  this,  and  indeed  in  a 
manner  peculiar  to  himfelf.  But  not  to  infill  on 
this,  were  it  true,  that  he  had  never  himfelf  affum- 
ed  the  name  of  God,  and  that  the  Sanhedrim 
could  have  alledged  nothing  of  this  kind  to  juflify 
their  fentence  againll  him : it  is  at  leafl  incon- 
teftable,  that  his  difciples  have  given  him  both 
the  titles  and  the  attributes  of  God.  The  fuc- 
ceeding  Jews  therefore,  knowing  that  the 
Spirit  of  Chrift:  was  the  fame  with  that  of  his  dif- 
ciples, could  not  but  approve  of  the  fentence 
G 3 of 


[ *5°  ] 

of  their  fathers  condeming  him  as  a blaf- 
phemer. 

In  a word.  If  he  who  was  in  the  fulnefs  of 
times  to  come,  to  redeem  Sion,  and  turn  away 
iniquity  from  Jacob,  was  to  be  the  true  God,  the 
God  of  Ifrael ; and  if  the  oracles  of  the  prophets 
clearly  teftify  this,  then  are  the  Jews  without  ex- 
cufe.  Rut  if  he  was  to  be  but  a mere  man,  or  a 
mere  creature,  neither  can  his  difciples  be  ex- 
cufed;  nor  can  Jefus  Chrift  himfelf  be  ac- 
counted innocent,  but  a blafphemer  worthy  of 
death. 


CHAP.  II. 

That  his  difciples  afcribe  to  Jefus  Chrift  all  the 
principal  titles,  which  in  the  writings  of  the  pro- 
phets form  the  idea  of  thefupreme  God,  and  tffen- 
tially  difinguifh  him  from  all  creatures. 

WHAT  farther  fhews,  that  Jefus  Chrift 
aifumes  the  name  of  God  in  the  true  and 
proper  fenfe,  is  that  the  apoftles  afcribe  all  thoie 
works  and  attributes  to  him,  which  the  prophets 
afcribe  to  none  but  the  Moft  High. 

The  prophets  conftantly  fpeak  of  the  creating 
heaven  and  earth,  as  the  peculiar  work  of  the 
Moft  High.  But  this  the  apoftles  afcribe  to  Jefus 
° Chrift. 


[ *5*  ] 

Chrift.  By  him,  faith  St.  John,  all  things  werr 
made.  He  hath  created,  faith  St.  Paul,  things  vifi- 
ble  and  invfible.  He  laid  the  foundations  of  the 
earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  work  of  his  hands. 
Thus  do  thev  charadletize  Chrift  by  the  creation* 
of  all  things,  the  handing  charadler  by  which  the 
prophets  ufe  to  diftinguifti  the  fupreme  God, 
and  to  exalt  him  above  all  things,  by  afcribing  to 
him  the  power  which  made  them.  What  impiety 
were  this,  if  he  were  a mere  creature  ? 

Secondly.  The  prophets  fpeak  of  God  as  of  one- 
who  knoweth  a'l  things.  But  this  alfo  is  afcribed 
to  Chrift.  Lord,  faith  St.  Peter , Thou  know  eft  all 
things  ; thou  knowejl  that  I love  thee.  Now  either 
this  is  blafphemy  or  a- truth.  If  he  does-know- 
all  things,  it  is  a truth.  If  he  does  not,  it  is 
blafphemy;  there  is  no  medium.  IT  it  is  a truth, 
he  who  is  truth  itfelf  could  not  but  approve  of  it. 
But  'if  it  was  blafphemy,  both  the  glory  of  God, 
and  the  care  be  had  for  the  falvation  of  his  difci- 
ple  required  that  he  fhould  fet  him  right  and  fe- 
verely  cenfure  him.  When  this  apoftle  would 
have  hindered  him  from  going  to  fuffer  at  Jeru- 
falem,  our  Lord  rebuked  him  fharply,.  Get  thee 
behind  me,  Satan  ; thou  art  an  oftnee  unto  ?ne. 
And  when  lie  was  robbing  God  of  his  peculiar 
honour,  to  give  it  to  a creature,  could  he  have- 
kept  (lienee-?  Certainly  that  which  was  reprov- 
able  in  St.. Peter’s  zeal  on  the  way  to  Jerufalem, 
was  bis.  inconfiderate  defire  to  binder  a work 
which,  was  lor.  the  glory  of  C-od.  But  in  this  a f- 
G q feition 


V 

L *6*  ] 

fern  on,  rf  it  be  not  true,  be  not  only  fpeaks  ;n- 
confiderately,  but  openly  blafpliemes  again!!  God, 
by  giving  bis  glory  to  another. 

St.  Peter  here  aferibes  to  Chrift  both  the  know- 
ing of  all  things  in  general,  and  in  particular, 
what  pafles  in  the  heart,  Thou  hnowefi  all  thing';-, 
thou  knoioejl  that  l love  thee.  But  this  is  a n.oft 
effential  character  of  the  fupreme  God.  The 
heart  of  man  is  deceitful  (faith  God  bv  Jeremiah) 
and  defmrately  wicked : who  can  know  it  ? I the 
Lord,  I am  he,  who  knowetk  the  heart  and  fearch 
the  reins.  So  Solomon,  Thou  alone  knowtjl  the 
hearts  of  men.  Two  things  are  here  affirmed. 
The  firft,  That  God  knows  the  hearts  of  men  ; 
the  fecond,  That  none  elfe  does.  Whence  it 
follows,  that  the  character  of fearcher  of  hearts  is, 
according  to  the  prophets,  pecnliar  to  the  God 
ot  Ifrael.  But  in  how  folemn  a manner  does  Je- 
fus  Chrift  aferibe  this  glorious  title  to  himfelf? 
And  all  the  churches  Jlial!  know,  that  I am  the 
fearcher  cf  the  heart  and  reins.  Thus  he  attri- 
butes to  himfelf,  not  barely  the  name  of  God, 
but  the  peculiar  character  given  of  him  by  the 
prophets.  Confequently,  either  he  is  indeed  the 
God  ol  Ifrael,  or  the  Jews  had  reafon  to  regard 
him  as  a blafphemer. 

Thirdly,  The  prophets  deferibe  the  fupreme 
God  as  the  Saviour,  the  only  Saviour  of  the 
world.  So  Ifaiah,  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  Javed, 
all  the  ends  of  the  earth : manifeftly  implying, 
there  is  no  other  Saviour.  I allow,  the  prophet 

here 


C *53  ] 

here  alludes  to  the  idols  of  the  Heathens,  which 
were  not  able  to  fave  them.  But  neverthelefs,  he 
edablilhes  this  general  principle,  That  it  is  God 
alone  who  can  lave  the  ends  of  the  earth.  This 
cannot  be  doubted,  if  we  confider  thofe  w’ords  of 
God  by  the  fame  prophet,  Am  not  1 the  Lord? 
Is  there  any  other  God  befide  me  ? There  is  no . 
other  God, juft  and  that  faveth,  but  me.  Now  Je- 
fus  Chrid  not  only  profedes  to  fave  men,  but 
names  himfelf  The  Saviour , by  way  cf  eminence. 
And  mull  it  not  be  owned,  that  he  hereby  attri- 
butes a name  to  himfelf,  which  belongs  only  to 
the  God  of  Ifrael  ? But  if  this  be  an  eternal  truth, 
that  there  is  no  other  God,  juf  and  that  faveth , 
but  the  God  of  Ifrael:  how  can  we  help  regard- 
ing him  as  a blafphemer,  who  not  being  the  God 
of  Ifrael,  yet  If  iles  himfelf  the  Saviour  of  the  no  rid, 
of  the  ends  of  the  earth  ? The  prophets  acknow-- 
ledged  but  one  God  and  Saviour,  namely,  the 
God  of  Ifrael,  the  mod  high  God.  He  there- 
fore who  Biles  himfell  God  and  the  Saviour  of 
all  the  earth,  not  only  takes  to  himfelf  the  name 
of  God,  but  takes  it  in  the  higheft  Jenfe. .wherein 
it  occurs  in  the  antient  oracles. 

Fourthly,  The  prophets  to  diltinguifh  the  fu» 
preme  God  from  all  others,  fay,  He. is  the  fr(\, 
and  the  laf.  But  Jefus  Chi  id  alfumes  this  title  to. 
himfelf,  no  lefs  than  five  times  in  the  Revelation*. 
That  this  is  the  incommunicable  title  of  the  Moll 
High  may  appear  from  many  confiderations. 

G,  5 Every 


[ J<54  ] 

Every  one  allows,  that  this  title  was  never  given 
before  Chrift  came  to  any  but  the  fupreme  God. 
2.  There  is  no  doubt,  but  if  any  before  him  had 
affumed  it,  he  would  have  been  charged  with 
blafphemy  ; and  fo  would  any  one,  3.  who  at  this 
day  attributed  it  to  himfelf.  4.  This  title  is 
placed  amidll  the  flrongell  defcriptions  of  the 
fupreme  majefty  of  God:  add  to  this,  It  is  fo 
blended  with  the  other  attributes  which  are  pe- 
culiar to  the  fupreme  God,  that  it  is  not  pofhble 
to  feparate  one  from  the  other.  Sometimes  it  is 
mingled  with  his  power  : as  when  it  is  laid,  Who 
is  he  that  hath  done  this  ? It  is  he  that  calleth  the 
generations  from  the  beginning.  I am  the  Lord: 
I am  the  JirJt , and  with  the  lajf,  I am  he.  Some- 
times with  his  glory  and  majefty;  as,  Thus  faith 
the  Lord , the  King  of  If/  at  l,  and  his  Rtdeeme ? the 
Lord , the  God  oj  hojls  : lam  the  fnji  and  the  !aji, 
and  there  is  no  other  God  befide  me,  and  who  is  like 
untome ? iiou  fee  that  after  having  faid,  I am 
the  fnji  and  the  lajl,  God  adds,  H' ho  is  like 
unto  me?  Giving  us  to  underhand,  that  none  but 
he  poddies  the  majefty  and  glory  which  is  con- 
tained in  that  title  and  others  that  accompany  it. 
Sometimes  he  joins  this  title  with  the  great  work 
of.creation,  aferibing  to  himfelt  both  the  cne  and 
the  other.  As,  Hear  me  Jacob,  and  thou  IfraeJ, 
•whom  I have  called.  I am  the  frjl  and  the  lajl ; 
and  it  is  my  hand  that  hath  laid  the  foundation  of 
the  earth.  Certainly  then,  either  Jefus  Chrift  is 
the  moft  high  God,  or  he  is  the  rnoft  grievous 

blaf- 


[ *S5  ] 

blafphemer  that  ever  lived.  If  therefore  he  was 
not  the  Moll  High,  the  Jews  did  well  in  con- 
demning him  to  death,  and  in  oppofing  to  the 
utterm'olf  his  whole  religion,  grounded  on  fuch 
{hocking  blafphemy. 


CHAP  III. 

That  the  apojlks  make  JeJus  Chrijl  equal  with  God. 

ST.  Paul  fcruples  not  to  fay,  That  jcfus  Chrijt 
thought  it  no  robbery  to  be  equal  with  his  Fa- 
ther. And  his  Father,  without  all  controverfy,  is- 
the  molt  high  God.  It  is  remarkable,  that  he 
who  fpeaks  thus  is  St.  Paul,  who  of  all  men  in 
the  world,  afcribes  the  moll  to  grace,  and  moll 
carefully  refers  all  things  to  the  glory  of  God. 
Would  one  who  is  fo  careful  not  to  afcribe  to 
fecond  caufes  any  ol  the  praife  that  belongs  to- 
God,  have  lightly  ufed  an  expreffion,  which  fets 
a creature  on  a level  with  his  Creator  ? 

I defire  three  things  in  particular  may  be  con- 
fidered  on  this  head.  The  full  is,  That  God  had 
folemnly  declared  by  his  prophets,  there  was 
none  like  unto  him.  Fie  had  not  faid  it  once  or 
twice  only,  but  had  repeated  it  a thoufand  times. 
He  had  fpoken  it  in  a manner  capable  of  con- 
founding idolaters : he  had  made  it  the  grand 
principle  of  his  religion.  St.  Paul  knew  this : he 
G 6 had 


[ 156  ] 

had  read  the  oracles  of  God  again  and  again. 
Yet  St.  Paul  dares  anfvver  that  voice  from  hea- 
ven, Who  is  like  unto  vie?  By  boldly  anfwering, 
“ Jefus  Chrill  : he  thought  it  no  robbery  to  be 
equal  with  this  great  God.” 

The  Second  confideration  is,  the  apoflle  could 
not  but  know,  that  reafon,  (or  rather  pretence] 
for  which  ChriR  had  been  accufed  and  condemn- 
ed by  the  Jews,  was  that  he  made  himfelf  like 
and  equal  to  God.  This  was  an  infufferable  of- 
fence,. to  them  who  had  heard  God  faying  by  the 
prophets,  Who'  is  like  unto  me  ? St.  Paul  did  all 
that  lay  in  his  power,  to  draw  the  Jews  to  Chrif- 
tianity  ; but  inftead  of  juRifying  the  ChriRians 
from  the  crime  of  equalling  a creature  with 
the  Creator,  at  a time  when  this  was  fo  r.eceffary 
both  for  the  falvation  and  for  the  glory  of  God, 
lie  affirms,  that  Jefus  ChriR  thought  it  not  rob- 
bery to  be  equal  with  God  ! Would  he  who  rent 
his  garments  when  they  took  him  for  Mercury 
a fubaltern  Godof  the  Heathens,  have  dared  to 
equal  a mere  creature  with  the  moR  high  God  ? 

In  the  Third  place,  I confider,  that  the  other 
expreffions  of  the  apoflles,  are  a fure  comment 
on  this  : and  that  as  the  apoRles  of  ChriR,  not 
only  attribute  to  him  the  name  of  God  but  attri- 
bute ittviththe  very  fame  idea  which  the  prophets 
had  affixed  to  it  ; as  they  give  him  the  titles 
which  could  not  poffibly  belong  to  him,  if  he 
were  not  equal  with  God  : it  cannot  be  doubted 

but 


[ *57  ] 

but  St.  Paul  here  ufes  the  terra  in  its  proper  and 
literal  fenfe. 

Obferve  four  judgments  which  the  Jews  might 
reafonably  form  hereon.  They  judged,  Firjl, 
That  Chrift  was  a mere  creature:  Secondly,  That 
we  cannot  without  impiety  fay,  a creature  is 
equal-  with  God  : Thirdly,  That  the  difciples  of 
Chrift  did  fay,  C hr i ft  was  equal  with  God,  e- 
qualling  a creature  with  the  Creator  : and , fourthly' 
That  they  ought  for  fo  doing  to  he  treated  as 
blafphemers.  This  laft  is  but  a juft  and  natural 
conclulion  from  the  three  preceding.  For  how  pro- 
perly might  they  have  faid  to  the  apoftles, 
“ When  God  faith,  Who  is  hie  unto  me  ? He 
does  not  exclude  a refemblance  of  conformity 
and  analogy  ; Tor  thus  we  are  like  him  in  many 
refpefds)  but  a refemblance  of  equality.  And  it 
is  this  very  refemblance  which  you  afcribe  to 
a creature,  when  you  affirm,  That  Jefus  Chrift 
thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God.  For 
ifyoufpoke  this  only  of  a refemblance  of  analogy 
you  lay  nothing  : this  may  be  afcribed  either  to 
angels  or  men:  and  yet  no  angel  or  man,  could 
or  ought,  to  have  expreft  bimfelf  in  the  manner. 
You  muft  therefore  afcribe  a refemblance  of  e- 
quality  to  him,  according  to  the  truth  and  na- 
tural force  of  the  expreftion. 

In  fine  ; If  Jefus  Chrift  was  not  equal  with 
God  why  does  the  apoftle  fay  fo  ? What  ne- 
cgftiiy  was  there  for  fpeaking  thus  P Was  it 
neceffary  for  the  glory  of  God  ? No.  On  the 

contrary. 


"1 

J 


[ 158 

contrary,  it  difhonours  God,  by  giving  ids  glory 
to  another,  at  lend,  if  you  take  the  words  in  the 
fame  fenfe,  wherein  they  have  been  always  hi- 
therto taken.  Was  it  necelTary  in  order  to  do 
honour  to  Jehus  Chrid  ? But  might  not  honour 
have  been  done  to  him,  without  fetting  him  on 
an  equal  footing  with  the  fupreine  God  ? Was  it 
nc-ceffary,  in  order  to  fhew  the  truth  and  accom- 
plilh'ment-  of  the  antient  oracles  P But  thofe  very 
oracles  had  pronounced,  that  there  was  but  one 
God,  and  that  theie  was  none  like  him.  Was  it 
to  edify  men  ? But  how  could  they  be  edified  by 
feeing  a creature  equalled  with  the  Mod  High  ? 
St.  Peter  and  Paul  were  the  difciples  of  Chrid, 
his  miniders,  1 is  ambaffadors ; and  thofe  who 
undoubtedly  held  the  firdrank  in  the  church  of 
Chrifl.  Neverthelefs  were  St.  Peter  or  Paul  to 
fay,  I count  it  no  robbery  to  be  equal  with  Chnjl , 
fhould  not  we,  would  not  every  fericus  Chriflian, 
look  upon  him  as  a blafphemer  ? Now  God,  the 
fupreme  God  Hands  at  an  infinitely  greater  dif- 
tance  from  Jefus  Chrid  (if  he  is  a creature)  than 
Jefus  Chrid  can  Hand  from  one  of  his  apodles. 
If  therefore  it  would  be  blafphemy  for  him,  to 
fay  he  was  equal  with  Chrid,  what  blafphemy 
mud  it  be,  to  fay  Jefus  Chrid  (if  a creature) 
thought  it  no t robbery  to  be  equal  with  God? 


CHAP. 


[ *59  ] 


CHAP.  IV. 


Thai  Jefus  Chrijl  required  and  received  adoration „ 
O fhew  fiill  more  dearly,  that  the  apoflles 


JL  made  Cirri  ft  equal  with  God,  and  that  he 
equalled  himfelf  with  the  Moll  High,  in  the  pro- 
per fenfe  of  the  word,  over  and  above  /hewing 
that  he  aflumed  the  names  and  titles  which  were 
facred  to  the  fupreme  God,  we  fhall  now  fhew 
farther,  that  he  laid  claim  to  the  fame  homage 
and  adoration. 

It  is  certain,  that  we  are  to  worfhip  God,  and 
that  we  are  to  worfhip  none  but  him.  When 
men  have  pretended  to  this  worfhip,  they  have 
thereby  pretended  alfo  to  be  gods.  And  if  they 
have  not  pretended  to  be  gods,  neither  have 
they  pretended  to  this  worfhip. 

Plad  we  then  hitherto  doubted,  whether  Jefus 
Chrift  would  have  men  regard  him  as  God,  we 
could  doubt  of  it  no  more  when  we  fee  him  per- 
mitting and  requiring  men  to  worfhip  him.  Not 
long  after  his  birth,  he  was  adored  by  the  fhep- 
herds,  and  then  by  the  wife-men.  And  the  fame 
gofpel  which  records  this,  records  his  being  fre- 
quently adored,  through  the  whole  courfe  of  his 
life  : and  adds  not  only  that  men  are  permitted 


to 


[ *&>  ] 

to  do  this,  but  likevvife,  that  all  the  angels  of  God 
are  commanded  to  worjhip  him. 

Now  if  Jefus  Chrifl  is  the  fupreme  God,  he 
has  reafon  to  claim  adoration.  But  if  he  is  not, 
we  cannot  pay  it  him,  without  a kind  of  facrilege. 
Certainly  were  all  the  reft  fupportable,  this  could 
not  be  borne  or  excufed  in  any  wife  : for  a crea- 
ture to  make  him  fell  equal  with  the  Molt  High, 
not  by  words  only,  but  actions  too. 

It  is  pretended  indeed,  that  there  are  two  forts 
of  worlhip  : a fubaltern  or  inferior  kind,  which 
may  be  paid  to  creatures,  and  a fupreme,  which 
can  be  paid  to  the  fupreme  God  only.  But  this 
avails  nothing  ; for  it  is  eafy  to  fee  that  Chrifl 
laid  claim  to  the  higheft  adoration : he  would 
have  men  think  of  him  as  they  think  of  the  moll 
high  God,  would  be  worfhipped  as  the  Me  ft  High. 
But  Jefus  Chrifl  would  have  men  think  of  him 
as  they  think  of  the  moll  high  God.  Tor  he 
deferibes  himfelf  as  equal  with  the  Mofl  H:gh, 
he  affumes  to  himfelf  his  attributes,  his  omnipo- 
tence, omnifcience,  and  the  reft.  Therefore  he 
would  have  men  think  of  him  as  they  think  of  the 
mofl  High  God.  Again  : he  w'ho  fpeaks  of  him- 
felf as  the  mofl  high  God,  or  who  authorizes 
others  fo  to  fpeak,  defigns  to  be  acknowledged 
as  fuch,  and  to  be  adored  as  the  Mofl  High.  But 
jefus  Chrifl  fpeaks  of  himfelf  thus,  and  autho- 
rizes others  fo  to  fpeak.  This  appears  from  hi* 
taking  the  names  of  God.  For  otherwife  what 
sseed  had  he  to  take  them  ? It  appears  farther, 

from 


[ i6i  ] 

from  his  afcribing  to  himfelf  the  attributes  and  the 
works  of  God.  All  things  were  made  by  him , 
and  without  him  was  not  any  thing  made  which 
was  made.  Lajily,  He  that  would  have  us  do  for 
him  what  has  never  been  done  but  for  the  moft 
high  God,  would  be  worfhipped  as  the  Moft 
High.  But  Jefus  Chrift  would  have  us  do  for 
him  what  has  never  been  done  but  for  the  Moft 
High.  We  ought  to  give  our  hearts  to  God  ; to 
love  him  above  all  ; and  it  is  to  God  alone  that 
we  owe  this.  But  we  owe  it  to  Jefus  Chrift. 
We  ought  to  love  him  above  what  we  love  moft, 
even  our  own  life.  If  a man  hate  not  his  own 
life , faith  he,  for  my  fake. , he  is  not  worthy  of  me. 
We  owe  to  God,  not  the  facrifice  of  bullocks 
and  lambs,  but  the  facrifice  of  our  blood  and  our 
life  : a fpiritual  facrifice  worthy  of  a religion  and 
a covenant  more  perfedf  than  that  of  the  law. 
But  Jefus  Chrift  requires  us  to  pay  him  this; 
which  was  never  done  for  any  but  God.  It  is 
therefore  every  way  plain,  that  he  would  have 
us  worfhip  him  as  the  moft  high  God. 

That  inferior  or  fubaltern  kind  of  worfhip,  of 
which  fome  love  to  fpeak,  was  not  known  either 
by  our  law-giver,  or  by  the  prophets,  or  by 
Chrift  himfelf,  or  his  apoftles. 

Two  confiderations  fliew,  that  this  fubaltern 
worfhip  was  not  known  to  the  Law-giver.  The 
firft  is,  that  he  forbids  in  general  all  worfhip,  but 
that  of  the  fupreme  God.  Now  this  he  would 
not  have  done,  if  there  had  been  a fort  of  fubal- 
tern 


C 162  ] 

tern  worfhip,  which  was  flill  lawful;  fell  he 
fhould  lay  a fnare  for  men,  by  fo  ambiguous  an 
expreflion,  as  would  naturally  intangle  them  in 
error.  He  would  not  have  forbidden  us  in  ge-  1 
neral,  to  worfhip  any  but  God  ; but,  to  worlbip 
any  other  with  fupreme  worfhip.  The  fecond  is, 
that  the  Law-giver  manifeftly  defigned,  to  flop 
the  courfe  of  Heathen  idolatry.  Now  the  idola- 
try of  the  Heathens  properly  lay,  in  paying  this  I 
fubaltern  worfhip  to  many  gods : for  they  alfo 
generally  (as  well  as  the  Jewsj  acknowledged  one  j 
fupreme  Being. 

I fay  in  the  fecond  place,  that  the  prophets 
knew  nothing  of  this  fubaltern  worfnip.  For  j 
they  had  no  example  of  it  before  their  eyes. 
They  had  never  heard  it  fpoken  of.  They  never 
mentioned  it  themfelves.  They  feoff  at  thofe  fub-  j 
altern  gods,  of  the  Heathens,  as  not  being  able 
to  comprehend,  how  they  could  regard  or  wor-  I 
fhip  as  gods  any  other  being  than  him  who  go- 
verns the  world,  and  who  created  heaven  and 
earth.  But  this  they  certainly  could  not  have  ] 
done,  had  they  known  that  there  was,  or  would  j 
be  in  the  fulnefs^of  time,  a fubaltern  and  depen- 
dent God,  who  ought  to  be  worfhipped,  though 
lie  did  not  govern  or  make  the  world. 

Thirdly , The  apoltles  knew  nothing  of  this  ] 
diflin&ion.  between  the  fupreme  and  fubaltern 
worfhip.  They  thought  that  all,  even  outward 
worfhip  paid  to  a creature,  was  an  injury  to  the  3 
Creator.  When  Cornelius  fell  down  at  St.  Pe-  j 

ter’s  1 


[ 163  ] 

ter’s  feet,  he  did  not  take  him  for  God.  He 
jknew  him  well  to  be  but  a man:  this  therefore 
could  be  but  a fubaltern  worfhip.  Yet  as  even 
this  outward  worfhip  was  an  aflion  confecrated 
by  cuflom,  to  denote  the  honour  paid  to  the  fu- 
preme  Being,  St.  Peter  could  not  fuffer  that  to  be 
done  to  him,  which  ought  to  be  done  to  God 
only.  Arife,  faid  he,  I alfo  am  a man:  giving 
us  hereby  two  invincible  proofs,  that  it  is  in  no 
cafe  lawful  to  worfhip  any  other  than  the  fupreme 
God.  The  firft,  that  St.  Peter  oppofes  this  ac- 
tion, for  the  glory  of  God : whence  it  appears, 
that  the  fubaltern  worfhip,  as  well  as  all  other, 
paid  to  any  but  God,  is  contrary  to  his  glory. 
The  fecond,  in  as  much  as  it  appears  from  hence, 
that  whoever  is  by  nature  a mere  man,  has  no 
right  to  any  worfhip  at  all,  either  fupreme  or 
fubaltern. 

In  the  fourth  place,  the  angels  know  nothing 
of  this  fubaltern  worfhip.  Otherwife  the  angel 
who  fpake  to  St.  John,  would  not  fo  earneftly 
have  reje&ed  that  which  the  apoflle  was  willing 
to  pay  him.  St.  John  did  not  take  him  for  God  : 
for  he  had  juft  been  faying,  The  Lord  God  of  the 
-holy  prophets  hath  fent  his  angel  to  Jheiu  his  fer~ 
vants  the  things  which  mujl  be  Jhortly.  The  apof- 
tle  adds,  After  Iliad  heard  and  fen  thefe  things, 
Jcafl  myfelf  down  to  worfhip  at  the  feet  of  the  angel 
who  Jhezued  me  thefe  things.  But  he  faid,  See  thou 
[ do  it  not.  Iam  one  of  thy  fellow  fervants,  and  of 
thofe  who  keep  the  words  of  the  prophets.  Worfhip 

God, 

* ' 


[ l64  3 

Cod.  St.  John  would  have  worfhipped  him,  be- 
caufe  he  was  an  angel  of  God,  not  beeaufe  he 
thought  he  was  God  himfelf.  But  this  angel, 
who  made  none  of  thefe  diitin&ions,  faid  to  hint, 
Worjhip  God.  Shewing  in  the  plaineit  manner, 
that  worth  ip  of  whatever  fort,  rauft  be  paid  to 
G-od  alone. 


CHAP.  V. 

That  thofe  pajfagcs  in  the  Old  Tejlament  which  mcjl 
inc  ontejl  ably  contain  the  char  ad  ers  of  the  fupreme 
God,  arc  applied-  in  the  New  to  Jefus  Chri/l. 

TO  ihew  beyond  all  poiTibility  of  doubt,  in 
what  fenfe  the  Jews  underitood  thofe  ex- 
preffions,  wherein  the  difciples  of  Jefus  Chriit 
aiferted  the  Godhead  of  their  Mailer  : it  may  be 
obferved,  that  they  made  no  difficulty  of  applying 
to  him  thofe  paifages  of  the  Old  Teifament, 
which  contain  the  moil  eifential  characters  of  the 
fupreme  God.  For  how  would  they  have  dared 
to  apply  thofe  paifages  to  Chriil,  if  he  was  not  the 
true  and  the  fupreme  God  ? Had  they  been  in- 
truded only  in  the  fchocl  of  nature,  they  might 
have  learned  not  to  apply  to  any  creature  thofe 
things  which  had  been  fpoken  cf  the  Creator 
alone,  exclufive  of  all  creatures. 


If 


[ ] 

If  then  we  regard  them  as  brought  up  in  the 
fthool  of  the  prophets,  we  can  never  fufpect  them 
of  fuch  madnefs.  For  can  any  thing  equal  the 
circumfpe&ion  of  the  prophets  in  this  particular  P 
They  are  continually  apprehenfive  of  confound- 
ing the  Creator  with  any  creature.  And  this  ap- 
prehenfion  fufficiently  guards  them  from  applying 
to  the  one,  the  moft  elfential  charafters  of  the 
other. 

Now  certainly  the  defcriptions  which  the  apof- 
tles  make  of  Chrill,  are  not  more  facred  than 
thofe  which  the  prophets  make  of  the  fupreme 
God.  As  then  one  would  not  dare  to  apply  to 
any  other  thofe  defcriptions  of  Jefus  Clirifl : 
neither  would  one  dare  (were  he  not  fuch}  to 
apply  to  Jefus  Chrift  thefe  defcriptions  of  the  fu- 
preme God. 

Should  we  not  accufe  him  of  impiety  who 
treated  a rnan,  fuppofe  St.  Peter,  as  the  only-begot- 
ten Son  of  God?  Who  fliled  him,  the  Lamb  of 
God,  our  Prophet , our  King,  our  Priejl  for  ever, 
after  the  order  of  Melckfedec,  the  Prince  of peace , 
the  Father  of  eternity,  Immanuel,  God  with  us-,  the 
eternal  IVord,  the  Saviour  of  the  world , the  Alpha 
and  Omega,  the  firjl  and  the  laf. 

Could  we  fuffer  a man  to  fay  of  St.  Peter,  that 
be  had  bought  the  church  with,  his  own  blood?  That 
he  had  made  an  atonement  for  our  f ns,  that  he  had 
borne  them  in  his  own  body  for  us  on  the  crofs  ? 
That  Peter  dwells  m our  hearts  by  faith,  and  that 

there 


[ ‘66  ] 

there  is  no  other  name  under  heaven  whereby  we 
can  be  faved,  neither  is  there falvation  in  any  other  ? 
That  he  is  made  oj  God  unto  us  zoifdom,  and  ngk - 
teoufnefs,  and fan  th fie  ado  n,  and  r edemption?  That 
he  was  made  Jin  for  us,  that  we  might  be  made  the 
righteoufnefs  oj  God  through  him  ? 

Would  you  not  regard  him  who  fpoke  thus  of 
St.  Peter,  as  a mod  impious  blafphemer  ? Al- 
though he  had  told  you  withal,  that  St.  Peter  was- 
lefs  than  Chrid,  this  would  not  fatisfv.  You 
would  have  reafon  to  fay,  that  this  very  acknow- 
ledgement left  him  without  excufe:  feeing  hereby 
he  flatly  contradicted  himfelf,  and  made  his  im- 
piety more  glaring. 

It  would  not  excufe  him  to  fay,  that  he  ap- 
plied thefe  characters  to  St.  Peter,  only  by  way 
of  allufion,  or  accommodation.  You  might  jultiy 
anfwer.  If  it  is  an  allufion,  it  is  an  impious  allu- 
fion ; if  it  is  an  accommodation,  it  is  a profane 
accommodation  : be  it  an  application  of  what- 
ever kind  it  will,  it  is  an  application  full  of  blaf- 

But  if  you  regard  as  blafphemous  an  applica- 
tion of  the  chief  characters  of  Jefus  Chrift  to  fo 
great  an  apoltle  as  St.  Peter,  it  mult  be  a dill 
greater  blafphemy  to  apply  it  to  Chrid  (if  he  is 
not  the  Mod  High)  the  chief  characters  of  the 
fupreme  God. 

On  this  fuppofition  then  it  would  be  execrable 
impiety  to  fay,  That  the  heavens  are  the  work  of 

his 


[ *6;  ] 

his  hands : that  he  is  the  fearcher  of  the  heart  and 
reins : that  he  is  the  Lord , the  everlajiing  God , 
Jehovah , the  God  who  cometh  bringing  falvation  : 
the  God  who  is  between  the  cherubim  ; the  God  of 
dur  Jalvalion  : the  Lord,,  who fretcheth  out  the.  hea- 
vens, who  layeth  the  foundations  of  the  earth , and 
formeth  the  fpirit  of  man  within  him:  the  Lord , 
before  whom  every  knee  [hall  bow,  and  to  whom  every 
tongue  fiall  give  praife.  Now  it  cannot  be  de- 
nied, that  the  apoilles  afcribe  all  this  to  Chrift, 
while  they  aftirm  that  it  is  Jefus  (Thrift  who  is 
defcribed  in  thefe  oracles  : that  it  is  he  of  whom 
the  prophets  have  fpoken  in  thefe  magnificent 
defcriptions. 

* In  truth,  if  there  is  a great  difproportion  be- 
tween (Thrift  and  St.  Peter,  there  is  a far  greater 
difproportion,  if  our  adverfaries  are  right,  be- 
tween (Thrift  and  the  fupreme  God  : feeing  the 
former,  however  great,  is  finite ; whereas  the 
latter  is  infinite.  If  then  one  cannot  without 
blafphemy  apply  to  St.  Peter  the  moll  eftential 
characters  of  (Thrift,  one  cannot  without  infinitely 
greater  blafphemy  apply  to  Chi  ill  the  eftential 
characters  of  God. 

, * This  will  appear  ftill  more  evident  if  we  fup- 

ii , pofe  further,  that  he  who  made  thofe  applicati- 
ons to  St.  Peter,  knew  that  it  was  already  a point 
in  debate,  if  St.  Peter  was  not  equal  to  Chrift! 
And  forefaw,  that  this  error  would  generally  pre- 
vail, and  that  men  for  feveral  ages,  would  con- 
found St.  Peter  with  Jefus  Chrift,  the  Saviour 

and 


and  Redeemer  of  mankind.  Such  a man  would 
in  this  cafe  be  guilty  of  aftonifhing  impiety,  to 
dare  to  make  fuch  an  application  of  the  charac- 
ters of  Jefus  Chrift,  as  he  knew  would  be  attend-  • 
ed  with  fo  dangerous,  fo  fatal  a confequence. 

There  is  nothing  eafier  than  to  apply  this  to 
the  apoftles.  They  could  not  be  ignorant  that  the 
queftion,  If  Jefus  Chrift  was  equal  with  God, 
ftrad  been  already  ftarted  ; yea,  and  that  the  Jews 
had  perfecuted  him  under  the  colour  of  this  pre- 
tended blafphemy.  They  who  forefaw  that  in  the 
laft  times  falfe  teachers  would  arife,  and  who 
charafterized  their  doftrine,  were  not  ignorant, 
that  Clniftians  would  fall  in:o  this  error  of  con- 
founding Chrift  with  the  moft  high  God.  How  a 
then*  could  they  who  knew  both  thefe  things, 
without  manifeil  impiety,  apply  to  Chrift  thofe 
antient  oracles,  which  exprefs  the  glory  of  the  j 
Moft  High  ? Thofe  in  particular  which  exprefs 
the  glory  of  God,  exc I u lively  of  all  his  ctea- 
tures  ? 

* It  follows  that  if  Jefus  Chrift  was  not  the 
true  God,  ol  the  fame  cllencc  with  the  Father,  the 
Sanhedrim  performed  an  aft  ol  juflice  in  putting 
him  to  death  ; and  the  Jews  ol  that  and  the  fuc- 
ceeding  ages  di-d  right  in  adhereing  to  their  fen-  j 
tences.  Nor  can  this  blafphemous  abfurditv  be  < 
avoided,  but  by  maintaining  that  lie  is,  as  the  fcrip- 
tUTe  teaches,  one  with  the  Father,  equal  with  the 
moft  high  God  : that  be  is  himfell  God,  the  true  I 
God, , the  great  God,  the  M&j}  Well,  God  over  all,  I 

the  I 


C *69  ] 

the  Lord,  the  Lord  of  glory , our  Lord  and  our 
God;  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Lfrael ; the  King  of 
kings  and  Lor d of  lor  ds . He  that  was,  and  is,  and 
is  to  come. 


THE 

advantage 

-«  OF  THE 

Members  of  the  Church  of  England, 

OVER  THOSE 

Of  the  Church  of  Rome. 


I Lay  ihis  down  as  an  undoubted  truth,  “ The 
“ more  the  dodtrine  of  any  church  agrees 
“ with  the  fcripture,  the  more  readily  ought  it  to 
be  received.”  And  on  the  other  hand,  “ The 
“ more  the  dodlrine  of  any  church  differs  from 
“jhe  fcripture,  the  greater  caufe  we  have  to  doubt 
*'  of  it.” 

Vo  l.  XIX. 


H 


2.N0W 


[ 17°  j 

2.  Now  it  is  a known  principle  of  the  church 
England,  that  nothing  is  to  be  received  as  an  arti- 
cle of  faith,  which  is  not  read  in  the  holy  fcrip- 
ture,  or  to  be  inferred  therefrom,  by  juft  and 
plain  confequences.  Hence  it  follows,  that  every 
Cnriflian  has  a right  to  know  and  read  the  fcrip- 
ture,  that  he  may  be  fure  what  he  bears  from 
his  teachers  agrees  with  the  revealed  word  of 
God. 

3.  On  the  contrary,  at  the  very  beginning  of 
the  reformation,  the  church  of  Rome  began  to 
oppofe  this  principle,  that  all  articles  of  faith 
mult  be  proveable  from  fcripture,  (till  then  re- 
ceived throughout  the  whole  Chriftian  world  and 
to  add,  if  not  prefer,  to  holy  fcripture,  tradition, 
or  the  doftrine  of  fathers  and  councils,  with  tiie 
decrees  of  popes.  And  foon  after  the  determined 
in  the  council  of  Trent.  “ + That  the  Old  and 
“ New  Tellament,  and  the  traditions  of  the 
“ church,  ought  to  be  received  pari  pietatis  ajfeElu 

ac  reverentia  (with  equal  piety  a;.d  reverence);'* 
and  that  “ it  fuffices  for  laymen,  if  the)' believe 
“ and  pradtife  what  the  church  believes  and  re- 
“ quires,  whether  they  underhand  the  ground  of 
“ that  dodtrine  and  pradtice  or  not.” 

q.  How  plain  is  it,  that  this  remedy  was 
found  out,  becaufe  they  tbemfelves  obferved, 
that  many  doctrines,  practices,  and  ceremo- 
nies of  their  church,  not  only  could  not  be 

proved 


•f  SeGT.  4. 


' [ m 3 

proved  by  fcripture,  but  were  flatly  contradic- 
tory thereto  ? 

As  to  the  fathers  and  councils  we  cannot  but 
obferve,  that  in  an  hundred  inflances  they  con- 
tradi£l  one  another  : confequently,  they  can  no 
more  be  a rule  of  faith  to  us,  than  the  papal  de- 
crees, which  are  not  grounded  on  fcripture. 

5.  But  the  church  of  Rome  does  not  flop  here. 
She  not  only  makes  tradition  of  equal  authority 
with  the  fcripture,  but  alfo  takes  away  the  fcrip- 
ture from  the  people,  and  denies  them  the  ufe 
ofit. 

For  foon  after  her  writers  began  to  teach,  yea 
and  infert  in  entire  volumes, 

“ That  the  fcripture  is  obfcure,  and  hard  to 
M be  underflood  ; 

“ 1 hat  it  gives  an  handle  to  error  and  liere- 

lies  ; 

“ That  it  is  not  a perfeQ:  or  fufficient  rule  of 
“ life; 

“ That  it  ought  to  he  underflood  no  other- 
“ wife  than  the  church , [that  is,  the  Fope)  ex- 

plains  it"; 

“ That  confequently  the  reading  the  fcrip- 
“ ture  is  of  more  hurt  than  ufe  to  the  generality 
■“  of  Chriflians.” 

And,  in  fa£t,  they  not  only  publicly  fpoke 
againfl  the  reading  the  holy  fcriptures,  but  in 
mod  countries  abfolutely  forbad  the  laity  to  read 
them,  yea  and  the  clergy  too,  till  they  were  or- 
dered to  preach. 

H £ 


And 


L *72  ] 

And  if  any  did  read  it  without  a particuia  r K- 
cenfe,  they  condemned  and  punifhed  it  as  a great 
crime. 

6.  Thus  the  cafe  (lands  fo  this  day:  yea,  the 
late  controverfies  in  France,  make  it  undeniably 
plain,  that  the  church  of  Rome  does  now  labour 
more  earneftly  than  ever,  to  take  away  the  ufe 
the  fcriptures,  even  from  thofe  who  have  hither- 
to enjoyed  them. 

Seeing  therefore  the  church  of  England  con- 
tends for  the  word  of  God,  and  the  church  of 
Rome  ogairfl  it,  it  is  eafy  to  difcern  on  which 
fide  the  advantage  lies,  with  regard  to  the  grand 
pi inciple  of  Chriflianity. 

7. But  that  it  may  more  clearly  appear,  how  wide- 
ly the  church  of  Rome  differs  from  the  holy  fcrip- 
tures,  we  have  fet  down  a few  indances,  where- 
in thev  flatly  contradift  the  written  word  of  God. 

Thus  the  church  of  Rome,  after  acknowledg- 
ing that  the  apoftle  terms  concupifcence  fin  ; yet 
fcruples  not  to  add  immediately,  “ The  Catho- 

lie  church  never  underflood,  that  this  is  truly 
“ and  properly  fin  : and  if  any  think  the  contra- 
“ ry,  let  him  be  accui  fed.  t 

Thus,  although  Chrift  himfelf  fays  to  all  his 
di  fci  pies,  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing  ; yet  the 
church  of  Rome  condemns  this  very  propofition, 
as  falfe  and  heretical,  “ The  grace  of  JefusChnJl , 
<;  the  effectual  principle  of  all  good,  is  neceffary 


Cone.  Tiid.  SefT.  5. 


[ m J 

f*  to  every  good  work.  Not  only  nothing  good 
“ is  done  without  it,  but  nothing  can  be  done/’;*: 

8.  In  like  manner,  the  church  of  Rome  does 
not  fcniple  to  impofe  upon  the  confidences  of 
men,  in  the  do&rine  of  the  mafs,  various  tradi- 
tions, that  have  no  authority  from  holy  writ  : 
and  alfo  takes  away  the  cup  in  the  Lord's  fupper 
from  the  laity,  contrary  to  the  plain  inftitu- 
tion  of  Chrift,  as  well  as  to  the  acknowledged 
cultom  of  the  primitive  church.  Whence  it 
manifeflly  appears,  that  it  is  not  the  defign  of 
the  Roman  church  to  conform  itfelf  to  the  rule 
of  the  written  word. 

9.  Again,  the  church  of  Rome  pronounces  all 
thole  accurfed,  | who  fay, 

“ That  baptifm,  confirmation,  the  Lord’s  fup- 
“ per,  penance,  extreme  unftion,  orders,  and 
“ matrimony,  are  not  facraments  inflituted  by 
“ Chrifi  himfelf : or, 

“ That  there  are  more  or  fewer  facraments 
“ than ftven  : or, 

“ That  any  of  thefe  is  not  truly  and  properly 
“ a facrament : or, 

“ That  they  do  not  confer  grace  barely  by  the 
“ work  done.” 

Now  whereas  thefe  pofitions  cannot  be  proved 
by  fcripture,  and  yet  are  enjoined  to  be  believed 
under  pain  of  an  Anathema , it  is  hence  alfo  plain, 
that  the  church  of  Rome  does  purpofely  teach, 
and  alfo  maintain  by  open  force,  things  which 
H 3 partly 

J In  the  bull  Unigenitus.  H Con.  Trid.  SelT.  7. 


[ *74  ] 

partly  are  not  founded  on  holy  writ,  partly  are 
contrary  thereto. 

10.  As  to  the  facraments  in  particular,  it  is 
eafy  to  fhew,  that  they  require  in  each  of  them 
fuch  doftrines  and  cufloms  to  be  received,  as  are 
wholly  unfnpported  by,  if  not  alfo  contrary  to, 
the  word  of  God. 

For  example.  They  teach,  that 

In  baptifm,  “ i The  right  intention  of  the  mi- 
“ nifter  is  (o  indifpenfably  neceffary,  that  if  it 
“ be  wanting,  the  baptized  receives  no  benefit : 
“ that 

“ i Confirmation  was  a true  and  proper  fa- 
“ crament  from  the  beginning  : that 

“jj  In  the  Lord’s  fupper  the  bread  and  wine  are 
“ converted  into  the  natural  body  and  blood  of 
“ Chrift : 

“ That  every  particle  of  what  is  confecrated  is 
“ no  longer  bread,  but  the  entire  body  of  Chrift: 

“ That  it  ought  to  be  worfhipped  and  adored  : 
u and 

“ That  the  laity  ought  not  to  receive  the  cup.” 

§ In  penance,  “ That  a full  confeftion  of  all  our 
“ fins  to  the  prieft  is  abfolutely  neceffary,  or  they 
“ cannot  be  pardoned  : 

“ That  the  penances  impofed  (fuch  as  pilgri- 
“ mage*,  whipping  thenrfelves,  and  the  like)  do 
“ meritorioufly  co-operate  toward  the  forgtve- 
“ nefs  of  fins: 

“ That  this  forgivenefs  is  obtained,  not  through 

“ the 

4 ibid.  Jibid.  H SefT.  13. and  £2.  §ScOT.  14. 


[ J75  ] 

“ the  merits  of  Chrid  alone,  but  alfo  through 
“ the  merits  and  interceffion  of  the  Virgin  Mary 
“ and  other  faints : that 

“ § Extreme  unftion  is  a true  and  proper  fa* 
f*  crament  indituted  by  Chrid  : 

“ That  the  oil  bleffed  by  the  bifhop,  eafes  the 
“ foul  of  the  Tick,  and  preferves  him  from  the 
“ temptations  of  the  devil  : that 

“ \ Ordination  is  a true  and  proper  facrament, 
“ infhituted  by  Chrid  : 

“ That  an  indeliable  character  is  given  there- 

by. 

“ That  there  were  from  the  beginning  thofe 
s‘  feven  orders  in  the  church,  prieds,  deacon, 
“ fub-deacon,  acolytb,  exorcid,  reader,  and 
4t  door-keeper: 

“ That  the  proper  bufmefs  of  a pried  is,  to 
“ confecrale  and  offer  the  body  and  blood  of 
“ Chrid,  and  to  remit  or  retain  Gns  in  the  chair 
44  of  confeffion  : that 

“ Marriage  is  a true  and  proper  facrament,. 
“ indituted  by  Chrid  : 

“ That  neverthelefs  marriage  may  be  diffolv- 
“ ed  by  either  party’s  entering  into  a convent, 
“ even  againd  the  confent  of  the  other  : 

“ That  it  is  unlawful  for  any  of  the  clergy  to 
“ marry.” 

11.  Now  feeing  all  thefe  doflrines  are  unfup- 
ported  by,  if  not  alfo  contrary  to  the  word  of 
God,,  which  yet  the  church  of  Rome  requires  to 
H 4 he. 


§ Ibid. 


% SetT.  23, 


[ ] 

be  received  as  true,  and  pronounces  all  accurfed 
who  do  not  receive  them,  we  cannot  but  con- 
clude, that  the  church  of  England  enjoys  an  un- 
fpeakable  advantage  over  the  church  of  Rome, 
with  refpeft  to  her  do&rines,  which  are  wholly 
agreeable  to,  and  founded  on,  the  written  word 
of  God. 

12.  The  advantage  of  the  church  of  England, 
over  the  church  of  Rome,  is  equally  great  with 
regard  to  public  worfhip. 

For  it  is  manifeft,  that  the  public  worfhip  of 
the  Roman  church  is  wholly  degenerated  from  the 
nature  of  Chrift’s  kingdom  and  the  (implicit)'  of 
the  firft  Chri Ilians  : 

Thatat  prefent  it  confifis  in  magnificent  build- 
ings, altars,  images,  ornaments,  and  habits  ; 
in  fplendid  ceremonies  ; in  procelTions  and  pil- 
grimages and  prayers  in  an  unknown  tongue  ; 
and  in  reciting  the  creed,  the  Lord  s prayer, 
and  the  Ave  Maria,  over  and  over  according  to 
the  number  of  their  beads  ; 

That  they  are  not  inltrufted  to  worfhip  God 
in  fpirit  and  in  truth  as  their  loving  and  molt 
beloved  Father  ; and  to  praife  him,  and  com- 
fort one  another,  with  pfalms,  and  hymns,  and 
fpiritual  fongs  : 

That  their  fouls  are  not  edified  by  fermons 
and  catechifing  out  of  the  word  God,  the  fcripture 
being  cited  very  fparingly  in  their  fermons,  and 
generally  in  a drained  and  allegorical  fenfe  ; 

That  they  are  not  permitted  to  fearch  the  fcrip- 

tures 


[ 177  ] 

tuTes  at  home,  and  feek  food  for  their  fouls 
therein  ; 

That  the  common  people  are  by  this  means 
purpofely  kept  in  the  grolfeft  ignorance  and 
fuperdilion. 

13.  It  is  manifeft  alfo,  that  the)’  are  held  in 
doubt  as  to  the  falvation  both  of  the  living  and 
the  dead,  by  the  doftrine  of  purgatory. 

That  hereby  the  minds  of  thofe  who  want 
to  be  allured  of  the  date  of  their  fouls,  are  dif- 
quieted  and  didurbed  : 

That  pardon  of  fins,  releafe  from  ponifhment 
due  thereto,  and  redemption  from  purgatory  by 
maiTes  and  indulgences,  either  lor  the  living  or 
dead,  are  daily  fold  for  money. 

14.  It  is  no  lefs  manned,  that  their  truft  in 
Chrid  alone,  the  one  mediator  between  God  and 
man,  is  hindred  fo  much  the  more,  the  more  the 
people  are  referred  to  the  merits  and  intercediorr. 
of  the  blefled  Virgin,  and  other  faints  : 

The  more  they  are  taught  to  adore  their  im- 
ages and  relics  ; to  make  vows  to  them,  and  to 
implore  their  help  in  any  trouble: 

Yea,  and  to  place  therein  a very  confidbrable 
part  of  tbeir  worlhip  and  devotion  ; 

As  well  as  in  a bare  outward  obfervance  of 
faints-days,  and  other  fedivals  of  the  church,, 
and  in  the  abftaining  from  fome  particular- kinds 
of  meat,  on  what  they  call  fad-days. 

15.  All  thefe  pra&ices,  wholly  unsupported' 
by  fcripture,  the  church  of  Rome  retains  to  this 

H 5 day.j 


C 17*  ] 

day;  at  the  fame  time  that  fhe  reje&3  and  pro- 
nounces accurfed  all,  whether  pra&ices  or  doc- 
trines, that  make  againft  her,  be  they  ever  fo 
plainly  contained  in,  and  grounded  on,  the  word 
of  God. 

Our  reformers  feeing  this,  judged  it  needful 
to  enquire  whether  it  could  be  proved  by  holy 
writ, 

That  the  bilhopof  Rome  is  the  fucceflor  of 
St.  Peter  ; 

That  he  is  Chrift’s  vicar  upon  earth,  and  the 
vifible  head  of  the  church  : 

That  he  has  a right  of  interpreting  the  word 
of  God  according  to  his  own  pleafure  ; 

To  introduce  and  prohibit  do&rines,  bcfides 
and  againft  the  written  word  ; 

To  licenfe  things  which  the  fcripture  forbid  : 

To  exercife  a fpiritual,  and,  in  many  cafes,  a 
fecular  power,  over  all  Chriftians,  kings  and  em- 
perors not  excepted  : 

To  anathematize  all  that  oppofe  bis  will,  de- 
pofe  princes,  and  abfolve  fubjefts  from  their  al- 
legiance : 

To  pronounce  heretics  ; to  curfe,  kill,  torture, 
and  burn  alive,  all  who  do  not  fubmit  to  him  in 
every  point. 

16.  Some  of  the  reafons  they  had  to  doubt  of 
ihefe  things,  were  thofe  which  follow  : 

That  neither  St.  Peter,  nor  any  of  the  antient 
bifhops,  had  the  fame  do&rine  or  manner  of  go- 
verning the  churcb,  which  the  bifhop  ol  Rome 

now 


E >79  ] 

now  has,  as  is  clear  both  from  the  epiftles  of  St. 
Peter,  from  the  aSls  of  the  apofles,  and  the  an- 
tient  ecclefiaftical  hiftory : 

That  Chrift  alone  is  made  of  God  head  over  all 
things  to  the  church , Epb.  i.  21.  iv.  15.  Col.  i. 
18.  Who  is  with  me  always,  even  to  the  end  of 
the  world  : 

That  the  kingdom  of  Chrift,  being  not  of  this 
world,  bears  no  referoblance  to  the  hierarchy  and 
monarchy  of  the  papal  kingdom: 

That  the  polfeffing  the  fee  of  Rome  no  more 
proves  the  pope  to  be  the  fuccelfor  of  St.  Peter, 
than  the  pofTeffing  the  city  of  Conftantinople 
proves  the  Great  Turk,  to  be-  the  fuccelTor  of. 
Confantine  the  Great. 

That  if  the  pope  were  the  vicar  of  Chrift, 
(which  is  not  yet  proved]  ftill  he  would  have  no 
authority  to  change  or  abrogate  the  laws  of  his  - 
Lord  and  King ; much  lefs  to  make  laws  juft  con- 
trary to  them,  or  to  exempt  any  from  obeying 
the  laws  of  Chrift  : 

That  attempts  of  this  kind  denote  an  adverfary, 
rather  than  a faithful  and  upright  vicar  of  Chrift. 

17.  They  doubt  ofthefe  things  the  more,  be»- 
caufe  the  primitive  church  knew  of  no  fuch 
thing  as  an  univerfal  head ; 

Becaufe  no  bifhop  was  acknowledged  as  fuch, 
at  the  time  of  the  council  of  Nice:  • 

Becaufe  Gregory  the  Great  declared,  “•  He 
“ fhould  account  any  man  to  be  antichrift,  who 
“ called  himfelf  by  fuch  a title 
'H  6 


Becaufe 


[ i8o  3 

Becaufe  it  is  apparent,  that  Boniface  III.  the 
next  pope  but  one  to  him,  about  the  year  60 6t 
was  the  firft  to  whom  the  title  of  univerfal  bi- 
Ihop  was  given,  as  a reward  for  his  abfolving  the 
tyrant  Pkocas,  after  he  had  murdered  his  mailer, 
the  emperor  Mauritius,  with  his  emprefs,  and 
eight  children  : 

Becaufe  the  fucceeding  popes  acquired  one 
part  of  their  power  after  another,  by  various  me- 
thods,  either  of  fraud  or  force  : 

Becaufe  many  of  them  have  been  notorioufly 
wicked  men,  and  encouragers  of  all  manner  of 
wickednefs : notwithflanding  all  which,  men  are 
required  to  believe  that  they  are  all  enlightened 
by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  in  fo  extraordinary  a man- 
ner, as  to  be  rendered  infallible;  although  one 
pope  is  continually  contradifling  another,  and 
reverfing  the  decrees  which  his  predecclTois  had 
moil  folemnly  eftablilhed. 

18.  When  the  Romanifts  are  defiredto  prove 
hy  fcripture,  that  the  pope  is  the  head  of  the 
church,  they  urge,  that  Chrifl  laid  to  St.  Peter,  1. 
I witt  give  unto  thee  the  keys  oj  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  2.  Feed  my  lambs  : feed  my  Jheep. — 
Therefore — 

We  anfwer,  Thefe  texts  by  no  means  prove 
'ihat  Chrifl  made  St.  Peter  himfeif  his  vicar;  much 
lefs  shat  he  gave  that  dominion  to  the  pope, 
which  he  now  ufurps  over  the  confciences  of 
men. 

And  hence  we  are  the  more  clearly  convinced. 

That 


[ 18*  3 

That  the  papal  power  is  not  of  divine  ori- 
ginal; 

And  that  we  have  great  caufe  to  blefs  God, 
whom  the  pope  has  excluded  from  his  commu- 
nion, and  thereby  reftored  ro  that  unfhaken  li- 
berty of  confcience,  wherein  by  the  grace  of 
God,  we  fhall  always  hand. 

* 29.  In  this  liberty  every  member  of  our 
church,  if  he  gives  himfelf  up  to  the  guidance  of' 
God’s  holy  Spirit,  may  learn  the  foundation  of 
his  faith  from  the  written  word  of  God  ; 

May  read  and  meditate  therein  day  and  night ; 

May  devoutly  pray  in  the  fpir it  of  adoption, 
like  the  holy  men  of  antient  times  ; 

May  comfort  and  quicken  himfelf  and  others, 
with  pfalms,  and  hymns,  and  fpiritual  fongs ; 

May  enjoy  all  the  ordinances  of  Chrifl,  ac- 
cording to  his  own  inhitution ; 

May  be  allured  of  the  remilhon  of  his  fins, 
and  of  his  jufiification  through  faith  in  Chrifl, 
the  Spirit  of  God  witneffing  with  his  fpirit,  that 
he  is  a child  of  God  ; 

May  fludy  to  have  a confcience  void  of  of- 
fence, both  toward  God  and  toward  man  ; 

May  freely  enjoy  every  bleffing  which  God 
hath  bellowed  upon  our  church  ; and 

May  make  advantage  of  whatever  good  the 
providence  of  God  has  Hill  preferved  in  the 
church  of  Rome : 

He  may  chearfully  look  for  a happy  death, 
and  a blelfed  eternity  : 


And 


[ *82  ] 

And  at  length,  by  reding  on  Chrid  alone,  and 
patiently  partaking  of  his  fufferings,  he  may,  with 
certain  hope  of  a refurre&ion  to  eternal  life, 
without  any  fear  either  of  purgatory  or  hell,  re- 
fign  his  fpirit  into  the  hand  of  God,  and  fo  be 
ever  with  the  Lord. 


A N 

EXTRACT 

OF  A 

Letter  to  the  Reverend  Mr.  L AW* 


Occafionedby  fome  of  his  late  writings- 


Reverend  Sir, 

IN  matters  of  religion,  I regard  no  writings 
but  the  infpired.  Tauler,  Behmen,  and  a 
whole  army  of  my  die  authors,  are  with  me  no- 
thing to  St.  Paul.  In  every  point  I appeal  to  the- 

law 


[ 1%  ] 

law  and  the  tefimony,  and  value  no  authority  but 
this. 

At  a time  when  I was  in  great  danger  of  not 
valuing  this  authority  enough,  you  made  that 
important  obfervation,  “ I fee  where  your  mif- 
take  lies.  You  would  have  a philofophical  reli- 
gion; but  there  can  be  no  fuch  thing.  Religion  is 
the  moll  plain,  fimple  thing  in  the  world.  It  is 
only,  We  love  him , becauje  he  firjl  loved  us.  So  far 
as  you  add  philofophy  to  religion,  juft  fo  far  you 
fpoil  it.”  This  remark  I have  never  forgotten 
fince.  AndY  truft  in  God  I never  {hall. 

But  have  not  you  ? Permit  me.  Sir,  to  fpeak 
plainly.  Have  you  ever  thought  of  it  fince  ? Is 
there  a writer  in  England  who  fo  continually 
blends  philofophy  with  religion  P Even  in  t rafts 
on  The  Spirit  of  Prayer,  and  The  Spir  it  of  Love , 
wherein  from  the  titles  of  them,  one  would  expefi 
to  find  no  more  of  philofophy,  than  in  the  epif- 
tles  of  St.  John.  Concerning  which,,  give  me- 
leave  to  obferve  in  general,  i.  That  the  whole  of 
it  is  utterly  fuperfuous  : a man  may  be  full  both 
of  prayer  and  love,  and  not  know  a word  of  this 
hypothefis : 2.  The  whole  of  this  hypothefis  is 
unproved ; it  is  all  precarious,  all  uncertain.  3.. 
The  whole  hypothefis  has  a dangerous  tendency. 
It  naturally  leads  men  off  from  plain  praffica! 
religion,  and  fills  them  with  the  knowledge  that 
puff  elk  up,  inftead  of  the  love  that  edifeth.  And, 
4.  It  is  often  flatly  contradidory  to  fnpture,  ter 
leaf  on?  and  to  itfelf. 


But 


[ i»4  1 

But  over  and  above  this  fuperfluous,  uncer- 
tain, dangerous,  irrational,  and  unfcriptural  phi- 
fofophy,  have  not  you  lately  grieved  many  who 
are  not  Grangers  to  the  fpirit  of  prayer  or  love, 
by  advancing  tenets  in  religion,  feme  of  which 
they  think  are  unfupported  by  feripture,  fome 
even  repugnant  to  it  ? Allow  me,  Sir,  firft  to 
touch  upon  your  philofophy,  and  then  to  fpeak 
freely  concerning  tbefe. 

I.  As  to  your  philofophy,  the  main  of  your 
theory  refpefts,  1.  Things  antecedent  to  the  crea- 
tion; 2.  The  creation  itfelf;  3.  Adam  in  para- 
dife;  4.  The  fall  of  man. 

I do  not  undertake  formally  to  refute  what  vou 
have  afferted  in  any  of  thefe  heads.  I dare  not : 
I cannot  anfwer  either  to  God  or  man  fuch  an 
employment  of  my  time.  I (hall  only  give  a 
(ketch  of  this  drange  fyftein,  and  afk  a few  obvi- 
ous quedions. 

And  1.  Of  thefe  antecedent  to  the  creation. 

+ “ All  that  can  be  conceived  is  God,  or  na- 
ture or  creation .”1 

Is  nature  created,  or  not  created?  It  mud  be 
one  or  the  other  ; for  there  is  no  medium.  If  not 
created,  is  it  not  God  ? If  created,  is  it  not  a crea- 
ture ? How  then  can  thefe  be  Lhree,  God,  na- 
ture, and  creature  ? Since  nature  mud  coincide 
either  with  God  or  creature. 

“ Nature 

+ Mr.  Law’s  words  are  inclofed  all  along  in  conusa’s. 

Spirit  of  Prayer,  Second  Part  p.  33. 


r j 

“ Nature  is  in  itfelf  a hungry,  wrathful  fref  of 
life.” 

“ Nature  is  and  can  be  only  a defire.  Defire  is 
t-be  very  being  of  nature 

S Nature  is  only  a defre,  becaufe  it  is  for 
the  fake  of  fomelhing  elf.  Nature  is  only  a tor- 
ment; becaufe  it  cannot  kelp  itfelf  to  that  which 
it  wants.” 

“ Nature  is  the  outward  manifeflation  of  the 
invifible  glories  ofGod.’T 

Is  -not  the  lafl  of  thefe  definitions  contradic- 
tory to  all  that  precede  ? 

If  defre  is  the  very  being  of  nature  ; if  it  is  a 
torment,  an  hungry  wrathful fire : how  is  it  “ the 
outward  manifeflation  of  the  invifible  glories  of 
God  ?” 

“ Nature  as  well  as  God  is  antecedent  to  all 
creatures.”;}: 

“ There  is  an  eternal  nature,  as  univerfal  and 
as  unlimited  as  God.”§§ 

Is  then  nature  God  ? Or  are  there  two  eter- 
nal, univerfal,  infinite  beings  ? 

“ Nothing  is  before  eternal  nature  but  God.”|| 

“ Nothing  but  ?”  Is  any  thing  before  that 
which  is  eternal? 

But  how  is  this  grand  account  of  nature  con- 
fiffent  with  what  you  fay  elfewhere  ? 

‘ Nature,  and  darknefs  and  felf. \ are  but 

three 

Sp.  of  Pi  . P.  II.  p.  34.  ||  Sp.  of  Love,  P.  I.  p.  20. 

II  P.  34.  + Part  II.  p-62.  ^ P.  59. 

ft  P.  64.  [|||  Ibid. 


[ i8<?  ] 

three  different  expreffions  for  one  ar.d  the  fame 
thing.”? 

“ Nature  has  all  evil  and  no  evil  in  it.”  Yea,  f 

“ Nature, flf  or  darknefs  has  not  only  no  evil 
in  it,  but  is^  the  only  ground  of  all. good. ”i 

O rare  darknefs  ! 

“ Nature  lias  feven  chief  properties , and  can 
have  neither  more  nor  Jefs,  becaufe  it  is  a birth 
from  the  deity  in  nature.”  {Is  nature  a birth  from 
the  deity  in  nature?  Is  this  fenfe  ? If  it  be,  what 
kind  of  proof  is  it?  Is  it  not  ignotum  per  aque 
ignotum  ? J “ For  God  is  tri-une  and  nature  is 
tri-une.”  (“  Nature  is  tri-une.”  Is  not  this  flat 
begging  the  queftion?)  “ And  hence  arife  pro- 
perties, three  and  three.”  (Nay,  why  not  nine 
and  nine  ?J  “ And  that  which  brings  thefe  three 
and  three  into  union  is  another  property.”^ 
Why  fo  ? Why  may  it  not  be  two,  or  five,  or 
nine  ? Is  it  not  rather  the  will  and  power  of 
God? 

“ The  three  fit  ft  properties  of  nature  are  the 
whole  eflence  of  that  dejire , which  is,  and  is  called 
nature.”||  How  ? Are  the  properties  of  a thing 
the  fame  as  the  effencc  of  it  ? What  confufion  is 
this?  But  if  they  were,  can  a vait  of  its  proper-, 
ties  be  the  whole  effencc  of  it  ? 

“ The  three  firft  properties  of  nature  are 
attraBion , refijlence,  and  whirling.  In  thefe  three 
properties  of  the  defire,  you  fee  the  reafon  of  the 

three 

5 P.  i8it  t P.192.  f Ibid.  § Sp.  of  Love, 

Part.  II.  p.  64.  |I  P.  69. 


[ } 

three  great  laws  of  matter  and  motion,  and  need 
not  be  told,  that  Sir  Ifaac  plowed  with  Jacob 
Behmen’s  heifer.'  S Juft  as  much  as  Milton 
plowed  with  Francis  Quarles’s  heifer. 

How  does  it  appear,  that  thefe  are  any  of  the 
properties  of  nature?  Jf  you  mean  by  nature  any 
thing  diftinH  from  matter  ? And  how  are  they 
the  properties  of  defire?  What  a jumbling  of 
dilfonant  notions  is  here  ? 

“ The  fourth  property  (you  affirm,  not  prove) 
is  called  fire  : the  fifth,  the  'form  of  light  and  love 
(What  do  you  mean  by  the  form  of  love?  Are 
light  and  love  one  and  the  fame  thing  PJ  “ The 
frxth , found  or  underfunding (Are  then  found 
and  underftanding  the  fame  thing?)  “ The  fe- 
venth,  a life  of  triumphing  joy."\  Is  then  a life 
of  triumphing  joy,  “ that  which  brings  the  three 
and  three  properties  into  union  ?”  If  fo,  how  can 
it  be  “ the  refult  of  that  union  ?M  Do  thefe 
things  hang  together  ? 

To  conclude  this  head.  You  fay,  “ attraElion 
is  an  incefiant  working  of  three  contrary  proper- 
ties, drawing,  refJHng,  and  whirling  That  is 
in  plain  terms,  (a  difcovery  worthy  of  Jacob 
Behmen,  and  yet  not  borrowed  by  Sir  Ifaac  !} 
“ Drawing  is  inceffant  drawing,  rf fence,  and 
whirling" 

II.  Of  the  creation  : 

You  put  thefe  words,  with  many  more 

equally 

S P.  37 . + P.  58.  $ P.  200, 


[ J 

equally  important,  into  the  mouth  of  God  him- 
feif! 

“ Angels  firft  inhabited  the  region  which  is 
now  taken  up  by  the  fun  and  the  planets  that 
move  round  him.  It  was  then  all  a a glaffy.fea, 
in  which  perpetual  feenes  of  light  and  glory  were 
ever  riling  and  changing  in  obedience  to  their 
call.  Hence  they  fancied  they  had  infinite  power, 
and  refolved  to  abjure  all  fubmifiion  to  God.  In 
that  moment  they  were  whirled  down  into  their 
own  dar/i,  fiery,  working  powers.  And  in  that 
moment  the  glalfy  lea,  by  the  wrathful  workings 
of  thefe  fpii  its,  was  broke  in  pieces,  and  became 
a chaos  of  fire  and  wrath , thicknejs  and  dark- 
nefsh'k 

I would  enquire  upon  this, 

3.  Is  it  well  for  a man  to  take  fuch  liberty  with 
the  moll  high  God  ? 

2.  Is  not  this  being  immeafurably  wife  above 
that  which  is  written  ? Wifer  than  all  the  prophets 
and  all  the  apollles  put  together. 

g.  How  can  any  thing  of  this  be  proved  ? 
Why  thus  : “ darknefs  was  upon  the  face  of  the 
deep.  What  can  this  mean,  but  that  the  fall  of 
angels  brought  deflation  into  the  very  place  of this 
world What  a proof! 

Secondly,  “ The  feripture  fhews,  that  the  Spi- 
rit of  God  entering  into  this  darknefs,  that  is, 

into 

t Sp.  of  Praver,  Part  I.  p.  14,  &c. 

J Part  II.  p.  43. 


[ 1*9  ] 

into  the  very  place  where  Satan  reigned  before, 

“ brought  forth  a new  world. ”t 

Where  does  it  fhew,  that  this  darknefs  was  the 
place  where  Satan  reigned  ? I cannot  find  it  in 
■my  bible. 

Thirdly , “ How  could  the  devil  he  called  The 
Prince  of  this  world,  if  it  was  not  once  his  own 
kingdom  ?”  ibid. 

May  he  not  be  fo  called,  becaufe  he  now 
reigns  therein  ? Is  lie  not  now  the  ruler  of  the 
darknefs  or  wickednefs  of  this  world ? 

Fourthly,  “ Had  it  not  been  their  own  king- 
dom, the  devils  could  have  no  power  here.  This 
may  pafs for  a demonjlration,  That  this  is  the  very 
place  in  which  the  angels  fell.”t 

I doubt,  it  zoill  not  pafs.  Cannot  God  permit 
Satan  to  exert  his  power,  wherever  it  pleafeth 
him  ? 

Hitherto  then  we  have  not  a grain  of  found 
proof.  Yet  you  pronounce  with  all  prerempto- 
rinefs, 

“ The  grounds  of  true  religion  cannot  be  truly 
known  but  by  going  fo  lar  back  as  this  fall  of  an- 

ge!s-’ll 

Cannot?  Pofitively,  cannot?  How  few  men 
in  England,  in  Europe,  can  or  do  go  back  fo 
far  ? And  are  there  none  but  thefe,  no  not  one, 
who  knows  the  grounds  of  true  religion  ? 

“ It  was  their  revolt  which  brought -wrath  and 
fire  and  thicknefs  and  darknefs  into  nature.  ’ § 

^ ibid. 


+ P.  50.  t p.  51.  i|p--37’38- 


[ *9°  ] 

It  it  was  fin  that  brought  fire  into  the  world, 
(which  is  hard  to  prove)  did  it  bring  darknefs  ? 
And  thicknejs  too  ? But  if  it  did  what  harm  is 
there  in  either?  Is  not  thicknejs  as  good  in  its 
place  as  thinnefs  ? And  as  to  darknefs  you  fay 
yourfelf,  “ It  has  not  only  no  evil  in  it,  but  is  the 
only  ground  of  all  poflible  good.” 

Touching  creation  in  general  you  aver, 

“ A creation  out  of  nothing  is  no  better  fenfe 
than  a creation  into  nothing .”  p.  60. 

“ A creation  into  nothing ” is  a contradiction 
in  terms.  Can  you  fay  a creation  cut  of  nothing 
is  fo  ? It  is  indeed  tautology  : iince  the  fingle 
term  creation  is  equivalent  with  pr/oduElion  out  of 
nothing. 

“ That  all  things  were  created  out  of  nothing, 
has  not  the  leal!  tittle  of  fcripture  to  fupport  it.”t 

Is  it  not  fupported  (as  all  the  Chrrflian  church 
has  thought  hitherto)  by  the  very  firfl  verfe  of 
Genefis  ? 

“ Nay,  it  is  a fiftion  big  with  the  grofTeft  ab- 
furdities.  It  is  full  of  horrid  confequences.  It 
Separates  every  thing  from  God.  It  leaves  no 
relation  between  God  and  the  creature.  For 
(mark  the  pr'oof!)  “ if  it  is  created  out  of  nothing, 
it  cannot  ha \-e  fomething  of  God  in  rt."^; 

The  confequence  is  not  clear.  Till  this  is 
made  good,  can  any  of  thofe  propofstions  be  al- 
lowed ? 

" Nature  is  the  firfl  birth  of  God.”  Did  God 

create 


+ p-  55- 


p.  58. 


[ 19*  1 

treate  it  or  not  ? If  not,  how  came  it  out  g/liim  ? 
If  he  did,  did  he  create  it  out  of  fomething,  or 
nothing  ? 

■“  St.  Paul  fays,  All  things  are  of,  or  out  of 
God.”  And  what  does  this  prove,  but  that  God 
is  the  caufe  of  all  thing's  ? 

“ The  materiality  of  the  angelic  kingdom  was 
spiritual. What  is  fpiritual  materiality  ? Is  it 
not  much  the  fame  with  immaterial  materiality  ? 

“ This  fpiritual  materiality  brought  forth  the 
heavenly  fltfi  and  blood  of  angels. ’’||  That 
angels  have  bodies  vou  affirm  elfewffiere.  But 

I are  you  fare,  they  ha \e  jlejh  and  blood?  Are 
not  the  angels  fpirits  ? And  finely  a Jpirit  hath 
r not  JleJli  and  blood. 

“ The  whole  glajfy  fea  was  a mirror  of  beau- 
teous forms,  colours,  and  founds  perpetually 
fpringing  up,  havirg  alfo  fruits  and  vegetables, 
hut  not  grofs,  as  the  fruits  of  the  world.  This 
was  continually  btinging  forth  new  figures  of  life 
not  animals,  but  ideal  forms  of  the  endlef  diviji - 
m hlity  of  lifer  \ 

This  likewife  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  God. 
But  is  nonfenfe  from  the  Aloft  High  ? 

What  lefs  is  “ a mirror  ol  beauteous  founds ?” 
And  what  are  figures  of  lift  ? Are  they  alive  or 
dead  ? Or  between  both  P As  a man  may  be  be- 
tween fleeping  and  waking?  What  ate  “ Jdeal 
forms  of  endlefs  divilibility  of  life?”  Are  they 
the  fame  with  thofe  forms  of  flones,  one  of 

which 

+ Spirit  of  prayer  P.  II.  p.  27.  [|j  p.  ,57.  § P.  I.  p.  18,  19, 


[ IQ2  ] 

■which  Maraton  took  up  (while  he  was  feekir.g 
Yaratilda,)  to  throw  at  the  form  of  a lion 

The  glaffy  fea  being  become  thick  and  dark, 
the  fpirit  converted  its  fire  and  wrath  into  fun 
and  liars,  its  drofs  and  darknefs  into  earth,  its 
mobility  into  air,  its  moilture  into  water.”  + 

Was  wrath  converted  \n\ofunox  flars  ? Or 
a little  of  it  bellowed  on  both  ? How  was  dark- 
nefs turned  into  earth  ? Or  mobility  into  air  ? 
Has  not  fire  more  mobility  than  this  ? Did  there 
need  omnipotence,  to  convert  fire  into  fie  ? 
Into  the  Sun?  Or  moijlure  into  water ? 

“ Darknefs  was  abfolutely  unknown  to  the 
angels  ’till  they  fell.  Hence  it  appears  that  : 
datknefs  is  the  ground  of  the  materiality  of  na- 
ture.” ^ Appears  ? To  whom  ? Nothing  ap- 
pears to  me,  but  the  proving  ignotum  per  ignotius.  \ 
“ All  life  is  a defre.”  ||  Every  d/fre,  as  j 
Jack , is  and  mufi  be  made  up  of  contrariety.’  \ ! 
“ God’s  bringing  a fenlible  creature  into  exif- 
tence,  is  the  bringing  th c power  of  defire  into  a 
creaturely  fate”  Does  not  all  this  require 
a little  more  proof  ? And  not  a little  illuf- 
tration  ? 

“ Hard  and  [oft,  thick  and  thin  could  have 
no  exillence,  till  nature  loll  its  firlt  purity. 
And  this  is  the  one  true  origin  of  all  the  materia- 
lity of  this  world.  Elfe  nothing  thick  or  hard 
could  ever  have  been.”5  Does  not  this  call  for 

much 

1 See  the  Speftator.  + P.  II.  p.  29.  | p.  33.  Sp.  of  Love, 

P.  II.  p.  198.  f)  ibid.  S P.  I.  p.  21. 


[ m ] 

much  proof?  Since  moil  people  believe,  God 
created  matter , merely  becaufeyb  it  fleemea  good 
in  his  fight. 

But  you  add  a kind  of  proof.  “ How  comes 
a fiint  to  be  fo  hard  and  dark?  It  is  becaufe  the 
meeknefis  and  fluidity  of  the  light,  air,  and  water 
are  not  in  it.’  + The  meeknefls  of  light,  and  air, 
and  water ! What  is  that  ? Is  air  or  water  capa- 
ble of  virtue  ? 

“ The  firfl  property  of  nature  is  a conftroining , 
attracting,  and  coagulating  power.”!  I wait  the 
proof  of  this. 

“ God  brought  grofs  matter  out  of  the  finful 
properties  of  nature,  that  thereby  the  fallen  an- 
gels might  lofe  all  their  power  over  them." ||  And 
have  they  loft  all  power  over  them  ? Is  Satan  no 
longer  prince  of  the  power  oflthc  air? 

“ As  all  matter  is  owing  to  the  firfl  property 
of  nature,  which  is  an  afl ringing,  comprejfing  de- 
fire") — Stop  here,  Sir.  I totally  deny,  that  any 
unintelligent  being  is  capable  of  any  define  at  all. 
And  yet  this  grofs,  capital  miftake  runs  through 
your  whole  theory. 

“ The  fourth  property  is  jirc'% — Where  is  the 
proof? — “ which  changes  the  properties  of  na- 
ture into  an  heavenly  ftate.’Tf  Proof  again  “ The 

A o 

conjunction  of  God  and  nature  brings  forth fire." 
This  needs  the  inoft  proof  of  all. 

“ Every  right  kindled  fire  muft  give  forth 
liahtr  Why?  “ Becaufe  the  eternalyfn?  is  the 
° Vo l.  XIX.  I effeCt 

t -ibi-d.  f p.si,  ||  p.  27,  f p.  28.  5 49.  +t  p.  48. 


C 194  ] 

effeft  of  fupernatural  light."  Nay  then  light 
fhould  rather  give  forth  fire. 

“ The  fire  of  the  foul  and  that  of  the  body  has 
but  one  nature.'  \ Can  either  Behmen  or  Spi- 
nofa  prove  this  ? 

III.  Ot  Adam  in  paradife. 

“ Paradife  is  an  heavenly  birth  of  life  "\\  How 
does  this  definition  explain  the  thing  defined  ? 

“ Adam  had  at  fir fl  both  an  heavenly  and  an 
earthly  body.  Into  the  latter  was  the fpirit  of  this 
-world  breathed,  and  in  this  fpirit  and  bod}-  did 
the  heavenly  fpirit  and  body  of  Adam  dwell.”§ 
So  he  had  originally  two  bodies  and  two  fouls  ! 
This  will  need  abundance  of  proof.  “ The  fpirit 
and  body  of  this  world  was  the  medium , through 
which  he  was  to  have  commerce  with  this  world.” 
The  proof.  “ But  it  was  no  more  alive  in  him, 
than  Satan  and  the  ferpent  were  alive  in  him  at 
his  frfl  creation.  Good  and  evil  were  then  only 
his  outwaid  body,  and  in  the  outward  world.” 
What  was  there  evil  in  the  world,  and  even  in 
Adam,  together  with  Satan  and  the  ferpent,  at  his 
frf  creation  ? “ But  they  were  kept  una&ive 
bvthe  power  of  the  heavenly  man  within  him 
did  this  cafe  cover  the  earthly  man  ? Or  the 
earthly  cafe  the  heavenly  ? 

But  “ he  had  power  to  chafe,  whether  he 
would  ufe  his  outward  body  only  as  a means  of 
opening  the  outward  world  to  him  — Soil  was 

not 

t P*  52'  H SP-  °f  Prayer,  P.  I.  p.  6.  § P- 


C 1 95  ] 

not  quite  unaklive  neither : “ or  of  opening  the 
beftial  life  in  himfelf.f  Till  this  was  opened  in 
him,  nothing  in  this  outward  world,  no  more  than 
his  own  outward  body”  (So  now  it  is  nnaElivt 
again,)  “ could  a£i  upon  him,  make  any  impref- 
fions  upon  him,  or  arife  any  fenfations  in  him  ; 
neither  had  he  any  feeling  of  good  or  evil  from 
it.”  All  this  being  entirely  new,  we  muft  beg 
clear  and  full  proof  of  it. 

“ God  faid  to  man  at  his  creation,  nile  thou 
over  this  imperfect , perijliing  world,  without 
partaking  of  its  itnpure  nature.”  t W as  not  the 
world  then  at  firft perfect  in  its  kind  ? Was  it 
impure  then  ? Or  would  it  have  perifhcd  if  man 
had  not  finned  ? And  are  we  fure  that  God 
fpake  thus  ? 

“ The  end  God  propofed  in  the  creation,  was 
the  rejloring  all  things  to  their  glorious  Hate.”  ;f 
In  the  creation?  Was  not  this  rather  the  end 
which  he  propofed  in  the  redemption  ? 

“ Adam  was  created  to  keep  what  is  called  the 
cuij'e,  covered  and  overcome  by  paradife.  And 
as paradife  concealed  and  overcame  all  the  evil  in 
the  elements,  lo  Adam's  heavenly  man  concealed 
from  him  all  the  evil-oi  the  earthly  natme  that 
was  under  it.”|{  Can  we  believe  that  there  was 
any  evil  in  man  from  the  creation,  il  we  believe 
the  bible  ? 

“ Our  own  good  fpirit  is  the  very  Spirit  of 
God  : and  yet  not  God,  but  the  Spirit  of  God 
I 2 kindled 

? p.  c.  f p,  21.  i £p.  of  Prayer,  P.  II.  p.  6x.  ||  p.  6z» 


C 196  1 

kindled  into  a crcaturely  form.'”  Is  there  any 
meaning  in  thefe  words  P And  how  are  they  con- 
fident with  thofe  that  follow  ? “ This  fpirit  is  fo 
related  to  God,  as  my  breath  is  to  the  aird'% 
Nay,  if  fo,  your  fpirit  A God.  For  your  breath 
is  air. 

“ That  Adam  had  at  firfl  the  nature  of  an  an- 
gel is  plain  from  hence,  that  he  was  both  male  and 
female  in  one  perfon.  Now  this  (the  being  both 
male  and  female)  is  the  very  perfeBion  of  the  an- 
gelic nature.”j|  Natural! ffs  fay,  that  fnails  have 
this  perjedhon.  But  who  can  prove,  that  angels 
have  ? 

You  attempt  to  prove  it  thus.  “ In  the  refur- 
reBion  they  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  m mar- 
riage, but  are  as  the  angels.  Here  we  are  told,  1. 
That  the  being  male  and  female  in  one  perfon, 
is  the  very  nature  of  angels.  2.  That  man  fhali 
be  fo  too  at  the  r-efur rection.  Therefore  he  was 
fo  at  firfl. 

Indeed,  we  are  not  told  here,  that  angels  are 
hermaphrodites.  No,  nor  any  thing  like  it. 

1 he  whole  pafBge  is,  They  who  a? e accounted 
worthy  to  obtain  that  world  and  the  refurretlion 
from  the  dead,  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  in 
marriage  : neither  can  they  die  any  more : for  they 
are  equal  unto  the  angels ; (Luke  xx.  35,  36.) 
namely,  (not  in  being  male  and  female,  hut)  in 
this,  that  they  cannot  die  any  more.  This  is  the 

indifputable 

i p-  *95-  !!?•  6o-  § ?•  66- 


[ *97  ] 

indifputable  meaning  of  the  words.  So  tliis 
whole  proof  vanifhes  into  air. 

You  have  one  more  thought,  full  as  new  as 
this.  **  All  earthly  beafs  are  but  creatively  erup- 
tions of  the  diforder  that  is  broken  out  from  the 
fallen  fpiritual  world.  So  earthly  ferpents  are 
but  tranfitory  out- births  of  covetoufnefs,  envy, 
pride,,  and  wrath. ”+ 

How  fhall  we  reconcile  this  with  the  Mofaic 
account?  And  God  faid , Let  the  earth  bring  forth 
cattle,  and  creeping  thing  and  beafl.  And  God 
made  the  be'ajl  of  the  earth]  and  God  faw  that  it 
was  good,  Gen.  i.  24,  25.  Does  anything  here 
intimate,  that  beajis  or  J'erpents  literally  crept  out 
of  the  womb  of  fin  ? And  what  have  ferpents  in 
particular,  to  do  with  covetoufnefs?  Or  indeed 
with  envy,  unlefs  in  poetic  fables  ? 

IV.  Of  the  fall  of  man. 

“ Adam  had  loft  much  of  his  peifecdion,  be- 
fore Eve  was  taken  out  of  him.  It  is  not  good, 
faid  God,  that  man  Jhould  be  alone.  This  fhews 
that  Adam  had  now  made  that  not  to  be  good, 
which  God  faw  to  be  good  when  he  created 
him.”i  Nay,  does  it  fhew  either  more  or  lefs 
than  this,  that  it  was  not  conducive  to  the  wife 
ends  God  had  in  view,  for  man  to  remain  Tingle? 

“ God  then  divided  the  human  nature,  into  a 
a male  and  female  creature.  Otherwife  man 
would  have  brought  forth  his  own  likenefs  out  of 
I 3 himfelf, 

+ Sp.  of  Love,  P.  II;  p.  207.  J Sp.  of  Pr.  p.  74. 


C >98  ] 

himfelf,  in  the  fame  manner  as  he  had  a birth 
from  God.  But  Adam  let  in  an  adulterous  love 
of  the  world  : by  this  his  virginity  was  loft,  and 
he  had  no  longer  a power  of  bringing  forth  a 
birth  from  himfelf.’  b We  have  no  lbadow  of 
proof  for  all  this. 

1 his  flate  of  inability  is  called,  his  falling 
into  a deep  fleep.  ’+  How  does  this  agree  with 
The  Lord  God  caufed  a deep  fleep  to  fall  upon 
Adam  ? Gen.  ii.  21. 

“ God  took  his  Eve  out  of  him,  as  a lefter 
evil,  to  avoid  a greater.  For  it  was  a lef  folly , 
to  love  the  female  part  of  himfelf,  than  to  love 
things  lower  than  himfelf. r’|| 

Who  can  extraft:  this  out  of  the  words  of  Mo- 
les ? Who  can  reconcile  it  with  the  words  of 
our  Lord  ? He  who  made  them  at  the  beginning 
(not  a word  of  any  previous  fall)  made  them  male 
and  female.  And f aid,  For  this  caufe Jhall  a man 
leave  father  and  mother,  and  cleave  unto  his  wife , 
Matt.  xix.  4,  5.  Is  here  any  'intimation,  for  a 
man  to  love  his  wife,  is  only  lef  folly  than  to 
love  the  world  ? A man  ought  fo  to  love  his  wife , 
even  as  Chrift  the  church.  Is  there  any  folly  in 
the  love  of  Chrift  to  the  church  ? 

“ Marriage  came  in  by  Adam’s  falling  from 
his  fir §.perfeElion.”\  Does  this  account  do  ho- 
nour to  that  inftitution  ? Any  more  than  that  me- 
morable faying  of  an  eminent  myftic,  “ Marriage 
is  but  licenfed  whoredom.” 

“ Had 

+ p.  75.  t p.  76.  |t  p.  77.  § p-  78- 


[ *99  ] 

“ Had  Adam  flood,  no  Eve  would  have  been 
taken  out  of  him.  But  from  Eve  God  raifed  that 
angelic  man,  whom  Adam  fhould  have  brought 
forth  without  Eve,  who  is  called  The  fecond 
Adam,  as  being  both  male  and  feraale.”§  Many 
things  here  want  proof.  How  does  it  appear  i. 
That  Eve  would  not  have  been,  had  Adam 
flood  P 2.  That  had  he  flood,  he  would  have 
brought  forth  the  fecond  Adam  without  Eve?  g. 
That  Chrift  was  both  male  and  female?  And  4. 
That  he  was  on  this  account  called  The  fecond 
Adam  ? 

“ The  fecond  Adam  is  now  to  do  that  which 
the  firft  fhould  have  done.”|]  Is  he  to  do  no 
more  than  that?  No  more  than  a mere  creature 
fioulcl  have  done  ? Then  what  need  is  there  of  his 
being  any  more  than  a creature  ? What  need  of 
his  being  God  ? 

“ Our  having  from  him  a new  heavenly  JleJh 
and  blood,  raifed  in  us  by  his  fpiritual power,  is 
the  flrongefl  proof,  that  we  fhould  have  been 
born  of  Adam  by  the  fame  fpiritual  power. 

Had  Adam  then  the  very  fame  fpiritual  power, 
which  Chrift  had  ? And  would  he  if  he  had 
flood,  have  tranfmitted  to  us  the  very  fame  bene- 
fit? Surely  none  that  believes  the  Chriftian  re- 
velation will  aver  this  in  cool  blood  ! 

“ Prom  Adam’s  defire  turned  toward  the  world, 
the  earth  got  a power  of  giving  forth  an  evil  tree. 
It  was  his  will  which  opened  a paffage  for  the  evil 
I 4 hid 

h ?•  79*  UP- 84= 


+ P.  85. 


[ 200  ] 

hid  in  the  earth,”  (I  know  not  how  it  came  there 
before  Adam  fell)  “ to  bring  forth  a tree  in  its 
own  hkenefs.  No  fooner  was  it  brought  forth, 
than  God  affured  him  that  death  was  hid  in  it  : 
a plain  proof  that  this  tree  was  not  from  God, 
but  from  a power  in  the  earth,  which  could  not 
fhew  iifelf,  till  Adam  defired  to  talle  fomething 
which  was  not  paradifiacal.’  i 

This  is  the  marvellous  in  the  highefl  degree, 
and  affords  many  queftions  not  very  eafy  to  be 
anfwerea.  But  waving  all  thefe,  can  any  thing  be 
more  flatly  contradicting  to  the  Mofaic  account  ? 
We  read  there,  The  Lord  God  formed  man , Gen. 
ii.  7.  And  the  Lord  planted  a garden,  ver.  8.  And 
out  of  the  ground  made  the  Lord  God  ever)  tree  to 
grow  that  is  pleaf ant  to  the  fight  and  good for  food ; 
the  tree  of  life,  and  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good 
and  evil,  ver.  9.  Is  it  not  here  plainly  taught,  that 
this  tree  was  from  God?  That  not  the  defire  of 
Adam,  but  the  Lord  God  made  this  tree  to  grow, 
as  well  as  the  tree  of  life?  And  when  was  it  that 
God  gave  him  that  folemn  warning,  In  the  day 
that  thou  eatef  thereof  thou  fialt  fur ely  die?  ver. 
17.  Not  as  foon  as  that  tree  was  brought  forth-, 
but  when  Adam  was  put  into  the  garden. 

“At  fit  ft  all  the  natural  properties  of  man’s 
creaturely  life  were  hid  in  God,  juft  as  the  natural 
qualities  of  darknefs  are  hid,  till  glorified  by  the 
light, ”+  Nay,  were  they  not  fufficiently  hid  by 

the 

i p.  96. 


+ Sp.  of  Love,  P.  II.  p 1 81 . 


[ 201  ] 

the  heavenly  man  ? Need  they  be  hid  over-  and 
over  ? 

“ But  when  man  fell,  all  thefe  properties  broke 
forth,  juft  as  the  darknefs,  when  it  has  loft  the 
Jkftt,  muft  fhew  forth  its  own  coldnefs,  horror 
and  other  uncomfortable  qualities.'’  Exernplum 
placet ! But  are  either  coldnefs  or  horror,  natural 
qualities  of  darknefs  ? If  fo,  they  muft  be  infe» 
parable  from  it.  But  who  will  affirm  this  ? 

“ Darknefs,  though  contrary  to  light,  is  yet 
abfolutely  neceftary  to  it.  Without  this  no  ma- 
nifeftation  or  vifibility  of  light  could  poffibly  be.” 
This  is  abfolutely  new  and  furprizing.  But  how 
is  it  to  be  proved  ?' 

Thus : “ God  dwelleth  in  the  light  which  no  man 
can  approach.  Therefore  light  cannot  be  mani- 
fefted  to  man  but  by  darknefs. ”1:  Ah  poor  con- 
fequence  !*  Would  not  the  fame  text  juft  as  well 
prove  tranfubftantiation  ? 

“ Light  and  darknefs  do  every  thing,,  whether  - 
good  or  evil,  that  is  done  in  man.  Light  is  all 
power,  light  is  all  things  and  nothing .”§ 

I cannot  conceive  what  ideas  you  affix  to  the 
terms,  light  and  darknefs.  But  I forget.  Yyo 
except  again  ft  ideas.  Can  you.  teach  us  to  think  . 
without  them ? 

Once  more.  You  fay,  “ darknfs  is  a pofitive 
thing , and  has  a frength  and fubjiantiaht j in  it.’jf 
I have  fcarce  met  with  a greater  friend  to  daik- 
nefs,  except  “ the  illuminated  Jacob  Bekmea.” 

1 5 

' iP.  189.  f, ibid,  [J  P.  18.2, 


202  ] 

But,  Sir,  have  you  not  done  him  an  irrepara- 
ble injury  ? I do  not  mean  by  mifreprefenting 
his  fentiments,  (though  fome  of  his  profound  ad- 
mirers are  pofitive,  that  you  mifunderftand  and 
murder  him  throughout :)  but  by  dragging  him 
out  of  his  awful  obfcurity  ; by  pouring  light  upon 
his  venerable  darknefs?  Men  may  admire  the 
deepnefs  of  the  well,  and  the  excellence  of  the 
water  it  contains.  But  if  fome  officious  perfon 
puts  a light  into  it,  it  will  appear  to  be  both  very 
ffiallowand  very  dirty. 

I could  not  have  borne  to  fpend  fo  many 
words  on  fo  egregious  trifles,  but  that  they  are 
mifchievous  trifles : 

lice  migac  Jaia  ducunt 
In  mala. 

This  is  dreadfully  apparent  in  your  own  cafe, 
(I  would  not  fpeak,  but  that  I dare  not  refrain) 
whom  notwithflanding  your  uncommon  abilities, 
they  have  led  aflray  in  ibings  of  the  greateft  im- 
portance. Bad  philofophy  has  by  infenfible  de- 
grees paved  the  way  for  bad  divinity:  in  confe- 
quence  of  this  mifeiable  hypothefis,  you  advance 
many  things  in  religion  alfo.  ffime  of  which  are 
unfupported  by  lcripture,  fome  even  repugnant 
to  it. 

31,  Some  of  ihefe  I {hall  now  mention  with 

the 


[ 203  ] 

the  utmofl  plainnefs,  as  knowing  for  whom,  and 
before  whom  I fpeak. 

And  x.  You  deny  the  omnipotence  of  God. 

You  fay,  “ As  no  feeing  eye  could  be  created, 
unlefs  there  was  antecedent  to  it,  a natural  viabi- 
lity of  things,” — Why  not  ? Why  might  not 
vifible  things  be  created  at  the  fame  inflant  with 
it  ? — “ So  no  creature  could  come  into  any  natu- 
ral life , unlefs  fuch  a (fate  of  nature  was  antece- 
dent to  it.”+  “ All  that  God  does,  is  and  mufl  be 
done  in  and  by  the  powers  of  nature.”^:  What 
then  did  it  avail,  that  as  you  elfewhere  fay,  God 
was  before  nature?  He  not  only  could  not  ri.en 
do  all  things,  but  he  could  do  nothing,  till  nature 
exiffed.  But  if  fo,  how  came  nature  itfelf,  this 
fecond  eternal , to  exifl  at  all  ? 

“ There  cannot  poffibly  be  any  other  difference 
between  created  beings,  than  arifesfrom  that  out 
of  which  they  were  created. Why  not?  Who  ■ 
will  flay  the  hand  of  the  Almighty,  or  fay  unto 
him,  What  dofl  thou  ? 

“ No  fruits  or  vegetables  could  have  fprung  up 
in  the  divided  elements,  but  becaufe  they  are 
parts  of  that  glaffy  fea,  where  angelical  fruits 
grew  before.”! 

But  how  came  thofe  fruits  to  grow  before? 
How  came  they  to  grow  in  the  glaffy  fea  ? W ere 
they  not  produced  out  of  nothing  at  firfl  ? If  not, 
God  was  not  before  nature.  If  they  were,  cannot 
16  he, 

+ P,  135.  § P.  60.  ||  Spirit  of  Prayer, 

Part  I.  p.  15, 


+ P.  60. 


[ 204  ] 

he  flill  produce  out  of  nothing  whatfoever  pleai- 
eth  him  ? 

“ All  outward  nature  being  fallen  from  hea- 
ven”— That  we  deny — “mull,  as  well  as  it  can, 
do  and  work  as  it  did  in  heaven.”?  As  well  as  it 
can!  What  can  it  do  without  God  .?  Who  up- 
holdeth  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power! 
And  whatcrzrczV  not  do,  if  he  pleafeth  ? Or  rather, 
what  cannot  he  do,  with  orwithout  it  ? 

“ Matter  could  not  pofhble  be,  but  from  fin.:,T 
That  is,  in  very  plain  terms,  God  could  not  have 
created  matter,  if  Satan  had  not  finned  ! 

“ God  could  not  create  man  with  a foul  and  a 
body,  unlefs  there  was  fuch  a thing  as  nature, 
antecedent  to  the  creation  of  man. 

Why  could  not  God  do  this  ? Becaufe  “ body 
and  fpiritare  not  two  feparate  things,  but  are  only 
the  inward  and  outward  condition  of  one  and  the 
fame  being.  Every  creature  mujl  have  its  own 
body,  and  cannot  be  without  it.  For  its  body  is 
that” — Who  would  have  thought  it?  “ which 
makes  it  manifefl  to  itfelf.  It  cannot  know, 
either  that  it  is,  or  what  it  is,  but  by  its  own 
body  !”§ 

What  a heap  of  bold  affertions  is  here,  to  curb 
omnipotence  ? And  not  one  of  them  has  a tittle 
of  proof,  unlefs  one  can  prove  the  other. 

But  we  have  more  ffill.  “ The  body  (of  any 
creaturej  has  nothing  of  its  own,  but  is  folely  the 

outward 

5 P.  20.  + Spiric  of  Love.  Part  I p.  23. 

J P.  20.  § P.  32. 


[ 20  6 ] 

outward  manifejiation , of  that  which  is  inwardly 
in  the  foul.  Every  animal  has  nothing  in  its  out- 
ward form  or  lhape,  but  that  which  is  the  f orm, 
and  growth  of  its  fpirit.  As  no  number  can  be 
any  thing  elfe,  but  that  which  the  units  contained 
in  it  make  it  to  be,  fo  no  body  can  be  any  thing 
elfe  but  the  coagulation  or  fum  total  of  thofe  pro- 
perties of  nature  that  are  coagulated  in  it.”|| 
Aftomfhing  ! What  a dilcovery  is  this  ? That 
a body  is  only  a curdled fpirit ! That  our  bodies 
are  only  the  fum  total  oi  our  fpiritual  properties: 
and  that  the form  of  every  man’s  body  is  only  the 
form  of  his  fpirit  made  vifible  ! 

“ Every  fpirit  manifefts  its  own  nature  by  that 
body  which  proceeds  from  it  as  its  own  birth.”\ 
Does  the  body  then  grow  out  of  the  fpirit,  as 
the  hair  and  nails  grows  out  of  the  body  P And 
this,  in  confequence  of  the  “ powers  of  naturef 
diflinft  from  the  power  and  will  of  God  ? 

To  abridge  God  of  his  power,  after  creation, 
as  well  as  before  it,  you  affirm  farther, 

“ This  is  an  axiom  that  cannot  be  fhaken,  no- 
thing can  rife  higher  than  its f ft  created  nature-, 
and  therefore  an  angel  at  lafi  muft  have  been  an 
angel  at  firft.  Do  you  think  it  poffible  for  an  ox 
to  be  changed  into  a rational  philofopher  ? Yet 
this  is  as  poffible  for  one  who  has  only  by  crea- 
tion the  life  of  this  world,  to  be  changed  into  an 
angel  of  heaven.  The  life  of  this  world  can  reach 
no  farther  than  this  world  : no  omnipotence  of 

God 

|j  P.  33,  5 Spirit  efLtrve,  Part  II.  p.  i> 


[ 20  6 ] 

God  can  carry  it  farther.  Therefore  if  man  is  to 
be  an  angel  at  lad,  he  mull  have  been  created  an 
angel : becaufe  no  creature  can  poflibly  have  any 
other  life  or  higher  degree  of  life,  than  that  which 
his  creation  brought  forth  in  him/’t 

I have  quoted  this  pafTage  at  fome  length  that 
the  fenfe  of  it  may  appear  beyond  difpute.  But 
what  divinity  ? And  what  reafoning  to  fupport 
it  ? Can  God  “ raife  nothing  higher  than  its  firji 
created Jlate ?”  Is  it  not  podible  for  him  to  change 
an  ox  or  a hone  into  a rational  philofopher,  or  a 
child  of  Abraham  ? To  change  a man  or  a worm 
into  an  angel  of  heaven  ? Poor  omnipotence  which 
cannot  do  this ! Whether  he  will,  or  no,  is  ano- 
ther quedion.  But  il  he  cannot  do  it,  how  can 
he  be  faid  to  do  whatsoever  pleajctk  him  in  hea- 
ven, and  in  earth,  and  in  the  fea,  and  in  all  deep 
places  ? 

Thus  does  your  attachment  to  a miferable  phi- 
lofopher, lead  you  to  deny  the  almighty  power  of 
God. 

II.  It  leads  you,  in  the  fecond  place,  to 
deny  his  jujlice,  to  abridge  this  no  lefs  than  his 
power. 

This  I may  be  permitted  to  confider  more  at 
large ; becaufe  though  it  was  allowed  by  all  the 
wifer  Heathens  of  pad  ages,  yet  it  is  now  one 
main  hinge  on  which  the  controverfy  between 
Chriftianity  and  Deifm  turns.  To  convert  a thou- 

fand 


+ Spilit  of  Prayer,  Partll.  p 81. 


[ 207  ] 

fand  Deifls  therefore,  by  giving  up  this  point* 
with  the  doftrine  of  jufiif cation  which  is  built 
upon  it,  is  little  more  than  it  would  be  to  con- 
vert as  many  Jews,  by  allowing  the  Meffiah  is 
not  yet  come.  It  is  converting  them  by  allowing 
all  they  contend  for  : by  granting  them  the  main 
point  in  queftion.  Confequently  it  is  no  other 
than  ejlablifliing  Deifm,  while  it  pretends  to  over- 
turn it. 

I would  greatly  wifh,  in  weighing  what  you 
have  advanced  on  this  head,  to  forget  who  fpeaks, 
and  (imply  conftder  what  is  fpoken.  The  perfon 
I greatly  reverence  and  love  ; the  doftrine  I ut- 
terly abhor  ; as  I apprehend  it  to  be  totally  fub- 
verfive  of  the  very  effence  of  Chriftianity. 

God  himfelf  hath  declared,  that  in  confequence 
of  his  jiflice,  he  will  in  the  great  day  of  general 
retribution,  render  to  every  man  according  to  his 
works,  whether  they  he  good  or  evil. 

But  man  fays  no.  “ There  is  no  righteous 
wrath  or  vinditlive  juftice  in  God.’T  If  fo,  ye 
may  go  on,  ye  children  of  the  devil,  in  doing 
the  works  of  your  father.  It  is  written  indeed 
the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  again/l 
all  ungodlinefs  and  unrighteoufuefs.  But  this  is 
not  literally  to  be  taken;  for  propet ly  fpeak- 
ing,  there  is  no  fuch  thing  as  the  wrath  of 
God ! 

Fear  not  the  bug-bear  of  everlajling  burnings. 
There  is  not  only  no  everlajling  punifhment,  but 

no 

iSp.  of  Love,  Part  II.  p.  IoB. 


[ 208  ] 


no  punifhment  at  all  ; no  fuch  thing  in  theuni- 
verfe.  It  is  a mere  vulgar  error  ! 

I ffiould  be  extremely  glad  to  prophefy  thefe 
fmooth  things  too,  did  not  a difficulty  lie  in  the 
way.  As  nothing  is  more  frequently  or  more  ex- 
prefly  declared  in  fcripture,  than  God's  anger  at 
fin,  and  his  punjjhing  it  both  temporally  and  eter- 
nally, every  affection  of  this  kind  ftrikes  direfftiy 
at  the  credit  of  the  whole  revelation.  For  if  there 
be  one  falfhood  in  the  bible,  there  may  be  a thou- 
fand  ; neither  can  it  proceed  from  the  God  of 
truth.  However  I will  weigh  all  your  affertions. 
And  may  the  God  of  truth  fliine  on  both  our 
hearts ! 

* I mull  premife,  that  I' have  no  obje&ion  to 
the  ufing  the  words  wrath  (or  anger ) ax\&  jujlice 
as  nearly  fynonvmous;  feeing  anger  Hands  in  the 
fame  relation  to  jujlice,  as  love  does  to  mercy: 
love  and  anger  being  the  pajficns.  (fpeaking  after 
the  manner  of  men)  which  correfpond  with  the 
difpofilions  of  mercy  and  jujlice.  Whoever 
therefore  denies  God  to  be  capable  of  wrath 
or  anger , a£ls  confidently  in  denying  his  jujlice 
alfo. 

You  begin,  l.  “ No  wrath  (anger,  vindictive 
jujlice ) ever  was  or  ever  will  be  in  God.t  If  a 
wrath  of  God  were  any  where,  it  mult  be  every 
where.”  So  it  is,  as  fure  as  th ejujl  God  is  every 
where. 

2.  “ Wrath  and  pain  dwell  only  in  the  crear 

tures.’* 

+ Spirit  of  Pny.er,,  Part  I.  p,  27. 


[ 209  ] 

tures/T  Pain  is  only  in  creatures.  Of  wrath  we 
are  to  enquire  farther. 

g.  “ To  fay  God  ever  punifhed  any  creature 
out  of  u rath , is  as  abfurd  as  to  fay,  he  began  the 
creation  out  of  wrath.'”  I conceive,  not.  It  is 
not  as  abjurd  to  fay,  God  is  angry  at  th e guilty, 
as  to  fay,  God  is  angry  at  the  innocent.  Now  it 
is  certain,  when  God  began  the  creation  of  man, 
no  guilty  man  were  in  berng. 

4.  “ He  muff  always  will  that  to  his  creatures, 
which  he  willed  at  the  creation  of  them.”  True. 
And  lie  willed , at  the  very  creation  of  men,  to  re- 

j ward  every  cne  as  his  work JJiould  be. 

5.  “ God  is  incapable  of  willing  pain  to  any 

I creature,  becaufe  he  is  nothing  but  goodnefs.”^ 
You  mean,  becaufe  his  goodnefs  excludes  jus- 
tice. Nay,  that  is  the  very  queflion. 

6.  “ God  can  give  nothing  but  happmefi  f>  om 
himjelf  becaufe  he  hath  nothing  elfe  in  himfelf”'\ 
As  if  you  had  faid,  “ God  can  give  nothing  but 
infinity  from  himjelf , becaufe  he  has  nothing  elfe  in 
himfelf.”  It  is  certain  he  has  not.  He  is  all  in- 
finity. Yet  the  argument  will  not  hold. 

1 7.  “ God  can  no  more  begin  to  have  any 

wrath  after  the  creature  is  fallen,  than  he  could 
be  infinite  wrath  and  rage  from  all  eternity.”^ 
No  changing  the  terms.  \'V e have  nothing  to  do 
with  rage.  This  properly  means  exceffive  anger. 
Setting  this  abide,  I anfwer  to  the  argument, 

God 

+ p.  28.  f p.  29.  ||  Spirit  of  Love,  P,  I,  p.  3, 

$ Spirit  of  Love,  P,  II,  p,  4, 


[ 2fO  ] 

God  was  infinitely  jujt  from  all  eternity  : in  con- 
fequence  of  which  his  anger  then  began  to Jlitw 
itfelf,  when  man  had  finned.. 

8.  “ To  wrath  can  ne  in  God,  nnlefs  God 
was  from  all  eternity  an  infinity  of  wrath,”  + 
Tliat  is  infinitely  jnf.  So  he  was  and  will  be  to 
all  eternity. 

g.  “ There  mull  either  be  no  portability  of 
wrath,  or  no  pofhbility  of  its  having  any 
hounds”  j| 

The  divine  jujlice  cannot  poffibly  have  any 
hounds.  If  is  as  unlimited  as  his  power. 

10.  “ Two  things  fhew  the  nature  of  wrath,  a 
tempert  and  a raging  fore.  The  former  is  wrath 
in  the  elements  ; the  latter  is  wrath  in  the  body . 
Now  both  thefe  are  a diforder.  But  there  is  no 
diforderin  God.  Therefore  there  is  no  w’rath  in 
God.”§ 

“ A tempefl  is  wrath  in  the  elements  ; a raging 
fore  is  wrath  in  the  body”  It  is  not.  Neither 
the  body,  the  elements,  nor  any  thing  inanimate 
is  capable  of  wrath.  And  when  we  fay,  “ The 
fore  looks  angry,”  does  any  one  dream  this  is  to  : 
be  taken  literally  ? The  pillars  of  the  argument 
therefore  are  rotten.  Confequently  the  fuper-  J 
flrufture  falls  to  the  ground. 

In  vain  would  you  prop  it  up  by  faying, 

“ Wrath  can  have  no  other  nature  in  body  than  I 
it  has  in  fpirit,  becaufe  it  can  have  no  exijlenct  in  i 
body,  but  what  it  has  from  fpirit. Nay,  it  can 

have  I 


+ p.  6.  |1  p.  7,  § p.  13. 


5 p.  15. 


[ 211  ] 

have  no  exi/lence  in  body  at  all,  as  yourfelf  affirm 
prefently  after.  Yet  you  flrangely  go  on,  “ There 
is  but  one  wrath  in  all  outward  things,  animate 
or  inanimate.”  Moll  true  ; for  all  wrath  is  in 
animals  ; things  inanimate  are  utterly  incapable 
of  it. 

“ There  can  be  but  one  hind  of  wrath  becaufe 
nothing  can  be  wrathful  but Jpirif.”i 

Never  then  let  us  talk  of  wrathful  elements , of 
j,  wrathful  temp  f Is,  or  fores  again. 

11.  “ Wrath  and  evil  net  but  two  words  for 
the  fame  thing.” j:  This  is  home.  But  i-t  cannot 
be  granted  without  proof. 

> 12.  “ God  is  as  capable  of  wrath,  as  of  thick- 
nefs,  hardnefs,  and  darknefs ; becaufe  wrath  can 
exi ft  no  where  elfe  but  in  thicknefs,  hardnefs , and 
darknefsd\ 

So  far  from  it,  that  wrath  cannot  exilt  in  thick- 
nefs or  hardnefs  at  all.  For  thefe  are  qualities  of 
bodies ; and  “ nothing  can  be  wrathful  but 
fpirit.” 

13.  “ Wrath  cannot  be  in  any  creature,  till  it 
has  loll  its  firlt  perfe£tion.”§  That  remains  to  be 
proved. 

Thus  far  you  have  advanced  arguments  for 
your  do&rine.  You  next  attempt  to  anfwer  ob- 
jections. 

And  to  the  objection,  that  feripture  fpeaks  fo 
frequenly  of  the  wrath  of  God,  you  anfwer, 

j.  “ All 

+ p-  18.  f ||p.  71.  § p.  72. 


[ ^ ] 

1.  “ All  the  wrath  and  vengeance  that  ever 
was  in  any  creature,  i3  to  be  called  and  looked 
on  as  the  wrath  and  vengeance  of  God.” 

I totally  deny  that  propofuion,  and  call  for 
the  proof  of  it. 

2.  11  God  works  every  thing  in  nature. 
Therefore  all  death , or  rage,  or  cur/e,  wherever 
it  is,  mud  be  faid,  in  the  language  of  fcripture, 
to  be  the  wrath  or  vengeance  of  God.’T 

I deny  the  confequence.  The  latter  propoft- 
tion  does  not  follow  from  the  iormer.  And  indeed 
it  is  not  true.  All  death  and  rage  and  c wrfe,  is 
not  in  the  language  of  fcripture  termed  the  wrath 
and  vengeance  of  God. 

3.  “ Becaufe  the  devils  have  their  life  from 
God  ; therefore  their  curfed,  mferahle,  wrath- 
ful life,  is  faid  to  he  the  curfe  and  mifery,  and 

wrath  of  God  upon  them 

Neither  can  this  be  proved,  that  the  devils 
having  their  life  from  God,  is  the  reafon  why 
they  are  faid  to  he  under  his  wrath.  Nor  does 
the  fcripture  ever  term  their  wrathful,  mfearble 
life,  the  wrath  or  mifery  of  God. 

4.  “ Devils  are  his,  as  well  as  holy  angels. 
Therefore  all  the  wrath  and  rage  of  the  one 
mud  be  as  truly  his  wrath  and  rage  burning  in 
them,  as  the  joy  of  the  others  is  his  joy. ”\\ 

So  it  feems,  The  wrath  of  God  in  fcripture 
means  no  more  or  lefs  than  The  wrath  of  the  de- 
vil l However,  this  argument  will  not  prove  it. 

The 

+ P'  55-  + P;  53*  II  P-  54* 


[ 213  ] 

*Tke  joy  of  faints  (not  of  angels  that  I rememoer) 
is  lliled  The  joy  of  their  Lord,  becaufe  h e prepar- 
ed it  for  them  and  bejiows  it  on  them.  Does  he 
prepare  and  bejiow  the  rage  of  devils  upon  them  ? 

g.  “ His  wrath  and  his  vengeance  are  no  more 
in  God,  than  what  the  pfalmift  calls  his  ice  and 
his  Jr  oft.”  t 

There  is  nothing  parallel  in  the  cafe.  We  can- 
not take  the  latter  exprehions  literally,  without 
glaring  sbfurditity  : the  former  we  may. 

6.  “ The  earth  trembled  becaufe  he  was  wroth. 
No  wrath  here  but  in  the  elements.” 

Nav,  if  fo,  here  was  no  wrath  at  all.  For  we 
are  agreed,  “ Only  fpirits  can  be  wrathful.” 

7.  One  more  text,  ufually  cited  againfl  your 
opinion,  you  improve  into  an  argument  for  it. 
“ Avenge  not  yourfelves , for  vengeance  is  mine. 

' This  is  a full  proof  that  the  vengeance  is  not  in 
God.  If  it  was,  then  it  would  belong  to  every 
child  of  God,  or  he  could  not  be  perjeCl  as  las 
Father  is  pefecld’X 

Yes  he  could  in  all  his  imitable  perfections. 
But  God  has  peculiarly  forbidden  our  imitating 
him  in  this.  Vengeance , favs  he,  is  mine , in- 
communicably  mine  ; unlefs  fo  far  as  he  dele- 
gates it  to  tbofe  who  are  in  authority.  This 
therefore  clearly  (hews,  that  God  executes  ven- 
geance, though  j ujl ice,  not  vengeance,  is  proper- 
ly in  him. 

Having  now  proved  (as  you  fuppofe)  that  God 

has 

t P-  76. 


•f  P*  74* 


[ 2*4  ] 


lias  neither  anger  nor jujhce , it  remains  only  to 
{hew  (which  indeed  follows  by  eafy  and  natural 
confequencej  that  he  never  did,  nor  can  pumjlu 
“ To  fay  Adam' s miferable  ftate  was  a punijh- 
ment  inflifted  upon  him  by  God,  is  an  utter  ab- 
furdity.+  His  fin  had  not  the  leafl: punfhment  ot 
any  kind  inflicted  upon  it  by  God.”^: 

This  is  flat  and  plain.  But  let  us  fee  how  far 
this  account  agrees  with  that  which  God  himfelf  . j 
hath  given. 

Of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  thou, 

J. halt  not  eat : in  the  day  thou  eatejl  thereof  thou 
fhalt furely  die,  Gen.  ii.  17. 

And  the  ferpent  [aid  unto  the  woman , ye  Jliall 
not  die,  ch.  iii.  4.  And  the  woman,  bang  deceiv- 
ed, did  eat,  1 Tim.  ii.  14.  and  gave  unto  her 
hufband  and  he  did  eat,  Gen.  iii.  6. 

And  the  Lord  God  faid  unto  the  ferpent,  Be- 
caufe  thou  haf  done  this,  thou  art  curfed — Dufl 
thou fhalt  eat  all  the  days  of  thy  life,  vcr.  14. 

And  I will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  wo- 
man, ver.  15.  .11 

Unto  the  woman  he  faid,  I wilt  greatly  multiply  i 
thy  /orrow  and  (that  is,  in ) thy  conception,  ver.  16,  i 
And  unto  Adam  he  faid,  br.caufe  thou  hajl  eaten  !i 
of  the  tree , curfed  is  the  ground  for  thy  Jake  : in  | If 
forrow  fialt  thou  eat  of  it  all  the  days  of  thy  life, 


ver.  17. 


Dufl  thou  art,  and  unto  dufl  thou  .fhalt  return. 


ver.  19. 


Can 


f Spirit  of  Prayer,  P.  I.  p.  2.4. 


t p.  26, 


[ 2l5  ] 

Can  any  man  read  this  and  affirm,  “ God 
did  not  infli&  the  ^eafl  pumjhment  of  any  hind, 
either  on  Eve  or  Adam , or  the  ferpent  ?:’  With 
what  eyes  or  underftanding  then  mult  he  read  ? 

But  you  fay,  “ AH  that  came  on  Adam 
was  implied  in  what  he  chofe  to  bimfellV’t  It 
was.  He  chofe  it  to  himfef'ui  the  fame  fenfe, 
that  he  who  robs,  chufes  to  be  hanged.  But 
this  does  not  at  all  prove,  that  the  death  which 
one  or  the  other  buffers  is  no  punifhment. 

You  go  on.  “ Fire  and  brimf  one,  or  manna 
rained  on  the  earth,  are  only  one  and  the  fame 
love.  I It  was  the  fame  love  that  preferved  Noah 
burnt  up  Sodotn  and  overwhelmed  Pharaoh  in 
in  the  Red  Sea.”|| 

Surely  nothing  can  equal  this,  unlefsyou  add 
(which  indeed  you  mull  do,  to  be  confident  with 
yourfelf)  “ It  is  one  and  the  fame  love  which 
will  fay,  Come  ye  blejjcd,  and,  Depart  ye  cuifed, 
into  everlajling  fire  A 

You  add,  “ Whom  the  Lord  loveih  he  chafincth. 
Here  you  have  God’s  own  word  for  if,  nothing 
hut  love  chafneth.”  \ W e know  his  love  challneih 
his  children.  Ol  thefe  only  God  is  fpeaking 
here,  appears  from  the  latter  claufe  of  the  fen- 
tence.  And  yet  we  cannot  fay  even  as  to  them. 
It  is  nothing  but  Jus  love.  It  is  mercy  mixt  with 
jultice, 

You  cite  one  text  more.  Amos  iv.  9 “ I have 
Jmilten  you  : yet  have  ye  not  returned  to  me ,” 

and 

+ p.  25.  t So.  of  Love,  P.  II,  p,  -2.  ]|  p.  78.  §p.8i. 


[ ■«*  ] 

and  fay,  **  Now  how  is  it  poffible  for  words  to 
give  ftronger  proof  ?”f  Proof  of  what  ? Not 
that  God  did  not punifk  them  : but  that  in  the 
midji  of  wrath  he  remembered  mercy . 

To  thefe  texts  of  fcripture  (wide  enough  of 
the  point)ycu  fubjoin,  “ The  doftrine  of  atone- 
ment made  by  Chrift  is  the  ftrongefl  demonftra- 
tion,  that  the  wrath  to  be  atoned,  cannot  be  in 
God.”}:  Who  talks  of  wrath  to  be  atoned?  The 
wrath  to  be  atoned  is  neither  fenfe  nor  EngUJh ; 
though  it  is  a folecifm  you  perpetually  run  into: 

(I  hope,  not  on  purpofe  to  puzzle  the  caufe) 
that  the fin  to  be  atoned  cannot  be  in  God  we  all 
allow  ; but  it  does  not  affeft  the  quellion. 

Once  more,  to  filence  all  contradiftion  at 
once,  to  Hop  the  mouths  of  all  gainfayers,  you 
fay,  “ This  (that  there  is  no  anger,  no  vindi&ivc 
juflice  in  God,  no punifiment  at  all  inflifted  by 
him)  is  openly  aflerted,  conftantly  affirmed  and 
repeated  in  the  plained  'letter  of  fcripture."  W he- 
lper this,  or  the  very  reverfe  is  true,  will  ap- 
pear, from  a lew  out  of  numberlefs  texts,  which  j 
f ffiall  barely  fet  down,  without  any  comment,  i 
and  leave  to  your  cool  confideration. 

You  fay,  I.  There  is  no  vindi&ive,  avenging,  t 
or  punitive f if  ice  in  C»od  : II.  There  is  no  wrath  I 
or  anger  in  God.  III.  God  inflifts  no  pun  fi-  |i 
went  .1  any  creature,  neither  in  this  world,  nor 
that  to  come, 

God 

$ P-  ** 


+ ibid. 


[ 217  ] 


God  fays, 

I.  The  juft  Lord  is  in  the  inidjl  of  you , Zepb. 
in.  5. 

Juftice  and  judgment  are.  the  habitation  of  thy 
throne,  Pfalm  lxxxix.  14. 

Wilt  thou  condemn  him  that  is  mojl  juft.  ? Job 
xxx  iv.  17. 

He  is  excellent  in  power,  and  in  plenty  of jufice. 
Job  xxxvii.  13. 

Juft  and  true  are  thy  ways,  0 King  of  faints. 
Rev.  xv.  3. 

Thou  art  juft  in  all  that  is  brought  upon  us, 
Neh.  ix.  33. 

There  is  no  Cjo&beftde  me,  a juft  God  and  a. 
Saviour,  Ifaiah  xlv.  21. 

Whom  God  hath  Jet  forth,  that  he  might  'be 
juft  and  the  juftifer  of  him  that  believeth  in  Jefus, 
Rom.  iii.  23,  26. 

II.  The  Lord  heard  their  words,  and  was  wroth 
Heat.  i.  34. 

The  Lord  was  wroth  with  me  for  your  fakes, 
Ch.  iii.  26. 

I was  wroth  with  my  people,  Ifai.  xlvii.  6. 

For  his  covetoufnefs  J was  wroth,  Ch.  lvii.  17. 

And  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  againji 
Ifrael,  Num.  xxv.  3. 

His  wrath  is  again ft  them  that  forfake  him, 
Ezra  viii.  22. 

Thou  art  very  wroth  with  us,  Lam.  v.  20. 

Thou  art  wroth,  for  we  have finned , If.  ixiv.  5. 
Vol.  XIX.  K Who 


[ *>*  ] 

Who  may  j land  in  thy  fight,  when  thou  art  an - 
gry?  Pfalm  Ixxiv.  7. 

/ have  mingled  my  drink  with  weeping , becaufe 
of  thine  indignation,  and  thy  wrath,  Pf.  cii.  9,  10. 

In  my  wrath  I fmote  thee,  I fa.  lx.  to. 

He  hath  vifited  in  his  anger,  Job  xxxv.  15. 

God  dijlributcth  fotrow  in  his  anger,  Ch.  xxii. 
*7- 

I have  J'een  nJJlitUon  by  the  rod  of  his  wrath, 
Lam.  iii.  1. 

I /ware  in  my  wrath,  they  Jhall  not  enter  into 
my  ref,  Pfalm  xcv.  11. 

He  ccjleth  upon  them  the  ftercenefs  of  his  anger, 
■wrath  and  indignation — He  made  a way  to  his 
anger,  he  fpared  not  their  foul jrom  death,  Pfal. 
Jxxviii.  49,  50. 

At  his  wrath  the  earth  Jhall  tremble,  Jer.  x.  10. 

The  land  is  defolate  becauje  of  his  anger,  Ch. 
■xxv.  38. 

By  his  anger  they  are  confumed,  Job  iv.  9. 

The  Loid  fall  [wallow  them  up  in  his  wrath, 
and  the fire  Jhall  devour  them , Pia.  xxi.  9. 

The  Lord  turned  not  Jrom  his  wrath,  2 Kings 
xxiii.  26. 

For  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  his 
hand  is  fir  etched  out  [till,  I fa.  v.  2.5. 

The  Lord  is  fow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kind - 
nefs  ; he  will  not  always  chide,  neither  keepeth  he 
his  anger for  ever,  Pfa.  ciii.  8,  9. 

The  Lord  turned  from  the  ferceuefs  of  his  an* 
ger,  JoJk.  vii.  26. 


la 


[ 2I9  ] 

In  wrath  remember  mercy,  Hab.  iii.  2. 

Though  thou  waft  angry,  thine  anger  is  turned 
away,  Ifa.  xii.  1. 

Many  a time  turned  he  his  anger  away,  Pfah 
lxxvii.  38. 

III.  I will  punifh  the  world  for  their  evil,  and 
the  wicked  for  their  iniquity,  Ifa.  xiii.  11. 

Bthold  the  Lord  cometh  to  punilh  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  earth  for  their  iniquity,  Ch.  xxvi.  21, 

Is  not  defiru&ion  to  the  zvicked,  and  a f range 
punifhment  to  the  workers  of  iniquity? Job  xxxi.  3. 

1 will  punifh  you  according  to  the  fruit  of  your 
doings,  Jer.  xxi.  14. 

I will  punifli  you for  all  your  iniquities,  Amos 
iii.  2. 

If  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  me,  then  I will  pu- 
nifh you  J even  times  more  for  yeur fns.  Lev.  xxvi. 
18. 

I will  punifh  all  that  opprefs  them,  Ifa.  xxx.  20. 

Now  which  am  I to  believe,  God  orman  ? 

Your  miferable  philofophy  leads  you,  in  the 
third  place,  totally  to  deny  the  fcripture  dodfrine 
ofjuftification.  Indeed  you  do  not  appear  to 
have  the  leaf!  conception  of  the  matter:  no,  not 
even  to  know  what  the  term  juf  if  cation  means. 
Accordingly  you  affirm, 

“ Salvation  (which  as  all  divines  agree,  in- 
cludes both  jufifcation  zn&fandlification)  is  no- 
thing elfe-but  to  be  made  like  ChriftAf 

K 2 “ Re- 

f Spirit  of  Prayer.  Part.  I.  p.  53. 


[ 220  ] 

•*  Regeneration  is  the  whole  of  man’s  falva- 
tion.  t 

Redemption  is  nothing  dlfe  but  the  life  of  God 
in  the  foul.  | 

“ The  one  only  work  of  CbriA  as  your  Re- 
deemer is,  to  raife  into  life  the  fmolhered  fpark  of 
heaven  in  you.)) 

“ He  is  our  atonement  and  reconciliation  with 
God,  becaule  by  him  we  are  let  again  inourfirft 
flate  ol  holinefs.  § 

“ The  atonement  of  the  divine  wrath  or  jujlice" 

(a  mere  folecifm,  on  which  your  whole  reafon- 
ing  for  feveral  pages  is  built)  *•  and  the  extin- 
guishing of  On  in  the  creature,  are  only  different 
exprellions  of  the  fame  thing.”  5 (Nay  the  for- 
mer is  an  exprelfron  of  nothing  : it  is  flat  non-  j 
fenfe.) 

“ All  that  Chrifl  does  as  an  atonement,  has  no 
other  operation  but  that  of  renewing  the  fallen 
nature  of  man.”  ft 

Here  are  feven  peremptory  affertions.  But 
'till  they  are  fully  proved,  I cannot  give  up  my 
bible. 

But  you  grow  bolder  and  bloder  ; and  fay 
“ The  fatisfafiion  of  Chrifl  is  reprefented  in  all 
our  fyflems  of  divinity,  as  a fatisfaftion  made  to 
God,  and  the  fufferings  and  death  of  Chrifl,  as 
that  which  could  only  avail  with  God  to  have 
mercy  on  man.  Nay,  what  is  fill  worfe , if pof- 

f&K 

4 P.  II.  p.  37.  J P.  I.  p.  79.  |j  sp.  of  Love,  P.  II.  p.  45. 

2*1.  p.  ro.  § Pi  II,  p.  85-  S p.  106.  p.  (ji, 


[ 2Z1  ] 

jfble,  the  ground  and  nature  and  efficacy  of  this 
great  tranfadlion  between  God  and  man,  is  ofteh 
explained  by  debtor  and  creditor:  man  as  having 
contrahled  a debt  with  God,  which  he  could-  not 
pay,  and  God  as  having  a right  to  injijl  upon  tie 
payment  of  it”\ 

“ There  is  no  wrath  in  God  no  fhhtious  a- 
tonement , no  folly  of  debtor  and  creditor  f 
“ What  is  ff  ill  worfe  if  poflible  ! Folly  of  debtor 
and  creditor  1”  Surely  I would  not  have  fpoken 
thus,  unlefs  I had  been  above  the  Son  of.  God- 
After  this  manner  pray  ye.  Forgive  us  our  debts 
as  we  forgive  our  debtors,  Matt , vi.  eg  i-a» 

And  Jefas  Jaid , There  was  a certain  creditor 
which  had  two  debtors,  Luke  vii.  41. 

The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  likened  to  a king  who 
would  take  account  of  his Jervants.  And  one  was 
brought  unto  him  who  owed  him  ten  thoufand  ta- 
lents. But  for  as  much  as  he  had  not  to  pay; 
his  Lord  commanded  him  to  be  fold  and  all  that 
he  had.  The  fervant  fell  down,  faying.  Lord 
have  patience  with  me.  And  his  Lord  was 
moved  with  companion,  and  forgave  him  the  debt* 
Yet  afterwards  on  his  unmercifulnefs  to  nis 
fellow-fervant,  he  retraced  that  forgivenefs ; 
and  delivered  him  to  the  tormentors  ; till  he 
fiould  pay  all  that  was  due  unto  him.  So  hke- 
wife  fiall  my  heavenly  Father  do  unto  you  alfo,  if 
ye  from  your  heart  forgive  not  every  one  his  brother 
their  t reji p off. ~es,  Matt,  xviii.  23 , &c. 

K3  Is 


106, 


§ P-  *3‘.‘ 


£ 222  ] 

Is  not  man  here  reprefented  as  having  contract- 
ed a debt  with  God , which  he  cannot  pay  ? And 
God  as  having  ncverthelefs  a right  to  inftji  upon 
the  payment  oj  it  ? And  a light,  if  he  hath  not  to 
pay,  of  delivering  him  to  the  tormentors  ? And  is  it 
not  exprefsly  afferted,  that  God  will,  in  fome 
cafes  claim  this  right,  and  life  it  to  the  utter- 
moA  ? Upon  whom  then  lights  this  imputation  of 
folly,  and  of  what  is  fill  war  fe  ? Lord,  lay  not 
this Jm  to  their  charge  ! Forgive  them  for  they  know 
not  what  they  do. 

But  if  the  Son  of  God  did  not  die  to  atone 
for  our  fins,  what  did  he  die  for  ? 

You  an-fwer,  “ He  died, 

1.  “ To  extinguijh  our  own  hell  within  us.”+ 

Nay,  the  fcripture  reprefents  this,  not  as  the 

firft,  but  the  fecond  end  of  his  death. 

2.  “ To  Jhew  that  he  was  above  the  world, 
death,  hell,  and  Satan  : 

Where  is  it  written,  that  he  died  for  this 
end  ? Could  he  not  have  done  this  without  dying 
at  all  ? 

3.  “ His  death  was  the  only  poffible  way  of 
overcoming  all  the  evil  that  was  in  tallen  man.  ^ 

This  is  true,  fuppofing  he  atoned  for  our  fins. 
But  if  this  fuppofition  be  not  made,  his  death  was 
not  the  only  poffible  way  whereby  the  Almighty 
could  have  overcome  all  things. 

4.  “ Through  this  he  got  power  to  give  the 

fame 

+ Spirit  of  Prayer,  Part  II.  p.  159. 

$P.  130,1s1*  S P'129* 


L 22  3 J 

fame-  viEfcry  tx>  all  his  brethren  of  the  humans 
sace.”|JJ 

Had  he  not  this  power  before  ? Otherwife, 
how  was  he  5 ’dv.he  that  is  ; God  over  all;  hleffed 
for  ever  ? 

If  Chrift  died  for  no  other  ends  than  thefe, 
what  need  was  there  of  his  being  more  than  a crea- 
ture P 

As  you  feem  never  to  have  employed  your 
thoughts  on  jujiif cation  or  redemption,  in  the 
fcripture  fenfe,  I beg  leave  to  fubjoin  a plain  ac- 
count thereof,  wrote  by  a woman  of  the  laft  cen- 
tury. 

l.  “ Chi  ill  + hath  acquired  for  us  a right  to 
eternal  life  by  his  fatisfaffion  and  merits  alone. 
Neither  our  repentance  nor  amendment,  can  be 
any  fatisfaclion  for  fin.  It  is  only  through  his 
blood  that  we  have  redemption,  Eph.  i.  7.  This 
alone  cleahfeth  us  from  all  fin,  1 John  i.  7.  And 
herein  was  the  love  of  God  manifefled  towards  us, 
that  he  J'ent  his  Sen  to  he  the  propitiation  for  our 
Jins,  1 John  iv.  9,  10.  So  was  the  Lord  our 
righteoufhejs,  Jer.  xxiii.  6.  without  which  we 
could  not  have  been  jufiified.  As  man  owed  his 
Creator  the  perfect  obedience  of  his  whole  life, 
or  a punifhment  proportioned  to  his  tranfgreflion, 
it  was  impoffible  he  could  fatisfy  him,  by  a par- 
tial and  imperfett  obedience.  Neither  could  he 
K 4 merit 

II  P-  is2- 

.f  Anne  Maria:  a Schurman  ’e-je^x  Pars  II.  p, 
118,  &c. 


[ 224  ] 

merit  any  thing  from  him,  to  whom  he  owed  all 
things.  There  was  need  therefore  of  a Media- 
tor, who  could  repair  the  immenfe  wrong  he 
had  done  to  the  Divine  Majelty,  fatisfy  the  Su- 
preme Judge,  who  had  pronounced  the  fentence 
of  death  againft  the  tranfgreffors  pf  his  law,  fuffer 
in  the  place  of  his  people,  and  merit  for  them 
pardon,  holinefs,  and  glory.  Accordingly  he 
gave  himjtlf  a ranfom  for  all,  i Tim.  ii.  6.  and 
by  himfef purged  our  fins,  Heb.  i.  3.  He  loved  us, 
and  gave  hvnfelf for  us,  an  offering  and  a facrifce 
to  God,  Eph.  v.  2.  So  we  read,  God  raifed  him 
from  the  dead ; who  was  delivered for  our  offences , 
and  raifed  again  for  our  juf  if  cation  : becaufe  our 
furety’s  being  difcharged,  by  the  will  and  act  of 
the  Judge  himfelf,  is  a full  proof  that  he  has  paid 
our  whole  debt.” 

2.  “ Nor  is  there  any  more  fure  way  to  the 
imitation  of  Chrift,  than  faith  in  Chrift  crucified, 
in  him  who  fuffered for  us,  leaving  us  an  example , 
that  we  might  tread  in  his  fieps  : who  died  for  us, 
while  we  were  yet  enemies,  that  we  might  be 
jufified  by  his  blood,  Rom.  v.  9.  Yet  it  is  true 
this  doftrine  finds  no  place  in  thofe  who  are 
proud  of  heart,  who  love  their  own  reafonings , 
and  have  no  tafie  for  the  fincere  milk  oj  the.  word. 
But  it  is  precious  to  them  who  feel  the  weight  of 
their  (ins,  who  know  they’  arc  by  nature  children 
ff  wrath,  and  at  the  fame  time  utterly'  incapab  e 
either  of  paying  the  debt,  of  rifing  from  the 
death  of  fin,  of  conquering  themfelves,  the 

world, 


C «5  ] 

world,  and  the  devil,  or  of  meriting  eternal 
life.” 

3.  “ The  origin  and  caufe  of  our  redemption 
is,  the  ineffable  love  of  God  the  Father,  who 
willed  to  redeem  us  by  the  blood  of  his  own  Son: 
the  grace  of  the  Son,  who  freely  took  our  curfe 
upon  him,  and  imparts  his  blefling  and  merits  to 
us.  And  the  Holy  Spirit  who  communicates  the 
love  of  the  Father,  and  the  grace  of  the  Son  to 
our  hearts.” 

“ When  we  fpeak  erf  this,  and  of  the Jatisfac- 
tion  of  Chrift,  we  fpeak  of  the  inmofl  myllery  of 
the  Chriflian  faith.  Therefore  all  the  inventions 
of  men  ought  now  to  be  kept  at  the  utmofl  dif- 
iance : nor  can  any  thing  certain  be  effablifhed, 
without  the  exprefs  authority  of  feripture.  And 
heiein  is  offered  firfl  to  our  confideration,  the 
only  begotten  Son  of  God,  as  the  head  of  the 
redeemed,  the  righteous  fervant  of  God,  who  by 
the  knowledge  of  himfelf  [hall  j ujijfy  many,  Ifa. 
liii.  xi.  Him  God  hath  conflituted  the J'urety  of 
that  better  covenant,  Heb.  vii.  22.  The  covenant 
of  grace.  And  how  clearly  is  his  execution  of 
this  office  deferib'ed  in-the  fifty-third  chapter  of- 
Ifaia'n  r Where  the  prophet  deferibes  him  as- 
bearing  our  griefs,  or  fins,  and  carrying  our*- Jar-- 
rows,  ver.  4.  AH  we,  favs  he,  like  Jheep  have 
gone  aji ray,  ice  have  turned  every  one-to  his  own  ■ 
way  ; and  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of 
us  all,  ver.  6.  All  mankind  have  forfaken  God,\ 
and  placed  their  own  will  upon  his  throne,  and  •' 

K5  fo- 


[ 226  ] 

fo  were  liable  to  the  higheft  punifhment,  when 
the  Mediator  voluntarily  interpofed  himfelf  be- 
tween them  and  the  juft  Judge.  And  the  in- 
comprehenfible  love  of  God  that  he  might  fpare. 
them,  fpared  not  his  own  Son.  This  is  (hewn  in 
thofe  words.  The  Lord  hath,  laid  on  him  the  iniqui- 
ty oj  us  all.  It  was  on  this  account  that  he  was 
hpprjfed  and  afplitled  \ and  brought  as  a lamb  to 
thejlaughter , vet'.  7.  while  God  made  him  to  be 
fin  for  us.  who  knew  no  fin,  that  we  might  be  made 
the  righteoufuefs  oj  God  in  him,  2 Cor.  v.  21.  This 
is  expreft  in  the  9th  and  10th  verfes. — He  had 
done  no  violence,  nor  was  any  deceit  in  his  mouth . 
Yet  it  pleafed  the  Lord  to  bruife  him,  when  he 
made  his  foul  an  offering  for fin.  How  exactly  do 
his  own  words  agree  with  thefe  ? I am  the  good 
Shepherd,  and  I lay  down  my  life  for  the  Jhtep, 
John  x.  14,  ig.  For  them  was  he  takenfrom pri- 
fon  and  from  judgment,  and  cut  oft  out  of  the 
land  of  the  living,  ver.  8.  How  doth  God  here- 
in commend  his  love  towards  us,  in  delivering  up 
his  own  Son  to  die  for  us  ? Yea,  God  was  pleafed 
with  bruiting,  him,  when  cloathed  with  our  flelh, 
and  bearing  our  fins,  he  manifefted  to  angels 
and  men  his  infinite  love  of  divine  juftice, 
till  being  made  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death 
oj  the  cr ofs,  he  fatisfied  its  utmoft  demand. 

“ It  was  then  God  was  pleafed  to  bruif  him, 
when  he  made  his  Joul  an  offering  for  fn.  He 
then  appeared  before  the  Judge  ol  ah,  under  the 
hJenefs  cf fuful fjh,  and  for  fin,  as  the  apoftle 

fpeaks. 


[ 227  ] 


fpeaks.  And  therefore  God  was  pleafed  to  con- 
demn Jin  in  the  Jlefh,  Rom.  viii.  g,  4.  to  bruife 
him  who  fuftained  the  perfon  of  finners.  But 
this  was  only  the  prelude  of  a glorious  viftory. 
Therefore  the  prophet  adds,  He Jhall fee  his  Jeed, 
he  fall  prolong  his  days , and  the  pleajure  of  the 
Lord  fiall proffer  in  his  hand,  ver.  10.  Alter  re- 
peating, ver.  1 1.  the  fura  of  all,  He fiall  bear  their 
iniquities,  he  fubjoins  the  caufe  of  his  reward, 
ver.  12.  Becaufe  he poured  out  his  J'oul  unto  death, 
and  was  numbered  with  the  tranfgreJJ'ors  : Jor  he 
bore  the  fin  of many,  and  made  interceffion  Jor  the 
tranfgrejfors .” 

“ The  fifth  verfe,  of  which  I have  not  yet 
fpoken,  renders  this  great  truth  dill  more  evi- 
dent. He  was  wounded  Jor  our  tranjgrejfions,  he 
Toas  bruifedfor  our  iniquities  : the  chajlifement  of 
our  peace  was  upon  him,  and  by  his  fripes  we  are 
healed.  He  loved  his  own  body  lefs  than  his  myf- 
tical  body  the  church,  and  therefore  gave  the  for- 
mer for  the  latter,  to  redeem  and  purchafe  it  with  - 
his  own  blood , by  paying  himfelf  as  a ranfom  for 
it.  Hereby  nailing  the  hand-zuriting  which  was . 
againjl  us  to  the  crofs,  he  took  it  out  of  the  way, 
and  fo  became  our  peace." 

*4.  “ From  all  which  it  appears*  that  Chrift; 
was  not  only  a pattern,  but  firft  and  principally 
the  furety  of  the  new  covenant,  yea,  a facnfice- 
and  a viftim,  for  the  fins  of  his  people  ; whom 
Cod  hath  fet  forth  to  be  a propitiation,  through 
faith  in  his  blood,  Rom.  iii.  2£.  And  that  preci— 
K 6 ous 


[ 228  ] 

mis  facri fice  offered  on  the  crofs,  is  the  very 
center  and  marrow  of  the  gofpel.  To  that  one 
offering  whereby  our  great  High  Pried  hath  per  - 
Jetted for  ever  than  that  are  fa nil  i fed,  Heb.  x.  1 |. 
all  the  antient  facrifices  referred,  as  well  as  nnm- 
berlefs  other  types  and  figures.  All  thefe , fays 
the  apollle,  were  fhadows  oj  things  to  come,  but 
the  body  is  Chrijl,  Col.  ii.  17.  He  it  was,  who 
not  by  the  blood  of buds  and  goats,  but  by  his  own 
blood  entered  into  the  hohejl,  having  obtained  eter- 
nal redemption  for  us,  Heb  xi.  12.  In  confe- 
quence  of  this  we  are  accepted,  through  the  of- 
fering of  the  body  of  Chrijl  once  for  all,  chap.  x. 

10.  In  all  the  antient  types  and  figures  without 
Jhed ding  of  blood  there  was  no  remi/jion  : which 
was  intended  to  fhew  there  never  could  be  any 
without  the  blood  of  the  great  Antitype  : with- 
out that  grand  propitiatory  lacrifice,  which  (like 
the  figure  of  it)  was  to  be  offered  without  the 
gate” 

“ Indeed  the  whole  worlhip  of  the  Old  Tefla- 
ment  teaches  nothing  elie  but  the  JatisJ attion 
made  by  the  blood  of  Clirilf,  and  our  reconcilia- 
tion with  God  thereby  : hence  he  is  ft i led  Ihe 
Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  array  the  Jin  of  the  world ; 
with  a view  to  the  pafchal  lamb,  and  the  other 
lambs  that  were  offered  in  facrifice:  on  which 
account  the  inhabitants  of  heaven  likewife  giv£ 
gt'or  v and  fng  a new  fong,  be.caufe  he  hath  r catena d 
them  unto  God  by  his  blood,  out  of  every  tribe  and 
tongue  and  people  and  nation,  Rev.  v.  9.'’ 

* 5.  “ To 


[ 229  3 

* 5.  “To  this  might  he  added  the  numerous 
figures  that  occur  in  the  lives  of  the  old  patri- 
archs, prophets  and  kings.  But  it  may  fuffice  to 
add  to  the  preceding  only  two  teftimonies  more 
of  the  manner  of  our  redemption  by  a proper  fa- 
crtfice:  the  one  that  of  St.  Paul,  Chrift  hath  de- 
livered us  from  the  cur  Je  of  the  law,  bang  made  a 
cut  je  for  us  ; as  it - is  written,  cur  fed  is  every  one 
that  hangeth  on  a tree.  Gal.  iii.  13.  The  other  of 
St.  Peter,  Who  himjelj bore  our  fins,  111  his  own 
body  on  the  tree,  1 Pet.  ii.  2.J.  From  all  this 
abundantly  appears,  the  fubftitution  of  the  Mef- 
fiah  in  the  place  ol  his  people,  thereby  atoning 
for  their  fins,  and  reftoring  them  to  the  favour  of 
God.  ’ 

“ Thefe  are  the  points  which  are  fo  vehe- 
mently oppofed  by  Socinus  and  his  followers; 
who  rob  Cbrilt  of  the  principal  part  of  his  prieflly 
office,  and  leave  him  only  t fiat  of  interceding 
for  us  by  prayer:  as  if  any  inter  cef ion  were  wor- 
thy of  Chriil,  which  had  not  his  full JahsfciElion 
and  propitiatory  facrifice  for  its  foundation.  In- 
deed thefe  cannot  be  put  afunder,  as  fufficiently 
appears  from  the  words  cited  before,  He  bore  the 
Jin  of  many,  and  made  intercejion  f or  the  tranf- 
orejjots:  where  the  Holy  Gbofl  clofely  joins  his 
interceffion,  with  his  fatisfaflion  made  bv  facri- 
fice. Thefe  and  a thoufand  other  folid  argu- 
ments that  might  be  advanced  in  proof  of  this 
fundamental  dobtrine,  overturn  all  the  caivils  that 

flow 


[ 22°  ] 

flow  from  corrupt  reafcn , which  indeed  are  weak 
and  thin  as  a fpider’s  web.” 

I have  dwelt  the  longer  on  this  head,  becaufe 
of  its  inexpreflible  moment.  For  whether  or  no 
the  doctrine  of  juf  if  cation  by  faith  be,  as  all 
protellans  thought  at  the  time  of  the  reformati- 
on, Arliculus  Jr arihs  vel  cadentis  Eccltficz , a doc- 
trine without  which  there  can  be  no  Chrijhan 
church  : molt  certainly  there  can  be  none  where 
the  zvho'e  notion  of  jijiification  is  ridiculed  and  ex- 
ploded : unlefs  it  be  fuch  a church  as  includes, 
according  to  your  account,  every  child  of  man  : 
of  which  ccnfequently  Turks,  Beilis  and  Pagans 
are  as  real  members,  as  the  molt  pious  Chriflian 
under  the  fun.  I cannot  but  obferve,  that  this  is 
the  very  elfence  of  Deifm  : no  ferious  Infidel 
need  contend  for  more.  I would  therefore  no 
more  fet  one  of  this  opinion  to  convert  Deifls, 
than  I would  fet  a Turk  to  conveit  Maho- 
metans. 

4.  As  every  one  that  is  juflified  is  lorn  of  God t 
I am  naturally  led  to  confider  in  the  next  place 
(fo  far  as  it  is  delivered  in  the  tracts  now  before 
us)  your  doftrine  of  the.  new-birth. 

“In  the  day  that  Adam  ate  of  the  tree  he  died ; 
that  is,  his  heavenly  fpirit,  with  its  heavenly  bo- 
dy, were  extinguifhed.  To  make  that  heavenly 
fpirit  and  body  to  be  alive  again  in  man,  this  is 
regeneration O no  ; this  is  not;  nor  any  thing 

like 


-t  Sp.  of  Pr.  P.  I.  p.  9. 


[ 23*  ] 

like  if.  This  is  the  unfcripturai  dream  of  Beh- 
men’s  heated  imagination. 

“ See  the  true  reafon  why  only  the  Son  of 
God  could  be  our  Redeemer.  It  is  becaufe  he  alone 
could  be  able  to  bring  to  life  attain  that  celeflial 
fpirit  and  body  which  had  died  in  Adam.”+ 

Not  fo  : but  he  alone  could  be  our  Redeemer , 
becaufe  he  alone,  “ by  that  one  oblation  of  him- 
felf  once  offered,  could  make  a fufficient  facrifce 
cm&falufaQion  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  world.” 

“ See  alfo  why  a man  muff  be  born  again  of 
water  and  of  the  Spirit.  He  muff  be  born  again 
of  the  Spirit , becaufe  Adam’s  heavenly  fpirit  was 
lojl’%  Nay,  but  becaufe  Adam  had  lof  the  in- 
ward image  of  God,  wherein  he  was  created. 
And  no  lets  than  the  almighty  Spirit  of  God 
could  renew  that  image  in  his  foul. 

“ He  muff  be  born  of  water,  becaufe  that  hea- 
venly body  which  Adam  loll  was  formed  out  of 
the  heavenly  materiality,  which  is  called  water.”§ 
Vain  pbilofophy!  The  plain  meaning  of  the 
exprefficn,  Except  a man  be  born  of  water , is  nei- 
ther more  nor  lefs  than  this,  Except  he  be  bap- 
tized. And  the  plain  reafon  why  he  ought  to  be 
thus  born  of  water  is,  becaufe  God  bath  appointed 
it.  He  bath  appointed  it  as  an  outward  and  vifi- 
ble  fign  of  an  inward  and  fpiritual  grace:  which 
grace  is,  “ a death  unto  fin,  and  a nezv-birth  unto 
righteoif nefs 

“ The  neceffity  of  our  regaining  our  frjl  hea- 
venly 

$ bid. 


1 Ibid, 


+ Ibid. 


[ 232  ] 

venly  body,  is  the  neceffity”  (I  prefume  you 
mean,  the  ground  of  the  neceffity)  “of  our  eat- 
ing the  body  and  blood  of  Chrifi.”t 

Neither  can  I believe  this,  till  I find  it  in  the 
bib'le.  I am  there  taught  to  believe,  that  our 
“ fpiritualiy  receiving  the  body  and  blood  of 
Chrilt,”  which  is  inoli  eminently  done  in  the 
Lord’s  fupper,  is  neceffary  to  “ flrengthen  and 
refrefh  our  fouls,  as  our  bodies  are  by  the  bread 
and  wine.’’ 

“ The  neceffity  of  having  again  our  firfl  hea- 
venly fpirit  is  (hewn,  by  the  neceffity  of  our  be- 
ing baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghofl  !’’t 

No.  T hat  we  mujjt  be  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Ghojl  implies  this  and  no  more,  that  we  cannot 
be  renewed  in  righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs,  any 
otherwife  t)ianby  being  over-ffiadowed,  quicken- 
ed, and  animated  bv  that  bluffed  Spirit. 

“ Our fall  z.r  nothing  e'f  but  the  falling  of  our 
foul  ftom  its  heavenly  body  and  fpirit,  into  a 
beftial  body  ’and  fpirit.  Our  redemption  (you 
mean,  our  new  birth ) is  nothing  elfe  but  the  re- 
gaining our  frjl  angelic  fpirit  end  bodyi'\ 

What  an  account  is  here  of  the  Chriflian  re- 
demption ? How  would  Dr.  Tinda!  have  fmilej 
at  this?  Where  you  fay  redemption  is  nothing 
elfe  but  the  life  of  God  in  the  foul,  you  allow  an 
effential  part  of  it.  But  here,  you  allow  it  to  be 
nothing  elfe  but  that  which  has  no  part  of  it  at  all: 

nothing 

i p.  10.  } ibid.  |]  ibid. 


[ 233  ] 

* nothing  elfe  but  a whim,  a madman’s  dream,  a 
chimera,  a mere  non-entity! 

This  ( Angelic  fpint  and  body ) “ in  fcripture 
is  called  our  new  or  inward  man."  t 

The  inward  man  in  fcripture  means  one  thing, 
the  new  man  another.  The  former  .means, 
the  mind  oppofed  to  the  body  ; tho’  our  outward 
man,  our  body,  perijh,  yet  the  inward  man,  the 
mind  or  foul  is  renewed  clay  by  day,  2 Cor.  iv. 
16.  The  latter  means  miiverfal  holinejs  : put 
off  the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt-,  and  put  on  the 
new  man,  winch  after  God,  is  created  in  rigk - 
teoufnefs  and  true  holinejs,  Eph.  iv.  22.  24. 
But  neither  does  the  one  nor  the  other  ever  mean 
H This  angelic  fpirit  and  body.” 

You  yourfelf  know  better  what  the  new-birtk 
is.  You  defcribe  it  better,  though  {fill  with 
amazing  queernefs  of  language,  where  you 

I 

“ Man  hath  the  light  and  water  of  an 
outward  nature  to  quench  the  wrath  of  his  own 
life,  and  the  light  and  meeknefs  of  Chrifl,  as  a 
feed  born  in  him,  to  bring  forth  anew  the  image 
of  God.” 

But  it  is  not  firange,  that  you  fpeak  fo  con- 
fufedly  and  darkly,  as  you  generally  do,  of  the 
New- Birth  feeing  you  feem  to  have  no  concep- 
tion of  that  faith  whereby  we  are  born  again. 

This  abundantly  appears  from  your  frank  de- 
claration, “We  are  neither faved  by  faith  nor  by 

works,’3 


+ ibid. 


[ 234  3 

Works.”  + Flatly  contrary  to  the  declaration  of 
St.  Paw',  By  gi  ace  we  arefaved  through  faith. 

To  put  the  matter  out  of  difpute,  you  de- 
clare that  you  mean  by  faith,  “ a defire  to  be  one 
with  Chrift.”| 

Again.  “ The  defire  of  turning  to  God  is  the 
corning  of  Chrift  into  the  foul.  This  faith  will 
fave  thee.’’  || 

So  in  your  judgment,  having  faith  is,  “ a 
defire  of  coming  to  God,  or  of  being  one  with 
Chrift.”  I know  the  contrary  from  experience., 

I had  this  defire  many  years  before  I even  knew, 
what  faving  faith  was. 

Faith  is  fo  far  from  being  only  this  dtfre,  that 
it  is  no  defre  at  all.  It  differs  from  all  define  tot^  ■. 
gentre,  although  doubtefs  all  good  defires  ac-  ' 
company  it.  It  is,  according  to  St.  Paul,  An 
I'ae an  evidence  or  conviElion,  (which  is  totally 
different  from  a define,  of  things  not  J'een : a fii-  ■ 
pernatural,  a divine  evidence  and  cor.vihho'n  of  the 
things  which  God  hath  revealed  in  bis  word  ; 
of  this  in  particular,  that  the  Son  of  God  hath 
loved  rue  and  given  himfelf  fot  me.  "Whofoever 
hath  this  faith  is  born  of  God.  W hofoever 
thus  believeth  is  faved  ; and  if  he  endure  therein 
to  the  end,  fiall  be yizm/everlaftingly. 

The  procefs  of  this  work  in  the  foul,  of  the 
prefent  falvation  which  is  through  faith,  you 
likewife  defcribe  confufedly  and  obfcurely.  1 he 
Sum  of  what  you  fay  is  this  ; 

“ The 

+ Sp.ofPr.  P.  II.  p.  36.  £P.  I.p.50.  Up.  76* 


[ 235  ] 

“ The  painful  fenfe  of  what  you  are,  kindled, 
into  a working fate  of  fenfbility  by  the  light  of 
God,  is  the  light  and  fire  from  whence  th ejpint 
of  prayer  proceeds.  In  its  firft  kindling  nothing 
is  found  but  pain,  wrath,  and  darknefs.  And 
therefore  its  firft  prayer  is  all  humility .”  [| 

Would  it  not  be  more  intelligible,  if  one  had, 
faid,  “ The  convincing  Spirit  of  God,  gives  yoU 
to  fee  and  feed,  that  you  are  a poor  undone, 
guilt)',  belplefs  finner.  At  the  fame  time,  lie 
incites  you  to  cry  for  help  to  him  who  is  mighty 
tofavi”  This  is  true.  But  it  is  not  true,  that 
in  thejirjl  kindling  of  this  fire,  in  plain  terms, 
during  the  firft  conviElioris,  “ nothing  is  found 
but  pain,  wrath,  and  darknefs Very  often  there 
are  found  even  in  the  firft  conviEfion,  fweet 
gleams  of  light,  touches  of  joy,  of  hope,  and  of 
love  mixt  with  forrow  and  fear.  Much  lefs  is  it 
true,  that  the  frjl  prayer  of  an  awakening  finner 
is  all  humility.  § On  the  contrary,  a finner new- 
ly  awakened,  has  always  more  or  lefs  confi- 
dence in  himfelf,  in  what  he  is,  or  has,  or  does, 
and  will  do  ; which  is  not  humility,  but  downright 
pride.  And  this  mingles  itfelf  with  all  his  prayer 
’till  the  day-ftar  is  juft  riling  in  his  heart. 

You  add,  “ This  prayer  is  met  by  the  divine 
love,  and  changed  into  hymns,  and  fongs,  and 
thankfgivings.”+  It  is  fo,  when  being  jujtifed  by 
faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrift.  “ The  ftate  of  fervor  melts  away 

all 

P.  II.  p.  173.  § p.  173.  t ibid*. 


[ 236  ] 

all  earthly  pafHons  and  affe&ions,  and  leaves  no 
inclination  in  the  foul,  but  to  delight  in  Ood 
alone,  't  It  is  certain,  this  is  the  genuine  effeft 
ot  the  love  of  God  fixed,  abroad  in  the  heart ; which 
expreflion  of  St.  Paul,  I fuppofe  means  ihe  fame 
with  this  Jlate  of  fervor.  “ Then  its-  praver 
changes  again,  and  continually  hands  in  fulnefs 
of  faith,  in  purity  of  love,  in  aJfolute  refigna- 
tion,  to  do  and  be  what  and  how  his  beloved 
pleafeth.  Ibis  is  the  la  ft  hate  of  the  fpirit  of 
prayer,  and  i^  our  highef  union  with  God,  in 
' this  life.”^L 

Ahuredly  it  is : fulnefs  of  faith,  beholding  v'ilh 
open  face  the  glory  of  the  Lord;  purity  of  love, 
free  from  all  mixture  of  its  contrary,  yielding 
the  whole  heart  to  God  ; abfolute  refignation, 
excluding  every  degree  of  felf- will,  facrificing 
every  thought,  word  and  work  to  God.  .But 
do  we  change  direftly,  from  our  f rfl  love , into 
the  higheh  union  with  God  ? Surely  not.  There 
is  an  intermediate  hate  between  that  of  babes  in 
Chrih,  and  that  of  fathers.  You  yourfelf  are 
very  fenfible  there  is  ; although  you  here  fpeak 
as  if  there  were  not. 

You  go  on.  “ People  who  have  long  dwelt  in. 
this  fervor , are  frighted  when  coldnefs  feizes 
upon  them  :”||  that  is,  when  they  lofe  it,  when 
their  love  grows  cold.  And  certainly,  well  they 
may,  if  this  fervor  was  to  bring  them  to  “ ful- 
nefs 

4 ibid.  f p.  173-  t P1  *74* 


C *37  ] 

Kefs  of  faith,  purity  of  love,  and  abfolute  refig- 
nation.”  Well  they  may  be  affrighted,  if  that 
fervor  be  loft,  before  “ it  has  done  its  work.” 

Indeed  they  might  be  affrighted,  when  it  is 
not  loft,  if  that  which  follows  be  true.  “ Fervor 
is  good  and  ought  to  be  loved ; but  dijlrefs  and 
coldnefs  aie  better.f  It  brings  the  foul  nearer  to 
God,  than  the  fervor  did.”^; 

The  fervor , you  fa  id , “ brought  the  foul  to 
its  higheft  union  with  God  in  this  hie.”  Can 
coldnefs  do  more  ? Can  it  bring  us  to  an  union 
higher  than  the  higheft  ? 

To  explain  this  you  fay,  “ The  fervor  made 
the  foul  delight  in  God.  But  it  was  too  much  an 
oicn  delight.  It  was  a fancied  felf  kolinefs,  and 
occafioned  reft  and  fat  is  faction  in  itfelf,  in  a 
fpintual felf.  '\  Either  fervor  does  bring  us  to 
purity  of  love,  and  abfolute  refignation,  or  not. 
To  fay,  it  does  not,  contradicts  what  you  fay 
now.  And  if  it  does,  we  cannot  fay,  “ Coldnefs 
does  the  work  which  fervor  did,  in  an  higher 
r degreed' 

I fhould  not  infill  fo  long  onthefe  glaring  in- 
confiftencies,  were  not  the  doCtrine  you  are  here 
labouring  to  fupport,  abfolutely  inconfiftent  with 
that  of  St.  Paul,  and  naturally  productive  of  the 
moil  fatal  confequences.  St.  Paul  aiferts,  the  pre- 
fent  kingdom  of  God  in  the  foul  is  righteoufnefs 
and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft.  He  con- 
tinually teaches,  that  thefe  which  God  hath 

joinedj 

+ p,  176,  $p.  175-  H ibid. 


E 3 

joined,  man  ought  not  to  put  afunder:  that 
peace  and  joy  fhould  never  be  feparated  from  ngh- 
•teoufnefs,  being  the  divine  means  both  of  preferv- 
ing  and  increafing  it,  and  that  we  may,  yea, 
ought  to  rejoice  evermore , till  the  God  oj peace 
) anclifes  us  wholly.  But  if  thefe  things  are  fo, 
then  “ Dijlrefs  and  coldnefs  are  not  beker  ’ than 
fervent  love  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft. 

Again.  The  dofclriue,  that  it  is  better  and 
more  profitable  for  the  foul,  to  1 ofe  its  fenfe  of 
the  love  of  God  than  to  keep  it,  is  not  only  un- 
fcriptural,  but  naturally  attended  with  the  moll 
fatal  confequences.  Itdireftly  tends  to  obftru£l, 
if  not  deftroy  the  work  of  God  in  the  heart,  by 
caufing  men  to  blefs  themfelves  in  thofe  ways, 
which  damp  t befervor  of  their  affeflions ; and  to 
imagine  hey  are  confiderably  advanced  in  grace, 
when  they  have  grieved,  yea,  quenched  the  Spirit. 
Nay,  but  let  all  who  now  feel  the  love  of  God 
in  their  hearts,  and  walk  in  the  light,  as  he  is 
in  the  light,  labour  by  every  poflible  means  to 
keep  themfelves  in  the  love  of  God.  Let  them  be 
ever  fervent  in  fpirit.  Let  them  rejoice  evermore , 
and  fli r up  the  gift  of  God,  which  is  in  them. 
And  if  at  any  time,  “ Coldnefs  feizes  upon  them,” 
let  them  be  affured,  they  ha ve  grieved  the  Spirit 
ofG od.  Let  them  be  affrighted  : let  them  fear 
left  they  fink  lower  and  lower  ; yea,  into  total 
deadnefs  and  hardnefs  of  heart.  At  the  peril  of 
their  fouls,  let  them  not  reft  in  darknfs,  but  exa- 
mine 


[[  239  ] 

aine  themfelves,  fearch  out  their  Tpirits,  cry  ve- 
hemently to  God,  and  not  ceafe,  ’till  he  reftores 
the  light  of  his  countenance. 

g.  If  this  doftrine  of  the  profitablenefs  of 
coldnefs  above  fervor,  directly  tends  to  make 
believers  eafy,  while  they  are  hiding  back  into 
unbelief,  you  have  another  which  tends  as  di- 
reftly  to  make  them  eafy  who  never  believed  at 
all,  I mean,  that  of  Chrijl  in  every  man.  What 
you  advanced  on  this  head,  I defire  next  to  con- 
fider,  as  the  importance  of  it  requires, 
j “ The  birth  of  Chrift  is  already  begun  in  every 
, one.  Jefus  is  already  within  thee,  (whoever  thou 
artj  living,  /hr ring,  calling,  knocking  at  the  door 
; of  thy  heart.”:}; 

“ Every  man  has  Chrift  in  his  fpirit,  lying 
[ there  as  in  a ftate  of  infenfibility  and  death.''' || 

But  he  is  living  for  all  that.  And  though  in 
a ftate  of  infenfibility , he  is  fir  ring,  calling , knock - 
ing  at  the  door  of  the  heart! 

“ Something  of  heaven  ’ (you  ufe  this  phrafe 
as  equivalent  with  Chrift)  “ lies  in  every  foul  in  a 
ftate  of  inability  and  death.'’) 

“ All  the  holy  nature,  tempers,  and  Spirit  of 
Chrift,  lie  hid  as  a feed  in  thy  foul.’H 

But  are  they  aftive  or  inaftive  ? Living  and 
birring,  or  in  a ftate  of  infenfibility  and  death  ? 

“ Thou  art  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked,  and 

miferable, 

Sp.ofPr.  P.  I-  p.  55.  |t  Sp.  of  Love,  P.  II.  p.  34,  -§  p.  35, 
+ Sp.  of  Pr,  P.  I.  p 68,, 


[ 240  ] 


referable,  while  all  the  peace  and  joy  of  God 
are  within  thee.”t 

This  is  mod  wonderful  of  all  ! Are  thefe  with- 
in him  who  is  dead  in  fin?  Who  is  a “ (han- 
ger to  all  that  is  holy  and  heavenly  ?”  If  they 
are,  how  can  he  be  miferable,  who  has  “ all  the 
peace  and  joy  of  God  within  him  ?”  Will 
you  fay,  “ They  are  in  him  but  he  does  not 
feel  them  ?”  Nay  then,  they  are  not  in  him. 
1 have  peace  in  me,  no  longer  than  I feel  peace , 
1 feel  joy,  or  I have  it  not. 

“ See  here  the  extent  of  the  Catholic  church 
of  Chrift  ! It  takes  in  all  the  world.'"’  ^ 

So  Jews,  Mahometans,  Deifts,  Heathens,  are 
all  members  of  the  chruch  of  Chnfi  ! Should  we 
not  add  devils  too  ? Seeing  thefe  alfo  are  to  dwell 
with  us  in  heaven  ! 

“ Poor  fin ner,  Chirfl  dwelleth  in  the  center, 
the  fund,  or  bottom  of  thy  foul,  jj 

What  is  this  ? What  is  either  the  center,  the 
top  or  bottom  of  a fpirit  ? 

“ When  Adam  fell,  this  center  of  his  foul 
became  a prifoner  in  an  earthly  animal.  But  from 
the  moment  God Jpokt  Chirft  into  Adam,  all  the 
treafures  oithe  divine  nature,  the  light  and  Spirit 
of  God  came  again  into  man,  into  the  center 
of  his  fpul."§ 

I cannot  find  in  the  bible  when  that  was  ; 
when  God  fpoke  Chrifl  into  Adam. 

We 

+ P-  74-  $P-56-  Up-59*  $P-  6°. 


S *4*  ] 

We  come  now  to  the  proofs  of  thefe  ftrong  af- 
fertions. 

And  1.  “ No  faith  could  ever  begin,  unlefs 
every  man  had  Chrift  in  him.”§ 

This  propofition  needs  juft  as  much  proof  it- 
felf,  as  that  which  it  is  brought  to  prove. 

2.  “ Unlefs  the  remains  of  the  perfefft  love 
of  God  were  in  every  man  it  would  be  impof- 
fible  he  {hould  ever  love  God  at  all.”  5 

Why  fo  ? Cannot  God  give  his  love  this 
moment  to  one  who  never  loved  him  before  ? 

3.  “ Unlefs  Chrift  was  hidden  in  the  foul, 
there  could  not  be  the  leaft  beginning  of  man’s 
falvation.  For  what  could  begin  to  defire  hea- 
ven, unlefs  Jomething  of  heaven  was  hid  in  ihe 
foul  ?”+ 

What  could  P Why  any  foul,  which  had  nothing 
but  hell  in  it  before  the  moment  grace  was  n- 
fufed  from  above. 

4.  “ The  ten  commandments  lay  hid  in  men’s 
fouls.”  (how  ?)  “ till  called  into  fenfibility  by 
writing  them  on  ftone.  Juft  fo  Chrijl  lies 
in  the  foul,  till  awakened  by  the  mediatorial  office 
of  the  Holy  Jefusi''% 

This  is  only  aflertion  fl ill,  not  proof.  But 
what  do  you  mean  by  the  mediatorial  office  of 
Chrift?  And  how  is  “ Chrift  awakened  by  the 
mediatorial  office  of  the  Holy  Jefus  ?” 

5.  “ The  fea  cannot  be  moved  by  any  other 

Vol.  XIX.  L wind 

§ Sp.  of  Love,  P.  II.  p,  34.  5 p.38.  t p.  35*  +P‘37' 


C 242  ] 

wind  than  that  which  had  its  birth  from  the  Fea 
itfelf.”|| 

I think,  it  can.  I have  feen  it  “ moved  by 
a wind,  which  had  its  birth  from  the  land.” 

6.  “ The  tnufician  cannot  make  his  inflru- 
r*ent  give  any  other  melody  than  that  which 
lies  hid  in  it,  as  its  own  inward Jiate 

Did  the  tune  them  lie  hid  in  the  trumpet, 
before  the  trumpeter  blew  ? And  was  this  tune, 
or  another,  or  all  tha*  ever  were  and  will  be 
played  on  it,  the  inward Jio.te  of  the  trumpet  ? 

“ No  more  can  the  mind  have  any  grief  or 
joy,  but  that  which  is from  itfelf.  'S 

An  unhappy  comparifon  ! For  the  inflrument 
can  have  no  melody  -or  found  at  all  from  itfelf: 
and  mofl  unhappily  applied  to  the  operations  of 
God  upon  the  fouls  of  men.  For  has  God  no 
more  power  over  my  foul,  than  I have  over  a 
mufical  inflrument  ? 

Thefe  are  your  arguments  to  prove  that  Chrift 
is  in  eveiy  man  ; a bleffing  which  St.  Paul 
thought  was  peculiar  to  i believers.  He  fain  Chrift  is 
in  you,  excepiye.be  reprobates  (unbelievers.)  You 
fay  Chrift  is  in  you,  whether  ye  be  reprobates  or 
no.  If  any  man  hath  not  the  Spirit  of  Chrift 
he  is  none  of  his , faith  tire  apoflle.  Yea,  but 
“ every  man,  faith  Mr.  Law,  hath  the  Spirit  of 
God.  The  Spirit  of  Chrift  is  in  every  foul:'  F 
He  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  life,  faith 
St.  John.  But  Mr.  Law  faith  Every  man  hath 

the 

§ p.  40.  $ p.  42.  Up.  43.  + Spirit  of  Frayer,  P.  I,  p.  63. 


i 243  ] 

the  Son  of  God.  Sleep  on  then  ye  Tons  of  Belial, 
and  take  your  reft  : ye  are  all  fafe  : for  he  that 
hath  the  Son  hath  lif. 

* There  can  hardly  be  anv  do&rine  under 
heaven  more  agreeable  to  llelh  and  blood  : nor 
any  which  more  diretlly  tends,  to  prevent  the 
very  dawn  of  convi&ion,  or  at  leaft  to  hinder  its 
deepening  in  the  foul,  and  coming  to  a found 
ififue.  None  more  naturally  tends  to  keep  men 
afieep  in  fin,  and  to  lull  afteep  thofe  who  begin  to 
beawakened.  Only  perfuade  one  of  this,  “ Chrift 
is  already  in  thy  heart  ; thou  haft  now  the 
infpii ation  of  his  Spirit : all  the  peace  and  joy  of 
God  are  within  thee,  yea,  all  the  holy  nature , 
tempers , and  Spirit  of  Chrift  and  you  need 
do  no  more  : the  fyren  fong  quiets  all  his  forrow 
and  fear.  As  foon  as  you  have  fewed  this  pillow 
to  his  foul,  he  finks  back  into  the  fieep  of 
death. 

VI.  But  you  have  made  an  ample  amends  for 
this,  by  providing  fo  fhort  and  eafy  a way  to 
heaven : not  a long,  narrow,  troublefome,  round 
about  path,  like  that  defcribed  in  the  bible:  but 
one  that  will  as  compendioufly  fave  the  foul,  as 
Dr.  Ward’s  pill  and  drop  heal  the  body  : a way 
fo  plain,  that  they  who  follow  it  need  no  bible, 
no  human  teaching,  no  outward  means  what- 
ever ; being  every  one  able  to  ftand  alone ; every 
one  fufficient  for  himfelf ! 

L 2 


The 


[ 244  ] 

**  The  firji. Jlep,  is,  To  turn  wholly  from  your- 
felf,  and  to  give  up  yourfelf  wholly  unto  God.”+ 
If  it  be,  no  flefh  living  (hall  be  faved.  How 
grievoufly  do  we  ftumble  at  the  threfhold  ? Do 
you  ferioufly  call  this,  The  frjl Jlep?  “ To  turn 
wholly  from  myfelf,  and  give  up  myjelj wholly  un- 
to God  ?”  Am  I then  to  Jlep  firji  on  the  higheft 
round  of  the  ladder  ? Not  unlefs  you  turn  it  up- 
fide  down.  The  way  to  heaven  would  be  {hort 
indeed,  if  the  firji  and  the  lajl  Hep  were  all  one  : 
if  we  were  to  Hep  as  far  the  moment  we  let  out, 
as  we  can  do  till  we  enter  into  glory. 

But  what  do  you  mean  by  giving  up  myfelf  to 
God  ? You  anfwer,  “ Tvery  fincere  with  and 
dtfire  alter  Chrifiian  virtues,  is  giving  up  yourfelf 
to  him,  and  the  very  perfection  of  Jaitkc'i 

Far,  very  far  from  it;  I know  from  the  ex- 
perience of  a thouiand  perfons,  as  well  as  from 
fcripture,  and  the  very  reafon  of  the  thing,  that 
a man  may  have  fincere  defircs  after  all  thefe, 
long  before  he  attains  them.  He  may  finccrely 
zuijh,  to  give  bimfeli  up  to  God,  long  before- 
he  is  able  lo  to  do.  He  may  defire  this,  not 
only  before  he  has  the  perfection , but  before  he 
has  any  degree  of  having  faith. 

More. marvellous  Hill  is  that  which  follows, 
“ d on  may  eafiiy  and  immediately , by  the  mere 
turning  of  your  mind,  have  all  thefe  virtues,  pa- 
tience, meeknefs,  humility,  and  refignaticn  to 
God/'jJ 

Who 

t P«  II.  p.  22.  $ Sp.  of  L&VC,  P.  II.  p.  2J  7.  [1  p , 212, 


[ 245  ] 

Who  may  ? Not  I.  Not  you.  Not  any  that 
is  born  of  a woman  : as  is  proved  by  the  daily 
experience  of  all,  that  know  what  patience, 
meeknefs,  or  refignation  means. 

But  how  lhall  I know  whether  I have  faith  or 
not?  “ I will  give  you  an  infallible  tcuchflone. 
Retire  from  all  conyerfation  only  for  a month. 
Neither  write,  nor  read,  nor  debate  any  thing 
with  youi  felf.  Stop  all  the  former  workings  of 
your  heart  and  mind,  and  Hand  all  this  month  in 
prayer  to  God.  If  your  heart  cannot  give  it/elf 
up  in  this  manner  to  prayer,  be  fully  aifured  you 
are  an  Infidel." + 

If  this  be  fo,  the  Inf  dels  are  a goodly  company  ! 
If  every  man  be  of  that  number,  who  cannot 
“ flop  all  the  former  workings  of  his  heart  and. 
mind,  and  Hand  thus  in  prayer  to  God  for  a. 
month  together.” 

But  I would  gladly  know,,  by  what  authority 
you  give  us  this  touchjlone?  And  how  you  prove 
.it  to  be  infallible  ? I read  nothing  like  it  in  the 
oracles  of  God.  I cannot  find  one  word  there 
of  “ refraining  from  all  converfation,  from  writ- 
ing, and  reading  for  a month.”  (I  fear,  you 
make  no  exception,  in  favour  of  public  w'orflnp, 
or  reading  the  word  of  God.)  Where  does  the 
biblefpeak  of  this  ? Of  “ flopping  for  a month, 
or  a day,  all  the  former  workings  of  my  heart  and 
mind  ? Of  refraining  from  all  converfe  with  the 
children  of  God,  and  from  reading  his  word  ? 

L 3 It 

■f  Sp.  of  P-rayer,  P.  II.  p,  163. 


[ 24«  ] 

It  would  be  no  wonder  ffiould  any  man  make  this 
unfcriptural  (if  not  anti-fcriptural)  experiment,  if 
Satan  were  permitted  to  work  in  him  a Jlrong 
delufion , fo  that  he  fhould  beHeve  a lie. 

Nearly  related  to  this  touchflone  is  the  direc- 
tion which  you  give  elfewhere.  “ Stop  all  felf- 
a&ivity  ; he  retired,  filent,  paffive,  and  humbly 
attentive  to  the  inward  light.  ”+ 

But  beware  the  light  which  is  in  thee  be  not 
darknefs ; as  it  furely  is,  if  it  agree  not  with  the 
law  and  the  tejlimony — ■“  Open  thy  heart  to  all 
its  impreffions” — If  they  agree  with  that  truly  in- 
fallible touchflone.  Otherwife  regard  no  impref- 
fion  of  any  kind,  at  the  peril  of  thy  foul — 
“ wholly  flopping  the  workings  of  thy  own  rea- 
fon  and  judgment.”  I find  no  fuch  advice  in  the 
word  of  God.  And  I fear  they  who  flop  the 
workings  of  their  reafon,  lie  the  more  open  to 
the  workings  of  their  imagination. 

There  is  abundantly  greater  danger  of  this 
when  we  fancy  we  have  no  longer  need  to  “ be 
taught  of  man.”  To  this  your  late  writings  di- 
re£tly  lead.  One  who  admires  them  will  be  very 
apt  to  cry  out,  “ I have  found  all  that  I need 
know  of  God,  of  Chrifl,  of  myfelf,  of  heaven, 
of  hell,  of  fin,  of  grace,  and  of  falvation.”£  And 
the  rather,  becaufe  you  yourfelf  affirm  roundly, 
« when  once  we  apprehend  the  all  of  God,  and 
our  own  nothingnefs”  (which  a man  may  per- 
fuade  himfelf  he  does,  in  lefs  than  four  and 

twenty 

+ P.  I.  p.  77- 82.  JP.1I.  p.  4. 


[ 247  ] 

twenty  hours)  “ it  brings  a kind  of  infallibility 
into  the  foul  in  which  it  dwells:  all-  that  is  vaiiv, 
and  falfe,  and  deceitful,  is  forced  to  vanifh  and 
fly  before  it.”§  Agreeably  to  which  you  tell  your 
convert,  “ You  have  no  queftrons  to  alk  of  any 
body.  "||  And  if,  notwithllanding  this,  he  will 
alk,  “ But  how  am  I to  keep  up  the  flame  of 
love  ?”  You  anfwer,  “ I wonder  you  (hould  want 
to  know  this.  Does  a blind,  or  lick,  or  lame 
man  want  to  know,  how  he  fhould  defue  fight, 
health,  or  limbs  P”1!!  No  ; but  he  wants  to  know, 
how  he  fhould  attain,  and  how  he  Ihould  keep- 
them.  And  he  who  has  attained  the  love  of  God', 
may  ftill  want  to  know  how  he  fhall  keep  it; 
And  he  may  {till  enquire,  “ May  I not  take  my 
own  paffions  or  the  fuggeftions  of  evil  fpints  for 
the  workings  of  the  Spitit  of  God?”+  To  this 
you  anfwer,  “ Every  man  knows,  when  he  is 
governed  by  the  fpirit  of  wrath,  envy  or  covet- 
oufnefs,  as  eafily  and  as  certainly  as  he  knows 
when  he  is  hungry.”];  Indeed  he  does  not;  nei- 
ther as  eafily  nor  as  certainly.  Without  great 
care,  he  may  take  wrath  to  be  piotis  zeal,  envy 
to  be  virtuous  emulation  ; and  covetoufnefs  to 
be  Chrilfian  prudence,  or  lauable  frugality. 
“ Now  the  knowledge  of  the  Spirit  of  God  m 
yourfelf  is  as  perceptible  as  covetoufnefs.” 
Perhaps  fo  ; for  this  is  as  difficultly  perceptible  as 
any  temper  of  the  human  foul — “ And  liable  to 
L 4 no 

§P  I.  p.  95.  ||  Sp.  of  Love,  Part  II.  p.  218.  ISp.  of 

Prayer,  P.  II.  p.  165.  + p.  198.  + ibid. 


[ «4«  ] 

no  more  delufion” — Indeed  it  need  not ; for 
this  is  liable  to  ten  tboufand  delufions. 

You  add,  “ His  Spirit  is  more  diffinguifhable 
from  all  other  fpirits,  than  any  ol  your  natural 
affedlions  are  from  one  another. Suppofe  joy 
and  grief.  Is  it  more  diltinguifhable  from  all  other 
fpirits,  than  thefe  are  from  one  another?  Did 
any  man  ever  miflake  grief  for  joy  ? No,  not 
from  the  beginning  ol  the  world.  But  did  none 
ever  miffake  nature  for  grace  ? Who  will  be  fo 
hardy  as  to  affirm  this  ? 

But  you  fet  your  pupil  as  much  above  the  being 
taught  by  books,  as  being  taught  by  men.  “ Seek, 
fay  you,  for  help  no  other  way,  neither  from 
men,  nor  books,  but  wholly  leave  yourfelf'  to 
God.’jl 

But  how  can  a man  “ leave  himfelf  wholly  to 
God,”  in  the  total  negleft  of  his  ordinances  ? 
The  old  bible  way  is,  to  “ leave  ourfelves  wholly 
to  God,”  in  the  conftant  ufe  of  all  the  means  he 
hath  ordained.  And  I cannot  yet  think  the  new 
is  better,  though  you  are  fully  perfuaded  it  is. 
* “ There  are  two  ways,  you  fay,  of  attaining 
goodnefs  and  virtue  ; the  one  by  books  or  the 
minijiry  of  men,  the  other  by  an  inward  birth. 
The  former  is  only  in  order  to  the  latter.”  This 
is  moll  true,  that  all  the  externals  of  religion,  are 
in  order  to  the  renewal  of  our  foul  in  righteouf- 
nefs  and  true  holtnefs.  But  it  is  not  true,  that 
the  external  way  is  one,  and  the  internal  way 

another. 

^ P*  *99*  USP-  of  Love,  P*  If*  p* 


r z49-  3 


another.  There  is  but  one  fcriptural  'wav, 
wherein  we  receive  inward  grace,  through  the 
outward  means  which  God  hath  appointed. 

Some  might  think  that  when  you  advifed, 
“ Not  to  feek  help  from  books,”  you  did  not  in- 
clude the  hible.  But  von  clear  up  this,  where 
you  anfwer  the  objection,  of  your  not  efteeming 
the  bible  enough.  You  fay,  “ How  could  you 
more  magnify  John  the  Baptift,  than  by  going 
from  his  teaching,  to  be  taught  by  that  Chrift,  to 
whom  he  directed  you  ? Now'  the  bible  can  have 
no  other  office  or  power,  than  to  direct  you  to 
Chriffi  How  then  can  you  more  magnify  the 
bible  than  by  going  from  its  teaching,  to  be  taught- 
by  Chrift  ?”  So  you  fet  Chrift  and  the  bible  in 
flat  oppolition  to  each  other  ! And  is  this  the 
way  we  are  to  learn  of  him  ? * Nay,  but  we  are 
taught  of  him,  not  by  going  from  the  bible,  but 
by  keeping  clofe  to  it.  Both  by  the  bible  and  by- 
experience  we  know,  that  his  word  and  his  Spi- 
rit aft  in  conneftion  with  each  other.  And  thus 
it  is,  that  by  Chrift  continually  teaching  and 
ftrengthening  him  through  the  fcripture,  the  man 
of  God  is  made  perfetd,  Trod  throughly  furniJhecL 
jor  every  good  word  and  work. 

According  to  your  veneration  for  the  bible,  is- 
your  regard  for  public  worfhip  and  for  the  Lord’s 
fupper,  “ Chrift,  you  fay,  is  the  church  ox  temple 
of  God  within  thee.  There  the  fupper  of  the 
Lamb  is  kept.  When  thou  art  w'ell  grounded  in 
this  inward  worfiip,  thou  wilt  have  learned  to 
L $ live 


[ 2<5®  ] 

live  unto  God  above  time  and  place.  For  every 
day  will  be  Sunday  to  thee  ; and  wherever  thou 
goeft,  thou  wilt  have  a priejl,  a church,  and  an 
altar  along  with  thec.”+ 

1 he  plain  inference  is,  thou  wilt  not  need  to 
make  any  difference  between  Sunday  and  other 
days.  Thou  wilt  need  no  other  church  than  that 
which  thou  haft  always  along  with  thee;  no  other 
fupper,  worfnp,  priejl,  or  altar.  Be  well  ground- 
ed in  this  inward  worfnp,  and  it  fupercedes  all 
the  reft. 

This  is  right  pleafing  to  flefh  and  blood,  and  I 
could  moll  eaftly  believe  it,  if  I did  not  believe 
the  bible.  But  that  teaches  me  inwardly  to  wor- 
fip  God,  as  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  fo  par- 
ticularly on  Ins  own  day,  in  the  congregation  of 
his  people,  at  his  altar,  and  by  the  minifry  of 
thofe  his  fervants  whom  he  hath  given  for  this 
very  thing,  for  the  perfeEling  cf  the  faints,  and 
with  whom  he  will  be  to  the  end  of  the  world. 

Extremely  dangerous  therefore  is  this  other 
gofpel,  which  leads  quite  wide  of  the  gofpel  of 
Chrift.  And  what  muff  the  confequence  be,  if 
■we  thus  break,  yea  and  teach  men  fo,  not  one  only, 
neither,  the  leaf  u/his  commandments?  Even  that 
we  fiall  be  called  the  leaf  in  the  kingdom  of  hea- 
ven. God  grant  this  may  not  fall  on  you  or  me ! 

7.  However,  whether  we  have  a place  in  hea- 
ven or  not,  you  are  very  fure  we  lhall  have  none 
in  hell.  For  there  is  no  hell  in  rerum  natura  ; no 

fuch 


i Sp.  of  Pr.  P.  I.  p.'73< 


[ *5*  } 

fuch  place  in  the  univerfe.  You  declare  this- 
over  and  over  again,  in  great  vaiiety  of  exprefli- 
ons.  It  may  fufHce  to  mention  two  or  three. 

“ Hell  is  no  penalty  prepared  or  inflifted  by 
God.T  Damnation  is  only  that  which  fprings  up 
within  you.}  Hell  and  damnation  are  nothing 
but  the  various  operations  offelf. 

I rather  incline  to  the  account  publifhed  a few 
years  ago,  by  a wife  and  pious  man,  (the  late  hi- 
lltop of  Cork)  where  he  is  fpeakmg  of  the  im- 
provement of  human  knowledge  by  revelation. 
S.ome  of  his  words  are,  ||  “Concerning  future 
punilhments,  we  learn  from  revelation  only,  1. 
That  they  are  both  for  foul  and  body,  which  are 
drff  i nguifhed  in  fcripture  by  the  worm  that  dieth 
not,  and.  the  fire  which  never  Jhall  be  quenched;: 
and  accordingly  we  are  bjd . to  fear  him  who  is 
able  to  dcjlroy  both  body  and  foul  in  hell.”  Upon  , 
which  I (hall  only  remark,  that  whereas  we  find 
by  experience,  the  body  and  foul  in  this  life  are  - 
not  capable  of  fuffcring  the  extremity  of  pain  and 
anguilh  at  the  fame  time,  infomuch  that  the  great-  - 
eft  anguifh,  of  mind  is  loft  and  diverted  by  acute  ? 
and  pungent  pain  of  body:  yet  we  learn  from  r 
fcripture,  that  in  hell  the  wicked  will  be  fubjefch  ; 
to  extreme  torments  of  both  together.”1I • 

2.  “ That  the  chief  caufe  of  their  eternal  mU  . 
fery  will  be,  an  eternal  exclufion  from-  the  beati-  - 
L6  fie;- 

-f  Spirit  pf  prayer,  P:  11.  p.  33-.  J-Sp:  ofdLove,  Part  II,- . 
p.  47.  <)  Spirit  of  Prayer,  P.  I.  p.  79.  ||  Procedure,  , 

&c.  of  Human  Underi’anding.  Up,  150,  . 


[ 2<52  ] 

fic  vifion  of  God.  This  exclufion  feems  to  be 
the  only  pumfhment  to  which  we  can  now  con- 
ceive a pure  /pint  liable.  And  according  as  all 
intelligent  beings  aieat  a lefis  or  greater  diflance 
from  this  fountain  of  all  happinefs,  fo  they  are 
neceffarily  more  orlefs  miferable  or  happy.” 

3.  “ That  one  part  of  thofe  punilhments  will 
be  hy  fire,  than  which  we  have  not  any  revela- 
tion more  exprefs  and  pofitive.  And  as  it  is  an 
indance  of  great  goodnefis  in  God,  that  the  joys 
of  heaven  are  represented  to  us,  under  figurative 
images  of  light  and  glory  and  a kingdom,  and 
that  the  fubdance  Shall  exceed  the  utmofl  of  our 
conception  : fo  it  is  an  argument  of  his  drift 
ju/hce,  that  futuie  punilhments  are  more  literally 
threatened  and  foretold'' 

4.  “ The  eternity  of  thefe  punilhments  is  re- 
vealed as  plainly  as  words  can  exprefs  if.  And 
the  difficulty  of  that  quedion,  “ What  proportion 
endlefs  torments  can  bear  to  momentary  fins,"  is 
quite  removed  by  confidering,  that  the  puniffi- 
ments  denounced  are  not  fanftions  entirely  arbi- 
trary, but  are  withal  fo  many  previous  warnings 
or  declarations  of  the  natural  tendency  of  fin  it- 
felf.  So  that  an  unrepenting  finner  mud  be  mi- 
ferable in  another  life  by  a necelfity  of  nature. 
Therefore  he  is  not  capable  of  mercy;  fince 
there  never  can  be  an  alteration  of  his  condition, 
without  fuch  a change  of  the  whole  man,  as 


would 


[ 2 53  ] 

tvould  put  the  natural  and  fettled  order  of  the 
creation  out  of  courfe.:’+ 

Doubtlefs  this  eminent  man  (whofe  books  on 
the  Human  Underfanding,  and  on  Divine  Analogy , 
I would  earnefily  recommend  to  all  who  either 
in  whole  or  in  part  deny  the  Chrifiian  Revela- 
tion] grounded  his  judgment  both  of  the  nature 
and  duration  of  future  punifhments  on  thefe  and 
the  like  palfages  of  fcripture. 

If  we  fin  wilfully  after  we  have  received  the  know- 
ledge of  the  truth , there,  remaineth  no  more  facrifce 
for  fins-,  but  a certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judg- 
ment and  fiery  indignation,  which  fall  devour  the 
adver  faries.  He  that  defpifd  Mofes’s  law  died 
without  mercy : of  how  much  forer  punifment  fall 
he  bethought  worthy,  who  hath  trodden  under  foot 
the  Son  of  God ? — For  we  know  him  that  hath  faid. 
Vengeance  belongeth  unto  me,  1 will  recompenfe.  It 
is  a fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living 
God,  Heb.  x.  2 6.  31. 

And  let  not  any  who  live  and  die  in  their  fins, 
vainly  hope  to  efcape  his  vengeance.  For  if  God 
If  ared  not  the  angels  that  fnned , but  caf  them  down 
to  hell,  and  delivered  them  into  chains  of  darknefs , 
to  be  referved  unto  judgment — The  Lord  knowetk 
how  to  referve  the  unjujl  unto  the  day  of  judgment  to 
be punifed,  2 Pet.  ii.  4 — 9.  In  that  day,  peculi- 
arly filled  The  day  of  the  Lord , they  that  feep  in 
the  cluf  of  the  earth  fall  awake : fome  to  everlafing 
life , and  fome  to  everlafing  fame  and  contempt , 

Dan* 


t P, 


[ 254  ] 

Dan.  xii.  2.  Among  the  latter  will  all  thofe  be. 
found,  who  are  now  by  their  obllinate  impend 
tence,  treafunng  up  to  tharf elves  wrpth  again fl  the 
day  oj  ’wrath  and  revelation  of  the  right  t<  us  judg- 
ment of  God : who  will  then  render  indignation 
and  wrath , tribulation  and  anguifh  upon  every  foul 
oj  man  thatdolh  evil , Rom.  i 'u  g—  9.  He  hath  de- 
clared the  very  fentence  which  he  will  then  pro- 
nounce on  a! ! the  workers  of  iniquity.  Depart,  ye 
cur  fed,  into  ever lafing fre,  prepared for  the  devil 
and  his  angels  fAsw..  xxv.  41.  And  in  that  hourit 
willbe  executed:  being  cajt  into  outward  darknejs , 
where  is. wailing  and  gnafhing  of  teeth,  ver.  30. 
they  will  be  punijhed  with  ever lajling  defir  uchon, 
from  the  prefence  of  the  Lord  and  from  the  glory  of 
his  power,  2 1 helf.  i.  9.  A punifnment  not  only 
without  e.nd,  but  likewife  without  iruermifllon. 
F.or  when  once  they  are  cafl  into  that  furnace  of 
fre,  that  lake  of  fre  burning  with  brimfone,  the 
worm  gnawing  their  foul  dieth  not,  and.  the  fre 
tormenting  their  body  is  not  quenched.  So  that 
they  have  no  refl  day  or  night ; but  the  fmoke  of 
their  torment  afcendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever. 

Now  thus  much  cannot  be  denied,  that  thefe 
texts  fpeak  as  if  there  were  really  fuch  a place  as 
hell,  as  if  there  were  a.real  fre  there,  and  as  if 
it  would  remain  for  ever.  I would  then  alk  but  one 
plain  qucflion.  If  the  cafe  is  not  fo,  why  did  God . 
fpeak  as  ij  it  was  P Say  you,  “To  affright  men 
from. fin  ?”  What,  by  guile  ? By  difliinulation? 
By  hanging  out  falfe  colours?  Can  you  podibly 

afcribe. 


[ 255  ] 

afcribe  this  to  the  God  of  truth  ? Can  you  be* 
lieve  it  of  him?  Can  you  conceive  the  Mod  High. 
dreiTing  up  a fcare-crow,  as  we  do  to  flight  chil- 
dren ! Far  be  it  from  him.  If  there  be  then  any 
fuch  fraud  in  the  bible,  the  bible  is  not  of  God,. 
And  indeed  this  muff,  be  the  refult  of  ail:  if 
there  be  no  unquenchable  jire , no  everlafhng  burn- 
ings, there  is  no  dependence  on  thofe  writings, 
wherein  they  are  fo  exprefly  afferted,  nor  of  the 
enmity  of  heaven,  any  more  than  of  hell.  So  that- 
if  we  give  up  the  one,  we  muif  give  up  the  other. 
No  hell,  no  heaven,  no  revelation  ! 

* In  vain  you  Ifnve  10  fupply  the  place  of  thisy. 
by  putting  purgatory  in  its  room;  by  faying, 
“ Thefe  virtues  muff  have  their  perfedl  work  in 
you,  if  not  before,  yet  certainly  after  deaths 
Every  thing  elfe  muff  be  taken  from  you  by  Jire, 
either  here  or  hereafter. '’J  Poor,  broken  reed! 
Nothing  will  “ be  taken.from.you”  by  that  fire 
which  is  prepared  jor  the  devil  and  hisangelx,  hut 
all  reft,  all  joy,  all  comfort,  all  hope.  For  the 
worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched. 

I have  now,  Sir,  delivered  my  own  foul.  And 
I have  ufed  great  plainnefs  of  fpeech  ; fuch  as  I 
could  not  have  prevailed. on  myfelf  to  ufe  to  one 
whom  I fo  much  refpedt,  on  any  other  occafion. 

O that  your  latter  works  may  be  more  and 
greater  than  your  firlt  ! Surely  they  would, .if  you 
could  ever  be  perfuaded  to  rfudy,  inftead  of  the 
writings  of  Tauler  and  Behmen,  thofe  of  St.  Paul, 

James, 

t Sp.  of  Love,  P,  II.  p.  232,  ^ ibid. 


[ 256  ] 

James,  Peter  and  John  : to  fpue  out  of  your 
mouth  and  out  of  your  heart  that  vain  philo fophy, 
and fpeal  neither  higher  nor  lower  things,  neither 
mote  nor  lefs  than  the  oracles  of  God  : to  re- 
nounce, defpife.  abhor  ail  the  high  flown  bom- 
bafl,  all  the  unintelligible  jargon  of  the  mvftics, 
and  come  back  to  the  plain  religion  of  the  bible, 
]V e love,  him , hecanfe  he  jrrjl  loved  us. 

London,  Jan.  6,  17,56. 


A 

LETTER  to  a PERSON. 

Lately  joined  jv-ith  the 

PEOPLE  called  QUAKERS . 

In  anfwer  to  a Letter  wrote  by  him. 


Bristol,  Feb.  10,  1747-8. 

YOU  afkme,  “ Is  there  any  difference  between 
Quakeiifm  and  Chriftianity?”  I think  there 
is.  What  that  difference  is,  I will  tell  you  as 
plainly  as  I can. 


I will 


I will  firfl  fet  down  the  account  of  Quatenfm 
ffo  called)  which  is  given  by  Robert  Barclay  : 
and  then  add,  wherein  it  agrees  with,  and  where- 
in it  differs  from  Chriilianity. 

I.  “ Seeing  the  height  of  all  happinefs  ts  placed 
in  the  true  knowledge  of  God,  the  right  under- 
Handing  of  this  is  what  is  tnoft  neceffary  to  be 
known  in  the  firfl  place,” 

II.  “ It  is  by  the  fpirit  alone  that  the  true  know- 
ledge of  God  hath  been,  is,  and  can  be  reveal- 
ed. Aod  thefe  revelations  which  are  abfolutely 
neceffary  for  the  building  up  of  true,  faith,  nei- 
ther do  nor  can  ever  contradict  right  reafon  or 
the  teftimony  of  the  fcriptures.” 

Thus  far  there  is  no  difference  between  Qua- 
kerifm  and  Chriilianity. 

“ Yet  thefe  revelations  are  not  to  be  fubjeCted 
to  the  examination  of  the  fcriptures  as  to  a touch- 
flone.” 

Here  there  is  a difference.  The  fcriptures  are 
the  touchflone  whereby  Chriflians  examine  all 
(real  or  fuppofea)  revelations.  In  all  cafes  they 
appeal  to  the  law  and  to  the  tejlimony , and  try 
every  fpirit  thereby. 

III.  “ From  thefe  revelations  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  to  the  faints,  have  proceeded  the  fcriptures 
of  truth.” 


[ *58  ] 

In  this  there  is  no  difference  between  (Duaker- 
ifm  and  Chrillianity. 

“ Yet  the  fcriptures  are  not  the  principal  ground 
oj  all  truth  and  knowledge , nor  the  adequate,  pri- 
mary rule  of  faith  and  manners.  Neverthelefs 
they  are  a fecondary  rule,  fubordinate  to  the 
fpint.  By  him  the  faints  are  led  into  all  truth. 
1 herefore  the  fpirit  is  the  firft  and  principal' 
leader.” 

If  by  thefe  words,  “ The  fcriptures  are  not  the 
principal  ground  oj  truth  and  knowledge , nor  the 
adequate , primary  rule  of  faith  and  manners ,”  be 
only  meant,  that  “ the  Spirit  is  our  firf  and  prin- 
cipal leader  ” Here  is  no  difference  between 
Quakerifm  and  Chriffianity.. 

But  there  is  great  impropriety  of  expreffion. 
For  though  the  Spirit  is  our  principal  leader , yet 
he  is  not  our  rule  at  all  ; the  fcriptures  are  the 
rule  whereby  he  leads  us  into  all  truth.  There- 
fore only  talk  good  Englifh  : call  the  Spirit 
our  guide  (which  fignifies  an  intelligent  being)  and 
the  fcriptures  our  rule,  (which  fignifies  fomethir.g 
ufed  by  an  intelligent  being)  and  all  is  plain  and 
elear. 

IV.  “ All  mankind  is  fallen  and  dead,  depriv- 
ed of  the  fenfation  of  this  inward  teftimony  of 
God,  and  fubjeft  to  the  power  and  nature  of 
the  devil,  while  they  abide  in  their  natural  date. 
And  hence  not  only  their  words  and  deeds,  but 

all 


[ 2 <59  J 

all  their  imaginations  are  evil  perpetually  in  the 
fight  of  God.” 

V.  “ God  out  of  his  infinite  love  hath  fo  lov- 
ed the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  Son,  to  the 
end  that  whofoever  believeth  on  him,  might 
have  evet lading  life.  And  he  enlighteneth 
every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world,  as  he  tall* 
ed  death  for  every  man.” 

VI.  “ The  benefit  of  the  death  of  Chrifl  is 
not  only  extended  to  fuch  as  have  the  diflin£t 
knowledge  of  his  death  and  fufferings,  but  even 
unto  thofe  who  are  inevitably  excluded  from  this 
knowledge.  Even  thefe  may  be  partakers  of 
the  benefit  of  his  death,  though  ignorant  of  the 
hillory,  if  they  fuffer  his  grace  to  take  place  in 
their  hearts,  fo  as  of  wicked  men  to  become 
holy.” 

In  thefe  points  there  is  no  difference  between 
Ouakerifm  and  Chi illianity. 

VII.  “ As  many  as  receive  the  light,  in  them 
is  produced  a holy  and  fpiritual  birth  bringing 
forth  holinefs,  righteoufnefs,  purity,  and  all 
other  bleffed  fruits.  By  which  holy  birth,  as  we 
are  fanftified,  fo  we  are  jullified.” 

Here  is  a wide  difference  between  Quakerifm 
and  Cbriflianity.  This  is  flat  juftification  by 
works.  Whereas  the  Chriftian  do&rine  is,  That 
we  are  juJHfied  by  faith  : that  unto  him  that  work * 
eth  not,  but  believeth  on  him  that  jufifeth  the- un- 
godly. 


[ 26o  j 

godly,  his  faith  is  counted  to  him  for  rigkteouf 
nefs . 

The  ground  of  this  miftake,  is,  the  not  un- 
demanding the  meaning  of  the  word  jollifica- 
tion. For  Robert  Barclay  takes  it  in  the  fame  fcnfe 
as  the  Pap  ids  do,  confounding  it  w ith  fanctifica- 
tion.  So  in  the  208th  page  ol  his  apology,  he  fays 
in  exprefs  terms,  “ Judification  taken  in  its  pro- 
per lignification,  is,  making  one  juft,  and  is  all 
am  with  fanctificatiou.” 

VIII.  “ In  whom  this  holy  birth  is  fully 
brought  forth,  the  body  of  fin  and  death  is  cru- 
cified, and  their  hearts  are  fubjedled  to  the  truth, 
fo  as  not  to  obey  any  fuggeftion  of  the  evil  one, 
but  to  be  free  from  adlua!  finning  and  tranfgrefs- 
ing  of  the  law  of  God,  and  in  that  refpedt,  per- 
fe'a.” 

IX.  “They  in  whom  his  grace  hath  wrought 
in  part  to  purify  and  fandlify  them,  may  yet  by 
difobedience  fall  from  it,  and  make  ftripwreck 
of  the  faith.” 

In  thefe  propofitions  there  is  no  difference  be- 
tween Ouakerifm  and  Chriftianity. 

The,  uncommon  expreffion,  Ths  holy  birth 
brought  forth,  is  taken  from  Jacob  Behmen.  And 
indeed  fo  are  many  other  expreflions  ufed  by 
the  Quakers,  as  are  alfo  many  of  their  fentiments. 

. X.  “ By  this  light  of  God  in  the  heart,  every 

true 


[ 3 

true  minifler  is  ordained,  prepared,  and  fupplied 
in  the  work  of  the  miniftry.” 

As  to  part  of  this  propofition,  there  is  no  dif- 
ference between  Quakerifm  and  Chriflianity. 
Doubtlefs  “ every  true  minifler  is  by  the  light  of 
God  prepared  and  fupplied  in  the  work  of  the 
mini ftry.”  But  the  apofUes  themfelves  ordained 
them  by  laying  on  of  hands-  So  we  read  through- 
out tire  Adis  of  the  apojlles. 

“ They  who  have  received  this  gift,  ought 
not  to  ufe  it  as  a trade,  to  get  money  thereby. 
Yet  it  m3}-  be  lawful  for  fuch  to  receive  what  may 
he  needful  to  them  for  food  and  cloathing.” 

In  this  there  is  no  difference  between  Ouaker- 

•s-/ 

ifm  and  Chrifl ianity. 

“ We  jttflge  it  no  ways  unlawful,  for  a wo- 
man to  preach  in  the  aflemblies  of  God’s  people.” 

In  this  there  is  a manifeft  difference.  For  the 
apoflle  Paul  faith  exprefsly,  Let  your  women  keep 
filencc  in  the  churches  : for  it  is  not  permitted  unto 
them  to  f peak — And  if  they  will  learn  any  thing , let ' 
them  ajk  their  hufbands  at  home  : for  it  is  a Jliame 
for  women  to  Jpeak  in  the  church , 1 Cor.  xiv. 

3d-  35- 

(Robert  Barclay  indeed  fays,  “ Paul  here  only 
reproves  the  inconfiderate  and  talkative  \yomen.” 

But  the  text  fays  no  fuch  thing.  It  evidently 
{peaks  of  women  in  general. 

Again,  the  apoflle  Paul  faith  to  Timothy,  Let 
your  women  learn  in  filence  with  all fubjedion.  For 
Lfujfer  not  a woman  to  Leach , nor  to  ufurp  autho- 
rity 


[ 262  j 

rity  over  the  man,  (which  public  teaching  necef- 
farily  implies)  hut  to  be  in  filence , 1 Tim.  ii. 
11,  12. 

To  this  Robert  Barclay  makes  only  that  harm- 
lefs  reply  ; “ We  think  this  is  not  any  ways  re- 
pugnant to  this  do&rine.”  Not  repugnant  to 
this,  “ I do  not  fuffer  a woman  to  teach  !”  Then 
I know  not  what  is. 

“ But  a woman  laboured  udth  Paul  in  the 
work  of  the  go/pel.”  Yea!  but  not  in  the  way  he 
had  himfelf  exprefslv  forbidden. 

“ But  Joel  foretold,  your  fons  and  your  daugh- 
ters Jhall  prophe/y.  And  Philip  had  Jour  daugh- 
ters which  prophefied.  And  the  apoflle  himfelf 
direfls  women  to  propheJy\  only  with  their 
heads  covered.'' 

Very  good.  But  hew  do  you  prove  that  pro - 
phefying  in  any  of  thefe  places  means  preaching? 

XI.  “ All  true  worfhip  to  God  is  offered  in 
the  inward  and  immediate  moving  of  his  own  Spi- 
rit. We  ought  not  to  pray  or  preach  where  and 
when  he  will,  but  where  and  when  we  are  moved 
thereto  by  his  Spirit.  All  other  worfhip,  both 
prai fes,  prayers  and  preachings,  which  man  fets 
about  in  his  own  will,  and  at  his  own  appoint- 
ment, which  he  can  begin  and  end  at  pleafure. 
do  or  leave  undone,  as  himfelf  fees  meet,  are  but 
fuperftitions,  will-worfhip  and  abominable  ido- 
latries.” 


Here 


C 2 63  ] 

Here  lies  one  of  the  main  differences  between 
Quakerifm  and  Chriftianity. 

It  is  true  indeed,  that  “ all  true  worfhip  to 
'God  is  offered  in  the  inward  and  immediate  mov. 
ing  of  his  own  Spirit  or,  (to  fpeak  plainj  that 
we  cannot  truly  worfhip  God,  unlefs  his  Spirit 
move  or  incline  our  hearts.  It  is  equally  true, 
that  “ we  ought  to  pray  and  preach,  only  where 
and  when  we  are  moved  thereto  by  his  Spirit.” 
But  I fear  you  do  not  in  any  wife  underfland, 
What  the  being  moved  by  his  Spirit  means  ? God 
moves  man  whom  he  has  made  a reafonable  crea- 
ture, according  to  the  reafon  which  he  has  given 
'him.  He  moves  him  by  his  under  {landing,  as  well 
as  his  affeRwns,  by  light  as  well  as  by  heat.  He 
moves  him  to  do  this  or  that  by  convitdion,  full  as 
often  as  by  defue.  Accordingly,  you  areas  real- 
ly m.oved  by  the  Spirit  when  he  convinces  you,  you 
ought  to  feed  him  that  is  hungry,  as  when  he 
gives  you  ever  fo  flrong  an  impulse,  defire , or  in- 
clination fo  to  do. 

In  like  manner,  you  are  as  really  moved 
by  the  Spirit  to  pray,  whether  it  be  in  public  or 
private,  when  you  have  a conviftion  it  is  the 
will  of  God  you  fhould,  as  when  you  have  the 
flrongefl:  impulfe  upon  your  heart.  And  he  does 
truly  move  you  to  preach,  when  in  bis  light 
you  fee  light  clearly  fatisfying  you  it  is  his  will  ; 
as  much  as  when  you  feel  the  mofl  vehement 
impu/fe  or  dcftre  to  hold forth  the  words  of  eternal 
ife. 


Now 


[ 264  j 

Now  let  us  confider  the  main  propofitioru 
“ All  worfhip  which  man  fets  about  in  his  own 
will,  and  at  his  own  appointment.” — Held  ! That 
is  quite  another  thing.  It  may  be  at  his  own 
appointment  and  yet  not  in  /as  own  will.  For 
inltance ; it  is  not  my  own  will  to  preach  at  all. 
It  is  quite  contrary  to  my  will.  Many  a time 
have  1 cried  out,  Lord  fend  by  whom  thou  wilt  fend. 
Only  fend  not  me  ! But  I am  moved  by  the  Spirit 
of  God  to  preach  : lie  clearly  fiews  me  it  is 
his  will  I lhould;  and  that  I fliould  do  it  when  and 
where  the  greateft  number  of  poor  Tinners  may 
be  gathered  together.  Moved  by  him,  I give 
up  my  will  and  appoint  a time  and  place,  when 
by  his  power  I trull  to  fpeak  in  his  name. 

How  widely  different,  then,  from  true  Chrif- 
tiaaity  is  that  amazing  fentence.  “ All  praifes, 
prayers  and  preachings  which  man  can  begin 
and  end  at  his  pleafure,  do  or  leave  undone,  as 
himfelf  fees  meet,  are  fupeiftition,  will-worlhip, 
and  abominable  idolatry  in  the  fight  ol  God  ?” 

There  is  not  one  tittle  of  feripture  for  this; 
nor  yet  is  there  any  found  reafori.  When  you 
take  it  for  granted,  “ In  all  preachings  which  a 
man  begins  or  ends  at  his  pleafure,  does  or 
leaves  undone  as  he  fees  meetf  he  is  not  moved 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  you  are  too  haftv  a great 
deal.  It  may  be  by  the  Spirit,  that  lie  fees  ?neet  to 
do  or  leave  it  undone.  How  will  you  prove  that  it 
is  not  ? His  pleafure  may  depend  on  the  pleafure 
of  God,  lignified  to  him  by  his  Spirit.  His  appoint- 
ing 


[ **5  ] 

ing  this  or  that  time  or  place,  does  in  no  wife 
•prove  the  contrary.  Prove  me  the  propor- 
tion if  you  can,  “ Every  man  who  preaches  or 
prays  at  an  appointed  time,  preaches  or  prays 
in  his  own  will,  and  not  by  the  Spirit.'’ 

That  all  fuch  preaching  is  wdl-zvor/hip,-  in  the 
fenfe  St.  Paul  ufes  the  word,  is  no  more  true 
than  that  it  is  murder.  That  it  is  fuperftition, 
remains  alfo  to  be  proved.  That  it  is  ahomina- 
•i able  idolatry , how  will  you  reconcile  with  what 
follows  but  a few  lines  after  ? “ However  it 
■might  pleafe  God,  who  winked  at  the  times 
■of  ignorance,  to  taife  fome  breathings  and  an- 
fwer  them.”  What  ! A.nfwer  the  breathings 
of  abominable  idolatry  / I obfet  ve  how  wearily 
this  is  worded.  But  it  allows  -enough.  If  God 
ever  raifed  and  anfwered  t-hofe  pravers  which 
were  made  at  fet  times,  then  tliofe  prayers  could 
not  be  abominable  idolatry. 

Again,  that  prayers  and  preachings,  though 
made  at  appointed  times  may  yet  proceed  from 
the  Spirit  oi  God  may  he  clearly  proved  from 
■t-hofe  other  words  of  Robert  -Barclay  ■h-imfelf, 
Page  3^9- 

“ Tiiat  preaching  (or  prayer)  which  is  not 
done  by  the  actings  and  movings  of  God's  Spnit 
cannot  beget  faith.”  Molt  true.  But  preaching 
and  prayer  at  appointed,  times,  have  begotten 
faith  both  at  Briflol  and  Paultotr.  (You  know  it 
well.)  Therefore  that  preaching  and  prayer, 
though  at  appointed  times,  was  done  by  the  a6t- 
ings  and  movings  of  God's  Spirit.” 

Vol.  XIX.  M 


It 


[ 266  ] 

It  follows,  that  this  preaching  and  prayer, 
were  far  from  aboninable  idolatry.  That  expref- 
fion  can  never  be  defended.  Say,  Itwasarafh 
word,  and  give  it  up. 

In  truth,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  you 
fet  this  matter  upon  a wrong  foundation.  It  is 
■not  on  this  circumilance,  •*  The  being  atyst  times 
or  not  that  the  acceptablenefs  of  our  prayers 
depends  : but  on  the  intention  and  tem- 
pers with  which  we  pray.”  He  that  prays 
in  faith,  at  w-hatfoever  time,  is  htard.  In 
every  time  and  place,  Gorl  accepts  him  who 
lifts  up  holy  hands , without  wrath  or  doubting. 
The  charge  of  fuperfiition  therefore  returns 
upon  yourfelf.  For  what  grofs  fuperfiition  is 
this  to  lay  fo  much  flrefs  on  an  indifferent  circum- 
flattce,  and  fo  little  on  faith  and  the  love  of  God  ? 

But  to  proceed.  “ We  confefs  finging  of 
pfalms,  to  be  a part  of  God’s  worfhip,  and  very 
fweet  and  refrefhful,  when  it  proceeds  from  a 
true  fenfe  of  God’s  love.  But  as  for  formal  Ting- 
ing, it  has  no  foundation  in  fcripture.” 

In  this  there  is  no  difference  between  Ouaker- 

"■w 

ifm  and  Chriflianity. 

But  let  it  be  obferved  here,  that  the  Quakers 
in  aeneral  cannot  be  excufed,  if  this  is  true.  For 
if  they  “ confefs  finging  of  pfalms  to  be  a part 
of  God's  worfhip,”  honT  dare  they  either  con- 
demn or  negleft  it  ? 

“ Silence  is  a principal  part  of  God’s  wor- 
ship : i.  e.  mens  “ fitting  filent  together,  ceafing 

from 


[ 26;  ] 

from  all  outwards,  from  their  own  words,  and 
a&ings,  in  the  natural  will  and  comprehenfion, 
and  feeling  after  the  inward  feed  of  life.” 

In  this  there  is  a manifefi  difference  between 
Ouakerifm  and  Cbriftianity. 

This  is  will-worfhip,  if  there  be  any  fuch 
thing  under  heaven.  For  there  is  neither  com- 
mand, nor  example,  for  it  in  fcripture. 

Robert  Barclay  indeed  refers  to  abundance  of 
fcriptures,  to  prove  it  is  a command.  But  as  he  did 
not  fee  good  to  fet  them  down  at  length,  I will 
take  the  trouble  to  tranfcribe  a few  of  them. 

Pfalm  xxvii.  14.  Wait  on  the  Lord  : Be  of 
good  courage , and  he Jhall Jlrengihen  thine  heart. 

PJalm  xxxvii.  7.  Refl  in  the  Lord  arid  wait 
patiently  ; fret  not  thy f elf  at  him  who  profpereth  in 
his  way. 

Verfe  34.  Wait  on  the  Lord  and  keep  his  way , 
and  he  fiall  exalt  thee  to  inherit  the  land. 

Piov.  xx.  22.  Say  not  thou,  1 will  recompenfe 
evil ; but  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  he  fiall fave  thee. 

By  thefe  one  may  judge  of  the  reft.  But  how 
amazing  is  this  ? What  are  all  thefe  to  the  point 
in  queftion  ? 

For  examples  of filent  meetings  he  refers  to  the 
five  texts  following: 

AQs  ii.  1.  They  were  all  zuith  one  aceord  in 
one  place. 

job  ii.  13.  So  they  fat  down  with  him  feven 
days  and [even  nights,  and  none  fpake  a word  un- 
to him  : for  they faw  that  his  grief  was  very  gr<a‘. 

M 2 Ezra 


[ 26B  ] 

Ezra  ix.  4.  Then  were  affemUed  unto  me  every 
cne  that  trembled  at  the  words  oj God — And  I Jat 
afomed  until  the  evening  facrifice. 

Ezek.  xiv.  1,  and  xx.  1.  Then  came  certain  of 
the  elders  of  Ifrael  unto  me , and  fat  before  me. 

Was  it  pofhble  for  Robert  Barclay  to  believe, 
that  any  one  of  thefe  texts  was  any  thing  to  the 
purpofe  ? 

The  odd  expreflions  here  alfo,  Ccafingfrom  all 
outwards , in  the  natural  will  and  comprehen/iov., 
and  feeling  after  the  inward  feed  of  life,  are  bor- 
rowed from  Jacob  Bchmen. 

XII.  “ As  there  is  one  Lord  and  one  faith, 
fo  there  is  one  baptifm.”  Yea,  one  outward 
baptifm  : which  you  deny.  Here  therefore  is 
another  difference  between  Quakerifm  and 
Chriftianhv. 

But  “ if  thofe  whom  John  baptized  with  wa- 
ter, were  not  baptized  with  the  baptifm  of 
Clirift.  then  the  baptifm  of  water  is  not  the  bap- 
tifm of  Chrift.” 

This  is  a mere  quibble.  The  fequel  ought  to 
be,  “ Then  that  baptifm  of  water,  fi.  e.  John  s 
baptifm,)  was  not  the  baptifm  oi  Chrtfl.”  Who 
fays  it  was  ? 

Yet  Robert  Barclay  js  fo  fond  of  this  argument 
that  he  repeats  it  almofl  in  the  fame  words. 

“ If  John  who  adminifferc-d  the  baptifm  of 
water,  yet  did  not  baptize  with  the  baptifm  of 

ChrnV 


[ ^9  ] 

Shrift,  then  the  baptifm  of  water  is  not  the  bap» 
tifm  of  Chrift.” 

This  is  the  fame  fallacy  {fill.  The  fequel  here 
alfo  fhould  be,  “ Then  that  baptifm  of  water  was 
not  the  baptifm  of  Chrift.” 

He  repeats  it,  with  a little  variation  a third 
time,  “ Chrift  himfelf  faith,  John  baptized  with 
water , but  yejkall  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghoji 

He  repeats  it  a fourth  time  : “ Peter  faith, 
Then  remembered  I the  word  of  the  Lord,  John 
baptized  with  water , but  ye  Jhall  be  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Ghoji.  From  all  which  it  follows,  that 
fuch  as  John  baptized  with  water,  yet  were  not 
baptized  with  the  baptifm  of  Chrift.”  Very  true. 
But  this  proves  neither  more  nor  lefs  than  that 
the  baptifm  of  John  differed  from  the  baptifm  of 
Chrift.  And  fo  doubtlefs  it  did  : not  indeed  as 
to  the  outward Jign,  but  as  to  the  inward  grace. 

XIII.  “ The  breaking  of  bread  by  Chrift  with 
his  difciples  was  but  a figure,  and  ceafes  in  fuch 
: as  have  obtained  the  fubftance.” 

Here  is  another  manifeft  difference  between 
Quakerifm  and  Chriftianity. 

From  the  very  time  that  our  Lord  gave  that 
command,  Ho  this  in  remembrance  oj'  me,  all 
Chriftians  throughout  the  habitable  world,  did  eat 
bread  and  drink  wine  in  remembrance  of  him. 

Allowing  therefore  all  that  Robert  Barclay  af- 
firms for  eighteen  or  twenty  pages  together,  viz. 

M 3 i.  That 

Ik'  y - 


C 27°  ] 

i.  That  believers  partake  of  i he  body  and  blood 
of  Child  in  a fpintual  manner ; 2.  That  this  may 
be  done,  in  forr.e  fenfe,  when  we  are  not  eating 
bread  and  drinking  wine ; 3.  That  the  Lutherans, 
Cal vin ills  and  Papills,  differ  from  each  other, 
w i h regard  to  the  Lord’s  fupper  ; and  4.  That 
many  of  them  have  fpoken  wildly  and  abfurdly 
concerning  it  : yet  all  this  will  never  prove,  that 
we  need  n<,t  do,  what  Chrifl  has  exprefsly  com- 
manded to  be  done  : and  what  the  whole  body 
of  Chrifliar  s in  all  ages  have  done,  in  obedience 
to  that  command. 

That  there  was  fuch  a command,  you  cannot  ' 
deny.  But  you  fay,  “ It  is  ceafed  in  fuch  as 
have  obtained  the  fubflance.” 

St.  Paul  knew  nothing  of  this.  He  fays  no- 
thing of  its  ceafing,  in  all  he  writes  of  it  to  the 
Corinthians.  Nay,  quite  the  contrary.  He 
fays,  As  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this 
cup , ye  do  fiezo  the  LordT  death  till  he  come.  O 
fay  you,  the  apoflle  means  “ his  inward  coming, 
which  fome  of  the  Corinthians  had  not  yet 
known.”  Nav,  this  cannot  be  his  meaning.  | 
For  he  faith  to  all  the  Corinthian  communicants. 

Ye  do  few  the  Lord’r  death , till  he  come.  Now 
if  he  was  not  come  (fpiritually)  in  fome  of  tbefe, 
undoubtedly  he  was  in  others.  Confequently 
be  cannot  be  fpeaking  here  of  that  coming, 
which  in  many  of  them,  at  leafl,  was  already  ^ 
pafl.  It  remains,  that  he  fpeaks  of  his  coming 
in  the  clouds,  to  judge  both  the  quick  and  dead. 

In 


[ 27*  ] 

In  what  Robert  Barclay  teaches  concerning  the- 
fcriptures,  juftification,  baptifm  and  the  Lord's 
fupper,  lies  the  main  difference  between  Qua- 
kerifm  and  Chriflianity. 

XIV.  “ Since  God  hath  afTumed  to  himfelf 
the  dominion  of  the  confcience,  who  alone  can 
rightly  inftruft  and  govern  it,  therefore  it  is  not 
lawful  for  any  whatfoever,  to  force  the  confcien- 
ces  of  others.” 

In  this  there  is  no  difference  at  all  between 
Quakerifm  and  Chriflianity.. 

XV.  “ It  is  not  lawful  for  Chriftians  to  give  or 
receive  titles  of  honour,,  as,  your  majefty,  your 
lordlhip,  See.  ” 

In  this  there  is  a difference  between  Quaker- 
ifm  and  Chriflianity.  Chriftians  may  give  titles 
of  honour,  fuch  as  are  ufually  annext  to  certain 
offices.. 

Thus  St.  Paul  gives  the  ufual  title  of  mojl  no- 
ble to  the  Roman  governor.  Robert  Barclay  in- 
deed fays,  “ he  would  not  have  called  him  fuch, 
if  he  had  not  been  truly  noble  : as  indeed  he  was, 
in  that  he  would  not  give  way  to  the  fury  of  the 
Jews  againft  him.” 

7'he  feripture  fays  quite  otherwife : that  he 
did  give  way  to  the  fury  of  the  Jews  againft  him. 

I read,  Fejlus  willing  to  do  the  Jews  a pleajure 
(who  had  dejired a javour  againjl  him,  that  he  would 
fendjor  him  to  JtruJalem , lying  in  wait  in  the  way 
M q.  to 


[ 272  1 

to  kill  him) f aid  St.  Paul,  Wilt  tlicu  go  up  to  Jeru- 
falem,  andthtre  be judged  of  theft  things  before  me?' 
Then  f aid  Paul,  I fund  at  Ccefars judgment  Jeat, 
where  1 ought  to  be  judged  : to  ihe  Jews  have  1 
done  no  wrong,  as  thou  very  well  knowejl.  If  I 
have  done  any  thing  worthy  oj  death,  I refufe  net 
io  die-,  but  if  there  be  none  of  thefe  things  whereof 
thefe  accvfc  me,  no  man  may  deliver  me  unto  them. 

Hence  it  plainly  appears,  that  Feftus  was  a 
very  wicked  perfon,  one  who  to  do  the  Jews  a 
pleajure,  would  have  betrayed  the  innocent  blood. 
But  although  St.  Paul  was  not  ignorant  of  his 
charafter,  {till  he  calls  him  mojl  noble  Feldus,  giv- 
ing him  the  title  of  his  office;  which  indeed  was 
neither  more  nor  lefs  than  faying,  “ Governor 
Feftus,”  or  “ King  Agrippa.” 

It  is  therefore  mere  luperfthion  to  fcruple 
this.  And  it  is,  if  poffitble,  greater  fuperftition 
Hill,  to  fcruple  faying,  You,  Vans,  or  Ihr,  whe- 
ther to  one  or  more  perfons,  as  is  the.  common 
way  of  fpeaking  in  any  country.  It  is  this  which 
fixes  the  language  of  every  nation.  It  is  this 
which  makes  me  fay  you  in  England,  vous  in 
France,  and  ihr  in  Germany,  rather  than  thou, 
tu,  or  du,  rather  than  Jtv,  or  TIN  (which  if  we 
fpeak  flri&lv,  is  the  only  fcriptural  language  ; not 
thou  or  thee  any  more  than  you.)  But  the  plac- 
ing religion  in  fuch  things  as  thefe,  is  fuch  egre- 
gious trifling,  as  naturally  tends  to  make  all  re- 
ligion ftink  in  the  noftrils  of  Infidels  and  Hea- 
thens. 


And 


[ 273  ] 

And  yet  this,  by  a far  greater  abufe  of  words 
than  that  you  would  reform,  you  call  the  plain 
language.  O my  friend  ! Pie  ufes  the  plain  lan- 
guage, who  fpeaks  the  truth  from  his  heart. 
Not  he  who  fays  thee  or  thou,  and  at  the  mean 
time  will  diffemble  or  flatter,  like  the  rell  ol  the 
world. 

“ It  is  not  lawful  for  Chriftians  to  kneel  or . 
bow  the  body,  or  uncover  the  head  to  any  man.” 

If  this  is  not  lawful,  then  feme  law  of  Gcd 
forbids  it.  Can  you  fhew  me  that  law?  If  you 
cannot,  then  the  ferupling  this  is  another  plain 
inffance  of  fuperftition,  not  Chriftianity. 

“ It  is  notjawfhl  for  a Chriftian  to  ufe  fuper- 
flui ties  in  apparel:  as  neither,  to  ufe  fuch  games, 
fports  and  plays,  under  the  notion  of  recreati- 
ons, as  are  not  confident  with  gravity  and  godly 
fear.” 

. As  to  both  thefe  propofitions,  there  is  no  dif- 
ference between  Ouakerifm  and  Chriftianity. 
Only  obferve,  touching  the  former,  that  the  fin 
of fuperfluons  apparel , iies  chiefly  in  th ftfuperjlu- 
otis  expence.  To  make  it  therefore  a point  of 
confcience,  to  differ  from  others,  as  to  the  Jhape 
or  colour  oS.  your  apparel,  is  mere  fuperftition:. 
let  the  difference  he  in  the  price , that  you  may 
have  the  more  wherewith  to  cloath  them  that 
have  none. 

“ It  is  not  lawful  for  Chriftians  to  fwear  before 
a magiftrate,  nor  to  fight  in  anycaufe.” 

Whatever  becomes  of  the  latter  propofition, 

M 5 taa 


[ 274  ] 

the  former  is  no  part  of  ChrifHanity  : for  Chrift 
himfelf  anfvvered  himfelf  upon  oath  before  a ma- 
giflrate.  Yea,  he  would  not  anfwer  till  he  was 
put  to  his  oath  ; till  the  high  prieft  faid  unto  him, 
I adjure  thee  by  tilt  living  Cod. 

* Friend,  you  have  an  honed  heart,  but  a weak 
head  : you  have  a zeal  but  not  according  to 
knowledge.  You  was  zealous  once  for  the  love 
of  God  and  man;  for  holinefs  of  heart  and  holi- 
nefs  of  life.  You  are  now  zealous  for  particular 
forms  ol  fpeaking,  for  a fett  of  phrafes  and  opini- 
ons. Once  your  zeal  was  againlt  ungodlinefs  and 
unrigbteoufnefs,  again!!  evil  tempers  and  evil 
works.  Now  it  is  again!!  forms  of  prayer,  again!! 
finging  pfalms  or  hymns,  again!!  appointing  times 
of  praying  or  preaching:  again!!  faying  you  to  a 
fingle  perfon,  uncovering  you  head,  or  having  too 
many  buttons  upon  your  coat.  O what  a fall  is 
here!  What  poor  trifles  are  thefe,  that  now  well 
nigh  engrofs  your  thoughts  ? Come  hack,  come 
back,  to  the  weightier  matters  of  the  lawr,  or  fpi- 
riiual,  rational,  fcriptural  religion.  No  longer 
tvafle  vour  time  and  ftrength  in  beating  the  air,  in 
vain  cent; overfies  and  fliife  of  words:  but  bend 
your  whole  foul  to  the  growing  in  grace  and  in 
the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrill,  to  the 
eontinua’ly  advancing  in  that  holinefs,  without 
which  you  cannot  fee  the  Lord. 


A TREA- 


[ -75  ] 


A TREATISE  ON 

B A P T I s m; 


CONCERNING  baptifm  I Ihall  enquire, 
what  it  is:  what  benefits  we  receive  by  it: 
whether  our  Saviour  defigned  it  to  remain  always 
in  his  church  : and  who  are  the  proper fuljeds . 
of  it  ? 

I.  1.  What  it  is.  It  is  the  initiatory  facra- 
ment,  which  enters  us  into  covenant  with  God. 
It  was  inftituted  by  Chrift,  who  alone  has  power 
to  inditute  a proper  facrament,  a fign,  leal,  pledge 
and  means  of  grace,  perpetually  obligatory  on  all 
Chriftians.  We  know  not  indeed  the  exaft  time 
of  its  inflitution  ; but  we  know  it  was  long  before 
our  Lord’s  afcenfion.  And  it  was  inftituted  in 
the  room  of  circumcifion.  For  as  that  was  a fign 
and  feal  of  God’s  covenant,  fo  is  this. 

2.  The  matter  of  this  facrament  is  water; 
which  as  it  has  a natural  power  of  cleanfing,  is  the 
more  fit  for  this  fymbolical  ufe.  Baptifm  is  per- 
M 6 formed 


[ 276  ] 

formed  by  wajJung , dipping , or  Jpnnkling  the  per- 
son, in  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Gholf,  who  is  hereby  devoted  to  the  ever  bleffed 
Trinity.  I fay -by  wajlnng , dipping , or  fpr  inkling ; 
becaufe  it  is  not  determined  in  fcripture,  in  which 
of  theie  ways  it  fhall  be  done,  neither  by  any  ex- 
prefs  precept,  nor  by  any  fuch  example  as  clearly 
proves  it;  nor  by  the  force  or  meaning  of  the 
word,  baptize. 

cp  That  there  is  no  exprefs  precept  all  calm 
men  allow.  Neither  is  there  any  conclufive  ex- 
ample. John’s  baptifm  in  fome  things  agreed 
with  Chrifl’s,  in  others  differed  from  it.  But  it 
cannot  be  certainly  proved  from  fcripture,  that 
even  John’s  was  performed  by  dipping.  It  is 
true,  he  baptized  in  Enon,  near  Salim,  where 
there  was  much  water.  But  this  might  refer  to 
breadth  rather  than  depth  ; fince  a narrow  place 
would  not  have  been  fufficient  for  fo  great  a 
multitude.  Nor  can  it  be  proved,  that  the  bap- 
tifm of  our  Saviour,  or  that  adininiffered  by  his 
difciples  was  by  immerfion.  No,  nor  that  of  the 
eunuch  baptized  by  Philip ; though  they  both 
went  down  to  the  water : for  that  going  down  may 
relate  to  the  chariot,  and  implies  no  determinate 
depth  of  water.  It  might  be  up  to  their  knees,  it 
might  not  be  above  their  ancles. 

4.  And  as  nothing  can  be  determined  from 
fcripture-precept  or  example,  fo  neither  from  the 
force  or  meaning  of  the  word.  For  the  words 
baptize  and  baptifm  do  not  neceffarily  imply 

dipping. 


[ 277  ] 

clipping,  but  are  ufed  in  other  fenfes  in  feveral 
places.  Thus  we  read,  that  the  Jews  were  all, 
baptized  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  fea:  (1  Cor.  x.  2,) 
but  they  were  not  plunged  in  either.  They  could 
therefore  be  only  fpnnlltd  by  drops  of  the  fea- 
water,  and  re fre filing  dews  from  the  cloud  : pro- 
bably intimated  in  that,  Thou  fentejl  a gracious 
rain  upon  thine  inheritance,  and  refrejliec'fl  it  when 
it  was  weary  : ( Pfalm.  Ixviii.  9.)  Again,  Chrift 
faid  to  his  two  difciples,  Yejhall  be  baptized  with 
the.  baptifni  that  I am  baptized  with  : ( Mark  x. 
38.)  but  neither  he  nor  they  were  dipt,  but  only 
fpnnhltd  or  wajlied  with  their  own  blood.  Acrain 
we  read,  Mark  vii.  4.  o Tike  baptifms  (fo  it  is  in 
the  original)  of  pots  and  cups  ami  tables  or  beds. 
Now  pots  and  cups  are  not  neceflfarily  dipt  when 
they  are  wafhed.  Nay,  the  Pirarifees  wafiied  the 
outfides  -of  them  only.  And  as  for  tables  or  beds, 
none  wiil  fnppofe  they  could  be  dipt : here  then 
the  word  baptifni  in  its  natural  fenfe,  is  not  taken 
for  dipping,  but  for  waffling  or  cleanfing.  And, 
that  this  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  word  baptize, 
is  tefiified  by  the  greatefl  fcholars  and  mod  pro- 
per judges  in  this  matter.  It  is  true,  we  read 
of  being  buried  with  Chrijl  in  baptifni.  But  no- 
thing can  be  inferred  from  fuch  a figurative  ex- 
preiTion.  Nay,  if  it  held  exaftly,  it  would  make 
as  much  for  Jprinlling  as  for  plunging  : fince  in 
burying  the  body  is  not  plunged  through  the  fub- 
flance  of  the  earth,  but  rather  earth  is  poured  or 
Jprinkltd  upon  it. 


5.  And 


r vs  i 


5.  And  as  there  is  no  clear  proof  of  dipping  in 
fcripture  fo  there  is  very  probable  proof  of  the 
contrary.  ’1  is  highly  probable,  the  apoftles  them- 
felves  baptized  great  numbers,  not  by  dipping, 
but  by  wafhing,  fpr inkling  or  pouring  water. 
This  clearly  reprefented  the  cleanfmg  from  fin, 
which  is  figured  by  baptifm.  And  the  quantity 
of  water  ufed  was  not  material  : no  more  than 
the  quantity  of  bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord  s 
fupper.  The  jailor  and  all  his  houfe  were  bap- 
tized in  the  prifon  : Cornelius  with  his  friends, 
(and  fo  feveral  houfholds)  at  home.  Now  is  it 
likely,  that  all  thefe  had  ponds  or  rivers,  in  or 
near  their  houfes,  fufficient  to  plunge  them  all  ? 
Every  unprejudiced  perfen  muff  allow,  the  con- 
trary is  far  more  probable.  Again,  3000  at  one 
time  and  5000  at  another,  were  converted  and 
baptized  by  St.  Peter  at  Jerufalem  ; where 
they  had  none  but  the  gentle  waters  of  Siloam, 
according  to  the  obfervation  of  Mr.  Fuller, 
“There  were  no  water-mills  injerufalem,  becaufe 
there  was  no  ftream  large  enough  to  drive  them.” 
The  place  therefore  as  well  as  the  number,  makes 
it  highly  probable  that  all  thefe  were  baptized 
by  fprinkling,  ox  pouring,  and  not  by  immerfion. 
To  fum  up  all,  the  manner  of  baptizing  (whe- 
ther by  dipping  or  fprinkling)  is  not  determinded 
in  fcripture.  1 here  is  no  command  for  one 
raiher  than  the  other.  There  is  no  example  from 
which  we  can  conclude  for  dipping  rather  than 
fprinkling . There  are  probable  examples  of 

both ; 


[ 279  ] 

both  ; and  both  are  equally  contained  in  the  na- 
tural  meaning  of  the  word. 

II.  1.  What  are  the  benefits  we  receive  by 
baptifm  is  the  next  point  to  he  confidered.  And 
the  firft  of  thefe  is,  the  waffling  away  the  guilt 
of  original  fin,  by  the  application  of  the  merits 
of  C hri ft’s  death.  That  we  are  all  born  under  the 
guilt  of  Adam’s  fin,  and  that  all  fin  deferves  eter- 
nal mifery,  was  the  unanimous  fenfe  of  the  an- 
tient  church,  as  it  is  exprefl  in  the  ninth  article 
of  our  own.  And  the  feripture  plainly  afferts, 
that  we  were  Jhapen  in  iniquity  and  in  fin  did  our 
mother  conceive  us.  lhat  we  were  all  by  nature 
children  of  wrath,  and  dead  in  trefpajfes  and  fins  : 
that  in  Adam  all  died : that  by  one  mans  dif obedi- 
ence all  were  made  firmer  s : that  by  one  man  fn  en- 
tered into  the  world,  and  death  by  fn  ; which  came 
upon  all  men  ; kecauje  all  had  finned.  This  plain- 
ly includes  infants;  for  they  too  die:  therefore, 
they  have  finned.  But  not  by  aftual  fin  : there- 
fore, by  original  : elfe  what  need  have  they  of 
the  death  of  Chrifi  ? Yea,  Death  reigned  from 
Adam  to  Mofes,  even  over  thofe  who  had  not  finned 
(aflualiv)  according  to  the  fmilitude  of  Adam's 
tranfgreffion.  This,  which  can  relate  to  infants 
only,  is  a clear  proof  that  the  whole  race  of  man- 
kind, are  obnoxious  both  to  the  guilt  and  punifh- 
ment  of  Adamh  tranfgreffion.  But  as  by  the  of- 
fence of  one,  judgment  came  upon  all  men  to  con- 
demnation, Jo  by  the  righteoufnefs  of  one , thejree- 


[ 2-80  ] 

gift  came  upon  all  men,  to  juf  if  cation  of  life.  And 
the  virtue  of  this  free-gift,  the  merits  of  (Thrift's 
life  and  death,  are  applied  to  us  in  baptifm.  He 
gave  himfef  for  the  church,  that  he  might  fanElify 
and  cleanfe  it  with  the  zvafiing  oj  water,  [Epli.  v. 
2g,  2 6.)  by  the  word‘\  namely,  in  baptifm  the 
ordinary  inflrmnent  of  our  juflification.  Agreea- 
bly to  this  our  church  prays  in  the  baptifmal  of- 
fice, that  the  perfon  to  be  baptized  may  be 
“ wafhed  and  fanctified  by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  and 
being  delivered  from  God’s  wrath,  receive  re- 
mi  (lion  of  fins,  and  enjoy  the  everlafting  bene- 
difiion  of  his  heavenly  wafhing  and  declares 
, in  the  rubric  at  the  end  of  the  office,  “ It  is  cer- 
tain, by  God's  word,  that  children  who  ate 
baptized,  dying  before  they  commit  actual  fin, 
are  faved.”  And  this  is  agreeable  to  the  unani- 
mous judgment  of  all  the  antient  fathers. 

2.  By  baptifm  we  enter  into  covenant  with 
God  ; into  that  evcrlafing  covenant,  which  he 
hath  commanded  for  ever,  (PJaL  cix.  n.j  That 
new  covenant,  which  he  promifed  to  make  with 
the  fpiritual  IfraeT ; even  to  give  them  a new 
heart  and  a new  fpirit,  to fprinkle  clean  water  up- 
on them,  (of  which  the  baptifmal  is  only  a figure} 
and  to  remember  their fns  and  iniquities  no  more: 
in  a word,  to  be  their  God,  as  he  promifed  to 
Abraham,  in  the  evangelical  covenant,  which  he 
made  with  him,  and'  all  his  fpiritual  offspring. 
Gen.  xvii.  7,  8.  And  as  circumcifion  was  then 
the  way  of-  entring  into  this  covenant,  fo  bap- 

tifea 


r **  ] 

»;Tm  is  now:  which  is  therefore  ft  led  by  the  apof- 
tle  (fo  many  good  interpreters  render  his  words,} 
The  fiipulation,  contract,  or  covenant  of  a good, 
confuence  with  God. 

3.  By  baptifm  we  are  admitted  into  the  church,, 
and  confequently  made  members  of  Chrift,  its 
head.  The  Jews  were  admitted  into  the  church 
by  circumcifion,  fo  are  the  Chriftians  by  baptifm. 
For  as  many  as  are  baptized  into  Chrift,  in  his 
name,  have  thereby  put  oh  Chrift,  Gal.  iii.  27. 
That  is,  are  myftically  united  to  Chrift,  and  made 
one  with.  him.  For  by  one  Spirit  we  are  all  baptized 
into  one  body,  (1  Cor.  xii.  13.)  Namely,  the 
church,  the  body  , of  Chiift,  ( Eph  iv.  12.)  From 
which  fpiritual,  vital  union  with  him,  proceeds 
the  influence  of  his  grace  on  thofe  that  are  bap- 
tized •,  as  from  our  uifion  with  the  church,  a 
fhare  in.  all  its  privileges,  and  in  all  the  promifes 
Chrift  has  made  to  it. 

4.  By  baptifm  we  who  were  by  nature  children 
of  wrath,  are  made  the  children  of  God.  And 
this  regeneration  which  our  church  in  fo  many 
places  aferibes  to  baptifm  is  more  than  barely 
being  admitted  into  the  church,  though  common- 
ly connefled  therewith  ; being  “ grafted  into 
the  body  of  Chrift ’s  church,  we  are  made  the 
children  of  God  bv  adoption  and  grace.”  This  is 
grounded  on  the  plain  words  of  our  Lord,  John 
iii.  g.  Except  a man  be  born  again  of  water  and  of 
the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God. 

By 


[ 282  ] 

By  water  then,  as  a means,  the  water  of  baptifm, 
we  are  regenerated  or  born  again  : whence  it  is 
alfo  called  by  the  apoftle,  The  wafting  oj  regene- 
ration. Our  church  therefore  afcribes  no  greater 
virtue  to  baptifm,  than  Chrift  himfelf  has  done. 
Nor  does  Ihe  afcribe  it  to  the  outward  wafhing, 
but  to  the  inward  grace,  which  added  thereto, 
makes  it  a facrament.  Herein  a principle  of  grace 
is  infufed,  which  will  not  be  wholly  taken  away, 
unlefs  we  quench  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  by 
long-continued  wickednefs. 

g.  In  confequence  of  our  being  made  children 
of  God,  we  are  heirs  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
If  children  fas  the  apoflle  obferves)  then  heirs, 
heirs  with  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Chi  ill. 
Herein  we  receive  a tide  to  and  an  earneft  of 
a kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved.  Baptifm  doth, 
nowfave  us,  if  we  live  anfvverable  thereto,  if  we 
repent,  believe  and  obey  the  gofpel.  Suppofing 
this,  as  it  admits  us  into  the  church  here,  fo 
into  glory  hereafter. 

III.  l.  But  did  our  Saviour  defign  thisfbould 
remain  always  in  his  church  ? This  is  the  third 
thing  we  are  to  confider.  And  this  may  bedtf- 
patched  in  few  words,  ftnce  there  can  be  no  rea- 
sonable doubt,  but  it  was  intended  to  laid  as 
lon<t  as  the  church  into  which  it  is  the  appointed 
means  of  entring.  In  the  ordinary  way,  there 
is  no  other  means  of  entring  into  the  church  or 
into  heaven. 


2.  In 


[ 283  ] 

8.  In  all  ages  the  outward  baptifm  is  a means 
of  th t inward  ; as  outward  clrcumcifion  was,  of 
the  circumcifion  of  the  heart.  Nor  would  it 
have  availed  a Jew  to  fay,  I have  the  inward 
circumcifion,  and  therefore  do  not  need  the  out- 
ward too,  that  foul  was  to  be  cut  off  from  his 
people.  He  had  dtfpifed , he  had  broken  God’s 
everlafling  covenant,  by  defpifing  the  feal  of  it, 
Gen.xvu.  14.  Now  the  feal  of  circumcifion  was  to 
la  ft  among  ihe  Jews  as  long  as  the  law  lafled,  to 
which  it  obliged  them.  By  plain  parity  of  rea- 
fon,  baptifm  which  came  in  its  room,  muft  laft 
among  Chriftians,  as  long  as  the  gofpel-covenant 
into  which  it  admits,  and  whereunto  it  obliges  all 
nations. 

3.  This  appears  alfo  from  the  original  com- 
miffion  which  our  Lord  gave  to  his  apoflles. 
Go,  difciple  all  nations , baptizing  them  in  the  name 
of  the  Father , of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghoft  \ 
teaching  them — And  lo  lam  with  you  always  even. 
Unto  the  end  of  the  world.  Now  as  long  as  this 
commiffion  lafled,  as  long  as  Clirift  promifed  to 
be  with  them  in  the  execution  of  it,  fo  loner 
doubtlefs  were  they  to  execute  it  and  to  baptize  as 
well  as  to  teach.  But  Chrifi  hath  promifed  to 
be  with  them,  that  is  by  his  Spirit,  in  their 
fucceffors,  to  the  end  of  the  world.  So  long 
therefore  without  difpnte,  it  was  his  defign,  that 
baptifm  fhould  remain  in  his  church. 


IV.  1.  But 


r ^ ] 

IV.  1.  But  the  grand  queftion  is,  "Who  ar<r 
the  proper  fubjeCis  of  baptifm  ? Grown  perfons- 
only,  or  infants  alfo  ? In  order  to  anfwer  this, 
fully,  I fhall  firft,  Lay  down  the  grounds  of 
infant-baptifm,  taken  from  fcripture,  reafon,  and. 
primitive,  univerfal  practice,  and  fecondly,  an- 
fwer the  objections  againft  it. 

2.  As  to  the  grounds  of  it ; if  infants  are  guil- 
ty of  original  fin,  then  they  -are  proper  fubjects  of 
baptifm  : feeing  in  the  ordinary  way,  they  can- 
not be  fayed,  unlefs  this  be  wafhed  away  by  bap- 
tifm. It  has  been  already  proved,  that  this  ori- 
ginal ftain  cleaves  to  every  child  of  man ; and 
that  hereby  they  are  children  of  wrath,  and  lia-F 
ble  to  eternal  damnation.  It  is  true,  the  fecond 
Adam  has  found  a remedy  for  the  difeafe  which 
came  upon  all  by  the  offence  of  the  firft.  But 
the  benefit  cf  this,  is  to  be  received  through  the 
means  which  he  hath  appointed  : through  bap- 
tifm in  particular,  which  is  the  ordinary  means  he 
hath  appointed  for  that  purpofe  : and  to  which 
God  hath  tied  us,  though  he  may  not  have  tied 
himjelf  Indeed  where  it  cannot  be  bad,  the 
cafe  is  different : but  extraordinary  cafes  do  not 
make  void  a {landing  rule.  This  therefore  is  our 
firft  ground  : infants  need  to  be  wafhed  from  ori- 
ginal fin  : therefore  they  are  proper  fubje&s  of 
baptifm. 

3.  Secondly,  If  infants  are  capable  of  making  a 
covenant,  and  were  and  ftill  are  under  the 
evangelical  covenant,  then  they  have  a right 

to 


r 

L 


285  i 


to  'baptifm,  which  is  the  entring  Teal  thereof. 
'But  infants  are  capable  of  making  a covenant, 
and  were  and  ftill  are  under  the  evangelical  cove- 
nant. 

The  cuflom  of  nations  and  common  reafon 
•of  mankind,  prove  that  infants  may  enter  into 
•■a  covenant,  and  may  be  obliged  by  compafts 
■made  by  others  in  their  name  and  receive  advan- 
tage by  them.  But  we  have  Wronger  proof  than 
this,  even  God’s  own  word  ( Deut.  xxix.  10,  11, 
12 .)  Ye  ft  and  this  dayall  of  you  before  the  Lord 
— your  captains,  with  all  the  men  oj  Ifrael  ; your 
little  ones,  your  wives  and  the  Jtranger — that 
■thou JliouldJl  enter  into  covenant  with  the  Lord 
thy  God.  Now  God  would- never  have  made  a 
•covenant  with  little  ones,  if  they  had  not  been 
■capable  of  it.  'Tis  not  faid  children  only  but 
little  children,  the  Hebrew  word  properly  figni- 
fy-ing  infants.  And  thefe  may  be  dill,  as  they 
were  of  old,  obliged  to  perform  in  after-time, 
:what  they  are  not  capable  of  performing  at  the 
time  of  their  entring  into  that  obligation. 

4.  The  infants  of  believers,  the  true  children 
of  faithful  Abraham,  always  were  under  the  gof- 
pel  covenant.  They  were  included  in  it,  they 
had  a right  to  it,  and  to  the  feal  of  it-:  as  an  in- 
fant-heir has  a right  to  his  eftate,  though  he  can- 
not yet  have  aftual  polTefTion.  The  covenant 
with  Abraham  was  a gofpel  covenant  : the  condi- 
tion the  fame,  namely  faith  : which  the  apollle 
-obferves  was  imputed  unto  him  for  righteoufhrfs. 

' The 


[ 286  ] 

The  irreparable  fruit  of  this  faith  was  obedience  ; 
for  by  faitli  he  left  his  country,  and  offered  his 
Son.  The  benefits  were  the  fame;  for  God  pro- 
mifed,  I will  be  thy  God,  and  the  God  oj  thy  feed 
after  thee  : and  he  can  promife  no  mote  to  any 
creature;  for  this  includes  all  bleflings,  temporal 
and  eternal.  The  Medrator  is  the  fame  ; for  it 
was  in  his  feed , that  is,  in  Ghrif,  (Gen.  xxii.  18. 
Gal.  iii.  16.)  that  all  nations  were  to  be  bltjfed ; 
on  which  very  account  the  apoflle  favs.  The  gof- 
pcl  was  preached  unto  Abraham,  [Gal.  iii.  8.)Now 
the  fame  promife  that  was  made  to  him,  rhe  fame 
covenant  that  was  made  with  him,  was  made 
With  his  children  after  him,  (Gen.  xvii.  7.  Gab 
iii.  7.)  And  upon  that  account  it  is  called  an  ever- 
lafting  covenant.  In  this  covenant  children  were 
alfo  obliged  to  what  they  knew  not,  to  the  fame 
faith  and  obedience  with  Abraham.  And  fo  they 
are  flill  : as  they  are  fiill  equally  entitled  to  all 
the  benefits  and  promifes  of  it. 

5.  Circumcifion  was  then  the  feal  of  the  co- 
venant; which  is  itfelf  therefore  figuratively 
termed,  The  covenant,  (Afts  vii.  8.)  Hereby  the 
children  of  thofe  who  profeft  the  true  religion, 
were  then  admitted  into  it,  and  obliged  to  the 
conditions  ofit.  and  when  the  law  was  added,  to 
the  obfervance  of  that  alfo.  And  when  the  old 
feal  of  circumcifion  was  taken  off,  this  of  baptifm 
was  added  in  its  room  ; our  Lord  appointing  one 
pofitive  inftitution  to  fucceed  another.  A new 
feal  was  fet  to  Abraham’s  covenant : the  feals  dif- 
fered 


[ 2$7  ] 

Fered,  but  the  deed  was  the  fame ; only  that  part 
was  firuckoff  which  was  political  or  ceremonial. 
That  baptifm  came  in  the  room  of  circumcifion, 
appears  as  well  from  the  clear  reafon  of  the  thing, 
as  from  the  apofiles  argument,  where  after  circum- 
cifion he  mentions  baptifm,  as  that  wherein  God 
had  forgiven  us  our  trefpaffes:  to  which  he  adds, 
the  blotting  out  the  hand  writing  of  ordinances , 
plainly  relating  to  circumcifion  and  other  Jewifli 
rites  - which  as  fairly  implies*  that  baptifm  catne 
in  the  room  of  circumcifion,  as  our  Saviour’s 
filling  the  other  facrament  the  pajfuver  (Col.  ii. 
it,  12,  13.  Luke  xxii.  1^.)  file ws  that  it  was  in- 
stituted in  the  place  of  it.  Nor  is  it  any  proof  that 
. baptifm  did  not  fucceed  circumcifion,  becaufe  it 
differs  in  fome  circumjlances , anv  more  than  it 
proves  the  Lord’s  fupper  did  not  fucceed  the  paf- 
fover,  becaufe  in  feveral  circumftances  it  differs 
from  it.  This  then  is  a fecond  ground.  Infants 
are  capable  of  entering  into  covenant  with  God. 
As  they  always  were,  fo  they  fiill  are  under  the 
evangelical  covenant.  Therefore  they  have  a 
right  to  baptifm,  which  is  now  the  entering  feal 

I thereof. 

6.  Thirdly , If  infants  ought  to  come  to  Chrift, 
if  they  are  capable  of  admifiion  into  the  church  of 
God,  and  confequently  of  folemn,  facramental 
dedication  to  him,  then  they  are  proper  fubjefts 
of  baptifm-  But  infants  are  capable  of  coming  to 
Chrifi,  of  admifiion  into  the  church,  and  folemn 
dedication  to  God. 


That 


[ 288  ] 

That  infants  ought  to  come,  to  Chrift  appears 
from  his  own  words.  They  brought  little  children 
to  Chrijl,  and  the  difciples  rebuked  them . And  Je- 
fus  [aid , Suffer  little  children  to  come  unto  me, 
and  forbid  them  not ; for  of fuch  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven , Matt.  xiv.  13,  14.  St.  Luke  expreffes  it 
ftill  more  flrongly,  (chap.  xiv.  18.)  They  brought 
unto  him  even  infants,  that  he  might  touch  them. 
Thefe  children  were  fo  little,  that  tbev  were 
brought  to  him.  Y<?t  he  fays,  Suffer  them  to  come 
■unto  me : fo  little,  that  he  took  them  up  in  his 
arms-,  yet  he  rebukes  thofe  who  would  have 
hindered  their  coming  to  him.  And  his  com- 
mand  refpecled  the  future  as-well  as  the  prefent. 
Therefore  his  difciples  or  mini  Hers  are  ftill  to 
f offer  infants  to  come,  that  is  to  be  brought  unto 
Chrift.  But  they  cannot  now  come  to  him,  unlefs 
by  being  brought  into  the  church  ; which  cannot 
be  but  by  baptifm.  Yea  and  of  fuch,  fays  our 
Lord,  is  the.  kingdom  of  heaven  ; not  of  fuch  only, 
as  were  like  thefe  infants.  For  if  they  themf'eKes 
were  not  fit  to  be  fubjefts  of  that  kingdom,  how 
could  others  be  fo,  becaufe  tbev  were  like  them  ? 
Inlants  therefore  are  capable  cf  being  admitted 
into  the  church,  and  have  a right  thereto.  E\en 
under  the  Old  Teftament  they  were  admi  .d 
into  it  by  circumcifion.  An  1 can  we  lupi  ofe 
they  are  in  a worfe  condition  under  the  g'  el, 
than  they  were  under  the  law  ? And  t at  our 
Lord  would  takeaway  any  pr  i leges  which  they 
then  enjoyed  p Would  he  not  rather  make  addi- 
tions 


[ 289  ] 

tionsto  them  ? This  then  is  a third  ground.  In- 
fants ought  to  come  to  Chriji,  and  no  man  ought 
to  forbid,  them.  They  are  capable  of  admiffion 
into  the  church  of  God.  Therefore  they  are  pro- 
per fubjedfs  of  baptifm. 

7.  Fourthly , If  the  apoflles  baptized  infants, 
then  are  they  proper  fubje&s  of  baptifm.  But  the 
apoflles  baptized  infants,  as  is  plain  from  the 
following  confideration.  The  Jews  conftantly 
baptized  as  well  as  circumcifed  all  infant-profe- 
iytes.  Our  Lord  therefore  commanding  his  apof- 
tlcs,  to  profelyte  or  difciple  all  nations  by  baptizing 
them,  and  not  forbidding  them  to  receive  infants 
as  well  as  others,  they  mull  needs  baptize  chil- 
dren alfo. 

That  the  Jews  admitted  profelytes  by  baptifm 
as  well  as  by  circumcifion,  even  whole  families 
together,  parents  and  children,  we  have  the  una- 
nimous teflimony  of  their  mofl  ancient,  learned 
and  authentic  writers.  The  males  they  received 
by  baptifm  and  circumcifion  ; the  women  by  bap- 
tifm only.  Confequently  the  apoflles,  unlefs  our 
Lord  had  exprefly  forbidden  it,  would  of  courfe 
do  the  fame  thing. 

Indeed  the  confequence  would  hold  from  cir- 
cumcifion only.  For  if  it  was  the  cuftom  ol  the 
Jews,  when  they  gathered  profelytes  out  of  all 
nations,  to  admit  children  into  the  church  by 
circumcifion,  though  they  could  not  aflually  be- 
lieve the  law  or  obey  it : then  the  apoflles,  mak- 
ing profelytes  to  Chriftianity  by  baptifm,  could 

Vol.  XlX.  N never 


[ 29°  ] 

never  think  of  excluding  children,  whom  the 
Jews  always  admitted  (the  reafon  for  their  admif- 
fion  being  the  fame]  unlefs  our  Lord  had  ex- 
prefly forbidden  it.  It  follows,  the  apoflles  bap- 
tized infants.  Therefore  they  are  proper  fubje&s 
of  baptifm. 

8.  If  it  be  obje&ed,  there'  is  no  exprefs  men- 
tion in  fcripture  of  any  infants  whom  the  apoflles 
baptized  : I would  afk,  Suppofe  no  mention  had 
been  made  in  the  affs  of  thofe  two  women  bap- 
tized by  the  apoflles,  yet  might  we  not  fairly 
conclude,  that  when  fo  many  thoufands,  fo  many 
entire  houfholds  were  baptized,  women  were  not 
excluded  ? Erpecially  ftnce  it  was  the  known  cuf- 
tom  of  the  Jews  to  baptize  them  ? The  fame 
holds  of  children  : Nay  more  ftrongly,  on  the 
account  ol  circumcifion.  Three  fhoufand  were 
baptized  by  the  apoflles  in  one  day,  and  five  thou- 
fand  in  another.  And  can  it  be  reafonably  fup- 
pofed,  that  there  were  no  children  among  fuch 
vafl  numbers  ? Again,  the  apoflles  baptized  many 
families  : nay,  we  hardly  read  of  one  matter  of  a 
family-,  who  was  converted  and  baptized,  but  bis 
whole  family  (as  was  before  the  cuflom  among 
the  Jews)  were  baptized  with  him.  Thus  the 
jailor's  houjhold , he  and  all  his:  the  houjhold of 
Caius,  of  Stephanie,  of  Crifpus.  And  can  we  fup- 
pote,  that  in  all  thefe  houfholds,  which  we  read, 
were  without  exception  baptized,  there  fliould 
not  be  fo  much  as  one  child,  or  infant  ? But,  to 
go  one  flep  further.  St.  Peter  lavs  to  the  multi- 
tude, 


[ 29*  ] 

tude,  Afts  ii.  38.  Repent  and  be  baptized  every 
one  of  you , for  the  remiffion  cfjins . For  the  pro- 
mifeis  to  you,  and  to  your  children.  Indeed  the 
anfwer  is  made  direfily,  to  thofe  who  afked. 
What  Jhall  toe  do  ? But  it  reaches  farther  than  to 
thofe  who  alked  the  queftion.  And  though  chil- 
dren could  not  actually  repent , yet  they  might  be 
baptized.  And  that  they  are  included  appears, 
1.  Becaufe  the  apollle  addrelfes  to  every  one  of 
them,  and  in  every  one,  children  muff  be  con- 
tained, 2.  They  are  exprefsly  mentioned,  Th'e 
promife  is  to  you  and  to  your  children. 

g.  Laftly , If  to  baptize  infants  has  been  the 
general  praftice  of  the  Chriflian  church  in  all 
places  and  in  all  ages,  then  this  mull  have  been 
the  praftice  of  the  apoftles,  anti  confequently,  the 
mind  ofCbrifi.  But  to  baptize  infants  has  been 
the  general  praftice  of  the  Chriflian  church,  in 
all  places  and  in  all  ages.  Of  this  we  have  unex- 
ceptionable witneffes.  St.  Auftin  for  the  Latin 
church,  (who  flourifhed  before  the  year  400} 
and  Origen  for  the  Greek  (born  in  the  fecond 
century J both  declaring,  not  only  that  the  whole 
church  of  Chrift  did  then  baptize  infants,  but 
likewife  that  thc-y  received  this  prablice  from  the 
apoftles  themfelves.  fAuguJ}.  de  Genefi  Lib.  10. 
c.  23.  Orig.  in  Rom.  6.)  St.  Cyprian  likewife  is 
exprefs  for  it,  and  a whole  council  with  him. 
( Epif.  ad  Fidum ) If  need  were  we  might  cite 
-likewife  Athartafius,  Chryfoftom,  and  a cloud  of 
N 2 'witneffes. 


[ 292  3 

witneffes.  Nor  is  there  one  injlanu  to  be  found 
in  all  antiquity,  of  any  orthodox  Chriflian,  who 
denied  baptifm  to  children  when  brought  to  be 
baptized  : nor  any  one  of  the  fathers,  or  antient 
writers,  for  the  firft  eight  hundred  years  at  leaf!:, 
who  held  it  unlawful.  And  that  it  has  been  the 
praftice  of  all  regular  churches  ever  fince  is  clear 
and  manifeft.  Not  only  our  own  anceflors  when 
firft  converted  to  Chriftianity,  not  only  all  the 
European  churches,  but  the  African  too  and  the 
Afiatic,  even  thofe  of  St.  Thomas  in  the  Indies, 
do  and  ever  did  baptize  their  children.  The  fact 
being  thus  cleared,  that  infant-baptifm  has  been 
the  general  practice  of  the  Chriftian  church  in  all 
places  and  in  all  ages,  that  it  has  continued  with- 
out interruption  in  the  church  of  God  for  above 
feventeen  hundred  years,  we  may  fafely  conclude, 
it  was  handed  down  from  the  apoftles,  who  beft 
knew  the  mind  of  Chrift. 

10.  To  fum  up  the  evidence;  if  outward  bap- 
tifm be  generally,  in  an  ordinary  way  neceffary 
to  falvation,  and  infants  may  be  faved  as  well  as 
adults,  nor  ought  we  to  negleft  any  means  of 
faving  them  : it  cur  Lord  commands  fuch  to 
come,  to  be  brought  unto  him,  and  declares,  of 
fuch  is  the  kingdo?n  of  heaven  : if  infants  are  capa- 
ble of  making  a covenant,  or  having  a covenant 
made  for  them  by  others,  being  included  in 
Abraham's  covenant,  (which  was  a covenant  of 
faith,  an  e\  angelical  covenant)  and  never  ex- 
cluded by  Chrift  : if  they  have  a right  to  be 

members 


C 293  ] 

members  of  the  church,  and  were  accordingly 
members  of  the  Jewifh  : if  fuppofe  our  Lord 
had  defigned  to  exclude  them  from  baptifm,  he 
-muft  have  exprefsly  forbidden  his  apoftles  to  bap= 
tize  them  (which  none  dares  to  affirm  he  did) 
fince  otherwife  they  would  do  it  of  courfe,  ac- 
cording to  the  univerfal  praflice  of  their  nation  : 
if  it  is  highly  probably  they  did  fo,  even  from  the 
letter  of  fcripture,  becaufe  they  frequently  bap- 
tized whole  houffiolds,  and  it  would  be  flrange, 
if  there  were  no  children  among  them  : if  the 
whole  church  of  Chrift  for  feventeen  hundred 
years  together  baptized  infants,  and  were  never 
oppofed  till  the  laft  century  but  one,  by  fome 
not  very  holy  men  in  Germany.  Laftly,  If  there 
are  fuch  ineftimable  benefits  conferred  in  baptifm, 
the  waffiing  away  the  guilt  of  original  fin,  the 
ingrafting  us  into  Chrift,  by  making  us  members 
of  his  church,  and  thereby  giving  us  a right  to 
all  the  bleffings  of  the  gofpel  : it  follows,  that  in- 
fants, may,  yea,  ought  to  be  baptized,  and  that 
none  ought  to  hinder  them. 

I am,  in  the  laft  place,  to  anfwer  thofe  objefti- 
ons,  which  are  commonly  brought  againft  infant- 
baptifm. 

l.  The  chief  of  thefe  is  : “ Our  Lord  faid  to 
his  apoftles,  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  Go  and  teach  all 
nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghojl.  Here  Chrift  himfelf 
put  teaching  before  baptizing.  Therefore  infants 
N 3 being 


[ 294  ] 

being  incapable  of  being  taught,  are  incapable  of 
being  baptized 

I anfvver,  i.  The  order  of  words  in  fcripture, 
is  no  certain  rule  for  the  order  of  things. 
We  read  in  St.  Mark  i.  4.  John  baptized  in  the 
wilder  nefs,  and  preached  the  baplifm  of  repentance. 
And  ver.  5.  They  were  baptized  of  fum  in  Jordan , 
confefp.ng  then  fins.  Now  either  the  order  of 
words  in  fcripture  does  not  always  imply  the 
fame  order  of  things;  or  it  follows,  that  John 
baptized  before  his  hearers  either  confefftd  or  re- 
pented. But  2.  the  words  are  manifeflly  mif- 
tranflated.  For  if  we  read.  Go  and  leach  all  na- 
tions, baptizing  them — teaching  them  to  obferve  all 
tilings,  it  makes  plain  tautology,  vain  and  fen fe- 
lefs  repetition.  It  ought  to  be  tranflated  (which 
Is  the  literal  meaning  of  the  words)  Go  and  make 
difciples  of  all  nations,  by  baptizing  them.  That 
infants  are  capable  of  being  made  profelytes  or 
difciples  has  been  already  proved.  Therefore 
this  text,  rightly  tranflated,  is  no  valid  objection 
againft  infant  baplifm. 

2.  Their  next  objedlion  is,  “ The  fcripture 
fays,  Repent  and  be  baptized  ; Believe  and  be  bap- 
tized. Therefore  repentance  and  faith  ought 
to  go  before  baptifm.  But  infants  are  incapable 
of  thefe.  Therefore  they  are  incapable  of  bap- 
tifm.” 

I anfwer,  repentance  and  faith  were  to  go 
before  circumcifion,  as  well  as  before  baptifm. 
Therefore  if  this  argument  held,  it  would  prove 

juft 


C 2ss  ] 

Jaft’as  well,  that  infants  were  incapable  of  cir- 
cumcifion.  But  we  know  God  Iiimfelf  determin- 
ed the  contrary,  commanding  them  to  be  circum- 
cifed  at  eight  days  old.  Now  if  infants  were  capa*- 
ble  of  being  circumcifed,  notwithftanding  that 
repentance  and  faith,  were  to  go  before  circum- 
cifion  in  grown  perfons,  they  are  juft  as  capable  of 
being  baptized-;  notwithftanding  that  repentance 
and  faith  are  in  grown  perfons  to  go  before  bap- 
tifm.  This  objection  therefore  is  of  no  force  : 
for  it  is  as  ft rong  again!!  circumcifton  of  infants  as 
infant-baptifm. 

3.  It  is  objected,  thirdly,  “ There  is  no  com- 
mand for  it  in  fcripture.  Now  God  was  angry 
with  his  own  people,  becaufe  they  did  that, 
which  he  faid,  I commanded  them  not , Jer.  vii.  31. 
One  plain. text  would  end  all  the  ciilpute.” 

I anfwer,  1.  We  have  reafon.to  fear  it  would 
not.  It  is  as  po-fitively  commanded  in  a very  plain 
text  of  fcripture,.  that  we  fhould  teach  and  ad- 
monijh  one  another  with  pfalms  and  hymns  and 
fpintual  Jongs , fngihg  to  the  Lord  with  grace  in 
our  hearts,  Eph.  v.  14.  as  it  is  to  honour  our  fa- 
ther and  mother.  But  does  this  put  an  end  to  all 
difpute  ? Do  not  thefe  very  perfons  abfolutely 
refufe  to  do  it,  notwithftanding  a plain  text,  an 
exprefs  command  ? 

I anfwer  2.  They  themfelves  praftife  what 
there  is  neither  exprefs  command , nor  clear  exam- 
ple for  in  fcripture.  They  have  no  exprefs  com- 
mand for  baptizing  women.  They  faid  indeed, 
N 4 « Women 


[ 29*  ] 

“ Women  are  implied  in  all  nations They  are; 
and  fo  are  infants  too  : but  the  command  is  not 
exprefs  for  either.  And  for  admitting  women  to 
the  Lord’s  flipper,  they  have  neither  exprefs 
command,  nor  clear  example.  Yet  they  do  it 
continually,  without  either  one  or  the  other. 
And  they  arejudified  therein  by  the  plain  reafon 
of  the  thing.  Tins  alfo  judifies  us,  in  baptizing 
infants,  though  without  exprejs  command,  or  clear 
example. 

If  it  be  faid,“  But  there  is  a command,  (1  Cor. 
xi.  28.}  Let  a man  ar^uiro<;  examine  himjelj,  andfo 
let  him  eat  of  that  bread : the  word  man  in  the 
original  dignifying  indifferently  either  men  or 
women.”  I grant  it  does  in  other  places ; but 
here  the  word  himfelj  immediately  following, 
C°ifex*i  to  men  only.  “ Slit  women  are  im- 
plied in  it,  though  not  expreft.”  Certainly  : and 
fo  are  infants  in  all  nations. 

“ But  we  have  feripture  example  for  it : for 
it  is  faid  in  the  ABs,  Vie  apojtles  continued  in 
prayer  and  J Application  with  the  women:’  True, 
in  prayer  and  fupplication  ; but  it  is  not  laid, 
in  communicating.  Nor  have  we  one  clear  exam- 
ple of  it  in  the  bible. 

Since  then  they  admit  women  to  the  commu- 
nion, without  any  exprefs  command  or  example, 
but  only  by  confequence  from  feripture,  they  can 
never  {hew  reafon  why  infants  fliould  not  be 
admitted  to  baptifm,  when  there  are  fo  many 

feriptures 


[ 297  ] 

fcriptures  which  by  fair  confequence  fhew  they 
have  a right  to  it,  and  are  capable  of  it. 

As  for  the  texts  wherein  God  reproves  his 
people  for  doing  what  he  commanded  them  not  : 
that  phrafe  evidently  means,  what  he  had  for- 
bidden; particularly  in  that  paffage  of  Jeremiah. 
The  whole  verfe  is,  They  have  built  the  high  places 
oJTophet,  to  burn  their  fons  and  their  daughters 
in  the  fire,  which  I commanded  them  not.  Now 
God  had  exprelly  forbidden  them  to  do  this; 
and  that  on  pain  of  death.  But  finely  there  is  a 
difference  between  the  Jews  offering  their  fons 
and  daughters  to  devils,  and  Chriftians  offering 
theirs  to  God. 

On  the  whole  therefore,  it  is  not  only  lawful 
and  innocent,  but  meet,  right  and  our  botrnden 
duty,  in  conformity  to  the  uninterrupted  praftice 
of  the  whole  church  of  Chrift  from  the  earlieft. 
ages,  to  confecrate  our  children  to  God  by  bap- 

tifm,  as  the  Jewiflt  church  were,  commanded  to 
do  by  circumcifion. 

Nav,  11,  1756, 


A LETTER 


[ 29B  ] 


A LETTER  to  the 

Rev.  Mr.  TOOGOOD,  of  Exeter ; 

Occafioned  by  his  diffent  from  the  church  of 
England 

FULLY  JUSTIFIED; 


i SIR, 

IF  you  fairly  reprefent  Mr.  White’s  arguments, 
they  are  liable  to  much  exception.  But  whe- 
ther they  are  or  no,  your  anfwersto  them  are 
far  from  unexceptionable.  To  the  manner  of 
the  whole  I objeft,  you  are  not  ferious  : you  do 
not  write  as  did  thofe  excellent  men,  Mr.  Baxter, 
Mr.  Howe,  Dr.  Calamy,  who  fee.rn  always  to 
fpeak  not  laughing  but  weeping.  To  the  mat- 
ter I objeft,  That  if  your  argument  hold,  as  it 
is  propofed  in  your  \ ery  title-page,  if“adiffent 
from  our  church  be  the  genuine  confequence 
of  the  allegiance  due  to  Chrift,  ’ then  all  who  do 
not  difTent,  have  renounced  that  allegiance, 
and  are  in  a ftate  of  damnation  ! 


I have 


[ 299  J 

I have  not  leifure  to  confider  all  that  you  ad- 
vance, in  proof  of  this  fevere  fentence.  I can 
only  at  perfent  examine  your  main  argument, 
which  indeed  contains  the  hrength  of  your 
caufe.  “ My  feparation  from  the  church  of 
England  you  fay,  is  a debt  I owe  to  God,  and 
an  a£f  of  allegiance  due  to  Chrift  the  only  Law- 
giver in  the  church.”  t 

Again.  “ The  controverfy  turns  upon  one  fn^ 
gle  point , Has  the  church  power  to  decree  rites  and 
ceremonies  ? If  it  has  this  power,  then  all  the 
objections  of  the  dilfenters,  about  kneeling  at  the 
Lord’s  fupper  and  the  like,  are  impertinent  ; if 
it  has  no  power  at  all.  of  this  kind,  yea,  if  Ghrilf’ 
the  great  Lawgiver  and  King  of  the  church  hath 
exprefsly  commanded,  that  no  power  of  this  kind 
fliall  ever  be  claimed  or  ever  be  yielded  by  any* 
of  his  followers:  then  the  dilfenters  will  have 
honour  before  God  for  protefting  againlt  fuch 
ufurpation.’T. 

I join  ilfue  on  this  fingle  point  : “ If  Chrifi. 
hath  exprefsly  commanded,  that  no  power  of 
this  kind  (hall  ever  be  claimed , or  ever  yielclcdby 
any  of  his  followers;”  Then  are , all  who  yield 
it,  all  churchmen,  in  a Hate  of  damnation,  as- 
much  as  thofe  who  deny  the  Lord  that  bought, 
them.  But  if  Chrift  hath  not  exprefsly  com- 
manded this,  we  may  go  to  church,  and  yet  not 
po  to  hell. 

O - 

To  the  point  then.  The  power  I fpeak  of 
N 6 ‘is 

t p.  2.  tp*3* 


[ 3°o  J 

is  a power  of  decreeing  rights  and  ceremonies, 
of  appointing  fuch  circumilantials  (fuppofej  of 
public  worfhip  as  are  in  themfelves  purely  in- 
different, being  no  way  determined  in  fcripture. 

And  the  queffion  is,  “ Hath  Chrifl  exprefsiy 
commanded,  that  this  power  fhall  never  be  clavn~ 
ed,  nor  ever  yielded  by  any  of  his  followers  ? ’ 
This  I deny.  How  do  you  prove  it  ? 

Why  thus.  “ If  the  church  of  England  has 
ibis  power,  fo  has  the  church  of  Rome.”+  Al- 
lowed. But  this  is  not  to  the  purpofe.  I want 
“ the  exprefs  command  of  Chriff.” 

You  fay,  “ Secondly , The  perfons  who  have 
ibis  power  in  England,  are  not  the  clergy,  but 
the  parliament.’1^  Perhaps  fo.  But  this  alfo 
Erikes  wide.  Where  is  the  “ exprefs  command 
of  Chrifl?  ” 

You  afk,  “ Thirdly,  How  came  the  civil  ma- 
giflrate  by  this  power  ?||  Chrifl  commands  us  to 
call  no  man  on  earth  father  and  majler,  that  is,  to 
acknowledge  no  authority  of  any  in  matters  of  re- 
ligion. At  length  we  are  come  to  the  exprefs 
command,  which  according  to  your  interpretation 
is  exprefs  enough  : “ That  is,  acknowledge  no 
authority  of  any  in  matters  of  religion  own  no 
power  in  any  to  appoint  any  circumflance  of  pub- 
lic worfhip,  any  thing  pertaining  to  decency  and 
order.  But  this  interpretation  is  not  allowed. 
It  is  the  very  point  in  quellion. 

We  allow,  Chrifl  does  here  exprefsiy  command 

to 

+ P.  4.  jp.  s)9.  lip.  u.  $p-i2. 


[ 301  3 

to  acknowledge  no  fuch  authority  of  any,  as  the 
Jews  paid  their  Rabbies,  whom  they  ufually  Ail- 
ed, either  fathers  or  majlers  : implicitly  believing 
all  they  affirmed,  and  obeying  all  they  enjoined. 
But  we  deny,  that  he  exprefsly  commands,  to 
acknowledge  no  authority  of  governors,  in  things 
purely  indifferent,  whether  they  relate  to  the  wor- 
fhip  of  God,  or  other  matters. 

You  attempt  to  prove  it  by  the  following  words, 
“ [Matt,  xxiii.  8,  9.)  One  is  your  MaJler  and 
Lawgiver,  even  Cbrift  : and  all  ye  are  brethren-, 
all  Chriftians ; having  no  dominion  over  one 
another,”  True  : no  fuch  dominion  as  their  Rab- 
bies claimed  : but  in  all  things  indifferent,  Chrif- 
tian  magiftrates  have  dominion.  As  to  your  in- 
ferring, and  Lawgiver  in  the  preceding  claufe, 
you  have  no  authority  from  the  text : for  it  is  not 
plain,  that  our  Lord  is  here  fpeaking  of  himfelf 
in  that  capacity.  the  word  here  ren- 

dered majler,  you  well  know  conveys  no  fuch 
idea.  It  fhould  rather  have  been  tranflated, 
teacher.  And  indeed  the  whole  text  primarily 
relates  to  doctrines. 

But  you  cite  another  text  : The  princes  of  the 
Gentiles  exercife  dominion  over  them:  but  it  flail 
not  be  fo  among  you  : Matt.  xx.  £ 5.  Very  good  : 
that  is,  Chriflian  pallors,  fhall  not  exercife  fuch 
dominion  over  their  flock,  as  Heathen  princes 
do  over  their  fubjefls.  Mod  fure  : but  without 
! any  violation  of  this,  they  may  appoint  how 
things  fhall  be  done  decently  and  in  order . 

4S 


But 


[ 302  1 

“ But  Chrifi  is  the  foie  Lawgiver,  Judge,  and 
Sovereign  in  his  church. ”t  He  is,  the  foie  Sove- 
reign, Judge,  and  Lawgiver.  But  it  does  not 
follow  (what  you  continually  infer)  that  there  are 
no Jubordinate  judges  therein  : nor,  that  there 
are  none  who  have  power,  to  make  regulations 
therein  in  fubordination  to  him.  King  George 
is  fovereign,  judge,  and  lawgiver,  in  thefe 
realms.  But  are  there  no  fubordinate  judges  ? 
Nay,  are  there  not  many  who  have  power  to 
make  rules  or  laws  in  their  own  little  communi- 
ties ? And  how  does  this  “ invade  his  authority 
and  throne  1”  Not  at  all ; unlefs  they  contradict 
the  laws  of  his  kingdom. 

“ However  he  alone  has  authority  to  fix  the 
terms  of  communion  for  his  followers  or  church.^- 
^nd  the  terms  he  has  fixt  no  men  on  earth  have 
authority  to  fet  aftde  or  alter.1’  This  I allow  (al- 
though it  is  another  queflion)  none  has  authority 
to  exclude  from  the  church  of  Chrifi,  thofe  who 
comply  w'ith  the  terms  which  Chrifi  has  fixt. 
But,  not  to  admit  into  the  fociety  called  The 
church  of  England,  or,  not  to  adminifler  the 
Lord’s  fupper- to  them,  is  not  the  fame  thing  with 
««  excluding  men  from  the  church  of  Chrifi : ' 
unlefs  this  fociety  be  The  whole  church  of  Chrifi,. 
which  neither  you  nor  I will  affirm.  This  fociety. 
therefore  may  fcruple  to  receive  thofe  as  mem- 
bers, who  do  not  obferve  her  rules  in  things 
indifferent,  without  pretending  “ to  fet  aCde  or 

alter 

* ibid. 


+ p.  12. 


[ 3°3  ] 

alter  the  terms  which  Chrift  has  fixt’’  for  admif- 
fion  into  the  Chrijlian  church  : and  yet  without 
“ lording  it  over  God’s  heritage,  or  ufurping 
Chrift’s  throne.”  Nor  does  all  “ the  allegiance  we 
owe  him,”  at  all  hinder  our  obeying  them  that 
have  the  rule  over  us,  in  things  of  a purely  indif- 
ferent nature.  Rather,  our  allegiance  to  him,  re- 
quires our  obedience  to  them.  In  being  “ their 
fervants”  thus  far  we  are  “ Chrift’s  fervants.” 
We  obey  his  general  command,  by  obeying  our 
governors  in  particular  inftances. 

Hitherto  you  have  produced  no  exprefs  com = 
rnandof  Chrift  to  the  contrary.  Nor  do. you 
attempt  to  fhew  any  fuch,  but  ftrike  off  from 
the  queftion  for  the  twelve  or  fourteen  pages 
following.  But  after  thefe  you  fay,  t “ The 
fubjefts  of  Chrift  are  exprefsly  commanded  to 
receive  nothing  as  parts  oj  religion,  which  are 
only  commandments  of  men,”  Matt.  xv.  g.  We 
grant  it  : but  this  is  no  command  at  all,  not  to 
obey  thofe  who  have  the  rule  over  us.  And  we 
muft  obey  them  in  things  indifferent,  or  not  at 
all.  For  in  things  which  God  hath  forbidden, 
fhculd  fuch  be  enjoined,  we  dare  not  obey. 
Nor  need  they  enjoin  what  God  hath  com- 
manded. 

Upon  the  whole,  we  agree,  that  Chrift  is 
the  only  fupreme  Judge  and  Lawgiver  in  tie 
church  : I may  add,  and  in  the  world  : for  there 
zj  no  power  no  fecular  power,  but  of  .God  : of 

God 


t p.  26. 


C 3°4  J 

God  who  was  manifefed  in  the JleJh  who  is,  over 
all,  blejjed  jor  ever.  But  we  do  not  at  all  agree 
in  the  inference  which  you  would  draw  there- 
from namely,  that  there  is  no  fub  ordinate  judge 
et  lawgiver  in  the  church.  You  may  juft  as  well 
infer,  That  there  is  no  fubordinate  judge  or  law- 
giver in  the  world.  Yea  there  is,  both  in  the  one 
and  the  other.  And  in  obeying  thefe fubor  dinate 
powers,  we  do  not,  as  you  aver,  renounce  the 
Supreme  : no,  but  we  obey  them,  for  his  fake. 

We  believe,  it  is  not  only  innocent,  but  our 
bounden  duty  fo  to  do  : in  all  things  of  an  in- 
different nature  to  fubmit  ourfelves  to  every  or- 
dinance oj  man  ; and  that for  the  Lord’s  fake : 
becaufe  we  think,  he  has  not  forbidden,  but 
exprefsly  commanded  it.  Therefore  “ as  a 
genuine  fruit  of  our  allegiance  to  Chrift,”  we 
fubmit  both  to  the  king  and  governors J'ent  by  him, 
fo  far  as  poffibly  we  can,  without  breaking  feme 
plain  command  of  God.  And  you  have  not  yet 
brought  any  plain  command,  to  juftify  that 
affertion  that  “ we  may  not fubmit  either  to  the 
king,  or  to  governor s ferit  by  him,  fn  any  circum- 
ftance  relating  to  the  worfhip  of  God.” 

* Here  is  a plain  declaration,  there  is  no  power 
but  of  God  ; the  powers  that  exiji  are  ordained 
cf  God.  Whofotver  therefore  rejijleth  the  power , 
(without  an  abfolute  neceffity,  which  in  things 
indifferent  there  is  not)  rejijleth  the  ordinance  cf 
God.  And  here  is  a plain  command  ground- 
ed thereon  : let  every  foul  be  Jubjedl  to  the 

higher 


[ 3 °5  ] 

I higher  powers.  Now  by  what  fcripture  does  It 
appear,  That  we  are  not  to  be  fubjeB  in  any 
thing  pertaining  to  the  worfhip  of  God  ? This 
is  an  exception  which  we  cannot  poffibly  allow, 
without  clear  warrant  from  Holy  Writ.  And 
we  apprehend,  thofe  of  the  church  of  Rome 
alone,  can  decently  plead  for  fuch  an  exception. 
It  does  not  iound  well  in  the  mouth  of  a protef- 
tant,  to  claim  an  exemption  jrom  the  jarifdic- 
tion  of  the  civil  powers,  in  all  matters  of  > ehgion, 
and  in  the  minuteft  circumflance  relating  to  the 
church . 

Another  plain  command  is  that  mentioned  but 
now  : fubmit  your  fives  to  every  ordinance  of  man 

If  or  the  Lord's  fake.  And  this  we  fhall  think  our- 
felves  hereby  fully  authorized  to  do,  in  things  of 
a religious  as  well  as  a civil  nature,  till  you  can 

I produce  plain  explicit  proof  from  fcripture,  that 
we  muff  fubmit  in  the  latter,  but  not  in  the 
former.  We  cannot  find  any  fuch  diftinffion 
inthebible;  and  till  we  find  it  there,  we  can- 
not receive  it.  But  muff  believe  our  allegiance 
to  Chrift  requires  fubmiffion  to  our  governors 
in  all  things  indifferent. 

IThis  I fpeak,  even  on  fuppofition,  that  the 
things  in  queflion  were  enjoined  merely  by  the 
king  and  parliament.  If  they  were,  what  then  ? 
Then  I would  fubmit  to  them  for  the  Lord’s 
fake.  So  that  in  all  your  parade,  either  with 
regard  to  king  George  or  queen  Anne,  there  may 
be  wit,  but  no  wifdom  : no  force,  no  argument, 

till 


[ 3°«  ] 

ti'I  you  can  fupport  this  diflinction,  from  plain 
teftimony  offcripture. 

I ill  this  is  done,  it  can  never  be  proved, 
that  “ a dilfent  from  the  church  of  England, 
(whether  it  can  be  juftified  from  olher  topics  or 
no)  is  the  genuine  and  juft  confequence,  of  the 
allegiance  which  is  due  to  Chrilf,  as- the  only 
Lawgiver  in  the  church.”  As  you  propofed  to 
“bring  the  controverfy  to  this  fhort  znA  plain 
iHue,  to  let  it  turn  on  this  Jingle  point I have 
done  fo  ; I have  fpoke  to  this  alone  t although 
I could  have  faid  fomething  on  many  other 
points,  which  you  have  advanced  as  points  of 
the  utmoff  certainty,  although  they  are  far  more, 
eafily  affirmed  than  proved.  But  I wave  them  I 
for  the  prefenl : hoping  this  may  fuffice,  to 
fhew  any  fair  and  candid  enquirer,  That  it  is 
very  poflible  to  be  united  to  Chrifl  and  to  the 
church  of  England  at  the  fame  time  : that  we 
need  not  feparate  from  the  church,  in  order  to  1 
preferve  our  allegiance  to  Chrilf  ; but  may  be 
firm  members  thereof  and  yet  have  a conscience 
void  oj  offence  toward  God  and  toward  man . 

/ am.  Sir, 

Your  very  humble  fervant, 

JOHN  WESLEY,  j 

Bristol, 

Jan.  to,  17,58. 


THOUGHTS 


[ 3°7  J 


THOUGHTS 


UPON 

INFANT-BAPTISM. 


Extracted  from  a late  Writer. 


r'l  “HE  baptifm  of  infants  has  been  a trouble- 
fome  difpute  altnoll  ever  fince  the  reforma- 
tion : but  I fhall  only  rehearfe  a few  arguments 
commonly  ufed  to  vindicate  the  practice  of  bap- 
tizing children. 

I.  The  covenant  made  with  Abraham,  and  his 
feed,  Gen.  xvii.  is  the  covenant  of  grace ; it  in- 
cludes, and  was  defigned  to  extend  to  all  believers-. 
When  God  promifed  to  be  a God  to  Abraham, 
and  to  his  feed,  St.  Paul  allures  us,  that  by  Abra- 
ham’s feed  is  meant  all  that  Ihould  imitate  thg 

faith 


[ 3°»  ] 

faith  of  Abraham,  whether  they  be  Jews  or  Gen- 
tiles, Gal.  iii.  7.  K/.ow  ye  therefore,  that  they 
who  are  o/faith,  the  fame  are  the  children  of  Abra- 
ham, ver.  29.  If  ye  are  Chrif’s,  then  are  ye  A- 
braham 's  fed,  and  heirs  according  to  the  promife. 

1 he  fame  fpiritual  promifes,  and  bleffings, 
which  belonged  to  the  church  under  the  Old  Tef 
tament,  belong  alfo  to  it  under  the  New,  A£ls  ii. 
39.  2 Cor.  i.  20.  Abraham  is  reprefented  as  the 
root,  or  fock  of  the  vifible  church,  Rom.  xi.  16, 
17,.  &c.  The  Jewifh  church  are  the  natural 
branches  of  it  : the  Gentiles  are  ingrafted  into  the 
fame  fock,  ver.  17.  24,  and  partake  of  the  blef- 
fings  of  it. 

From  thefe  texts  (and  many  others  might  eafily 
be  produced)  it  feems  evident,  that  the  Jewifh 
and  the  Chriflian  church  are  but  one  and  the  fame 
vifible  church  in  a continued  fucceflion,  though 
under  different  admin iflrations,  and  ordinances. 

II.  The  covenant  made  with  Abraham,  and  with 
his  fed,  is  fill  in  force.  This  is  implied  in  what 
has  been  already  faid  : but  it  ought  to  be  particu-  < 
lari)'  confidered.  It  is  plainly  afferted  by  the  apof- 
tle,  Gal  iii.  17.  To  the  fame  purpofe  the  apoffle 
fpeaks  in  Rom.  iv.  14,  16.  Here  he  declares,  that 
the  promife  made  to  Abraham,  is  not  made  of 
none  effeB,  or  abolifhed,  but  is  fure  to  all  believ- 
ers in  all  ages. 

Ever  fince  God  called  the  family  of  Abraham, 
and  fettled  his  vifible  church  in  it,  he  never  buf- 
fered 


T 3J9  1 

Fered  it  to  fail.  It  was  an  everlajling  covenant 
that  he  made  with  Abraham,  to  be  his  God,  and 
the  God  of  his  feed,  Gen.  xvii.  7,  that  he  might 
be  the  father  both  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  who 
were  brought  into  the  church,  as  in  Rom.  iv.  n, 
16. 

III.  The  children  of  the  Jews  were  vifible 
members  of  the  Jewifli  church  under  the  cove- 
nant of  Abraham,  and  as  fuch  they  were  acknow- 
ledged, and  received  into  it  by  circumcifion,  as 
the  door  of  entrance,  Gen.  xvii.  g — 14. 

IV.  The  children  of  Chriflians  were  never  cut 
off  from  this  privilege,  when  their  fathers  were 
received  into  the  church,  whether  they  were 
Jews  or  Gentiles;  and  therefore  they  are  mem- 
bers of  the  Chriftian  church  alfo,  under  fpiritual 
promifes,  and  bleffmgs.  When  the  Jews,  the 
natural  branches,  were  cut  off  from  the  good 
olive-tree,  their  little  buds  were  cu-t  off  with  them 
alfo  ; and  when  the  Gentiles  by  a profeffion  of 
faith  were  grafted  in,  as  foreign  branches,  their 
little  buds  were  grafted  in  with  them.  Chrilt  re- 
ceived the  children  that  were  brought  by  their  pa- 
rents, arid  laid  his  hands  on  them,  and  biffed 
them,  and  [aid.  Of  fuch  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven , 
Matt,  xi  13 — 16.  The  promifes  of  the  Old  Tef- 
tament,  wherein  children  are  included  in  f'ome  of 
the  prophets,  do  refer  to  the  Gentile  church  as 
well  as  the  Jewifh,  Ifa.  xliv.  3,  5.  Ifa  btv.  23. 

Joel 


[ 3to  ] 

Joel  ii.  28,  29.  For  it  is  the  blejfing  of  Abraham 
which  reaches  to  his  feed,  that  comes  upon  the 
Gentiles  through  Jefus  Chrift,  Gal.  iii.  14.  Rom. 
xv.  8,  9,  that  the  Gentiles  may  glorify  God  for 
his  mercy. 

V.  Baptifm  is  now  (like  circumcifion  of  old) 
thefgn  of  God's  covenant.  This  is  plainly  inti- 
mated by  the  apofile  in  Gal.  iii.  27,  29.  Circum- 
cifion being  abolifiied,  and  baptifm  coming  in 
the  room  of  it,  baptifm  fhould  be  applied  to  all 
thofe,  who  have  any  interefi  in  the  covenant,  as 
circumcifion  was.  Now  that  baptifm  is  come  in 
the  room  of  circumcifion,  feems  plain  from  Col. 
ii.  1 2,  whete  the  apofile  argues,  that  being  bap- 
tized, we  need  not  be  circumcifed:  and  befides 
baptifm  and  circumcifion  fignify  the  fame  thing, 
i.  e.  the  removal  of  fin  ; one  by  cutting  off,  and 
the  other  by  walking  away. 

VI.  As  this  feems  to  manifefi  the  right  of  the 
children  of  Chnfians  to  thefe  hleffings,  or  that 
they  have  an  intereft  in  this  covenant,  fo  there 
are  fome  conliderations,  which  render  it  very 
probable  that  children  fhould  be  admitted  into 
the  vifible  church,  by  the  Chrijhan  door  ol  en- 
trance, that  is  baptifm.  As  for  infiance 

Firjl  the  gofpel,  which  is  a difpenfation  of 
greater  grace,  does  not  lepfen,  but  increafe  the 
privileges  cf  the  church  : it  takes  away  yokes 
and  burdens  indeed,  fuch  as  circumcifion  was, 

43s 


[ 3«  3 

JiEls  xv.  xo.  but  does  not  diminifk  its  honours 
or  privileges. 

Again,  when  the  father  or  mother  of  a family 
believed  in  Chrift,  their  houfholds  were  bap- 
tized together  with  themfelves  even  where  there 
is  no  mention  that  the  houfhold  believed  in  Chrift 
alfo  : as  in  the  cafe  of  Lydia  and  Stephanas, 
Actsxvi.  15.  1 Cor.  i.  16.  Now  children  are 
■ufually  a confiderable  part  of  the  houfhold. 

Yet  further,  children  under  the  New  Tejtament 
are  as  capable  of  receiving  the  bleffings  fignified, 
and  fulfilling  the  duties  enjoined,  as  ever  they 
were  under  the  old.  It  is  granted,  that  they 
neither  could  then,  nor  can  now  underftand  the 
■bJe flings  nor  the  duties  ; yet  they  might  receive 
the  feal  of  circumcilion,  orofbaptifm,  as  a bond 
laid  upon  them  in  their  infancy,  to  fulfil  the  obli- 
gations and  the  duties  of  riper  years,  and  as  an 
encouragement  to  wait,  and  hope  for  the  blef- 
fings.  This  was  the  cafe  of  Jewiih  infants,  and 
why  may  not  Chriflians  be  favoured  with  it  alfo  ? 

The  covenant  made  with  Abraham,  and  with 
his  feed , Gen.  xvii.  7.  included  infants.  This 
covenant  is  not  repealed  or  difannulled  (.II.  Ar.) 
It  was  intended  to  extend  to  Chriflians,  and 
their  feed' (1.)  It  is  confirmed  bv  God  to  Chrift, 
[Gal.  iii.  17.)  i.  e.  It  was  made  with  Chrift,  con- 
fidered  as  including  all  his  members  in  him.  As 
circumcifion  ofold  was  the  fign  of  admitting  per- 
•fons  into  this  covenant  ; fo  now  baptifm  is  the 
(?<rn  of  admitting  perfons  into  the  fame  individual 

covenant 


C 312  ] 

covenant  (V.)  therefore  it  muft  be  adminiftered 
to  the  fame  per  Jons,  i.  e.  to  infants , as  well  as  to 
the  adult.  When  the  covenant  is  the  fame , the 
privileges  and  promifes  the  fame , the  feal  muft 
have  been  the  fame,  if  it  had  not  been  changed, 
and  the  feed  of  Abraham  to  inherit  muft  be 
the  fame  alfo,  unlefs  there  is  any  alteration  made 
in  the  gofpel.  The  feed  in  covenant  included 
infants ; and  therefore  infants  are  ftill  part  of  ; 
that  feed  of  Abraham.  The  feed  of  Abraham 
had  a right  to  the feal  of  the  covenant ; their  right 
ftill  continues  as  the  covenant  does  ; and  there- 
fore they  are  to  be  admitted,  infants  in  particular, 
to  baptifm,  the  prefent  feal  of  this  covenant. 

If  God  thought  fit  to  make  anv  alterations  in 
any  circumftance  of  this  covenant,  it  feems  ne- 
ceffarv,  that  he  Ihould  give  notice  of  it  in  the 
gofpel.  Accordingly  as  he  thought  fit  to  change 
the  old  fign  of  circumcifion  for  baptifm,  fo  he 
has  in  the  gofpel.  exprefsly  warned  us  of  the 
change,  AQs  xv.  24. — xxii.  21,  25.  Gal.  v.  2,  . 

3.  Arid  as  he  chofe  to  make  one  alteration, 
with  regard  to  the  perfons  to  whom  the  feal  of 
the  faid  covenant  ihould  be  applied,  and  to  ordain 
that  females , as  well  as  males,  fhould  be  baptized, 
fo  he  has  exprefslv  tol  i us  of  this  alteration  in  the 
gofpel,  Adis  viii.  12  xvi.  14,  15.  Gal  iii.  27, 

28.  In  like  manner  it  muft  be  concluded,  that 
if  God  would  have  had  a farther  alteration  made, 
if  infants  of  believing  parents,  that  were  former- 
ly to  partake  of  the  feal  of  this  covenant  were, 

upon 


[ 3*3  1 

upon  the  coming  of  Chrift,  to  partake  of  it  n» 
more ; undoubtedly  God  would  have  given  us  ex- 
prefs  warning  of  it,  and  have  told  us  in  the  gof- 
pel,  that  though  infants,  before  Chrift  came 
were  in  the  covenant,  noiv  they  are  to  be Jhut  out 
of  it.  But  as  the  gofpel  fays  no  fuch  thing,  it 
feerns  to  me  certain  it  cannot  be  true.  It  is  then 
incumbent  upon  thofe  who  oppofe  infant-bap- 
tifm,  if  they  would  make  their  point  good,  pofi- 
tively  to  prove  this  by  texts,  which  exprefsly  de- 
clare, that  Chrifl  has  cafi  infants  out  of  the  cove- 
nant., though  before  they  were  in  it.  But  no 
fuch  texts  can  be  produced  : therefore  it  appears 
they  continue  in  covenant  and  have  ftill  a right  to 
the  feal  of  it,  which  is  baptifm. 

It  will  he  in  vain  here  to  urge,  that  the  fcrip- 
ture  fufficiently  declares  againft  applying  this 
feal  of  the  covenant  to  infants,  by  mzYingfaitk 
and  repentance  the  conditions  of  baptifm.  For  this 
kind  of  arguing  would  as  well  prove,  that  infants 
heretofore  were  not  qualified  for  cirumcifon , 
which  yet  no  man  will  aftert.  As  this  argu- 
ment would  prove  too  much,  it  muft  be  looked 
upon  as  proving  nothing.  It  will  be  needful  to 
add  as  a diftinO.  head,  that 

VII.  The  texts  which  fpeak  of  faith  as  the 
term  of  baptifm,  do  not  at  all  imply,  that  infants 
are  not  to  be  baptized.  In  the  cafe  juft  now  men- 
tioned there  is  a parallel  between  baptifm  and 
circumcifon.  If  a Heathen  heretofore  was  pro- 
Vo  L.  XIX.  O felyted 


[ 3*4  ] 

felyted  to  the  Jewifh  religion,  and  did  hereupon, 
defire  to  be  circumcifed,  he  was  admitted  to 
circumcifion  upon  the  account  of  his  faith  in  the 
God  of  If racl.  And  till  he  profeffed  this  faith, 
he  could  not  laivfully  be  circumcifed.  And  if  a 
jfewijh  prophet  had  been  inviting  a fet  of  Hea- 
thens to  Judaifm , and  circumcifion , he  would 
have  been  forced  to  talk  in  fuch  a manner  as  this, 
viz.  “ Believe  in  the  one  true  God,  and  ye  (hall 
be  circumcifed.  He  that  believeth,  and  is  eir- 
cumcifed,  fhall  be  faved  : but  he  that  believeth 
not  fhall  be  condemned.  Repent  of  your  idola- 
try, and  other  fins,  and  be  circumcifed.  Cir- 
cumcifion now  faveth  us,  not  the  putting  away  a 
bitofflefh,  but  the  an  fwer  of  a good  confcience 
toward  the  true  God.  Arife  then  and  becircum- 
cifed,  and  put  away  your  fins/’  In  this  manner, 
the  Jewifi  prophet  muff  have  fpoke  to  his  Hea- 
then audience.  And  if  he  had  fucceeded,  and 
made  profelytes,  the  hiftory  of  it  muff  have  been 
expreffed  in  fuch  a language  as  this,  viz.  “ When 
the  Heathens  believed  the  prophet  preaching  the 
things  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God,  they 
were  circumcifed.  A certain  convert  faid  to  the 
JfezviJh  prophet,  What  fhould  hinder  ray  being 
circumcifed  ? The  prophet  anfwered,  if  you  be- 
lieve with  all  your  heart,  you  may.  He  replied, 

I believe  that  there  T one  God,  and  that  Mofes 
is  his  prophet.  And  hereupon  he  circumcifed 
him.  Others  hearing,  believed,  and  were  cir- 
cumcifed.” This,  I apprehend,  muft  have  been 

the 


[ 3i5  1 


the  language,  in  cafe  the  prophet  had  preached 
to  a Heathen  nation,  and  profelyted  them.  And 
yet,  I fuppofe,  that  no  one  would,  from  this  kind 
of  language,  infer,  that  infants  were  not  to  be 
circumcifed,  or  that  atlual  faith  in  God  was  fo 
university  necefTary  to  circumcifion , as  that  in- 
fants were  not  to  receive  it,  for  want  of  affual 
faith.  As  this  will  be  allowed  by  every  one,  it 
muff  be  acknowledged  alfo,  by  parity  of  reafon, 
that  the  very  fame  exprejfions , when  in  th tefame 
circurnffances  applied  to  baptifm,  cannot  imply 
that  infants  are  not  to  be  baptized.  All  I now 
contend  for  is,  that  they  do  not  even  feem  to 
imply,  that  infants  are  not  to  be  baptized ; for 
this  they  cannot  do,  unlefs  in  the  cafe  above  re- 
prefented,  they  did  alfo  imply,  that  infants  were 
not  heretofore  to  be  circumcifed.  As  it  will  be 
allowed,  they  would  not  have  implied  this,  they 
cannot  confidently  be  thought  to  imply  the  other. 

If  it  had  been  fit  to  have  continued  circumci- 
fion, as  the  fign  of  God’s  covenant,  and  Cinift 
had  aQually  continued  it,  w'hen  he  gave  his  apof- 
tles  a commiffion  to  profelyte  the  Gentile  nations, 
I do  not  fee  how  he  could  have  exprelfed  his 
thoughts  better  than  this  ; Go  profelyte  all  nations, 
circumcifng  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and 
of  he  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghofl,  i.  e.  Prove 
to  the  Gentiles , that  Jefus  is  the  Chriff,  and  when 
they  profefs  to  believe  this,  circumcife  them. 
Would  the  apoffles,  or  any  one  elfe,  have  in- 


O 2 


ferred 


C 3*6  ] 

ferred  from  hence,  that  infants,  not  having  ac- 
tual faith,  were  not  to  be  circumcifed  ? Nay,  ra- 
ther on  the  other  hand,  the  apoflle  would  have 
reafoned  thus : “ The  fign  of  God’s  covenant , cir- 
cumcifion,  has  hitherto  been  confined  to  one  na- 
tion, even  that  of  the  Ifraelites  ; but  now  Chrifl 
has  commanded  us  to  extend  it  to  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth  ; he  has  ordered  us  to  go  and  profelyte 
all  nations  and  circumcife  them.  Surely  it  is  his 
intention,  that  we  fhould  take  our  pattern  from 
■the  praftdce  of  circumafion  among  the  Jews.  He 
cannot  therefore  be  fuppofed  to  mean,  that  we 
muff  only  circumcife  grown  men,  who  are  ca- 
pable of  believing  the  gofpel,  and  profels  fo  to 
do.  It  is  evident  he  intends,  that  when  we  fhall 
have  circumcifed  fucb,  we  fhould  next  circum- 
cife their  male  children  ; and  that  in  after  genera- 
tions, the  males  among  them  fhould  be  circum- 
cifed the  eighth  dav.  Thus  it  was  at  the  fit  ft  in- 
ftitution.  Abraham  was  firft  circumcifed,  then 
his  children,  of  whatsoever  ages  they  happened 
to  be ; and  in  after  generations  their  children 
were  circumcifed  on  the  eighth  day.  This  is  a 
diie&ion  to  us.  And  when  we  are  bid  to  go , 
profelyte  all  nations,  circumcifing  them,  we  plain- 
ly fee,  we  are  not  forbidden  to  circumcife  in- 
fants ; but,  on  the  contrary,  are  ordered  to  imi- 
tate this  example  of  our  father  Abraham I ob- 
ferved,  if  circumafon  had  been  retained,  as  the 
feal  of  the  covenant , and  the  fame  commiffon  had 
been  given  to  the  apoftles,  as  now  was  given 

them,  - 


C 3*7  ] 

them,  only  the  ■wTord  circumcife  ufed  inftead  of' 
baptize,  no  one  would  have  imagined,  that  form 
of  expreflion  would  in  the  lead  have  interfered 
with  the  circumcijion  of  infants.  It  is  as  certain 
then  that  the  fame  form  of  words,  applied  to  bap - 
tifin,  cannot  in  the  lead  interfere  with  the  baptifm 
of  infants. 

Thefe  confiderations,  I think,  fully  take  off  the 
force  of  all  the  objections  that  men  think  they  find 
in  the  fcripture  againft  the  baptifm  ©f  infants* 
If  there  be  any  thing  in  the  nature  of  baptifm,  as 
a feat  of  the  covenant,  which  confines  it  to  fuch 
as  believe,  there  mud  have  been  the  fame  limiting 
nature  in  circumcijion , which,  was  a J'eal  of  the 
fame  covenant.  But  as  this  is  certainly  falfe,  the 
other  cannot  be  true.  If  an  infant  was  not  by 
reafon  of  his  age,  unqualified  to  receive  the  fign 
of  circumcijion,  a Jeal  of  the  righteou fiefs  cjfaith, 
an  infant  cannot  now  by  realon  of  his  age,  be 
confidently  thought  unqualified  for  baptifm y 
which  is  a feal  of  the  fame. 

Farther  to  confirm  this  point,  if  it  need's  con- 
firmation, it  may  be  obferved,  that  the Jarne forms 
of  expreflion,  which  are  urged  out  of  the  New 
T fit  ament,  to  prove  that  infants  are  not  qualified 
for  baptifm , for  want  of  a£hial  faith  and  repen- 
tance, would  equally  prove  them  unqualified  for 
falvation.  From  Chrift’s  faying,  He  that  believes, 
and  is  baptized,  Jhall  be  favtd,  fome  have  inferred, 
that  a perfon  mud  aftually  believe  or  elfe  he  can- 
not be  baptized.  With  as  much  ftrength  of  rea- 
O g fon 


r 3'»  ] 

* 

Ton  they  might  infer,  that  a perfon  cannot  be 
faved  unle fs  he  actually  believe ; efpecially  fmce 
it  is  added,  He  that  beheveth  Jliall  not  be  damned. 
'let  it  is  acknovvleged,  that  though  infants  do  not 
believe,  yet  they  {hall  not  be  damned.  It  is 
evident  then  to  all,  that  this  text  muft  be  inter- 
preted, as  fpeaking  only  of  the  adult , who  were 
capable  of  hearing  and  believing  the  gofpel. 
Since  then  it  does  not  at  all  fpeak  of  infants,  they 
may  be  faved,  and  may  be  baptized  too,  notwith- 
ftanding  they  are  not  believers.  The  method  of 
proving  that  they  may  be  faved  without  faith, 
will  as  necelfarily  demonflrate,  that  tnev  may  be 
baptized  without  their  own  faith , not  with  (landing 
any  thing  that  is  laid  down  in  this  text.  Thus  all 
the  objections  agamft  infant-baptifin  are  at  once 
cut  off. 

VIII.  In  the  Chrifian  church  from  its  earhfl 
ages , and  we  think  from  the  apojiles  time,  it  has 
been  the  cufiom  to  baptize  the  infant  children  of  pro - 
fffed  Chriflians. 

To  prove  this  I fliall  produce  a few  witneffes, 
among  many.  1.  Judin  Martyr,  who  wrote  about 
forty  years  after  the  apodles,  in  his  dialogue  with 
Trypho  the  Jew,  page  59,  plainly  fpeaks  of  bap- 
tifm,  as  being  to  Chridians  in  the  dead  of  circum- 
cifion.  And  in  his  apology  for  the  Chrifians , near 
the  beginning,  he  fays,  “Several perfon s among  us 
of  fxty  and feventy  years  old,  of  both  fexes,  were 
difcipled  (or  made  difciples)  to  Ckrifl  in  or  from 

their 


[ 3 *9  1 

their  childhood.”  Pleafe  to  obferve,  that  Juftin’s 
word  l/ASfc&wJflwa?,  were  dijcipled , or  made  dijci- 
ples,  is  the  very  fame  word  that  had  been  ufed  by- 
St.  Matthew,  xxviii.  19.  in  expreffing  our  Savi- 
our’s command,  ^u%revo-dl difciple  all  nations. 
And  it  was  done  to  thefe  perfons,  Judin  fays,  in, 
or  from  their  childhood.  And  he  wrote  that 
apology  within  forty  years  of  the  death  of  the 
apoftles : and  feventy  years  reckoned  back  from 
that  time,  do  reach  into  the  nr  id  ft  of  the  apoftles 
time. 

2.  Irenaeus,  born  about  the  time  of  St.  John’s 
death,  in  his  treadle,  Adv.  Hceref.  lib.  2.  cap.  3. 
fpeaking  of  Chrift,  fays,  “ Not  difdaining  nor  go- 
ing in  a way  above  human  nature,  nor  breaking 
in  his  own  perfon  the  law  which  he  had  fet  for 
mankind  : but  landiifying  every  fe'veral  age  by 
the  likenefs  it  has  to  him.  For  he  came  to  fave 
all  perfons  by  himfelf : all , I mean,  who  by  him 
are  regenerated  unto  God ; infants , and  little 
ones,  and  children,  and  youths,  and  elderly  per- 
fons. Therefore  he  went  through  the  feveral 
ages  : for  infants  being  made  an  infant,  fanflify- 
ing  infants,  &c.” 

This  teftimony,  which  reckons  infants  among 
thofe  that  are  regenerated , is  plain  and  full.  Dr. 
Wall  has  largely  fhewn,  that  the  word  regenerat- 
ing does,  particularly  in  the  writings  of  Irenaeus, 
and  in  the  ufual  phrafe  of  thofe  times,  fignify 
baptizing  ; he  mentions  fome  places,  which  ex- 
O 4 prefsly 


[ 32°  ] 

prefsly  declare,  that  Chrift  was  regenerated  by 
John;  meaning  that  he  was  baptized  by  him. 

Near  the  time  that  Iretiasus  wrote  the  above 
treatife,  Clemens  Alexandiinus  wrote  his  poeda- 
gog,  wherein  he  exprefsly  fays,  “ The  word  rege- 
neration is  the  name  of  bapti/in.”  (1.  i.  c.  6.  near 
the  beginning :)  His  thus  plainly  declaring,  that 
regenerating  is  the  common  name  for  baptizing, 
does  very  much  confirm  the  argument  taken 
from  Irenaeus,  who  aflerts,  that  infants  were  rege- 
nerated unto  God. 

Pleafe  to  take  notice  how  near  this  man  was 
to  the  apoftles  time.  Irenaeus  himfelf  fats,  1.  5. 
c.  30.  that  the  revelation  made  to  St.  John  in 
Patmos,  was  but  a little  before  his  time,  and  that 
revelation  was  five  or  fix  years  before  St.  John’s 
death.  In  an  age  fo  nigh  the  apofiles,  and  in  a 
place  where  one  of  them  had  fo  lately  lived,  the 
Chriflians  could  not  be  ignorant  what  had  been 
done  in  their  time,  in  a matter  fo  public  as  the 
baptizing,  or  not  baptizing  of  infants. 

3.  Origen  is  not  only  exprefs  for  the  baptizing 
of  infants,  but  gives  his  reafon  for  it : in  his 
eighth  homily,  or  fermon,  on  Leviticus,  c.  12. 
he  thus  fays,  “Hear  David  fpeaking;  I was, 
fays  he,  Jhapen  in  iniquity , and  in  fin  did  my  mo- 
ther conceive  me  : Ihewing,  that  every  foul  that  is 
born  in  the  flefh  is  polluted  with  the  filth  of  fin, 
and  iniquity  : and  that  therefore  that  was  faid, 
which  we  mentioned  before ; that  none  is  Jree 

from 


[ 32 1 ] 

from  pollution,  though  his  life  be  but  the  length  of 
one  okay. 

44  Befides  all  this,  let  it  be  confidered,  what  is 
the  reafon,  that  whereas  the  baptifm  of  the 
church  is  given  for  the  forgivenefs  of  fins,  in- 
fants are  alfo  by  the  ufage  of  the  church,  baptized  j 
when,  if  there  was  nothing  in  infants  that  wanted 
forgivenefs  and  mercy,  the  grace  of  baptifm. 
would  be  needlefs  to  them.” 

Again,  in  his  homily  on  Luke  xiv.  be  Hiys  as 
follows  : “ Infants  are  baptized  for  the  forgivenefs 
of  fins.  Of  what  fins  ? Or  when  have  they  fin- 
ned P Or  how  can  any  reafon  of  the  laver  in  their 
cafe  hold  good,  but  according  to  that  fenfe  that 
we  mentioned  even  now  : None  is  Jr  ee  from  pol- 
lution, though  his  life  be  but  the  length  of  one  day 
upon  earth  ? And  it  is  for  that  reafon,  becaufe 
by  the  lacrament  of  baptifm  the  pollution  of  our 
birth  is  taken  away,  that  infants  are  baptized.”' 

Yet  farther,  in  the  fifth  book  of  his  comment 
tary  on  the  epiftle  to  the  Romans,,  he.  fays;  thus, 

“ And  alfo  in  the  law  it  is  commanded,  that  a, fa-* 
crifice  be  offered  for  every  child  that  is  born  ; a 
pair  of  turtle  doves,  or  two  young  pigeons  ; of  which  ■ 
one  is  for  a fn  offering,  the  other  for  a. burnt- 
offering.  For  what  fin  is  this  one  pigeon  offered? 
Gan  the  child. that  is  new. born  have  committed 
any  fin  ? It  has  even  then  fin,  for  which  the  fa~- 
crifice  is  commanded  to  be  offered  ,*  from  which 
even  he,  whofelife  is  but  of  one  day,  is  denied  to 
be  free. 


**  For 


[ 322  ] 

“ For  this  alfo  it  was,  that  the  church  had 
FROM  THE  APOSTLES  AN  ORDER  to  give 
baptijm  to  infants.  For  they  to  whom  the  divine 
myfteries  were  committed,  knew  that  there  is 
in  all  perfons  the  natural  pollution  of  fin, 
which  mull  be  done  away  by  water,  and  the 
Spirit.” 

The  reader  is  defired  to  obferve,  that  Origen 
not  only  fays,  that  it  was  the  cuflom  of  the  church 
to  baptize  infants , but  he  exprefsly  affirms, 
“ That  the  church  received  an  order  from  the 
apostles  to  give  baptifm  even  to  infants .” 

4.  There  is  one  circumftance  that  makes  Ori- 
gen a more  competent  witnefs  to  give  evidence, 
whether  the  baptizing  of  infants  had  been  in  ufe 
time  out  of  mind,  or  not,  than  moll  other  authors 
that  we  have  left  to  us  of  that  age ; becaufe  he 
was  himfelf  of  a family  that  had  been  Chriftian 
for  along  time.  The  other  witneffes  that  I have 
mentioned,  except  Ireneasus,  muff  have  been 
themfelves  baptized  in  adult  age  ; becaufe  they 
were  of  Heathen  parents.  But  Origen’s  father 
was  a martyr  for  Chrift  in  the  perfecuiion  under 
Sever  us,  the  year  after  the  apoflles,  102.  And 
Eufebius  (in  iiis  hi  ft  cry,  book  6.  ch.  19.)  affures 
us,  that  his  forefathers  had  been  Chriftians  for 
feveral  generations. 

Now  fince  Origen  was  born  in  the  eighty-fifth 
year  after  the  apoflles  (for  he  was  feventeen  years 
old  when  h'is  father  fuffered  martyrdom;  his 
grandfather,  or  at  leaft  his  great-grandfather,  muft 

have 


C 323  3 

have  lived  in  the  apoflles  time.  And  as  he  could 
not  be  ignorant  whether  he  was  himfelf  baptized 
in  infancy,  fo  he  had  no  farther  than  his  own  fa- 
mily to  go,  to  enquire  w’hat  was  pradtifed  in  the 
time  of  the  apoflles. 

Beftdes  that,  he  was  a very  learned  man,  and 
could  not  be  ignorant  of  the  ufe  of  the  churches; 
and  in  moil  of  which  he  had  alfo  travelled  ; for 
as  he  was  born  and  bred  at  Alexandr  ia,  fo  it  ap- 
pears out  of  Eufebius  hiftory,  b.  6.  that  he  had 
lived  in  Greece,  and  at  Rome,  and  at  Cappado- 
cia, and  Arabia,  and  fpent  the  main  part  of  his 
life  in  Syria  and  Paleiline. 

5,  What  1 apprehend  very  much  ftrengthens 
the  truth  of  infant-baptifm,  that  it  is  of  a divine 
original,  is  this,  “ About. one  hundred  and  fifty 
years  after  the  death  of  St.  John  the  apofHe, 
there  was  an  affembly  of  fixty-ftx  bifhops,  who 
fpoke  of  infant-baptifm.  as  a known,  eflablifhed, 
and  uncontefled  practice.”  One  Fidus  quefti- 
oned,  whether  infants  were  to  be  baptized  fo  foon 
as  between  two  and  three  days  after  their  birth, 
and  whether  it  would  not  be  better  to  defer  their 
baptifm  till  they  were  eight  days  old,  as  was  ob- 
ferved  in  circwncifion ; which  fcruples  he  propoled 
to  this  affembly,  and  in  which  he  defired  their 
refolution,  which  they  fent  in  a letter  to-  him 
pait  of  which  I.  fhall  tranfcribe. 


ts  Cyprian,  and  the  reft  of  the  bifhops,  who- were. 

O 6 prefent-. 


[ 3N  ] 

prefent  at  the  council,  fixty-fix  in  number,  to 

Fidus  our  brother,  greeting. 

“ We  read  your  letter,  moft  dear  brother, 

but  as  to  the  cafe  of  infants:  whereas  you  judge, 
that  they  mufi  not  be  baptized  within  two  or  throe 
days  after  they  are  born  ; and  that  the  rule  of  cir- 
cumafion  is  to  be  obfrved , fo  that  none  Jhould  be 
baptized \ andjandijied , before  the  eighth  day  after 
he  is  born:  we  were  all  in  our  alfembly  of  the 
contrary  opinion. 

“We  judge  that  no  perfon  is  fo  be  hindered 
from  obtaining  the  grace  by  the  law  that  is  now 
appointed;  and  that  the  fpiritual  cin  urn  if  on 
ought  not  to  be  reftrai1  ed  by  rhe  circuma/ion  that 
was  according  to  the  flefh:  but  that  all  are  to  be 
admitted  to  the  grace  of  Chrift ; fince  Peter 
fpeaking  in  the  aids  of  the  apoftles,  fays,  The 
Lord  has  / hewn  me,  that  no  perfon  is  to  be  called 
common , or  unclean 

“ This  therefore,  dear  brother,  was  our  opinion 
in  the  aflembly;  that  it  is  not  lor  us  to  hinder 
3ny  perfon  from  baptifm  and  the  grace  of  God, 
who  is  merciful,  and  benign,  and  affe£fionate  to 
all.  Which  rule,  as  it  holds  for  all,  fo  we  think 
it  is  more  efpeciallv  to  be  obferved  in  reference 
to  infants  newly  born  : to  whom  our  help  and 
the  divine  mercy  is  rat  her  to  be  granted  ; becaufe, 
bv  their  cries  and  tears  at  their  fir fl  entrance  into 
the  world,  they  do  intimate  nothing  fo  much,  as 
that  they  implore  compaflion.” 

From  this  piece  ofhillory  it  appears,  that  both 

the 


[ 3 25  ] 

the  perfons  who  moved  the  doubt,  and  all  the 
perfons  who  relolved  it,  unammoufly  agreed  in 
this,  that  infants  were  to  be  baptized , and  that  it 
was  the  fettled  cuftom  of  t lie  church  to  baptize 
them.  IF  the  affembly  had  been  againft  infant- 
baptifm,  they  would  have  anfwered  ; It  is  fo far 
from  being  necejfary  to  baptize  children  on  the  eighth- 
day  after  their  birth , that  they  ought  not  to  be  bap- 
tized at  all,  till  they  are  of  age  to  judge  and  a If 
for  them/elves.  But  none  of  thole  bifhops  was  in 
this  fentimenr.  They  all  looked  upon  it,  as  a 
thing  uncontelled,  that  infants  were  to  be  bap- 
tized. 

If  we  look  back  from  this  time  to  the  fpace 
that  had  paffed  from  the  apoiiles  time,  which 
was  but  igo  years,  we  mull  conclude,  that  it 
was  eafy  then  to  know  the  practice  of  Chnjlians 
in  the  apoltles  days,  for  fome  ofthefe  66  bifhops 
may  be  thought  to  be  at  this  time  fixty  or  feventy 
years  old  themfelves,  which  reaches  almoh  to 
half  the  fpace  : and  at  that  time  when  they  were 
infants,  there  mult  have  been  feveral  alive,  that 
were  born  within  the  apohles  age.  And  fuch 
could  not  be  ignorant  whether  infants  were  bap- 
tized in  that  age,  when  they  themfelves  were 
fome  of  thofe  infants.  And  as  there  was  no 
difiuute,  or  difference  of  opinion  (as  there  mult 
have  been  among  fo  many,  if  any  innovation  had 
been  made  : for  it  is  here  exprefdy  faid,  there 
was  not  one  of  Fidus’r  mind ) that  infant  baptifiii 
limit  be  delayed  till  the  eighth  day  j much  lefs 

thea 


[ 3s6  ] 

then  was  there  any  of  opinion,  that  it  was  not  to 
be  at  all. 

“ In  a docfnnal  point,  as  Mr.  Baxter  well  ob- 
serves, a mi  flake  is  eafier,  than  in  a bare  narration 
of  fome  one  fact  : but  in  a matter  of  faff  of  fo 
public  notice,  and  which  fo  many  tboufands 
were  partakers  in,  as  baptifnr  was,  how  coidd 
they  be  ignorant  ?:! 

Suppofe  it  were  a aueflion  now  among  us, 
whether  perfons  were  baptized  at  age  only,  or 
in  infancy  alfo,  eighty  years  before  we  were 
born  ; were  it  not  eafy  to  know  the  truth,  what 
by  report,  and  w hat  by  records  ? 

I ihall  conclude  what  I have  to  remark  on  this 
teflimony  with  obferving,  that  we  fee  here  con- 
firmed what  w'as  faid  before,  that  baptifm  was 
reckoned  to  be  to  Chrijlians  in  the  room  of  cir- 
cumcifion.  For  it  was  upon  that-  accouut  that 
Fidus  thought  it  muft  be  the  time  of  the  old  cir- 
cumcifion  ; and  the  bifhops  of  the  council,  tho'" 
denying  that,  do  call  it  the  Spiritual  [or  Chriftian] 
circumci/ion. 

6.  Ambrofe  commenting  on  thofe  words,  Luke 
i.  17.  where  the  angel  prophefies  of  John  the 
bapiifc,  he Jhall  go  before  him  in  the  fpirit  and 
powers  of  Elias ; after  having  fhewn  in  feveral 
particulars,  how  John,  in  his  office,  did  refemblc 
Elias,  and  having  mentioned  that  miracle  of  Elias 
dividing  the  river  Jordan,  adds  thus  ; “ But 
perhaps  this  may  feem  to  be  fulfilled  in  our  time 
and  in  tire  apoflles  time.  For  that  returning  of 

the 


[ 3 °-7  ] 

the  river  waters  backward  toward  the  fpring-head, 
which  was-  caufed  by  Elias,  when  the  river  was 
divided  (as  the  fcripture  fays,  Jordan  was  driven 
back j fignified  the  facramen!  of  the  laver  of  falva- 
tion,  which  was  afterwards  to  be  inftituted  ; by 
which  thofe  infants  that  are  baptized,  are  reform- 
ed back  again  from'  wickednefs  [or  a corrupt 
flate]  to  the  primitive  hate  of  their  nature.'"’ 

He  means  they  are  freed  from  the  guilt  of  ori- 
ginal fin,  and  in  fome  fenfe  reduced  back  to  the 
primitive  ftate,  in  which  man  was,  before  that 
happened.  He  plainly  fpeaks  ol  infants,  as  baptiz- 
ed in  the  apojlles  time,  as  well  .as  in  his  own  ; and 
makes  St.  John,  in  baptizing  infants  for  the  re- 
formation of  their  nature  to  the  primitive  purity 
of  it,  to  refemble  Elias  in  turning  back  the  wa- 
ters to  their  fpring-head. 

Auflin,  in  his  treatife  Be  Baptifmo  contra  Do- 
nalijtas,  Lib.  4.  C.  23.  having  had  occafion  to 
fpeak  of  the  penitent  thief,  who  obtained  falva- 
tion  without  baptifm,  fhews,  that  that  is  no  more 
an  argument  againft  the  necelfity  of  baptifm, 
where  it  may  be  had,  than  the  example  of  bap- 
tized infants  obtainingTalvation  without faith,  -is 
an  argument  againft  the  necelfity  of  faith,  where 
the  fubjedt  is  capable  of  it.  Near  the  conclufion 
of  the  fourth  book,  he  fays,  “ And  as  the  thief 
who  by  necelfity  went  without  baptifm,.  was  fac- 
ed, becaufe,  by  his  piety,  he  had  it  fpiritually: 
fo  where  baptifm  is  had,  though  the  party  by 

necelfity 


[ 3»*  1 

Beceffity  go  without  that  [faith]  which  the  thief 
had,  yet  he  is  faved 

“ Which  the  zoho’c  body  of  the  church  holds, 
as  delivered  to  them,  in  the  cafe  of  little  infants 
baptized  : who  certainly  cannot  yet  believe  with 
the  heart  to  righteoufnefs,  or  confefs  with  the 
mouth  to  falvation,  as  the  thief  could;  nav,  by 
their  crying  aid  noife,  while  the  facramem  is 
admt m firing,  they  diltuib  the  holy  mvfteries: 
and  yet  no  Ckrijlian  man  oj  any  fort  will  fay,  they 
are  baptized  to  no  purpofe. 

“ And  if  any  one  do  afk  for  divine  authority 
in  this  matter,  though  that  which  the  whole 
church  pra&ifes,  and  which  has  not  been  i n fli- 
tuted  by  councils,  but  was  ever  in  ufe,  is  very 
realonably  believed  to  be  no  other  than  a thing 
or  da  dJ  by  the  authority  of  the  apo/lles  : yet  we 
may  befides  take  a true  eftimate,  how  much  the 
facrament  of  baptifm  does  avail  infants,  by  the 
circumajtun  which  God’s  former  people  receiv- 
ed.” In  what  lollows,  he  moll  plainly  declares, 
that  baptifm  is  to  the  Chtijlian  infants,  what  cir- 
cumcifion  was  toihe  Jewifh. 

Though  Aufiin  fpeaks  of  infant-baptifm  in  this 
place,  but  occafionally,  his  words  are  a full  evi- 
dence, that  it  was  then  nniverfally  pra£tifed,  and 
had  been  fo  beyond  the  memory  of  any  man,  or 
of  any  record  : that  they  took  it  to  be  a thing 
that  had  not  been  enafftd  by  any  councif.  but  had 
been  in  ufe  from  the  beginning  of  ChrifHanity.  And 
they  had  then  but  goo  years  to  look  back  to  the 


times 


[ 329  ] 

times  of  the  apoftles,  whereas  we  now  have  up- 
wards of  1600.  And  many  writings,  and  records, 
which  are  now  loft,  were  then  extant,  and  eafily 
known. 

It  deferves  a particular  remark,  that  moft  of 
thefe  witneffes  for  infant  baptifm,  were  not  only 
faithful  to  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  but  were  faith- 
ful unto  death,  joyfully  fuffering  martyrdom  for 
the  truth  : furely  this  is  a great  acceffion  to  the 
ftrength  of  their  teftimony. 

All  thefe  things  put  together,  feem  to  prove, 
that  infant-baptifm  was  praflifed  in  the  church 
of  Chrift  from  the  beginning,  and  confequently 
that  it  is  of  an  apoftolical  and  duine  original. 

A.s  for  the  fir  ft  four  hundred  years,  there  ap- 
pears only  one  man,  Teitullian,  that  advifed  the 
delay  of  infant-baptifm  in  fome  cafes,  and  one 
Gregory,  that  did  perhaps  praftife  fitch  delay  in 
the  cafe  of  his  children  ; but  no  focietv  of  men 
fo  thinking,  or  fo  praftifing : fo  in  the  next  fe- 
ven  hundred  years,  there  is  not  fo  much  as  one 
man  to  be  found,  that  either  fpoke  for,  or  prac- 
tifed  fuch  delay.  But  all  the  contrary.  And 
when  one  fe£l  among  the  Waldenfes  declared 
againft  the  baptizing  of  infants,  as  being  incapa- 
ble of  falvation,  the  main  bodv  of  that  people  re- 
jected their  opinion  : and  thofe  of  them  that 
held  that  opinion,  quickly  dwindled  away,  and 
difappeared  ; there  being  no  more  heard  of  hold- 
ing that  tenet,  till  the  riling  of  the  German  anti- 
pasdobaptifts,  in  the  year  1,522.  “ And  all  the 

national 


[ 33°  ] 

national  churches  nozv  in  the  world  do  profefs 
and  praflife  infant-baptifm.” 

This  brings  to  my  remembrance  a very  clear 
proof  for  the  bapiifm  of  infants,  which  much  fa- 
tisfied  the  mind  of  the  great  and  good  Mr.  Bax- 
ter  ; I fhall  relate  it  in  his  own  words.  “ I aim 
fully  fat  isfied,  that  Mr.  Tombs  cannot  fhew  me 
any  fociety  (I  think  not  one  man)  that  ever  open- 
ed their  mouths  againft  baptifm  of  infants,  till 
about  200  years  ago ; which  confirms  me  much, 
that  it  is  from  the  apoflles  time,  or  elfe  fome 
one  would  have  been  found  as  an  oppofer  of  it  ; 
even  as  I prolefs,  ferioufly,  that  it  much  fatisfi- 
eth  my  confcience,  that  Chrift  and  his  apoflles 
did  never  fhut  the  infants  of  believing  Jews  (and 
confequently  not  of  believing  Gentiles)  from  be- 
ing members  of  his  vifible  church,  in  that  I never 
find  in  all  the  New  Teflament  one  word  of  excep- 
tion, arguing,  murmuring,  or  diffatisfadlion  againfb 
it;  when  as  it  cannot  poflibly  be  conceived,  but 
thofe  Jews  who  kept  ftich  a ffir  before  they  w'ould 
let  go  civcumci/ion,  the  fign  ofchurch-memberfhip, 
when,  yet  they  had  baptifm,  another  fign,  would 
undoutbedly  have  been  much  more  fcandalized  at 
the  unchurching  of  all  their  children,  and  would 
have,  much  hardlier  have  let  go  that  privilege 
of  their  church-memberfhip,  or  at  leaf!  have 
raifed  fome  fcruple  about  it,  which  might  have 
occaftoned  one  word  of  fatisfa£lion  from  fome 
one  of  the  apoflles  ; efpecially  when  Paul  calls 
them  holy,  and  Chrift  faith,  Suffer  them  to  come 
, tc 


[ 33 1 1 

to  me,  and  forbid  them  not,  for  of  fucli  is  the  king- 
dom of  God.  I know  not  how  Mr.  T •, 

and  fuch  others  think  on  thefe  things  ; but  for 
my  part,  they  flic k fo  dole  to  my  confcience 
that  I dare  not  fay,  Chrift  would  have  no  in* 
fants  received  into  his  vifible  church  among 
the  number  of  Chrifians , when  I find  he  once 
placed  them  in  the  church  ; and  neither  Mr. 

T nor  any  man  breathing,  can  fhew  me 

one  word  of  fcripture  where  ever  Chrift  did  put 
them  out  again  ; and  yet  thefe  men  pretend 
to  Hand  to  the  determination  of  fcripture.  I 
would  this  one  thing  were  impartially  confider- 
ed.” 

With  regard  to  the  mode  of  baptizing,  I 
would  only  add,  Chrift  no  where  as  far  as  I 
can  find,  requires  dipping,  but  only  baptizing  : 
which  word,  many  moft  eminent  for  learning 
and  piety  have  declared,  fignifies  to  pour  on, 
or fpr inkle,  as  well  as  to  dip.  As  our  Lord  has 
gracioufly  given  us  a word  of  fuch  exienfive 
meaning,  doubtlefs  the  parent,  or  the  perfon  to 
be  baptized,  if  he  be  adult,  ought  to  cboofe 
which  way  he  heft  approves.  What  God  has 
left  indifferent,  it  becomes  not  man  to  make  ne- 
c diary. 

I think  it  proper  in  this  place  to  fubjoin  what 
Dr.  Watts  had  declared  concerning  the  fignifica- 
tion  of  this  word.  “ The  Greek  word  baptizo, 
(fays  he]  fignifies  to  wafi  any  thing  properly  by 
water  coming  over  it:  now  there  are  feveral 

ways 


C 332  ] 

ways  of  fuch  wafhing,  (viz.)  fprinkling  wa'er  oa 
it  in  a fmall  quantity,  pouring  water  on  it  in  a 
larger  quantity,  or  dipping  it  untier  water,  either 
in  part  or  in  whole  : and  fince  this  feems  to  be 
left  undetermined  in  fcripture  to  one  particular 
mode  ; therefore  any  of  thefe  ways  of  walhing 
may  be  fufficient  to  anfwer  the  purpofe  of  th is 
ordinance.  Now  that  the  Greek  word  fignifies 
wafhing  a thing  in  general  by  water  coining  over 
it.  and  not  always  dipping,  is  argued  by  learned 
men,  not  only  from  ancient  Greek  authors,  but 
from  the  New  Teftament  itfelf,  as  Luke  xi.  38. 
The  Pharifees  marvelled  that  Jefus  had  not  jirjl 
waflied  bejore  dinner ; in  Greek,  that  he  was  not 
fiill  baptized ; and  can  it  be  fuppofed,  that  they 
would  have  him  dip  himfelf  in  water  ? Mark  vii, 
4.  The  Pharifees , when  they  come  from  the  market , 
eat  not  except  they  are  wafhed ; in  Greek,  except 
they  are  baptized ; furely  it  cannot  mean  except 
they  were  dipped.  And  if  this  fhould  be  retrained 
to  fignify  wafhing  their  hands  only,  yet  it  does 
not  fignify  neceffarilv  dipping  them  ; for  the  man- 
ner  of  walking  their  hands  of  old,  was  by  pouring 
water  on  them,  as  Ehfia  poured  water  on  the 
hands  of  Elijah,  2 Kings  iii.  xx.  Yet  further,  they 
praftifed  the  waf. ling  of  tables , (in  Greek,  baptifm 
of  beds ) as  well  as  cups  and  veffels.  Now  beds 
could  not  ufually  be  walked  by  dipping,  Heb.  ix. 
10.  The  Jews  had  divers  walkings  preferibed  by 
Mofes,  (in  Greek,  baptfns)  which  wer  z fpnnk- 
ling  and  pouring  water  on  things,  as  well  as  plung- 


[ 333  ] 

ing  them  all  over  in  water.  The  children  of  Ifrael 
were  baptized  unto  Mofes  in  the  cloud  and  the  Jea, 
in  their  pffage  through  the  Red  Sea,  at  their  march 
from  Egypt,  1 Cor.  xii.  2.  Not  that  they  were 
dipped  in  the  water,  but  they  were  Jprinkled  by 
the  clouds  over  their  beads,  and  perhaps  by  the 
water  which  flood  up  in  heaps  as  they  paffed  by. 

Beftdes,  pouring  or  fprinkling  more  naturally 
reprefents  moll  of  the  fpiritual  bleffings  fignified 
by  baptifm,  (viz.)  the  fpi inkling  the  blood  of 
Chrift  on  the  confcience,  or  the  pouring  out  of 
the  Spirit  on  the  perfon  baptized,  or  fprinkling 
him  with  clean  water,  as  an  emblem  of  the  influ- 
ence of  the  Spirit;  all  which  are  the  things  figni- 
fied in  baptifm,  as  different  reprefentations  of  the 
cleanfing  away  of  the  guilt  or  defilement  of  fin 
thereby. 

I conclude,  fince  this  controverfy  has  difficul- 
ties attending  it,  perfons  of  an  honefl  and  fincere 
foul,  in  fearching  out  the  truth,  may  happen  to 
run  into  different  opinions  : but  the  things 
wherein  we  agree,  are  fo  important,  as  fhould 
not  fuffer  us  to  quarrel  about  the  leffer  things 
wherein  we  differ.  Our  brethren,  who  rejeft 
infant-baptifm,  as  well  as  we  who  praftife  it,  all 
agree  in  a belief  of  the  facred  inflitution  of  this 
ordinance  : we  all  agree,  that  children  fhould  be 
devoted  to  God,  and  fhould  be  partakers  of  all 
the  privileges  which  fcripture  admits,  and  that 
they  fhould  grow  up  under  all  poffible  obligations 
to  duty  i and  fince  each  of  us  defires  to  find  out 

the 


[ 334  ] 

the  will  of  Chrifl:,  and  pra&ife  it  accordingly,  it 
is  a mod  unreasonable  thing,  that  wc  fhould  be 
angry  with  each  other,  becaufe  fome  of  us  are 
devoted  to  God  and  Chrifl  by  this  ceremony,  a 
little  fooner  or  a little  later  than  others ; or  be- 
caufe fome  devote  their  children  to  God  in  bap- 
tifm,  as  a claim  of  privileges,  and  an  obligation  to 
duties,  before  they  can  do  this  for  tbemfelves, 
and  are  capable  of  afling  therein:  or  becaufe 
fome  of  us  think  this  ordinance  requires  much 
water,  and  that  the  whole  body  be  im'merfed  in 
it  ; others  fuppofe,  a little  is  Sufficient,  and  that 
he  who  has  the  face  and  head  walked  in  this  So- 
lemnity, has  as  true  a Ggnificancy  ofgoSpel  bene- 
fits and  obligations,  as  he,  who  has  his  whole 
body  put  under  water,  Since  our  Saviour  thought 
So  when  he  waffied  Peter’s  feet,  John  xiii.  10. 
In  Short,  where  faith  in  Chrifl:,  and  love  to  God, 
and  obedience  to  the  fanftifying  operations  of 
the  Spirit,  are  made  neceSSary  to  Salvation,  and 
agreed  upon  by  us  all,  it  is  pity  that  theSe  leifer 
things  Should  raiSe  Such  unhappy  contentions 
among  the  difciples  of  the  blefied  Jefus,  the 
Prince  ol  peace. 


SERIOUS 


C 335  ] 


SERIOUS 

THOUGHTS 


CONCERNIN  G 

Godfathers  and  Godmothers. 


I.  TN  the  antient  church,  when  baptifm  was 
-i-  adminiftered,  there  were  ufually  two  or 
more JbonJbrs  (fo  Tertullian  calls  them,  an  hun- 
dred years  after  the  death  of  St.  John)  for  every 
perfon  to  be  baptized.  As  thefe  were  untnejfes 
before  God  and  the  church,  of  the  folemn  en- 
gagement thofe  perfons  then  entered  into,  fo 
they  undertook  (as  the  very  word  implies)  to 
watch  over  thofe  fouls  in  a peculiar  manner,  to 
inftruft,  admoniflr,  exhort  and  build  them  up  in 
the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  faints.  Thefe 
were  confidered  as  a kind  of  fpiritual  parents  to 

the 


C 336  ] 

the  baptized,  whether  they  were  infants  or 
at  man’s  eftate,  and  were  expe&ed  to  fupply 
whatever  fpiritual  helps  were  wanting,  either 
through  the  death  or  negledt  of  the  natural  pa- 
rents. 

II.  Thefe  have  been  retained  in  the  Chriftian 
church  from  the  ea r 1 le fl  times,  as  the  reafon  for 
them  was  the  fame  in  all  ages.  In  our  church 
they  are  termed  (by  a proper  and  expreffive  name) 
godfathers  and  godmothers.  And  it  is  appointed, 
41  That  there  lhall  be  for  every  male  child  to  be 
baptized,  two  godfathers  and  one  godmother; 
and  for  every  female,  one  godfather  and  two  god- 
mothers.” 

III.  But  it  is  objedled  againfl;  thefe,  i.  That 
there  is  no  mention  of  godlathers  and  godmothers 
in  fcripture  ; a.  That  many  undertake  this  with- 
out ever  conftdering  what  they  undertake,  or  once 
feriouily  thinking  how  to  perform  it ; and  3. That 
no  ferious  man  would  undertake  it,  becaufe  it  is 
impoffible  to  perform  it. 

IV.  1 anfwer,  firjl.  It  is  undoubtedly  true, 
godfathers  and  godmothers  are  not  mentioned  in 
fcripture.  And  therefore  it  cannot  be  faid,  they 
are  abfolutely  necelfary,  or  that  baptifm  cannot 
be  adminiflered  without  them.  But  yet  it  may 
be  faid  they  are  highly  expedient.  For  when  they 
are  prudently  chofen,  they  may  be  of  unfpeakable 

ufe 


[ 337  ] 

ufe  to  the  perfons  baptized,  and  a great  relief 
and  comfort  to  the  parents  of  them. 

V.  I anfwer,  fecondly,  It  is  too  true,  that 
many  undertake  this  folemn  office,  without  ever 
confidering  what  they  undertake  ; giddy,  igno- 
rant perfons  (if  not  openly  vicious}  who  never 
once  ferioufly  think  how  to  perform  it.  But 
whofe  fault  is  this  ? It  is  not  the  fault  of  the 
church,  which  carefully  guards  againft  this  very 
thing,  by  ordering,  “ That  none  but  communi- 
cants be  admitted  to  be  godfathers  or  godmo- 
thers.” Nov  communicants  we  may  prefume  to 
be  ferious  perfons,  who  will  both  conftder  and 
perform  what  they  undertake.  It  is  altogether  the 
fault  of  thofe  fooliffi  parents,  who  will  on  any  ac- 
count whatever,  either  defire  or  fuffer  thofe  to  be 
fponfors  for  their  children,  that  do  not  take  care 
of  their  own  fouls.  It  is  thefe  inconfiderate  and 
cruel  men,  w ho  have  no  compaffion  for  their  own 
flefh,  that  deprive  their  children  of  all  the  benefits- 
of  this  wife  infiitution,  and  biinga  fcandal  on  the 
inftitution  itfelf,  by  their  wicked  abufe  of  it.  I 
therefore  earneilly  exhort  all  who  have  any  con- 
cern, either  for  their  own  or  their  children’s 
fouls,  at  all  hazards  to  procure  fuch  perfons  to  be 
fponfors,  as  truly  fear  God.  Regard  net  whether 
they  are  rich  or  poor  : and  if  they  are  poor,  fee 
that  it  be  no  expence  to  them.  You  will  then 
tear  up  by  the  roots  one  of  the  moft  pjaufihle 
Vol.  XIX.  P obje&iana 


[ 338  ] 


obje&ions  which  can  be  made  againft  this  pri- 
mitive cuftom. 

VI.  For,  thirdly , There  is  no  reafon  why  any 
truly  ferious  man  ffiould  fcruple  to  undertake  the 
office.  If  you  fuppofe  godfathers  and  godmo- 
thers undertake  what  is  impoffible  to  perform, 
you  entirely  miftake.  And  your  miftake  lies 
here  : you  think  they  undertake  what  they  do 
not.  Do  not  you  think  the  fponfors  themfelves 
undertake  or  promife,  that  the  child  ffiall  “ re- 
nounce the  devil  and  all  his  works,  conftantly 
believe  God’s  holy  word,  and  obediently  keep 
his  commandments  ?”  In  truth,  they  neither  un- 
dertake nor  promife  any  fuch  thing.  When  they 
anfwer,  “ I renounce  them  all : this  I fledfaftly 
believe  : I will (obediently  keep  God’s  holy 
■will  and  commandments)  they  promife  nothing  at 
all  ; they  engage  for  nothing  : it  is  another  per- 
fon  that  promifes  all  this.  Whatever  is  then  pro- 
mifed  or  undertaken,  it  is  not  by  them,  but 
by  the  child.  It  is  his  part,  not  theirs.  So  the 
church  tells  you  exprefsly  ; “ This  infant  mult 
for  his  part  promife.”  It  is  he  promifes  in  thefe 
words,  not  they.  So  again,  “ This  child  hath  pro- 
mifed-  -to  renounce  the  devil,  to  believe  in  God, 
and  ferve  him.”  If  it  be  faid,  But  why  are  thofe 
queftions  inferted,  which  feem  to  mean  what  they 
really  do  not?”  I anfwer,  I did  not  infert  them, 
and  fhould  not  be  forry  had  they  not  been  inferted 
at  alh  I believe  the  compilers  of  our  liturgy  in- 
ferted 


C 339  J 

ferted  them  becaufe  they  were  ufed  in  all  the 
antient  liturgies.  And  their  deep  reverence  for 
the  primitive  church  made  them  excufe  fome 
impropriety  of  expreflion. 

VII.  What  then  is  your  parts,  who  are  fpon- 
fors  for  the  child?  This  likewife  is  exprefsly  told 
you.  “ It  is  your  part  to  fee  that  this  infant  be 
taught,  fo  foon  as  he  fhall  be  able  to  learn  what  a 
folemn  vow,  promife,  and  profeffion  he  hath  here 
made  by  you. — You  (hall  call  upon  him  to  hear 
fermons,  and  fhall  providethat  he  may  learn  the 
creed,  the  Lord’s  prayer,  and  the  ten  command- 
ments, and  all  other  things  which  a Chriflian 
ought  to  know  and  believe  to  his  foul’s  health  ; 
and  that  this  child  may  be  virtuoufly  brought  up, 
to  lead  a godly  and  a Chriflian  life.” 

VIII.  Can  any  thing  then  be  plainer,  than 
what  you  do  not,  and  what  you  do  undertake  ? 
You  do  not  undertake,  that  he  fhall  renounce 
the  devil  and  ferve  God  : this  the  baptized  him- 
felf  undertakes.  You  do  undertake  to  fee  that 
he  be  taught  what  things  a Chriflian  ought  to 
know  and  believe.  And  what  is  there  in  this 
which  is  impoflible  ? Which  any  ferious  perfon 
may  not  perform  ? 

IX.  If  then  you  that  are  parents  will  be  fo 
wife  and  kind  to  your  children,  as  to  wave  every 
other  confideration,  and  to  choofe  for  their  fpon- 

P 2 fors 


E 34°  ] 

fors  thcfe  perfons  alone  who  truly  fear  and  ferve 
God  : if  fome  of  you  who  love  God,  and  love 
one  another,  agree  to  perform  this  office  of  love 
for  each  other’s  children  : and  if  all  you  who  un- 
dertake it  perform  it  faithfully,  with  all  the  wif- 
dom  and  power  God  hath  given  you : what  a 
foundation  of  holinefs  and  bappinefs  may  be  laid, 
even  to  your  late  pofterity  ? Then  it  may  juftly 
be  hoped,  that  not  only  you  and  your  houfe,  but 
alfo  the  children  which  ffiall  be  born,  fhall  ferve 
the  Lord. 

Athlone,  Augujl  6,  1752. 


The  End  of  the  Nineteenth  Volume. 


[ 34*  ] 


THE 

CONTENTS 

Of  the  Nineteenth  Volume. 


Page 

A letter  to  a Roman  'Catholic  — 3 

A Roman  Catechifn ; with  a Reply  thereto  15 

A Prefervative  againft  unfettled  Notions  in 
Religion  — — 110 

An  Ex  trad  of  a Jhort  and  eafy  Method,  with 
the  Deijls  — _ x j t 

A treatife  concerning  the  Godhead  of  Jefus 
Chrijl  — — 126 

The  advantage  of  the  members  of  the  church  of 
England,  over  tkofe  oj  uie  church,  oj  Rome  i6g 

An 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

An  extraEl  of  a letter  to  the  Rev.  A1  L >v,  oc- 
cafionea  by  his  late  writings  — 1*82 

A letter  to  a perfon  lately  joined  with  the 
Quakers , in  anfwer  to  a letter  wrote  by  him  £56 

A treatife  on  baptifm  — .275 

A letter  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Toogood,  of  Exeter, 
occafioned  bv  his  diffmt from  the  church  of 
England,  fully  juflifed  — 298 

Thoughts  upon  Infant  Baptifm  — 353 

Serious  Thoughts  concerning  Godfathers  and 
and  Godmothers.  — one 


I 

/ 

V 


/ 


J 

<4 

V 


I 


/ 


Date  Due 


AUG  18 'SB 

MAY  1 8 '39 

mi*  to  te 

■ • 

Demco  293-5 





/ 


